*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP(C) No.24118/2005

%

Date of decision : 01.04.2008

D.T.C.
Through:

….…
Petitioner
Mr.Abhinav Prasad, Advocate.

Versus

Shri Rishi Pal
Through:

.......
Nemo.

Respondent

CORAM :HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.

1.

This is a petition challenging the award dated 6th October, 2004

by which the petitioner was directed to reinstate the workman with full
back wages along with all other consequential benefits and the
continuity of service and awarding damages of Rs.50,000/- against the
depot manager of the petitioner and directing the petitioner to deducted

WP (C) No.24118/2005

Page 1 of 6

the damages from the salary of the Depot Manager in suitable
installments.

2.

The damages of Rs.50,000/- were awarded against the Depot

Manager as despite the documents produced by the workman, the order
removing the respondent from the services was passed as the
respondent had already been punished for his absence from January
1996 till December 1996.

3.

Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the Depot

Manager on whom the damages of Rs.50,000/- has been awarded was
not a party to the reference made by the appropriate government to the
Industrial Tribunal nor any notice was given to him nor he was heard
before awarding the damages of Rs.50,000/- against him.

4.

The show cause notice of the writ petition was issued to the

respondents pursuant to order dated 23rd May, 2006. Despite various
opportunities granted to the respondent, the counter affidavit to the
petition has not been filed.

In the circumstances, the right of the

respondent to file the counter affidavit is closed.

WP (C) No.24118/2005

Page 2 of 6

5.

Learned counsel for the petitioner also contends that the

workman has since been reinstated and the amounts due to him on
account of his reinstatement with full back wages and all other
consequential benefits with continuity of service has already been given
to him and the petitioner is impugning the damages of Rs.50,000/awarded against the depot manager without giving him a hearing.

6.

The reference by the appropriate government pursuant to the

complaint by the respondent was only to the effect whether the removal
of the respondent from the service was illegal or justified.

In the

circumstances, no damages could be imposed by the Presiding Officer,
Labor Court, on a Depot Manager, especially without giving him a show
cause notice and giving him a hearing for the proposed action of
imposing the damages of Rs.50,000/-.

7.

This cannot be disputed that while exercising its powers of

judicial review under Article 226 of the Constitution of India this Court
does not re-appreciate the pleas and contentions and evidence and does
not interfere with factual findings of the lower courts and it is meant to
ensure that the individual receives fair treatment and not to ensure that
the conclusion which the authority reaches is necessarily correct in the
eye of the court. The objective of judicial review is to ascertain that a
person received a fair treatment and an order is passed against a
WP (C) No.24118/2005

Page 3 of 6

person after hearing his pleas and contentions and after giving him a
reasonable opportunity. Judicial review is not an appeal from a decision
but a review of the manner in which the decision is made. In the
present facts and circumstances, the damages of Rs.50,000/- has been
ordered to be recovered from future salary of the depot manager in
suitable installments in addition to disciplinary action against him. The
allegation for such an action is that there was no justification for
passing an order of removal from service against the respondent from
his service on account of absence for a period of four days only from 3rd
June, 1996 to 6th June, 1996 and from 16th September, 1996 to 17th
September, 1996 for a period of two days only for which the workman
had already been punished by way of reduction of his salary and
therefore, the order to remove the workman from service was totally
malafide and illegal on the part of the depot manager and this displayed
a total lack of application of mind as the workman had been punished
twice for the same misconduct.

8.

Since the workman had been punished twice for his absence from

duty for only six days, the order of removal from the service could not
be sustained and had been set aside. The order of reinstatement with
the full back wages and continuity of service and all consequential
benefits has already been implemented by the petitioner and the
learned counsel for the petitioner also states that the said portion of the

WP (C) No.24118/2005

Page 4 of 6

award is not being challenged.

9.

From the proceedings before the Labor Court it is apparent that

before awarding damages of Rs.50,000/- against the depot manager,
the petitioner had not been heard nor the depot manager against whom
the damages have been awarded had been heard. On what basis the
damages have been awarded against the depot manager and not against
others is not clear. The respondent workman had also filed an appeal
against the order of his dismissal which was also dismissed. In the
circumstances, how the damages could be imposed only against the
depot manager who is alleged to had passed the order of dismissal with
alleged

malafide

intentions

and

in

irresponsible

manner.

An

irresponsible act of passing an order without considering the pleas and
contentions per se cannot be constituted as malafide. No malafides were
also pleaded by the respondent. In the circumstances, the inevitable
inference is that no malafides can be inferred against the depot
manager only on the basis of an order of dismissal passed by him
against the petitioner for absence from duty for six days for which the
punishment of reduction of salary had already been awarded to him. In
any case before awarding damages against the depot manager, he ought
to have been heard. Consequently awarding of damages of Rs.50,000/by the Labor Court cannot be sustained.

WP (C) No.24118/2005

Page 5 of 6

10.

Considering the peculiar facts and circumstances the award of

damages of Rs.50,000/- on the Depot Manager to be recovered from his
future salary in suitable installments is set aside and to that extent the
writ petition is allowed. All the pending applications are also disposed
of. Parties are, however, left to bear their own costs in the facts and
circumstances of the case.

April 1st , 2008.

ANIL KUMAR, J.

‘Dev’

WP (C) No.24118/2005

Page 6 of 6

