*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP(C) No.705/2008

%

Date of decision : 02.04.2008

M/s.Gurdayal Singh & Sons
Through:

….…
Petitioners
Mr.Rajat Aneja, Advocate.

Versus

Govt.of NCT of Delhi & Ors
Through:

.......

Respondents

Nemo.

CORAM :HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.

1.

The petitioner has impugned the award dated 19th September,

2006 passed by the Labour Court reinstating the respondent worker
with continuity of service and consequential benefit and 60% of back
wages from the date of his termination on 7th October, 2002.

2.

On the dispute being raised by the respondent workman the

appropriate Government had made the following reference:-

WP (C) 705 of 2008

Page 1 of 7

“Whether the services of Shri Brij Lal s/o.Shri Ram Adhar
have been terminated illegally and/or unjustifiably by the
management and if so, to what relief is he entitled and what
directions are necessary in this respect?”

3.

The workman filed a claim contending inter-alia that he had been

working as a fitter since 1982 and on account of legal demands made
by him, the workman was transferred from Delhi unit to Rajasthan on
3rd October, 2002. The transfer was opposed by the workman on the
ground that it is contrary to the terms and conditions and because the
workman was settled in Delhi with his children and, therefore, he
requested the management/petitioner to withdraw the transfer letter
which according to the workman was withdrawn and he was allowed to
perform his duties. However, on 7th October, 2002 during lunch hours
Sh. Bhupender Singh, owner and Sh.Arvind, Accountant abused the
workman with filthy language and misbehaved with him and also
obtained his signatures on various blank vouchers and forcibly kicked
him out.

4.

The claim was contested by the petitioner on the ground that the

real issue is whether the services of the respondent had been
transferred legally or illegally. It was also alleged that for raising a valid
dispute espousal is required in the matter whereas there is no espousal
and the reference is not proper. The petitioner contended that on 4th
September, 2002 notice was given to all workmen that their services will

WP (C) 705 of 2008

Page 2 of 7

be transferred to Shahjanpur factory. Though two other workers joined
the factory at Shahjanpur, the respondent first made an excuse of
having met with an accident and, thereafter refused to join the duties.
Even during the conciliation proceedings he was asked to join his duty
to the transferred place, however, he filed a false claim to extract money
from the petitioner. It was pleaded that his services were not terminated
but he was transferred. It was also pleaded that the factory of the
petitioner at Delhi is lying closed.

5.

After hearing the contention of the parties the Labour Court on

the issue of espousal held that since there is a demand notice through
the union and a statement of claim was filed before the Assistant
Labour Commissioner for conciliation and when the conciliation failed,
the matter has been referred to the Labour Court, therefore, the
reference is not illegal. No argument has been advanced by the learned
counsel for the petitioner regarding this issue.

6.

Regarding the transfer of the petitioner to the Shahjanpur factory

it was held that the respondent workman categorically deposed in his
statement after taking the plea in the claim petition that the transfer
order to the factory at Shahjanpur was withdrawn and the respondent
had been allowed to work at Delhi. This testimony of the workman had
not controverted by the petitioner by cross examining the workman on
WP (C) 705 of 2008

Page 3 of 7

this plea nor the petitioner has deposed refuting the plea that the
transfer order had not been withdrawn orally. Perusal of the affidavit
dated 29th March, 2006 shows that no such deposition was made on
behalf of petitioner that the transfer order was not withdrawn in respect
of petitioner. What is deposed is that along with the respondent two
other persons namely Ramadhar and Amarnath were directed to join
duty at Shahjanpur where they had joined the duties and no employee
had objected to the transfer. The Labour Court also considered the
document

exhibit

WW1/M1

and

M2

and

on

account

of

non

controverting the testimony of the workman, regarding withdrawal of
the transfer order held that the respondent was not transferred to
Shahjanpur. The learned counsel for the petitioner has emphatically
contended that the transfer order was pursuant to transfer of factory to
Shahjanpur. It was contended that a reference was issued by Delhi
Government and the reference was to be made for transfer but
mistakenly that was issued for termination of service. The deposition as
in the affidavit dated 29th March, 2006 was not put to the workman
which is apparent from the perusal of the cross examination of the
workman recorded on 20th February, 2006. The management witness
Sh.Arvind Kumar also admitted that no condition was mentioned in the
appointment letter that the workman could be transferred at any time.

7.

In the circumstances on consideration of pleas and contentions

and the deposition of the parties, the inferences drawn by the Labor
WP (C) 705 of 2008

Page 4 of 7

Court are probable and feasible and in exercise of jurisdiction under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India, this Court is not to substitute
its own inference with the inferences drawn by the Labor Court. The
learned counsel for the petitioner is unable to show as to why the said
inference be not drawn when the petitioner himself has not controverted
the deposition of the respondent workman that the transfer order was
withdrawn by the petitioner and he was allowed to work thereafter and
on 7th October, 2002 he was abused and beaten by Sh. Bhupender
Singh and Sh.Arvind Kumar and kicked out from the premises of the
management.

8.

The Labor Court has distinguished the case relied on by the

petitioner namely D.B.Mathur Vs. Cement Corporation of India & Ors,
2006 LLR 240 and has reinstated the workman on the ground that
while terminating the services of the respondent, the petitioners did not
comply with Section 25-F of the I.D Act and ordered reinstatement with
continuity of service and consequential benefit and also granted 60% of
the back wages. The Labour Court noticed that even suggestion was not
given to the respondent workman that he was unemployed nor any
evidence was led that the workman was gainfully employed somewhere.

9.

The findings and inferences of the Labor Court are based on

evidence and documents on record and there does not appear to be any

WP (C) 705 of 2008

Page 5 of 7

manifest errors in them. This court in exercise of its jurisdiction under
article 226 of Constitution of India is not to substitute its own
inferences with the inferences drawn by the Labor Court. In (2006) 2
SCC 373 , at page 378 Govt. of A.P. v. Mohd. Nasrullah Khan the
Supreme court had held:

11. By now it is a well-established principle of law that the
High Court exercising power of judicial review under Article
226 of the Constitution does not act as an appellate
authority. Its jurisdiction is circumscribed and confined to
correct errors of law or procedural error, if any, resulting in
manifest miscarriage of justice or violation of principles of
natural justice. Judicial review is not akin to adjudication
on merit by reappreciating the evidence as an appellate
authority.

10.

Thus it is a settled position of law that in exercise of jurisdiction

under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the High Court is not to
interfere with factual findings of the lower courts and should restrain
itself from re-appreciating evidence while exercising powers of judicial
review.

Writ court is not to interfere with the orders of an inferior

tribunal or subordinate court unless the order suffers from an error of
jurisdiction or from a breach of the principles of natural justice or is
vitiated by a manifest or apparent error of law. The objective of judicial
review is that a person receives a fair treatment and objective is not to
re-appreciate the entire pleas and evidence and draw inferences again.
Judicial review is not an appeal from a decision but a review of the

WP (C) 705 of 2008

Page 6 of 7

manner in which the decision is made. Power of judicial review is meant
to ensure that the individual receives fair treatment and not to ensure
that the conclusion which the authority reaches is necessarily correct in
the eye of the court.

11.

In the facts and circumstances the award dated 19th September,

2006 does not suffer from any apparent or manifest error so as to entail
interference by this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The writ petition is without any merit and is, therefore, dismissed.

April 2nd, 2008
‘k’

WP (C) 705 of 2008

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 7 of 7

