IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Decision: November 2, 2007
AA No.359/2007
#
!

Sh.Om Prakash Singla
Through:

......... Petitioner
Mr.B.P. Singh, Advocate
Vs.

$
^

Municipal Corporation of Delhi & Anr.
........ Respondents.
Through:
Mr.Sanjeev Sabharwal, Advocate
for MCD.

.
CORAM :* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

YES

2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?

NO

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
+
*

AA No.359/2007

1.

This is a petition under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration &

Conciliation Act, 1996 for appointment of an arbitrator.

2.

The petitioner has contended that he is a proprietor of

M/s.Singhla Construction Company duly enrolled with the defendant
no.1 as Municipal
AA No.359/2007

Contractor and is engaged in the business of
Page 1 of 9

contract work, building material supply and other related contract
business. The respondents invited tender for “Improvement of
different lanes along H.No. 192 to latrine in village Baharolla C105/CLZ”. The petitioner succeeded in the tender bid and therefore
the work was awarded to him by a work order no. 329 dated 28th
September, 2001 for a tender amount of Rs.3,02,071/- and a
contractual value of Rs.3,15,930/-. According to the petitioner the
work was completed within a stipulated period of four months in
terms of the tender document and after inspection of site the first
running bill was prepared, passed and released by the respondents
but the final amount was withheld despite the completion of work in
all respect as per the tender document. An amount of Rs.3000/towards remaining bill was withheld by the respondents by reason of
which the earnest money and the security amounts have also not
been released.

3.

According to the petitioner there is an arbitration agreement

between the parties and that the work in issue is the subject matter of
the arbitration clause (Clause 25). The arbitration agreement between
the parties is under:
'Clause 25
Settlement of Disputes and Arbitration
Except where otherwise provided in the contract all questions
AA No.359/2007

Page 2 of 9

and disputes relating to the meaning of the specifications designs,
drawings and instructions hereinbefore mentioned and as to the
quality of workmanship or materials as used on the work or as to any
other question, claim, right, matter or thing whatsoever in any way
arising out of or relating to the contract designs, drawings,
specifications, estimates instructions orders or these conditions or
otherwise concerning the works or the execution or failure to execute
the same whether arising during the progress of the work or after the
cancellation, termination completion or abandonment thereof shall be
dealt with as mentioned hereinafter:
1.

If the contract considers any work demanded of him to be outside
the requirement of the contract, or disputes any drawings, record
or decision given in writing by the Engineer in charge on any
matter in connection with or arising out of the contract of carrying out of the work, to be unacceptable, he shall promptly within
15 days request the Superintending Engineer in writing for written
instructions or decision. Thereupon, the Superintending engineer
shall give his written instructions or decision within a period of
one month from the receipt of contractor’s letter.
If the Superintending engineer fails to give his
instructions or decision in writing within the aforesaid period
or if the contract are is dissatisfied with the instructions or
decision of the Superintending engineer, the contract may,
within 15 days of the receipt of Superintending Engineer’s
decision, appeal to the chief engineer who shall afford an
opportunity to the contractor to be heard, if the latter so
desires, and to offer evidence in support of his appeal. The
chief engineer shall give his decision within 30 days of the
receipt of contractor’s appeal. If the contractor is dissatisfied
with this decision, the contractor shall within a period of 30
days from receipt of the decision, give notice to the

AA No.359/2007

Page 3 of 9

Commissioner MCD for appointment of arbitrator failing
which the said decision shall be final binding and conclusive
and not referable to adjudication by the arbitrator.
2).

Except where the decision has become final, binding and
conclusive in terms of sub Para (i) above disputes or
differences shall be referred for adjudication through
arbitration a sole arbitrator appointed by the Commissioner
MCD. If the arbitrator so appointed is unable or unwilling to
act or resigns his appointment or vacates his office due to any
reason whatsoever another sole arbitrator shall be appointed
in the manner aforesaid. Such personal shall be entitled to
proceed with the reference from the stage at which it was left
by his predecessor.
It is a term of this contract that the party invoking
arbitration shall give a list of disputes with amounts claimed
in respect of each such dispute along with the notice for
appointment of arbitrator and giving reference to the rejection
by the chief engineer of the appeal.
It is also a term of this contract that no person other
than a person appointed by such Commissioner MCD as
aforesaid should act as arbitrator and if for any reason that is
not possible, the matter shall not be referred to arbitration at
all.
It is also a term of this contract that if the contractor
does not make any demand for appointment of arbitrator in
respect of any claims in writing as aforesaid within 120 days
of receiving the intimation from the Engineer in charge that
the final bill is ready for payment, the claim of the contractor
shall be deemed to have been waived and absolutely barred
and MCD be shall be discharged and released of all liabilities
under the contract in respect of these claims.

AA No.359/2007

Page 4 of 9

The arbitration shall be conducted in accordance with
the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,1996 (26
of 1996) or any statutory modification or re-enactment thereof
and the rules made thereunder and for the time being in force
shall apply to the arbitration proceedings under this clause
It is also a term of this contract that the arbitrator shall
adjudicate on only such disputes as are referred to him by the
appointing authority and give separate award against each
dispute and claim referred to him and in all cases where the
total amount of the claims by any party exceeds Rs. 1,00,000
the arbitrator shall give reasons for the award.
It is also a term of the contract that if any fees are
payable to the arbitrator these shall be paid equally by both
the parties.
It is also a term of the contract that the arbitrator shall
be deemed to have entered on the reference on the day he
issues notice to both the parties calling them to submit their
statement of claims and counter statement of claims.

The

venue of the arbitration shall be such place as may be fixed by
the arbitrator in his sole discretion. The fees, if any, of the
arbitration shall, if required to be paid before the award is
made and published, be paid half and half by each of the
parties. The cost of the reference and of the award (including
the fees, if any, of the Arbitrator) shall be in the discretion of
the arbitrator who made direct to any by whom and in what
manner, such cost or any part thereof shall be paid and fix or
settle the amount of cost to be so paid.

4.

Despite repeated requests as no amount was forthcoming, the

petitioner issued a legal notice dated 12th June, 2007 to the

AA No.359/2007

Page 5 of 9

respondents, thereby invoking the arbitration agreement between the
parties, which notice was served on 13th June, 2007. By way of legal
notice dated 12th June, 2007 the respondents were called upon to
appoint an arbitrator for adjudication of the disputes which has
arisen between the parties which was served on the respondents.
However despite service of legal notice no arbitrator was appointed by
the respondents.

5.

Notice of the petition was issued and three weeks time was

given to the respondents for filing the reply from the date of service of
notice by order dated 20th August, 2007. A copy of the order directing
the respondents to file the reply within three weeks was also served
on the respondents along with the notice of the petition. However no
reply has been filed nor any cogent reason has been stated by the
learned counsel for the respondents for not filing the reply except that
he has received the copy of the petition a few days back. The right of
the respondent to file the reply is, therefore, closed.

6.

The learned counsel for the respondent, however, has produced

in Court a copy of letter dated 24th October, 2007 issued by the
respondent no.1, Municipal Commissioner of Delhi, appointing
Mr. Ashok Kumar, Commissioner, Municipal Commissioner of Delhi,
as an Arbitrator in terms of Clause 25 of the Arbitration Agreement.

AA No.359/2007

Page 6 of 9

7.

The existence of arbitration agreement has not been disputed

by the parties. The respondents have admitted in the letter dated 24th
October, 2007 that in terms of Clause-25 of the Agreement the
disputes which have arisen between the parties were to be referred to
the sole arbitrator yet the arbitrator was not appointed

8.

A learned Single Judge in Haryana Telecom Ltd. v. Union of

India & Anr., 112 (2004) DLT 339=2004 (3) RAJ 147, had held that if
the respondent fails to appoint an Arbitrator within the stipulated
time of 30 days of the notice, and even after filing of the petition
under Section 11 of the Act, it is for the Court to appoint an
Arbitrator. A Division Bench of this Court in Delkon (India) Pvt. Ltd.
v. G.M., Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd., 120 (2005) DLT 542 (DB),
relying on Datar Switchgears Ltd Vs Tata Finance Ltd has held paras
4 is as under:
“4. We have given our careful consideration to the
arguments advanced by learned Counsel for both the
parties. In view of the law laid down in the case of Datar
Switchgears Ltd. v. Tata Finance Ltd. & Anr., IV (2000)
CLT 191 (SC)=VII (2000) SLT 543=JT 2000 (Suppl. 2) SC
226 it is no more res integra that the vacancy can be
supplied by a party pursuant to the arbitration agreement
even after thirty days of the receipt of the notice. However,
once a party approaches the Court and files a petition for
appointment by the designated authority of the Chief
Justice of that Court under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, the right to supply vacancy by the
opposite party is extinguished. If that right stood
extinguished on filing of the petition under Section 11(6)
AA No.359/2007

Page 7 of 9

of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, in September
1998 the appointment of an Arbitrator on 3rd May, 1999
could not be made, therefore in our view, the order
passed by the learned Single Judge on 7th May, 1999
suffers from patent illegality. Therefore, the submission of
the respondent that the petitioner had appeared before
the Arbitrator and the application of the petitioner raising
preliminary objections is pending adjudication which
inter alia challenges the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator to
decide the dispute is of no consequence as from the order
reproduced above it was pursuant to the directions
passed by the learned Single Judge that the parties were
directed to appear before the Arbitrator. The petitioner
had no other option but to appear before the Arbitrator
and after appearing before the Arbitrator the petitioner
has not submitted to the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator,
rather has at first opportunity taken the objection that
the Arbitrator had no jurisdiction to proceed with the
matter.
9.

In Union of India v. M/s. R.R. Industries, 120 (2005) DLT 572

(DB) also it was held that once a party does not supply the vacancy or
fails to supply the vacancy before filing of a petition under Section
11(6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, such a party forfeits the
right to supply the vacancy in terms of the arbitration clause and
what remains is only the arbitration clause, i.e. the dispute has to be
resolved under the mechanism of alternative dispute redressal
scheme but no right survives to the respondent to supply the named
Arbitrator in the arbitration clause. Thus the arbitrator was to be
appointed before the filing of the petition and not after the filing of the
petition.

10.

In totality of facts and circumstances, it is inevitable to infer

AA No.359/2007

Page 8 of 9

that there is arbitration agreement between the parties which is
reproduced hereinabove. The respondent failed to appoint an
arbitrator within four weeks of notice being given by the petitioner for
appointment of an arbitrator. Even before filing of the petition the
arbitrator has not been appointed. Thus the right of the respondents
to appoint the arbitrator was forfeited and the arbitrator appointed by
the respondents after forfeiture of their right to appoint an arbitrator
cannot be agreed to in the facts and circumstances of the case.

11.

Consequently, I appoint Mr.S.M. Chopra, Retired Additional

District Judge 181, Deshbandhu Apartment, Kalkaji, New Delhi110019 (Mob: 9213230349, Res.:26484158) as an arbitrator to
adjudicate all the disputes between the parties arising out of the
above noted agreement between the petitioner and the respondents..
Parties shall appear before him on 3rd December, 2007 at 4.30 PM.
Considering the amount involved, the fee of the Arbitrator shall only
be Rs.10,000/- to be paid by the petitioner. A copy of this order be
sent forthwith to the learned Arbitrator.

Learned counsel for the

parties are also directed to give the copy of the order to the Arbitrator.
Dasti.

November 2, 2007
'k'

AA No.359/2007

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 9 of 9

