*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CM No.2766/2005 in W.P.(C) No.18845/2005

%

Date of decision : March 3rd , 2008

M/S. Alisha Enterprises (P) Ltd.
Through:

….…
Petitioner
Mr.D.R.Bhatia, Advocate.

Versus
Tej Pal Singh
Through :

.........
Respondent
Mr.Tej Pal Singh, respondent in
person

CORAM :*

HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.
*
1.

This is an application by the respondent/applicant under Section

17 B of Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 claiming full back wages,
allowances admissible to the respondent/applicant from the date of the
award, 25th September 2004 of the Industrial Tribunal till final disposal
of the writ petition. The respondent/applicant contended that he has
not been employed in any establishment after his termination and till
date he is unemployed.
W.P.(C) No.18845/2005

Page 1 of 8

2.

The respondent/applicant had raised an industrial dispute

against the petitioner/management.

The respondent had contended

that

from

he

was

illegally

removed

the

services

by

the

petitioner/management. The claim of the respondent/applicant was
contested by petitioner/management. The Court, however, held the
termination to be illegal and that the respondent is entitled to be
reinstated with full back wages by award dated 25th September, 2004
and

set

aside

the

impugned

order

of

termination.

The

management/petitioner filed the present writ petition where the
operation of the award directing reinstatement of the respondent has
been stayed by the Hon’ble Court.

3.

The respondent/ workman has filed an affidavit deposing that he

has not been employed in any establishment after his termination from
the services by the petitioner/management and till the date of the
affidavit he has not been employed anywhere.
4.

The petitioner has contested the application of the respondent

under section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 by contending
that the respondent has not filed the counter affidavit and in absence of
counter affidavit on behalf of the respondent, the petitioner is unable to
file a proper reply to the application of the respondent. It was asserted
by the petitioner that the application is not maintainable and is an

W.P.(C) No.18845/2005

Page 2 of 8

abuse of process of law. It is also contended that a proper affidavit has
not been filed by the respondent and till a proper affidavit is filed, the
application is not maintainable. The pleas raised on the merit of the
case were denied by the petitioner. It was denied that the respondent
was terminated illegally. It was denied that the respondent is not
employed, however, no details as to where the respondent is employed
has been given.

5.

Perusal of Section 17 B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947

reveals that it comes into operation when an Award directing
reinstatement of a workman is assailed in further proceedings by the
employer. The preliminary consideration for making available such a
relief under Section 17B to a workman is to be found in the benevolent
purpose of the enactment, its spirit, intendment and object underlying,
which is to mitigate and relieve, to a certain extent, the hardship which
would be caused to a workman due to delay in the implementation of an
award directing reinstatement of his services on account of the
challenge made to it by the employer. Section 17B recognizes a
workman’s right to the bare minimum to keep the body and soul
together when a challenge has been made to an Award directing his
reinstatement. The statutory provisions provide no inherent right of
assailing an order or an award by an industrial adjudicator by way of
an appeal. The payment which is required to be made by the employer
to the workman has been held to be akin to a subsistence allowance
W.P.(C) No.18845/2005

Page 3 of 8

which is neither refundable nor recoverable from a workman even if the
Award in his favor is set aside by the High Court. In 1999 (2) SCC 106
(para 22), Dena Bank v. Kiritikumar T. Patel the Apex Court was of the
view that the object under Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947 is only to relieve to a certain extent, the hardship that is caused to
the workman due to the delay in implementation of the Award.

6.

Moreover granting relief under Section 17B of the Act and passing

orders directing payment of wages last drawn, is generally the rule;
refusing to grant relief under Section 17B is an exception, as the relief
could be denied only in the rarest of the rare cases of jurisdictional
error where there is no relationship of employer and employee between
the parties.

7.

Thus if the requisites of Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes

Act, 1947 are satisfied then no order can be passed denying the
workman the benefit of statutory provisions of Section 17B of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. The statute requires satisfaction of the
following four conditions:
(i) an Award by a Labour Court, Tribunal or National
Tribunal directing reinstatement of a workman is assailed
in proceedings in a High Court or the Supreme Court;
(ii) during the pendency of such proceedings, employer is
required to pay full wages to the workman;
(iii) the wages stipulated under Section 17B are full wages
last drawn by him, inclusive of any maintenance allowance
W.P.(C) No.18845/2005

Page 4 of 8

admissible to him under any Rule;
(iv) such wages would be admissible only if the workman
had not been employed in any establishment during such
period and an affidavit had been filed to such effect
8.

The practice of disposal of the petition as well as the application

under Section 17B of the Act contemporaneously was deprecated by the
Apex Court and the High Court was directed to first expeditiously
dispose of the application under Section 17B by the Supreme Court by
its decision reported at VII (2000) SLT 70=JT 2000 (8) SC 501,
Workmen Hindustan Vegetable Oil Corporation Ltd. v. Hindustan
Vegetable Oil Corporation Ltd. & Ors. While considering an application
under Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act, the Court cannot go
into the merits of the case in the writ petitioner. It was so held in 86
(2000) DLT 510=2000 (5) AD (Delhi) 413, Anil Jain v. Jagdish Chander.

9.

Whether the applicant is entitled for last drawn wages or

something more. In 1970 1 SCR 51 entitled Town Municipal, Athani v.
P.O. LC Hugli & Ors. it was held by the Apex Court that a workman has
a legal right to wages under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 and cannot
be diverted to a remedy under Section 20 of the Minimum Wages Act for
enforcing such right. In this case, the Apex Court was concerned with
the power of the Act under Section 33(C)(2) of the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947 and the principles laid down by the Court would have a
bearing on the issues raised before this Court as well. From the
W.P.(C) No.18845/2005

Page 5 of 8

authoritative pronouncements of the Apex Court, the right of a
workman to an amount equivalent to the wages notified under the
Minimum Wages Act, 1948 is thus, in fact, recognition of the
constitutional mandate. Full wages last drawn can therefore only mean
all the wages that have fallen due at least from the date of the Award.

10.

In the present case the workman has categorically averred in the

application that he has remained unemployed since the date of his
illegal termination by the petitioner/management. During the pendency
of this application, after the reply was filed by the petitioner, a plea was
taken that the respondent is gainfully employed with Hotel Bristol,
Gurgaon (Haryana) and he had sought time to file an affidavit to this
effect. By order dated 4th May, 2007, the petitioner was given two weeks
time to file the affidavit.

11.

Nothing has been filed by the petitioner to show that the

respondent is gainfully employed with Hotel Bristol at Gurgaon,
Haryana nor any thing has been produced to show that the respondent
has been gainfully employed anywhere after his termination.

12.

In reply to application of the respondent under section 17B of the

Act, though an objection was taken by the petitioner that the applicant
has not filed any reply to the writ petition and till reply is filed, the
petitioner cannot file a proper reply, however, even after filing of counter
W.P.(C) No.18845/2005

Page 6 of 8

affidavit/reply to the writ petition dated 24th July, 2006, the petitioner
has not filed any additional affidavit or raised any other plea to show
that the respondent is not entitled for an order under section 17B of the
Act.

13.

The respondent has therefore, established that he is entitled for

an order under section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.

14.

Consequently, the application of the workman/respondent under

Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 is allowed and the
petitioner is directed to pay the last drawn wages or the minimum
wages whichever is higher from the date of award 25th September, 2004
and continue to pay the same during the pendency of the present writ
petition. Arrears of wages from the date of award be paid to the
respondent/workman within eight weeks. The petitioner shall continue
to pay the last drawn wages or minimum wages whichever is higher by
15th of every English calendar month during the pendency of the writ
petition. The respondent is also directed to file an undertaking that in
case the writ petition is allowed, the respondent shall refund/repay the
difference of last drawn wages or minimum wages within the time as
shall be permitted by this Court. Undertaking be filed by the respondent
within four weeks.

W.P.(C) No.18845/2005

Page 7 of 8

W.P.(C) No.18845/2005
The learned counsel for the petitioner seeks time to file the
rejoinder. Rejoinder be filed within eight weeks.
List on 20th October, 2008.

March 3rd, 2008

ANIL KUMAR, J.

'K'

W.P.(C) No.18845/2005

Page 8 of 8

