IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Date of decision :August 03, 2007
CM(M) No.1934/2006

#
!

Smt.Shakuntala Devi
......... PETITIONER
Through: Mr.Pankaj Gupta, Advocate
Vs.

$
^

Shri Ram Lal

.......... RESPONDENT
Through : Mr.R.K.Shukla, Advocate

CORAM :* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
1.

The petitioner has impugned the order dated 16th October, 2006

passed by Additional Rent Control Tribunal allowing the appeal of the
respondent tenant holding that the rate of rent of the premises is Rs.400 per
month exclusive of electricity charges and after the notice of increment, the
rent is Rs.440/- per month and directing the respondent to deposit the arrears
of rent, if any, within one month from that day. The appeal before the
Additional Rent Control Tribunal was filed by the respondent/tenant against
CM(M) No.1934/2006

Page 1 of 17

the order dated 18th November, 2004 of the Controller in eviction petition
bearing No.E-124 of 2000 directing the respondent to pay arrears of rent with
effect from August 1997 at the rate of Rs.3,000/- per month and revised rate
of rent with effect from 1st August, 1999 at the rate of Rs.3,300/- per month.

2.

The petitioner had filed an eviction petition under Section 14(1)(a) of

Delhi rent Control Act, 1959 against the respondent in respect of shop
measuring 7’ x 8’ forming part of the residential property bearing No.L-58,
Near Vijay Chowk, Near Laxmi Nagar, Delhi. The petitioner had alleged that
a notice of demand dated 5th July, 1999 was sent to the respondent claiming
arrears of rent claiming that respondent is a chronic defaulter and has not
tendered or paid the rent with effect from 1st December, 1996 at the rate of
Rs.3,000/- per month and to increase the rent in compliance of Section 6(A)
of Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 pursuant to the notice served on the
respondent.

3.

The notice was replied by the respondent by reply dated 14 th July,

1999 contending specifically that he is a tenant at the rate of Rs.400/- per
month. In the premises demised, he is carrying on business of sale and repair
of watches. The respondent categorically contended that since very

CM(M) No.1934/2006

Page 2 of 17

inception, no rent receipts were issued to him and he had been paying the
rent at the rate of Rs.400/- per month. It was contended that the rent has
been received up to the month of May 1999 and since the petitioner failed to
accept the rent from June and July, the rent was sent by money order on 3rd
July, 1999 and the allegation that the rent was due from 1st December, 1996
is incorrect. The petitioner thereafter filed the eviction petition dated 1st July,
2000.

4.

The petitioner categorically contended that whenever the rent was paid

to her she recorded the same in a diary which was maintained by her and,
therefore, no separate rent receipts were issued by her. The Additional Rent
Controller, however, by order dated 18th November, 2004 allowed the petition
holding that the respondent is in arrears of rent with effect from August 1997
and directed the respondent to pay or deposit arrears of rent at the rate of
Rs.3000/- per month from August 1997 and at the rate of Rs.3,300/- per
month from 1st September, 1999 onwards.

5.

The respondent challenged the order of the Additional Rent Controller

in an appeal which was allowed by Additional Rent Control Tribunal, Shri
S.M. Chopra, by his order dated 28th January, 2005 holding that the finding of

CM(M) No.1934/2006

Page 3 of 17

the Controller that the rate of rent is Rs.3,000/- is against the evidence on
record and held that considering the small size of shop, the rate of rent is
Rs.400/- per month. The petitioner challenged the order dated 28th January,
2005 passed by the Additional Rent Control Tribunal by filing a petition being
CM(M) No.363 of 2005 under Article 227 of the Constitution of India. The
petition filed by the petitioner under Article 227 of the Constitution of India
was allowed by this Court by order dated 13th July, 2006 and this Court
directed the Tribunal to decide the appeal in accordance with law in view of
the observation made in the order. This Court had relied on Santosh Hazari
Vs. Purushottam Tiwari, 2000(1) SCC 179.

This court had held that the

Tribunal had simply brushed aside the testimony of three witnesses though
the same is the primary evidence available in the present case regarding the
rate of rent.

6.

After remanding the matter to the Tribunal, the same was heard by

Shri M.C. Garg, another Additional Rent Control Tribunal, who has also held
the rate of rent payable by the respondent to the petitioner was Rs.400/- per
month and after 1st September, 1996 the rent payable to the petitioner is
Rs.440/- per month.

CM(M) No.1934/2006

Page 4 of 17

7.

The order of the Additional Rent Control Tribunal again holding after

the matter was remanded to the Tribunal that the rate of rent is Rs.400/- per
month till August 1999 and after that Rs.440/- per month, is challenged in the
present petition on the ground that no reasons have been disclosed by the
Tribunal except reproducing the oral testimony of the witnesses.

8.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has very vehemently contended that

the finding of rate of rent given by the Controller is a finding of fact which
could not be interfered with by the Tribunal.

According to the petitioner,

contradictions in the testimonies of the witnesses of the petitioner and the
attorney of the petitioner is not sufficient to reach a finding as has been given
by the Tribunal.

9.

I have heard the parties at length and have also perused the record of

lower courts. The Rent Control Tribunal has considered the testimonies of
the attorney of the petitioner who has contended that the shop was let out to
the respondent on 1st October, 1996 in the presence of Shri Deep Chand,
Shri S.P. Chawla and Shri J.N. Kapoor. This was objected to by the
respondent on the ground that it was beyond pleadings as it was not pleaded
in the petition that the premises was let out in presence of these witnesses.

CM(M) No.1934/2006

Page 5 of 17

The attorney of the petitioner also deposed that the respondent had paid
Rs.3,000/- as advance rent for the month of October 1996. In the crossexamination, the attorney of the petitioner categorically contended that in the
record of the house tax, the rate of rent has been shown as Rs.3000/- per
month and that he has not produced the relevant record.

10.

The testimony of AW2, Shri Deep Chand, has also been noticed by

the Tribunal who had deposed that the premises under the tenancy of the
respondent was let out on 1st October, 1995. He also deposed that in 1994,
1995 the prevailing market rate of rent was Rs.3,000/- per month. According
to him, the present rate is about Rs.3,600/- to Rs.4,000/- per month. The
said witness, Shri Deep Chand, categorically contended that there is another
shop under the tenancy of Shri Vinod Pandey of the same size which is a
part of the same property which has been let out by Shri Vinod Pandey after
purchasing it from the petitioner at a monthly rent of Rs.3,000/- to Mohd. Ilyas
Master son of Master Sattar on 1st March, 2002 by a lease deed duly
registered before the Sub-Registrar of Delhi. According to him, this fact could
be verified from Mohd. Ilyas or Shri Vinod Pandey. He admitted that the
amount of Rs.3,000/- was not given in his presence by respondent to the
petitioner and he categorically stated that he noted the date as 1st October,

CM(M) No.1934/2006

Page 6 of 17

1995 in his diary though no diary was produced by him. He categorically
contended that the amount of Rs.3000 was not paid in his presence.

11.

The Tribunal has also considered the testimony of Shri S.P. Chawla,

AW3, who stated that he remembered the date of tenancy on his own and
that one/half of the property where the premises in dispute is located has
been purchased by him from the petitioner. After considering the testimony
of the attorney of the petitioner, Shri Deep Chand and Shri S.P. Chawla, the
Tribunal has noted that the attorney of the petitioner had stated that the
premises was let out four years prior to institution of petition which was filed
in 2000 and therefore, the attorney of the petitioner deposed that the
premises was let out in 1996 whereas the witnesses, Deep Chand and S.P.
Chawla, deposed that the premises was let out on 1st October, 1995. The
Tribunal has considered the difference in the date of letting deposed by
witnesses and by the attorney of the petitioner and relied on it in disbelieving
them because the witness was categorical that he had noted the date of
letting in his diary as 1995. If the witness had noted the date in his diary, then
the probability is that he would not make a mistake about the year of letting.
The Tribunal has also considered the photocopy of the lease deed of Shri
Vinod Pandey to his tenant which tenancy was created in 2002 and has held

CM(M) No.1934/2006

Page 7 of 17

that the prevalent market rent of 2002 will not be relevant for considering and
interfering as to what was the rent at which the premises was let out in 1996
by the petitioner to the respondent. As far as the letting of premises by Vind
Pandey to his tenant in order to show what was the market rent in 2002,
neither Vinod Pandey had been produced by the petitioner nor the tenant of
Vinod Pandey, which fact has been considered by the Tribunal now.

The

Tribunal has also noted that no evidence was produced by the landlady that
she had spent Rs.35,000/- so that it could be inferred that the rate of rent of
the premises in dispute was higher than the ordinary market rent.

12.

The Tribunal has also considered the fact that land lady who had let

out the premises did not appear in the witness box. The Tribunal has also
considered the fact that though in reply to notice the respondent categorically
contended that the rate of rent was Rs.400/- per month, however, in the
petition it was not disclosed by the petitioner that the premises was let out by
her in presence of Shri Deep Chand and Shri S.P. Chawla and this fact was
objected to on behalf of respondent when the attorney of the petitioner
deposed about it.

The petitioner/landlady though categorically pleaded that

she had been maintaining a diary where she had been writing the rent
received from the respondent, however, the diary was not produced.

CM(M) No.1934/2006

Page 8 of 17

13.

The attorney of the petitioner also stated that the rent has been shown

as Rs.3,000/- per month in the record of Municipal Corporation of Delhi but
the same was not produced. In Habeeb Khan and others Vs. Valusula Devi &
Others, AIR 1997 Andhra Pradesh 53, it was held that it is not a sound practice for those desiring to rely upon a certain set of facts, to withhold from court
the best evidence which is in their possession which could throw light upon
controversies and the fact of withholding the evidence, which have been
available to a party, is that adverse inference should be drawn from withholding the same which judgment was also noted and relied on by the Tribunal.
Since the petitioner failed to produce the record of the house tax, which according to the petitioner shows that the rate of rent is Rs.3000 per month and
the diary maintained by her, the adverse inference should be taken against
her. Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied on 131 (2006) DLT 332, Raj
Rani Vs. Lekh Raj where it was held that the Tribunal in that case had erroneously exercised jurisdiction while seeking to rely upon documents, which
was MCD record, which was rightly ignored by the Trial Court. In this case,
the disputes between the parties was as to what was the agreed rate of rent
for one room. The land lord had contended that the premises was let out at
Rs.500/- per month, however, the tenant relied on the survey conducted by
CM(M) No.1934/2006

Page 9 of 17

the Municipal Corporation of Delhi where the rate of rent was given as
Rs.80/-per month. This document was not produced by the respondent at the
stage of evidence and nor the keeper of this was produced and the document
was produced by the respondent only at the time of cross-examination of the
landlord and the landlord in that case had denied the knowledge of this document. In these circumstances, the Tribunal had held that survey record of the
Municipal Corporation of Delhi which was not produced at the time of evidence but was produced only to contradict the landlord and the record keeper
of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi was not produced, therefore, the same
could not be relied on. The case of the petitioner is apparently distinguishable.

In

Ambica

Quarry

Works

v.

State

of

Gujarat

and

Ors.

MANU/SC/0049/1986 the Supreme Court observed:-

"The ratio of any decision must be understood in the background of the facts of that case. It has been said long time ago
that a case is only an authority for what it actually decides, and
not what logically follows from it."

Similarly in Bhavnagar University v. Palitana Sugar Mills Pvt Ltd (2003)
2 SC 111 (vide para 59), the Supreme observed:-

CM(M) No.1934/2006

Page 10 of 17

"It is well settled that a little difference in facts or additional facts
may make a lot of difference in the precedential value of a decision."

As held in Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd and Anr. v. N.R.Vairamani and Anr. (AIR 2004 SC 778), a decision cannot be relied on without disclosing the factual situation. In the same judgment the Supreme Court also
observed:-

" Court should not place reliance on decisions without discussing as to how the factual situation fits in with the fact situation of the decision on which reliance is placed. Observations of
Courts are neither to be read as Euclid's theorems nor as provisions of the statute and that too taken out of their context.
These observations must be read in the context in which they
appear to have been stated. Judgments of Courts are not to be
construed as statutes. To interpret words, phrases and provisions of a statute, it may become necessary for judges to embark into lengthy discussions but the discussion is meant to explain and not to define. Judges interpret statutes, they do not interpret judgments. They interpret words of statutes; their words
are not to be interpreted as statutes.

Circumstantial flexibility, one additional or different fact may make a
world of difference between conclusions in two cases. In the

Raj Rani

(supra) the tenant had produced the copy of survey report in the cross
examination and not examined the person who had carried out the survey
and it was therefore, not relied on whereas in the case of petitioner, it is her

CM(M) No.1934/2006

Page 11 of 17

case that rent of the premises has been shown as Rs.3000 per month in the
record of the House Tax Department and yet she did not produce the same.
It is the case of the attorney of the petitioner who has deposed on oath that
the rate of rent as has been shown by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi also
is Rs.3,000/- per month in the survey conducted by the Municipal Corporation
of Delhi. If the petitioner relies on a document and it is not produced, the
inevitable inference is that the petitioner has tried to withhold a very relevant
evidence which should have been produced by the petitioner. The finding of
the Tribunal, therefore, on the ground as has been alleged by the learned
counsel for the petitioner can not be faulted. The other evidence of the
petitioner which could be produced by her, is her own diary in which it is
stated in the pleadings that she was maintaining and writing the rent paid by
the respondent.

14.

In the facts and circumstances, it cannot be held that the Rent Control

Tribunal has not considered the evidence of the petitioner's attorney and her
witnesses and has not given any reasoning and has only reproduced the
testimonies of the attorney and two other witnesses by the petitioner and has
come to a wrong finding ex facie.

CM(M) No.1934/2006

Page 12 of 17

15.

It is also no more res integra that while reversing a judgment or order

of the trial Court, Appellate court must remain conscious of two principles,
particularly on the finding of the facts which are based on

conflicting

evidence. Firstly the findings of fact based on conflicting evidence arrived at
by the trial Court must weigh with the appellate Court, more so when the
findings are based on oral evidence. The observation of the Supreme Court
in Santosh Hazari Vs Purushottam Tiwar, (2001) 3 SCC, 179 are as under:-

15. ………….First appeal is a valuable right of the parties and
unless restricted by law, the whole case is therein open for rehearing both on questions of fact and law. The judgment of the
appellate court must, therefore, reflect its conscious application
of mind and record findings supported by reasons, on all the issues arising along with the contentions put forth, and pressed
by the parties for decision of the appellate court. The task of an
appellate court affirming the findings of the trial court is an easier one. The appellate court agreeing with the view of the trial
court need not restate the effect of the evidence or reiterate the
reasons given by the trial court; expression of general agreement with reasons given by the court, decision of which is under
appeal, would ordinarily suffice (See Girijanandini Devi v. Bijendra
Narain Choudhary, AIR 1967 SC 1124). We would, however, like to
sound a note of caution. Expression of general agreement with
the findings recorded in the judgment under appeal should not
be a device or camouflage adopted by the appellate court for
shirking the duty cast on it. While writing a judgment of reversal
the appellate court must remain conscious of two principles.
Firstly, the findings of fact based on conflicting evidence arrived
at by the trial court must weigh with the appellate court, more so
when the findings are based on oral evidence recorded by the
same Presiding Judge who authors the judgment. This certainly
does not mean that when an appeal lies on facts, the appellate
court is not competent to reverse a finding of fact arrived at by the
CM(M) No.1934/2006

Page 13 of 17

trial Judge. As a matter of law if the appraisal of the evidence by
the trial Court suffers from a material irregularity or is based on
inadmissible evidence or on conjectures and surmises, the appellate court is entitled to interfere with the finding of fact. (See
Madhusudan Das v. Narayanibai,(1983) 1 SCC 35). The rule is — and it is
nothing more than a rule of practice — that when there is conflict of oral evidence of the parties on any matter in issue and
the decision hinges upon the credibility of witnesses, then unless there is some special feature about the evidence of a particular witness which has escaped the trial Judge’s notice or
there is a sufficient balance of improbability to displace his opinion as to where the credibility lie, the appellate court should not
interfere with the finding of the trial Judge on a question of fact.
(See Sarju Pershad Ramdeo Sahu v. Jwaleshwari Pratap Narain Singh 10 )
Secondly, while reversing a finding of fact the appellate court
must come into close quarters with the reasoning assigned by
the trial court and then assign its own reasons for arriving at a
different finding. This would satisfy the court hearing a further
appeal that the first appellate court had discharged the duty expected of it. We need only remind the first appellate courts of
the additional obligation cast on them by the scheme of the
present Section 100 substituted in the Code. The first appellate
court continues, as before, to be a final court of facts; pure findings of fact remain immune from challenge before the High
Court in second appeal. Now the first appellate court is also a final court of law in the sense that its decision on a question of
law even if erroneous may not be vulnerable before the High
Court in second appeal because the jurisdiction of the High
Court has now ceased to be available to correct the errors of
law or the erroneous findings of the first appellate court even on
questions of law unless such question of law be a substantial
one.

16.

In the circumstances, it cannot be held that finding of fact arrived at by

the Controller could not be upset by the appellate Tribunal, as the fact of nonproduction of the municipal record which according to petitioner herself

CM(M) No.1934/2006

Page 14 of 17

recorded that the rent was Rs.3,000/- which was not produced nor the
petitioner has produced her diary showing that the rate of rent was Rs.3,000/per month. The appellate court has also considered the discrepancies in the
testimonies of the witnesses. On the basis of the entry made by Shri Deep
Chand in his diary he contended that the premises was let out in October
1995 whereas the attorney of the petitioner stated that the premises was let
out in October, 1996 and therefore, the discrepancies between the
statements of two was not irrelevant.

17.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has also relied on AIR 1996 Madhya

Pradesh 247, Kashi Ram Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh & Others to contend
that the oral evidence is primary evidence and khasra entries have
presumptive value. It cannot be disputed that oral evidence, in the facts and
circumstances, is the primary evidence as there is no written evidence as not
rent note or rent receipt has been produced to show as to what was the rate
of rent and the record of the Municipal Corporation and her own diary has not
been produced by her. The oral testimony has been considered as a primary
evidence by the appellate Tribunal and, therefore, the finding of the appellate
Tribunal cannot be impugned on the ground as has been alleged by the
petitioner.

CM(M) No.1934/2006

Page 15 of 17

18.

This is also no more res integra that to be amenable to correction by

the High Court, the error committed by the court or authority on whose
judgment the High court was exercising jurisdiction, should be an error which
is self-evident.

The error which needs to be established by lengthy and

complicated arguments or by indulging into a long drawn process of
reasoning cannot possibly be an error available for correction by writ of
certiorari or Article 227 of the Constitution of India.

If it is reasonably

possible to form two opinions on the same material, the finding arrived at one
way or other way cannot be called a patent error. In Surya Dev Rai vs. Ram
Chander Rai, (2003) 6 SCC 675, it was held by the Apex Court that the
jurisdiction under Article 226 was not available to be exercised for indulging
into re-appreciation or evaluation of finding or correcting errors in drawing
inference like a court of appeal.

19.

An error which is self-evident can be correct but if two views are

possible then finding arrived at one way or the other cannot be called patent
error and cannot be corrected by exercising jurisdiction under Article 227 of
the Constitution of India.

CM(M) No.1934/2006

Page 16 of 17

20.

For the foregoing reasons, I do not find any patent illegality or error

apparent in the order of the Tribunal holding the rate of rent was Rs.400/- per
month in 1996 and Rs.440/- per month from 1st September, 1999. There are
no ground to interference under Article 227 of the constitution of India and the
petition is, therefore, dismissed.

August 03, 2007
'sdp'

ANIL KUMAR, J.

CM(M) No.1934/2006

Page 17 of 17

