IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Date of decision: December 3, 2007
AA No.395/2007

#
!

Ananta Construction Company
......Petitioner
Through: Mr.Rajiv Kumar, Advocate.
Vs.

$
^

Municipal Corporation of Delhi and Anr .....Respondents
Through : Ms.Amita Gupta, Advocate.

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

YES

2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?

NO

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.(Oral)

1.

This is a petition under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration &

Conciliation Act, 1996 for the appointment of an arbitrator in terms of
arbitration agreement between the parties as the disputes have
arisen.

2.

The notice of the petition was issued to the respondent,

however, despite opportunity given to the respondent, reply has not
AA No.395/2007

Page 1 of 10

been filed and consequently the pleas and averments raised by the
petitioner have not been denied by the respondent.

3.

The petitioner is a Government contractor, Builders and

Suppliers. It is a proprietary concern and that the petition has been
filed through its proprietor Smt.Sarvesh Sharma.

4.

The petitioner contended that the respondents invited tender for

execution of work as detailed under para (iii) of the petition which are
as under:1. Upgradation/restoration of old dispensary building at
Lahori Gate City Zone.
Subhead:P/F aluminium fitting in door windows
clerestory window and other frames.
2. Upgradation/restoration of old dispensary building at
Lahori Gate City Zone.
Subhead:P/F wooden frames for door/ windows
and other frames.
3. Restoration/ Upgradation of old dispensary building at
Lahori Gate City Zone.
Subhead:P/F sanitary, water supply and drainage
installation.
4. Renovation/restoration of old dispensary building at
Lahori Gate in walled city area, City Zone.
Subhead: Development/Imp. of open space in front
of old dispensary building.
5. Renovation/restoration of old dispensary building at
Lahori Gate City Zone.
Subhead: Const. of footpath around the open space
in front of old dispensary building.

5.

Pursuant to the notice inviting tender, the petitioner submitted

AA No.395/2007

Page 2 of 10

the tenders for the aforesaid works which was accepted and the works
were awarded to the petitioner. According to the petitioner after the
major part of work orders were completed, first running bill was
prepared in respect of which payments were made after huge delays.
Various work orders were completed by the petitioner to the
satisfaction of all concerned within the stipulated period of the
various work orders. After the completion of all work orders a second
and final bills dated 22nd July, 2004 were prepared and passed for
payment to the respondent. However no payment was made by the
respondents. The deficit liability period of six month has also since
expired, however, no payment has been made. The petitioner pleaded
that the respondents have not only failed to make payment in respect
of the final bill raised by the petitioner but has also withheld the
earnest money and security deposits even though it became payable
to the petitioners long back. The respondents therefore, also became
liable to pay interest on the withheld amount.. The petitioner
contended that despite repeated visits and oral requests the payment
in respect of II/final bill has not been made by the respondents.

6.

Consequently disputes have arisen between the parties. There is

an arbitration agreement between the parties for adjudication of the
disputes by an arbitrator in terms of clause 25 of the agreement.
Clause 25 of the agreement containing the arbitration agreement is as

AA No.395/2007

Page 3 of 10

under:“Clause 25:
Settlement of Disputes and Arbitration
Except where otherwise provided in the contract all questions
and disputes relating to the meaning of the specifications
designs, drawings and instructions hereinbefore mentioned
and as to the quality of workmanship or materials as used on
the work or as to any other question, claim, right, matter or
thing whatsoever in any way arising out of or relating to the
contract
designs,
drawings,
specifications,
estimates
instructions orders or these conditions or otherwise concerning
the works or the execution or failure to execute the same
whether arising during the progress of the work or after the
cancellation, termination completion or abandonment thereof
shall be dealt with as mentioned hereinafter:
i)

AA No.395/2007

If the contractor considers any work demanded of him
to be outside the requirement of the contract, or disputes any drawings, record or decision given in writing
by the Engineer in charge on any matter in connection
with or arising out of the contract of carrying out of the
work, to be unacceptable, he shall promptly within 15
days request the Superintending Engineer in writing for
written instructions or decision. Thereupon, the Superintending engineer shall give his written instructions or
decision within a period of one month from the receipt
of contractor’s letter.
If the Superintending engineer fails to give his
instructions or decision in writing within the aforesaid
period or if the contract are is dissatisfied with the
instructions or decision of the Superintending engineer,
the contract may, within 15 days of the receipt of
Superintending Engineer’s decision, appeal to the chief
engineer who shall afford an opportunity to the
contractor to be heard, if the latter so desires, and to
offer evidence in support of his appeal. The chief
engineer shall give his decision within 30 days of the
receipt of contractor’s appeal.
If the contractor is
dissatisfied with this decision, the contractor shall
within a period of 30 days from receipt of the decision,
give notice to the Commissioner MCD for appointment of
arbitrator failing which the said decision shall be final
Page 4 of 10

binding and conclusive and not referable to adjudication
by the arbitrator.
ii).

AA No.395/2007

Except where the decision has become final, binding
and conclusive in terms of sub Para (i) above disputes or
differences shall be referred for adjudication through
arbitration a sole arbitrator appointed by the
Commissioner MCD. If the arbitrator so appointed is
unable or unwilling to act or resigns his appointment or
vacates his office due to any reason whatsoever another
sole arbitrator shall be appointed in the manner
aforesaid. Such personal shall be entitled to proceed
with the reference from the stage at which it was left by
his predecessor.
It is a term of this contract that the party
invoking arbitration shall give a list of disputes with
amounts claimed in respect of each such dispute along
with the notice for appointment of arbitrator and giving
reference to the rejection by the chief engineer of the
appeal.
It is also a term of this contract that no person
other than a person appointed by such Commissioner
MCD as aforesaid should act as arbitrator and if for any
reason that is not possible, the matter shall not be
referred to arbitration at all.
It is also a term of this contract that if the
contractor does not make any demand for appointment
of arbitrator in respect of any claims in writing as
aforesaid within 120 days of receiving the intimation
from the Engineer in charge that the final bill is ready
for payment, the claim of the contractor shall be deemed
to have been waived and absolutely barred and MCD be
shall be discharged and released of all liabilities under
the contract in respect of these claims.
The arbitration shall be conducted in accordance
with the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation
Act,1996 (26 of 1996) or any statutory modification or
re-enactment thereof and the rules made thereunder
and for the time being in force shall apply to the
arbitration proceedings under this clause
It is also a term of this contract that the
arbitrator shall adjudicate on only such disputes as are
referred to him by the appointing authority and give

Page 5 of 10

separate award against each dispute and claim referred
to him and in all cases where the total amount of the
claims by any party exceeds Rs. 1,00,000 the arbitrator
shall give reasons for the award.
It is also a term of the contract that if any fees are
payable to the arbitrator these shall be paid equally by
both the parties.
It is also a term of the contract that the arbitrator
shall be deemed to have entered on the reference on the
day he issues notice to both the parties calling them to
submit their statement of claims and counter statement
of claims. The venue of the arbitration shall be such
place as may be fixed by the arbitrator in his sole
discretion. The fees, if any, of the arbitration shall, if
required to be paid before the award is made and
published, be paid half and half by each of the parties.
The cost of the reference and of the award (including the
fees, if any, of the Arbitrator) shall be in the discretion of
the arbitrator who made direct to any by whom and in
what manner, such cost or any part thereof shall be
paid and fix or settle the amount of cost to be so paid.”

7.

Since no payment was forthcoming in respect of the II/final bill

as raised by the petitioner despite repeated requests, therefore, the
petitioner wrote letters dated dated 31st January, 2007, 16th February,
2007 and 8th March, 2007 addressed to the Executive Engineer,
Superintendent Engineer and Chief Engineer respectively demanding
release of payments due to the petitioner on the final bill which
letters, were neither replied nor the amounts due have been paid. In
the facts and circumstances, the petitioner was constrained to invoke
the arbitration clause and issued a letter dated 8th May, 2007
addressed to the Commissioner and demanded appointment of an

AA No.395/2007

Page 6 of 10

arbitrator in terms of arbitration agreement to adjudicate the dispute
between the parties. No reply to this letter was given.

8.

Consequently, the petitioner has filed the present petition and

despite opportunity given, the respondents have not filed any reply
and in any case has failed to appoint the arbitrator within 30 days
from the receipt of the notice invoking the arbitration agreement and
even before filing the present petition. In the circumstances, the plea
of the petitioner that there is an arbitration agreement in terms of
clause 25 cannot be refuted.

9.

The learned counsel for the respondent has contended, without

filing any reply, that the respondents are willing to settle the claims of
the petitioner and offered an amount which offer has been declined by
the petitioner as the amount offered by the respondent is much less
than the amount claimed by the petitioner as reflected in the
statement of claims filed along with the petition. The learned counsel
for the respondents is unable to give any reason for not appointing an
arbitrator on demand being raised by the petitioner nor any
explanation has been given as to how appointment of an arbitrator
could be withheld on the ground of an offer being made in the Court.

10.

A learned Single Judge in Haryana Telecom Ltd. v. Union of

AA No.395/2007

Page 7 of 10

India & Anr., 112 (2004) DLT 339=2004 (3) RAJ 147, had held that if
the respondent fails to appoint an Arbitrator within the stipulated
time of 30 days of the notice, and even after filing of the petition
under Section 11 of the Act, it is for the Court to appoint an
Arbitrator. A Division Bench of this Court in Delkon (India) Pvt. Ltd.
v. G.M., Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd., 120 (2005) DLT 542 (DB),
relying on Datar Switchgears Ltd Vs Tata Finance Ltd has held in
para 4 is as under:
“4. We have given our careful consideration to the
arguments advanced by learned Counsel for both the
parties. In view of the law laid down in the case of Datar
Switchgears Ltd. v. Tata Finance Ltd. & Anr., IV (2000)
CLT 191 (SC)=VII (2000) SLT 543=JT 2000 (Suppl. 2) SC
226 it is no more res integra that the vacancy can be
supplied by a party pursuant to the arbitration agreement
even after thirty days of the receipt of the notice. However,
once a party approaches the Court and files a petition for
appointment by the designated authority of the Chief
Justice of that Court under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, the right to supply vacancy by the
opposite party is extinguished. If that right stood
extinguished on filing of the petition under Section 11(6)
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, in September
1998 the appointment of an Arbitrator on 3rd May, 1999
could not be made, therefore in our view, the order
passed by the learned Single Judge on 7th May, 1999
suffers from patent illegality. Therefore, the submission of
the respondent that the petitioner had appeared before
the Arbitrator and the application of the petitioner raising
preliminary objections is pending adjudication which
inter alia challenges the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator to
decide the dispute is of no consequence as from the order
reproduced above it was pursuant to the directions
passed by the learned Single Judge that the parties were
directed to appear before the Arbitrator. The petitioner
had no other option but to appear before the Arbitrator
and after appearing before the Arbitrator the petitioner
has not submitted to the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator,
AA No.395/2007

Page 8 of 10

rather has at first opportunity taken the objection that
the Arbitrator had no jurisdiction to proceed with the
matter.

11.

In Union of India v. M/s. R.R. Industries, 120 (2005) DLT 572

(DB) also it was held that once a party does not supply the vacancy or
fails to supply the vacancy before filing of a petition under Section
11(6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, such a party forfeits the
right to supply the vacancy in terms of the arbitration clause and
what remains is only the arbitration clause, i.e. the dispute has to be
resolved under the mechanism of alternative dispute redressal
scheme but no right survives to the respondent to supply the named
Arbitrator in the arbitration clause. Thus the arbitrator was to be
appointed before the filing of the petition and since no arbitrator has
been appointed by the respondent consequently, the respondent has
lost its right to appoint the arbitrator in terms of clause 25 of the
arbitration agreement.

12.

Considering

the

facts

and

circumstances,

I

appoint

Sh.B.L.Garg, Additional District Judge (Retd), Delhi, r/o A/9, Ganpati
Apartments, 6 Alipur Road, Civil Lines, Delhi (Mobile No.9810827815)
as an arbitrator to adjudicate all the disputes between the parties.
The fees of the arbitrator shall be Rs.60,000/- payable by the
petitioner in the first instance. The parties shall appear before the
AA No.395/2007

Page 9 of 10

learned arbitrator on 17.12.2007 at 4.30 PM. A copy of this order be
sent to the learned arbitrator forthwith. The parties shall also produce
a copy of this order before the arbitrator on the said date. Copies of
this order be given dasti to the parties.

December 03, 2007
'k'

AA No.395/2007

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 10 of 10

