*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P(C) No.1195/2008

%

Date of decision: 03.03.2008

Sh.Inder Kumar

….… Petitioner
Through: Mr.T.K.Samanta, Advocate.
Versus

M/s.Air Force Senior Secondary School
....... Respondent
Through:
Mr.J.H.Jafri, Advocate.
CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.
*

1.

The petitioner has impugned the award dated 20th April, 2007

dismissing the claim of the petitioner on the ground of delay.

2.

A reference dated 14th August, 2006 was made by the appropriate

Government as under:“Whether the services of Sh.Inder Kumar, s/o.Late Sh.Mool
Chand have been terminated by the management illegally
and/or unjustifiably and if so to what sum of money as
monetary relief alongwith consequential benefits in terms of
existing Law/Govt. Notifications and to what other relief is
he entitled and what directions are necessary in this
respect?”
W.P(C) No.1195/2008

Page 1 of 6

3.

The petitioner alleged that he was employed with the respondent

management on a post of Chowkidar at a salary of Rs.500 per month
which was later increased to Rs.800 per month. He alleged that his
services were terminated without any cogent reason on 26th October,
1995. The petitioner contended that during the time he was working,
some false charges were made against him regarding missing of a
torchlight worth Rs.120 though the said torchlight belonged to the
petitioner. Other allegations were also made against the petitioner as a
counter blast to the petitioner approaching the Court claiming
minimum wages.

4.

The petitioner is stated to be a poor person and is unemployed

and a demand notice dated 22nd February, 1993 was sent to the
management. The petitioner also contended that he was handed over to
the police several times with false allegations which were proved to be
false and no case was ever made out against the petitioner. In the
circumstances the petitioner has prayed for reinstatement with
continuity of service and full back wages.

5.

The respondent contended that the petitioner had filed another

petition being case No.MW.94/92 claiming minimum wages. During the
pendency of those proceedings, the pleas of illegal termination or
dismissal or reinstatement with back wages, continuity of service were
never raised. According to the respondent the petitioner was careless
W.P(C) No.1195/2008

Page 2 of 6

and was guilty of dereliction of duties and since the month of October,
1995 he stopped coming to the school without any intimation and
permission. It is stated by the respondent that the petitioner is gainfully
employed with different establishment thereafter and, therefore, neither
he filed any claim regarding reinstatement nor he is entitled for
anything.

6.

On consideration of pleas and the evidence of the parties the

Labour Court held that the claim of the petitioner suffers from delay
and latches as the same was filed almost after 12 years of the alleged
termination of the petitioner. The Labour Court has held that though
there is no limitation provided under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947
to raise an industrial dispute but it cannot be raised at any time
without any rational explanation. The Labour Court has also held that
when the dispute is raised by a workman belatedly the same must form
a relevant part for refusing reference and decision of the Government
refusing to make a reference on the ground of inordinate and
unexplained delay will be justified.

7.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has produced a copy of

affidavit dated April, 1997 alleged to have been filed before the Labour
Court deposing inter-alia that after lots of request the respondent
started to pay Rs.800 per month and did not pay the dues for all the

W.P(C) No.1195/2008

Page 3 of 6

years and threatened the petitioner to withdraw the case filed by him
seeking minimum wages.

8.

This is not a sufficient explanation for raising the dispute almost

after eleven years after alleged termination on 26th October, 1995. The
petitioner has also produced a copy of award dated 7th March, 2005 in
MW No.94/92 where it was held that the petitioner is entitled for
difference of minimum wages for the period uptil August, 1992. The
learned counsel is unable to show anything that any grievance was
made in the said petition regarding illegal and unlawful dismissal of the
petitioner.

9.

The petitioner had deposed that he was working as a peon/ gate

keeper and Lashkar since 6th December, 1991 and was given Rs.500/per month till July, 1992 and after August, 1992 the petitioner was
paid Rs.700/- per month. No cogent reason or sufficient reason has
been given by the petitioner for not raising the dispute about his illegal
termination since October, 1995 when he is alleged to have been
dismissed. The learned counsel is also unable to give any sufficient
reason or cogent reason for the delay in raising the dispute regarding
the reinstatement and payment of back wages. Perusal of the writ
petition reflects that no sufficient reason has been made out for not
challenging the alleged dismissal on 26th October, 1995 till the claim
was filed after the reference dated 14th August, 2006. In the
W.P(C) No.1195/2008

Page 4 of 6

circumstances the findings of the Labour Court that the claim of the
petitioner is belated and he is not entitled for any relief cannot be
faulted.

10.

It is a settled position of law that in exercise of jurisdiction under

Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the Court is not to interfere with
factual findings of the lower courts and should restrain itself from reappreciating evidence while exercising powers of judicial review.
Reliance for this proposition can be placed on the judgment of the
Supreme Court, Government of A.P. and Ors. v. Mohd. Nasrullah Khan
reported as (2006) 2 SCC 373. Writ court should refrain from interfering
with the orders of an inferior tribunal or subordinate court unless it
suffers from an error of jurisdiction or from a breach of the principles of
natural justice or is vitiated by a manifest or apparent error of law. The
objective of judicial review is that a person receives a fair treatment and
objective is not to re-appreciate the entire pleas and evidence and draw
inferences again. Judicial review is not an appeal from a decision but a
review of the manner in which the decision is made. Power of judicial
review is meant to ensure that the individual receives fair treatment and
not to ensure that the conclusion which the authority reaches is
necessarily correct in the eye of the court.

11.

In the circumstances there are no grounds to interfere with the

award dated 20th April, 2007. There is no manifest error in the award
W.P(C) No.1195/2008

Page 5 of 6

dismissing the claim of the petitioner which was filed after an
inordinate delay of about eleven year after alleged dismissal on 26th
October, 1995. The writ petition in the facts and circumstances is
without any merit and is liable to be dismissed. The writ petition is,
therefore, dismissed.

March 3rd, 2008.
'K'

W.P(C) No.1195/2008

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 6 of 6

