IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of decision : February 04th , 2008
WP(C) No.322/2008
#
!

S.S.Saini

….…
PETITIONER
Through: Mr.Ashok Aggarwal, Advocate.
Versus

$
^

Centre for Culture Resources
.........
RESPONDENT
& Training
Through: Mr.Rajendra Dhawan, Advocate.

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)

1.

The petitioner has impugned the award dated 28th September,

2006 of the Labour Court not interfering with the punishment
awarded to the petitioner of dismissal from service and holding it to
be proper and justified and rejecting the claim of the petitioner/
workman.

2.

The petitioner had raised an industrial dispute against his

WP(C) 322 of 2008

Page 1 of 10

dismissal from the service by the management, the Centre for
Cultural Resources and Training and the reference was made whether
the dismissal of Sh.S.S.Saini from service was illegal and or
unjustified by the management and what relief the petitioner is
entitled and what directions are necessary in that respect.

3.

An issue was framed before the Labor Court “Whether the

domestic enquiry was not fair and valid and in accordance with the
observance of the principles of natural justice?”

After hearing the

parties it was held that the enquiry conducted by the respondent
against the workman was fair and valid and in accordance with the
principles of natural justice by order dated 24th August, 2006.

4.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that while

deciding whether the enquiry was fair and valid, the Labor Court
could not decide about the allegations made against the petitioner.

5.

Perusal of order dated 24th August, 2006 reflects that the

contentions were raised by the petitioner that documents which were
essential for the defense were not provided to the petitioner despite
demands made by him. The Labor Court had relied on the well
reasoned order dated 2nd April, 1993 passed by the enquiry officer. By

WP(C) 322 of 2008

Page 2 of 10

the said order the enquiry officer had held that all the listed
documents had been furnished to the petitioner. The enquiry officer
had also noted that the charges against the petitioner were not for
defamation but for violation of their conduct rules as the petitioner
has communicated to the press without any valid permission from the
competent authority. It was also considered that the petitioner had
not denied the release of the documents but had pleaded that the
petitioner has not released them in his individual capacity but as a
Secretary of the CCRT Union. Since the Union was neither recognized
by the respondent nor by the Central Government, it was held that
the action of the petitioner was in individual capacity. In any case it
was for the petitioner to establish that he had released the
communications to the press after taking due oral or written
permission.

6.

While considering the fact whether the enquiry was fair and

valid and question whether the petitioner had permission to release
the information to the press and whether the act of the petitioner was
in contravention of the rules was also considered. There is no
perversity in the order dated 24th August, 2006 nor there is any
manifest error or denial of principles of natural justice. The plea of
the petitioner that while deciding the issue whether the enquiry

WP(C) 322 of 2008

Page 3 of 10

conducted was fair and valid, the other issue that the petitioner had
violated the rules in releasing the information to the press without
valid permission could not be decided, is without any legal valid basis.

7.

The learned counsel for the petitioner is unable to point out any

provision of law or any precedent holding that while deciding the
issue regarding the domestic enquiry being fair and valid the other
aspects could not be considered by the Labor Court especially in view
of the fact that the burden was on the petitioner to establish that he
had permission to release the correspondence to the press.

8.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has also contended that

no evidence was led by the parties before the enquiry officer. Perusal
of the record reflects that the change of enquiry officer on the ground
of bias was raised which was rejected as Sh.C.Venkataramani who
was Director, Department of Culture who was then working as a
Deputy Secretary in the Department of Culture, Ministry of Human
Resource Development. He was appointed as an enquiry officer who
was not associated with the Centre. Whether the enquiry officer was
conducting the enquiry strictly as per rules was also considered by
the Appellate Authority. The Chairman, CCRT had observed that the
petitioner had not been maintaining proper decorum during the

WP(C) 322 of 2008

Page 4 of 10

proceedings and had been indulging in various tactics of delaying the
enquiry.

9.

It had also transpired that the enquiry officer in the proceeding

on 29th September, 1992 had directed the petitioner to give a list of
documents and witnesses, however, the petitioner did not avail the
opportunity and did not send any list. The petitioner was again
directed by letter dated 26th October, 1992 to submit the list of
documents that were required from the point of view of petitioner,
however, the list of witnesses and documents were not submitted by
the

petitioner.

Again

the

petitioner

was

asked

by

letter

No.5682/DS(A)/92 dated 23rd November, 1992 to furnish a list of
documents/witnesses. But the petitioner instead of furnishing the
list, by letter dated 30th November, 1992 questioned the authority of
the enquiry officer. Even thereafter opportunities were given to the
petitioner, however, the petitioner did not submit the list and
submitted a letter dated 15th December, 1992 that it was not
necessary for him to submit the list of documents and witnesses at
that stage. Thereafter on 21st December, 1992 a list of documents and
witnesses was sent which was found to be vague. After detailed
consideration the enquiry officer by order dated 2nd April, 1993 had
disallowed the witnesses and documents demanded by the petitioner

WP(C) 322 of 2008

Page 5 of 10

as they were not having any bearing or relevance to the actual charge.

10.

In the circumstances, the plea of the petitioner that there was

no evidence is not borne out from the record as the fact that the
letters were communicated by the petitioner to the press were not
disputed and the point of controversy was whether the permission
was taken by the petitioner so as not to be liable under the various
rules on the basis of which the disciplinary enquiry was initiated
against the petitioner. In the circumstances the burden was on the
petitioner and the petitioner failed to discharge its burden and cannot
contend that the findings of the enquiry are without any basis in the
facts and circumstances and without any evidence.

11.

By the award dated 28th September, 2006 all the pleas and

contentions had been considered by the Labor Court. The Labor Court
has considered whether the punishment awarded to the petitioner is
shockingly disproportionate to the charge proved and held that the
petitioner cannot absolve himself of his responsibility on the ground
that he was the General Secretary of the Union. It has been noted that
the petitioner has not been victimized on account of trade union
activities. Reliance was placed on Karnataka Bank Ltd Vs. A.L.Mohan
Rao, 2006 LLR 252 (SC) regarding leniency if any to be shown to the

WP(C) 322 of 2008

Page 6 of 10

workman/petitioner.

12.

Considering all these factors in detail the Labor Court has held

that the punishment of dismissal from service imposed upon him is
proper and justified and rejected the claim of the petitioner. The
award dated 28th September, 2006 in the circumstances is not
perverse nor has any such manifest error so as to entail interference
by this Court in exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India.

13.

While exercising powers of judicial review under Article 226 of

the Constitution of India this Court is not to re-appreciate the
evidence. It is a settled position of law that in exercise of jurisdiction
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the Court is not to
interfere with factual findings and should restrain itself from reappreciating evidence while exercising powers of judicial review.
Reliance for this proposition can be placed on the judgment of the
Supreme Court, Government of A.P. and Ors. v. Mohd. Nasrullah
Khan reported as (2006) 2 SCC 373. Reliance may also be placed on
the following judgments rendered by the Supreme Court and this
Court concerning the scope of judicial review by a writ court: Harbans

WP(C) 322 of 2008

Page 7 of 10

Lal v. Jagmohan Saran (1985) 4 SCC 333; B.C. Chaturvedi v. Union of
India (1995) 6 SCC 749; Indian Overseas Bank v. I.O.B. staff Canteen
Workers' Union AIR 2000 SC 1508 ; Municipal Corporation of Delhi v.
Asha Ram and Anr.117 (2005) DLT 63 and Filmistan Exhibitors Ltd.
v. N.C.T. Secy. Labour and Ors. 131 (2006) DLT. In all the above
judgments, it has been held that a writ court should refrain from
interfering with the orders of an inferior tribunal or subordinate court
unless it suffers from an error of jurisdiction, or from a breach of the
principles of natural justice or is vitiated by a manifest or apparent
error of law.

14.

The objective of judicial review is that a person receives a fair

treatment and objective is not to re-appreciate the entire pleas and
evidence and draw inferences again. The Apex Court in (1995) 6 SCC
749 B.C.Chaturvedi Vs Union of India at page 759 in para 12 had
held as under:
“ 12 . Judicial review is not an appeal from a decision
but a review of the manner in which the decision is made.
Power of judicial review is meant to ensure that the
individual receives fair treatment and not to ensure that
the conclusion which the authority reaches is necessarily
correct in the eye of the court. When an inquiry is
conducted on charges of misconduct by a public servant,
the Court/Tribunal is concerned to determine whether
the inquiry was held by a competent officer or whether
rules of natural justice are complied with. Whether the

WP(C) 322 of 2008

Page 8 of 10

findings or conclusions are based on some evidence, the
authority entrusted with the power to hold inquiry has
jurisdiction, power and authority to reach a finding of fact
or conclusion. But that finding must be based on some
evidence. Neither the technical rules of Evidence Act nor
of proof of fact or evidence as defined therein, apply to
disciplinary proceeding. When the authority accepts that
evidence and conclusion receives support therefrom, the
disciplinary authority is entitled to hold that the
delinquent officer is guilty of the charge. The
Court/Tribunal in its power of judicial review does not act
as Appellate Authority to re-appreciate the evidence and
to arrive at its own independent findings on the evidence.
The Court/ Tribunal may interfere where the authority
held the proceedings against the delinquent officer in a
manner inconsistent with the rules of natural justice or in
violation of statutory rules prescribing the mode of
inquiry or where the conclusion or finding reached by the
disciplinary authority is based on no evidence. If the
conclusion or finding be such as no reasonable person
would have ever reached, the Court/Tribunal may
interfere with the conclusion or the finding, and mould
the relief so as to make it appropriate to the facts of each
case.”

15.

All the relevant documents were with the petitioner. The charge

framed against the petitioner was releasing the documents to the
press without the permission and not whether the defamation was
committed. It had been held that all the relevant documents were with
the petitioner. Burden was on the petitioner to prove that he released
the documents after due permission. No plea has been taken by the
petitioner that for releasing the documents, permission was obtained
from the respondent. Dismissal from the service by the respondent is

WP(C) 322 of 2008

Page 9 of 10

not shockingly disproportionate in the facts and circumstances.
Petitioner is unable to point out violation of any rules of natural
justice. Rather it has been established that the petitioner tried his
best to delay the proceedings by taking all sorts of objections which
were considered and rejected by the enquiry officer. No other grounds
have been raised by the petitioner impugning the award of the Labor
Court.

16.

In the circumstances, there are no grounds to interfere with the

order of the Labor Court. The writ petition in the facts and
circumstances is without any merit and is, therefore, dismissed.

February 04th, 2008
'k'

WP(C) 322 of 2008

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 10 of 10

