IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of decision : February 04th , 2008
W.P.(C) No.879/2008
#
!

Royal File Products
Through:

….…
Petitioner
Mr.S.P. Gautam, Advocate.

Versus
$
^

Ram Sakal & Others. .........
Respondents
Through : Mr.Nawal Kishore Jha, Advocate.

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
*
1.

The petitioner has impugned the award dated 21st March, 2007

directing the petitioner management to pay a compensation of
Rs.50,000/- in lieu of the reinstatement of the respondent No.1
considering the last drawn wages and other factors.
2.

The reference made to the Court was whether the respondent

No.1 had abandoned his services or whether his services were
terminated illegally or unjustifiably by the management, and, if so, to
what relief the respondent No.1 is entitled and what directions were

WP(C) 879 of 2008

Page 1 of 7

necessary in that respect”
3.

Respondent No.1 was working as a Godown Keeper with effect

from 10th November, 1973 at a salary of Rs.3,200/- per month.
According to the respondent No.1, he was not issued any appointment
letter and he was denied legal entitlements like the provident funds,
ESI, bonus, etc. and he was paid less than the minimum wages as
applicable in the case of respondent No.1.

According to the

respondent No.1, he was not paid wages for the month of October to
December, 1999 and on his demanding the same, he was beaten up
and his services was terminated on 17th January, 2000.

The

respondent No.1 is alleged to have made a complaint to the Police
regarding the incident and thereafter a demand notice was sent by the
petitioner.
4.

The petitioner contended in their written statement before the

Labor Court that the services of the respondent No.1 had not been
terminated rather they tried to search him but could not locate him as
he had abandoned the work.
5.

After considering the pleas and contentions of the parties and

the evidence led by the parties, the Labor Court relied on the facts
that the workman was beaten up and turned out on 17th January,

WP(C) 879 of 2008

Page 2 of 7

2000 Though he made a complaint but no case could be registered as
the alleged offence was non-cognizable and his goods were recovered
with the police help. This fact that goods of the respondent had been
recovered with the police help could not be refuted by the
petitioner/management. The petitioner had also pleaded that the
workman/respondent

had

stolen/mis-appropriated

some

files,

however, this allegation was not substantiated by the petitioner.
6.

The petitioner has heavily relied on the fact that the services of

the respondent No.1 were never terminated and he continued on the
rolls till the claim was filed by the respondent No.1. However, the
Labor Court had taken an adverse inference on account of nonproduction of attendance register to substantiate the plea taken by
the petitioner/management that the respondent No.1 continued on
the rolls of the petitioner.
7.

The management/petitioner has also taken contradictory stand

inasmuch as it has been contended that his services were not
terminated and at the same time a justification has been given for his
physical ouster on the ground that he had committed a theft. No
inquiry had been conducted on account of alleged mis-conduct of
theft.

If, the workman had mis-conducted on account of theft, the

petitioner/management should have made a complaint to the police

WP(C) 879 of 2008

Page 3 of 7

which was, however, also not done and taking these facts into
consideration, it has been inferred by the Labor Court that the
respondent/workman had not abandoned his services.

It has been

held that rather the services were terminated without complying with
the requirement of Section 25 F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
8.

The Labor Court has also considered the plea of the petitioner

that the workman/respondent was asked to join the duties, however,
reliance has been placed on the fact that while demanding the
workman to join the duty, he was asked to give an explanation for
theft.

If the case of the respondent/workman is that he never

committed theft, seeking an explanation for theft as a pre-condition to
join the services, is not an offer to join the services by the
respondent/workman so as to absolve the petitioner management of
its liability.
9.

Considering all these evidence, a cogent inference has been

drawn

by

the

Labor

Court

and

considering

the

facts

and

circumstances, only a sum of Rs.50,000/- has been awarded in lieu of
reinstatement.
10.

While exercising its powers of judicial review under Article 226

of the Constitution of India, this Court ought not re-appreciate the

WP(C) 879 of 2008

Page 4 of 7

evidence. It is a settled position of law that in exercise of jurisdiction
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the Court is

not

interfere with factual findings of the lower courts and should restrain
itself from re-appreciating evidence while exercising powers of judicial
review. Reliance for this proposition can be placed on the judgment of
the Supreme Court, Government of A.P. and Ors. v. Mohd. Nasrullah
Khan reported as (2006) 2 SCC 373. Reliance may also be placed on
the following judgments rendered by the Supreme Court and this
Court concerning the scope of judicial review by a writ court: Harbans
Lal v. Jagmohan Saran (1985) 4 SCC 333; B.C. Chaturvedi v. Union of
India (1995) 6 SCC 749; Indian Overseas Bank v. I.O.B. staff Canteen
Workers' Union AIR 2000 SC 1508 ; Municipal Corporation of Delhi v.
Asha Ram and Anr.117 (2005) DLT 63 and Filmistan Exhibitors Ltd.
v. N.C.T. Secy. Labour and Ors. 131 (2006) DLT. In all the above
judgments, it has been held that a writ court should refrain from
interfering with the orders of an inferior tribunal or subordinate court
unless it suffers from an error of jurisdiction, or from a breach of the
principles of natural justice or is vitiated by a manifest or apparent
error of law.
11.

The objective of judicial review is that a person receives a fair

treatment and objective is not to re-appreciate the entire pleas and

WP(C) 879 of 2008

Page 5 of 7

evidence and draw inferences again. The Apex Court in (1995) 6 SCC
749 B.C.Chaturvedi Vs Union of India at page 759 in para 12 had
held as under:
“ 12 . Judicial review is not an appeal from a decision
but a review of the manner in which the decision is made.
Power of judicial review is meant to ensure that the
individual receives fair treatment and not to ensure that
the conclusion which the authority reaches is necessarily
correct in the eye of the court. When an inquiry is
conducted on charges of misconduct by a public servant,
the Court/Tribunal is concerned to determine whether
the inquiry was held by a competent officer or whether
rules of natural justice are complied with. Whether
the findings or conclusions are based on some
evidence, the authority entrusted with the power to
hold inquiry has jurisdiction, power and authority to
reach a finding of fact or conclusion. But that finding
must be based on some evidence. Neither the technical
rules of Evidence Act nor of proof of fact or evidence
as defined therein, apply to disciplinary proceeding.
When the authority accepts that evidence and conclusion
receives support therefrom, the disciplinary authority is
entitled to hold that the delinquent officer is guilty of the
charge. The Court/Tribunal in its power of judicial
review does not act as Appellate Authority to reappreciate the evidence and to arrive at its own
independent findings on the evidence. The Court/
Tribunal may interfere where the authority held the
proceedings against the delinquent officer in a manner
inconsistent with the rules of natural justice or in
violation of statutory rules prescribing the mode of
inquiry or where the conclusion or finding reached by the
disciplinary authority is based on no evidence. If the
conclusion or finding be such as no reasonable person
would have ever reached, the Court/Tribunal may
interfere with the conclusion or the finding, and
mould the relief so as to make it appropriate to the
facts of each case.”

WP(C) 879 of 2008

Page 6 of 7

13.

On the basis of pleadings and the

evidence, the Court has

inferred that the respondent No.1 was not offered to join the duties.
An allegation of theft was made against the respondent No.1 which
was denied and in respect of which no enquiry was conducted. The
offer to join the duties was conditional in as much as the respondent
No.1 was asked to explain the theft alleged to have been committed by
him which, in fact, was never committed by him. No police report was
made by the petitioner against the alleged theft. Considering all the
facts noticed and considered by the Court, the inferences drawn by
the Court cannot be termed perverse or suffering from any manifest
error. If that be so this Court is not to substitute its findings with the
findings of the Court. In any case, this Court also endorses the
findings of the Labor Court in the facts and circumstances of the
case.
14.

In the circumstances, there is no perversity or manifest error in

the award of the Labor Court so as to entail interference by this court
in exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India.

The writ petition is, therefore, without any merit and it is

dismissed.

February 04th , 2008
'Dev'

WP(C) 879 of 2008

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 7 of 7

