IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Date of decision: December 5, 2007
AA No.408/2007

#
!

M/s Naresh Maheshwari
......Petitioner
Through: Mr.S.K.Goyal, Advocate.
Vs.

$
^

Delhi Development Authority
.....Respondent
Through : Mr.Gaurav Kanth, Advocate.

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.(Oral)

1.

This is a petition under Section 11(5) read with Section 11(6) of

the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 for the appointment of an
arbitrator in terms of arbitration agreement between the parties as the
disputes have arisen.

2.

The petitioner contended that the tender for running an “Idle

Truck Parking Site at Azadpur, Sabzi Mandi, Delhi” was awarded to

AA No.408/2007

Page 1 of 8

the petitioner and the parking site was allotted for a period of three
years commencing from 27th September, 2004 till 26th September,
2007 at a license fee of Rs.81,000/- per month subject to increase of
10% per year as per the terms and conditions enumerated in the
acceptance letter and license deed.

Pursuant thereto a sum of

Rs.2,43,000/- was deposited as three months advance license fee and
license deed and bank guarantee of Rs.7,29,000/- was executed by
the petitioner. Subsequently the period of allotment was extended till
6th

January,

2008

by

99(24)2004/LPC/Parking/406

respondent’s
dated

16th

letter

August,

dated
2007

as

Fthe

possession of the parking site was given on 7th January, 2005.

3.

According to the petitioner by letter dated 23rd September, 2004,

the respondent called upon the petitioner to take vacant physical
possession of the parking site on 27th September, 2004 when it
transpired that the site was not fit for operation as the same was
under illegal encroachments and was also undeveloped being full of
pot holes, water logging, garbage, waste material etc. which fact was
acknowledged by the respondent who gave an assurance that site
would be made available to the respondents after the hindrances are
removed and necessary development work is carried out. However, no
steps were taken by the respondents to remove the encroachments
and to develop the site despite several representations made by the

AA No.408/2007

Page 2 of 8

petitioner to the respondent to carry on the development work at the
parking site by its letters dated 9th November, 2004 and 18th
November, 2004.

4.

It is the case of the petitioner that on 7th January, 2005 the

petitioner was forced by the respondent to either take the possession
of the parking site even though only 50% of the parking site could be
operated else the agreement would be cancelled and entire deposit
would

be

forfeited.

Thereafter,

the

petitioner

made

various

representations apprising the respondent of the hardship faced and
also the heavy losses suffered by the petitioner on account of the
illegal occupants covering 50% of the parking site under allotment
and poor condition of the parking site since the date on which the
possession of the parking site was taken over by the petitioner. The
grievance of the petitioner is that no attention was paid by the
respondent, DDA, to the various representations made by the
petitioner nor the matter was referred to the remission committee.

5.

Consequently,

disputes

arose

between

the

parties.

The

petitioner has also detailed the disputes which have arisen between
the parties in para (h) of the petition. There is an arbitration
agreement between the parties for adjudication of the disputes by an
arbitrator in terms of clause 23 of the license deed. Clause 23 of the
AA No.408/2007

Page 3 of 8

License deed containing the arbitration clause is as under:“23. That in case of any dispute arising between the
licensor and the licensee in respect of interpretation or
performance of any terms or conditions of the license, the
same be shall be referred to the sole arbitrator of the Vicechairman DDA, whose decision thereon , shall be final
and binding on both the parties. The licensee shall not
object to the Vice-Chairman of the Delhi development
authority’s action as a sole arbitration on the ground that
he had dealt with case or has at some stage of expressed
opinion in any matter connecting herewith.”

6.

In the facts and circumstances, the petitioner was constrained

to invoke the arbitration clause contained in clause 23 of the license
deed dated 16th September, 2004 and issued a notice dated 18th June,
2007 to the respondent demanding appointment of an arbitrator in
terms of arbitration clause contained in clause 23 of the license deed
to adjudicate the disputes between the parties. No reply to this letter
was given by the respondent nor any arbitrator was appointed within
30 days of the receipt of notice invoking the arbitration agreement.

7.

Consequently, the petitioner has filed the present petition.

Notice was issued to the respondent and reply has been filed by the
respondent objecting to the appointment of the arbitrator

on the

ground that the respondent has always co-operated and acted on the
request

and representations of the petitioner and necessary steps

have been taken by the respondent to facilitate the full use of the
parking site by the petitioner during the license period by freeing it
AA No.408/2007

Page 4 of 8

from unauthorized

and illegal

encroachments etc. on various

representations made by the petitioner. The respondent submitted
that the vacant possession of the parking site was handed over to the
petitioner on 7th January, 2005 free from all the encroachments after
removing all the encumbrances and denied the allegation of the
petitioner that only 50% of the site was vacated as on 7th January,
2005. The respondent objected to the appointment of the arbitrator
on the ground that there is no dispute between the parties in respect
of

interpretation or performance of any terms or conditions of the

license, thus clause 23 of the License deed would not be attracted.
The respondent also submitted that on the date of receipt of notice
dated 18th June, 2007 a status report dated 4th June, 2007 prepared
by the AE(CE) after inspection of the parking site was forwarded to
AD/LPC, executive engineer/ND-2, DDA for immediate necessary
action in the matter of unauthorized occupation at Idle Truck Parking
Site at Azadpur, Sabzi Mandi, Delhi and that the respondents are
taking all the steps to remove all the encroachments from the parking
site in view of the status report.

8.

Whether steps were taken by the respondent to facilitate the

use of the parking site by the petitioner or not and whether there
exists a dispute between the parties, this is not for this Court to
decide and it is the arbitrator only who can adjudicate on the same.

AA No.408/2007

Page 5 of 8

Once the parties have willfully opted for adjudication of dispute by an
alternative redressal mechanism then in such a case the jurisdiction
of this court is limited and the Court cannot make any observation in
respect of any dispute therein or adjudicate on the point of law or
fact. The jurisdiction of Courts is confined only to the extent of
referring the matter for adjudication to an independent arbitrator on
request of the parties on being satisfied that their exists an arbitration
agreement between the parties containing an arbitration clause and
the respondent has failed to appoint an arbitrator in terms of
arbitration agreement despite invocation of arbitration agreement by
one of the party.

9.

The respondent has not denied the existence of an arbitration

clause in terms of Clause 23 of the license deed. Thus there exists a
valid arbitration agreement between the parties. The respondent has
failed to appoint an arbitrator within 30 days from the receipt of the
notice invoking the arbitration agreement and even before filing the
present petition and no cogent reason has been given by the
respondent for not appointing the arbitrator within the stipulated
time. The learned counsel for the respondent is unable to explain as
to how appointment of an arbitrator could be withheld on the grounds
raised in the reply to the petition by the respondent. Therefore, it will
be just and appropriate to appoint an arbitrator to adjudicate

AA No.408/2007

Page 6 of 8

disputes between the parties.

10.

A learned Single Judge in Haryana Telecom Ltd. v. Union of

India & Anr., 112 (2004) DLT 339=2004 (3) RAJ 147, had held that if
the respondent fails to appoint an Arbitrator within the stipulated
time of 30 days of the notice, and even before filing of the petition
under Section 11 of the Act, it is for the Court to appoint an
Arbitrator. A Division Bench of this Court in Delkon (India) Pvt. Ltd.
v. G.M., Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd., 120 (2005) DLT 542 (DB),
relying on Datar Switchgears Ltd Vs Tata Finance Ltd has held in
para 4 is as under:
“4. We have given our careful consideration to the
arguments advanced by learned Counsel for both the
parties. In view of the law laid down in the case of Datar
Switchgears Ltd. v. Tata Finance Ltd. & Anr., IV (2000)
CLT 191 (SC)=VII (2000) SLT 543=JT 2000 (Suppl. 2) SC
226 it is no more res integra that the vacancy can be
supplied by a party pursuant to the arbitration agreement
even after thirty days of the receipt of the notice. However,
once a party approaches the Court and files a petition for
appointment by the designated authority of the Chief
Justice of that Court under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, the right to supply vacancy by the
opposite party is extinguished. If that right stood
extinguished on filing of the petition under Section 11(6)
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, in September
1998 the appointment of an Arbitrator on 3rd May, 1999
could not be made, therefore in our view, the order
passed by the learned Single Judge on 7th May, 1999
suffers from patent illegality. Therefore, the submission of
the respondent that the petitioner had appeared before
the Arbitrator and the application of the petitioner raising
preliminary objections is pending adjudication which
inter alia challenges the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator to
decide the dispute is of no consequence as from the order
AA No.408/2007

Page 7 of 8

reproduced above it was pursuant to the directions
passed by the learned Single Judge that the parties were
directed to appear before the Arbitrator. The petitioner
had no other option but to appear before the Arbitrator
and after appearing before the Arbitrator the petitioner
has not submitted to the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator,
rather has at first opportunity taken the objection that
the Arbitrator had no jurisdiction to proceed with the
matter.
11.

In Union of India v. M/s. R.R. Industries, 120 (2005) DLT 572

(DB) also it was held that once a party does not supply the vacancy or
fails to supply the vacancy before filing of a petition under Section
11(6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, such a party forfeits the
right to supply the vacancy in terms of the arbitration clause and
what remains is only the arbitration clause, i.e. the dispute has to be
resolved under the mechanism of alternative dispute redressal
scheme but no right survives to the respondent to supply the named
Arbitrator in the arbitration clause. Thus the arbitrator was to be
appointed before the filing of the petition and since no arbitrator has
been appointed by the respondent consequently, the respondent has
lost its right to appoint the arbitrator in terms of clause 13 of the
arbitration agreement. The disputes which have been raised by the
petitioner are also within the arbitration agreement and there is no
reason that all the disputes which have arisen between the parties
can not be adjudicated by the arbitrator.

AA No.408/2007

Page 8 of 8

12.

Considering the facts and circumstances, I appoint, Shri Prem

Kumar, Retired Additional District Judge, C-12, Chirag Enclave, New
Delhi-110048, (Phone No.9313783914) as an Arbitrator. The fees of
the arbitrator shall be Rs.10,000/- per hearing subject to a maximum
amount of Rs.1 lakh. The fees shall be borne equally by the parties.
Parties shall appear before the Arbitrator on 2nd January, 2008 at
4.30 PM. Registry to send a copy of this order to the Arbitrator
forthwith. Parties are also directed to intimate the Arbitrator about
the order. Copies of this order be also given to the parties dasti.

December 05, 2007
'k'

AA No.408/2007

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 9 of 8

