IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of decision : February 05, 2008
WP(C) No.409/2008
#
!

Sh.A.S.Parmar

….…
PETITIONER
Through: Mr.N.S.Dalal, Advocate.
Versus

$
^

Delhi Transco Co.Ltd
.........
RESPONDENT
Through : Mrs.Avnish Ahlawat, Advocate.

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)

1.

The petitioner has impugned the penalty imposed upon him of

reduction of three stages of his pay.

2.

Disciplinary proceedings under Regulation 7 of the DESU (DMC)

Regulations were initiated against the petitioner and an enquiry
report was submitted holding that the charges were not proved. The
disciplinary authority, however, disagreed with the findings of the
enquiry officer after giving opportunity to the petitioner and
communicated the disagreement note dated 21st November, 2003.

WP(C) No.409/2008

Page 1 of 9

3.

The disciplinary authority imposed a penalty of reduction of six

stages in his scale of pay for a period of three years with further
direction that he will not earn increments of pay during the period of
reduction and on expiry of period the reduction will have the effect of
postponing the future increments of pay.

4.

An appeal filed by the petitioner was dismissed and, thereafter,

a revision was filed which was disposed of by order dated 29th
September, 2005 whereby the penalty was modified from reduction of
six stages to the reduction of three stages in time scale pay of
petitioner for a period of three years and with a further direction that
he will not earn increments of pay during the period of reduction and
on expiry of the period, the reduction will have the effect of
postponing the future increments of pay.

5.

While

disposing

of

the

revision

the

revisional

authority

considered the contention of the petitioner that he was neither part of
a joint inspection team nor he lodged an FIR and the FIR issued was
not in his knowledge. The revisional authority noted that the
petitioner while giving technical feasibility report had concealed the
existence of two connections on the sites. The revisional authority also
noted that despite there being no financial bungling on the part of the

WP(C) No.409/2008

Page 2 of 9

consumer, disciplinary action was taken against him for grant of a
new connection at the same site where FAE case was booked.

6.

Against the order of the revisional authority modifying his

penalty from reduction of six stages to three stages, a review petition
was also filed which was also disposed of by order dated 18th October,
2007 dismissing the same.

7.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has very vehemently

contended that if the disciplinary authority had already accepted the
enquiry report, the disciplinary authority subsequently could not
differ with the enquiry report and issue disagreement note dated 21st
November, 2003 and has relied on the letter dated 27th February,
2001 of Director, Vigilance/CVO.

8.

Perusal of the said letter dated 27th February, 2001 shows that

the letter was written to the Secretary, Central Vigilance Commission
requesting him to examine the matter and to give a second stage
advice so that the decision can be taken. It is admitted by the
petitioner that Sh.Virender Prakash, Director (Vigilance) was not the
disciplinary authority, however, had the rank equivalent to the
disciplinary authority. The disciplinary authority seems to be General
Manager (Admn). The letter dated 27th February, 2001 reflects that it

WP(C) No.409/2008

Page 3 of 9

is not an order passed by the disciplinary authority after considering
the enquiry report.

9.

In any case this plea that disciplinary authority had taken a

decision while communicating the letter dated 27th February, 2001 to
the Secretary, Central Vigilance Commission and had accepted the
report of the enquiry officer and therefore, later on the disciplinary
authority could not differ with the alleged earlier decision was neither
taken before the disciplinary authority pursuant to disagreement note
dated 21st November, 2003 nor before the appellate authority and nor
before the revisional authority which had reduced the penalty from
reduction of six stages to the reduction of three stages.

10.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the

ground was taken in the review petition dated 19th February, 2007
where this ground seems to have been incorporated in para 12 as
under:“CVO of DVB also accepted the IO report vide letter
No.V.C.152-157/95-VIG/AVO-I/JS/54 dated 27.2.2001.”
11.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that this

ground is a question of law which could be raised at any time. The
letter dated 27th February, 2001 is a letter written by Director
(Vigilance) and not by the disciplinary authority to the Secretary,

WP(C) No.409/2008

Page 4 of 9

Central Vigilance Commission. What was the intent of the said letter
and whether it was binding on the disciplinary authority, shall be a
question of fact which has not been raised and adjudicated and
consequently the plea of the learned counsel for the petitioner that it
is only a question of law is not correct and, therefore, the petitioner
could not be allowed to raise the same seeking review of the order of
disciplinary authority, appellate authority and revisional authority.
The petitioner, therefore, cannot be allowed to impugn the order of
penalty imposed upon him on this ground now. In any case the letter
dated 27th February, 2001 shall not be an order of the disciplinary
authority accepting the enquiry report.

12.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has also raised a ground

that the disciplinary authority could not differ with the inferences
drawn by the enquiry officer on the same material on the basis of
which enquiry report was given absolving the petitioner from all the
charges. The plea of the learned counsel for the petitioner is
untenable as in accordance with the established procedure the
disciplinary authority can differ with the enquiry report after giving
due opportunity to the delinquent. No precedent or law has been
brought to the notice of this Court holding that the disciplinary
authority cannot draw inferences different from the enquiry officer on
the basis of same material. The plea of the petitioner is not

WP(C) No.409/2008

Page 5 of 9

sustainable in the facts and circumstances.

13.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has also impugned the

penalty imposed on the petitioner on the ground that the FIR relied in
the case against the consumer was quashed by a bench of this Court.
Perusal of the orders of the disciplinary authority, appellate authority
and revisional authority reflect that disciplinary action has been
taken against the petitioner not merely on the basis of FIR registered
against the consumer but on account of grant of new connection at
the same site where FAE case was booked and the report given by the
petitioner concealing the existence of two connections at the same site
where two IL and IP connections existed whereas in the reports given
by the petitioner he mentioned the name of one user only that is
M/s.Rani Absorbent Cotton Mfg.Co. Consequently on account of
quashing of FIR filed against the consumer, the petitioner cannot be
absolved of charges leveled against him.

14.

While exercising its powers of judicial review under Article 226

of the Constitution of India this Court is not to re-appreciate the
evidence. It is a settled position of law that in exercise of jurisdiction
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the Court is not to
interfere with factual findings and should restrain itself from reappreciating evidence while exercising powers of judicial review.
WP(C) No.409/2008

Page 6 of 9

Reliance for this proposition can be placed on the judgment of the
Supreme Court, Government of A.P. and Ors. v. Mohd. Nasrullah
Khan reported as (2006) 2 SCC 373. Reliance may also be placed on
the following judgments rendered by the Supreme Court and this
Court concerning the scope of judicial review by a writ court: Harbans
Lal v. Jagmohan Saran (1985) 4 SCC 333; B.C. Chaturvedi v. Union of
India (1995) 6 SCC 749; Indian Overseas Bank v. I.O.B. staff Canteen
Workers' Union AIR 2000 SC 1508 ; Municipal Corporation of Delhi v.
Asha Ram and Anr.117 (2005) DLT 63 and Filmistan Exhibitors Ltd.
v. N.C.T. Secy. Labour and Ors. 131 (2006) DLT. In all the above
judgments, it has been held that a writ court should refrain from
interfering with the orders of an inferior tribunal or subordinate court
unless it suffers from an error of jurisdiction, or from a breach of the
principles of natural justice or is vitiated by a manifest or apparent
error of law.

15.

The objective of judicial review is that a person receives a fair

treatment and objective is not to re-appreciate the entire pleas and
evidence and draw inferences again. The Apex Court in (1995) 6 SCC
749 B.C.Chaturvedi Vs Union of India at page 759 in para 12 had
held as under:
“ 12 . Judicial review is not an appeal from a decision
but a review of the manner in which the decision is made.
WP(C) No.409/2008

Page 7 of 9

Power of judicial review is meant to ensure that the
individual receives fair treatment and not to ensure that
the conclusion which the authority reaches is necessarily
correct in the eye of the court. When an inquiry is
conducted on charges of misconduct by a public servant,
the Court/Tribunal is concerned to determine whether
the inquiry was held by a competent officer or whether
rules of natural justice are complied with. Whether
the findings or conclusions are based on some
evidence, the authority entrusted with the power to
hold inquiry has jurisdiction, power and authority to
reach a finding of fact or conclusion. But that finding
must be based on some evidence. Neither the technical
rules of Evidence Act nor of proof of fact or evidence
as defined therein, apply to disciplinary proceeding.
When the authority accepts that evidence and conclusion
receives support therefrom, the disciplinary authority is
entitled to hold that the delinquent officer is guilty of the
charge. The Court/Tribunal in its power of judicial
review does not act as Appellate Authority to reappreciate the evidence and to arrive at its own
independent findings on the evidence. The Court/
Tribunal may interfere where the authority held the
proceedings against the delinquent officer in a manner
inconsistent with the rules of natural justice or in
violation of statutory rules prescribing the mode of
inquiry or where the conclusion or finding reached by the
disciplinary authority is based on no evidence. If the
conclusion or finding be such as no reasonable person
would have ever reached, the Court/Tribunal may
interfere with the conclusion or the finding, and
mould the relief so as to make it appropriate to the
facts of each case.”

16.

In the circumstances there is no such error manifest in the

decisions taken by the respondent in awarding the penalty nor there
is denial of principles of natural justice so as to entail interference by
this Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India.

WP(C) No.409/2008

Page 8 of 9

17.

In the facts and circumstances, the writ petition is without any

merit and therefore, it is dismissed. All the pending applications are
also disposed of.

February 05, 2008
'k'

WP(C) No.409/2008

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 9 of 9

