IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of decision : December 5th , 2007

%

OMP No. 235 of 2003
# MMTC Ltd
!

......... Petitioner
Through:

Mr.Naveen Kumar, Advocates

Vs.
$ M/s.Irano Hind Shipping Co.
^

Through :

.......... Defendant
Mr.Siddharth Mridul,Sr.Advocate
with Mr.Manoj Khanna,
Advocate.

CORAM :*

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?

YES

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES

YES

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)

1.

This is a petition under section 34 of the Arbitration and

Conciliation Act, 1996 for setting aside the arbitral award dated 15th
November, 2002 passed by a majority of arbitrators, Mr. P.M.
Abraham and Mr.N. Sukumaran, in the matter of disputes relating to
M.V. Dehkhoda-Charter Party dated 17th May, 1995.

OMP No. 235 of 2003

Page 1 of 26

2.

The petitioner is a Government Company engaged in the

business of import and export of several commodities. The respondent
is a company incorporated under the laws of Iran and is in the
business as carriers by sea.

3.

The brief facts of the case are that the petitioner entered into a

contract no. 10/1995 with the Ministry of Food, Government of
Bangladesh for export of 50,000 MT of non-Basmati Rice. With a view
to fulfill its contractual obligations, the petitioner entered into a
charter party agreement dated 17th May, 1995 with the respondent
who leased out MV vessel, Dehkhoda for carriage of 12,300 MT of
bagged rice from ½ safe berths, safe Anchorages Madras to ½ safe
berths, safe Anchorages Chittagong and /or Mongla.

4.

As per the petitioner the MV Dehkhoda arrived at the Madras

port on 20th May 1995 and on completion of loading of the cargo at
the Madras port on 7.6.1995 the vessel MV Dehkhoda proceeded to
the first discharge port at Chittagong in Bangladesh where it arrived
and after the cargo was discharged on 28.6.1995 the vessel proceeded
to the last and final discharge port Mongla where the discharge was
completed on 20.7.1995.

OMP No. 235 of 2003

Page 2 of 26

5.

As per the respondents since the vessel utilized 12 days, 19 hrs

and 40 min in excess allowable lay time, the respondents had earned
a demurrage of US$57,690/- and after giving credit to the petitioner
herein for commission on freight, dispatch at the load port, brokerage
on commission, the amount due and payable by the petitioner to the
respondent was a sum of US $92,440.51 which was claimed by the
respondent from the petitioner.

6.

A certificate report dated 9th August 1995 was issued by the

SGS limited which inspected the cargo on board. Thereafter the
ministry of Food, Government of Peoples Republic of Bangladesh,
made a provisional claims of US$1,92,699.78 on account of shortage
of consignment of 727.169 MT bagged rice including 12.822 MT
damaged and 303.278 MT beyond specification. It was also contended
that the final claim will be preferred by the Ministry of Food as per the
contract.

7.

Thereafter

the

respondents

vide

letter

dated

25.10.1995

addressed to M/s J.M. Baxi and Co., respondents local agents,
requested the petitioner to remit an amount of US $92,440.51. The
respondents also sent along with the letter, the statement of account,

OMP No. 235 of 2003

Page 3 of 26

lay time calculation and receipt of 90% freight.

The petitioner

intimated the respondents that the vessel had delivered 412.410 MT
less cargo than the bills of lading quantity and intimated that 12.822
MT was received in a damaged conditions at Chittagong and the
Mongal Ports. A fax message dated 20th September, 1996 was sent to
the respondents’ local agents conveying that a sum of US$49,022.20
was processed and sent to F&A department for release of payment,
however the same was provisional in nature.

8.

An explanation was thereafter sought by the respondents

towards reduction in the amount claimed (US$92440.51) and the
amount authorized for remittance (US$49022.20) to which the
petitioner replied explaining that the main difference was because the
lay time was calculated from 20th June, 1996 in accordance with the
remarks at port and not from 12.6.1995 as calculated by the owners
and that the total over-age premium deducted was US$8594.86.
Thereafter the respondents sent a notice dated 2.5.1998 claiming the
principal amount of US$92400.51 along with interest accrued therein
at the rate of 24% per annum amounting to US$55,554.96 which
became due to the respondents 90 days from the date of completion of
discharge of cargo i.e. 22nd July 1995 to 31st October 1995 .

OMP No. 235 of 2003

Page 4 of 26

9.

On account of failure on the part of the petitioner in remitting

the payment in terms of the charter party agreement, a reference was
made to arbitration under clause 37 of the Charter party and a claim
of US$ 147995.47 being the principal amount and interest @ 24% per
annum was submitted before the arbitrator. The petitioner denied the
statement of claims filed by the respondent and relying upon clause 8
and 35 of the Charter party agreement stated that the respondents
should have exercised lien on cargo in respect of its claim for
demurrage, instead the respondents opted to keep quite. The
petitioner further during the proceeding before the arbitrator filed a
counter claim on 12.1.2000.

10.

The claims of the claimants/respondents and the counter

claims of the petitioners were as under:-

“A. Claims of the claimants/respondent:- US$
i) Balance 10% freight:
37,026.38
ii) Add Demmurage at the dispatch ports: 57,690.00
Less 3.75% commission
on demurrage: 2,163.37
55,526.63
Less Despatch at the load port:
112.50
922,440.51
B. Counter Claims of the petitioner:-

US$

i) Short delivery and delivery of damaged. 1,11,410.78
cargo to receivers

OMP No. 235 of 2003

Page 5 of 26

ii) Dispatch at load port:
iii) Dispatch at discharge port:
v) Over Age Insurance Premium (OAP):
v) Gear hire charges:

11.

276.56
7,945.83
8,594.86
793.55
1,29,021.58

The learned arbitrators after considering the Charter party

agreement and other relevant factor passed an arbitral award on 15th
November, 2002 which is as under :“To sum up the respondents shall pay the following
claims to the claimants:Balance 10% freight after adjustment of dispatch
at load port and demurrage at discharge port.
US$ 58,074.42
Less; 10% value of damaged cargo
of 12.822MT
US$ 1,679.68
US$ 56,394.74

12.

The aforesaid award passed by the learned arbitrator is under

challenge by means of a present petition on the grounds that the
same is against public policy and is erroneous and that the same was
based on assumptions and surmises. The petitioner contended that
since the respondents did not make any attempt to exercise its lien,
the same resulted in forfeiture of its right to claim demurrage from the
petitioner thereby discharging the petitioner of any liability for
demurrage. The petitioner further asserted that there was no bar on
the exercise of lien by the respondent and that clause 35 of the

OMP No. 235 of 2003

Page 6 of 26

charter party provided complete protection and that the petitioner
cannot be saddled with any liability arising from the negligence of the
respondents.

13.

The Petitioner has mainly challenged the majority maritime

award dated 15th November, 2002 made by Mr.P.M. Abraham and
Mr.N. Sukumaran contending that the award is contrary to the public
policy of India as contemplated in ONGC Vs. Saw Pipe Limited, Civil
Appeal no.7419 of 2001 decided by the Apex Court by order dated 17 th
April, 2003 on the ground that the award is in violation of statutory
provisions and cannot be said to be in public interest and
consequently the award is likely to adversely affect the administration
of justice. According to the petitioner, clause 38 of the Charter Party
clearly required the Tribunal to confine itself to the Charter Party
Contract entered into between the parties. The plea of the petitioner
is that perusal of the relevant clauses 8, 35 and 41(b) of the
Agreement, it is apparent that there was no bar on the exercise of lien
by the respondent. In any case, it is contended that exercise of lien
was not impossible and therefore as the respondent did not exercise
its lien, it lost its right to claim the demurrage and the balance freight
from the petitioner.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has very

emphatically contended that clause 35 fully protects the petitioner

OMP No. 235 of 2003

Page 7 of 26

from liability as there was no local law or practice in Bangladesh by
which lien could not be exercised by the respondent. The petitioner
has contended that the majority award is liable to be set aside as it is
contrary and in breach of Charter Party Contract and on account of
breach committed by the respondent in not exercising its lien over the
goods, the petitioner cannot be saddled with any liability arising from
the negligence of the respondent in the facts and circumstances.

14.

The petition is contested by the respondent contending that in

terms of clause 8 of Charter Party though respondent had a lien on
the cargo for freight, dead freight, demurrage and the petitioner was
responsible

for

the

demurrage

only

to

the

extent,

the

claimant/respondent was unable to obtain the payment of demurrage
from the foreign buyer by exercising lien over the cargo. Relying on
clause 41 B of the Charter Party, it was contended that balance 10%
freight

together

with

demurrage

had

become

payable

by

Charters/petitioner only within 90 days of completion of discharge.
Therefore, the lien could be exercised by the respondent only when
money became due, as the demurrage was not payable until the
expiry of 90 days after discharge and in these circumstances the
claimant/respondent could not lawfully and in accordance with
Charter Party Terms exercise lien on the cargo at a discharge port.

OMP No. 235 of 2003

Page 8 of 26

It is also contended that the Arbitrators were apprised of the legal and
practical difficulties at the port of discharge due to which lien could
not be legally and practically exercise as the lien clause was not
incorporated in the bills of lading number 1/1 and 1/2 dated 31st
May, 1995. Therefore, against the receiver of the goods, the
claimant/respondent was never in position to assert the lien in order
to recover the balance of freight and demurrage at the discharged
ports.

Relying on clause 41 (B) it is contended that since the

respondents could not exercise lien on the cargo for balance freight
and demurrage at the discharge port, therefore, the petitioner is liable
for the same. Inability and impossibility to exercise the lien was also
contended on the ground that the bills of lading had been marked as
`freight pre paid’ and as per settled law once “freight pre paid” bills of
lading were issued, no lien could be exercised for balance freight over
the cargo of an innocent third party and even Bangladesh law does
not provide for lien on the cargo of receiver nor such a lien could be
exercised where the bills of lading were marked “freight pre paid”.
Factually also, it is contended that there was no storage facility at the
discharge port and therefore, it was impossible and impracticable to
exercise lien at the discharge port and in the circumstances right of
lien was not effective as the receiver was the Government of
Bangladesh and the owner of cargo certainly would not have

OMP No. 235 of 2003

Page 9 of 26

permitted the cargo to be liened.

15.

Perusal of the majority award reflects that the arbitrator has

considered the respective pleas of the parties specially clause 8,
clause 26, clause 35 and clause 41 which are reproduced hereinafter:
“Cl.8: Lien Clause
Owners shall have a lien on the cargo for freight,
deadfreight, dumrrage. Charters shall remain responsible
for deadfreight and demurrage incurred at port of loading.
Charterers shall also remain responsible for freight and
demurrage incurred at port of discharge, but only to such
extent as the Owners have been unable to obtain
payment thereof by exercising the lien on the cargo”.
Cl.26:
At discharge Port(s) Notice of Readiness to be
tendered and accepted after obtaining fee pratique, plant
inspection, fumigation, if required, and after vessel's
entrance into berth. If docking is prevented due to berth
being occupied. Notice of Readiness to be tendered by
cable after free pratique, plant inspection and fumigation,
if required. Fumigation and plant inspection if required,
to be to Charterers and Receivers time and expense.
Notice of Readiness to be tendered and accepted at office
of Receivers at or before 4 P.M. Or before 1200 noon if
Thursday and lay time shall count 24 hours thereafter.”
Cl.35:
All liability of Charterers shall cease on completion
of loading, owners having lien on cargo for freight, dead
freight and demurrage.”

Cl.41:

OMP No. 235 of 2003

Page 10 of 26

(A)
Freight is payable in U.S. Dollars at London (U.K)
by telegraphic transfer to:Freight payable to : Freight to be remitted to US$
A/C No.
105551-102, at State Bank of India,
1 Milk Street, London EC2P 2JP,
Beneficiary: Irano-Hind Shipping Co.,
TEHRAN”
(B)
90% of the freight payable within (7) working days
of submission of freight bill, in triplicate, by the Indian
broker on behalf of Owners to Charterers. The balance
10% of the freight together with demurrage (if any) or less
despatch (if any) is payable by Charterers within 90
(Ninety) days of completion of discharge on production of
(i) copy of Charter party (ii) copy of Bills of Lading (iii)
receipt for payment of dispatchers fee at the loading port
(s) (if applicable).”

16.

The majority award has interpreted the implication of clauses,

8, 26, 35 and 41. The plea of the petitioner that clauses 8, 26 and 35
exonerates them from paying the demurrage at the discharged port
was considered as also the plea of the respondent

that it was

impracticable and impossible to exercise lien on the cargo giving the
environment in which they were placed. The relevant clause of
majority award in respect of impracticability and impossibility of
exercise of the lien by the respondent being paras 10.2 to 10.7 are
reproduced hereinafter:

OMP No. 235 of 2003

Page 11 of 26

“10.2
We have carefully considered the arguments
advanced by both parties and the various documents
including court decisions cited by the parties in support
of their respective stands. The CP/P terms have to be
viewed and interpreted as a single cohesive document and
any seeming inconsistency between specific Clauses have
to be viewed in the above context. Apparently Clause 8
gives a lien for the claimant on the cargo for demurrage at
the discharge port with the
Charters remaining
responsible only to such extent, as the owners have been
unable to obtain payment thereof by exercising lien on
cargo. According to Clause 35, all liability of Charters
shall cease on completion of loading; owners having lien
on cargo for freight, deadfreight and demurrage. At the
same time as per Clause 41B, 10% balance freight
together with demurrage, if any, is payable by Charterers
within 90 days of completion of discharge on production
of certain specified documents. This naturally raises a
question as to the point of time at which the Claimant
would have to exercise their right of lien under Clause 8.
It seems quite obvious from Clause 41B that the 10%
balance freight and demurrage is payable within 90 days
of completion of discharge and that too on production of
certain specified documents. When the Respondents in
this case under the charter party have upto 90 days from
completion of discharge to pay the 10% balance freight
and demurrage, it would seem to be an impossibility for
Claimants to exercise his right of lien which can best be
done when the cargo was still in his possession and
control. It is obviously not realistic to expect the
Claimants or anyone similarly placed to anticipate a
default on the part of Respondents to pay the 10%
balance freight and demurrage and exercise lien and
withhold the release of the cargo either prior to or during
or even immediately on completion discharge.
10.3
We have also considered the question
whether the Claimants could have reasonably exercised

OMP No. 235 of 2003

Page 12 of 26

his lien on the cargo under the facts and circumstances
of this case. The lien Clause has been the object of
scrutiny and analysis in a number of judicial
pronouncements and what stands out from these is that
it is not sufficient to merely give a right of lien to
Claimants but that right has to be an effective one. In the
“SINOE” (Lloyd's Law Reports, 1972 Volume I) Lord
Denning pronounced that “It seems to me that once it is
accepted that the two parts of the Clause are coextensive,
then it is sensible to require that the lien should be an
effective lien. It is no use for the shipowner to be given a
right of lien unless he can exercise it so as to get the
money due to him ........ So I would hold the lien for
demurrage must be effective at the time of discharge of
cargo-unless it is so, the Charterers are not relieved of
their liability” (Page 204-205). If the case of Respondents
is, as in this case, that the Claimant had a practicable
and effective right to exercise lien on the cargo then it is
for the Respondents to establish that it is in fact so. After
analysing various judgments having bearing on this
subject, M/s.Julian Coke, John Kimball, Timuthy Young,
David Martowski, Andrew Young and Leray Lambert in
their book “Voyage Charters” (Lloyd's of London Press,
1993) have concluded as follows “As the law is clearly
that the cessation of liability is coextensive with the
creation of an effective lien, the charterers ought to
establish that there is a lien and that it is effective in
order for their liability to cease.” (Page 342). In this case
the Respondent has not even attempted to establish that
the Claimants have an effective lien under the facts and
circumstances of this case.
10.4: It is also clear that it would have been
impracticable for the Claimants to exercise the lien. It
may be recalled that the Claimants' cause of action is in
respect of 10% balance freight and demurrage at the two
discharge ports. The partial discharge was completed at
Chittagong on 28.06.1995 and the balance at Mongla on

OMP No. 235 of 2003

Page 13 of 26

20.7.1995, where the demurrage claims had arisen.
Under Clause 41 B of C/P the Respondents are required
to settle the balance freight and demurrage claim within
90 days from the date of completion of discharge i.e
within 90 days after 20th July, 1995. The Respondents
have been claiming till their revised laytime statement
was given to the Arbitration Tribunal on 16.11.2001 that
instead of demurrage payable to the Claimants, despatch
is owed to them by the Claimants. When the fact of
demurrage, not to speak of its quantum, is repudiated by
the Claimants, it becomes all the more difficult, if not
impossible, for the Claimants to take any concrete step in
pursuance of their right of lien even if the implications of
Clause 41B are ignored for the sake of argument. The
Claimants could have effectively exercised his lien only by
stopping the delivery of cargo at some point of time when
the ship was still at berth. No port will allow a ship to idle
merely because the ship owner is in the process of
exercising some right of his against the Charterer/Cargo
receiver. Any such action on the part of shipowner would
have resulted in the ship losing her discharging turn and
in order to regain her turn the shipowner would have had
to join the ships queing for discharge at the port. This is
not a feasible option for any shipowner to take especially
in Bangladesh ports where delays in getting berths and
delays caused by cyclones etc are by no means unusual.
The fact that in this very case the ship had to wait for 9
days to enter berth due to bad weather should not be lost
sight of.
10.5 The vessel owner will have a lien on the charterer's
cargo only so long as he retains possession of the cargo.
In this case the Shipper/Charterer is MMTC, a Public
Sector Undertaking and the Cargo Receivers are the
Bangladesh Government. The original Bills of Lading
issued to MMTC have been endorsed to the Bangladesh
Government. Even though the Charter party does not
mention that the Bills of Lading shall be deemed to
contain all the conditions of the charter party, neither the

OMP No. 235 of 2003

Page 14 of 26

Claimants nor the Respondents have produced before the
Tribunal the original Bills of Lading and it is not,
therefore, clear whether the endorsee as an innocent third
party has been made aware of the charter party
provisions and that the Claimants have a lien on the
cargo. Further it is noted that the Bills of Lading have
been endorsed “Freight Prepaid” and under these
circumstances it is neither possible or legal for the vessel
owner to deny delivery of the cargo to an endorsee
especially if it is the Government of Bangladesh. It is
therefore clear to us that it would have been
impracticable to exercise lien in the Bangladesh port and
any attempt to exercise lien while the ship was in
Bangladesh
waters
would
have
invited
serious
consequences for the ship perhaps including seizure of
the vessel. We hold that under the facts and
circumstances of this case, the lien given by Clause 8 was
not an effective or practical one and therefore failure to
exercise the lien does not weaken much less invalidate
the right of Claimants to recover demurrage at discharge
port from the Respondents. Similar ineffectiveness of the
lien is applicable to recovery of freight also and therefore
clause 35 which exonerates the Charterer of all liability
for freight also and demurrage cannot have any effect. So
far as freight is concerned Charterer has not disputed his
liability to pay 10% balance freight despite the working of
cesser value 35. In other words, in our view either clause
35 is applicable in toto or not applicable at all against the
Claimants and cannot be truncated and invoked to suit
respondent's convenience.
10.6 As regards Clause 41 B it clearly provides that the
balance 10% freight together with demurrage is payable
by Charterers within 90 days of completion of discharge.
It may be noted that this a typed Clause in its entirety;
whereas Clause 8 (lien clause) is a printed clause with
some minor deletions concerning damages for detention
to vessel which is irrelevant to the subject case. It has

OMP No. 235 of 2003

Page 15 of 26

been held by the Queens Bench in the UK (Justice J.
Mocatta) in the ATHINOULA case that “It is well
established, where there was a conflict between a typed
Clause and printed Clause, the typed Clause should
prevail” and hence Clause 41B being the typed clause
prevails over the printed lien clause 8. Apart from this in
the same typed clause prevails over the printed lien
clause 8. Apart from this in the same ATHINOULA case
similar situation prevailed with regard to Lien Clause and
Freight/Demurrage payment Clause viz. Demurrage
would be paid by charterers within one week after
presentation of the Statement of Facts and time Sheet for
the voyage and since these things cannot take place until
after the cargo has been discharged and by then the
possibility of exercise of lien would have vanished and in
the circumstances Justice Mocatta Held that the
Charterers were liable to owners for discharge port
demurrage. In the case of M.V. DEHKHODA also the
demurrage as well as balance 10% freight became payable
by Respondents within 90 days of completion discharge.
Hence, the question of exercising lien for demurrage at
discharge port either during or immediately on
completion of discharge would have been a breach of
Clause 41 B of the Charter Party as the demurrage was
only accruing due but not yet due, till completion of
discharge and submission of certain documents and as
argued in the above case a lien can only be exercised for
money actually due and not for sums accruing due but
not yet due.
Moreover as stated earlier there was
divergence in calculation of laytime at discharge ports
between the Respondents/Receivers and the Claimants;
while the respondents maintained that despatch was
earned at discharge ports, the claimants all the while
maintained that the vessel had incurred demurrage. In
such a situation of diametrically opposite positions, it is
all the more difficult to ascertain with any degree of
certainty as to when to trigger clause 8 of the C/P for
exercising lien.

OMP No. 235 of 2003

Page 16 of 26

10.7 It is plausible to argue that given the right of lien by
the Claimants under clause 8 of C/P it was incumbent on
them to attempt to exercise lien for recovery of demurrage
at discharge port and their failure to do so is fatal to their
right to proceed against the respondents. The Tribunal is
unable to subscribe to this view.
Clause 41 (B)
contemplates the completion of discharge, the submission
of specific documents by the Claimants and the payment
to the Claimants of balance 10% freight and demurrage
within 90 days of completion of discharge. Any attempt
to enforce the lien before the completion of the above time
frame is liable to the deemed premature and an attempt
to exercise the lien after the above time frame would have
been infructuous. Apart from clause 41 (B) of C/P there
were other practical difficulties also which have been
referred to in the earlier paragraphs. These factors would
have rendered the exercise of lien or an attempt to
exercise it, under the circumstances of the case, an
impossibility, not merely an inconvenience.”

17.

Clause 8 of the charter party is a lien clause which provides

that owners shall have lien on the cargo for freight, dead freight,
demurrage and that the charterers shall remain responsible for dead
freight and demurrage incurred only at the port of loading. It further
provides that the charterers shall be responsible for freight and
demurrage incurred at the port of discharge, but only to such extent
as the owners have been unable to obtain payment thereof by
exercising lien on the cargo. Clause 35 of the charter party provides
that all the liability of the charterer shall cease on completion of

OMP No. 235 of 2003

Page 17 of 26

loading, owners having lien on cargo for freight, dead freight and
demurrage. Thus clauses 8 and 35 of the charter party exonerate a
charterer from any liability on account of demurrage the moment the
ship leaves the loading port. Thereafter, in case of any demurrage
incurred by the respondent at the discharge port, the buyer shall be
responsible for the same. However, clause 41(B) of the charter party
provides that 90% of the freight is to be payable within 7 days of the
submission of freight bill and that the 10% of the balance payment
together with dispatch (if any) or less dispatch (if any) is payable by
the charterer within 90 days of completion of discharge on production
of a copy of charter party, copy of Bills of Lading and receipt for
payment of dispatchers fee at the loading port(s) (if applicable).
However, clause 41 B states that 10% of the balance freight along
with demurrage shall be payable within 90 days of completion of
discharge.

18.

Because of clause 8 and 41 B the liability of the charterer

continues even after loading at the port of loading, in case the owner
is unable to obtain payment of 10% of freight with demurrage (if any)
by exercising his lien ninety days after discharge of goods. Because of
clause 41 B the amount of demurrage could not be demanded before
handing over the cargo to the receiver of the goods and the

OMP No. 235 of 2003

Page 18 of 26

respondent could not exercise his lien. Therefore creation of lien on
the goods was ineffective as the same was to be exercised only after
discharge of goods. In the circumstances the majority award that the
respondent was unable to exercise his lien does not suffer from any
such illegality which will shock the conscience of this court.

This

interpretation of the terms of the contract can also not be termed
contrary to the contract so as to be interfered with by this court in
exercise of its jurisdiction under section 34 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act,1996.

The dissenting award has laid emphasis on

the word ' impossible ' whereas clause 8 contemplates the liability of
the petitioner to the extent the respondent is ' unable ' to obtain
payment by exercising the lien. The arbitrators have held in detail the
contingency of exercise of lien by the respondent. In interpreting the
lien clause the majority award has considered a number of judicial
pronouncement and holding that merely giving a right of lien is not
sufficient but it has to be effective one also and in case the goods are
discharged, the lien cannot be exercised. The law is clear that
cessation of liability is coextensive with creation of an effective lien
but the lien should be effective for the liability to cease.

19.

The majority award has held that it is of no use for the ship

owner to be given a right of lien unless he can exercise it so as to get

OMP No. 235 of 2003

Page 19 of 26

money due to him and in the circumstances the lien for demurrage is
not effective and the petitioner is not relieved of its liability.

The

dissenting award by the Arbitrator, Mr.R.S. Saran, has gone on the
premise that process of exercise of lien may not always be a simple
affair and difficulties do arise and the lien being ineffective could
either be caused on account of illegality or because of impossibility.
According to him the word “impossibility” means impossibility and it
is not enough for the ship owners to show commercial inconvenience
or difficulty.

20.

Perusal of the charter agreement reflects that the liability of the

petitioner subsists in case the owner of the ship is unable to recover
the demurrage and once the goods have been discharged, it is not
possible to recover the demurrage. If the goods are discharged and
the demurrage cannot be recovered or it is not possible to recover, it
will be inability of the owner of the ship to recover the demurrage and
the liability of the petitioner/charterer will subsist. In any case, the
interpretation of contract as given by the majority arbitrators, is
possible. Though the dissenting award has a different interpretation,
but it does not lead to any inference that the interpretation given by
the majority award is not feasible. The majority award is not to be
interfered with or inferences which are drawn by the majority

OMP No. 235 of 2003

Page 20 of 26

Arbitrators are not to be substituted by this Court with the inferences
arrived at in adjudication of objections under Section 34 of the
Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 in the present facts and
circumstances of the case.

21.

The learned counsel for the respondent has also relied on a

decision of the single Judge of the High Court of Judicature of
Bombay in Arbitration Petition No.163 of 2003, Mineral and Metal
Trading Corporation Limited Vs. John Frangos & Others dated 21 st
July, 2003 holding that the petitioner Undertaking is indulging in
unnecessary litigation consuming the resources of the public sector
undertaking and wasting the court time.

In the said case also, the

dispute was whether the ineffective lien of the owner of the ship will
discharge the liability of the charterer to pay the demurrage. In the
said case also, 5% of the balance freight together with demurrage was
payable within 30 days of completion of discharge and acceptance of
time sheets by both the parties. In this case relied on by the
respondent, the majority Arbitrators had held that because of the
similar clause 41(b) in the charter party agreement, it was not
possible for the owner of the ship to exercise his lien on the cargo for
recovery of demurrage, because the liability to pay the amount of
demurrage by the receiver had arisen after cargo was discharged and

OMP No. 235 of 2003

Page 21 of 26

the time sheets had been accepted. While dealing with the objections
of the petitioner corporation in that case also the learned single Judge
had relied on various judgments and had rejected the contention of
the petitioner that the liability of the corporation was discharged on
account of lien created in favor of the owner of the ship. It was held
that the amount of the demurrage could not be demanded before
handing over the cargo to the receiver and the ship owner could not
exercise his lien on the cargo after it passes to the hand of the
receiver and consequently it was held that lien was ineffective and did
not discharge the liability of the petitioner corporation.

22.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has tried to distinguish the

ratio of this case on the ground that in the case of MMTC (supra)
before the Bombay High Court, the receiver of the goods had also
given a bank guarantee to the petitioner corporation. Perusal of the
judgment of the learned single Judge of the Bombay High Court
reflects that the ratio of the decision is that in case the lien is
ineffective, it will not discharge the liability of the charterer.

The

liability of the charterer was not held to be subsisting on the ground
of bank guarantee being given by the receiver of the goods to the
charterer, petitioner corporation. In the circumstances, the ratio of
the Mineral and Metal Trading Corporation (supra) is also applicable

OMP No. 235 of 2003

Page 22 of 26

to

the

liability

present case and the petitioner cannot contend that its
stood

discharged

as

the

lien

was

given

to

the

respondents/ship owner and it was for the ship owner to demonstrate
the impossibility of exercising the lien. If the owner is unable to
exercise lien, the liability of the petitioner corporation is not
discharged. In any case the liability of the petitioner corporation not
ceasing on account of ineffective lien of the respondent/owner is a
possible plausible interpretation of the contract and the same cannot
be interfered or set aside and/or substituted by the view now sought
to be contended by the petitioner.

23.

This is no more res integra that the Court cannot substitute its

own decision and conclusions, in interpretation of a contract which is
a matter for an arbitrator to decide. As appraisement of evidence by
arbitrator is never a matter which the Court questions and considers
because the parties have selected their own forum and the deciding
forum must be conceded the power of the appraisement of the
evidence. Reliance for this can be placed on 1992(2) RAJ 162 (SC)
Himachal Pradesh Electricity Board Vs. R.J. Shah and Co.; AIR 1990
SC 1340, M/s. Hind Builders vs. Union of India; AIR 1989 SC 890,
Sudharshan Trading Co. Vs. Government of Kerala and Anr; AIR 1989
SC 1263, Food Corporation of India Vs. Joginder Pal Mohinder Lal

OMP No. 235 of 2003

Page 23 of 26

and Anr.; AIR 1971 SC 1646, Union of India Vs. Kalinga Construction
Co., AIR 1999 (3) SC 3869, Arosan Enterprises Vs. Union of India.
There are limits for judicial reviewability and the Courts exercise
limited jurisdiction in the proceeding for setting aside an award under
Section 34 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. The Courts
do not exercise appellate jurisdiction over the verdict of an arbitrator
and as such cannot go into the merits of the case nor the court
should re-appraise and re-examine the evidence led before the
arbitrator.

24.

In AIR 1991 SC 945, S Harcharan Singh Vs Union of India; AIR

1992 SC 2192, Hindustan Construction Co Ltd. Vs State of J & K and
(2003) 8 SCC 4, Continental Construction Ltd. Vs State of U.P it was
held by the Apex Court regarding interpretation of the terms of the
contract that the Court cannot substitute its own interpretation with
that of the arbitrator so long as the interpretation of the arbitrator is a
possible one. If an interpretation to a particular clause of agreement is
given by the Arbitrator, such an interpretation although may be
erroneous, is final and binding and Court does not have power to
upset the findings. However, if Arbitrator passes an award by ignoring
the stipulation and prohibition contained in the agreement, then
Arbitrator travels beyond his jurisdiction. The objector is unable to

OMP No. 235 of 2003

Page 24 of 26

show as to which clause or term of the agreement has been ignored by
the Arbitrators.

25.

The arbitrator has given sufficient and cogent reasons for

deciding the claims of the claimant and for rejecting counter claim
nos. 1 & 2 of the objector in the present facts and circumstances. In
the circumstances, it cannot be said that the Arbitrator has exceeded
in his jurisdiction.

There does not seem to be any errors in the

inferences. Even if it is presumed that there is any error in the
inferences, the same shall be error within their jurisdiction and this
Court will not substitute its decision with the decision of

majority

Arbitrators who has considered all the material which is also relied on
by the objector. Though a ground has been taken that the Arbitrator
has not considered a material document but no such document has
been pointed out by the learned counsel for the objector.

26.

Under the award, the petitioners have been directed to pay

respondent 10% of the balance freight and the petitioner's contention
of being not liable to pay demurrage at discharge port was rejected.
The award rejecting the contention of the petitioner about being not
liable to pay demurrage at discharge port is, therefore, sustained. The
other claims awarded to the respondents have not been challenged.

OMP No. 235 of 2003

Page 25 of 26

The majority award had also awarded reimbursement of US$ 8594.86
to the petitioner on production of original voucher or other
satisfactory proof of payment in respect of which no original voucher
or other satisfactory proof of payment has been produced and
consequently the petitioner will not be entitled for over-age insurance
premium of US$ 8594.86 which is now disallowed as the petitioner
has still not produced any original voucher or any other satisfactory
proof of payment.

No other findings of the Arbitrators have been

challenged. The objections by the petitioner in the facts and
circumstances are without any merit and, therefore, they are
dismissed. However, parties are left to bear their own costs.

December 5th, 2007
'K/Dev'

OMP No. 235 of 2003

ANIL KUMAR J.

Page 26 of 26

