*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP(C) No.22020/2005

%

Date of decision : 05.05.2008

Ramesh Vimal
Through:

….… Petitioner
Mr. Deepak Vohra, Advocate.

Versus
District & Sessions Judge, Delhi & Another
......... Respondents
Through : Ms.Avnish Ahlawat with Ms.Latika
Chaudhary, Advocates.

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.
*
1.

This is a petition challenging the order dated 9th September, 2005

passed by the respondent holding that the petitioner was negligent in
his duties and was not properly doing work nor he performed his duties
as per High Court Rules and, therefore, imposing a penalty of
withholding two increments with cumulative effect subsequent to this
order.

W.P(C) No.22020/2005

Page 1 of 6

2.

The petitioner has challenged the order contending inter alia that

the Disciplinary Authority had completely ignored the defense version
and the fact that the petitioner is a physically handicapped person and
the penalty imposed upon him is not a minor penalty and is too harsh.

3.

The petition is contested by the respondent contending inter alia

that the petitioner failed to complete the peshi register despite two
memos issued to him by the Metropolitan Magistrate and it had also
been reported that the petitioner had not forwarded the case on peshi
register for the last seven years. The petitioner is also alleged to have
two memos issued to him on 27th September, 2003 and 6th December,
2003 by the Administrative Branch for joining the duties immediately
and to complete the peshi register as per the rules laid down by the
High Court. It is contended that the memo of 6th December, 2003 was
issued for non-completion of peshi register despite issuance of memos
dated 27th August, 2003; 27th September, 2003 and 18th October, 2003.
It is also asserted by the respondent that the petition for judicial review
of order dated 9th September, 2005 is based on evidence and for the
judicial review the Court is not to exercise jurisdiction as an appellate
Court and therefore the writ petition is not maintainable and in any
case it is contended that the petitioner has an alternative remedy
available to him to file an appeal against the order dated 9th September,

W.P(C) No.22020/2005

Page 2 of 6

2005 and therefore, this Court should not exercise its jurisdiction
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.

4.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has not disputed that the order

dated 9th September, 2005 is appealable.

Learned counsel for the

respondent has also relied on Rule 24 of CCS Rules to contend that the
order dated 9th September, 2005 is appealable.

5.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that though the

appeal is maintainable but since the writ petition had been filed in
2005, it will be too harsh on the petitioner in case the writ petition
against the order dated 9th September, 2005 is not considered on the
ground that the alternative remedy is available to the petitioner.

6.

It is a settled position of law that in exercise of jurisdiction under

Article 226 of the Constitution of India, this Court is not interfere with
factual findings of the lower courts and should restrain itself from reappreciating evidence while exercising powers of judicial review.
Reliance for this proposition can be placed on the judgment of the
Supreme Court, Government of A.P. and Ors. v. Mohd. Nasrullah Khan
reported as (2006) 2 SCC 373. Writ court should refrain from interfering
with the orders of an inferior tribunal or subordinate court unless it
suffers from an error of jurisdiction or from a breach of the principles of
W.P(C) No.22020/2005

Page 3 of 6

natural justice or is vitiated by a manifest or apparent error of law. The
objective of judicial review is that a person receives a fair treatment and
objective is not to re-appreciate the entire pleas and evidence and draw
inferences again. Judicial review is not an appeal from a decision but a
review of the manner in which the decision is made. Power of judicial
review is meant to ensure that the individual receives fair treatment and
not to ensure that the conclusion which the authority reaches is
necessarily correct in the eye of the court.

7.

The principal question which arises for consideration is as to

whether a discretionary jurisdiction should be refused to be exercised
on the ground of existence of an alternative remedy. Ordinarily, when a
dispute between the parties requires adjudication of disputed question
of facts based on evidence led by the parties both oral and documentary
which is to be re-appreciated, the Court may not entertain a writ
petition. However, access to justice by way of public law remedy should
not be denied when a lis involves public law character and when the
forum chosen by the parties would not be in a position to grant
appropriate relief. The present petition does not involve a lis of public
law character. It can also be not said that the appellate authority
against the impugned order dated 9th September, 2005 would not be in
position to grant an appropriate relief. This also cannot be disputed that
in an appropriate case, in spite of availability of the alternative remedy,
W.P(C) No.22020/2005

Page 4 of 6

the High Court may still exercise its writ jurisdiction in at least three
contingencies: (i) where the writ petition seeks enforcement of any of the
fundamental rights; (ii) where there is failure of principles of natural
justice; or (iii) where the orders or proceedings are wholly without
jurisdiction or the vires of an Act is challenged.

8.

In the case of the petitioner it is apparent that he is not seeking

enforcement of his fundamental rights nor there is alleged failure of
principles of natural justice nor the order is wholly without jurisdiction
considering the scope of interference by this Court in exercise of its
jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.

9.

Consequently, though this Court will have jurisdiction under

Article 226 of the Constitution of India, however, the petitioner must
exhaust the alternative remedy available to him to approach the
appellate authority against the order dated 9th September, 2005 and
this Court is not exercising its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India for the relief claimed by the petitioner. It is for the
petitioner to exhaust his alternative remedy. The petitioner has
impugned the order dated 9th September, 2005 mainly on the evidence
led by the parties. The petitioner has been contending that he had not
failed to discharge his duties for the various reasons disclosed by him
and has also relied on the statement of the witness of the respondent.
W.P(C) No.22020/2005

Page 5 of 6

In the circumstances, it will be appropriate for the petitioner to avail an
alternative remedy available to him and this Court is not inclined to
exercise its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.

10.

In the circumstances, this Court declines to exercise its

jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and the writ
petition is disposed of with liberty to the petitioner to avail the
alternative remedy of appeal against the order dated 9th September,
2005. The learned counsel for the petitioner has also prayed that delay
in filing the appeal against the order dated 9th September, 2005 be
condoned. Considering the facts and circumstances, it will be for the
appellate authority to decide whether the petitioner is entitled for
condonation of delay in filing the appeal in accordance with rules and
regulations in case the appeal is filed by the petitioner against the order
dated 9th September, 2005. Therefore the delay in filing the appeal, if
any, in case an appeal is filed by the petitioner against the order dated
9th September, 2005 cannot be condoned and it will be decided by the
Appellate Authority. With these directions and observations the writ
petition is disposed of. Parties are left to bear their own costs.

May 05th, 2008
'Dev'
W.P(C) No.22020/2005

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 6 of 6

