IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Date of decision :August 06, 2007
A.A. No.441/2006

#
!

Mr.Manohar Bhatia

......... PETITIONER
Through: Mr.V.K. Sharma, Advocate
Vs.

$
^

Development Credit Bank Limited
.......... RESPONDENT
Through : Mr.Ajay Monga, Advocate

CORAM :* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?

YES

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

NO

NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)

1.

This is a petition filed by Mr.Manohar Bhatia, petitioner, under Section

11 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 for appointment of an
arbitrator.

2.

The petitioner contended that he is the owner/landlord of flat No.4F,

Forth floor, Hansalaya Building, 15, Barakhamba Road, New Delhi-110 001
and the premises was demised to the respondent and a registered lease

A.A. No.441/2006

Page 1 of 7

deed dated 20th March, 2004 was executed for a period of five years
commencing from 1st April, 2004.

3.

According to the petitioner under the terms of the lease, the petitioner

was entitled to terminate the lease on account of respondent being in arrears
of rent. The petitioner contended that the rent for April, 2006 till June 2006
was not paid in accordance with the terms of the lease and, therefore, a
notice dated 12th June, 2006 was sent to the respondent asking him to pay
the arrears of three consecutive months within 30 days of the receipt of the
notice. The notice dated 12th June, 2006 was received by the respondent on
19th June, 2006, however, within 30 days as demanded by the petitioner, the
arrears of rent at the rate of Rs.42,780/- per month were not paid and
consequently a legal notice dated 20th July, 2006 was served on the
respondent terminating the lease and seeking possession of the premises
besides damages and other dues and interests was sent.

4.

The petitioner contends that pursuant to notice dated 20th July,

2006, the rent for three months, i.e., April, May and June, 2006 was tendered
to the petitioner on 27th July, 2006 by three different cheques which were
accepted by the petitioner without prejudice to his rights and contentions.

A.A. No.441/2006

Page 2 of 7

5.

The petitioner, therefore, contended that since the tenancy of the

respondent has already been determined and he failed to handover the
possession of the premises and the respondent also failed to pay other
charges, the disputes have arisen and, therefore, a notice dated 29th August,
2006 invoking the Arbitration Agreement between the parties was sent asking
the respondent to appoint the arbitrator.

6.

The arbitration agreement as incorporated in the lease deed

executed between the parties is as under:-

“10.1 Any dispute, controversy or claim arising out of or relating to this Lease
or any related agreement or other document or the validity, interpretation,
breach or termination thereof (“Dispute”), including claims seeking redress or
asserting rights under applicable law, if any shall, be resolved and finally
settled by referring the same to arbitration of a sole arbitrator to be appointed
by the mutual consent of the parties. The arbitrator to be appointed shall be a
retired Judge of Delhi High Court or the Supreme Court of India and the
arbitration shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 as may be amended from time to time
or its re-enactment (the “Arbitration Act”). The parties consent to a single,
consolidated arbitration for all Disputes that may at the time exist. The
arbitrtation shall be conducted in Delhi. The parties agree to be bound by any
award or order resulting from any arbitration conducted hereunder.
10.2 The Lessor and the Lessee agree that they shall not commence or
maintain any suit or legal proceeding concerning the Dispute, until the
Dispute has been finally settled in accordance with the arbitration procedure
provided for herein. Subject to the provisions for reference to arbitration, the
Courts at New Delhi shall have exclusive jurisdiction to try and entertain any
A.A. No.441/2006

Page 3 of 7

proceedings arising out of or in relation to this Agreement.”

7.

The notice invoking arbitration clause and seeking appointment of

the arbitrator was served on the respondent on 2nd September, 2006,
however, no reply was received nor the arbitrator in terms of arbitration
agreement has been appointed even after passing of 30 days from 2nd
September, 2006 when the notice was served. In these circumstances, the
petitioner has sought for appointment of an arbitrator to adjudicate the
disputes regarding recovery of possession, damages with effect from 10th
August, 2006, payment of maintenance charges and recovery of rent from
1st July, 2006 to 9th August, 2006 and interest on the late payment for April,
May and June, 2006 and the cost of the arbitration proceedings.

8.

After the petition was filed, the notice was issued to the respondent

and a reply dated 17th March, 2007 has been filed on behalf of respondent
contending inter alia that the application seeking appointment of sole
arbitrator is a gross abuse of process of law as there is no dispute,
controversy or claim arising out of or in relation to the lease deed dated 20th
March, 2004. The respondent contended that there is no dispute and the
petitioner is trying to execute a pre-meditated plan to oust the respondent
from the said premises. According to the respondent, the rent was paid
A.A. No.441/2006

Page 4 of 7

regularly till December 2005, however, thereafter petitioner closed his
account on 6th December, 2005 with the respondent and the rents for the
subsequent months from January til March 2006 were paid to the petitioner
by demand drafts which were personally collected by him. The respondent
has objected to the appointment of arbitrator also on the ground that all the
cheques of the rentals are processed at Mumbai and are forwarded to
respective divisions for further remittance and since the petitioner did not
come to collect the rent with malafide intention despite telephonic enquiries
being made and he was intimated to collect the pay orders, however, he did
not come and collect the rent and kept on assuring that the cheques would
be collected. According to respondent, no cause of action has arisen and
there are no disputes as contemplated under the arbitration agreement and in
the circumstances, the arbitrator cannot be appointed.

9.

I have heard the learned counsel for the parties. Learned counsel for

the respondent has very vehemently contended that under Section 114 of the
Transfer of Property Act since the rent has been collected by the
petitioner/landlord, there is waiver of forfeiture of tenancy and up to date rent
has been paid, therefore, there are no disputes and the possession of
premises can not be handed over to the petitioner.

A.A. No.441/2006

Page 5 of 7

10.

It is apparent that the rent was collected by the petitioner without

prejudice to his rights. In case the tenancy between the petitioner and the
respondent was forfeited on account of non-payment of rent, whether
acceptance of rent without prejudice to rights and contentions of the landlord
will also tantamount to waiver of forfeiture and revival of tenancy or not, is a
dispute which has to be adjudicated by the Arbitrator. Similarly, the petitioner
is claiming interest for late payment of rent for the months of April, May and
June 2006. Where as the plea of the respondent is that cheques were ready
and petitioner had been assuring the respondent that the rent shall be
collected and, therefore, the petitioner is not entitled for any interest the
petitioner denies the same and therefore, this dispute also require
adjudication by the Arbitrator. This is a dispute which has arisen in respect of
tenanted premises which was demised pursuant to lease deed executed
between the parties, which has the arbitration clause and, therefore, it cannot
be inferred that the disputes which have arisen between the parties do not
pertain to the arbitration agreement between the parties. The petitioner is
also claiming recovery of possession of the premises besides interest at 15%
per annum on various accounts including the damages with effect from 10th
August, 2006, i.e., the date of termination of the lease deed which are the

A.A. No.441/2006

Page 6 of 7

disputes which have arisen between the parties pertaining to the arbitration
agreement and, therefore, the plea of the respondent that there is no
arbitrable disputes between the parties cannot be sustained.

11.

Considering the facts and circumstances that the disputes have arisen

between the parties and there is a legal and valid arbitration agreement
between the parties. I appoint Mr. Justice J.B.Goel (Retd.) A-3, Mod
Apartments, 61, Vashundhara Enclave, Delhi 110096 (Mobile: 9811559347;
Phone: 22628299) as the sole Arbitrator to adjudicate the disputes between
the parties. Learned Arbitrator shall be entitled to decide his fee per sitting.
The parties are, however, directed to appear before the sole Arbitrator on
27th August, 2007 at 4.00 pm. A copy of this order be communicated to the
Arbitrator forthwith. The parties are also directed to communicate the order
to the Arbitrator. Copies of this order be given dasti to the parties.

With these directions, the petition is disposed of.

August 06, 2007
'sdp'

ANIL KUMAR, J.

A.A. No.441/2006

Page 7 of 7

