IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of decision: December 6th , 2007

%

AA No.529/2006
#
!

M/s UP State Bridge Corporation
......Petitioner
Through: Mr.Vivekanand, Advocate.
Vs.

$
^

Delhi Development Authority and Anr
.....Respondents
Through : Mr.Bhupesh Narula, Advocate.

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
ANIL KUMAR, J.(Oral)

1.

This is a petition under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration &

Conciliation Act, 1996 for the appointment of an arbitrator in terms of
arbitration agreement between the parties as the disputes have
arisen.

2.

The petitioner is a public sector undertaking of the government

of Uttar Pradesh and is engaged in the work of the construction of
Bridges. Sh.Arun Kumar, Deputy Project Manager of the petitioner,

AA 529 of 2006

Page 1 of 13

has signed, verified and instituted the petition who is duly authorized.

3.

The petitioner contended that the respondents invited tender for

execution of works as detailed under para (iii) of the petition which
are as under:a)
b)

Construction of clover leaf to Noida more flyover
(under construction at inter section of NH -24
NPOIDA more on Delhi side,

c)

Construction of culvert on slip road on Delhi side of
NOIDA more Flyover,

d)

4.

Construction of clover leaf to Sarita Vihar flyover at
the intersection of NH-2 and road no. A.

Widening of existing culvert on NH-24 near NOIDA
More Flyover.

Pursuant to the notice inviting tender, the petitioner submitted

the tenders for the aforesaid works which was accepted and the works
were awarded to the petitioner by the respondents by letter dated the
24th February, 2003 bearing number F. 6(28) EE/FD-4/DDA/2002 –
2003 issued by the Executive Engineer flyover division no. 4, DDA on
behalf of the respondents for Rs. 6, 33, 00, 000/-.

The stipulated

date for commencement and completion of all the works was on 10th
March 2003 and 9th April, 2004 respectively.

The petitioner

contended that despite all the efforts made by the petitioner to
execute and complete the work within the stipulated time, the work
could not be completed within the stipulated time and was prolonged

AA 529 of 2006

Page 2 of 13

much beyond the stipulated period on account of persistent delays,
faults, failures and breaches of contract, attributable wholly to the
respondents as a result of which huge losses were incurred by the
petitioner which the respondents were liable to make good. The
completion of work at Noida More and at Sarita Vihar were recorded
as on 31st March, 2005 and 30th June, 2005 respectively.

5.

Thereafter the respondents issued show cause notice to the

petitioner in terms of letters dated 13th October, 2005 and 14th
October, 2005 under clause 2 of the contract. Show cause notices
were replied by the petitioner on 25th October, 2005 refuting the
allegations made therein. Subsequently, a penalty of Rs.20,000/- and
Rs.50, 000/- was imposed on the petitioner on account of delay in
completion of work at the Sarita Vihar and Noida More site
respectively

which

was

communicated

to

the

petitioner

by

respondents letters dated 10th November, 2005 and 30th November,
2005. The imposition of penalty by the respondents was refuted by
the petitioner in its letter dated 31st December, 2005 on the ground
that the delay was occasioned on account of lapses on the part of the
respondents due to which huge losses were suffered by the petitioner.
Thereafter final bills were raised by the petitioner, however, the
respondents declined to make payment against the final bills despite
repeated requests made by the petitioner for release of payment.

AA 529 of 2006

Page 3 of 13

6.

Since no payment was forthcoming and as the claims of the

petitioner were declined by the subordinate officer of the respondent,
therefore, the petitioner was constrained to invoke the arbitration
clause and issued a letter dated 27th October, 2006 addressed to the
respondent no.2, who is the competent authority in terms of the
arbitration clause 25, and demanded appointment of an arbitrator in
terms of arbitration agreement to adjudicate the claims of the
petitioner.

By a letter dated 1st December, 2006, the respondents

appointed Shri Pramod Kumar, SE of DDA as an arbitrator, however,
the copy of the letter appointing an arbitrator was not sent to the
petitioner. The Arbitrator appointed by the respondent declined to be
an arbitrator and intimated about it by his letter date 5 th December,
2006. Arbitrator appointed declined to be an Arbitrator on account of
having dealt with/inspected all the works in question in the capacity
of the Executive Engineer, East Zone.

7.

As the petitioner did not know about the appointment of

arbitrator by the respondent and the appointed arbitrator declining to
act as an arbitrator, consequently, the petitioner has filed the present
petition for appointment of an independent and impartial arbitrator
by this Court on the ground that the disputes and claims as raised by
the petitioner are to be decided in accordance with Arbitration
agreement and the respondents have failed to appoint an arbitrator

AA 529 of 2006

Page 4 of 13

within thirty days of demand being made for the appointment of the
arbitrator.

8.

Till the filing of the petition, the respondents did not appoint an

arbitrator, therefore, notice was issued to the respondents. A reply
has been filed by the respondents objecting to the appointment of an
arbitrator by the Court on the ground that on 27th October, 2006 the
petitioner applied for appointment of an arbitrator and on 22nd
November, 2006, Sh. Pramod Kumar, was appointed as an arbitrator
by the respondent. Appointment of arbitrator was communicated to
the Arbitrator by respondents by letter dated 1st December, 2006
which was dispatched to the petitioner on 4th December, 2006 which
is before the date of filing of the petition. The respondent contended
that Sh.Pramod Kumar did not enter upon the reference and gave his
resignation on 5th December, 2006 and that within 30 days of the date
of resignation of Sh. Pramod Kumar, the respondent has appointed
Sh.S.S.Jain, SE(Arbn)-1 as a sole arbitrator in place of Sh.Pramod
Kumar by letter dated 21st December, 2006 bearing number
F4(62)Arbn/FD-4/06/DDA/417 and a copy of the same was sent to
the petitioner as well.

The respondent has therefore prayed for

dismissal of the petition on the ground that there is no cause of action
for instituting the petition as an arbitrator has already been appointed
by the EM /DDA which is the appointing authority, within 30 days

AA 529 of 2006

Page 5 of 13

from the date of resignation of Sh. Pramod Kumar.

9.

I have heard the counsel for the parties. The issue which needs

adjudication

is

whether

an

arbitrator

was

appointed

by

the

respondent within thirty days of the demand being made by the
petitioner for appointment of arbitrator for adjudication of disputes in
terms of arbitration agreement or before the filing of the present
petition. The petition was filed on 18th December, 2006 and the notice
on the petition was issued on 20th December, 2006.

10.

There is an arbitration agreement between the parties for

adjudication of the disputes by an arbitrator in terms of clause 25 of
the agreement which has not been disputed by the parties. Clause 25
of the agreement containing the arbitration agreement is as under:“Clause 25:
Settlement of Disputes and Arbitration
Except where otherwise provided in the contract all
questions and disputes relating to the meaning of the
specifications designs, drawings and instructions
hereinbefore mentioned and as to the quality of
workmanship or materials as used on the work or as to
any other question, claim, right, matter or thing
whatsoever in any way arising out of or relating to the
contract designs, drawings, specifications, estimates
instructions orders or these conditions or otherwise
concerning the works or the execution or failure to
execute the same whether arising during the progress of
the work or after the cancellation, termination completion
or abandonment thereof shall be dealt with as mentioned
AA 529 of 2006

Page 6 of 13

hereinafter:
i)

If the contractor considers any work demanded of
him to be outside the requirement of the contract,
or disputes any drawings, record or decision given
in writing by the Engineer in charge on any matter
in connection with or arising out of the contract of
carrying out of the work, to be unacceptable, he
shall promptly within 15 days request the Superintending Engineer in writing for written instructions
or decision. Thereupon, the Superintending engineer shall give his written instructions or decision
within a period of one month from the receipt of
contractor’s letter.
If the Superintending Engineer/Project Manager
fails to give his instructions or decision in writing
within the aforesaid period or if the contractor is
dissatisfied with the instructions or decision of the
Superintending Engineer/Project Manager, the
contractor may within 15 days of the receipt of
Superintending
Engineer/Project
Manager’s
decision appeal to the Engineer Member who shall
accord an opportunity to the contractor to be
heard. If the later so desires and to offer evidence
in support of his appeal. The Engineer Member
shall give his decision within 30 days of receipt of
contractor’s appeal. If the contractor is dissatisfied
with this decision, the contractor shall within a
period of 30 days from receipt of the decision, give
notice to the Engineer Member for appointment of
arbitrator failing which the said decision shall be
final binding and conclusive and not referable to
adjudication by the arbitrator.

ii).

AA 529 of 2006

Except where the decision has become final,
binding and conclusive in terms of sub Para (i)
above disputes or differences shall be referred for
adjudication through arbitration a sole arbitrator

Page 7 of 13

appointed by the Engineer member, DDA. If the
arbitrator so appointed is unable or unwilling
to act or resign his appointment or vacates his
office due to any reason whatsoever shall be
appointed in the manner aforesaid.
Such
personal shall be entitled to proceed with the
reference from the stage at which it was left by
his predecessor.
It is a term of this contract that the party invoking
arbitration shall give a list of disputes with
amounts claimed in respect of each such dispute
along with the notice for appointment of arbitrator
and giving reference to the rejection by the chief
engineer of the appeal.
It is also a term of this contract that no person
other than a person appointed by Engineer
member, DDA as aforesaid should act as arbitrator
and if for any reason that is not possible, the
matter shall not be referred to arbitration at all.
It is also a term of this contract that if the
contractor does not make any demand for
appointment of arbitrator in respect of any claims
in writing as aforesaid within 120 days of receiving
the intimation from the Engineer in charge that the
final bill is ready for payment, the claim of the
contractor shall be deemed to have been waived
and absolutely barred and Government shall be
discharged and released of all liabilities under the
contract in respect of these claims.
The arbitration shall be conducted in accordance
with the provisions of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act,1996 (26 of 1996) or any statutory
modification or re-enactment thereof and the rules
made thereunder and for the time being in force
shall apply to the arbitration proceedings under

AA 529 of 2006

Page 8 of 13

this clause
It is also a term of this contract that the arbitrator
shall adjudicate on only such disputes as are
referred to him by the appointing authority and give
separate award against each dispute and claim
referred to him and in all cases where the total
amount of the claims by any party exceeds Rs.
1,00,000/- the arbitrator shall give reasons for the
award.
It is also a term of the contract that if any fees are
payable to the arbitrator these shall be paid equally
by both the parties.
It is also a term of the contract that the arbitrator
shall be deemed to have entered on the reference on
the date he issues notice to both the parties calling
them to submit their statement of claims and
counter statement of claims. The venue of the
arbitration shall be such place as may be fixed by
the arbitrator in his sole discretion. The fees, if
any, of the arbitration shall, if required to be paid
before the award is made and published, be paid
half and half by each of the parties. The cost of the
reference and of the award (including the fees, if
any, of the Arbitrator) shall be in the discretion of
the arbitrator who made direct to any by whom and
in what manner, such cost or any part thereof shall
be paid and fix or settle the amount of cost to be so
paid.
It is also a term of the contract that wherever and
whenever
decision
of
Superintending
Engineer/Project Manager is final in terms of the
contract, would not be open to arbitration.”

11.

In terms of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 an

arbitrator is to be appointed within 30 days from the receipt of the

AA 529 of 2006

Page 9 of 13

notice invoking the arbitration clause or before filing the present
petition. Sh.Pramod Kumar was appointed as an arbitrator within 30
days of the issuance of notice dated 27th October, 2006 invoking the
arbitration clause by the petitioner. If the Arbitrator was appointed by
the respondents on 22nd November, 2006 who was intimated by letter
dated 1st December, 2006 which was not communicated to the
petitioner and if such an appointment is valid then in case of
unwillingness of the Arbitrator to act on account of the Arbitrator
having dealt with the matter earlier, appointment of another
arbitrator within thirty days when the arbitrator showed his
unwillingness to act as an arbitrator, will be valid and the petitioner
will not be entitled for any relief is to be considered in this petition.

12.

If the appointment of Shri Pramod Kumar was valid, then on

Arbitrator showing his unwillingness to act as an arbitrator, the
respondents do not get right to appoint another arbitrator, rather the
vacancy which had occurred on account of appointed arbitrator not
agreeing to act as an arbitrator, should have been filled under Section
15 (2) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. For filling the
vacancy which had occurred under section 15 of the Act, the
respondents should have given notice to the petitioner, which was not
done, rather present petition was filed before the vacancy could be
filled by the respondents by appointing Shri S.S.Jain as an arbitrator.

AA 529 of 2006

Page 10 of 13

The arbitration agreement between the parties also contemplates that
on account of Arbitrator appointed being unable or unwilling to act
or resign the subsequent Arbitrator shall be entitled to proceed form
the stage at which it was left by his predecessor. The petitioner was
intimated about the substituted Arbitrator only after the petition
under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 was
filed by the petitioner on 18th December, 2006 in which the notice was
issued to the respondent on 20th December, 2006 and a substituted
Arbitrator

was

appointed

only

on

21st

December,

2006.

The

Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 contemplates appointment of
an arbitrator and not arbitrator entering upon reference. If an
arbitrator is validly appointed who has not issued notice to the parties
to appear before him and if such an arbitrator decides not to act as an
arbitrator, it will create a vacancy as contemplated under section 15
(1)(a) of the Act which can be filled under section 15(2) of the Act.
Section 15 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 is as under:“15. Termination of mandate and substitution of
arbitrator:1) In addition to the circumstances referred to in
Section 13 or Section 14, the mandate of an
arbitrator shall terminatea) where he withdraws from office for any
reason; or
b) by or pursuant to agreement of the parties.
2) Where the mandate of an arbitrator

AA 529 of 2006

Page 11 of 13

terminates, a substitute arbitrator shall be
appointed according to the rules that were
applicable to the appointment of the arbitrator
being replaced.
3) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties,
where an arbitrator is replaced under sub-Section
(2), any hearings previously held may be repeated at
the discretion of the arbitral tribunal.
4) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, an
order or ruling of the arbitral tribunal made prior to
the replacement of an arbitrator under this section
shall not be invalid solely because there has been a
change in the composition of the arbitral tribunal.”
13.

Learned

counsel

for

the

petitioner,

in

the

facts

and

circumstances, contends that since the vacancy had to be filled by a
substituted Arbitrator, therefore, without prejudice to rights and
contentions of the petitioner, the Arbitrator already appointed by the
respondent be appointed as an Arbitrator and the present petition be
treated as a petition under Section 15(2) of the Arbitration &
Conciliation Act, 1996 for appointment of a substituted Arbitrator in
place of earlier Arbitrator who showed his unwillingness to act as an
Arbitrator.

14.

In the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, therefore,

Shri S.S. Jain, SE, (Arbitration-I) is appointed as a substituted
Arbitrator by this Court who will adjudicate all the disputes between
the parties and his appointment shall not be by his designation. The

AA 529 of 2006

Page 12 of 13

present petition in terms hereof is disposed of.

December 6th, 2007
'sdp'

AA 529 of 2006

ANIL KUMAR J.

Page 13 of 13

