IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of decision : February 6th , 2008
WP(C) No.4490/1997
#

M/s Trading Engineer (International)
…… PETITIONER
Private Ltd
Through: Mr.S.S. Ray, Advocate.
Versus

$
^

Sh. Sudarshan Yadav & Others
...... RESPONDENTS
Through : Mr.S.K. Kashyap, Advocate for
respondent No.1
Mr.Yashpal Singh, Advocate for
respondent.

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
+ CM No.6270/2004 in W.P.(C) No.4490/1997
*
Learned counsel for non-applicant states that the copy of the
application which was given to him did not include name of Shri Ajay
Pal Singh, applicant No.12, nor any copy of the affidavit of Shri Ajay
Pal Singh in support of the application was given to him. The counsel
states that though he has filed the reply to the said application,
however, in view of non-supply of the copy of the affidavit of Shri Ajay

WP(C) 4490 of 1997

Page 1 of 9

Pal Singh, he seeks time to file an additional reply. Additional reply
be filed within four weeks.
List on April 1, 2008.
CM No. 9990/2005 in W.P(C) No.4490/1997
1.

The applicants/workmen have filed this application under

Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 seeking a direction
to the petitioner to pay full salary to the respondents including the
back wages during the pendency and till the final disposal of the writ
petition.

2.

According to the respondents/applicants, they are unemployed

since the date of termination of their services being 1st November,
1983 and that despite best of their efforts they have not been able to
find a job in any establishment, as a result of which they are facing
financial crisis and also have no other source of income. The
application is supported by the affidavits of all the applicants.

3.

In reply to the application of the respondents/applicants, the

petitioner has filed an affidavit of Sh.Satvinder Singh, Vice President
of the petitioner company, contending that an affidavit dated 3rd
December, 1997 was filed by the petitioners wherein a list ‘A’ and list
‘B’ were filed as annexure. List ‘A’, indicated the name of the workmen

WP(C) 4490 of 1997

Page 2 of 9

who were entitled for compensation calling upon them to receive the
amount due under section 25FFF of the Industrial Disputes Act
without prejudice to their right and contention in the writ petition
whereas list ‘B’ indicated the name of the workmen who have already
received the compensation. According to the petitioner the applicants
before this Court are the workmen whose names were included in list
‘A’ who, however, did not come forward to collect the compensation;
consequently, they are not entitled for any relief under section 17B of
the Industrial Disputes Act.

4.

In relation to applicant nos. 4, 7 and 8 the petitioner contended

that an application under Section 340 Code of Criminal Procedure
read with Section 193 of I.P.C has been filed against them praying for
an enquiry against these workmen as they had filed false affidavits
claiming themselves to be unemployed when they are gainfully
employed and that the same is pending adjudication. The petitioner
also asserted that it has already taken back in service five workmen
and is ready to give preference to the other workmen in case of any
future engagement in that category. The petitioner also stated that it
has also granted retrenchment compensation under section 25FFF to
other 20 workmen as well who had come forward to receive the same.
The petitioner, has therefore, contended that the application under
section 17B is not maintainable.

WP(C) 4490 of 1997

Page 3 of 9

5.

Section 17 B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 comes into

operation when an Award directing reinstatement of a workman is
assailed in further proceedings by the employer. Section 17B of the
Industrial Disputes Act is as under:"17-B. Payment of full wages to workman pending proceedings in Higher Courts. - Where in any case a Labour
Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal by its award directs
reinstatement of any workman and the employer prefers
any proceedings against such award in a High Court or
the Supreme Court, the employer shall be liable to pay
such workman, during the period of pendency of such
proceedings in the High Court or the Supreme Court, full
wages last drawn by him, inclusive of any maintenance
allowance admissible to him under any rule if the workman had not been employed in any establishment during
such period and an affidavit by such workman had been
filed to that effect in such court :
Provided that where it is proved to the satisfaction of the
High Court or the Supreme Court that such workman
had been employed and had been receiving adequate remuneration during any such period or part thereof, the
Court shall order that no wages hall be payable under
this section for such period or part, as the case may be."

Thus a workman would be entitled for relief under Section 17B
of the Industrial Disputes Act, if there is an award directing reinstatement of the workman and the employer has preferred proceedings
against such award at the High Court or Supreme Court and that the
workman had not been employed in any establishment during the pe-

WP(C) 4490 of 1997

Page 4 of 9

riod of pendency of such proceedings and an affidavit to that effect
has been filed by the workman. On satisfaction of the requisites as
laid down under section 17B, the court is bound to grant relief to the
workman in terms of the provision as laid down under section 17B of
the Industrial Disputes Act. Also the Court cannot go into the merits
of the case/writ petition while deciding an application under section
17B of the Act as was held in 86 (2000) DLT 510=2000 (5) AD (Delhi)
413, Anil Jain v. Jagdish Chander.

6.

The object underlying section 17B of the Industrial Disputes

Act, 1947 is to mitigate and relieve, to a certain extent, the hardship
which would be caused to a workman due to delay in the
implementation of an award directing reinstatement of his services on
account of the challenge made to it by the employer.

Section 17B

recognizes a workman’s right to the bare minimum to keep the body
and soul together when a challenge has been made to an Award
directing his reinstatement as the statutory provisions provide no
inherent right of assailing an order or an award by an industrial
adjudicator by way of an appeal.

7.

Also granting relief under Section 17B of the Act and passing

orders directing payment of wages last drawn, is generally the rule;

WP(C) 4490 of 1997

Page 5 of 9

refusing to grant relief under Section 17B is an exception, as the relief
could be denied only in the rarest of the rare cases of jurisdictional
error where there is no relationship of employer and employee
between the parties.

8.

In the present case, by award dated 30th April, 1997 the relief of

reinstatement was awarded to the workmen which award has been
assailed by the employer/petitioner and that the workmen has
categorically averred in the application that they have not been
employed in any establishment since the date of termination of his
services which is 1st November, 1983 and have also filed affidavits
deposing the same. The petitioner has placed nothing on record to
negate the factum of unemployment of the respondents/workmen
since the date of termination of their services. Merely on the basis of
an application being filed by the petitioner under section 340 of the
Cr.P.C the benefit of section 17B of the Act cannot be denied to the
respondents, also the application is pending adjudication and that
there is no finding by this court that the respondents were gainfully
employed nor any order for holding an enquiry to ascertain the same
has been made. Further granting of retrenchment compensation
cannot be a ground for denying benefit of section 17B to the
workmen. The applicants/workmen, in the facts and circumstances,
fulfills the criteria for availing the benefit under section 17B of the Act

WP(C) 4490 of 1997

Page 6 of 9

and in exercise of powers under Article 226 of the Constitution, if the
requisites of Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 are
satisfied, no order can be passed denying the workman the benefit of
statutory provisions of Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947.

9.

The applicants are not the workmen who have been reinstated

by the petitioner. The applicants have also been given retrenchment
compensation without prejudice to the rights and contentions of the
parties. It is also not disputed that the Labor Court had directed the
reinstatement of the petitioner and the order of the Labor Court has
been stayed pursuant to the application of the petitioner.

10.

Though the petitioner has filed an application under section

340 of the Criminal Procedure Code, however, it has not been
established that the applicants have filed false affidavits. Merely on
account of pendency of the application, it can not be inferred that the
applicants are gainfully employed. The plea of the petitioner is based
on the presumption that the workmen would have been gainfully
employed

without

giving

the

particulars

and

details

of

their

employment.

WP(C) 4490 of 1997

Page 7 of 9

11.

The learned counsel for the petitioner is also unable to explain

as to how the applicant shall not be entitled for an order under
section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 on account of
payment of retrenchment compensation which has been accepted by
the applicants without prejudice to their rights and contentions. In
reply to the application of the applicants, the petitioner has not given
any such facts from which it could be inferred that the applicants are
gainfully employed with any establishment. As has already been held
that this Court will not go into merits of the writ petition at the time of
consideration of this application under section 17B of the Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947. In the circumstances, the petitioner has been
unable to make out a case for declining the relief of an order in favor
of the applicant under Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947 in the present facts and circumstances.

12.

Consequently, the application of the workmen/applicants/

respondents under Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947
is

allowed

and

the

petitioner

is

directed

to

pay

to

the

respondents/workmen the last drawn wages or the minimum wages
whichever is higher from the date of award dated 30th April, 1997
within eight weeks. The petitioner shall continue to pay last drawn
wages or the minimum wages in future also during the pendency of
this writ petitioner by 10th day of every month. Learned counsel for the

WP(C) 4490 of 1997

Page 8 of 9

petitioner has also offered the respondents/workmen to join the
services. In case individual offer is made and the applicants or any
one of them join the services, the petitioner shall be entitled for
modification of this order for future wages for such applicants who
will

join

the

services

of

the

petitioner.

The

applicants/

respondents/workmen are also directed to file their individual
undertaking that in case the writ petition is allowed, the difference
between the last drawn wages and the minimum wages shall be
repaid/refunded by the applicants/respondents to the petitioner
within the time allowed by this court. The undertaking to this effect
be filed by the applicants/ respondents/workmen within eight weeks.
With these directions, the application is disposed of.
W.P.(C) No.4490/1997
Rule has already been issued on 29.11.2000.
List the writ petition in the category of “Regular Matters” at its
turn.

February 06th, 2008
'Dev'

WP(C) 4490 of 1997

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 9 of 9

