*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP(C) No.19227/2006

%

Date of decision : 07.02.2008
MCD

….… PETITIONER
Through: Mr.Gaurang Kanth, Advocate.
Versus

Late Smt.Mithilesh through LRs
......... RESPONDENT
Through: Mr.Sanjoy Ghosh, Advocate.
CORAM :HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
Rule.
With the consent of the parties, the matter is taken up for final
disposal.
The petitioner has impugned the award dated 1st December,
2004 passed by the Industrial Tribunal reinstating the respondent,
Smt.Mithilesh, now deceased, with effect from 18th November, 2002
and granting back wages from 15th May, 1998 to 23rd February, 2000
and from 17th March, 2000 to 18th November, 2002.
The petitioner has impugned the award on the ground that the
WP(C) No.19227/2006

Page 1 of 8

workman/respondent had left the work on her own and, therefore,
she is not entitled for back wages. It is also contended that the
application for maternity leave of the respondent dated 15th May, 1998
was rejected and, therefore, the respondent ought to have remained
on her duty whereas the respondent continued to remain absent
unlawfully.
The contention of the respondent workman is that she was in
continuous service for more than 240 days before her termination and
consequently she was entitled to all the benefits of Section 25F of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
Regarding back wages awarded to the respondent, the learned
counsel for the respondent has relied on (2005) 8 SCC 314, Srikantha
S.M. vs. Bharath Earth Movers Ltd. and (2007) 7 SCC 689,
Commissioner, Karnataka Housing Board vs. C. Muddaiah to contend
that

since

the

respondent

was

willing

to

work

but

the

petitioner/Corporation did not allow her to work, it will not be open to
the petitioner to deny the monetary benefits to the respondent who
was not permitted to discharge her duties.

Learned counsel,

Mr.Sanjay Ghosh, for the respondent has also contended that since
the respondent was willing to work but she was illegally and
unlawfully not allowed to do so, the court shall be justified in
awarding her the back wages as if she had worked and consequently

WP(C) No.19227/2006

Page 2 of 8

the award of the Industrial Tribunal granting back wages for the
period specified does not suffer from any illegality. It has also been
pleaded that there is no such absolute proposition that if there is “no
work there will not be any pay”.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have perused
the pleadings, evidence and the award dated 1st December, 2004. The
Industrial Tribunal had relied on the fact that the workman had
applied for maternity leave on 15.03.1998 and her maternity leave
was wrongly refused and thereafter she was not allowed to join her
duties.

The workman has established that she had applied for

maternity leave and this was declined. This has been proved by the
respondent by stating on oath about it which fact was not denied by
the petitioner, rather it has been established that another person was
appointed in place of her and, therefore, justifying her contention that
she was entitled to continue for work and her term could not be
terminated.
The Tribunal has also noticed that the workman had served a
demand notice dated 21st March, 2001 which fact was accepted by the
Management and in the circumstances the inference which is drawn
by the Industrial Tribunal is that if the workman had made an
application for grant of maternity leave which was not granted,
therefore, she was not allowed to join her duties even after the period

WP(C) No.19227/2006

Page 3 of 8

when she became ready to attend her duties.
Learned counsel for the petitioner is unable to point out in the
award such anomaly or perversity in the inferences which have been
drawn by the Industrial Tribunal, which will entail interference by
this Court.. The findings of the fact arrived at by the Tribunal holding
that the respondent had applied for maternity leave which was not
allowed and that she was ready to join her duties after the period of
maternity leave but was not allowed to join the duties cannot be
termed to have any manifest error. It was also held that though she
failed to join her duties after the receipt of letter dated 23 rd February,
2000, however, she raised a demand for reinstatement on 17th March,
2001 and she was reinstated only on 18th November, 2002 and,
therefore, the back wages has been awarded from 17th March, 2001 to
18th November, 2002 and from 15th May, 1998 when she applied for
maternity leave till 23rd February, 2000 when the workman received
letter to join her duties.
Learned counsel for the respondent/workman had contended
that these inferences which have been drawn by the Industrial
Tribunal are plausible and cannot be termed perverse or suffering
from manifest error. Learned counsel for the petitioner is also unable
to show any perversity or such manifest error which should be
corrected by this court in exercise of the jurisdiction under Article 226
of the Constitution of India.
WP(C) No.19227/2006

Page 4 of 8

While exercising powers of judicial review under Article 226 of
the Constitution of India this Court is not to re-appreciate the
evidence. It is a settled position of law that in exercise of jurisdiction
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the Court is not to
interfere with factual findings and should restrain itself from reappreciating evidence while exercising powers of judicial review.
Reliance for this proposition can be placed on the judgment of the
Supreme Court, Government of A.P. and Ors. v. Mohd. Nasrullah
Khan reported as (2006) 2 SCC 373. Reliance may also be placed on
the following judgments rendered by the Supreme Court and this
Court concerning the scope of judicial review by a writ court: Harbans
Lal v. Jagmohan Saran (1985) 4 SCC 333; B.C. Chaturvedi v. Union of
India (1995) 6 SCC 749; Indian Overseas Bank v. I.O.B. staff Canteen
Workers' Union AIR 2000 SC 1508 ; Municipal Corporation of Delhi v.
Asha Ram and Anr.117 (2005) DLT 63 and Filmistan Exhibitors Ltd.
v. N.C.T. Secy. Labour and Ors. 131 (2006) DLT. In all the above
judgments, it has been held that a writ court should refrain from
interfering with the orders of an inferior tribunal or subordinate court
unless it suffers from an error of jurisdiction, or from a breach of the
principles of natural justice or is vitiated by a manifest or apparent
error of law.
The objective of judicial review is that a person receives a fair
WP(C) No.19227/2006

Page 5 of 8

treatment and objective is not to re-appreciate the entire pleas and
evidence and draw inferences again. The Apex Court in (1995) 6 SCC
749 B.C.Chaturvedi Vs Union of India at page 759 in para 12 had
held as under:
“12 . Judicial review is not an appeal from a decision but
a review of the manner in which the decision is made.
Power of judicial review is meant to ensure that the
individual receives fair treatment and not to ensure that
the conclusion which the authority reaches is necessarily
correct in the eye of the court. When an inquiry is
conducted on charges of misconduct by a public servant,
the Court/Tribunal is concerned to determine whether
the inquiry was held by a competent officer or whether
rules of natural justice are complied with. Whether the
findings or conclusions are based on some evidence, the
authority entrusted with the power to hold inquiry has
jurisdiction, power and authority to reach a finding of fact
or conclusion. But that finding must be based on some
evidence. Neither the technical rules of Evidence Act nor
of proof of fact or evidence as defined therein, apply to
disciplinary proceeding. When the authority accepts that
evidence and conclusion receives support therefrom, the
disciplinary authority is entitled to hold that the
delinquent officer is guilty of the charge. The
Court/Tribunal in its power of judicial review does not act
as Appellate Authority to re-appreciate the evidence and
to arrive at its own independent findings on the evidence.
The Court/ Tribunal may interfere where the authority
held the proceedings against the delinquent officer in a
manner inconsistent with the rules of natural justice or in
violation of statutory rules prescribing the mode of
inquiry or where the conclusion or finding reached by the
disciplinary authority is based on no evidence. If the
conclusion or finding be such as no reasonable person
would have ever reached, the Court/Tribunal may
interfere with the conclusion or the finding, and mould
the relief so as to make it appropriate to the facts of each
case.”
In the circumstances award of back wages for the period 15th
May, 1998 to 23rd February, 2000 and from 17th March, 2001 to 18th
WP(C) No.19227/2006

Page 6 of 8

November, 2002 cannot be faulted and the award does not have any
manifest error in respect thereof.
As to how much back wages are to be awarded has to be
determined considering the nature of job and the willingness of the
respondent to join the duties.

Once the Tribunal has come to a

finding that the respondent was willing to join, however, she was
declined maternity leave wrongly, therefore, considering all the
relevant factors, it is just and appropriate to award the back wages for
the period as have been granted by the Industrial Tribunal.
The Supreme Court in the case of Srikantha S.M.(supra) had
held that where a workman was willing to work but he was not
allowed to work, the employee cannot deny monetary benefits to such
a workman who was not permitted to discharge his duties. Relying on
Shambhu Murari Sinha Vs. Project and Development India, (2000) 5
SCC 621 it was approved that where the employee had attained the
age of superannuation, he would be entitled to full salary and
allowances.

In

a

recent

judgment

of

the

Supreme

Court,

Commissioner, Karnataka Housing Board (supra), it was held that
there is no absolute principle that if there is no work there would not
be any pay. It was held that where a person was willing to work and
he was illegally and unlawfully not allowed to do so, the proposition
that “no work no pay” cannot be applied absolute.

WP(C) No.19227/2006

Page 7 of 8

In the circumstances, the findings of the Tribunal awarding
back wages to the respondent from 15th May, 1998 to 23rd February,
2000 and from 17th March, 2001 to 18th March, 2000 cannot be set
aside on any of the grounds alleged by the petitioner.

Learned

Counsel for the respondent/workman has also contended that the
respondent/workman has since died and the amount of back wages
is also a paltry sum of few thousands rupees. In the totality of
circumstances, there is no perversity or manifest error or denial of
principle of natural justice or such other error which will require
inference of this court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226
of the Constitution of India.
The writ petition is, therefore, without any merit and it is
dismissed. Parties are however, left to bear their own costs.

February 7th, 2008
‘Dev’

WP(C) No.19227/2006

ANIL KUMAR J.

Page 8 of 8

