*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P(C) No.14134/2006

%

Date of decision: 07.03.2008

Sh.Sudhi Ram

….… Petitioner
Through: Mr.H.K.Chaturvedi, Advocate.
Versus

The Management of M/s.D.N.Rehani
....... Respondent
Through: Mr.Dhanesh Relan, Advocate.
CORAM :HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.
1.

The petitioner has impugned the award dated 14th November,

2005 not granting the back wages while granting reinstatement and
granting litigation expenses of Rs.20,000/-.

2.

That a reference dated 6th March, 1991 in the following terms

was made:“Whether the services of Sh.Sudhi Ram have been
terminated illegally and/or unjustifiably by the
management, and if so to what relief is he entitled and
what directions are necessary in this respect.”
WP (C) 14134 of 2006

Page 1 of 6

3.

The services of the petitioner were terminated on 7th July, 1990.

On the reference being made the claim was filed by the petitioner and
in the reply dated 10th November, 1992 to the claim, a copy of which
is produced by the petitioner, it was contended by the management to
direct the petitioner to report for duty immediately without causing
any further delay.

4.

An ex-parte award was passed against the respondent which

was, however, set aside and thereafter the matter was reconsidered
and it has been held that the petitioner had not abandoned the job
and therefore, he has been granted reinstatement.

5.

Regarding the back wages, it is apparent that the Labour Court

has considered the plea of the respondent in the written statement
dated

10th

November,

1993

seeking

a

direction

to

the

workman/petitioner to report on duty immediately without causing
any further delay and the fact that even in the evidence of the
management by affidavit dated 25th August, 2005, it was reiterated
that the petitioner be directed to report for duty immediately without
causing any further delay. However, the workman for the reason best

WP (C) 14134 of 2006

Page 2 of 6

known to him did not bother to report for duty and chose litigation for
his own convenience.

6.

The petitioner workman in his cross examination had admitted

that he has agricultural land of 1 bigha in the village and he is
cultivating it himself.

7.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the

back wages have been declined to the petitioner on the ground that in
the notice of demand the back wages were not demanded. It appears
from the award dated 14th November, 2005 that considering the
entirety of facts and circumstances the Labour Court has not granted
back wages especially in view of the fact that the petitioner was offered
to join the services as back as 10th November, 1993. The petitioner
had been cultivating his lands and petitioner did not make any
serious effort to go and join the duties offered by the respondent. In
the circumstances the decision of the Labour Court not granting back
wages cannot be held to suffer from any manifest error.

WP (C) 14134 of 2006

Page 3 of 6

8.

While exercising its powers of judicial review under Article 226

of the Constitution of India this Court is not to re-appreciate the pleas
and evidence of the parties and give its own findings. It is a settled
position of law that in exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India, the Court does not interfere with factual
findings of the lower courts and restrain itself from re-appreciating
evidence while exercising powers of judicial review. Reliance for this
proposition can be placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court,
Government of A.P. and Ors. v. Mohd. Nasrullah Khan reported as
(2006) 2 SCC 373. Reliance can also be placed on the following
judgments rendered by the Supreme Court and this Court concerning
the scope of judicial review by a writ court: Harbans Lal v. Jagmohan
Saran (1985) 4 SCC 333; B.C. Chaturvedi v. Union of India (1995) 6
SCC 749; Indian Overseas Bank v. I.O.B. Staff Canteen Workers'
Union AIR 2000 SC 1508; Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Asha Ram
and Anr.117 (2005) DLT 63 and Filmistan Exhibitors Ltd. v. N.C.T.
Secy. Labour and Ors. 131 (2006) DLT. In all the above judgments, it
has been held that a writ court should refrain from interfering with
the orders of an inferior Labor Court or subordinate court unless it
suffers from an error of jurisdiction, or from a breach of the principles
of natural justice or is vitiated by a manifest or apparent error of law.

WP (C) 14134 of 2006

Page 4 of 6

9.

The objective of judicial review is that a person receives a fair

treatment and objective is not to re-appreciate the entire pleas and
evidence and draw inferences again. The Apex Court in (1995) 6 SCC
749, B.C.Chaturvedi v. Union of India at page 759 in para 12 had held
as under:
“ 12 . Judicial review is not an appeal from a decision but
a review of the manner in which the decision is made.
Power of judicial review is meant to ensure that the
individual receives fair treatment and not to ensure that
the conclusion which the authority reaches is necessarily
correct in the eye of the court. When an inquiry is
conducted on charges of misconduct by a public servant,
the Court/Labor Court is concerned to determine whether
the inquiry was held by a competent officer or whether
rules of natural justice are complied with. Whether the
findings or conclusions are based on some evidence, the
authority entrusted with the power to hold inquiry has
jurisdiction, power and authority to reach a finding of fact
or conclusion. But that finding must be based on some
evidence. Neither the technical rules of Evidence Act nor
of proof of fact or evidence as defined therein, apply to
disciplinary proceeding. When the authority accepts that
evidence and conclusion receives support therefrom, the
disciplinary authority is entitled to hold that the
delinquent officer is guilty of the charge. The Court/Labor
Court in its power of judicial review does not act as
Appellate Authority to re-appreciate the evidence and to
arrive at its own independent findings on the evidence.
The Court/ Labor Court may interfere where the authority
held the proceedings against the delinquent officer in a
manner inconsistent with the rules of natural justice or in
violation of statutory rules prescribing the mode of inquiry
or where the conclusion or finding reached by the
disciplinary authority is based on no evidence. If the
WP (C) 14134 of 2006

Page 5 of 6

conclusion or finding be such as no reasonable person
would have ever reached, the Court/Labor Court may
interfere with the conclusion or the finding, and mould
the relief so as to make it appropriate to the facts of each
case.”

10.

Whether the finding of the Court that the petitioner is not

entitled for back wages is based on some evidence or not. Perusal of
the pleas and contentions of the parties that the inference drawn by
the Labor Court is based on pleas and evidence of the parties. This
Court does not have to review the findings of Labor Court in the facts
and circumstances as an appellate authority. There is no manifest
error or any perversity in the order of the Labor Court directing
reinstatement of the petitioner but declining him the back wages.
There are no grounds to invoke the jurisdiction of this Court under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India in the present facts and
circumstances of the case. The writ petition is without any merit.

11.

The writ petition, therefore, is without any merit and it is

dismissed. Parties are however, left to bear their own costs.

March 7th, 2008.
'k'
WP (C) 14134 of 2006

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 6 of 6

