IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of decision: December 7th, 2007

%

AA No.417/2007
#
!

M/s The Care Taker Group & Anr.
...... Petitioners
Through: Mr.Ashish Nischal, Advocate.
Vs.

$
^

Municipal Corporation of Delhi
.....Respondent
Through : Mr.Amit K.Paul, Advocate.

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
ANIL KUMAR, J.(Oral)
1.

This is a petition under Section 11 of the Arbitration &

Conciliation Act, 1996 for the appointment of an arbitrator in terms of
arbitration agreement between the parties as the disputes have
arisen.

2.

The notice of the petition was issued to the respondent,

however, despite opportunity given to the respondent, reply has not
been filed. No plausible reason has been given for not filing the reply
except that matter is also pending with CBI. The learned counsel for
AA No.417/2007

Page 1 of 10

the respondent is unable to explain as to how the pendency of the
matter will entitle them not to file the reply to the petition.

3.

The petitioner no. 1, Messrs Care Taker Group, is a partnership

firm and petitioner no. 2, Messrs Kaki Group, is a sole proprietorship
firm. The petitioners are civil contractors and are being represented
by Sh. Ashutosh Gangwar, partner and sole proprietor of petitioner
no. 1 and petitioner no.2 respectively, in the present petition.

4.

The petitioner contended that work for procuring and fixing of

Redstone benches in the MCD parks was executed by the petitioners
to the full satisfaction of the MCD as per the specifications laid down
by the respondents in terms of the work order awarded to the
petitioners. The petitioner had also deposited an earnest money of
Rs.1, 25,000/- with the respondent.

5.

The petitioner contended that pursuant to the completion of

work in the year 2003 --2004 bills amounting to Rs1, 00,06, 000/and were cleared/approved by the zones of MCD, Department of
Horticulture and also by the Chief Accountant of MCD. Thereafter,
other bills were sent for release of payments to the respective zones,
however, the respondents denied release of payments to the petitioner
relying on office order dated 23rd April, 2004 on the pretext that a case
AA No.417/2007

Page 2 of 10

bearing number AC 3 2004 A 0004 under section 13(2) read with
section 13(1)(d) of the PC Act, 1988 has been registered by Central
Bureau of Investigation and that no payment would be released if a
case is pending.

6.

Consequently disputes have arisen between the parties. There is

an arbitration agreement between the parties for adjudication of
disputes by an arbitrator in terms of clause 1 of the additional
condition of the contract. Clause 1 of the additional conditions of the
contract containing the arbitration agreement is as under:“ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS
Clause 1: Arbitration Clause
Except where otherwise provided in the contract all
requisitions and disputes relating to the meaning of the
specifications, design, drawing and instructions herein
before mentioned and as to the quality of workmanship of
materials used on the work or as to any other questions
claim right matter or thing whatsoever in any way arising
out or relating to the contract design, drawing
specifications, estimate instructions orders or these
conditions otherwise considering the work or the
execution or failure to execute the same whether arising
during the progress of the work or after the completion of
abandonment shall be referred to the sole arbitration of
the person appointed by the Commissioner MCD at the
time of dispute or the administrative head of MCD at the
time of such appointment. It will be no objection to any
such appointment that the arbitrator so appointed as a
Government Servant that he had to deal with the matters
to which the contract relates and that in the course of his
duties as Govt. Servant that he had expressed views on all
or any of the matter in dispute or difference.
The
arbitration to whom the matter is originally referred being
transferred vacation of office or being unable to act shall
AA No.417/2007

Page 3 of 10

appoint another person to act as arbitrator in accordance
with the terms of contract. Such person shall be entitled
to proceed with the reference from the stage at which it
was left by his predecessor it is also a terms of this
contract that no person other then a person appointed by
the Commissioner administrator head of the MCD as
aforesaid should act as arbitrator and if for any reason
that is not possible the matter is not to be referred to
arbitration at all. In all cases where the amount of the
claim in dispute in Rs.25,000/- (Rs.Twenty Five
Thousand only) and above the arbitrator shall give
reasons for the award.
Subject as aforesaid the provisions of the
Arbitration Act 1940 or any statutory notification or reinactment there of the rules made the render and for the
time being in force shall apply to the arbitration
proceeding under this clause.
It is a term of the contract that the party invoking
arbitration shall specified that dispute or disputes to be
referred to arbitration under this clause together with the
amount of amount claimed in respect of each such
disputes.
It is also a term of the contract and if the
contractor(s) do/does not make any demand for
arbitration in respect of any claim in writing within 90
days or receiving the intimation from the corporation or
any officer authorized in this behalf that the bill is ready
for payment in the claim of the contractor(s) will be
deemed to have been waived and absolutely barred and
the corporation shall be discharged and released of all
liabilities under the contract in respect of these claim.
In case the amount awarded by the Arbitration
exceed Rs.40,000/- the beard of the Arbitrator shall be a
speaking awarded.
The Arbitrator may from time to time with consent
of the parties enlarge the time for making and publishing
the award.
The decision of the Superintending Engineer
regarding the material or reduction as well as justification
there of in respect of rates for sub standard work which
may be decided to be accepted will be final and would not
be open to arbitration.”

AA No.417/2007

Page 4 of 10

7.

Since the disputes have arisen between the parties the

petitioner issued a legal notice dated 8th December, 2005 to the
respondent for release of the payments due to the petitioner. A writ
petition was filed by the petitioner for release of payments withheld
by the respondents, which petition was dismissed by an order dated
13th January, 2006 which order was challenged by the petitioner in a
Letters Patent Appeal which appeal was also dismissed as withdrawn
with the liberty to take appropriate remedy in accordance with law by
order dated 5th February, 2007.

8.

In the meanwhile, a reply dated 2nd February, 2006 was sent by

the respondent to the legal notice of the petitioner dated 8th December
2005 claiming the dues, stating that the payments can not be
released to the petitioner on account of pendency of case with the
Central Bureau of Investigation. In these facts and circumstances, the
petitioner was constrained to invoke an arbitration clause by letter
dated 11th July, 2007 addressed to the Commissioner, MCD and
demanded appointment of an arbitrator in terms of arbitration
agreement to adjudicate the disputes between the parties. No reply to
this letter invoking the arbitration agreement was given.

9.

Consequently, the petitioner has filed the present petition and

despite opportunity given, the respondents have not filed any reply

AA No.417/2007

Page 5 of 10

and in any case failed to appoint an arbitrator within 30 days from
the receipt of the notice invoking the arbitration agreement and even
before filing the present petition. In the circumstances, the plea of the
petitioner that there is an arbitration agreement in terms of clause 1
of additional condition of the contract cannot be refuted.

10.

The learned counsel for the respondent has contended, without

filing any reply, that the arbitrator was not appointed on account of
an investigation being carried on by the Central Bureau of
Investigation and that the entire contract/ agreement is vitiated by
fraud and therefore the Court cannot appoint an arbitrator in terms of
the arbitration clause as the same is also vitiated.

11.

The power of this Court under section 11 of the Arbitration and

Conciliation Act is no longer an administrative power as has been
held by the Supreme Court in SBP & Co. Versus Patel Engineering,
(2005)8 SCC 618 wherein it was opined that an order passed by the
Chief Justice or his designate under Sub-sections (5) or (6) of
Section11 of the 1996 Act is judicial in nature. It was stated:
39. It is necessary to define what exactly the Chief Justice, approached with an application under Section 11 of
the Act, is to decide at that stage. Obviously, he has to
decide his own jurisdiction in the sense, whether the
party making the motion has approached the right High
Court. He has to decide whether there is an arbitration
agreement, as defined in the Act and whether the person
AA No.417/2007

Page 6 of 10

who has made the request before him, is a party to such
an agreement. It is necessary to indicate that he can also
decide the question whether the claim was a dead one;
or a long barred claim that was sought to be resurrected
and whether the parties have concluded the transaction
by recording satisfaction of their mutual rights and obligations or by receiving the final payment without objection. It may not be possible at that stage, to decide
whether a live claim made, is one which comes within
the purview of the arbitration clause. It will be appropriate to leave that question to be decided by the arbitral
tribunal on taking evidence, along with the merits of the
claims involved in the arbitration. The Chief Justice has
to decide whether the applicant has satisfied the conditions for appointing an arbitrator under Section 11(6) of
the Act. For the purpose of taking a decision on these
aspects, the Chief Justice can either proceed on the basis of affidavits and the documents produced or take
such evidence or get such evidence recorded, as may be
necessary. We think that adoption of this procedure in
the context of the Act would best serve the purpose
sought to be achieved by the Act of expediting the process of arbitration, without too many approaches to the
court at various stages of the proceedings before the
Arbitral tribunal.”

Thus, in exercise of power under section 11 of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act what the court is to see is whether their existed a
valid arbitration agreement between the parties and once the court
comes to the conclusion that there exists a valid arbitration
agreement between the parties then on the request of any of the party
to such an agreement the Court may appoint an arbitrator to
adjudicate the disputes between the parties. The arbitration clause is
independent of the other terms of the contract. Even if the Contract is
vitiated by the alleged fraud the same would not ipso jure invalidate
the arbitration clause. No details of alleged fraud has been given by
the respondent in any of the replies to the communications and
AA No.417/2007

Page 7 of 10

notices from the petitioner. The principle that an arbitration
agreement is separate and independent of the contract in which it is
embedded and it survives the annulment of such contract, has even
been given statutory force in section 16(1) of the Act. Consequently,
the principle of autonomy is applicable however severe may be the
breach of the contract. Even if the contract in which the arbitration
clause has been embedded is held to be invalid for the reason that its
subject matter is not arbitrable under the law for the time being in
force, in India, the arbitration clause survives and the award resulting
from the arbitral proceeding under such clause will be perfectly valid.
Therefore the plea of the respondent that the arbitrator cannot be
appointed as the contract is vitiated which renders the arbitration
clause, forming a part of the contract, invalid is not acceptable. In any
case whether the contract is vitiated or not is not to be adjudicated by
this Court. What the court has to see is the existence of a valid
Arbitration Clause for appointing an arbitrator and the factum of
existence of an arbitration clause in the agreement has not been
challenged by the respondent. No reply to the letter dated 11th July,
2007 invoking the arbitration agreement was filed neither any reply to
the petition has been filed. Thus on the oral plea of the respondent
that the agreement is vitiated by fraud the appointment of arbitrator
cannot be declined. Also the learned counsel for the respondents is
unable to give any reason for not appointing an arbitrator on demand

AA No.417/2007

Page 8 of 10

being raised by the petitioner within 30 days of the notice nor any
explanation has been given as to how appointment of an arbitrator
could be withheld on the ground that the Central Bureau of
Investigation has registered a case against the petitioner.

12.

A learned Single Judge in Haryana Telecom Ltd. v. Union of

India & Anr., 112 (2004) DLT 339=2004 (3) RAJ 147, had held that if
the respondent fails to appoint an Arbitrator within the stipulated
time of 30 days of the notice, and even after filing of the petition
under Section 11 of the Act, it is for the Court to appoint an
Arbitrator. A Division Bench of this Court in Delkon (India) Pvt. Ltd.
v. G.M., Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd., 120 (2005) DLT 542 (DB),
relying on Datar Switchgears Ltd Vs Tata Finance Ltd has held in
para 4 is as under:
“4. We have given our careful consideration to the
arguments advanced by learned Counsel for both the
parties. In view of the law laid down in the case of Datar
Switchgears Ltd. v. Tata Finance Ltd. & Anr., IV (2000)
CLT 191 (SC)=VII (2000) SLT 543=JT 2000 (Suppl. 2) SC
226 it is no more res integra that the vacancy can be
supplied by a party pursuant to the arbitration agreement
even after thirty days of the receipt of the notice. However,
once a party approaches the Court and files a petition for
appointment by the designated authority of the Chief
Justice of that Court under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, the right to supply vacancy by the
opposite party is extinguished. If that right stood
extinguished on filing of the petition under Section 11(6)
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, in September
1998 the appointment of an Arbitrator on 3rd May, 1999
could not be made, therefore in our view, the order
passed by the learned Single Judge on 7th May, 1999
AA No.417/2007

Page 9 of 10

suffers from patent illegality. Therefore, the submission of
the respondent that the petitioner had appeared before
the Arbitrator and the application of the petitioner raising
preliminary objections is pending adjudication which
inter alia challenges the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator to
decide the dispute is of no consequence as from the order
reproduced above it was pursuant to the directions
passed by the learned Single Judge that the parties were
directed to appear before the Arbitrator. The petitioner
had no other option but to appear before the Arbitrator
and after appearing before the Arbitrator the petitioner
has not submitted to the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator,
rather has at first opportunity taken the objection that
the Arbitrator had no jurisdiction to proceed with the
matter.

13.

In Union of India v. M/s. R.R. Industries, 120 (2005) DLT 572

(DB) also it was held that once a party does not supply the vacancy or
fails to supply the vacancy before filing of a petition under Section
11(6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, such a party forfeits the
right to supply the vacancy in terms of the arbitration clause and
what remains is only the arbitration clause, i.e. the dispute has to be
resolved under the mechanism of alternative dispute redressal
scheme but no right survives to the respondent to supply the named
Arbitrator in the arbitration clause. Thus the arbitrator was to be
appointed before the filing of the petition and since no arbitrator has
been appointed by the respondent consequently, the respondent has
lost its right to appoint the arbitrator in terms of clause 1 of the
additional condition containing the arbitration agreement.

AA No.417/2007

Page 10 of 10

14.
1/36,

Consequently, I appoint Ms.Justice Usha Mehra (Retired), CSafdarjung

Development

Area,

New

Delhi,

(Mobile

No.9818421144, residence No.26531100, 26561316) as an arbitrator
to adjudicate all the disputes between the parties. The learned
Arbitrator shall decide her fees and the procedure for adjudication of
disputes between the parties.

The parties shall appear before the

arbitrator on 7.1.2008 at 4.30 PM. A copy of this order be sent to the
learned arbitrator forthwith. The parties are also directed to give a
copy of this order to the arbitrator. Copy of this order be given dasti to
the parties.

December 07, 2007
'k'

AA No.417/2007

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 11 of 10

