IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Date of decision : November 07, 2007
CS(OS) No.1178/2007

#
!

Mrs.Anita V.Kumar
Through:

......... PLAINTIFF
Nemo.

Vs.
$
^

Smt.Poonam Gupta & Ors
Through:

.......... DEFENDANTS
Mr.Vinay Kr. Garg, Advocate
for defendant Nos.1 and 2.
Ms.Rachana Srivastava,
Advocate for defendant No.3.

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

YES

2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?

NO

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.(Oral)

+

IA No.12850/2007

1.

This is an application by the Defendant nos.1 & 2 under

Order 7 Rule 11 read with Section 151 of the Code of Civil
Procedure seeking rejection of the plaint on the ground that the
transaction between the plaintiff and the defendant No.1 is
opposed to public policy and is barred under Section 23 of the
CS(OS) No.1178/2007

Page 1 of 16

Contract Act.

2.

According to the applicants/defendant Nos.1 & 2 the basis of

the claim of the plaintiff for suit for specific performance is a
compromise effected in W.P(Crl) No.844/2004 where plaintiff gave
her consent for quashing of FIR No.205/2004 and in return the
plaintiff was to receive from defendant No.1 her entire share
holding in defendant Nos.2 & 3 companies. According to the
defendants

the

aforesaid

compromise/agreement

was

also

acknowledged in letter dated 6th July, 2004.

3.

The plaintiff has filed the above noted suit for specific

performance. Her husband was the owner of the plot No.1, Savita
Vihar, New Delhi and a Conveyance Deed dated 31.7.1995 was
executed in his favor. Defendant Nos.2 & 3 are stated to be the
companies whose promoter Directors are, Smt. Poonam Gupta,
defendant No.1, and her husband Sh.Umesh Gupta. According to
the plaintiff during the lifetime of Sh.Virender Kumar Gupta a
Memorandum of Understanding dated 1st November, 1999; Sale
Deed dated 8th December, 1999; Deed of Sale agreement dated 3rd
January, 2000 and a Memorandum of settlement dated 24th
February, 2003 were executed between her husband and defendant
no.1 in respect of property at plot No.1, Savita Vihar, Delhi. Under

CS(OS) No.1178/2007

Page 2 of 16

the

documents

executed

by

late

husband

of

the

plaintiff

Sh.Virender Kumar Gupta had agreed to sale the basement to
defendant No.2 for sale consideration of Rs.10 lakhs and the
ground floor of the said house for Rs.25 lakhs. By sale deed dated
8th December, 1999 husband of the plaintiff had sold the ground
floor of the house to defendant No.2 and by agreement to sell dated
3rd January, 2000 it was agreed that the remaining consideration of
the ground floor that is the difference of the value agreed in
Memorandum of Understanding dated 1st November, 1999 and the
value of consideration mentioned in sale deed dated 8th December,
1999 shall be paid to her husband at the time of registration of the
sale deed. By Memorandum of Settlement dated 24th February,
2003 it was agreed that irrespective of whatsoever has been stated
in the Sale Deed dated 8th December, 1999, the possession of the
ground floor shall always remain with her husband and was not
delivered to defendant No.2 and since defendant No.2 failed to meet
his obligation and liabilities defendant No.2 shall execute and
register Deed of Re-Conveyance with respect to the ground floor of
the said house in favor of her husband.

4.

Since the defendant No.2 had failed to execute the Deed of

Re-Conveyance, Suit No.50/2004 was filed by plaintiff's husband
for a decree of declaration, however, during the pendency of the

CS(OS) No.1178/2007

Page 3 of 16

suit Sh.Virender Kumar Gupta died on 4th May, 2004 and
thereafter Sh.Umesh Gupta husband of defendant No.1 along with
his other associates took forcible possession of the ground floor of
the said house from the plaintiff on 6th May, 2004 and removed
plaintiff's belongings.

5.

On dispossession of the plaintiff the cases were registered

against Sh.Umesh Gupta, Deepak Gupta and Sh.Mangat Ram
Sharma and the proceedings were filed by them for quashing the
FIR filed against them. In the proceedings for quashing of FIR a
settlement was arrived at under which plaintiff gave her consent
for quashing the FIR and also agreed not to pursue the suit
No.50/2004 filed by her husband. It was also agreed that the share
holding of defendant No.1 in defendant Nos.2 & 3 shall also be
transferred to her.

The plaintiff has categorically averred:“12. That it is pertinent to mention that while making
the mention of aforesaid compromise, the petitioners
and their counsel in the aforesaid writ petition
influenced the plaintiff herein not to seek her
independent legal assistance for recordial of
compromise in the said writ petition as according to
them the same would be mere waste of money and
they assured that they would take proper care of the
interests of the present plaintiff. Accordingly the
plaintiff followed their advice in getting the aforesaid
CS(OS) No.1178/2007

Page 4 of 16

compromise recorded in the said writ petition. Even
the present plaintiff's affidavit dated 07.07.2004, as
filed in aforesaid writ petition was prepared by Shri
Anand Kumar, Advocate who is/was a junior to Shri
A.K.Wali, Advocate. Shri A.K.Wali is a retainer of the
present defendants since long. The counsels of the
petitioner in said writ petition though made a mention
of the settlement to the Court as well as in the present
plaintiff's aforesaid affidavit dated 07.07.2004, but
cleverly concealed the part to be performed by
defendant
No.1
by
virtue
of
said
settlement/compromise.
13. That though the plaintiff has performed her part
of the above mentioned compromise/agreement in
entirety yet the defendant No.1 has not performed her
part and has not done anything for transferring her
share holdings in the defendant Nos.2 & 3.”

6.

In the circumstances the plaintiff has prayed for a decree of

specific performance seeking a direction to the defendant No.1 to
transfer her entire share holding in defendant Nos.2 & 3 in the
name of and in favor of the plaintiff and for a permanent injunction
restraining the defendants from selling, transferring, pledging or
creating third party rights in the shares that the defendant No.1 is
holding in defendant Nos.2 & 3.

7.

The applicants contend that the basis of the suit of the

plaintiff is the agreement which was arrived at between the plaintiff
and defendant No.1 for transfer of her shareholding in defendant

CS(OS) No.1178/2007

Page 5 of 16

Nos.2 & 3 which was also acknowledged by letter dated 6 th July,
2004. The defendants contend that no agreement dated 6th July,
2004

was

ever

entered

into

or

that

defendant

No.1

ever

acknowledged her liability and the letter dated 6th July, 2004 is a
forged document. According to the defendants in their written
statement they have specifically taken the objection that the suit of
the plaintiff is barred under Section 23 of the Contract Act as the
agreement between the plaintiff and defendant No.1 was to stifle
criminal prosecution subject to consideration namely the entire
shareholding of defendant No.1 in defendant Nos.2 & 3 being
transferred in favor of plaintiff and for discontinuation of the
criminal proceeding.

8.

According

to

the

applicant/defendant

Nos.1

&

2

the

transaction is opposed to public policy in India and is barred under
Section 23 of the Contract Act. According to the applicant
agreement/compromise with defendant was effected during the
pendency

of

Writ

Petition

No.844/2004

whereas

from

the

documents it transpires that the writ petition was filed by
defendant Nos.2 & 3 and others including the husband of
defendant No.1 on 7th July, 2004 and perusal of the writ petition
and the order passed and the affidavits filed in the writ petition will
show that the story projected now before this Court is entirely

CS(OS) No.1178/2007

Page 6 of 16

different than stated by the plaintiff on oath before the Hon'ble
Court in W.P(Crl) No.844/2004. According to the applicant the
plaintiff herself has not withdrawn her statement dated 7th July,
2004 made in writ petition as incorrect and, therefore, the
statement to the contrary in the present suit is prima facie a false
statement.

9.

The applicant has relied on AIR 1976 Delhi 24, M/s.Anand

Prakash Om Prakash Vs.Oswal Trading Agency and Another and
AIR 1965 SC to contend that the agreement between the parties is
contrary to public policy and the suit is barred under Section 23 of
the Contract Act and the plaint is liable to be rejected.

10

It is no more res integra that to decide under Order VII Rule

11 of the Code of Civil Procedure, averments in the plaint have to
be read without looking at the defense and thereupon it has to be
seen whether on the averments made in the plaint, Order VII Rule
11 gets attracted or not and from the averments made in the plaint
it has to be seen whether the jurisdiction of the Court is made out
or not and whether the suit is barred by any law or plaint does not
discloses any cause of action. Rejection of a plaint is a serious
matter as it non suits the plaintiff and kills the cause of action. It
cannot be ordered cursorily without satisfying the requirement of
CS(OS) No.1178/2007

Page 7 of 16

the said provision. Reliance for this proposition can be placed on
2005

(4)

AD

S.D.Technical

(Delhi)
Services

541,
Pvt.

Kanwal
Ltd.;

Kishore

Manchanda

Vs

2005 (2) AD (Delhi) 430,

Arvinda Kumar Singh Vs Hardayal Kaur;

2005 (116) DLT 191,

Asha Bhatia Vs. V.L.Bhatia; 2003 (5) AD (Delhi) 370, Punam Laroia
Vs Sanjeev Laroia 2004 (111) DLT 121, Condour Power Products
Pvt. Ltd. Vs Sandeep Rohtagi.

11.

A cause of action is a bundle of facts which are required to

be pleaded and proved for the purpose of obtaining relief claimed in
the suit. For the aforementioned purpose, the material facts are
required to be stated but not the evidence except in certain cases
where the pleading relies on any misrepresentation, fraud, breach
of trust, willful default, or undue influence. Whether a plaint
discloses a cause of action or not is essentially a question of fact.
But whether it does or does not must be found out from reading
the plaint itself. For the said purpose the averments made in the
plaint in their entirety must be held to be correct. The test is if the
averments made in the plaint are taken to be correct in their
entirety, a decree would be passed or not. In ascertaining whether
the plaint shows a cause of action, the court is not required to
make an elaborate enquiry into doubtful or complicated questions
of law or fact. By the statute the jurisdiction of the court is
CS(OS) No.1178/2007

Page 8 of 16

restricted to ascertaining whether on the allegations a cause of
action is shown. In Vijai Pratap Singh v. Dukh Haran Nath Singh
(AIR 1962 SC 941) the Supreme Court held: (AIR pp.943-44, para
9)
“
By the express terms of Rule 5 clause (d), the
court is concerned to ascertain whether the allegations
made in the petition show a cause of action. The court
has not to see whether the claim made by the
petitioner is likely to succeed: it has merely to
satisfy itself that the allegations made in the
petition, if accepted as true, would entitle the
petitioner to the relief he claims. If accepting those
allegations as true no case is made out for granting
relief no cause of action would be shown and the
petition must be rejected. But in ascertaining
whether the petition shows a cause of action the
court does not enter upon a trial of the issues
affecting the merits of the claim made by the
petitioner. It cannot take into consideration the
defences which the defendant may raise upon the
merits; nor is the court competent to make an
elaborate enquiry into doubtful or complicated
questions of law or fact. If the allegations in the
petition, prima facie, show a cause of action, the court
cannot embark upon an enquiry whether the
allegations are true in fact, or whether the petitioner
will succeed in the claims made by him.”

12.

Therefore, if the plaint discloses some cause of action or

raises some questions which require to be adjudicated or to be
decided by the judge, the mere fact that the case is weak and not
likely to succeed is no ground for striking it out. The purported
failure of the pleadings to disclose a cause of action is distinct from
the absence of full particulars. In ascertaining whether the plaint
shows a cause of action the court does not enter upon a trial of the

CS(OS) No.1178/2007

Page 9 of 16

issues affecting the merits of the claim made by the plaintiff. It
cannot take into consideration the defenses which the defendant
may raise upon the merits; nor is the court competent to make an
elaborate enquiry into doubtful or complicated questions of law or
fact.

13.

In D. Ramachandran Vs. R.V. Janakiraman and Others,

(1999) 3 SCC 267 the Apex Court had held that effect of dismissal
of a suit is altogether different and distinct from the effect of
rejection of the plaint. For consideration whether the plaint
discloses cause of action or not the pleas and documents of the
defendants are not to be considered. The Apex Court had held as
under:“Learned Single Judge fell in error in placing
reliance upon the material supplied by the
defendant, which alone is sufficient to set aside the
impugned order. Learned Single Judge instead of
proceeding to reject the plaint dismissed the suit,
which approach is also erroneous. The effect of
dismissal of suit is altogether different and distinct
from the effect of rejection of the plaint. In case plaint
is rejected under Order 7 Rule 11, CPC, filing of a
fresh plaint in respect of the same cause of action is
specifically, permitted under Rule 13 of Order 7, CPC.
Altogether different consequence follows in the event of
dismissal of suit, which has the effect of precluding
the plaintiff to file a fresh suit on the same cause of
action. Rejection of plaint takes away the very basis
of the suit rendering as if there was no suit at all or
that no suit was instituted. Order of dismissal of suit
while recognising the existence of a suit indicates its
termination. While deciding the application under
Order 7 Rule 11, CPC, learned Single Judge ought not
CS(OS) No.1178/2007

Page 10 of 16

and could not have dismissed the suit. Even in the
decision of the Supreme Court in T.Arvindandam's
case (Supra), relied upon by learned Counsel for the
appellant, it was held that if on a meaningful-not
formal-reading of the plaint it is manifestly vexatious
and merit-less, in the sense of not disclosing a clear
right to sue, the Trial Court should exercise his power
under Order 7 Rule 11, CPC taking care to see that the
ground mentioned therein is fulfilled. In order to fulfill
that ground bare allegation made in the plaint and
documents filed therewith were required to be looked
into, which in the instant case clearly disclosed at
least a cause of action against the defendant that
defendant was liable for damages for its acts of
omission and commission. It would be an altogether
different situation that the plaintiff might not
ultimately succeed in obtaining a decree against the
defendant or that Court might come to the conclusion
that suit would not be maintainable against the
defendant and that plaintiff had a cause of action only
against defendant's principal and its parent until in
Hong Kong, but such aspect could not have been gone
into at this stage. Three paragraphs of the plaint
quoted above in our view do clearly disclose cause of
action for the plaintiff to claim damages.”

14.

In these circumstances what is to be ascertained is whether

the plaint discloses a clear right to sue on consideration of bare
allegations made in the plaint.

What is to be seen is that the

allegations made in the plaint, if accepted to be true, would entitle
the plaintiff to the relief he claims.

In ascertaining whether the

plaint shows cause of action, the court does not have to enter upon
a trial of issues affecting the merits of the case. The court does not
have to take into consideration the defenses which the defendant
has raised nor it will be appropriate to make an elaborate inquiry
CS(OS) No.1178/2007

Page 11 of 16

into doubtful or complicated questions of law or fact. The plaintiff
has alleged that her husband had entered into agreements with the
defendant no.1 for the sale of the properties and conveyance deeds
were executed and there after another agreement was executed
under which it was agreed that the possession was not handed
over to defendant no.1 as was stipulated in the conveyance deeds.
Agreement was also reached about re-conveyance of the property to
the plaintiff. The defendants, however, allegedly took possession of
the property from the plaintiff unlawfully resulting into registration
of cases against the defendants. The defendants agreed to transfer
the shareholding of the defendant no.1 in defendant no.2 & 3 to
the plaintiff. The defendants also acknowledged their liability by
letter dated 6th July, 2004.

15.

The cause of action in the facts and circumstances as had

been alleged and contended by the plaintiff is not only the
agreement agreeing to withdrawal of the criminal proceedings
registered against the defendant no.1 but also the acknowledgment
of liability by letter dated 6th July, 2004 by the defendants which is
denied by the defendants contending that the said letter of the
defendant no.1 has been forged by the plaintiff. The cause of action
of the plaintiff is also based on the agreements executed by the
husband of the plaintiff selling immovable property to the

CS(OS) No.1178/2007

Page 12 of 16

defendant no.1 and the agreement for re-conveyance of the
property by the defendant no.2 to the plaintiff. Whether the
agreement by the plaintiff not to oppose the withdrawal of the
criminal cases will be barred on account of public policy requires
adjudication of facts and law and it is only a part of the cause of
action. The defendants in the facts and circumstances, seek
rejection of plaint on the basis of defense raised by them that the
cause of action is only based on the compromise arrived at between
the parties in criminal proceedings and the letter dated 6th July,
2004 is forged and fabricated. Taking all the allegations in the
plaint it is apparent that the pleas raised by the defendants cannot
be decided without an elaborate enquiry and the plaint cannot be
rejected on the basis of same.

16.

The precedents relied on by the applicant stipulate the public

policy and the agreement against the public policy. In M/s Anand
Prakash Om Prakash (supra) the agreement relied on by the
plaintiff in that case was based on a transaction for sale of goods
otherwise than in the open market and intended to be carried out
with the aid of unaccounted funds, popularly called the `black
market’ and to defraud public revenue and it was held that such a
transaction is invalid and unenforceable.

In the present case,

however, the husband of the plaintiff entered into valid agreements

CS(OS) No.1178/2007

Page 13 of 16

for conveyance of the different portion of the property and another
agreement stipulating that the possession had been transferred to
the defendants is not correct and consequently it was also agreed
that the property shall be re-conveyed to the husband of the
plaintiff. The defendants however, took the forcible possession and
consequently criminal proceedings were initiated against them. In
the circumstances it cannot be said that the consideration is for
illegal purposes. The defendant no.1 agreed to transfer her
shareholding in the defendant no.2 & 3 and the possession of the
property which was to be re-conveyed was also agreed to remain
with the defendants and it was also agreed that the criminal
proceeding

will

be

withdrawn

against

the

defendants.

The

applicants have also contended that the reason given in the
affidavit dated 7th

July, 2004 is different than pleaded by the

plaintiff now in the suit and both the statements of the plaintiff
cannot be true and one of them is false. In the circumstances on
the basis of the allegations made by the defendants, it will not be
appropriate to reject the plaint in the facts and circumstances of
the present case. In view of the allegation of the defendants, it may
be possible to infer that the plaint of the plaintiff may be weak but
that will not be ground for rejection of the plaint nor the plaint can
be rejected at this stage on the ground that it is against the public
policy. Whether the defendants executed letter/agreement dated 6th

CS(OS) No.1178/2007

Page 14 of 16

July, 2004 or it is forged by the plaintiff, requires adjudication by
the Court and in the circumstances, it can not be inferred that the
plaint does not disclose cause of action and plaint is liable to be
rejected. The defendants had entered into an agreement for reconveyance of the property. Thereafter the defendants gained the
possession illegally and by the agreement not to further take
criminal action and the defendants being allowed to retain the
possession

the

consideration

involved

is

the

transfer

of

shareholding of the defendant no.1 in the defendant no.2 & 3.
Consequently the defendant no.1 has been allowed to retain the
possession subject to transfer of shareholding of the defendant
no.1 in the defendant no.2 & 3. In the circumstances, entire cause
of action is not against the public policy and hit by section 23 of
the Contract Act.

17.

Therefore, in the present facts and circumstances, there is no

merit in the plea of the defendants that the suit of the plaintiff is
barred under Section 23 of the Contract Act and the plaint is liable
to be rejected. The application is, therefore, without any merit and
deserves dismissal. The application is, therefore, dismissed. The
parties are however, left to bear their own costs.

CS(OS) No.1178/2007

Page 15 of 16

IA No.12848/2007 in CS (OS) No.1178/2007
*
This is an application by defendant Nos.1 and 2 for
condonation of delay in filing the written statement though the
caption of the application states that this is an application on
behalf of defendant Nos.2 and 3.
Issue notice to the non-applicant/plaintiff on applicant
taking steps within one week, returnable on January 18, 2008.
IA No.12849/2007
This is an application by defendant No.3 for condonation of
delay in filing the written statement.
Issue notice to the non-applicant/plaintiff on applicant
taking steps within one week, returnable on January 18, 2008.

November 7th, 2007
‘k’

CS(OS) No.1178/2007

ANIL KUMAR J.

Page 16 of 16

