IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of decision : January 7, 2008
WP(C) No.7487/2005
#
!

C.P.W.D

….… PETITIONER
Through: Mr.Jaswinder Singh, Advocate.
Versus

$
^

PRESIDING OFFICER & ANR
......... RESPONDENTS
Through : Mr.Varun Prasad, Advocate

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
*
CM No.3754/2006 in W.P(C) No.7487/2005

1.

This is an application by the respondent No.2 under Section

17B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 for direction to the petitioner
to pay full wages last drawn or minimum wages whichever is higher to
the applicant/respondent No.2 during the pendency of the writ
petition.

2.

The respondent No.2/applicant contended that he has not been

W.P(C) No.7487/2005

Page 1 of 14

in employment anywhere since termination of his services nor he has
been

engaged

in

any

other

employers/firms/companies/

establishment or in any other gainful avocation as he could not
secure the same despite best efforts on his part. In the circumstances
the applicant has prayed that he be paid last drawn wages with effect
from the date of award that is 30th August, 2004.

3.

A reply has been filed on behalf of petitioner contending that the

award dated 30th August, 2004 is legally unsustainable as the services
of respondent No.2 are deemed to be terminated on account of his
absence. It is also contended on behalf of petitioner/non-applicant
that in terms of policy dated 21st May, 1991 applicant’s services were
deemed to be terminated on account of respondent No.2 being
charged with murder and in the circumstances the Tribunal has
wrongly granted reinstatement with back wages and the award cannot
be sustained.

4.

Regarding payment of full wages or the minimum wages

whichever is higher from the date of the award it is contended that
the workman should be directed to disclose on affidavit as to how he
has been subsisting for such a long time after his acquittal as in the
circumstances it is inconceivable that the respondent is not gainfully
employed. The payment of any amount under Section 17B is also

W.P(C) No.7487/2005

Page 2 of 14

contested on the ground that respondent No.2/applicant was a
muster roll employee and he was not entitled to any particular post
for any period of time.

5.

Regarding the allegation of the applicant that he is not gainfully

employed since the date of termination of his services, the denial by
the petitioner is bald without any particulars. Rather it is contended
that the applicant should be directed to disclose as to how he has
subsisted and survived since the time his services were terminated.
The petitioner/non applicant has also not placed any material facts to
show that the applicant is gainfully employed and he is not entitled
for last drawn back wages from the date of the award.

6.

It is no more res integra that the provisions of Section 17 B of

the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 comes into operation when an
Award directing reinstatement of a workman is assailed in further
proceedings. The statute requires satisfaction of the following four
conditions:
(i)

(ii)
(iii)

an Award by a Labour Court, Tribunal or National
Tribunal directing reinstatement of a workman is
assailed in proceedings in a High Court or the
Supreme Court;
during the pendency of such proceedings, employer
is required to pay full wages to the workman;
the wages stipulated under Section 17B are full
wages last drawn by him, inclusive of any
maintenance allowance admissible to him under
any Rule;

W.P(C) No.7487/2005

Page 3 of 14

(iv)

7.

such wages would be admissible only if the
workman had not been employed in any
establishment during such period and an affidavit
had been filed to such effect

While considering an application under this provision it is

necessary to bear in mind that the spirit, intendment and object
underlying the statutory provision of Section 17B is to mitigate and
relieve, to a certain extent, the hardship resulting to a workman due
to delay in the implementation of an award directing reinstatement of
his services on account of the challenge made to it by the employer.
The preliminary consideration for making available such a relief to a
workman is to be found in the benevolent purpose of the enactment.
It recognizes a workman’s right to the bare minimum to keep body
and soul together when a challenge has been made to an Award
directing his reinstatement. The statutory provisions provide no
inherent right of assailing an order or an award by an industrial
adjudicator by way of an appeal. The payment which is required to be
made by the employer to the workman has been held to be akin to a
subsistence allowance which is neither refundable nor recoverable
from a workman even if the Award in his favor is set aside by the High
Court. In 1999 (2) SCC 106 (para 22), Dena Bank v. Kiritikumar T.
Patel the Apex Court was of the view that the object under Section
17B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 is only to relieve to a certain

W.P(C) No.7487/2005

Page 4 of 14

extent, the hardship that is caused to the workman due to the delay
in implementation of the Award. While considering the payment which
is required to be made by the employer to the workman in this behalf,
the Apex Court observed as follows:
“21. As indicated earlier Section 17B has been enacted by
Parliament with a view to give relief to a workman who
has been ordered to be reinstated under the Award of a
Labour Court or the Industrial Tribunal during the
pendency of proceedings in which the said award is under
challenge before the High Court or the Supreme Court.
The object underlying the provision is to relieve to a
certain extent the hardship that is caused to the
workman due to delay in the implementation of the
award. The payment which is required to be made by the
employer to the workman is in the nature of subsistence
allowance which would not be refundable or recoverable
from the workman even if the award is set aside by the
High Court or this Court. Since the payment is of such a
character, Parliament thought it proper to limit it to the
extent of the wages which were drawn by the workman
when he was in service and when his services were
terminated and therefore used the words ‘full wages last
drawn’. To read these words to mean wages which would
have been drawn by the workman if he had continued in
service if the order terminating his services had not
passed since it has been set aside by the award of the
Labour Court or the Industrial Tribunal, would result in
so enlarging the benefit as to comprehend the relief that
has been granted under the award that is under
challenge. Since the amount is not refundable or
recoverable in the event of the award being set aside, it
would result in the employer being required to give effect
to the award during the pendency of the proceedings
challenging the award before the High Court or the
Supreme Court without his being able to recover the said
amount in the event of the award being set aside. We are
unable to construe the provisions contained in Section
W.P(C) No.7487/2005

Page 5 of 14

17B to cast such a burden on the employer. In our
opinion, therefore, the words ‘full wages last drawn’ must
be given their plain and material meaning and they
cannot be given the extended meaning as given by the
Karnataka High Court in Visveswaraya Iron & Steel Ltd.
or the Bombay High Court in Corona Sahu Co. Ltd.
22. xxxx
23. As regards the powers of the High Court and the
Supreme Court under Articles 226 and 136 of the
Constitution, it may be stated that Section 17B, by
conferring a right on the workman to be paid the amount
of full wages last drawn by him during the pendency of
the proceedings involving challenge to the award of the
Labour Court, Industrial Tribunal or National Tribunal in
the High Court or the Supreme Court which amount is
not refundable or recoverable in the event of the award
being set aside, does not in any way preclude the High
Court or the Supreme Court to pass an order directing
payment of a higher amount to the workman if such
higher amount is considered necessary in the interest of
justice. Such a direction would be dehors the provisions
contained in Section 17B and while giving the direction,
the Court may also give directions regarding refund or
recovery of the excess amount in the event of the award
being set aside. But we are unable to agree with the view
of the Bombay High Court in Elpro International Ltd. that
in exercise of the power under Articles 226 and 136
granted under Section 17B. The conferment of such a
right under Section 17B cannot be regarded as a
restriction on the powers of the High Court or the
Supreme Court under Articles 226 and 136 of the
Constitution.”

8.

The petitioner has sought in his reply from the respondent

No.2/applicant as to how he has survived since his termination. The
W.P(C) No.7487/2005

Page 6 of 14

contention of the workman/applicant is that he is not gainfully
employed in any establishment.

“Gainful employment in an

establishment’ has been held by the Apex Court as not a self
employment. In Rajinder Kumar Kundra v. Delhi Administration,
(1984) 4 SCC 635 while considering the question relating to award of
back wages, the Supreme Court noticed thus:
“It was next contended on behalf of the appellant that
reinstatement with full back wages be awarded to him.
Mr. P.K. Jain, learned Counsel for the employer
countered urging that there is evidence to show that the
appellant was gainfully employed since the termination of
service and therefore he was not entitled to back wages.
In support of this submission Mr. Jain pointed out that
the appellant in his cross-examination has admitted that
during his forced absence from employment since the
date of termination of his service, he was maintaining his
family by helping his father-in-law Tara Chand who owns
a coal depot, and that he and the members of his family
lived with his father-in-law and that he had no alternative
source of maintenance. If this is gainful employment, the
employer can contend that the dismissed employee in
order to keep his body and soul together had taken to
begging and that would as well be a gainful employment.
The gross perversity with which the employer had
approached this case has left us stunned. If the employer
after an utterly unsustainable termination order of service
wants to deny back wages on the ground that the
appellant and the members of his family were staying
with the father-in-law of the appellant as there was no
alternative source of maintenance and during this period
appellant was helping his father-in-law of the appellant
as there was no alternative source of maintenance and
during this period appellant was helping his father-in-law
Tara Chand who had a coal depot, it cannot be said that
the appellant was gainfully employed. This cannot be said
W.P(C) No.7487/2005

Page 7 of 14

to be gainful employment so as to reject the claim for
back wages. There is no evidence on the record to show
that the appellant was gainfully employed during the
period of his absence from service. Therefore, the
appellant would be entitled to full back wages and all
consequential benefits.”

9.

Since the section itself mentions ‘employment in establishment’

self employment quite apparently is not in contemplation. Workman
can be denied the benefits under Section 17B of the Industrial
Disputes Act only when it is proved to the satisfaction of the Court
that the workmen has been employed and has been receiving
adequate remuneration during the period of pendency of the writ
petition. It is thus well settled that transient employment by the
workman does not affect his entitlement to receive wages pending
decision; that is to say that, the benefit of Section 17B of the Act
cannot be denied merely because the workman is engaged in some
activity or in some vocation to eke out his livelihood. Such relief can
be denied only if it is proved that the workman is gainfully employed
in some establishment and is receiving adequate and regular
remuneration which is not the case with the applicant.

10.

While considering an application under Section 17B of the

Industrial Disputes Act, the Court cannot go into the merits of the
case in the writ petition. It was so held in 86 (2000) DLT 510=2000 (5)
W.P(C) No.7487/2005

Page 8 of 14

AD (Delhi) 413, Anil Jain v. Jagdish Chander.

11.

Whether the applicant is entitled for last drawn wages or

something more. In 1970 1 SCR 51 entitled Town Municipal, Athani v.
P.O. LC Hugli & Ors. it was held by the Apex Court that a workman
has a legal right to wages under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 and
cannot be diverted to a remedy under Section 20 of the Minimum
Wages Act for enforcing such right. In this case, the Apex Court was
concerned with the power of the Act under Section 33(C)(2) of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and the principles laid down by the
Court would have a bearing on the issues raised before this Court as
well. From a conspectus of the authoritative pronouncements of the
Apex Court, the right of a workman to an amount equivalent to the
wages notified under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 is thus, in fact,
recognition of the constitutional mandate and nothing more. It is
undoubtedly, the bare minimum which is required by the workman to
subsist and is nothing more. Full wages last drawn can therefore only
mean all the wages that have fallen due atleast from the date of the
Award.

12.

This also cannot be disputed that granting relief under Section

17B of the Act and passing orders directing payment of wages last

W.P(C) No.7487/2005

Page 9 of 14

drawn, is generally the rule; refusing to grant relief under Section 17B
is an exception, as it could be passed only in the rarest of the rare
cases of jurisdictional error where there is no relationship between the
parties.

13.

A single Judge of this Court had culled the principles laid down

in various judicial pronouncement for grant of interim relief under
Section 17 B of the Act in 134 (2006) DLT 49, Food Craft Instt. Vs
Rameshwar Sharma & anr. As under:

(i)
An application under Section 17B can be made only
in proceedings wherein an industrial award directing
reinstatement of the workman has been assailed.
(ii)
This Court has no jurisdiction not to direct
compliance with the provisions of Section 17B of the
Industrial Disputes Act if all the other conditions
precedent for passing an order in terms of the Section
17B of the Act are satisfied [Re : (1999) 9 SCC 229
entitled Choudhary Sharai v. Executive Engineer,
Panchayati Raj Department & Anr.].
(iii) As the interim relief is being granted in exercise of
jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India,
the High Court can grant better benefits which may be
more just and equitable on the facts of the case than the
relief contemplated by Section 17B. Therefore, dehors the
powers of the Court under Section 17B, the Court can
pass an order directing payment of an amount higher
than the last drawn wages to the workman [Re : (1999) 2
SCC 106 (para 22), Dena Bank v. Kirtikumar T. Patel].
(iv)

Such higher amount has to be considered necessary

W.P(C) No.7487/2005

Page 10 of 14

in the interest of justice and the workman must plead
and make out a case that such an order is necessary in
the facts of the case.
(v)
The Court can enforce the spirit, intendment and
purpose of legislation that the workman who is to get the
wages from the date of the award till the challenge to the
award is finally decided as per the statement of the
objections
and
reasons
of
the
Industrial
Disputes(Amendment) Act, 1982 by which Section 17B
was inserted in the Act [Re : JT 2001 (Suppl.1) SC 229,
Dena Bank v. Ghanshyam (para 12)].
(vi)
An application under Section 17B should be
disposed of expeditiously and before disposal of the writ
petition [Re : 2000 (9) SCC 534 entitled Workman v.
Hindustan Vegetable Oil Corporation Ltd.].
(vii) Interim relief can be granted with effect from the
date of the Award [Re : JT 2001 Supplementary (1) SC
entitled Regional Authority, Dena Bank v. Ghanshyam;
2004 (3) AD (DELHI) 337 entitled Indra Perfumery
Company v. Sudarshab Oberoi v. Presiding Officer].
(viii) Transient employment and self-employment would
not be a bar to relief under Section 17B of the Industrial
Disputes Act [Re : 2000 (1) LLJ 1012 entitled Taj Services
Limited v. Industrial Tribunal; 1984 (4) SCC 635 entitled
Rajinder Kumar Kundra v. Delhi Administration; 109
(2004) DLT 1 entitled M/s. Birdhi Chand Naunag Ram
Jain v. P.O., Labour Court No. IV & Others].
(ix) The Court while considering an application under
Section 17B of the ID Act cannot go into the merits of the
case, the Court can only consider whether the
requirements mentioned in Section 17B have been
satisfied or not and, if it is so, then the Court has no
option but to direct the employer to pass an order in
terms of the statute. It would be immaterial as to whether
the petitioner had a very good case on merits [Re : 2000
W.P(C) No.7487/2005

Page 11 of 14

(5) AD Delhi 413 entitled Anil Jain v. Jagdish Chander].
(x) A reasonable standard for arriving at the conclusion
of the quantum of a fair amount towards subsistence
allowance payable to a workman would be the minimum
wages notified by the statutory authorities under the
provisions of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 in respect of
an employee who may be performing the same or similar
functions in scheduled employments. [Re: Rajinder
Kumar Kundra v. Delhi Administration, (1984) 4 SCC
635; Sanjit Roy v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1983 SC 328;
decision dated 3rd January, 2003 in Writ Petition (Civil)
Nos. 3654 & 3675/1999 entitled Delhi Council for Child
Welfare v. Union of India; DTC v. The P.O., Labour Court
No. 1, Delhi & Ors., 2002 II AD (Delhi) 112 (para 12, 13)]
(xi) Interim orders directing payment to a workman can
be made even on the application of the management
seeking stay of the operation and effect of the industrial
Award and order. Such interim orders of stay sought by
the employer can be granted unconditionally or made
conditional subject to payment or deposits of the entire or
portion of the awarded amount together with a direction
to the petitioner employer to make payment of the wages
at an appropriate rate to the workman. Such an order
would be based on considerations of interests of justice
when balancing equities.
(xii)
For the same reason, I find that there is no
prohibition in law to a direction by the Court to make an
order directing payment of the wages with effect from the
date of the Award. On the contrary, it has been so held in
several judgments that this would be the proper course
[Re : Regional Authority, Dena Bank & Anr. v.
Ghanshyam, reported at JT 2001 (Suppl. 1) SC 229 and
Indra Perfumery Co. Thr. Sudershab Oberoi v. Presiding
Officer & Ors., 2004 III AD (Delhi) 337].
(xiii) While passing an interlocutory direction for payment
of wages, the Court may also secure the interests of the
W.P(C) No.7487/2005

Page 12 of 14

employer by making orders regarding refund or recovery
of the amount which is in excess of the last drawn wages
in the event of the industrial award being set aside so as
to do justice to the employer.
(xiv) A repayment to the employer could be secured by
directing a workman to given an undertaking or offer
security to the satisfaction of the Registrar (General) of
the Court or any other authority [Re : para 12, 2002 (61)
DRJ 521 (DB), Hindustan Carbide Pvt. Ltd. v. Govt. of
NCT of Delhi & Ors.(supra)]
(xv) In exercise of powers under Article 226 and Article
136 of the Constitution, if the requisites of Section 17B of
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 are satisfied, no order
can be passed denying the workman the benefit granted
under the statutory provisions of Section 17B of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 [Re: 1999 (2) SCC 106,
Dena Bank v. Kirtikumar T. Patel (para 23)].
(xvi) Gainful employment of the workman; unreasonable
and unexplained delay in making the application by the
workman after the filing of the petition challenging the
award/order; offer by the employer to give employment to
the workman would be a relevant factors and
consideration for the date from which the wages are to be
permitted.
(xvii)It will be in the interest of justice to ensure if the
facts of the case so justify, that payment of the amount
over and above the amount which could be directed to be
paid under Section 17B to a workman, is ordered to be
paid only on satisfaction of terms and conditions as
would enable the employer to recover the same [para 13
of Regional Manager, Dena Bank v. Ghanshyam].
(xviii)The same principles would apply to any interim
order in respect of a pendentelite payment in favour of the
workman.

W.P(C) No.7487/2005

Page 13 of 14

14.

In the present case the applicant has contended that he is not

gainfully employed in any establishment. The applicant fulfills all the
criteria for availing the benefit under section 17 B of the Act. For the
foregoing reasons, the application of the workman/respondent No.2
under Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 is allowed and
the petitioner is directed to pay the last drawn pay or the minimum
wages as may be applicable from time to time whichever is higher
from the date of the award to the respondent No.2. The wages be paid
to the respondent No.2/workman on or before 15th day of each month
and all the arrears from the date of the award be paid within six
weeks. The respondent/workman shall also file an affidavit that in
case

the

writ

petition

is

allowed

and

it

is

held

that

the

respondent/applicant was not entitled for minimum wages, the
respondent shall refund the difference of the last drawn wages and
the minimum wages within such time as shall be allowed by this
Court.

The

undertaking

to

this

effect

be

filed

by

respondent/applicant within two weeks.
With these directions the application is disposed of.
W.P(C) No.7487/2005
List on May 13, 2008.

January 07, 2008
'k/Dev'

W.P(C) No.7487/2005

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 14 of 14

the

