IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Decision: March 7th, 2007
+
*

Company Petition No.53/2007

Sh. Satish Batra & Another
Through:

........
Petitioners
Mr.Vibhu Bakhru, Advocate

Versus
Registrar of Companies & Another
Through:

........

Respondents

Nemo.

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
*
1.

This is a petition under Section 633(2) of the Companies Act, 1956

read with Rule 9 of the Companies (Court) Rules, 1959, seeking an order
excusing the petitioner from any liability for default as specified in Section 628
and 629A of the Companies Act, 1956 and seeking an order excusing the
petitioners from any criminal liability and or prosecution.

2.

The petitioners are the Directors of Vimal Plast (I) Pvt. Ltd. and in an

Company Petition no. 53 of 2007

Page 1 of 5

inspection under Section 209 of the Companies Act, 1956, it was observed
that the Company has accepted huge amounts from Directors, shareholders,
corporate bodies (Companies) and from public ever year since 1999 and no
resolution of the Board at any point of time authorizing the management to
receive the application money, was passed.

3.

For various breaches committed, the show cause notice categorically

spelt out that allotment of shares in a company could be done by the
Directors in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act and in
accordance with the Article of Association of the Company and not by the
Managing Director as the Managing Director was not authorized by Board
Resolution to receive the application money for allotment of shares.

4.

The show cause notice has also stated that no information regarding

receipt of share application money was given to the Board nor the proposal
for allotment was put up before the Board by the Management. It has also
been contended that on a few occasions, the Board has allowed shares for a
part amount but it was not brought to the notice of the Board as to how much
amount has been received by the Management against the share application
and thus the Management acted beyond their powers encroaching upon the
powers of the Board of Directors.

Company Petition no. 53 of 2007

Page 2 of 5

5.

A letter dated 19th January, 2006 seeking explanation from the

Directors/Officers was sent regarding violation of various provisions of the
Companies Act and a reply/explanation was furnished on 24th February, 2006
on behalf of the petitioners contending that the amount shown under the
head share application money is in fact for current account transactions and
as there is no provision to reflect the current account balances, the same has
been reflected under the head 'share application money'.

6.

The Registrar of Companies has taken note of the fact that if it was a

current account and the money received was not application money then the
figure shown in the balance sheets as on 31st March, 2001 to 31st March,
2005 as against application money would be a false statement and
consequently the show cause notice dated 21st December, 2006 has been
issued which is being challenged by the petitioner.

7.

This is no more res integra that the powers under Section 633 of the

Companies Act, 1956, are to be used sparingly and for the High Court to
exercise its jurisdiction under the said Section, the persons concerned must
show that they have acted honestly, reasonably and having regard to all the
circumstances of the case, they should be excused. The petitioners are not

Company Petition no. 53 of 2007

Page 3 of 5

entitled to contend that they have acted honestly and reasonably, in case the
violation are of statutory duties.

8.

The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that where the Board

had allotted shares for a part of amount, later on the shares have been
allotted for the entire amount, however, it has been done after the show
cause notice had been given by the respondents.

In the grounds raised in

the petition, it is, however, contended that as against the share application
money received by the company, the company as on date has allotted shares
to almost all applicants meaning thereby still in some of the cases, the shares
have not been issued for the entire application money which was received by
the Directors. The defense which has been taken by the petitioners are also
that unsecured loans were in fact friendly and temporary loans based on oral
agreements and therefore no interest was payable thereon and the
acceptance of share application money from various companies during the
period 31st March, 2000 to 31st March, 2005 were current account transaction
and as such no specific disclosure requirement has been prescribed in
Schedule VI.

9.

From the averments made and considering the facts and totality of

circumstances, it is difficult to infer that the petitioners have acted reasonably

Company Petition no. 53 of 2007

Page 4 of 5

and that considering all the circumstances, it will be appropriate to excuse the
petitioners.

10.

Merely on the basis of the bald averments made by the petitioners, it

will be difficult to infer that the amounts received were temporary loans based
on oral agreements and no interest was payable thereon.

11.

In the totality of facts and circumstances, it will not be appropriate to

excuse the petitioners. The petitioners are also unable to show prime facie that
they have acted in good faith and they have justifiable reasons to escape
from the liability.

12.

Taking into consideration the lapses committed by the petitioner, it also

cannot be inferred that these are not statutory violations. Consequently there
is no merit in the petition. The petition, therefore, is dismissed.

March 07, 2007
sdp

Company Petition no. 53 of 2007

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 5 of 5

