IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of decision : January 7th , 2008
WP(C) No.9/2008
#
!

Rajendras (India) Ltd.
….… PETITIONER
Through: Mr.Rajesh Aggarwal, Advocate
Versus

$
^

Sageer Ahmed

.........
Through : Nemo.

RESPONDENT

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
*
1.

This matter was listed on 4th January, 2008 when after some

arguments it was observed that there are no grounds to interfere with
the order of the Labour Court where after the counsel for the
petitioner sought transfer of the case on the ground that another case
being CS(OS) No.283/2004 was transferred before some other Bench.
It was observed that there are no grounds to list the matter before any
other Bench especially once this court had partially given its mind
that there are no ground to interfere with the order. The Counsel for
the petitioner, thereafter, had sought adjournment and the matter

WP(C) No.9/2008

1 of 11

was adjourned for today.

2.

Today again the counsel for the petitioner has sought that the

matter be transferred to some other bench which is declined in the
present facts and circumstances and the matter is taken up for
hearing.

3.

The petitioner has impugned the award dated 22nd August,

2007 awarding an amount of Rs.5 lakh to the workman in lieu of
reinstatement, continuity of service and all other legal benefits.

4.

On the application of the respondent reference was made under

the Industrial Disputes Act so as to determine whether the services of
the respondent had been terminated illegally and/or unjustifiably by
the petitioner, and if so, to what sum of money as monetary relief
along

with

consequential

benefits

in

terms

of

existing

laws/Government notifications and as to what other relief the
respondent is entitled.

5.

Respondent had contended that he was appointed as a Driver

and he had been working for four years and his last drawn salary was
Rs.6,600/- per month. He contended that he continuously worked
without any break.

The respondent's plea was that he was not

provided any legal benefits, such as, leave book, attendance card,

WP(C) No.9/2008

2 of 11

appointment letter, identity card, ESI, annual increments, earned
leave, casual leave, weekly holidays, festival holidays, bonus, over
time etc. despite the demands made to the petitioner and he was not
paid the salary even for the month of November 2001.

According to

the respondent, the management had been changing the name of the
firm after every one year such as, M/s.Rajendra Estates Management
company, M/s.Indus Valley Information Systems Pvt. Ltd. etc.

The

respondent contended that he worked from 14th February, 1998 to
31st March, 1999 with the petitioner under the name and style of
M/s.Rajendra Singh management Company and thereafter from 1st
April, 1999 to 30th November, 1999 with the petitioner under the
name of M/s.Indus Valley Information Systems Pvt. Ltd. According to
him, no transfer letters were ever issued to him.

The respondent

alleged that he was beaten up on 23rd November, 2001 and he was
made to sign some blank papers and on 24th November, 2001 he was
not allowed to join duties and his service was terminated.

6.

The petitioner refuted the claim of the respondent contending

inter alia that he is not a workman as defined under Section 2(s) of
the Industrial Disputes Act and the respondent failed to report for
duty upon his transfer to Kanpur office of the company. According to
the petitioner, he was appointed as a Supervisor in Rajendra Group of
Companies and he was issued appointment letter for the same. It was
also alleged that though he was appointed as a Supervisor, he used to

WP(C) No.9/2008

3 of 11

drive vehicles of the company for his personal use or some urgent
work of the company as he knew driving well.

7.

On the basis of the pleadings of the parties, issues were framed

– whether claimant is a workman within the meaning of Section 2(s) of
the Industrial Act and whether claimant himself abandoned his job by
not reporting for duty to his place of transfer at Kanpur?

8.

The Labour Court after detailed consideration of the evidence

on record and deposition of the claimant/ respondent and the
petitioner held that the respondent is a workman. The Labour court
relied on the cross-examination of management's witness, Shri
Ravinder Singh, admitting that the respondent had no powers to
sanction leave or to give appointment letters to anybody and also
relied on various documents including documents which were
exhibited as Ex.WW1/18 and WW1/16-20. It has been noted that the
burden to prove that the respondent is not covered within the
category of workman, was on the petitioner. To prove that the
respondent was not workman, the petitioner management relied on
the copy of the appointment letter which has been dis-believed by the
Court.

While dis-believing the appointment letter, the Labor court

relied on the fact that the designation of the respondent was not
mentioned nor the name of the company was given and it appeared
that part of the appointment letter had been filled later on.

WP(C) No.9/2008

4 of 11

Mr.Ravinder Singh, sole witness, was examined on behalf of the
management who is merely a Record Keeper, though there is a Board
of Directors in the management of the company, however, only the
evidence of a Record Keeper was adduced on behalf of the petitioner.
The record keeper of the petitioner did not have any authorization
letter nor he could produce any resolution passed by the Board of
management for giving evidence on behalf of the petitioner and,
therefore, it was held that the competence of the witness even to
depose on behalf of the petitioner was not established.

The

documents, Ex.WW1/17 to WW1/20 and WW1/18 and other
documents have been considered in detail and on the basis of the
same, it has been inferred that the respondent used to drive the
vehicles and also used to get them repaired and he was not a
Supervisor. The Labour Court considered the evidence that the
respondent had no power to sanction leave or to give appointment to
any one and though he was employed in Rajendra Group of
Companies comprising of many companies but he was not given
appointment in any specific company.

Reliance was placed on the

ratio of Ananda Bazar Patrika (P) Ltd. Vs. The Workmen, (1970) 3 SCC
248 and S.K. Maini Vs. M/s.Carona Sahu Co. Ltd., (1994) 3 SCC 510
to infer whether the respondent is a workman or not. The inference of
the Labour court is also that the appointment letter was got signed
from the respondent no.2, before it was filled up by the management
and, therefore, in absence of any authentic document or any evidence

WP(C) No.9/2008

5 of 11

of a responsible person on behalf of the petitioner, no inference could
be drawn that the respondent was appointed on a supervisory post
and he is not a workman. It has also been noted that in the crossexamination of the workman/respondent not a single question had
been put to him regarding the actual duties performed by him. Based
on all this evidence and reason, the inference was drawn that the
respondent is a workman.

9.

While exercising its powers of judicial review under Article 226

of the Constitution of India this Court ought not to re-appreciate the
evidence. It is a settled position of law that in exercise of jurisdiction
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the Court should not
interfere with factual findings of the lower courts and should restrain
itself from re-appreciating evidence while exercising powers of judicial
review. Reliance for this proposition can be placed on the judgment of
the Supreme Court, Government of A.P. and Ors. v. Mohd. Nasrullah
Khan reported as (2006) 2 SCC 373. Reliance may also be placed on
the following judgments rendered by the Supreme Court and this
Court concerning the scope of judicial review of a writ court: Harbans
Lal v. Jagmohan Saran (1985) 4 SCC 333; B.C. Chaturvedi v. Union of
India (1995) 6 SCC 749; Indian Overseas Bank v. I.O.B. staff Canteen
Workers' Union AIR 2000 SC 1508 ; Municipal Corporation of Delhi v.
Asha Ram and Anr.117 (2005) DLT 63 and Filmistan Exhibitors Ltd.

WP(C) No.9/2008

6 of 11

v. N.C.T. Secy. Labour and Ors. 131 (2006) DLT. In all the above
judgments, it has been held that a writ court should refrain from
interfering with the orders of an inferior tribunal or subordinate court
unless it suffers from an error of jurisdiction, or from a breach of the
principles of natural justice or is vitiated by a manifest or apparent
error of law.

10.

The finding of the Court below that the respondent is not a

workman has been arrived at after due consideration of evidence on
record and lacunas on the part of the petitioner. On the basis of pleas
of the parties and the evidence, the inference that the respondent is
not a workman, is not possible. In any case this Court, in exercise of
its extraordinary jurisdiction, cannot interfere with the findings of
facts of the

court below only on the ground that two views are

possible, and cannot substitute its own views with the views of the
labour court. In the present case, after appreciating the evidence on
the record and perusing the documents produced by the parties, the
Court has held that the respondent is a workman. The finding that
the respondent is a workman as contemplated under Section 2(s) of
the Industrial Disputes Act does not suffer from any perversity or any
other such manifest error which will entail interference by this Court
under the Article 226 of the Constitution of India.

WP(C) No.9/2008

7 of 11

11.

Regarding the contention of the petitioner that respondent

workman had himself abandoned the job by not reporting for duty
upon his transfer to Kanpur Office which was vehemently denied by
the workman and considering all the documents produced by the
management upto MW1/12, which do not show that the respondent
remained absent from duty, it has been inferred that the respondent
has not abandoned the work. While drawing this inference against
the petitioner, the adverse inference was also taken against the
petitioner company as the basic piece of evidence, i.e., attendance
register in possession of the management which could throw light on
the controversy had been withheld. Learned counsel for the petitioner
has emphatically relied on various letters dated 9th February, 2002;
16th March, 2002 and 28th March, 2002 to contend that respondent
was given the offer to attend the duties but he refused to do so.
Perusal of the copies of these letters produced by the petitioner
reflects that they are all conditional letters where respondent was
asked to resume services or to pay amount equivalent to three
months salary and to render balance of imprest account and
thereafter, the respondent was asked to report for duty at Kanpur
Office though he was not issued any transfer letter. There is no
specific communication to the respondent to attend the duties at his
place of work. All the demands to resume the duties are conditional
which could not be accepted by the respondent.

WP(C) No.9/2008

8 of 11

12.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has also contended that the

respondent had been given an offer before the Conciliation Officer as
well as in the present petition to attend the duties. The reliance has
been placed on the undated written agreement, a copy of which has
been filed along with the petition at page 160, stipulating that the
petitioner has always shown its readiness and willingness and offered
the claimant to join the duties if he wishes so. Even in the said offer,
it has not been clarified whether the respondent had to join the duties
at the Kanpur Office, where he was never transferred or at his old
work place from where he was not allowed to work and whether the
conditions which were claimed for joining the duties in various letters
had to be complied by the respondent before joining the duties or not.
Reliance has also been placed on para 20 stipulating that the
petitioner has always been ready and willing to make the respondent
work for the petitioner's company which is equally vague. In the
circumstances, the findings of the Labor Court that the workman had
not abandoned his job does not suffer from any such perversity or
manifest error which will entail interference by this Court under the
Article 226 of the Constitution of India.

13.

The Labour Court has not granted reinstatement to the

workman but has granted a sum of Rs.5.00 lakh only in lieu of
reinstatement, continuity of service and all other legal benefits and
the same does not suffer from any illegality or perversity.

WP(C) No.9/2008

Learned

9 of 11

counsel for the petitioner is unable to point out any perversity or
manifest error or violation of principle of natural justice so as to entail
interference by this court and it is not for the High Court to reappreciate the findings of facts and substitute the view of the Labor
Court with its own view in the present facts and circumstances.

14.

Learned counsel for the petitioner had relied on Allahabad Jal

Sansthan vs. Daya Shankar Rai and Another, (2005) 5 SCC 124
which is rather against the plea advanced by the petitioner himself. In
Allahabad Jal Sansthan (supra), the Court was pleased to grant 50%
of the back wages to the workman in the interest of justice though the
workman had not raised any plea or adduced any evidence to the
effect that he remained unemployed throughout. In contra distinction
in the present facts the workman has categorically contended that he
has remained unemployed which fact has not been refuted by the
petitioner as there is no cross-examination of the workman on this
aspect nor any evidence has been led that the workman has been
gainfully employed. The reliance was also placed by the petitioner's
counsel

on

Kendriya

Vidyalaya

Sangathan

and

Another

vs.

S.C.Sharma, (2005) 2 SCC 363 to contend that the onus was on the
workman to prove that he remained unemployed. Perusal of the pleas
and the evidence adduced by the workman, reflects that a specific
plea has been raised by the respondent/workman that he remained
unemployed and he has also deposed about the same which facts has

WP(C) No.9/2008

10 of 11

not been refuted in the cross-examination of the workman by the
petitioner. Consequently it is inevitable to infer that the workman
discharged his burden and thereafter the onus was on the petitioner
management which it failed to discharge. In the circumstances, the
workman who has been without any employment since 2001 and who
has been awarded only Rs.5.00 lakh in lieu of reinstatement and
continuity of services and other legal benefits, cannot be construed to
be excessive or perverse so as to be interfered with by this Court.

15.

There are no grounds to interfere with the order of the Labor

Court in the facts and circumstances and the writ petition is without
any merit and it is dismissed.

January 7, 2008
‘Dev’

WP(C) No.9/2008

ANIL KUMAR, J.

11 of 11

