IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of decision : January 8th , 2008
WP(C) No.105/2008
#
!

Shri Inder Singh
Through:

….… PETITIONER
Ms.Deepti Kathpalia, Advocate

Versus
$
^

Sub Divisional Officer & Another
......... RESPONDENTS
Through : Nemo.

CORAM :*

HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
*

1.

The petitioner has impugned the order dated 15th May, 2007

dismissing the claim of the petitioner for reinstatement with full back
wages and all other consequent benefits.

2.

The petitioner contended that he was employed with Sub

Divisional Officer (Telephone), Bhartiya Sanchar Nigam Limited,
Narwana, Jind (Hryana), since 1991-1992 as regular welder and he
has regularly worked up to 28th February, 2002 and his last drawn
WP(C) No.105/2008

Page 1 of 7

wages were Rs.1500/- per month.

3.

The petitioner further contended that he was not given any legal

facilities and when he demanded the same, he was illegally
terminated from the services of respondent on 1 st March, 2002
without any information or compensation and notice. The petitioner
contended that even pay has not been paid to him. According to him,
he visited the office of respondent on various occasions for joining his
duties but the respondent mis-behaved with the petitioner and
refused to take him on duty.

4.

It

was

further

contended

by the

petitioner

that

he

is

unemployed since his illegal termination and he has no source of
income to maintain himself and his family members and in the
circumstances the applicant prayed for his reinstatement and back
wages with 18% interest.

5.

The management contested the petition contending that the

petitioner was never appointed by the respondent No.1 and therefore
there could not be termination by the respondent No.1.

The

respondent No.1 specifically relied on the fact that no documents were
filed by the petitioner to show that he was ever employed by the
respondent No.1.

WP(C) No.105/2008

Page 2 of 7

6.

The Tribunal has considered the pleas and evidence of the

parties and the documents produced. The Tribunal concluded that
though the petitioner contended that he worked for 12 years from
1991-1992 upto 28th February, 2002, however, he has not produced
any document to show that he was employed by respondent No.1
Though the petitioner had alleged that he worked under two persons,
but those persons, Mr.Dhillan and Mr.Tara Chand appeared as
witnesses of the respondent and denied that the petitioner ever
worked as an employee of the respondents under them.

7.

The Tribunal also noted that the alleged identity card produced

by the petitioner had interpolations and cuttings and it also did not
bear the seal of respondent No.1. Therefore, on the basis of cogent
reasons held that the petitioner was not the employee of the
respondents and it could not be inferred otherwise. The Tribunal also
relied on the statement of the workman/petitioner that he was given
employment by Shri Jai Prakash, Hon'ble Member of Parliament of
the area.

8.

The

petitioner/applicant

seems

to

have

demanded

some

documents from the respondent, however, without giving any specific
particulars of the documents. The respondents were not expected to

WP(C) No.105/2008

Page 3 of 7

produce all the documents and records for the petitioner to go
through them and find any alleged document. In the circumstances,
Tribunal inferred that no evidence to show that the petitioner was
gainfully employed with respondent No.1 and consequently there
could not be wrongful termination and in the circumstances the
petitioner was held to be not entitled for reinstatement and full back
wages.

9.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied on AIR 1977

Calcutta 7, Raipada Pramanik vs. The State of West Bengal; 2000
Lab. I.C. 1495, Indian Overseas Bank vs. I.O.B. Staff Canteen
Workers' Union and another

and Gopal Krishanji Ketkar vs.

Mahomed Haji Latif & Others, (1963) 3 SCR 862 to contend that it
was for the respondent to produce the documents.

In Raipada

Pramanik (supra), the suit for money for the work done was filed and
it was established that Sub Divisional Controller, Food and Supplies,
had been duly authorized to enter into contract on behalf of Governor
by the District Magistrate. It was further held that when any fact is
within the knowledge of any person, the burden of proving that fact is
upon him. In the present case, the plea of the respondents is that the
petitioner was not employed with them whereas the case of the
petitioner is that he was employed with the respondent No.1 from
1991-1992 to 2002, in the circumstances, it was for the petitioner to

WP(C) No.105/2008

Page 4 of 7

produce and prove the appropriate documents so that it could be
established that he was employed by respondent No.1. If any
particular documents were not with the petitioner, he could have
asked for the production of same. But he could not ask for production
of entire record, so that the petitioner could go through that. The ratio
of the judgment relied on by the petitioner, therefore, does not
support his plea and contention.

10.

In Gopal Krishnaji Ketkar (supra), it was held that if important

documentary evidence is withheld, the technical plea of onus of proof
cannot prevent adverse inference. Apparently all the precedents relied
on by the petitioner are distinguishable. In Bhavnagar University v.
Palitana Sugar Mills Pvt Ltd (2003) 2 SC 111 (vide para 59), the
Supreme observed:" It is well settled that a little difference in facts or
additional facts may make a lot of difference in the
precedential value of a decision."

In Ambica Quarry Works v. State of Gujarat and Ors.
MANU/SC/0049/1986 the Supreme Court observed:"The ratio of any decision must be understood in
the background of the facts of that case. It has
been said long time ago that a case is only an authority for what it actually decides, and not what
logically follows from it."

WP(C) No.105/2008

Page 5 of 7

11.

In the present case, it was for the petitioner to establish that he

was employed with respondent No.1 as the petitioner had contended
that he had been in employment of the respondent no.1 since 1991
and therefore, it was for the petitioner to establish that. The
respondent no.1 had contended that the petitioner was never
employed by them. In the circumstances, it could not be inferred that
the respondents had withheld the best evidence from the Tribunal, as
the case of the respondents is that the petitioner was never employed
by them and, therefore, there could not be termination of the
petitioner.

12.

In Indian Overseas Bank (supra), it was held that for assessing

the relationship of master and servant, no straight jacket formula can
be laid down. The Supreme Court rather, in this case, also held that
inference drawn by the Tribunal and the finding of facts given are not
to be interfered by the High Court under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India. It is a settled position of law that in exercise of
jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the Court
should not interfere with factual findings of the lower courts and
should restrain itself from re-appreciating evidence while exercising
powers of judicial review. Reliance for this proposition can be placed
on the judgment of the Supreme Court, Government of A.P. and Ors.
v. Mohd. Nasrullah Khan reported as (2006) 2 SCC 373. Writ court
WP(C) No.105/2008

Page 6 of 7

should refrain from interfering with the orders of an inferior tribunal
or subordinate court unless it suffers from an error of jurisdiction or
from a breach of the principles of natural justice or is vitiated by a
manifest or apparent error of law. The objective of judicial review is
that a person receives a fair treatment and objective is not to reappreciate the entire pleas and evidence and draw inferences again.
Judicial review is not an appeal from a decision but a review of the
manner in which the decision is made. Power of judicial review is
meant to ensure that the individual receives fair treatment and not to
ensure that the conclusion which the authority reaches is necessarily
correct in the eye of the court.

13.

In the present case, the finding of the fact arrived at by the

Tribunal is that the petitioner was never employed by respondent
No.1 as nothing has been produced by the petitioner.

14.

In the circumstances, there is no perversity or apparent mistake

or violation of principles of natural justice in any manner so as to
entail inference by this Court. The writ petition is, therefore, without
any merit and it is dismissed.

January 08, 2008
'Dev'

WP(C) No.105/2008

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 7 of 7

