IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of decision : January 8th , 2008
WP(C) No.8756/2007
#
!

Shri Sachey Singh
Through:

….… PETITIONER
Mr.K.C. Mittal, Advocate

Versus
$
^

Director of Education & Others
......... RESPONDENTS
Through : Mr.Mukesh Gupta, Advocate for
respondent Nos.1 & 2.

CORAM :*

HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
*
1.

The petitioner has challenged the promotion of the respondent

No.4 alleging that it is on the basis of seniority list and not on the
merit and has sought quashing of the promotion of respondent No.4.
The petitioner has also sought re-consideration of petitioner as per
rules and direction to be appointed to the post of Vice Principal with
all consequential benefits as he had been acting as Vice Principal.

2.

The petitioner was appointed as a TGT Teacher in Hindi in 1977

WP(C) No.8756/2007

Page 1 of 5

and he has been working as TGT and thereafter petitioner completed
his M.A. in the year 1986.

3.

According to the Principal, Vice Principal of the school,

Mr.Mahender Singh, was due to retire on 31st January, 2007 and the
Deputy Director, respondent No.2, had directed him to handover the
charge of the school to the respondent No.4.

It seems that charge

was, however, handed over by the outgoing Vice Principal to the
petitioner on 31st January, 2007 and was not handed over to
respondent No.4.

4.

The petitioner though was not entitled to take over the charge,

however, he accepted the charge from the outgoing Vice Principal and
continued as a Vice Principal. The post of Vice Principal is to be filed
according to the recruitment rules of promotion failing upon by direct
recruitment and for promotion the PGT/HM of the same school with
at least five years experience come under the zone of consideration.

5.

According to the petitioner, the respondent No.3 issued a

number of memos to the petitioner to hand over the charge of the said
school and to hand over the ACRs of petitioner and other teachers,
however, that has not been done by him rather he has given reply to
every memo and he wants to hand over the ACRs of other teachers to

WP(C) No.8756/2007

Page 2 of 5

Directorate of Education.

6.

The meeting of DPC was convened on 14th September, 2007 and

in the said DPC, the respondent No.4, Shri Inderjit Singh, has been
promoted being a senior most teacher in the school and not according
to the merit according to the petitioner.

7.

The grievance of the petitioner is based on his premise that the

respondent No.4 has been promoted on the basis of seniority and not
on merit and to substantiate that learned counsel for the petitioner
has pointed out the assessment of respondent No.4. The learned
counsel has pointed out remarks in the ACR of 2004 that he is not
punctual and he was also reprimanded verbally as well as in writing.
The petitioner has also pointed out and compared the remarks given
to the petitioner by the head of the school in his ACR for 2006 that he
is a very good teacher and he is an asset to the school and
consequently the petitioner contends that he ought to have been
selected in place of respondent No.4 and therefore, the promotion of
respondent No.4 is malafide.

8.

Perusal of other reports of respondent No.4 specially for 2006

reflects that even respondent No.4 during the period April 2005 to
March 2006 which assessment was given on 6th July, 2006 has been

WP(C) No.8756/2007

Page 3 of 5

categorized as a very good teacher and his grading is “very good”.

9.

The plea of the petitioner that the respondent no.4 has been

promoted on account of favoritism shown to him and promoting him
only on the basis of his seniority, is based on petitioner’s misconception and seems to be an attempt to continue to be the Vice
Principal of the school.

10.

The allegation that the respondent no.4 has been promoted only

on the basis of seniority and not on merit is not supported by any
cogent evidence. Prima facie, there is nothing to show that the DPC
which was convened on 14th September, 2007 has considered only the
seniority. The allegation is based on petitioner's own premise and is
without any legal and factual basis and is an attempt to somehow
continue to act as the Vice Principal.

11.

The petitioner had taken the charge from outgoing Vice

Principal, Shri Mahender Singh, although he was not entitled to take
the charge as the charge was to be given to respondent No.4 in terms
of letter of the respondent No.2. However, he has continued with the
charge and the various letters by the respondent No.3 to the
petitioner though replied, however, the charge has not been handed
over on one pretext or other.

WP(C) No.8756/2007

Page 4 of 5

12.

In the circumstances, it is inevitable to infer that the petitioner

who took the charge from the Vice Principal unlawfully is trying to
continue with the charge and in any case there is no apparent
perversity in the decision of DPC recommending promotion of
respondent No.4 to the post of the Principal. This court in any case,
does not have to review the selection made by the DPC for the
promotion to the post of Vice Principal in the present facts and
circumstances nor can substitute the recommendation of DPC with
its own recommendations. The writ petition is, therefore, without any
merit and is liable to be dismissed. The writ petition is, therefore,
dismissed.

January 08, 2008
'K/Dev'

WP(C) No.8756/2007

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 5 of 5

