IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of decision : January 8th , 2008
WP(C) No.8729/2007
#
!

Om Prakash Sharma
Through:

….… PETITIONER
Mr.Vinay Sabharwal, Advocate

Versus
$
^

Onida Savak Ltd. & Anr.
Through :

......... RESPONDENTS
Mr.Virender Singh, Advocate for
respondent No.2

CORAM :*

HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
*
1.

The petitioner has impugned the award dated 27th August, 2007

of the Labour Court holding that the petitioner was workman and that
his services were not illegally terminated by the management.

2.

The

petitioner

was

working

with

the

respondent

since

22.10.1999 and his last drawn salary was Rs.4676/- per month. The
petitioner was transferred from Delhi office to Guwahati against which
petitioner made representations dated 18th December, 1996, 19th
WP(C) No.8729/2007

Page 1 of 9

December, 1996 not to transfer him due to sickness of his wife and he
alleged that even he had fallen sick and he remained under treatment
of doctors till 12th January, 1997.

3.

According to the petitioner, after availing medical leave, he had

gone on 13th January, 1997 along with medical certificate for joining
the duty but he was not allowed to join his duties.

4.

The respondent's contention is that the petitioner was

transferred to Guwahati. For the transfer he had also taken advance
of Rs.8,000/- for joining his duties at Guwahati which fact has not
been denied by the petitioner. The petitioner, however, did not join the
duty at Guwahati. Even after 13th January, 1997 when petitioner is
alleged to have gone with medical certificate to join the duties, letters
dated 31st January, 1997, 12th February, 1997 and 20th February,
1997 were sent to the workman petitioner calling upon him to join
duties, the receipt of which letters have not been denied by the
petitioner.

5.
it

The Labor Court has noted that during the course of argument
was

contended

by

the

authorized

representative

that

the

workman/petitioner could not join the duties at Guwahati as he was
not relieved from Delhi Office in order to join the duties.

WP(C) No.8729/2007

Page 2 of 9

6.

The Labour Court has considered the pleas and facts and

circumstances

and

evidence

and

has

held

that

there

is

no

requirement for any formal order of relieving the workman and since
the transfer order stipulated to join the duties at Guwahati
immediately, there was no necessity for any formal relieving order
which was only a ploy adopted by the petitioner to avoid joining the
duties at Guwahati. The letter dated Ex.MW1/10 and MW1/11 and
12 were relied on by the Labour Court to draw an inference that
petitioner did not join the duties despite specific demands by the
management and, therefore, the contention of the workman that he
went to join the duties but he was not allowed to join the duties were
dis-believed.

7.

The Labor Court dis-believed the version of the petitioner also

on the ground that no complaint was filed by the petitioner with the
Labor Department.

Regarding the plea of the petitioner that no

domestic inquiry was conducted, the Labour Court relied on 2007
LLR 344, University of Delhi vs. Suresh Chand, holding that
termination of a workman remaining absent from duty without any
intimation or prior permission even without holding of an inquiry will
be justified.

WP(C) No.8729/2007

Page 3 of 9

8.

Reliance has also been placed by the Labor Court on 2007 LLR

7, MCD Vs. Vijay Pal and Others.

Learned counsel for the petitioner

has also relied on AIR 1979 Supreme Court 582, G.T.Lad and others
vs. Chemicals and Fibers India Limited and 1978 Vol.I Labour Law
Journal page 1, Delhi Cloth & General Mills Ltd. Vs. Shambhu Nagh
Mukherjee and others to contend that abandonment of service by the
petitioner cannot be inferred in the present facts and circumstances.

9.

Perusal of the precedents relied on by the petitioner reflect that

they are distinguishable. In Ambica Quarry Works v. State of Gujarat
and Ors. MANU/SC/0049/1986 the Supreme Court observed:"The ratio of any decision must be understood in
the background of the facts of that case. It has
been said long time ago that a case is only an authority for what it actually decides, and not what
logically follows from it."
Similarly in Bhavnagar University v. Palitana Sugar Mills Pvt
Ltd (2003) 2 SC 111 (vide para 59), the Supreme observed:" It is well settled that a little difference in facts or
additional facts may make a lot of difference in the
precedential value of a decision."
In Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd and Anr. v. N.R.Vairamani
and Anr. (AIR 2004 SC 778), it was held that a decision cannot be relied on without disclosing the factual situation. The Apex Court had
also observed:-

WP(C) No.8729/2007

Page 4 of 9

" Court should not place reliance on decisions without
discussing as to how the factual situation fits in with the
fact situation of the decision on which reliance is placed.
Observations of Courts are neither to be read as Euclid's
theorems nor as provisions of the statute and that too
taken out of their context. These observations must be
read in the context in which they appear to have been
stated. Judgments of Courts are not to be construed as
statutes. To interpret words, phrases and provisions of a
statute, it may become necessary for judges to embark
into lengthy discussions but the discussion is meant to
explain and not to define. Judges interpret statutes, they
do not interpret judgments. They interpret words of
statutes; their words are not to be interpreted as statutes.

10.

In G.T. Lad and others (supra), Supreme Court had held that

whether there has been a voluntary abandonment of services or not is
a question of fact which is to be determined in the light of
surrounding circumstances. Inthe circumstances of that case it was
held that the workers had not voluntarily abandoned as in reply to
management letters they had intimated that they did not intend to
abandon the services and in the circumstances it was held that there
was no abandonment. In Delhi Cloth and General Mills Limited
(supra), the workman absented for 8 days and the management had
struck them off the rolls and the question for determination before the
Supreme Court was whether the management was right in striking off
the names of the workman from the rolls and in those facts and
circumstances it was held that merely on workman remaining absent
for 8 days will not entitle the management to strike off their names
from the rolls.
WP(C) No.8729/2007

In contra distinction, the petitioner was asked to
Page 5 of 9

attend the duties at Guwahati. The petitioner, however, did not join
the duties at Guwahati. First he took the excuse that first wife was
sick and then he avoided joining duties on the ground that he fell sick
and he had given representations. Thereafter, his plea is that he went
to join duties with his medical certificate but he was not allowed to
join the duties, which has been disbelieved by the Labor Court. Even
after that day, the management has sent many communications to
the petitioner to join the duties at Guwahati, the receipt of which
communications was admitted by the petitioner, but he did not join
on the plea that he was not given relieving order. This ploy of the
petitioner has also been disbelieved by the Labor Court.

11.

From the award of the Labour Court, it is apparent that even

after 13th January, 1997 various communications were sent to the
petitioner to join the duties at Guwahati. The receipt of which letters
had not been denied by the petitioner but he did not join the duties
despite drawing an amount of Rs.8,000/- and during the arguments
the plea has been raised that he could not join the duties as he was
not relieved from his duties at Delhi which explanation has been disbelieved by the Labour Court. This Court in exercise of jurisdiction
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India does not have to
substitute the cogent inference drawn by the Labor Court with the
other inference, if any, of this Court.

WP(C) No.8729/2007

Page 6 of 9

12.

While exercising its powers of judicial review under Article 226 of

the Constitution of India this Court ought not to re-appreciate the
evidence. It is a settled position of law that in exercise of jurisdiction
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the Court should not
interfere with factual findings of the lower courts and should restrain
itself from re-appreciating evidence while exercising powers of judicial
review. Reliance for this proposition can be placed on the judgment of
the Supreme Court, Government of A.P. and Ors. v. Mohd. Nasrullah
Khan reported as (2006) 2 SCC 373. Reliance may also be placed on
the following judgments rendered by the Supreme Court and this
Court concerning the scope of judicial review by a writ court: Harbans
Lal v. Jagmohan Saran (1985) 4 SCC 333; B.C. Chaturvedi v. Union of
India (1995) 6 SCC 749; Indian Overseas Bank v. I.O.B. staff Canteen
Workers' Union AIR 2000 SC 1508 ; Municipal Corporation of Delhi v.
Asha Ram and Anr.117 (2005) DLT 63 and Filmistan Exhibitors Ltd.
v. N.C.T. Secy. Labour and Ors. 131 (2006) DLT. In all the above
judgments, it has been held that a writ court should refrain from
interfering with the orders of an inferior tribunal or subordinate court
unless it suffers from an error of jurisdiction, or from a breach of the
principles of natural justice or is vitiated by a manifest or apparent
error of law.

WP(C) No.8729/2007

Page 7 of 9

13.

The objective of judicial review is that a person receives a fair

treatment and objective is not to re-appreciate the entire pleas and
evidence and draw inferences again. The Apex Court in (1995) 6 SCC
749 B.C.Chaturvedi Vs Union of India at page 759 in para 12 had
held as under:
“ 12 . Judicial review is not an appeal from a decision
but a review of the manner in which the decision is made.
Power of judicial review is meant to ensure that the
individual receives fair treatment and not to ensure that
the conclusion which the authority reaches is necessarily
correct in the eye of the court. When an inquiry is
conducted on charges of misconduct by a public servant,
the Court/Tribunal is concerned to determine whether
the inquiry was held by a competent officer or whether
rules of natural justice are complied with. Whether
the findings or conclusions are based on some
evidence, the authority entrusted with the power to
hold inquiry has jurisdiction, power and authority to
reach a finding of fact or conclusion. But that finding
must be based on some evidence. Neither the technical
rules of Evidence Act nor of proof of fact or evidence
as defined therein, apply to disciplinary proceeding.
When the authority accepts that evidence and conclusion
receives support therefrom, the disciplinary authority is
entitled to hold that the delinquent officer is guilty of the
charge. The Court/Tribunal in its power of judicial
review does not act as Appellate Authority to reappreciate the evidence and to arrive at its own
independent findings on the evidence. The Court/
Tribunal may interfere where the authority held the
proceedings against the delinquent officer in a manner
inconsistent with the rules of natural justice or in
violation of statutory rules prescribing the mode of
inquiry or where the conclusion or finding reached by the
disciplinary authority is based on no evidence. If the
conclusion or finding be such as no reasonable person
would have ever reached, the Court/Tribunal may
interfere with the conclusion or the finding, and
mould the relief so as to make it appropriate to the
facts of each case.”
WP(C) No.8729/2007

Page 8 of 9

14.

In entirety of facts and circumstances, there is no perversity or

manifest error or denial of principal of natural justice so as to entail
interference by this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India against the award dated 27th August, 2007 of the Labour Court.

15.

The writ petition is without any merit and it is, therefore,

dismissed.

January 08, 2008
'Dev'

WP(C) No.8729/2007

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 9 of 9

