*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CM No.8991/2007 in W.P.(C) No.12178/2006

%

Date of decision : 08.02.2008

Director General of Works
CPWD, New Delhi

….… Petitioner
Through: Mr.R.N.Singh, Advocate.
Versus

Sh.Daya Shankar Prasad

......... Respondent
Through: Ms.Renu Verma, Advocate.

CORAM :HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

YES

2. To be referred to the reporter or not?

NO

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
*
1.

This is an application by the respondent under Section 17B of

Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 read with Section 151 of Code of Civil
Procedure for payment of full wages to the respondent.
2.

The notice of the application was accepted by the learned

counsel for the petitioner on 6th July, 2007 and four weeks time was
granted to the counsel for the petitioner to file the reply. No reply to
the application was filed within four weeks and till the next date of

WP(C) 12178 of 2006

Page 1 of 12

hearing 22nd October, 2007. On 22nd October, 2007 when the matter
was taken up, no one appeared on behalf of petitioner. The Court,
however, granted four weeks time more to the petitioner to file the
reply which has not been filed till today.
3.

The learned counsel for the petitioner is unable to give any

cogent or sufficient reason for not filing the reply since 6 th July, 2007
when the notice of the application

was accepted by the learned

counsel for the petitioner. Consequently, there are no grounds to
grant further time and the right of the petitioner to file the reply is
closed.
4.

The respondent/applicant has contended that award dated 23rd

February, 2005 in I.D No.50/96 was given directing the petitioner to
reinstate the respondent within one month from the publication of the
award, however, the respondent workman was denied any back wages
but was granted benefit of continuity of service. The respondent
workman was also awarded interest at 12% on back wages that may
accrue in view of non reinstatement.
5.

Aggrieved by the award dated 23rd February, 2005 the present

writ petition was filed where this Court had stayed the operation of
award dated 23rd February, 2005 till further orders.

WP(C) 12178 of 2006

Page 2 of 12

6.

The respondent applicant has contended that he was entitled

for reinstatement in terms of award dated 23rd February, 2005 after
his termination from service with effect from 27th August, 1994,
however, the respondent has not been reinstated despite the letters
sent to the petitioner dated 25th April, 2005 and 20th April, 2006
seeking his reinstatement and implementation of award.
7.

The respondent applicant also contended that he approached

the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Kasturba Gandhi Marg,
New Delhi for implementation of award dated 23rd February, 2005 and
filed an execution petition. Despite an execution petition filed by the
respondent workman neither he has been reinstated nor he has been
paid back wages with 12% interest on default of petitioner to reinstate
him.
8.

The respondent applicant has also contended that he has not

been in employment in any establishment during the period from the
date of the award till the filing of the application. The respondent
workman contended that he had to go to his hometown at Village
Dorghat Tola

Pakadihawa, Post Dhani Bazar, Tehsil Farinda,

Distt.Maharaj Ganj, U.P as it was not possible for him to live in the
city and in the circumstances the respondent has prayed for payment
of full back wages including all allowances during the pendency of the

WP(C) 12178 of 2006

Page 3 of 12

writ petition.
9.

The learned counsel for the petitioner non-applicant has

contended that the respondent workman has been gainfully employed
and in any case he is not in Delhi. The learned counsel has also
argued on the merits of the case that the respondent is not entitled for
reinstatement.
10.

It is no more res integra that while deciding the applications of

the workman who has been ordered to be reinstated and which order
has been stayed, the merits of the case are not to be considered at the
time of passing an order under Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947. The provisions of Section 17 B of the Industrial Disputes
Act,

1947

comes

into

operation

when

an

Award

directing

reinstatement of a workman is assailed in further proceedings. The
statute requires satisfaction of the following four conditions:
(i)

an Award by a Labour Court, Tribunal or National
Tribunal directing reinstatement of a workman is
assailed in proceedings in a High Court or the
Supreme Court;

(ii)

during the pendency of such proceedings, employer
is required to pay full wages to the workman;

(iii)

the wages stipulated under Section 17B are full
wages last drawn by him, inclusive of any
maintenance allowance admissible to him under
any Rule;

(iv)

such wages would be admissible only if the

WP(C) 12178 of 2006

Page 4 of 12

workman had not been employed in any
establishment during such period and an affidavit
had been filed to such effect
11.

While considering an application under this provision it is

necessary to bear in mind that the spirit, intendment and object
underlying the statutory provision of Section 17B is to mitigate and
relieve, to a certain extent, the hardship resulting to a workman due
to delay in the implementation of an award directing reinstatement of
his services on account of the challenge laid to it by the employer. The
preliminary consideration for making available such a relief to a
workman is to be found in the benevolent purpose of the enactment.
It recognizes a workman’s right to the bare minimum to keep body
and soul together when a challenge has been laid to an Award
directing his reinstatement. The statutory provisions provide no
inherent right of assailing an order or an award by an industrial
adjudicator by way of an appeal. The payment which is required to be
made by the employer to the workman has been held to be akin to a
subsistence allowance which is neither refundable nor recoverable
from a workman even if the Award in his favor is set aside by the High
Court. In 1999 (2) SCC 106 (para 22), Dena Bank v. Kiritikumar T.
Patel the Apex Court was of the view that the object under Section
17B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 is only to relieve to a certain
extent, the hardship that is caused to the workman due to the delay

WP(C) 12178 of 2006

Page 5 of 12

in implementation of the Award. While considering the payment which
is required to be made by the employer to the workman in this behalf,
the Apex Court observed as follows:
“21. As indicated earlier Section 17B has been enacted by
Parliament with a view to give relief to a workman who
has been ordered to be reinstated under the Award of a
Labour Court or the Industrial Tribunal during the
pendency of proceedings in which the said award is under
challenge before the High Court or the Supreme Court.
The object underlying the provision is to relieve to a
certain extent the hardship that is caused to the
workman due to delay in the implementation of the
award. The payment which is required to be made by the
employer to the workman is in the nature of subsistence
allowance which would not be refundable or recoverable
from the workman even if the award is set aside by the
High Court or this Court. Since the payment is of such a
character, Parliament thought it proper to limit it to the
extent of the wages which were drawn by the workman
when he was in service and when his services were
terminated and therefore used the words ‘full wages last
drawn’. To read these words to mean wages which would
have been drawn by the workman if he had continued in
service if the order terminating his services had not
passed since it has been set aside by the award of the
Labour Court or the Industrial Tribunal, would result in
so enlarging the benefit as to comprehend the relief that
has been granted under the award that is under
challenge. Since the amount is not refundable or
recoverable in the event of the award being set aside, it
would result in the employer being required to give effect
to the award during the pendency of the proceedings
challenging the award before the High Court or the
Supreme Court without his being able to recover he said
amount in the event of the award being set aside. We are
unable to construe the provisions contained in Section

WP(C) 12178 of 2006

Page 6 of 12

17B to cast such a burden on the employer. In our
opinion, therefore, the words ‘full wages last drawn’ must
be given their plain and material meaning and they
cannot be given the extended meaning as given by the
Karnataka High Court in Visveswaraya Iron & Steel Ltd.
or the Bombay High Court in Corona Sahu Co. Ltd.
22. xxxx
23. As regards the powers of the High Court and the
Supreme Court under Articles 226 and 136 of the
Constitution, it may be stated that Section 17B, by
conferring a right on the workman to be paid the amount
of full wages last drawn by him during the pendency of
the proceedings involving challenge tot he award of the
Labour Court, Industrial Tribunal or National Tribunal in
the High Court or the Supreme Court which amount is
not refundable or recoverable in the event of the award
being set aside, does not in any way preclude the High
Court or the Supreme Court to pas an order directing
payment of a higher amount to the workman if such
higher amount is considered necessary in the interest of
justice. Such a direction would be dehors the provisions
contained in Section 17B and while giving the direction,
the Court may also give directions regarding refund or
recovery of the excess amount in the event of the award
being set aside. But we are unable to agree with the view
of the Bombay High Court in Elpro International Ltd. that
in exercise of the power under Articles 226 and 136
granted under Section 17B. The conferment of such a
right under Section 17B cannot be regarded as a
restriction on the powers of the High Court or the
Supreme Court under Articles 226 and 136 of the
Constitution.”

12.

‘Gainful employment in an establishment’ has been held by the

Apex Court as not a self employment. In Rajinder Kumar Kundra v.

WP(C) 12178 of 2006

Page 7 of 12

Delhi Administration, (1984) 4 SCC 635 while considering the
question relating to award of back wages, the Supreme Court noticed
thus:
“It was next contended on behalf of the appellant that
reinstatement with full back wages be awarded to him.
Mr. P.K. Jain, learned Counsel for the employer
countered urging that there is evidence to show that the
appellant was gainfully employed since the termination of
service and therefore he was not entitled to back wages.
In support of this submission Mr. Jain pointed out that
the appellant in his cross-examination has admitted that
during his forced absence from employment since the
date of termination of his service, he was maintaining his
family by helping his father-in-law Tara Chand who owns
a coal depot, and that he and the members of his family
lived with his father-in-law and that he had no alternative
source of maintenance. If this is gainful employment, the
employer can contend that the dismissed employee in
order to keep his body and soul together had taken to
begging and that would as well be a gainful employment.
The gross perversity with which the employer had
approached this case has left us stunned. If the employer
after an utterly unsustainable termination order of service
wants to deny back wages on the ground that the
appellant and the members of his family were staying
with the father-in-law of the appellant as there was no
alternative source of maintenance and during this period
appellant was helping his father-in-law of the appellant
as there was no alternative source of maintenance and
during this period appellant was helping his father-in-law
Tara Chand who had a coal depot, it cannot be said that
the appellant was gainfully employed. This cannot be said
to be gainful employment so as to reject the claim for
back wages. There is no evidence on the record to show
that the appellant was gainfully employed during the
period of his absence from service. Therefore, the

WP(C) 12178 of 2006

Page 8 of 12

appellant would be entitled to full back wages and all
consequential benefits.”

13.

Since the section itself mentions ‘employment in establishment’

self employment quite apparently is not in contemplation. Workman
can be denied the benefits under Section 17B of the Industrial
Disputes Act only when it is proved to the satisfaction of the Court
that the workmen have been employed and have been receiving
adequate remuneration during the period of pendency of the writ
petition. It is thus well settled that transient employment by the
workman does not affect his entitlement to receive wages pending
decision; that is to say that, the benefit of Section 17B of the Act
cannot be denied merely because the workman is engaged in some
activity or in some vocation to eke out his livelihood. Such relief can
be denied only if it is proved that the workman is gainfully employed
in some establishment and is receiving adequate and regular
remuneration which is not the case with the applicant. The
applicant/respondent has gone back to his native village as he did not
have any means to survive and live at the place where it was directed
to reinstate him and despite the award in his favor and many
representations made by him, he has not been reinstated.
14.

While considering an application under Section 17B of the

Industrial Disputes Act, the Court cannot go into the merits of the

WP(C) 12178 of 2006

Page 9 of 12

case in the writ petitioner. It was so held in 86 (2000) DLT 510=2000
(5) AD (Delhi) 413, Anil Jain v. Jagdish Chander.
15.

Whether the applicant is entitled for last drawn wages or

something more. In 1970 1 SCR 51, Town Municipal, Athani v. P.O.
LC Hugli & Ors. it was held by the Apex Court that a workman has a
legal right to wages under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 and cannot
be diverted to a remedy under Section 20 of the Minimum Wages Act
for enforcing such right. In this case, the Apex Court was concerned
with the power of the Act under Section 33(C)(2) of the Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947 and the principles laid down by the Court would
have a bearing on the issues raised before this Court as well. From a
conspectus of the authoritative pronouncements of the Apex Court,
the right of a workman to an amount equivalent to the wages notified
under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 is thus, in fact, recognition of
the constitutional mandate and nothing more. It is undoubtedly, the
bare minimum which is required by the workman to subsist and is
nothing more. Full wages last drawn can therefore only mean all the
wages that have fallen due at least from the date of the Award.
16.

This also cannot be disputed that granting relief under Section

17B of the Act and passing orders directing payment of wages last
drawn, is generally the rule; refusing to grant relief under Section 17B
is an exception, as the relief could be denied only in the rarest of the

WP(C) 12178 of 2006

Page 10 of 12

rare cases of jurisdictional error where there is no relationship
between the parties.
17.

The plea of the petitioner that the respondent/workman has

already gone to his native village and, therefore, he is not entitled for
an order under Section 17B is, therefore, without any legal basis and
is not sustainable in the facts and circumstances. The learned
counsel for the petitioner is unable to show any rule or any precedent
that in case a workman who had been dismissed and has been
directed to be reinstated, if goes to his native place as the order of
reinstatement has not been implemented, the workman shall not be
entitled for an order under Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947.
18.

What is material is whether the workman is gainfully employed

in an establishment or not. The plea of the workman that he has not
been gainfully employed after the date of award dated 23rd February,
2005 directing his reinstatement and he is not re-employed in any
establishment

remains

un-rebutted

and

in

the

circumstances

respondent workman has become entitled for an order under Section
17B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
19.

For the foregoing reasons the application is allowed. The

petitioner is directed to pay the last drawn wages or minimum wages

WP(C) 12178 of 2006

Page 11 of 12

whichever is higher from 23rd February, 2005, the date of the award.
Arrears of last drawn wages or minimum wages whichever is higher
be paid within eight weeks. The petitioner shall continue to pay last
drawn wages or minimum wages to the respondent by the 10th of
every succeeding month. The respondent is also directed to file an
undertaking that in case this writ petition is allowed, the respondent
shall return/refund the difference of last drawn wages and minimum
wages within such time as will be permitted by this Court. The
undertaking be filed within four weeks. With these directions, the
application is disposed of.
W.P.(C) No.12178/2006
The learned counsel for the petitioner states that the amount of
Rs.5000/- as litigation expenses was deposited. The counsel for the
respondent states that the amount has not yet been released to the
respondent. The learned counsel seeks time to file the counter
affidavit. Counter affidavit be filed within eight weeks. Rejoinder, if
any, within four weeks thereafter.
List on 21st August, 2008.

February 08th , 2008
'k'

WP(C) 12178 of 2006

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 12 of 12

