IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
WP(C) No.2888/2008
%

Date of decision : 09.04.2008

Jag Ram
Through:

….… Petitioner
Mr.A.K.Soni, Advocate.

Versus
BSES Yamuna Power Ltd.
Through :

......... Respondent
Mr.Nikhil Singhla, Advocate.

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.
*
1.

The petitioner has impugned the penalty of stoppage of three

annual increments of pay in time scale and restriction of payment of
pay equal to subsistence allowance during the period of suspension on
account of penalty imposed on the petitioner. The charges against the
petitioner were that he along with Mr.R.L.Ladwal had illegally removed
the meter from the premises of the consumer named Kumari Nahidh
Khanaka and did not make entries in the official records and on coming
to know the vigilance investigation going on, he rushed to the site and
installed the meter and produced a fabricated note and also restored
WP(C) 2888 of 2008

Page 1 of 8

the supply of the consumer illegally without receiving reconnection
order or deposit of reconnection fee by the consumer.

2.

The petitioner was posted as Jr. Manager and he was suspended

on 29th August, 2005 on

account of charges against him. A

memorandum and statement of article of charges dated 1st September,
2005 was issued to him. The inquiry was conducted and after a due
inquiry after giving due opportunity, the enquiry officer had held that
the charges in articles 2, 3 and 4 had been proved against the
petitioner. Articles 2, 3 and 4 against the petitioner were that he had
gone with Mr.R.L. Ladwal to the premises of the consumer named
Kumari Nahidh Khanaka and illegally removed the electricity meter and
did not make the relevant entry in the official record regarding removal
of the meter and coming to know that a vigilance investigation was
going on, he rushed to the site and installed the meter and produced a
fabricated note and thereafter restored the supply of the consumer
without receiving the reconnection order or deposit of reconnection fee
by the consumer.

3.

The disciplinary authority imposed the penalty of stoppage of four

annual increments in the time scale of Rs.7750-13700 for a period of
four years with cumulative effect and the period of suspension was
treated as leave of the kind due and the payment was restricted to the
amount of subsistence allowance already paid to him.

The petitioner

WP(C) 2888 of 2008

Page 2 of 8

filed an appeal before the appellate authority contending that the
punishment

of

stoppage

of

four

annual

increments

did

not

commensurate with the gravity of charges and that the petitioner was
entitled for full wages during the period of suspension and the order
passed by the disciplinary authority was a non-speaking order.

4.

The appeal was disposed of by order dated 27th November, 2006

where considering the plea of the petitioner of disproportionate
punishment to the gravity of charges, the penalty was decreased to
three annual increments of pay in time scale of petition for a period of
three years with cumulative effect, however, the penalty of payment of
wages equivalent to suspension amount paid to the petitioner was
sustained. The petitioner, thereafter filed a review petition against the
order dated 31st August, 2006 which was also disposed of by order
dated 4th October, 2007.

5.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the penalty

imposed does not commensurate with the gravity of offence against the
petitioner though the disciplinary authority had awarded the stoppage
of four annual increments which was modified to stoppage of three
annual increments. The charges against the petitioner are that he
illegally removed the meter and then did not make the relevant entry in
the official record and thereafter on realizing about the ongoing

WP(C) 2888 of 2008

Page 3 of 8

vigilance investigation reinstalled the meter and fabricated a note and
also reenergized the meter without reconnection charges or order.

6.

The

appellate

authority

considering

the

plea

of

the

disproportionate punishment has already reduced the punishment of
stoppage of four annual increments to three annual increments.

The

review petition has also been dismissed. Considering the offence
committed by the petitioner, it cannot be inferred that the penalty
imposed is disproportionate to the offence committed by the petitioner.
In any case, this Court is not to award different penalty or modify the
same in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution
of India as there is no manifest error in the order of the appellate
authority.

7.

Perusal of the case law on the issue of the scope of interference in

a domestic enquiry and applicability of the strict and sophisticated
rules of evidence to the domestic enquiry clearly establishes that once a
domestic tribunal based on the evidence arrives at a particular
conclusion, normally it is not open to the Appellate Tribunals and
courts to substitute their subjective opinion in the place of the one
arrived at by the domestic tribunal. Thus if an enquiry held is
consistent with the rules and in accordance with the principles of
natural justice and the misconduct is proved, then the Tribunal has no

WP(C) 2888 of 2008

Page 4 of 8

power to substitute its own discretion for that of the said disciplinary
authority, unless it is mala fide, arbitrary or the findings are quite
perverse. If an enquiry is properly conducted, then the departmental
authorities are held to be the sole judges of the facts and if there be
some legal evidence on which the findings can be based, the adequacy
or reliability of that evidence is not a matter which can be argued upon
or disputed before the Tribunal. The following judgments rendered by
the Supreme Court fortify the aforesaid conclusion:
(i) Martin Burn Ltd. v. R.N. Banerjee 1958 SCR 514.
(ii) State of Orissa v. Bidyabhushan Mohapatra MANU/SC/0361/1962.
(iii) State of A.P. v. S. Sree Rama Rao MANU/SC/0222/1963.
(iv) State Bank of India and Ors. v. Samarendra Kishore Endow and
Anr. MANU/SC/0655/1994.
(v)
Regional
Manager,
MANU/SC/0841/2004.

Rajasthan

SRTC

v.

Sohan

Lal

(vi) Bharat Forge Co. Ltd. v. Uttam Manohar Nakate (2005) 2 SCC 489.
(vii) Divisional Controller,
MANU/SC/0832/2004.
(viii)
Muriadih
Colliery
MANU/SC/0131/2005.

KSRTC
v.

Bihar

(NWKRTC)
Colliery

v.

A.T.

Kamgar

Mane
Union

(ix) V. Ramana v. AP. SRTC MANU/SC/0539/2005.
(x) Hombe Gowda Educational Trust and Anr. v. State of Karnataka and
Ors. MANU/SC/2522/2005.
(xi) L.K. Verma v. H.M.T. Ltd and Anr. MANU/SC/0703/2006.

WP(C) 2888 of 2008

Page 5 of 8

8.

The objective of judicial review is to ascertain that a person

received a fair treatment and objective is not to re-appreciate the entire
pleas and evidence and draw inferences again. The Apex Court in (1995)
6 SCC 749 B.C.Chaturvedi Vs Union of India at page 759 in para 12
had held as under:
“ 12 . Judicial review is not an appeal from a decision but
a review of the manner in which the decision is made.
Power of judicial review is meant to ensure that the
individual receives fair treatment and not to ensure that the
conclusion which the authority reaches is necessarily
correct in the eye of the court. When an inquiry is
conducted on charges of misconduct by a public servant,
the Court/Tribunal is concerned to determine whether the
inquiry was held by a competent officer or whether rules of
natural justice are complied with. Whether the findings
or conclusions are based on some evidence, the
authority entrusted with the power to hold inquiry has
jurisdiction, power and authority to reach a finding of
fact or conclusion. But that finding must be based on
some evidence. Neither the technical rules of Evidence
Act nor of proof of fact or evidence as defined therein,
apply to disciplinary proceeding. When the authority
accepts that evidence and conclusion receives support
therefrom, the disciplinary authority is entitled to hold that
the delinquent officer is guilty of the charge. The
Court/Tribunal in its power of judicial review does not
act as Appellate Authority to re-appreciate the evidence
and to arrive at its own independent findings on the
evidence. The Court/ Tribunal may interfere where the
authority held the proceedings against the delinquent
officer in a manner inconsistent with the rules of natural
justice or in violation of statutory rules prescribing the
mode of inquiry or where the conclusion or finding reached
by the disciplinary authority is based on no evidence. If the
conclusion or finding be such as no reasonable person
would have ever reached, the Court/Tribunal may
WP(C) 2888 of 2008

Page 6 of 8

interfere with the conclusion or the finding, and mould
the relief so as to make it appropriate to the facts of
each case.”

9.

For the charges against the petitioner, the punishment cannot be

termed shocking or illogical or suffering from procedural impropriety or
is in defiance of logic or moral standards. The Learned counsel is
unable to point out as to how, the punishment imposed is in defiance of
logic or moral standards. The Supreme Court in Damoh Panna Sagar
Rural Regional Bank Vs Munna Lal Jain, (2005) 10 SCC 84 had held as
under:
"The court would not go into the correctness of the choice
made by the administrator open to him and the court
should not substitute its decision for that of the
administrator. The scope of judicial review is limited to the
deficiency in decision-making process and not the decision.
The court should not interfere with the administrator’s
decision unless it is illogical or suffers from procedural
impropriety or is shocking to the conscience of the Court, in
the same that it is in defiance of logic or moral standards.
Unless the punishment imposed by the disciplinary
authority or the appellate authority shocks the conscience
of the Court/Tribunal, there is no is scope for interference.
Further, to shorten litigation it may, in exceptional
circumstances and rare cases, impose appropriate
punishment by recording cogent reasons in support
thereof. When a Court feels that the punishment is
shockingly disproportionate, it must record reasons for
coming to such a conclusion. Mere expression that the
punishment is shockingly disproportionate would not meet
the requirement of law. In the normal course if the
punishment imposed is shockingly disproportionate it
would be appropriate to direct the disciplinary authority or
the appellate authority to reconsider the penalty imposed.
WP(C) 2888 of 2008

Page 7 of 8

In the case at hand, the High Court did not record any
reason as to how and why it found the punishment
shockingly disproportionate.

10. Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the order is
not a speaking order. The disciplinary authority and the appellate
authority and the authority which has reviewed the order have
considered the facts and on the basis of the facts have decided the
penalty to be imposed. Though detailed reasons are not given, however,
it cannot be inferred that the order suffers from any manifest error.
Learned counsel for the petitioner is unable to show as to how the
charges are not made out against the petitioner on the basis of the
material on record.

11.

In the circumstances, there are no grounds to interfere with the

penalty awarded by the respondents in exercise of jurisdiction under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India and the writ petition is,
therefore, dismissed.

April 9th, 2008.

ANIL KUMAR, J.

‘Dev’

WP(C) 2888 of 2008

Page 8 of 8

