*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) No.2895/2008

%

Date of decision : 09.04.2008

Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. & Others
….… Petitioners
Through:
Ms.Raavi Birbal, Advocate.
Versus
Satyavir

…..... Respondent
Through:

Nemo.

CORAM :HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.
1.

The petitioner/management has impugned the award dated 19th

September, 2007 of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum
Labour Court II directing reinstatement of the respondent with 25% of
the back wages.

2.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has not disputed that the

respondent was a workman and he had worked for more than 240 days
W.P(C) No.2895/2008

Page 1 of 6

in the years 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001 and 2002.

Learned counsel

contends since the respondent was not a regular workman, he cannot
be reinstated. While ordering the reinstatement, the Tribunal has noted
that compensation is payable in a case where an undertaking has
become sick or which has been closed or it is in economic losses.

The

petitioner has neither become sick nor has been closed nor there is any
evident that it is running in the economic loss.

3.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied on case of Uma Devi,

however, the finding of the Tribunal that the Apex Court has not
declared the provisions of I.D. Act unconstitutional and in cases of
violation of Section 25 F, the workman is entitled for reinstatement
cannot be faulted.

While directing the petitioner to reinstate the

workman, the Industrial Tribunal has not directed the petitioner to
regularize the worker.

The Tribunal has categorically noted that the

management/petitioner is at liberty to engage the daily wager but at the
time of termination of their services the provisions of Section 25 F has
to be complied with and in case the provisions of Section 25 F are not
complied, the petitioner is liable to reinstate the workman.

The

reasoning and finding of the Industrial Tribunal cannot be faulted in
the facts and circumstances nor the learned counsel for the petitioner is
able to show to the contrary.
W.P(C) No.2895/2008

Page 2 of 6

4.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied on Rolston John v.

Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court and Others,
1995 Supp (4) Supreme Court 549 and 2005-III-LLJ Supreme Court 52,
General Manager, Haryana Roadways v. Rudhan Singh. Perusal of the
judgments relied on by the petitioner, it is apparent that they are
distinguishable. In Rolston John (supra), it was rather held by the Apex
Court that retrenchment without complying with its requirements is
void.

In the abovementioned case relied on by the petitioner, the

workman was not reinstated, as time of 18 years had lapsed since the
workman was dismissed without complying with the provisions of
Section 25 F. Apparently, the case of the respondent is different and
distinguishable as his services were terminated in December 2002
without complying with the requirement of Section 25 F of Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947 and in the circumstances, reinstatement of the
workman cannot be faulted nor on the basis of the ratio of Rolston John
(supra) it can be held that the respondent was not liable to be
reinstated.

5.

In General Manager, Haryana Roadways (supra), the Supreme

Court had held that there is no rule of thumb that in every case where
the termination of service was held to be in violation of Section 25 F of
the Act, entire back wages should be awarded. It was held that host of
W.P(C) No.2895/2008

Page 3 of 6

facts like the manner and method of selection and appointment, i.e.,
whether

after

proper

advertisement

of

the

vacancy

or

inviting

applications from the employment exchange, nature of appointment,
i.e., ad hoc, short term, daily wage, temporary or permanent in
character, any special qualification required for the job and the like has
to be considered inferring as to the quantum of back wages to be
awarded.

6.

In

the

present

case,

the

respondent/workman

has

been

reinstated after his termination in 2002 and only 25% of the back
wages has been awarded. A law in absolute terms cannot be laid down
as to in which cases, and under what circumstances, full back wages
can be granted or denied. The Labour Court and/or Industrial Tribunal
before which industrial dispute has been raised, would be entitled to
grant the relief having regard to the facts and circumstances of each
case. For the said purpose, several factors are required to be taken into
consideration. A division bench of this Court in 2006 IV AD (DELHI)
739 (DB); Lords Homeopathic Laboratories Private Ltd. Vs Ms. Lissi
Unnikunju & ors had held that the discretion exercised by the Labor
Court in awarding compensation should not ordinarily be interfered
with. The Court had held as under:

W.P(C) No.2895/2008

Page 4 of 6

21. We are of the opinion that the learned Single Judge
in writ jurisdiction should not have interfered with the
discretion of the Labour Court on the facts of the case.

7.

The Labor Court being the final court of facts, therefore, the

superior Courts do not normally interfere with the findings of facts. In
P.G.I. of Medical Education & Research, Chandigarh v. Raj Kumar (2001)
2 SCC 54 Supreme Court found fault with the High Court in setting
aside the award of the Labour Court which restricted the back wages to
60% and directing payment of full back wages. It was observed thus:
(SCC p. 57, para 9)
“9. The Labour Court being the final court of facts came to
a conclusion that payment of 60% wages would comply
with the requirement of law. The finding of perversity or
being erroneous or not in accordance with law shall have to
be recorded with reasons in order to assail the finding of
the Tribunal or the Labour Court. It is not for the High
Court to go into the factual aspects of the matter and there
is an existing limitation on the High Court to that effect.”

8.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has relied on the case of

Uma Devi (supra) which was on service law. Apparently the ratio of the
case of Uma Devi (supra) is not applicable to the present case. The
respondents were workmen under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
Section 25-F of the Act had to be complied with if the respondent had
put in 240 days of service in the year prior to the date of termination of
service. Respondent had admittedly put in over 240 days of service.

W.P(C) No.2895/2008

Page 5 of 6

Hence the termination of his service was illegal, since compliance of
Section 25-F is a condition precedent to the termination of service. The
plea of the petitioner that in the circumstances, the respondent could
not be reinstated cannot be accepted.

9.

In the circumstance, there are no ground to interfere with the

award dated 19th September, 2007 which neither has any manifest
error or any error apparent so as to entail interference by this Court
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.

10.

The writ petition, therefore, is without any merit and it is

dismissed.

April 9th, 2008

ANIL KUMAR, J.

‘Dev’

W.P(C) No.2895/2008

Page 6 of 6

