*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP(C) No.3623/2008

%

Date of decision : 09.05.2008

D.K. Gupta
Through:

….… Petitioner
Mr.Rajiv Sharma, Advocate.

Versus
MCD and others
Through :

......... Respondents
Mr.Ajay Arora and Mr.Kapil Dutta,
Advocate for respondents/MCD.

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.
*

The petitioner has challenged the decision of disciplinary and
appellate authority imposing the punishment of reduction of pay in time
scale by three stages for a period of three years with cumulative effect.

The petitioner is a Junior Engineer and a charge sheet was issued
to the petitioner contending that he did not take any effective
step/action to stop and demolish the unauthorized construction carried
WP(C) No.3623/2008

Page 1 of 9

out in property No.A-8, Hardev Puri, Main 100’ Road, Shahdara (N)
Zone and helped the owner/builder to complete the under-construction
consisting of one hall and staircase and loft at ground floor, 4 rooms,
one kitchen, under-construction at first floor, 3 rooms, 2 kitchens, one
under-construction at second floor and one room, one store, one underconstruction and staircase at third floor in the said property. Another
charge against the petitioner was not taking demolition action against
under Section 343/344 of the DMC Act and for not initiating sealing
action under Section 345-A and failure to prosecute owner/builder
under section 332/466-A of the DMC Act in respect of the said
property.

The charge sheet was duly communicated to the petitioner and
the inquiry was conducted against the respondent. The inquiry officer
gave a report holding that all the charges against the petitioner were
made out and consequently the disciplinary authority imposed a
punishment of reduction of pay in time scale by three stages for a
period of three years with cumulative effect.

The appeal filed by the

petitioner before the Appellate Authority was also dismissed and the
order of disciplinary authority dated 9th May, 2007 was upheld in the
appeal by order dated 12th December, 2007 upholding the penalty
imposed of reduction of pay in time scale by three stages for a period of
three years with cumulative effect.
WP(C) No.3623/2008

Page 2 of 9

The petitioner has challenged the order of the disciplinary and
appellate authority on the ground that the charge sheet had been
prepared on assumptions as the construction was completed on 17th
January, 2000 much prior to the date of posting of the petitioner and
inspection was conducted on 19th June, 2000 after the transfer of the
petitioner and on the day of inspection, it was found that stone/tile
cutting work was going on.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has

contended that the penalty has been imposed on the petitioner on the
assumption that if the stone work was in progress on the date of
inspection then such work must have continued even during the time
the petitioner was posted as Junior Engineer. The petitioner has also
challenged the penalty imposed upon him on the ground that the
Junior Engineers posted in the area were much less than the number of
Junior Engineers required and consequently it was not possible for to
have knowledge of all the unauthorized construction carried out in the
colony/area and he had come to know about the unauthorized
construction only on the basis of news item. The petitioner has also
contended that there he has been discriminated inasmuch as the other
persons during the tenure of the whom the unauthorized construction
was carried on, no action has been taken.

Perusal of the inquiry report reveals that the reference received
from

the

Commissioner

WP(C) No.3623/2008

regarding

carrying

on

unauthorized

Page 3 of 9

construction carried out at property No.A-8, Hardev Puri, Main 100’
Road, Shahdara (N) Zone was taken into consideration along with other
material. On perusal of all the material it was found that the finishing
work was going on and one hall with stairecase with loft at ground floor,
four rooms, one kitchen, stairs, WC and Balcony at first floor, three
rooms, two kitchen, L/B, one WC, stairs at Second Floor and one room,
one store, one WC, stairs at Second Floor and one room, one store, one
WC, stairs at Second Floor and one room, one store, one WC land stair
case at third floor were incomplete and the construction was still going
on. The inquiry officer has considered the documents PW1/A to PW1/H
and has inferred that unauthorized constructions was carried out in the
property from January 2000 to July 2000. Since the petitioner was
posed as Junior Engineer from 4th February, 2000 till 2nd April, 2000,
therefore, it could not be inferred that the petitioner could not have the
knowledge

of

the

unauthorized

constructions.

Considering

the

testimonies and the documents, it has been inferred that the charges
for not taking action for the unauthorized constructions and for
demolition and sealing had been made out.

This is no more res integra that this Court in exercise of its
jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India will not
substitute the findings of the inquiry officer with its own finding. While
exercising its powers of judicial review under Article 226 of the
WP(C) No.3623/2008

Page 4 of 9

Constitution of India this Court is not to re-appreciate the evidence. It is
a settled position of law that in exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226
of the Constitution of India, the Court does not interfere with factual
findings and restrain itself from re-appreciating evidence while
exercising powers of judicial review. The objective of judicial review is to
ascertain that a person received a fair treatment and objective and it is
not to re-appreciate the entire pleas and evidence and draw inferences
again. The findings and inferences of the Labor Court are based on
evidence and documents on record and there does not appear to be any
manifest errors in them. Judicial review is not an appeal from a
decision but a review of the manner in which the decision is made.
Power of judicial review is meant to ensure that the individual receives
fair treatment and not to ensure that the conclusion which the
authority reaches is necessarily correct in the eye of the court. If an
enquiry is properly conducted, then the departmental authorities are
held to be the sole judges of the facts and if there be some legal
evidence on which the findings can be based, the adequacy or reliability
of that evidence is not a matter which can be argued upon or disputed
before the Tribunal. The following judgments rendered by the Supreme
Court fortify the aforesaid conclusion:
(i) Martin Burn Ltd. v. R.N. Banerjee 1958 SCR 514.
(ii) State of Orissa v. Bidyabhushan Mohapatra MANU/SC/0361/1962.
(iii) State of A.P. v. S. Sree Rama Rao MANU/SC/0222/1963.
WP(C) No.3623/2008

Page 5 of 9

(iv) State Bank of India and Ors. v. Samarendra Kishore Endow and
Anr. MANU/SC/0655/1994.
(v)
Regional
Manager,
MANU/SC/0841/2004.

Rajasthan

SRTC

v.

Sohan

Lal

(vi) Bharat Forge Co. Ltd. v. Uttam Manohar Nakate (2005) 2 SCC 489.
(vii) Divisional Controller,
MANU/SC/0832/2004.
(viii)
Muriadih
Colliery
MANU/SC/0131/2005.

KSRTC
v.

Bihar

(NWKRTC)
Colliery

v.

A.T.

Kamgar

Mane
Union

(ix) V. Ramana v. AP. SRTC MANU/SC/0539/2005.
(x) Hombe Gowda Educational Trust and Anr. v. State of Karnataka and
Ors. MANU/SC/2522/2005.
(xi) L.K. Verma v. H.M.T. Ltd and Anr. MANU/SC/0703/2006.

The findings of the enquiry officer are not perverse nor have any
manifest errors. The pleas of the petitioner are solely for re-appreciating
the inferences drawn by the authorities. The plea of the petitioner that
he could not have knowledge has not been believed. The objective of
judicial review is to ascertain that a person received a fair treatment
and objective is not to re-appreciate the entire pleas and evidence and
draw inferences again. The Apex Court in (1995) 6 SCC 749
B.C.Chaturvedi Vs Union of India at page 759 in para 12 had held as
under:
“ 12 . Judicial review is not an appeal from a decision but
a review of the manner in which the decision is made.
Power of judicial review is meant to ensure that the
WP(C) No.3623/2008

Page 6 of 9

individual receives fair treatment and not to ensure that the
conclusion which the authority reaches is necessarily
correct in the eye of the court. When an inquiry is
conducted on charges of misconduct by a public servant,
the Court/Tribunal is concerned to determine whether the
inquiry was held by a competent officer or whether rules of
natural justice are complied with. Whether the findings
or conclusions are based on some evidence, the
authority entrusted with the power to hold inquiry has
jurisdiction, power and authority to reach a finding of
fact or conclusion. But that finding must be based on
some evidence. Neither the technical rules of Evidence
Act nor of proof of fact or evidence as defined therein,
apply to disciplinary proceeding. When the authority
accepts that evidence and conclusion receives support
therefrom, the disciplinary authority is entitled to hold that
the delinquent officer is guilty of the charge. The
Court/Tribunal in its power of judicial review does not
act as Appellate Authority to re-appreciate the evidence
and to arrive at its own independent findings on the
evidence. The Court/ Tribunal may interfere where the
authority held the proceedings against the delinquent
officer in a manner inconsistent with the rules of natural
justice or in violation of statutory rules prescribing the
mode of inquiry or where the conclusion or finding reached
by the disciplinary authority is based on no evidence. If the
conclusion or finding be such as no reasonable person
would have ever reached, the Court/Tribunal may
interfere with the conclusion or the finding, and mould
the relief so as to make it appropriate to the facts of
each case.”

For the charges against the petitioner, the punishment cannot be
termed shocking or illogical or suffering from procedural impropriety or
is in defiance of logic or moral standards. The Learned counsel is
WP(C) No.3623/2008

Page 7 of 9

unable to point out as to how, the punishment imposed is in defiance of
logic or moral standards. The Supreme Court in Damoh Panna Sagar
Rural Regional Bank Vs Munna Lal Jain, (2005) 10 SCC 84 had held as
under:
"The court would not go into the correctness of the choice
made by the administrator open to him and the court
should not substitute its decision for that of the
administrator. The scope of judicial review is limited to the
deficiency in decision-making process and not the decision.
The court should not interfere with the administrator’s
decision unless it is illogical or suffers from procedural
impropriety or is shocking to the conscience of the Court, in
the same that it is in defiance of logic or moral standards.
Unless the punishment imposed by the disciplinary
authority or the appellate authority shocks the conscience
of the Court/Tribunal, there is no is scope for interference.
Further, to shorten litigation it may, in exceptional
circumstances and rare cases, impose appropriate
punishment by recording cogent reasons in support
thereof. When a Court feels that the punishment is
shockingly disproportionate, it must record reasons for
coming to such a conclusion. Mere expression that the
punishment is shockingly disproportionate would not meet
the requirement of law. In the normal course if the
punishment imposed is shockingly disproportionate it
would be appropriate to direct the disciplinary authority or
the appellate authority to reconsider the penalty imposed.
In the case at hand, the High Court did not record any
reason as to how and why it found the punishment
shockingly disproportionate.

So long as the charges are proved against the petitioner, he
cannot contend that the others persons allegedly also responsible for

WP(C) No.3623/2008

Page 8 of 9

unauthorized constructions should also be punished before action can
be taken against him or that there is discrimination.
For the foregoing reasons, I do not find any perversity or manifest
error so as to entail interference with the findings of the disciplinary
authority and the appellate authority under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India in the present facts and circumstances of the case.
The writ petition is without any merit and it is, therefore, dismissed.

May 09, 2008
‘Dev’

ANIL KUMAR, J.

WP(C) No.3623/2008

Page 9 of 9

