IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Date of decision :September 10, 2007
CS(OS) No.340/1993

#
!

Vaish Brothers

......... Plaintiff
Through: Mr.Sandeep Sharma, Advocate
Vs.

$
^

Union of India

.......... Defendant
Through : Mr.Sanjay Katyal, Advocate

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
YES
YES

ANIL KUMAR, J.
*
1.

This judgment shall dispose of petition under Sections 14 and 17 of

the Arbitration Act, 1940, by Vaish Brothers & Company for filing the award
dated 19th January, 1993 and to make the said award rule of the court and
pass a decree in terms thereof and the objections filed by Union of India
under Sections 30 and 33 of the Arbitration Act, 1940 against the said award.

2.

The petitioner is a partnership firm and Mr. C.P.Vaish is a partner of

the petitioner firm who contended that he is competent to sign, verify and file
CS(OS) No.340/1993

Page 1 of 36

the petition being conversant with the facts of the case. The petitioner had
entered into a contract with respondent No.1, Union of India, for the
execution of work of construction of building No.6 at project site Milaram near
Shankarapally bearing contract No.CE(P)FY/MDK/20 of 85-86 which
agreement was executed between the petitioner and the respondent No.1.
During the execution of the work and after conclusion of the work by the
petitioner, the disputes arose and on account of arbitration agreement
between the parties, the disputes were referred to the arbitration of
respondent No.2, Shri S.G. Mahajan, one of the Arbitrators on the panel of
respondent No.1 by the Engineer-in-Chief of respondent No.1 on 18th
February, 1992. The Arbitrator, respondent no.2, entered upon reference on
29th February, 1992. The parties filed their claims, replies to the claims and
produced evidence and there after Arbitrator made and published the award
dated 19th January, 1993.

3.

The present petition has been filed by the petitioner seeking filing of

the original award along with arbitration record and for making the award
dated 19th January, 1993 rule of the Court and for passing a decree in terms
thereof and also for grant of interest @ 18% per annum from the date of
decree till the date of payment or realization.

CS(OS) No.340/1993

Page 2 of 36

4.

Pursuant to the petition filed by the petitioner, notice was sent to Union

of India and the Arbitrator, who filed the award along with proceedings and
the notice of filing of the award and the proceeding was accepted by the
petitioner on 20th August, 1993 and the notice of filing of the award was
served on Union of India/respondent No.1 on 15th March, 1993.

5.

Pursuant to the notice of filing the award, the respondent No.1 filed the

objections under Sections 30 and 33 of Arbitration Act, 1940 being IA
No.4659 of 1993.

6.

The objector/respondent No.1 contended that while allowing the claim

No.1, the Arbitrator ignored the material placed before him. It was contended
that plea of the petitioner that he did not furnish any guarantee against
leakage is absurd and for rectification of defects carried out by the
claimant/petitioner cannot be termed extra work and consequently the
Arbitrator has mis-conducted while allowing part of claim No.1. Regarding
claim No.2, it was contended that the Arbitrator ignored material placed
before him and the damage to the structure was caused on account of
workmanship and not due to faulty design and, therefore, the repair work

CS(OS) No.340/1993

Page 3 of 36

carried out by the petitioner could not be measured up again nor any amount
could be awarded to the petitioner on that account.

7.

The respondent No.1 also challenged awarding of a part of the amount

under claim No.6 on the ground that the contract contemplated electrically
operated rolling shutters and, therefore, the reason given by the Arbitrator
that electrically operated type shutters does not include electric motor is
contrary to the agreement especially because the petitioner had claimed that
he was asked to provide electronic fittings which were put by the petitioner
under pressure from the respondent No.1 and, therefore, the finding of the
Arbitrator is contrary to the claim of petitioner himself and thus the Arbitrator
has mis-conducted himself in awarding the amount to the petitioner.

8.

Regarding claim No.7 which was allowed partly, the respondent No.1

contended that the sanitary annexe to the building and the external sewerage
were within the scope of work and the value of the work was 0.65% of the
total work and consequently in terms of condition No.7 of IAFW2249, it was
within the deviation which had not radically changed the scope of the work
and, therefore, the Arbitrator mis-conducted in awarding the amount to the
petitioner in respect of the said work as being outside the scope of the work.

CS(OS) No.340/1993

Page 4 of 36

The finding of the Arbitrator was also challenged on the ground that the
contractor while receiving the approval letter or signing the deviation order did
not raise any objection either to the work order or the rates at which the work
was priced.

The respondent No.1 also challenged the award of amount

under claim No.7 on the ground that there has not been any reason given for
allowing CP/SSR right which is higher than the prevailing percentage.

9.

The respondent No.1 has challenged the award under claim no.9

where part of the claim has been allowed on the ground that the petitioner
had signed the extension deviation orders with all Nil financial effects and
therefore awarding any amount on account of it makes the claim No.9
untenable. It was contended that for making price adjustment three different
formulas were given in the contract for material procured by the contractor.
The contractor claimed Rs.7.18 lakhs as reimbursement for price variation
and Rs.2.17 lakh as refund of minus price adjustment and awarding part of
the amount is, thus, contrary to the specific terms of the agreement and
consequently the Arbitrator has mis-conducted in awarding the said amount.

10.

The objector/respondent No.1 also challenged the amount awarded

under claim No.10 on the ground that the electricity required for fabrication

CS(OS) No.340/1993

Page 5 of 36

depends upon the type of work, i.e., quality of welding involved in a particular
work and could not be generalized on the basis of other works. Since the
assessment of the electricity consumption was based on the decision of the
Board of Officers constituted for this purpose who had also based their
assessment on the basis of tonnage of steel fabricated and electricity
consumed and, therefore, the Arbitrator mis-conducted in ignoring these
factors and allowing the entire claim of the contractor.

11.

Though in the objections the other claims allowed by the learned

arbitrator, respondent no.2 were challenged, however, during the arguments
the learned counsel for respondent No.1 has confined his pleas and
contentions only in respect of claims Nos.1, 2, 6, 7, 9 and 10.

12.

The reply was filed on behalf of the petitioner to the objections filed by

the respondent No.1 contending inter alia that the objections raised by the
respondent are not covered within the scope of Sections 30 and 33 of the
Arbitration Act, 1940 as the objections raised by the respondent No.1 are
pertaining to challenge of the finding of facts, whereas the Arbitrator is the
sole Judge of questions of fact and the court is not to sit in appeal over the
findings of facts of the Arbitrator.

CS(OS) No.340/1993

Page 6 of 36

13.

During the pendency of objections, a preliminary objection had been

raised regarding the territorial jurisdiction of this court to entertain and to
dispose of the petition which was decided by order dated 30 th September,
2002 holding that communication of acceptance of the contract to the
petitioner at Delhi will also constitute a cause of action at Delhi and,
therefore, the Delhi courts will also have jurisdiction and consequently the
preliminary objection of the respondent No.1 was declined.

14.

I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and respondent

No.1 in detail and have also perused the record of the Arbitrator and the
award dated 19th January, 1993.

15.

The plea of the objector and the reply by the petitioner and

adjudication thereof is as under:
16.

Claim No.1

16.1

The contractor/petitioner had claimed an amount of Rs.1,48,465/- on

account of losses and damages suffered by the petitioner on account of
defects in design and specifications for provision of GI flashing around AC

CS(OS) No.340/1993

Page 7 of 36

roof extractors.

The objection of the objector is that the amount of

Rs.58,996/- has been awarded to plaintiff contrary to the conditions of the
contract and the material evidence has been ignored and the reasons given
in para 6(b) and (d) of award are contrary to the evidence brought on record.

16.2

The petitioner had filed a claim of Rs.1,48,465/- which was revised to

Rs.1,44,304/-.

The petitioner had contended that he had procured the

extractors from the approved manufacturers and there was no dispute about
the quality of extractors. The dispute has been raised on account of leakage
having occurred from the roof where the extractors were fixed. According to
the claimant/petitioner there was no defect with the extractors and the defect
was in the design/fixing arrangement. As per the manufacturer’s instructions,
the extractors had to be located near the ridge but according to the design of
the respondent, they were located in the mid-span and had been fixed with
PGI sheet lining of 1 MM thickness which was provided by the respondent
though as per manufacturer’s instructions lead sheet flashing had to be used.
According to the petitioner, he did not provide any guarantee against leakage
through fixing arrangement of the roof extractors and since he carried out the
extra work in fixing the leakage from the extractors, he claimed the amount.

CS(OS) No.340/1993

Page 8 of 36

16.3

The respondent no.1 has objected on the ground that fixing

arrangement of extractors as given by the respondent no.1 was adequate
and lead was replaced with PGI sheet lining of 1 mm thickness as lead was a
costly item. It was also contended that the petitioner had not pointed out
alleged fault in the design at the time when the work was carried out and it
was only an afterthought. The award of an amount of Rs.58,996/- is also
challenged on the ground that the petitioner only carried out the rectification
only to stop the leakage which is deemed to be a part of his work and
consequently nothing extra is payable to the petitioner.

16.4

Learned Arbitrator has awarded an amount of Rs.58,996/- though an

amount of Rs.1,44,304/- was claimed on the ground that the petitioner has
used extractors of standard make “Everest” and under the agreement it was
not provided that the roof extractors shall be leak proof. In order to make the
roof extractors leak proof, the additional work was done by the petitioner
which was also necessitated because though the manufacturer’s instructions
contemplated use of lead sheet and even the Board of Officers which had
gone into various aspects of construction of such type of building also
recommended use of lead sheet lining, however, the respondent no.1 only
provided PGI sheet and therefore lining was done with the PGI sheet

CS(OS) No.340/1993

Page 9 of 36

resulting into leakage.

16.5

The petitioner had also claimed the amount for providing bituminous

Gola and tarfelt lining which were, however, not found to be at site and so the
claim was rejected but for making the extractors leak proof, an amount of
Rs.58,996/- on account of cost of welding was awarded which also existed at
the site.

16.6

The respondent is unable to show any term under the agreement

under which it was the liability of the petitioner to make the extractor leak
proof. If the leakage had occurred in the extractors, there is no evidence to
show that this was not on account of using PGI sheet instead of lead sheet
which was recommended by the Board of Officers of the respondent and
which is also the manufacturer’s instructions to install such extractors.
Consequently, the leakage in the extractor cannot be imputed to the
petitioner solely nor there can be liability of the petitioner solely for rectifying
such defect.

16.7. The amount claimed under claim no.1 is given in appendix 1 which
also includes the cost of welding which has been allowed by the Arbitrator. In

CS(OS) No.340/1993

Page 10 of 36

the appendix annexed with the claim filed by the petitioner, the cost of
welding has been claimed at Rs.96/- per extractor for 301 extractors for a
total amount of Rs.28896/-. Learned counsel for the petitioner has pointed
out that on 19th October, 1992 petitioner had submitted additional documents
as per appendix A and the respondent No.1, Union of India, had also filed
documents which were detailed in Appendix B. These documents filed by the
petitioner also included the revised details of claim No.1 filed by the petitioner
where he had claimed the welding charges at Rs.195.18 rounded off to
Rs.196/- and therefore for 301 extractors an amount of Rs.58,996/- has been
claimed.

This amount of Rs.58,996/- has not been challenged by the

respondent except denying the entire claim. The Arbitrator considering the
material on record has dis-allowed the claim for bituminous gola and tarfelt
lining but allowed the claim for the cost of welding and, therefore, the award
of Rs.58,996/- cannot be faulted in the facts and circumstances. The learned
Arbitrator has considered the material on record and applied his mind taking
into consideration the relevant material for arriving at the findings and the
respondent is unable to show any evidence or plea which has not been
considered or any error apparent on the face of the record. What has to be
seen is whether the reasons given by the Arbitrator are perverse and no
reasonable person could have come to that view. Since while awarding the

CS(OS) No.340/1993

Page 11 of 36

amount of the present claim, the Arbitrator had applied his mind and taken
into consideration the relevant material for arriving at the findings, the award
of Rs.58,996/- under claim No.1 cannot be interfered with.

17.

Claim No.2.

17.1

Under claim No.2, the petitioner claimed an amount of Rs.2,44,712/-

for repairing the damages which was caused to AC sheet roofing, AC north
light curves and north light aluminium glazing on account of cyclonic wind
storm which caused widespread damages. According to the petitioner, the
damages was caused on account of faulty design of the respondent no.1 and
for repairing the damage he is entitled for the amount because the damage
was not caused on account of any act attributable to him.

17.2

The objection of the respondent no.1 is that damage was caused

during the currency of the contract and during the maintenance period and
consequently the petitioner was liable to repair the damage caused to the
building which was got repaired by the respondent no.1 through another
agency which was the liability of the petitioner under the contract. According
to the respondent no.1, the damage which was caused was attributable to the

CS(OS) No.340/1993

Page 12 of 36

petitioner and therefore the petitioner is liable for the amount spent on the
repair of the same.

17.3

The arbitrator has awarded an amount of Rs.1,22,356/- on the ground

that the damage had taken place on account of abnormal nature of storm and
even the respondent carried out modification in the design to avoid any
further damage due to storms which reflects that initially the design was
defective which led to the damage. The arbitrator has also considered that
had a plea been taken that the work was half done and the petitioner had not
taken adequate precaution then no damage would have taken place after the
completion of the work. The arbitrator also considered that the damage to the
building had also taken place in a storm in 1989 and the respondent had to
adopt strengthening measures which in the opinion of the Arbitrator was
reflective of defective design which led to the damage to the building and
because of the factors attributable to the petitioner.

17.4

The plea of the objector/respondent no.1 is that the damage which

was caused due to the storm was got repaired from another agency and the
petitioner has not carried out any repair to the damage caused due to the
storm. Learned counsel for the respondent is unable to show any evidence

CS(OS) No.340/1993

Page 13 of 36

to reflect that the damage which was caused by the storm was attributable to
the petitioner and the repair work was got done from other agency. The
arbitrator has considered the evidence on record and has applied his mind
taking into consideration the relevant material. It is not denied that the design
was got modified through other agencies. If the design was got modified
through other agencies, it is reasonable to infer that there were some defects
which lead to damages earlier also in 1989, therefore, the possibility that the
damage was caused on account of defect in the design could not be ruled out
in the opinion of the arbitrator.

The finding of the Arbitrator in the facts and

circumstances cannot be inferred to be so perverse or so unreasonable that
any reasonable person could not have come to the same. If any inference
drawn by the arbitrator is plausible on the basis of material on record, this
Court will not substitute its inference with the inferences drawn by the
Arbitrator while considering the objections under section 30 and 33 of the
Arbitration Act, 1940. This is no more res integra that there are limits for
judicial review ability and the courts exercise limited jurisdiction in setting
aside the findings of an Arbitrator.

Though the court cannot go into

insufficiency of the evidence led before the arbitrator but in the present facts
and circumstances of this claim, it cannot even be inferred that there is
insufficiency of evidence.

CS(OS) No.340/1993

The arbitrator has given a reason and even

Page 14 of 36

considering the reasonableness of the reasons, though it is not permitted, the
reasons given by the arbitrator cannot be faulted on the basis of the material
referred to by the learned counsel for the respondent no.1. The finding of the
arbitrator awarding a amount of Rs.1,22,356/- does not suffer from such
perversity or wrong proposition of law so as to entail inference by this court
and setting aside the same.

Consequently, awarding of an amount of

Rs.1,22,356/- under this claim no.2 by the Arbitrator cannot be inferred with.

18.

Claim No.6

18.1

Under claim No.6, the petitioner claimed an amount of Rs.10,26,460/-

on account of non-payment for electrically operated rolling shutters over and
above the contractual stipulation. However, while giving the details of this
claim in the claim petition filed before the Arbitrator, the petitioner contended
that he had to provide steel rolling shutters which were to be operated
manually or electrically. For operating the steel rolling shutters, respondent
wanted electronic equipment also to be installed for operation of these
shutters and providing and using electronic equipment was outside the scope
of the contract and thus the petitioner became entitled for Rs.10,26,460/-. In
the claim filed before the Arbitrator, petitioner contended that the details of
electronic equipment provided over and above the electric equipment were

CS(OS) No.340/1993

Page 15 of 36

given in appendix 5 annexed with the claim petition. The claim No.6 of the
petitioner in the claim petition was as under:-

Claim No.6: NON PAYMENT FOR ELECTRICALLY OPERATED
ROLLING SHUTTERS OVER AND ABOVE THE CONTRACTUAL
STIPULATIONS
The contract agreement vide clause 13.31 on page 149
of the contract agreement stipulates that we have to provide
steel rolling shutters which should be susceptible of being
operated manually or electrically. This was done but the
respondent wanted electronic equipment also to be installed for
operation of these shutters. This was clearly outside the scope
of the contract. Non-the-less we were prevailed upon to provide
such equipment for which no payment has been made. Apart
from the extra expenditure so incurred by us, the delay in
ordering the work was also instrumental in incidence of
additional expenditure to be incurred by us. The respondent
interprets that provisions of the electronic gadgetry is covered
by the contract provision.
We shall further explain the
irrelevance of such a misinterpretation of the contract provision
at the time of hearing. The details of the claim are at Appendix
5.”

18.2

Perusal of claim petition of the petitioner reflects that it did not have

appendix 5 and the details of electronic equipment, the price of which
amounting to Rs.10,26,460/- was claimed were not given. The respondent
no.1 categorically contended in the reply to the claim petition that there is no
appendix 5 giving the details of electronic equipments for which amount of
Rs.10,26,460/- was claimed by the petitioner.

CS(OS) No.340/1993

The respondent relied on

Page 16 of 36

clause 13.6.1 which is as under:“Steel rolling shutters shall be electrically operated type (as also
manually operated in case of power failure) ball bearings and
made out of 1.25mm thick mild steel laths of convex
corrugations complete all as specified in clause 10.23 of MES
schedule Part-I. Rolling shutters shall be given two costs of
synthetic enamel paint over a coat of primer as specified.
Rolling shutter shall conform to the requirements of IS-6248 and
shall be of approved make/manufacturer, Steel rolling shutters
shall be procured from any one of the following manufacturers:(a) M/s.Swastic Rolling Shutters.
(b) M/s.Standard Rolling Shutters.
© M/s.Venkateshwara Rolling Shutters & Engineering Works,
Secunderabad.
(d) Ganesh Rolling Shutters & Engineers Works,
Secunderabad.
(e) M/s.Shaktiman Industries.
(f) M/s Best & Company”

18.3

According to the respondent no.1 from the said clause, it is apparent

that the petitioner had to provide electrically operated as well as manually
operated rolling shutters and not only manually operated or electrically
operated shutters only. It is also not provided that the petitioner had to be
paid separately for electric equipment used for operating the shutter
electrically.

CS(OS) No.340/1993

Page 17 of 36

18.4

Learned Arbitrator has, however, awarded an amount of Rs.2,18,450/-

for the electric motors which were provided by the petitioner which according
to the arbitrator was distinct separate feature which had to be specified
clearly.

According to the arbitrator, in a similar contract the provision of

electric equipment had been clearly spelled out and in case electrically
operated equipment was to be used, it ought to have been stipulated
categorically as electric fittings are generally specified separately.

The

arbitrator also considered that the claim for extra charges, is for providing
electric motor and other features such as reduction gear, steel couplings
device etc. which are deemed to be included in the contractor’s rate when it is
stated that shutters shall also be electrically operated. The reasons given by
the arbitrator in para 23 while allowing part of claim No.6 are as under:“23. Contractor’s claim is partly sustained for the following
reasons:(a)
Contract does not give any specifications for electric
equipments required for electrically operated rolling shutters. In
fact this is a distinct feature which has to be specified clearly.
(b)
In a similar contract which was perhaps running
concurrently, provisions of electric equipments have been
clearly spelt out. If by merely saying electrically operated would
have included the complete electric equipments, there was no
necessity of specifying it separately in other contracts.
(c)
It is also seen that those electric fittings are generally
specified separately.
(d)
CS(OS) No.340/1993

As per contrapreferentem rule, the clause is to be
Page 18 of 36

interpreted against the drafter of the contract.
(e)
However, it is seen that the contractor has claimed extra
charges for providing electric motor and other features. It is
considered that the other features such as reduction gear, steel
coupling devise etc are deemed to be included in the contractor’s
rate when it is stated that shutters shall also be electrically
operated. It is considered that contractor’s claim is sustained for
provision of electric motor which is a distinct separate feature. I,
therefore, uphold contractor’s claim partly and cost of providing
electric motor will work out to Rs.2,570/- each. The cost of
providing 85 Nos would be Rs.2,18,450.00/-.”

18.5

It is apparent that along with the claim petition, appendix 5 was not

filed by the petitioner and, therefore a specific objection was taken by the
respondent No.1 that the appendix 5 giving the details of electronic
component in respect of which claim No.6 was filed were

not detailed.

However, the details of claim No.6, appendix 5, was filed on 19 th October,
1992 when the respondent No.1 also filed their documents. In appendix 5
filed subsequently the details have been given for an amount of
Rs.10,26,460/- for 85 numbers of complete electric drive units at Rs.12,076/-.
The petitioner has claimed the amount in an electric drive unit for one electric
motor of 2 horse power rating; one reduction gear (20:1 reducing) radicon;
one steel coupling device; one manual clutching device with shifting
lever/handle; electric starter with reverse service switches having three push
buttons for up, down and stop operation and two electrical limit switches

CS(OS) No.340/1993

Page 19 of 36

besides labour charges for fixing and aligning electric driving unit and for
onsite fabrication of pedestal for mounting plate and supporting legs/brackets
with angle iron complete including fixing and grouting in walls and three coats
of synthetic enamel paint and 10% of profit excluding sales tax.

18.6

Learned counsel for respondent No.1 had contended that when the

specific objections was taken in reply to the claim that the appendix had not
been filed giving the details of electronic equipments, subsequently filing of
the details negates the opportunity to the respondent no.1 to reply to the
various equipments in respect of which the amount was claimed by the
petitioner. However, on the perusal of the record, it is apparent that not only
the petitioner filed appendix 5 regarding claim no.6 along with various other
documents but the respondent no.1 also filed various documents.
Respondent No.1 had the notice and the knowledge about the claim of the
petitioner and, therefore, cannot challenge the same now on the ground that
respondent No.1 did not have the notice of the appendix no.5 regarding claim
no.6 which was filed later on after the objection had already been taken by
the respondent no.1.

18.7

From the perusal of the above facts what emerges is that petitioner

CS(OS) No.340/1993

Page 20 of 36

has claimed the amount under claim No.6 on account of electronic equipment
which was installed for operation of these shutters which, according to the
petitioner, was outside the scope of the contract which the petitioner had to
provide, as the respondent prevailed upon them. From the perusal of the
details which had been filed by the petitioners later on, it is apparent that
none of the components in respect of which the claim has been filed by the
petitioner are electronic equipments. The claim of the petitioner is not only for
electric equipment but for enamel paint on the same and even for the profit.
The petitioner had claimed the amount on account of electronic equipment
which petitioner was forced to supply. The Arbitrator has mis-conducted in
awarding the claim on the ground that it was not the electronic equipment but
the electrical motor for which the petitioner was entitled. The findings of the
arbitrator are inconsistent.

The petitioner had claimed the amount on

account of electronic equipment contending that the electronic equipment
which was installed by the petitioner were outside the scope of the
agreement whereas the arbitrator has held that some of the components
used for electrical drive units were to be provided as a part of the contract but
the electric motor was not part of the contract. The contract between the
parties does not provide specifically as to what parts were to be used to make
the shutter electrically operatable. In the circumstances to hold that some of

CS(OS) No.340/1993

Page 21 of 36

the parts of the electric drive unit were within the scope of the contract and
the electric motor was not part of the drive unit and was beyond the scope of
the contract reflect inconsistent conclusions arrived at by the arbitrator. The
arbitrator has also assumed that to make the shutter electrically operatable,
the details of the equipments ought to have been given separately in the
contract. It is no more res integra that an arbitrator is not a conciliator and
his duty is to decide the dispute according to the legal rights of the parties
and not according to what he may consider to be fair and reasonable. How
one component of the electric drive unit is not within the scope of the
agreement whereas other parts are within the scope of the agreement,
reflects non application of mind by the arbitrator. Therefore the amount
awarded cannot be termed to be fair and reasonable in the facts and
circumstances.

18.8

In M/s Sikkam Subba Associates Vs State of Sikkam, (2001) 1 SCC

629 at page 641 the Supreme Court had held relying on Champsey Bhara &
Company Vs Jivraj Ballo Spinning & Weaving Company Ltd, AIR 1923 PC
66

and

M/s

Alopi

Parshad

&

Sons

Ltd

Vs

Union

of

Inida,

MANU/SC/0057/1960 as under:
12.
Relying upon the ratio in Champsey Bhara & Co . v. Jivraj Balloo
Spg. & Wvg. Co. Ltd. AIR 1923 PC 66 this Court in Alopi Parshad & Sons Ltd. v.
CS(OS) No.340/1993

Page 22 of 36

Union of India AIR 1966 SC 588 observed that the award may be set
aside on the ground of an error on the face thereof, when in the
award or in any document incorporated with it, as for instance, a
note appended by the arbitrator(s) stating the reasons for the
decision wherein the legal propositions which are the basis of
the award are found to be erroneous. A specific question submitted to the arbitrator for his decision, even if found answered
wrongly involving an erroneous decision in point of law also,
was considered not to make the award bad on its face so as to
call for interference. While emphasising the position that “misconduct” in Section 30( a ) of the Act comprises legal misconduct, this Court held it to be complete in itself when the arbitrator was found to have, on the face of the award, arrived at a decision by ignoring the very material and relevant documents
which throw abundant light on the controversy to help a just and
fair decision or arrived at an inconsistent conclusion on his own
finding ( K.P. Poulose v. State of Kerala (1975) 2 SCC 236). In Chahal Engg.
and Construction Co. v. Irrigation Deptt. (1993) 4 SCC 186 this Court held
that the words “is otherwise invalid” in clause ( c ) of Section 30
of the Act would include an error apparent on the face of the
record. In Trustees of the Port of Madras v. Engineering Constructions Corpn.
Ltd.(1995) 5SCC 531 after adverting to the ratio of the Constitution
Bench of this Court in Raipur Development Authority v. Chokhamal Contractors (1989) 2 SCC 721) this Court held that the error apparent on the
face of the award contemplated by Section 16(1)( c ) and Section 30( c ) of the Act is “an error of law” apparent on the face of
the award and not an error of fact and that the arbitrator cannot
ignore the law or misapply it in order to do what he thinks is just
and reasonable. In State of Orissa v. Kalinga Construction Co. (P) Ltd.(1970)
2 SCC 861 it was held that the court, in a proceeding to set aside
the award cannot exercise jurisdiction, as if on an appeal by reexamining and re-appraising the evidence considered by the arbitrator and come to the decision that the arbitrator was wrong
[see also U.P. Hotels v. U.P. SEB (1989) 1 SCC 539, Puri Construction (P) Ltd.
v. Union of India (1989) 1 SCC 411 and Sudarsan Trading Co. v. Govt. of Kerala
(1989) 2 SCC 38].

CS(OS) No.340/1993

Page 23 of 36

13.
In Union of India v. Jain Associates (1994) 4 SCC 665 this Court held
as follows: (SCC pp. 670-71, para 7)
“ 7 . In K.P. Poulose v. State of Kerala 5 this Court held that misconduct under Section 30( a ) does not connote a moral
lapse. It comprises legal misconduct which is complete if
the arbitrator, on the face of the award, arrives at an inconsistent conclusion even on his own finding, by ignoring material documents which would throw abundant light
on the controversy and help in arriving at a just and fair
decision. It is in this sense that the arbitrator has misconducted the proceedings in the case. In that case the
omission to consider the material documents to resolve
the controversy was held to suffer from manifest error apparent ex facie. The award was accordingly quashed. In
Dandasi Sahu v. State of Orissa (1990) 1 SCC 214 this Court held
that the arbitrator need not give any reasons. The award
could be impeached only in limited circumstances as provided under Sections 16 and 30 of the Act. If the award is
disproportionately high having regard to the original claim
made and the totality of the circumstances it would certainly be a case of non-application of mind amounting to
legal misconduct and it is not possible to set aside only
invalid part while retaining the valid part. In other words
the doctrine of severability w as held inapplicable in such
a situation. It is, therefore, clear that the word ‘misconduct’ in Section 30( a ) does not necessarily comprehend
or include misconduct of fraudulent or improper conduct
or moral lapse but does comprehend and include actions
on the part of the arbitrator, which on the face of the
award, are opposed to all rational and reasonable principles resulting in excessive award or unjust result or the
like circumstances which tend to show non-application of
the mind to the material facts placed before the arbitrator
or umpire. In truth it points to the fact that the arbitrator or
umpire had not applied his mind and not adjudicated
upon the matter, although the award professes to determine them. Such situation would amount to misconduct.
In other words, if the arbitrator or umpire is found to have
CS(OS) No.340/1993

Page 24 of 36

not applied his mind to the matters in controversy and
yet, has adjudicated upon those matters in law, there can
be no adjudication made on them. The arbitrator /umpire
may not be guilty of any act which can possibly be construed as indicative of partiality or unfairness. Misconduct
is often used, in a technical sense denoting irregularity
and not guilt of any moral turpitude, that is, in the sense
of non-application of the mind to the relevant aspects of
the dispute in its adjudication. In K.V. George v. Secy. to Govt.,
Water & Power Deptt. (1989) 4 SCC 595) this Court held that the
arbitrator had committed misconduct in the proceedings
by making an award without adjudicating the counterclaim made by the respondent. In Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd. v. Amritsar Gas Service (1991) 1 SCC 533 (SCC at p.
544) the
counter-claim was rejected on the ground of delay and
non-consideration of the claim, it was held, constituted
an error on the face of the award.”
14.
It is also, by now, well settled that an arbitrator is not a
conciliator and his duty is to decide the disputes submitted to
him according to the legal rights of the parties and not according to what he may consider to be fair and reasonable. An arbitrator was held not entitled to ignore the law or misapply it and
he cannot also act arbitrarily, irrationally, capriciously or independently of the contract (see Rajasthan State Mines and Minerals Ltd. v.
Eastern Engg. Enterprises (1999) 9 SCC 283).

18.9

Therefore an arbitrator being a creature of the agreement between the

parties has to operate within the four corners of the agreement and if he
ignores the specific terms of the contract, it would be question of jurisdictional
error on the face of the award falling within the ambit of legal misconduct
which can be corrected by the court.

It is also true that if an arbitrator

commits an error in construction of the contract that is an error within his
CS(OS) No.340/1993

Page 25 of 36

jurisdiction but if he wanders outside the contract and deals with the matters
not allotted to him it becomes a jurisdictional error. The agreement between
the parties does not provide that the electric drive unit will be separate. No
reliance could be placed on the similar contracts where the electric
equipments had been spelt out and provided separately. If in the contract
between the parties in respect of building no.6, no electric equipment had
been spelt out separately then what was contemplated was that rolling
shutters should be capable of being operated manually as well as electrically
and any equipment to operate the same electrically will be part of the
agreement. The Arbitrator could not read the terms and conditions of some
other contract and extrapolate the same to the present contract between the
parties. The observation of the Arbitrator that electric fittings are generally
specified separately also seems to be based on his own assumption. If the
steel rolling shutters which was to be provided had to be operated electrically,
the electrical fittings would be part of the contract. Another glaring misconduct
on the part of the arbitrator is that the petitioner had claimed for electronic
equipment while the arbitrator has awarded for electrical motor.

18.10 The respondent No.2 has also awarded a sum of Rs.2,18,450/- for
providing 85 motors at the rate of Rs.2,570/- whereas the claim of the

CS(OS) No.340/1993

Page 26 of 36

petitioner is for Rs.2175/- per motor in appendix 5 filed later on. No reason
has been given for awarding an amount of Rs.2570/- per electric motor and
not Rs.2175/- demanded by the petitioner. The reasoning of the Arbitrator
runs counter to his own reasoning and is contradictory inasmuch as if the
amount has only been awarded for electric motors and not for reduction gear
and other accessories which were required to operate the shutters
electrically, then the amounts could not be awarded for even the electric
motors.

There is an apparent error in awarding the claim No.6 by the

Arbitrator to the petitioner and it is also contrary to the terms of the award.
The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that only a shutter
which should be operated electrically was to be provided and not anything
required to operate the shutter electrically also runs contrary to the
agreement

entered

into

between

the

parties

and

his

own

claim.

Consequently, the award of Rs.2,18,450/- under claim No.6 by the
respondent No.2 to the petitioner is set aside being erroneous on the face of
the award.

19.

Claim No.7

19.1

The petitioner claimed an amount of Rs.2,06,126/- on the ground that

the work in respect of sanitary annexe and external sewage to building was
CS(OS) No.340/1993

Page 27 of 36

outside the scope of the contract and he was forced to do it as a DO whereas
this additional work could be got done as an amendment to the contract only.
According to plaintiff, he was paid less and, therefore, the claim of
Rs.2,06,126/- was filed. The respondent No.1 refuted the claim on the ground
that under clause 7 it was a deviation and had to be done under the contract
and was not beyond the scope of the agreement. Clause 7 is stipulated
hereinafter:“7.
Deviations (Applicable specifically to Measurement and
Lump Sum Contracts and generally to Term Contracts) – The
Contractor shall not make any alteration in addition to or
omission from the Works as described in the tender document
except in pursuance of the written instructions of the G.E.
No work that radically changes the original nature and
scope of the Contract shall be ordered as a Deviation and in the
event of the disagreement between the Contractor and the
Accepting Officer, the decision, of the next higher authority (or
of the Chief Engineer in case of contracts accepted by him)
shall be final and binding on the contract or,
The Accepting Officer, or person specifically authorised
by him on his behalf, may vary either by way of addition to
and/or deduction from the Works so described provided that the
Contract Sum be not thereby varied on the whole by more than
the percentage set out in the tender documents (referred to
hereinbelow as the 'Deviation Limit'), subject to the following
restrictions:a) The Deviation Limit referred to above is the net effect
(algebrical sum) of all additions and deductions ordered.
b) In no case shall the addition/Deductions (arithmetical
sum) exceed twice the Deviation Limit.
CS(OS) No.340/1993

Page 28 of 36

c) The Deviation ordered on terms of any individual trade
included in the Contract shall not exceed plus/minus 25% of the
value of that trade in the Contract as a whole or half the
Deviation Limit, whichever is less except in the case of Prime
Cost and Provisional Items where the parties to the contract
may agree to at different percentage for any particular trade
item.
d) The value of additions of items of any individual trade
not already included in the Contract shall not exceed 10% of the
Deviation Limit.
All additions and deductions will be priced as per
Condition 62 hereof and added to or deducted from the
Contract Sum. Whenever the Accepting Officer intends to
exercise such right his intentions shall be communicated to the
Contractor by the G.E, whose order in writing shall specify the
deviations which are to be made, the lump sum assessment or
the proposed basis of payment, the change, if any in the date or
completion of the relevant phase and/or the entire Contract. Any
objection by the Contractor to any matter concerning the
Deviation Order, shall be notified by him in writing to the G.E
within fifteen days from the date of receipt of such order, but
under no circumstances shall the progress of the Works be
stopped (unless so ordered by the G.E) owing to differences or
controversy that may arise from such objection. In default of
such notification the Contractor will be deemed to have
accepted the order and the conditions stated therein without in
any way affecting the right of the parties to rectify any mistake
on the basis of payment only to the extent it differs from
Condition 02. In the event of the Contractor failing to agree with
the G.E regarding the proposed alteration of time, the objection
shall be referred to the Accepting Officer or, in the case of
Contracts (other than Term Contracts) accepted by the G.E to
the C.W.E whose decision shall be final.”

19.2. The petitioner had accepted this DO without reservation and in any
CS(OS) No.340/1993

Page 29 of 36

case in accordance with clause 7 of the agreement, the sanitary annexe to
the building and the external sewage was not such a work which will radically
change the original nature and scope of the contract. As the value of the
additional items did not exceed 10% of the deviation limit, as the work was
admittedly about 0.65% of the total contract amount, the same will be
covered under clause 7 and the petitioner is not entitled for the additional
charges demanded by him after the conclusion of the work.

19.3. The learned Arbitrator has sustained the claim on the ground that it is
not covered in the scope of the contract and this cannot be ordered as
deviation. Learned Arbitrator, however, has not considered clause 7 and has
given no reason as to why this is not a deviation. There is nothing to show
that the sanitary annexe and sewage of the building is such a work which
radically changes the building work awarded to the petitioner. Merely
contending that it is not covered in the scope of work is on account of non
application of mind and the error in the observation of the arbitrator is
apparent on the face of the award.

19.4

Clause 7 of the contract considers as to what is deviation. It stipulates

that if a work does not radically changes the nature of contract and it is less

CS(OS) No.340/1993

Page 30 of 36

than 10% of the total work it would be deviation. It is admitted that the
contract was for construction of a building and in a building the sanitary
annexe and external sewage cannot be termed as such works which would
radically change the original nature and scope of the contract. It is also
admittedly 0.65% of the total value of work which was about Rs.4 lakhs which
amount was paid to the petitioner. The petitioner can not claim that it should
have been done as an amendment to the contract in the facts and
circumstances. In any case, the learned Arbitrator has allowed the same
mechanically without giving any reasons and holding that it is not covered in
the scope of the contract and cannot be ordered as deviation. The error is
apparent on the face of award and awarding of this claim to the petitioner
cannot be sustained and it is set aside

20.

CLAIM NO.9

20.1

The plaintiff had claimed a revised amount of Rs.9,36,422.54 as

reimbursement in price due to escalation. It was contended that in keeping
with the spirit and intention of the contract, the petitioner was required to be
compensated for the escalation of the total quantity of stores procured by him
particularly when substantial quantity of stores were procured after original
date of completion. According to the plaintiff, the delay in execution of the

CS(OS) No.340/1993

Page 31 of 36

work was attributable to the defaults and breaches of the contract on the part
of the respondent No.1. Respondent No.1 contested the claim on the ground
that the reimbursement on account of escalation in the material was covered
by the contract condition which stipulated pre-determined constant which
were quoted in the tender and according to respondent No.1 they could not
be changed later on. It was also stated that the escalation has been paid to
the plaintiff up to the actual date of completion which is beyond the original
scheduled date of completion. It was also contended that the plaintiff has
signed the DOs for extension of time with nil financial effect.

20.2

Learned

Arbitrator

has

considered

the

fact

that

a

sum

of

Rs.7,18,890.45 is the demand for the material procured by the petitioner after
the original date of completion. The Arbitrator did not uphold the claim on
account of formula given in the contract being the basis for making any
payment for escalation of the material which formula was agreed by both the
parties. However, the Arbitrator justified the claim of Rs.2,17,532.09 for the
adjustment of the escalation done in the final bill on the ground that the
intention of the contract was to compensate the contractor for any increase in
the material when the price index was rising. The Arbitrator has considered
the formula Vm2 – Vm1 which was in minus whereas the intention was not to

CS(OS) No.340/1993

Page 32 of 36

make any plus payment when the price index was decreasing. Taking into
consideration all these aspects, the amount of Rs.2,17,532.09 was awarded.

20.3

Learned counsel for the respondent No.1 has contended that the

stores were procured by the petitioner in advance and consequently the
petitioner is not entitled for escalation. Perusal of the record of the arbitration
reflects that no such plea was taken nor there is any evidence that stores
were procured by the petitioner in advance so as to dis-entitle him for
escalation. Learned Arbitrator has considered the claim and reply of the
respondent No.1 and after due application of mind has sustained the claim
for Rs.2,17,532.09 and same cannot be interfered in the facts circumstances.

CS(OS) No.340/1993

Page 33 of 36

21.

Claim No.10

21.1

Under claim 10, the petitioner has claimed an amount of Rs.1,84,726/-

deducted on ad hoc basis without any justification. According to the
petitioner, he had to pay electric charges on actual meter consumption basis
whereas the respondent No.1 has claimed the electricity charges on ad hoc
basis on higher side and consequently the petitioner is liable for refund of
extra charges.

21.2

The respondent No.1 had justified the recovery made on the basis of

assessment made by the board of officer. The learned Arbitrator has relied on
the terms of the contract and the fact that the meter for recording the
consumption was to be installed by the respondent No.1 and was also to be
kept in working condition. The ad hoc charges claimed by the respondent
No.1 on the basis of assessment made by a Board of Officers was held to be
not binding, as the petitioner was not associated with the Board of Officers
The petitioner had given the electric charges in respect of other similar
contracts which was relied on by the Arbitrator and an amount of
Rs.1,84,726/- has been awarded which finding cannot be impugned on the
ground that the meter showing the consumption of electricity went out of

CS(OS) No.340/1993

Page 34 of 36

order and thus the recovery for the same has been made in RARs on the
basis of similar work during the same period. The meter had to be maintained
by the respondent No.1 which fact has been noticed by the Arbitrator and
since the Board of Officers on whose recommendation the amount has been
deducted were not associated with the petitioner, the decision of the
Arbitrator cannot be faulted within the scope of interference by this Court
under Sections 30 and 33 of Arbitration Act, 1940. Consequently, the award
of Rs.1,84,726/- is sustained and the objection of the respondent No.1 is
rejected.

22.

No other claim has been disputed by and on behalf of respondent

No.1. Consequently, the amounts awarded to the petitioner under claim No.6
and 7 are rejected and other amounts awarded to the petitioner under
different claims are sustained. The objection to the claims no.6 & 7 are
allowed whereas objections filed by the respondent no.1 for other claims are
dismissed. The claims 6 and 7 can be segregated from the other claims,
therefore, the award can be made rule of the court in respect of other claims
except claim Nos.6 and 7.

23.

Consequently, the application IA no 4659 of 1993 of the respondent

CS(OS) No.340/1993

Page 35 of 36

no.1 in respect of claim no.6 & 7 is allowed and for other claims it is
dismissed. The petition of the petitioner under section 14 & 17 of the
Arbitration Act, 1940 is allowed and the award is made rule of the Court
except claims no.6 & 7. The decree for recovery of amount as awarded in
respect of claims other than 6 and 7 is passed in favour of petitioner and
against the respondent no.1. Future simple interest at the rate of 8% per
annum till the realization of decreetal amount is also awarded to the
petitioner. Decree sheet in terms hereof be drawn.

September 10th , 2007
‘Dev’

CS(OS) No.340/1993

ANIL KUMAR J.

Page 36 of 36

