IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of decision: December 11th, 2007
AA No.378/2007
#
!

Sh.Subhash Chand Goel
Through:

......... Petitioner
Mr.B.P. Singh, Advocate.
Vs.

$
^

Municipal Corporation of Delhi & Anr.
........ Respondent
Through: Mr.Alok Singh, Advocate.

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

YES

2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?

NO

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.(Oral)

1.

This is a petition under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration and

Conciliation Act, 1996 for appointment of arbitrator in terms of
arbitration agreement between the parties as the disputes have arisen
between them.

2.

The firm, M/s.S.C.Goel & Co., is a Municipal Contractor

enrolled with the Municipal Corporation of Delhi and is engaged in the
business of contract work, building material supply and related
AA No.378/2007

Page 1 of 9

contract business and the petitioner being the proprietor of the firm,
M/s S.C.Goel & Co, is competent to depose, sign and verify the
pleadings have signed this petition.

3.

The contention of the petitioner is that the respondent no.2 on

behalf of Respondent no.1 invited tender for “Laying of 350mm dia
changing main from dividing road, Yamuna Vihar to Trunk Drain no.1
on road no.66 in Shah(N) Zone” which work was awarded to the
petitioner’s firm by work order no.174 dated 28th March, 2001 for
tender

amount

of

Rs.3006445/-

and

contractual

value

of

Rs.3153761/-. According to the petitioner the work was executed as
per the terms and conditions of the tender document and that the
first running bill for an amount of Rs.28,89,985/- was prepared,
passed and released.

4.

Thereafter on completion of work, the petitioner raised the final

bill, however, the final bill towards the completed work was neither
passed nor released despite innumerable requests made by the
petitioner. Consequently disputes have arisen between the parties.
According to the petitioner clause 25 of the general agreement entered
into between the petitioner and the respondents contained the
Arbitration agreement.

Clause 25 of the agreement containing the

arbitration agreement is as under:-

AA No.378/2007

Page 2 of 9

“Clause 25:
Settlement of Disputes and Arbitration.
Except where otherwise provided in the contract all
questions and disputes relating to the meaning of the
specifications, designs, drawings and instructions here-inbefore mentioned and as to the quality of workmanship or
materials as used on the work or as to any other question,
claim, right, matter or thing whatsoever in any way arising
out of or relating to the contract designs, drawings,
specifications, estimates instructions orders or these
conditions or otherwise concerning the works or the
execution or failure to execute the same whether arising
during the progress of the work or after the cancellation,
termination, completion or abandonment thereof shall be
dealt with as mentioned hereinafter:
1. If the contractor considers any work demanded of him
to be outside the requirement of the contract, or disputes any drawings, record or decision given in writing
by the Engineer in charge on any matter in connection
with or arising out of the contract of carrying out of the
work, to be unacceptable, he shall promptly within 15
days request the Superintending Engineer in writing for
written instructions or decision. Thereupon, the Superintending engineer shall give his written instructions or
decision within a period of one month from the receipt
of contractor’s letter.
If the Superintending Engineer fails to give his
instructions or decision in writing within the
aforesaid period or if the contract are is dissatisfied
with
the
instructions
or decision
of
the
Superintending engineer, the contract may, within
15 days of the receipt of Superintending Engineer’s
decision, appeal to the chief engineer who shall
afford an opportunity to the contractor to be heard, if
the latter so desires, and to offer evidence in support
of his appeal. The chief engineer shall give his
decision within 30 days of the receipt of contractor’s
AA No.378/2007

Page 3 of 9

appeal. If the contractor is dissatisfied with this
decision, the contractor shall within a period of 30
days from receipt of the decision, give notice to the
Commissioner MCD for appointment of arbitrator
failing which the said decision shall be final binding
and conclusive and not referable to adjudication by
the arbitrator.
2).

AA No.378/2007

Except where the decision has become final, binding
and conclusive in terms of Sub-Para (i) above
disputes or differences shall be referred for
adjudication through arbitration a sole arbitrator
appointed by the Commissioner MCD. If the
arbitrator so appointed is unable or unwilling to act
or resigns his appointment or vacates his office due
to any reason whatsoever another sole arbitrator
shall be appointed in the manner aforesaid. Such
personal shall be entitled to proceed with the
reference from the stage at which it was left by his
predecessor.
It is a term of this contract that the party
invoking arbitration shall give a list of disputes with
amounts claimed in respect of each such dispute
along with the notice for appointment of arbitrator
and giving reference to the rejection by the chief
engineer of the appeal.
It is also a term of this contract that no person
other than a person appointed by such
Commissioner MCD as aforesaid should act as
arbitrator and if for any reason that is not possible,
the matter shall not be referred to arbitration at all.
It is also a term of this contract that if the
contractor does not make any demand for
appointment of arbitrator in respect of any claims in
writing as aforesaid within 120 days of receiving the
intimation from the Engineer in charge that the final
bill is ready for payment, the claim of the contractor
shall be deemed to have been waived and
absolutely barred and MCD be shall be discharged
and released of all liabilities under the contract in
Page 4 of 9

respect of these claims.
The arbitration shall be conducted in
accordance with the provisions of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act,1996 (26 of 1996) or any statutory
modification or re-enactment thereof and the rules
made thereunder and for the time being in force
shall apply to the arbitration proceedings under this
clause
It is also a term of this contract that the
arbitrator shall adjudicate on only such disputes as
are referred to him by the appointing authority and
give separate award against each dispute and claim
referred to him and in all cases where the total
amount of the claims by any party exceeds Rs.
1,00,000 the arbitrator shall give reasons for the
award.
It is also a term of the contract that if any fees
are payable to the arbitrator these shall be paid
equally by both the parties.
It is also a term of the contract that the
arbitrator shall be deemed to have entered on the
reference on the day he issues notice to both the
parties calling them to submit their statement of
claims and counter statement of claims. The venue
of the arbitration shall be such place as may be
fixed by the arbitrator in his sole discretion. The
fees, if any, of the arbitration shall, if required to be
paid before the award is made and published, be
paid half and half by each of the parties. The cost of
the reference and of the award (including the fees, if
any, of the Arbitrator) shall be in the discretion of the
arbitrator who made direct to any by whom and in
what manner, such cost or any part thereof shall be
paid and fix or settle the amount of cost to be so
paid.”

5.

In the facts and circumstances, the petitioner, was constrained

AA No.378/2007

Page 5 of 9

to invoke the arbitration clause and issued a notice dated 12th June,
2007 demanding appointment of an arbitrator in terms of arbitration
agreement to adjudicate the disputes between the parties. No reply to
the notice was given by the respondents nor was any arbitrator was
appointed despite service of notice dated 12th June, 2007 within thirty
days of receipt of notice.

6.

Consequently, the petitioner has filed the present petition. The

arbitrator was not appointed by the respondents even before filing of
the present petition. Despite opportunity given, the respondents have
not filed any reply to the petition. The learned counsel for the
respondents, however, is unable to point out as to how the
respondents can appoint an arbitrator in terms of clause 25 of the
general agreement after failing to appoint an arbitrator within thirty
days of notice and even before filing of the present petition.
Consequently it is for this Court to appoint an arbitrator to adjudicate
the disputes between the parties.

7.

The Apex Court in Datar Switchgears Ltd. v. Tata Finance Ltd.

& Anr., IV (2000) CLT 191 (SC)=VII (2000) SLT 543=JT 2000 (Suppl.
2) SC 226 had held that if the vacancy of an arbitrator is not filled till
a party approaches the Court and files a petition for appointment by
the designated authority of the Chief Justice of that Court under

AA No.378/2007

Page 6 of 9

Section 11(6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, the right to
supply vacancy by the opposite party is extinguished. This ratio of
Datar Switchgear Ltd.(supra) was approved by the Supreme Court in
Punj Lloyd Ltd. Vs Petronet MHB Ltd., (2006) 2 SCC 628 and it was
reiterated that once period of notice had lapsed and the petitioner had
moved under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
1996, the party having right to appoint arbitrator under arbitral
agreement loses the right to do so.

8.

A learned Single Judge in Haryana Telecom Ltd. v. Union of

India & Anr., 112 (2004) DLT 339=2004 (3) RAJ 147, had held that if
the respondent fails to appoint an Arbitrator within the stipulated
time of 30 days of the notice, and even after filing of the petition
under Section 11 of the Act, it is for the Court to appoint an
Arbitrator. A Division Bench of this Court in Delkon (India) Pvt. Ltd.
v. G.M., Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd., 120 (2005) DLT 542 (DB),
relying on Datar Switchgears Ltd Vs Tata Finance Ltd has held in
para 4 as under:
“4. We have given our careful consideration to the
arguments advanced by learned Counsel for both the
parties. In view of the law laid down in the case of Datar
Switchgears Ltd. v. Tata Finance Ltd. & Anr., IV (2000)
CLT 191 (SC)=VII (2000) SLT 543=JT 2000 (Suppl. 2) SC
226 it is no more res integra that the vacancy can be
supplied by a party pursuant to the arbitration agreement
even after thirty days of the receipt of the notice. However,
once a party approaches the Court and files a petition for
appointment by the designated authority of the Chief
AA No.378/2007

Page 7 of 9

Justice of that Court under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, the right to supply vacancy by the
opposite party is extinguished. If that right stood
extinguished on filing of the petition under Section 11(6)
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, in September
1998 the appointment of an Arbitrator on 3rd May, 1999
could not be made, therefore in our view, the order
passed by the learned Single Judge on 7th May, 1999
suffers from patent illegality. Therefore, the submission of
the respondent that the petitioner had appeared before
the Arbitrator and the application of the petitioner raising
preliminary objections is pending adjudication which
inter alia challenges the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator to
decide the dispute is of no consequence as from the order
reproduced above it was pursuant to the directions
passed by the learned Single Judge that the parties were
directed to appear before the Arbitrator. The petitioner
had no other option but to appear before the Arbitrator
and after appearing before the Arbitrator the petitioner
has not submitted to the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator,
rather has at first opportunity taken the objection that
the Arbitrator had no jurisdiction to proceed with the
matter.
9.

In Union of India v. M/s. R.R. Industries, 120 (2005) DLT 572

(DB) also it was held that once a party does not supply the vacancy or
fails to supply the vacancy before filing of a petition under Section
11(6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, such a party forfeits the
right to supply the vacancy in terms of the arbitration clause and
what remains is only the arbitration clause, i.e. the dispute has to be
resolved under the mechanism of alternative dispute redressal
scheme but no right survives to the respondent to supply the named
Arbitrator in the arbitration clause. In the circumstances, it is for this
Court to appoint an arbitrator to adjudicate all the disputes between
the parties.
AA No.378/2007

Page 8 of 9

10.

Considering

the

facts

and

circumstances,

I

appoint

Mr.G.P.Thareja, Advocate( Retd. Additional District Judge), B-201,
Priyadarshini Apartments, I.P Extension, Patpar Ganj, Delhi-110092
(Ph:20906899) as an Arbitrator to adjudicate all the disputes between
the parties. The fee of the arbitrator shall be Rs50,000/- which shall
be paid by the petitioner in the first instance. Parties shall appear
before the Learned Arbitrator on 14th January, 2008 at 4.30 PM.
Registry to send a copy of this order to the Arbitrator forthwith.
Parties are also directed to intimate the Arbitrator about the order.
Copies of this order be also given to the parties dasti.

December 11th , 2007
'Dev'

AA No.378/2007

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 9 of 9

