*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) No.2429/2008

%

Date of decision : 11.04.2008

Shekhar & Ors
Through:

….… Petitioners
Mr.R.K.Saini, Advocate.

Versus
MCD & Anr
Through:

…..... Respondents
Mr.Sanjeev Sabharwal, Advocate.

CORAM :HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.
1.

The petitioners have prayed for quashing the action of the

respondents in trying to fill up the vacancies of “Safai Karamchari” (SK)
from outside the approved list of 1275 candidates who had allegedly
earlier worked during the sanitation drive, in violation of rules,
regulations and policies and principles of equity, justice and good
conscience.

2.

The petitioners have contended that a list of 1275 candidates who

had earlier worked during the sanitation drive was prepared. According
W.P(C) No.2429/2008

Page 1 of 5

to the petitioners workers other than those whose name appears in the
list are not entitled for appointment. The allegation of the petitioners is
that now the respondents are trying to employ people other than those
who are in the approved list of 1275 candidates.

3.

The plea of the petitioners is that the list was prepared by

sanitation department (South Zone), Green Park, MCD, New Delhi on
21st December, 1998 and an office note was put up on 21st April, 2000
that keeping in view the difficulties being faced in maintaining
cleanliness, hygiene and sanitation, the Zonal Commissioner had
approved the said list on 7th January, 2000. According to the petitioners
this note was further put up for approval from the Additional
Commissioner, Headquarter who wrote a further note that in the South
Zone the said list be adhered strictly as per seniority and no fresh
person should be engaged till such time the list is exhausted and was
approved by the Additional Commissioner on 7th August, 2000. A copy
of the list dated 21st December, 1998 and the alleged file notings dated
21st April, 2000 and 26th July, 2000 have been produced by the
petitioner.

4.

The learned counsel for the respondent who appears on advance

notice has contended that no such list as has been alleged by the
W.P(C) No.2429/2008

Page 2 of 5

petitioner dated 21st December, 1998 was prepared. He has also
produced a copy of the dispatch register showing that no such list was
dispatched. The alleged list filed with the writ petition has not been
admitted by the respondents.

5.

The respondents have refuted the alleged list dated 21st

December, 1998. In case the list as produced by the petitioner is not
the list prepared by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi but some other
list was prepared which is not before this Court, no direction can be
given to the respondents to appoint the substitute in future according
to the said list.

6.

The petitioners have prayed that since they have worked with

Municipal Corporation of Delhi, therefore, they are entitled to be given a
preferential treatment in appointment. The petitioners in the facts and
circumstances contended that in Ward Nos.57 to 62 of South Zone, only
they are to be appointed in preference to others pursuant to list dated
21st December, 1998 or any other list prepared by the respondents.

7.

The learned counsel for the petitioner is unable to explain as to

how the petitioners have got the photocopies of the Annexures P2 & P3,
W.P(C) No.2429/2008

Page 3 of 5

the alleged minutes of the respondents. There is no affidavit filed about
the correctness of these annexures. In any case the petitioner cannot
claim a preferential right on the basis of any list allegedly prepared by
the respondent in appointment in any of zones of the Municipal
Corporation of Delhi. The case of the petitioner is not that since they
have worked on daily wages, therefore, they are entitled for preferential
appointment with the Municipal Corporation of Delhi rather they are
claiming that they are entitled for preferential appointment in South
Zone of the respondent.

8.

On account of having worked in a particular zone on daily basis

during the sanitation drive earlier, will not entitle the petitioners for
their appointment in preference of others. In any case the petitioners
are seeking appointment according to the alleged seniority list allegedly
prepared by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi which has been denied
by the respondents.

The respondents are denying the seniority list

which allegedly has the names of various other persons. The petitioners
are claiming a preferential appointment in accordance with the said list.
Whether the seniority of the petitioner is a shown correctly in the
alleged list or not cannot be decided without hearing all the persons
who would be affected by the seniority list. In the circumstances the
petitioners are not entitled for the direction to the respondents to
W.P(C) No.2429/2008

Page 4 of 5

appoint persons in accordance with the alleged seniority list. The
petitioners are not entitled for any relief as prayed by them. The writ
petition is without any merit and it is, therefore, dismissed.

April 11th, 2008
‘k’

W.P(C) No.2429/2008

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 5 of 5

