IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Date of decision: December 11, 2007
AA No.463/2006

#
!

Sh.Raj K. Gupta

......Petitioner
Through: Mr.Ranjit Singh, Advocate
Vs.

$
^

India Tourism Development Corporation .....Respondent
Through : Mr.A.K. Sharma, Advocate.

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.(Oral)
*
1.

This is a petition under Section 11(6) of Arbitration &

Conciliation Act, 1996 by the petitioner for appointment of an
arbitrator in terms of arbitration agreement with the respondent.

2.

The petitioner contended that he is the Proprietor of M/s.C.G.

Foods, Janpath Hotel, New Delhi, and a restaurant space which was
earlier licensed to Mr.K.S. Kumar & Company was taken by him on
license. Consequently, the restaurant area measuring 2995 sq.ft. on

AA 463 of 2006

Page 1 of 9

as -is-where-is basis with an understanding that the open space
adjacent to the restaurant was also to be provided to the petitioner,
was entered between the petitioner and the respondent.

A License

Deed dated 15th September, 2005 was thereafter, executed between
the petitioner and the respondent incorporating the terms and
conditions of the license for giving the restaurant space for a period of
three years from 15th September, 2005 till 14th September, 2008.
According to the petitioner, the open area adjacent to the restaurant
was also given to the petitioner for holding banquet/parties at a
license fee of Rs.20,000/- per month and the petitioner had been
holding banquets/parties in the open area and had also been paying
the license fee for the open area. The averment of the petitioner is
that entire cash of the restaurant was to be collected by the
respondents and they had to retain 30% of the collection and
thereafter, amount was adjustable towards the license fee and the
balance amount was payable to him after adjustment of license fee.
The respondent had been collecting the amounts but no details were
being provided to the petitioner.

3.

The disputes arose between the petitioner and the respondent

as the respondent started claiming that the open space did not form
part of the agreement and the petitioner was deprived of the use of the
open space and the respondent also started claiming the minimum

AA 463 of 2006

Page 2 of 9

guaranteed amount without providing any details about the collection
and how much amount was payable to the petitioner.

The petitioner,

therefore, requested the respondent for resolution of disputes by
reference to the sole arbitration of Vice President (Hotels) I.T.D.C.,
New Delhi or any other person appointed by the respondent. The
petitioner has also contended that the proceedings for eviction of the
petitioner had also been wrongly initiated under the provisions of
Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971
before the Estate Officer. The disputes which have arisen between the
petitioner and the respondent are detailed in para 20 of the petition.

4.

The petitioner contended that he sent a notice dated 26th

October, 2006 demanding for appointment of the Arbitrator in terms
of the arbitration agreement between the parties. Despite the notice
having been duly served on the respondent, neither any reply to the
notice was given nor any Arbitrator has been appointed.

5.

The arbitration agreement between the parties is contained in

clause 60 of the agreement dated 15th September, 2005, which is as
under:“In respect where provision of Public Premises
(Eviction of Unauthorised Occupation) Act, 1971 can be
invoked by the licensor in respect of the licensed premises
the provision of the said Act shall apply. In respect of any
other dispute or difference relating to the terms of his

AA 463 of 2006

Page 3 of 9

license deed, the matter shall be referred to the sole
arbitration of the Vice President (Hotels) or any other
person appointed by him in this behalf. The award given
by the arbitrator shall be binding upon the parties. It is
specifically agreed by the licensees that it will have no
objection to any such appointment that the arbitrator so
appointed is an employee of the licensor or that he has
already expressed view on, for or any of the matters
dispute or difference. The Arbitrator shall act under
provision of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
Subject to above, only Delhi Courts will have jurisdiction.”

6.

The arbitration agreement categorically contemplates that the

provisions of Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants)
Act, 1971 can be invoked in respect of licensed premises, however, all
other disputes or differences relating to the terms of the licence deed
shall be referred to the sole arbitration of the Vice President (Hotels),
I.T.D.C. or any other person appointed by him in this behalf.

7.

Since the respondent failed to appoint an arbitrator in terms of

the arbitration agreement between the parties, the present petition
was filed.

The notice of the present petition was issued on 10 th

November, 2006 and the respondent failed to appoint any arbitrator
in terms of arbitration clause before the filing of the petition.

8.

At the request of counsel for the respondent, the matter was

adjourned on 15th March, 2007 for 6th July, 2007. On 6th July, 2007,
again time was sought by the respondent to file the reply to the

AA 463 of 2006

Page 4 of 9

petition and respondent was given time to file the reply by 22nd
October, 2007 and the matter was listed for arguments for today.
Again no reply has been filed nor any plausible reason has been given
for not filing the reply and, consequently, the right of the respondent
to file the reply is closed.

9.

Since no reply has been filed to the petition and even no reply

was given to the notice dated 26th October, 2006, it is apparent that
the respondent has failed to refute the allegations made against the
respondent.

10.

In the circumstances, it cannot be denied that there is a valid

arbitration agreement between the parties which contemplates
adjudication of disputes other than pertaining to the recovery of
possession of premises for which the provisions of Public Premises
(Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 can be invoked. The
respondents have also failed to appoint any Arbitrator within 30 days
of the demand being raised by the petitioner to appoint an arbitrator
in terms of Arbitration agreement and have not appointed an
arbitrator before filing of the petition and therefore, the respondent
forfeited his right to appoint an arbitrator in terms of arbitration
clause and it is for this Court to appoint an arbitrator.

AA 463 of 2006

Page 5 of 9

11.

Learned counsel for the respondent has orally contended that

the disputes are not covered within the arbitration agreement and the
possession of the premises has already been recovered pursuant to
proceedings initiated under Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised
Occupants) Act, 1971.

12.

The

clause

contemplates

60

containing

adjudication

of

arbitration

disputes

other

agreement
than

also

recovery

of

possession and other disputes by the Arbitrator. The disputes raised
by the petitioner show that there are disputes other than those
relating to recovery of possession of the premises by the respondent
and these other disputes can be adjudicated by the Arbitrator to be
appointed by this Court in the facts and circumstances.

13.

The Apex Court in Datar Switchgears Ltd. v. Tata Finance Ltd.

& Anr., IV (2000) CLT 191 (SC)=VII (2000) SLT 543=JT 2000 (Suppl.
2) SC 226 had held that if the vacancy of an arbitrator is not filled till
a party approaches the Court and files a petition for appointment by
the designated authority of the Chief Justice of that Court under
Section 11(6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, the right to
supply vacancy by the opposite party is extinguished. This ratio of
Datar Switchgear Ltd.(supra) was approved by the Supreme Court in
Punj Lloyed Ltd. Vs Petronet MHB Ltd., (2006) 2 SCC 628 and it was

AA 463 of 2006

Page 6 of 9

reiterated that once period of notice had lapsed and the petitioner had
moved under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
1996, the party having right to appoint arbitrator under arbitral
agreement loses the right to do so.

14.

A learned Single Judge in Haryana Telecom Ltd. v. Union of

India & Anr., 112 (2004) DLT 339=2004 (3) RAJ 147, had held that if
the respondent fails to appoint an Arbitrator within the stipulated
time of 30 days of the notice, and even after filing of the petition
under Section 11 of the Act, it is for the Court to appoint an
Arbitrator. A Division Bench of this Court in Delkon (India) Pvt. Ltd.
v. G.M., Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd., 120 (2005) DLT 542 (DB),
relying on Datar Switchgears Ltd Vs Tata Finance Ltd has held in
para 4 as under:
“4. We have given our careful consideration to the
arguments advanced by learned Counsel for both the
parties. In view of the law laid down in the case of Datar
Switchgears Ltd. v. Tata Finance Ltd. & Anr., IV (2000)
CLT 191 (SC)=VII (2000) SLT 543=JT 2000 (Suppl. 2) SC
226 it is no more res integra that the vacancy can be
supplied by a party pursuant to the arbitration agreement
even after thirty days of the receipt of the notice. However,
once a party approaches the Court and files a petition for
appointment by the designated authority of the Chief
Justice of that Court under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, the right to supply vacancy by the
opposite party is extinguished. If that right stood
extinguished on filing of the petition under Section 11(6)
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, in September
1998 the appointment of an Arbitrator on 3rd May, 1999
could not be made, therefore in our view, the order

AA 463 of 2006

Page 7 of 9

passed by the learned Single Judge on 7th May, 1999
suffers from patent illegality. Therefore, the submission of
the respondent that the petitioner had appeared before
the Arbitrator and the application of the petitioner raising
preliminary objections is pending adjudication which
inter alia challenges the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator to
decide the dispute is of no consequence as from the order
reproduced above it was pursuant to the directions
passed by the learned Single Judge that the parties were
directed to appear before the Arbitrator. The petitioner
had no other option but to appear before the Arbitrator
and after appearing before the Arbitrator the petitioner
has not submitted to the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator,
rather has at first opportunity taken the objection that
the Arbitrator had no jurisdiction to proceed with the
matter.
15.

In Union of India v. M/s. R.R. Industries, 120 (2005) DLT 572

(DB) also it was held that once a party does not supply the vacancy or
fails to supply the vacancy before filing of a petition under Section
11(6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, such a party forfeits the
right to supply the vacancy in terms of the arbitration clause and
what remains is only the arbitration clause, i.e. the dispute has to be
resolved under the mechanism of alternative dispute redressal
scheme but no right survives to the respondent to supply the named
Arbitrator in the arbitration clause.

16.

Consequently, for the foregoing reasons, the petition is allowed.

Mr.Prem Kumar, Additional District Judge (Retd.), C-12, Chirag
Enclave, New Delhi-110048 (Mobile: 9313783914) is appointed as an
Arbitrator to adjudicate the disputes between the parties in terms of

AA 463 of 2006

Page 8 of 9

arbitration agreement other than those which have already been
raised under Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants)
Act, 1971 by the respondent. The fees of the Arbitrator shall be
Rs.70,000/- payable by the petitioner, in the first instance.

Parties

are directed to appear before the Arbitrator on 14th January, 2008 at
4.30 PM.

A copy of this order be sent to the learned Arbitrator

forthwith. Parties are also directed to produce a copy of this order
before the learned Arbitrator. Copy of this order be given dasti to the
parties.

December 11th , 2007
'Dev'

AA 463 of 2006

ANIL KUMAR J.

Page 9 of 9

