IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of decision : January 11th , 2008
WP(C) No.316/1999
#
!

The Management of M/s.Flood
….… PETITIONER
Control and Drainage Division No.II
Through: Mr.V.K.Tandon, Advocate.
Versus

$
^

Rama Kant & Anr
Through :

......... RESPONDENTS
Mr.Sanjay Ghose, Advocate.

CORAM :*

HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
*
+ CM No.1948/2007 in W.P(C) No.316/1999
*
This is an application by the respondent under Section
17B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. The petitioner has
contended that he is not employed in any establishment after
unlawful termination of his services till date and due to his
unemployment it has become difficult for him to support himself and
his family which includes his wife and two children.

By order dated 10th October, 2007 four weeks time was
W.P(C) No.316/1999

Page 1 of 7

granted to the petitioner to file the reply. It was ordered that in case
the advance copy of the reply is not given to the counsel for the
respondent the petitioner shall be liable to pay Rs.5000/- as cost.

The learned counsel for the petitioner contends that a
copy of the reply was sent to the counsel for the respondent by courier
yesterday and the reply has also been filed by the petitioner yesterday
which is not on record. A copy of the reply is taken from the counsel
for the petitioner and perused.

It is no more res integra that the provisions of Section 17
B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 comes into operation when an
Award directing reinstatement of a workman is assailed in further
proceedings. The statute requires satisfaction of the following four
conditions:
(i)

(ii)
(iii)

(iv)

W.P(C) No.316/1999

an Award by a Labour Court, Tribunal or National
Tribunal directing reinstatement of a workman is
assailed in proceedings in a High Court or the
Supreme Court;
during the pendency of such proceedings, employer
is required to pay full wages to the workman;
the wages stipulated under Section 17B are full
wages last drawn by him, inclusive of any
maintenance allowance admissible to him under
any Rule;
such wages would be admissible only if the
workman had not been employed in any
establishment during such period and an affidavit
had been filed to such effect

Page 2 of 7

While considering an application under this provision it is
necessary to bear in mind that the spirit, intendment and object
underlying the statutory provision of Section 17B is to mitigate and
relieve, to a certain extent, the hardship resulting to a workman due
to delay in the implementation of an award directing reinstatement of
his services on account of the challenge made to it by the employer.
The preliminary consideration for making available such a relief to a
workman is to be found in the benevolent purpose of the enactment.
It recognizes a workman’s right to the bare minimum to keep body
and soul together when a challenge has been made to an Award
directing his reinstatement. The statutory provisions provide no
inherent right of assailing an order or an award by an industrial
adjudicator by way of an appeal. The payment which is required to be
made by the employer to the workman has been held to be akin to a
subsistence allowance which is neither refundable nor recoverable
from a workman even if the Award in his favor is set aside by the High
Court. In 1999 (2) SCC 106 (para 22), Dena Bank v. Kiritikumar T.
Patel the Apex Court was of the view that the object under Section
17B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 is only to relieve to a certain
extent, the hardship that is caused to the workman due to the delay
in implementation of the Award. While considering the payment which
is required to be made by the employer to the workman in this behalf,
the Apex Court observed as follows:

W.P(C) No.316/1999

Page 3 of 7

“21. As indicated earlier Section 17B has been enacted by
Parliament with a view to give relief to a workman who
has been ordered to be reinstated under the Award of a
Labour Court or the Industrial Tribunal during the
pendency of proceedings in which the said award is under
challenge before the High Court or the Supreme Court.
The object underlying the provision is to relieve to a
certain extent the hardship that is caused to the
workman due to delay in the implementation of the
award. The payment which is required to be made by the
employer to the workman is in the nature of subsistence
allowance which would not be refundable or recoverable
from the workman even if the award is set aside by the
High Court or this Court. Since the payment is of such a
character, Parliament thought it proper to limit it to the
extent of the wages which were drawn by the workman
when he was in service and when his services were
terminated and therefore used the words ‘full wages last
drawn’. To read these words to mean wages which would
have been drawn by the workman if he had continued in
service if the order terminating his services had not
passed since it has been set aside by the award of the
Labour Court or the Industrial Tribunal, would result in
so enlarging the benefit as to comprehend the relief that
has been granted under the award that is under
challenge. Since the amount is not refundable or
recoverable in the event of the award being set aside, it
would result in the employer being required to give effect
to the award during the pendency of the proceedings
challenging the award before the High Court or the
Supreme Court without his being able to recover the said
amount in the event of the award being set aside. We are
unable to construe the provisions contained in Section
17B to cast such a burden on the employer. In our
opinion, therefore, the words ‘full wages last drawn’ must
be given their plain and material meaning and they
cannot be given the extended meaning as given by the
Karnataka High Court in Visveswaraya Iron & Steel Ltd.
or the Bombay High Court in Corona Sahu Co. Ltd.

W.P(C) No.316/1999

Page 4 of 7

22. xxxx
23. As regards the powers of the High Court and the
Supreme Court under Articles 226 and 136 of the
Constitution, it may be stated that Section 17B, by
conferring a right on the workman to be paid the amount
of full wages last drawn by him during the pendency of
the proceedings involving challenge to the award of the
Labour Court, Industrial Tribunal or National Tribunal in
the High Court or the Supreme Court which amount is
not refundable or recoverable in the event of the award
being set aside, does not in any way preclude the High
Court or the Supreme Court to pass an order directing
payment of a higher amount to the workman if such
higher amount is considered necessary in the interest of
justice. Such a direction would be dehors the provisions
contained in Section 17B and while giving the direction,
the Court may also give directions regarding refund or
recovery of the excess amount in the event of the award
being set aside. But we are unable to agree with the view
of the Bombay High Court in Elpro International Ltd. that
in exercise of the power under Articles 226 and 136
granted under Section 17B. The conferment of such a
right under Section 17B cannot be regarded as a
restriction on the powers of the High Court or the
Supreme Court under Articles 226 and 136 of the
Constitution.”

Whether the applicant is entitled for last drawn wages or
something more. In 1970 1 SCR 51 entitled Town Municipal, Athani v.
P.O. LC Hugli & Ors. it was held by the Apex Court that a workman
has a legal right to wages under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 and
cannot be diverted to a remedy under Section 20 of the Minimum
Wages Act for enforcing such right. In this case, the Apex Court was
concerned with the power of the Act under Section 33(C)(2) of the
W.P(C) No.316/1999

Page 5 of 7

Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and the principles laid down by the
Court would have a bearing on the issues raised before this Court as
well. From a conspectus of the authoritative pronouncements of the
Apex Court, the right of a workman to an amount equivalent to the
wages notified under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 is thus, in fact,
recognition of the constitutional mandate and nothing more. It is
undoubtedly, the bare minimum which is required by the workman to
subsist and is nothing more. Full wages last drawn can therefore only
mean all the wages that have fallen due at least from the date of the
Award.

This also cannot be disputed that granting relief under
Section 17B of the Act and passing orders directing payment of wages
last drawn, is generally the rule; refusing to grant relief under Section
17B is an exception, as it could be passed only in the rarest of the
rare cases of jurisdictional error where there is no relationship
between the parties.

For the foregoing reasons the application is allowed and the
petitioner is directed to pay last drawn wages or the minimum wages
whichever is higher from the date of award to the respondent. Arrears
be paid within four weeks. Future wages be paid on 7 th of every
month. The respondent shall also file an undertaking that in case it

W.P(C) No.316/1999

Page 6 of 7

is held that he is not entitled for minimum wages then he will pay the
difference of last drawn wages and minimum wages within the time
granted by this Court. A undertaking to this effect be filed within four
weeks. The cost of Rs.5000/- be also paid within four weeks.
The application is disposed of.
W.P(C) No.316/1999
Rule.
List in the category of “Regular Matters” at its turn.

January 11, 2008
'k'

W.P(C) No.316/1999

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 7 of 7

