*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP(C) No.1981/2008

%

Date of decision : 12.03.2008

Jainendra Kumar

….…
petitioner
Through: Mr.Jagat Arora, Advocate.
Versus

Airport Authority of India & Others
......
Respondents
Through : Mr.Piyush Sharma, Advocate.
CORAM :HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.

CM No.3760/2008
Allowed, subject to just exceptions.
WP(C) No.1981/2008

1.

The petitioner has impugned the award dated 6th November,

2007 declining the claim of the petitioner for regularization of his

WP(C) No.1981/2008

Page 1 of 10

services with the respondents.

Reference was made by the Central

Government to the Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court – II by letter
dated 5th October, 2004 for adjudication as follows:
“Whether the demand of Shri Jagdeep Kumar and
others against the Airport Authority of India, New
Delhi for regularization in service of 25 workmen in
the list enclosed, engaged in the work of
maintenance of CAT-III lighting system on runway
is just, valid and legal? If so, to what benefits the
workmen concerned are entitled for and what
directions are necessary in the matter?”

The petitioner had contended that he along with other persons
had been working with the respondents for the maintenance of CAT-III
lightening system of main runway and second runway since 2001
which work is of a regular nature, however, for which the tenders were
invited from independent contractors having specialization for the
work of maintenance of ground lightening facility at IGI Airport.

It

was asserted that despite the petitioner being the employee of the
contractor, the respondent having control over the petitioner’s
subsistence, skill and continued employment and since the work is
not seasonal in nature and it is continuous work and the attendance
and duties of the workers/applicant was also regulated and controlled
by the respondents, therefore, the petitioner was working under the
direct control of the respondents.

WP(C) No.1981/2008

It was also asserted that the

Page 2 of 10

petitioner was discharging his duties under the supervision and
control of the superior official appointed by the respondents.

The

petitioner also made a grievance that neither the respondent nor AMA
Private Ltd., the contractor were registered under The Contract Labour
(Regulation & Abolition) Act, 1970 and no permission was obtained for
engaging the contract labor nor the appropriate government has
accorded permission to the respondents to get the work done from
contract labor.

2.

The respondents had contested the claim of the workman

contending that the petitioner were engaged by the contractor, AMA
Pvt. Ltd. for performing the work of irregular nature.

The Central

Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court II has held that it
was the duty of the petitioner to establish their claim that they were
under the control and supervision of the management/respondents
which could be proved by cogent documentary evidence and the
inference that the petitioner was under the supervision and control of
the Management, could not be drawn on the basis of the deposition on
affidavit only filed by the petitioner.

Relying on the fact that no

documents have been filed showing that any duty was assigned to
petitioner by the respondents and his work was controlled by the
Administrative

WP(C) No.1981/2008

Officer

of

respondents

and

the

fact

that

Page 3 of 10

the

appointments were given by the AMA Pvt. Ltd., it was held that the
petitioner was not under the supervisors and other officials of the
respondents nor he was engaged by the respondents/management.
The Tribunal also relied on the fact that no document regarding
economic control and control over workers’ subsistence, skill and
continued employment have been filed and thus holding that the
workman has failed to prove the averments of the claim statement and
relying on the judgments of the Supreme Court has held that the
petitioner was not employed by the respondents nor he was under the
supervision and control of the respondents and consequently he is
not the employee of the respondents and is not entitled for
regularization.

3.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has relied on AIR 1995

Supreme Court 1893= (1995) 5 SCC 27,

Gujarat Electricity Board,

Thermal Power Station, Ukai v. Hind Mazdoor Sabha and others to
contend that even if the labour contract was genuine, neither the
respondent had obtained any prior permission to engage the contract
labor for the work being done by the petitioner nor the appropriate
Government had accorded permission to the respondent to get the
work done through contract labor nor there is any sanction about the
contract system in the respondent and section 10 of the Contract

WP(C) No.1981/2008

Page 4 of 10

Labor (Regulation & Abolition) Act, 1970 put embargo upon the
respondents to employ the contract for the work which is perennial in
nature.

4.

Perusal of the judgment relied on by the petitioner, Gujarat

Electricity Board, Thermal Power Station, Ukai (supra), it is apparent
that the dispute regarding the abolition of the contract labour and
absorption of such employee had to be raised specifically and after
receipt of the reference, the Industrial Adjudicator was first to direct
the workman to approach the appropriate government for abolition of
the contract labor under Section 10 of the Act and keep the reference
pending and only if pursuant thereto, if the contract labour is
abolished by the appropriate government, the Industrial Adjudicator
after giving opportunities to place the necessary material before him to
decide whether the workmen of the contractor can be directed to be
absorbed by the principal employer and how many of them could be
directed and on what terms, could pass such an order. The Supreme
Court in Gujarat Electricity Board, Thermal Power Station, Ukai
(supra) in paragraph 18 on page 63 had held as under:-

“. Our conclusions and answers to the questions raised are,
therefore, as follows:
(i) In view of the provisions of Section 10 of the Act, it is
only the appropriate Government which has the authority
to abolish genuine labour contract in accordance with the

WP(C) No.1981/2008

Page 5 of 10

provisions of the said section. No court including the
industrial adjudicator has jurisdiction to do so.
(ii) If the contract is a sham or not genuine, the workmen
of the so-called contractor can raise an industrial dispute
for declaring that they were always the employees of the
principal employer and for claiming the appropriate
service conditions. When such dispute is raised, it is not a
dispute for abolition of the labour contract and hence the
provisions of Section 10 of the Act will not bar either the
raising or the adjudication of the dispute. When such
dispute is raised, the industrial adjudicator has to decide
whether the contract is a sham or genuine. It is only if the
adjudicator comes to the conclusion that the contract is a
sham, that he will have jurisdiction to adjudicate the
dispute. If, however, he comes to the conclusion that the
contract is genuine, he may refer the workmen to the
appropriate Government for abolition of the contract
labour under Section 10 of the Act and keep the dispute
pending. However, he can do so if the dispute is espoused
by the direct workmen of the principal employer. If the
workmen of the principal employer have not espoused the
dispute, the adjudicator, after coming to the conclusion
that the contract is genuine, has to reject the reference,
the dispute being not an industrial dispute within the
meaning of Section 2(k) of the ID Act. He will not be
competent to give any relief to the workmen of the
erstwhile contractor even if the labour contract is
abolished by the appropriate Government under Section
10 of the Act.
(iii) If the labour contract is genuine a composite
industrial dispute can still be raised for abolition of the
contract labour and their absorption. However, the
dispute will have to be raised invariably by the direct
employees of the principal employer. The industrial
adjudicator, after receipt of the reference of such
dispute will have first to direct the workmen to
approach the appropriate Government for abolition of
the contract labour under Section 10 of the Act and
keep the reference pending. If pursuant to such
reference, the contract labour is abolished by the
appropriate Government, the industrial adjudicator
will have to give opportunity to the parties to place
the necessary material before him to decide whether
the workmen of the erstwhile contractor should be

WP(C) No.1981/2008

Page 6 of 10

directed to be absorbed by the principal employer,
how many of them and on what terms. If, however, the
contract labour is not abolished, the industrial
adjudicator has to reject the reference.
(iv) Even after the contract labour system is abolished, the
direct employees of the principal employer can raise an
industrial dispute for absorption of the ex-contractor’s
workmen and the adjudicator on the material placed
before him can decide as to who and how many of the
workmen should be absorbed and on what terms.

5.

The finding of the Tribunal that the agreement between the

respondents and the contractor is not sham does not suffer from any
manifest error. The learned counsel for the petitioner is unable to
show any ground on the basis of which said finding can be interfered
with.

6.

Therefore the finding of the Court is that agreement between the

respondents and the contractor is genuine and is not a sham
document and the direct employees of the respondents have not
approached the Industrial adjudicator for abolition of contract labor.
In the facts and circumstances, the petitioner cannot claim any relief
on the basis of ratio of Gujrat Electricity Board, Thermal Power
Station, Ukai. The petitioner also did not approach the appropriate
government for abolition of the contract labour under Section 10 of
the Act nor any reference has been made to this effect. The reference
made is only whether the petitioner is entitled to be regularized in the

WP(C) No.1981/2008

Page 7 of 10

service of the respondents. If the daily wage employees of the
respondents are not entitled for regularization on account of having
worked on contract for the limited period, the employees of the
contractor which contract has been held to be not sham and is valid,
the employees of the such contractor shall also not be entitled for
regularization.

7.

In Gujrat Electricity Board (supra) relied on by the petitioners, it

was rather held that the authority to abolish the contract labor under
section 10 of the Act is exclusively vested in appropriate Government.

8.

The Supreme Court in (2001) 7 SCC 1,Steel Authority of India

Ltd. and ors. Vs National Union Waterfront Workers and ors had held
that where a workman is hired through a contractor, master and
servant relationship exists but where a workman is hired in or in
connection with the work of a establishment to produce a given result
or the contractor supplies workmen for any work of the establishment,
unless, the contractor is mere camouflage, the workmen cannot be
treated as an employee of the Principal employer. The Apex Court in
Steel Authority of India (supra) on page 55 in para 105 had held as
under:
“105. The principle that a beneficial legislation needs to be
construed liberally in favour of the class for whose benefit it is

WP(C) No.1981/2008

Page 8 of 10

intended, does not extend to reading in the provisions of the Act
what the legislature has not provided whether expressly or by
necessary implication, or substituting remedy or benefits for
that provided by the legislature. We have already noticed above
the intendment of the CLRA Act that it regulates the conditions
of service of the contract labour and authorizes in Section 10(1)
prohibition of contract labour system by the appropriate
Government on consideration of factors enumerated in subsection (2) of Section 10 of the Act among other relevant factors.
But, the presence of some or all those factors, in our view,
provides no ground for absorption of contract labour on
issuing notification under sub-section (1) of Section 10.
Admittedly, when the concept of automatic absorption of contract
labour as a consequence of issuing notification under Section
10(1) by the appropriate Government, is not alluded to either in
Section 10 or at any other place in the Act and the consequence of
violation of Sections 7 and 12 of the CLRA Act is explicitly
provided in Sections 23 and 25 of the CLRA Act, it is not for the
High Courts or this Court to read in some unspecified remedy in
Section 10 or substitute for penal consequences specified in
Sections 23 and 25 a different sequel, be it absorption of contract
labour in the establishment of principal employer or a lesser or a
harsher punishment. Such an interpretation of the provisions of
the statute will be far beyond the principle of ironing out the
creases and the scope of interpretative legislation and as such,
clearly impermissible. We have already held above, on
consideration of various aspects, that it is difficult to accept that
Parliament intended absorption of contract labour on issue of
abolition notification under Section 10(1) of the CLRA Act.

9.

In the case of the petitioner it has been held that the agreement

between the respondents and the contractor is valid and is not a sham
document and the contract labor has not been abolished, the
petitioner is not entitled for regularization in the service of the
respondents. In the circumstances, there is no perversity or manifest
error in the award dated 6th November, 2007 so as to entail

WP(C) No.1981/2008

Page 9 of 10

interference by this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India.

10.

The writ petition is, therefore without any merit and it is

dismissed.

March 12th , 2008.
‘k/Dev’

WP(C) No.1981/2008

ANIL KUMAR J.

Page 10 of 10

