*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) No.1124/2008

%

Date of decision : 12.02.2008

Excel Industries Ltd

….… Petitioner
Through: Mr.J.Buther, Advocate.
Versus

Sh.O.P.Mishra

......... Respondent
Through: Nemo.

CORAM :HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
*
1.

The petitioner/management has impugned the award dated 18th

August, 2007 directing reinstatement of respondent workman with
continuity of service along with back wages of Rs.2500/- per month
and other legal benefits.
2.

The respondent workman had filed a claim pursuant to a

reference by the appropriate Government. The respondent contended
that he was working as an Assistant Accountant with petitioner since
22nd January, 1992 and his last drawn salary was Rs.2500/- per
month. He alleged that he had applied for the post of Assistant

W.P.(C) No.1124/2008

Page 1 of 11

Accountant in January, 1992 and he was called for an interview by
letter dated 9th January, 1992 and he was interviewed on 21st
January, 1992 and was appointed on 22nd January, 1992.
3.

The respondent workman contended that though he demanded

the appointment letter but the petitioner avoided to give the same. He
had raised the demands for other facilities like ESI, PF, bonus, leave
encashment etc but the demands of the respondent workman were
not complied with. The respondent workman alleged that at times he
was made to work for 12 hours daily, however, no over time was given
to him and he continued working like this till 31st August, 1997 when
without assigning any cause and reason his services were terminated.
4.

The petitioner contested the claim of the respondent contending

that the respondent is not a workman as defined under Section 2(c) of
the Industrial Disputes Act and he was never employed in the
company and there was no employer-employee relationship. The rate
of salary as was claimed by the respondent workman was also denied.
It was asserted by the petitioner management that the respondent
was hired on contract basis and he was providing the service of
visiting the banks for depositing cheques and documents of the
company and for this service he was paid a consolidated sum of
Rs.2000/- per month initially which was later on increased to
Rs.2500/- per month. It was contended that the respondent was

W.P.(C) No.1124/2008

Page 2 of 11

working and rendering service only for 1-2 hours in the whole day.
5.

The respondent/workman proved his interview letter dated 9th

January, 1992, a certificate dated 25th August, 1994, an authorization
which was issued to the respondent workman for cancellation of a DD
and for obtaining a pay order and other documents. On behalf of the
petitioner management only the statement of Manager, Accounts &
Administration, Sh.Jitender Kumar was recorded who only proved a
reply dated 10th December, 1997 to the demand notice of the
respondent

workman

and

the

postal

receipt

and

denied

the

allegations made by the workman.
6.

Before the Labour Court despite as many as 12 opportunities

granted, the authorized representative of the petitioner did not appear
nor anyone appeared on behalf of respondent workman. Since no one
appeared to argue the matter the Industrial Tribunal has decided the
matter on the basis of pleas and evidence available on the record.
7.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has very emphatically

contended that there is no relationship of employer and employee as
the respondent workman was appointed on contract basis and as per
the contract of service respondent workman was providing service of
visiting the banks for depositing the cheques and delivering the
documents.

W.P.(C) No.1124/2008

Page 3 of 11

8.

The Labor Court has drawn an adverse inference against the

petitioner as the petitioner did not produce the contract of service
whereby the respondent workman was allegedly engaged on contract
basis to carry out the work of only visiting the banks for depositing
cheques and documents of the company.
9.

The Labour Court has also relied on the statement of the

respondent workman who had proved the copy of the interview letter
dated 9th January, 1992 as exhibit WW.1/1 and a certificate dated
25th August, 1994 issued to the respondent stipulating

that he is

working with the petitioner for last two years and a letter dated 6th
December, 1996 authorizing the respondent to get a DD issued in
favor of petitioner cancelled and to get a pay order issued.
10.

The learned counsel for the petitioner contends that these

documents have not been proved. The statement of the respondent
workman reflects that the evidence was led in respect of these
documents which have not been categorically denied by the petitioner
in the cross examination of the respondent workman. Instead of
saying that the letter dated 9th January, 1992 was not issued a
suggestion was put to the respondent workman in the cross
examination that Sh.S.C.Kaushik who had signed the letter dated 9th
January, 1992 had no power to sign such letter. If the plea of the
petitioner is that Shri.S.C.Kaushik was not authorized to sign the

W.P.(C) No.1124/2008

Page 4 of 11

interview letter on behalf of the petitioner, it was for the petitioner to
show as to how he was not authorized and if he was not authorized
then who was authorized on behalf of the petitioner company. No
reliable evidence has been led by the petitioner to substantiate his
plea that Shri S.C.Kaushik was not authorized to sign the interview
letter and the certificate issued to the workman.
11.

It is not disputed that the respondent workman was appointed

by the petitioner. The dispute is whether he was appointed as a
contract worker for few hours to carry out specific work of going to the
banks only or there is a relationship of employer and employee on
account of appointment of the respondent. If the respondent workman
was not issued an interview letter on 9th January, 1992, then who had
issued this letter has not been disclosed by the petitioner. The
petitioner has also withheld the best evidence to show as to who was
authorized on behalf of the petitioner company to sign the letters for
interview or for appointing any person on contract basis. The witness
who has been examined on behalf of petitioner/management is just a
Manager, Accounts & Administration. The said witness in his
deposition has deposed that Sh.S.C.Kaushik of the petitioner
management has misused the letter heads of the company. So long as
the petitioner has admitted that the respondent was appointed to
carry out some work, it was for the petitioner to produce the contract
which was executed between the petitioner and the respondent.
W.P.(C) No.1124/2008

Page 5 of 11

Though an allegation of fraud has been made against Sh.S.C.Kaushik,
signatory of the letter produced by the respondent workman, however,
no evidence has been led about the fraud alleged to have been
committed by Sh.S.C.Kaushik and any action taken by the petitioner
against the said person.
12.

Perusal of the cross examination of the respondent workman

rather reflects that a suggestion was given to the respondent
workman that Pradeep who was in the marketing department had
asked the respondent workman to work as a peon which suggestion is
contrary to the pleas taken by the petitioner company.
13.

Considering all the pleas and the entire evidence, the Labor

Court has also drawn an adverse inference against the petitioner on
account of non production of employees salary record, ESI record etc
and consequently on the preponderance of probability has drawn an
inference that the petitioner had employed the respondent. In the
circumstances the petitioner is unable to show any perversity or
manifest error in the award dated 18th August, 2007. The inferences
drawn by the Court cannot be termed without any rational.
14.

Even if another view or inference is possible in the facts and

circumstances and on the basis of the evidence led by the parties, it is
not appropriate for this Court to substitute its inferences with the
plausible inference drawn by the Labour Court. There has not been
W.P.(C) No.1124/2008

Page 6 of 11

denial of principles of natural justice as opportunities were given to
both the parties and they were given opportunity to lead evidence and
after considering the pleas and contentions and the evidence, award
dated 18th August, 2007 has been passed.

15.

While exercising its powers of judicial review under Article 226

of the Constitution of India this Court is not to re-appreciate the
evidence. It is a settled position of law that in exercise of jurisdiction
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the Court does not
interfere with factual findings of the lower courts and restrain itself
from re-appreciating evidence while exercising powers of judicial
review. Reliance for this proposition can be placed on the judgment of
the Supreme Court, Government of A.P. and Ors. v. Mohd. Nasrullah
Khan reported as (2006) 2 SCC 373. Reliance may also be placed on
the following judgments rendered by the Supreme Court and this
Court concerning the scope of judicial review by a writ court: Harbans
Lal v. Jagmohan Saran (1985) 4 SCC 333; B.C. Chaturvedi v. Union of
India (1995) 6 SCC 749; Indian Overseas Bank v. I.O.B. staff Canteen
Workers' Union AIR 2000 SC 1508 ; Municipal Corporation of Delhi v.
Asha Ram and Anr.117 (2005) DLT 63 and Filmistan Exhibitors Ltd.
v. N.C.T. Secy. Labour and Ors. 131 (2006) DLT. In all the above
judgments, it has been held that a writ court should refrain from
interfering with the orders of an inferior tribunal or subordinate court

W.P.(C) No.1124/2008

Page 7 of 11

unless it suffers from an error of jurisdiction, or from a breach of the
principles of natural justice or is vitiated by a manifest or apparent
error of law.
16.

The objective of judicial review is to ascertain that a person

received a fair treatment and objective is not to re-appreciate the
entire pleas and evidence and draw inferences again. The Apex Court
in (1995) 6 SCC 749 B.C.Chaturvedi Vs Union of India at page 759 in
para 12 had held as under:
“ 12 . Judicial review is not an appeal from a decision but
a review of the manner in which the decision is made.
Power of judicial review is meant to ensure that the
individual receives fair treatment and not to ensure that
the conclusion which the authority reaches is necessarily
correct in the eye of the court. When an inquiry is
conducted on charges of misconduct by a public servant,
the Court/Tribunal is concerned to determine whether
the inquiry was held by a competent officer or whether
rules of natural justice are complied with. Whether
the findings or conclusions are based on some
evidence, the authority entrusted with the power to
hold inquiry has jurisdiction, power and authority to
reach a finding of fact or conclusion. But that finding
must be based on some evidence. Neither the technical
rules of Evidence Act nor of proof of fact or evidence
as defined therein, apply to disciplinary proceeding.
When the authority accepts that evidence and conclusion
receives support therefrom, the disciplinary authority is
entitled to hold that the delinquent officer is guilty of the
charge. The Court/Tribunal in its power of judicial
review does not act as Appellate Authority to reappreciate the evidence and to arrive at its own
independent findings on the evidence. The Court/
Tribunal may interfere where the authority held the
proceedings against the delinquent officer in a manner
inconsistent with the rules of natural justice or in
violation of statutory rules prescribing the mode of
W.P.(C) No.1124/2008

Page 8 of 11

inquiry or where the conclusion or finding reached by the
disciplinary authority is based on no evidence. If the
conclusion or finding be such as no reasonable person
would have ever reached, the Court/Tribunal may
interfere with the conclusion or the finding, and
mould the relief so as to make it appropriate to the
facts of each case.”
17.

The learned counsel for the petitioner management has relied

on Manager, Reserve Bank of India, Bangalore Vs. S.Mani & Ors, CA
Nos.6306-6316/2003 decided on 14th March, 2005 to contend that it
was for the workman to prove that he had been an employee. Perusal
of the precedent relied on by the petitioner shows that it is
distinguishable from the case of the respondent workman. The point
in dispute in the said case was whether a judgment of acquittal
passed in favor of employees by giving him benefit of doubt per se
would be binding upon the employer or not. The Supreme Court had
held that the initial burden of proof is on the employee to show that
he was employed by the employer and filing of an affidavit is only a
statement of the workman which may not be sufficient evidence for
any Court or Tribunal to come to the conclusion that there is
relationship of employer and employee and the workman has worked
for 240 days in the year. In contradistinction to the case relied on by
the petitioner, in the case of respondent the evidence has been
produced by the workman to show that he was given an interview
letter and he was appointed as an Accountant. Though the petitioner
has denied such a letter on the ground that there was collusion
W.P.(C) No.1124/2008

Page 9 of 11

between the respondent workman and the signatory of the letter but
then who appointed the respondent workman for the alleged contract
work for few hours has not been explained nor the contract executed
between the petitioner and the respondent has been produced. The
ratio of the case relied on by the petitioner is, therefore, apparently
distinguishable and not applicable to the case of the respondent
workman.
18.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has also emphasized on

the fact that in the demand letter the reinstatement and back wages
has not been claimed by the respondent worker. A reference was
made pursuant to the complaint of the respondent workman whether
his services had been terminated illegally and/or unjustifiably by the
management and if so to what relief the respondent workman is
entitled and what directions are necessary in this respect. If the
respondent workman had not raised any claim and reference was
made de hors the claim of the respondent, the petitioner should have
challenged the reference which was not done nor this plea was taken
before the Labor Court that the reference is beyond the claim of the
respondent. From the claim filed by the petitioner it cannot be
inferred that without a demand notice raising the claim, the same will
not be maintainable. The learned counsel for the petitioner is also
unable to show any provision requiring a notice of demand for
reinstatement or back wages before filing the claim pursuant to the
W.P.(C) No.1124/2008

Page 10 of 11

reference made by the appropriate Government. Even on this ground
the award dated 18th August, 2007 cannot be set aside.
19.

In totality of facts and circumstances there is no manifest error

or such perversity which will entitle petitioner for interference by this
Court exercising jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India against the award dated 18th August, 2007. There are no
grounds to interfere in exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India and the writ petition is without any merit and is,
therefore, dismissed.

February 12th, 2008
'k'

W.P.(C) No.1124/2008

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 11 of 11

