*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP(C) No.1980/2008

%

Date of decision : 12.03.2008

Jitender Kumar & Others
….…
petitioners
Through: Mr.Som Dutt Sharma, Advocate.
Versus
Airport Authority of India & Others
......
Respondents
Through: Mr.Piyush Sharma, Advocate.
CORAM :HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.
CM No.3759/2008
Allowed, subject to just exceptions.
WP(C) No.1980/2008
The petitioners have impugned the award dated 6th November,
2007 declining the claim of the petitioners for regularization of their
services with the respondent.

WP(C) No.1980/2008

Reference was made by the Central

Page 1 of 9

Government to Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court – II by letter
dated 5th October, 2004 for adjudication which was as follows:
“Whether the demand of Shri Jagdeep Kumar and
others against the Airport Authority of India, New
Delhi for regularization in service of 25 workmen in
the list enclosed, engaged in the work of maintenance
of CAT-III lighting system on runway is just, valid
and legal? If so, to what benefits the workmen
concerned are entitled for and what directions are
necessary in the matter?”
The petitioners have contended that they have been working with
the respondent for the maintenance of CAT-III lightening system of
main runway and second runway since 2001 which work is of a regular
nature, however, for which the tenders were invited from independent
contractors having specialization in the work of maintenance of ground
lightening facility at IGI Airport.

It was asserted that despite the

petitioners being the employees of the contractor, the respondent
having control over the petitioners’ subsistence, skill and continued
employment and since the work is not seasonal in nature and it is
continuous

work

workers/applicants

and

the

attendance

were

also

regulated

and
and

duties

controlled

of

the

by

the

respondent, therefore, the petitioners were working under the direct
control of the respondent. It was also asserted that the applicants were
discharging their duties under the supervision and control of the
superior official appointed by the respondent. The petitioner also made
a grievance that neither the respondent nor AMA Private Ltd., the
contractor were registered under The Contract Labour (Regulation &
WP(C) No.1980/2008

Page 2 of 9

Abolition) Act, 1970 and no permission was obtained for engaging the
contract labor nor the appropriate government has accorded permission
to the respondent to get the work done from contract labor.

The respondent had contested the claim of the workman
contending that the petitioners were engaged by the contractor, AMA
Pvt. Ltd. for performing the work of irregular nature.

The Central

Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court II has held that it
was the duty of the petitioners to establish their claim that they were
under the control and supervision of the management/respondent
which could be proved by cogent documentary evidence and the
inferences that the petitioners were under the supervision and control
of the Management, could not be inferred on the basis of the deposition
on affidavit only filed by the petitioners.

Relying on the fact that no

documents have been filed that any duty was assigned to them by the
respondent and their work was controlled by the Administrative Officer
of respondent and the fact that the appointments were given by the
AMA Pvt. Ltd., it was held that the petitioners were not under the
supervisors and other officials of the respondent nor they were engaged
by the respondent/management. The Tribunal also relied on the fact
that no document regarding economic control and control over workers’
subsistence, skill and continued employment have been filed and thus
holding that the workmen have failed to prove the averments of the
claim statement and relying on the judgments of the Supreme Court
WP(C) No.1980/2008

Page 3 of 9

held that the petitioners were not employed by the respondent nor they
were under the supervision and control of the respondent and
consequently they are not the employees of the respondent and are not
entitled for regularization.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has relied on AIR 1995
Supreme Court 1893= (1995) 5 SCC 27,

Gujarat Electricity Board,

Thermal Power Station, Ukai v. Hind Mazdoor Sabha and others to
contend that even if the labour contract was genuine, neither the
respondent had obtained any prior permission to engage the contract
labor for the work being done by the petitioners nor the appropriate
Government had accorded permission to the respondent to get the work
done through contract labor nor there is any sanction about the
contract system in the respondent and section 10 of the Contract Labor
(Regulation & Abolition) Act, 1970 put embargo upon the respondent to
employ contract labour for the work which is perennial in nature.

On a perusal of the judgment relied on by the petitioner, Gujarat
Electricity Board, Thermal Power Station, Ukai (supra), it is apparent
that the dispute regarding the abolition of the contract labour and
absorption of such employee had to be raised specifically and after
receipt of the reference, the Industrial Adjudicator was first to direct the
workman to approach the appropriate government for abolition of the
contract labour under Section 10 of the Act and keep the reference
WP(C) No.1980/2008

Page 4 of 9

pending and only if pursuant thereto, the contract labour is abolished
by the appropriate government, the Industrial Adjudicator after giving
opportunities to place the necessary material before him to decide
whether the workmen of the contractor can be directed to be absorbed
by the principal employer and how many of them can be directed and
on what terms, could pass such an order.

The Supreme Court in

Gujarat Electricity Board, Thermal Power Station, Ukai (supra) in
paragraph 18 on page 63 had held as under:-

“. Our conclusions and answers to the questions raised are,
therefore, as follows:
(i) In view of the provisions of Section 10 of the Act, it is
only the appropriate Government which has the authority
to abolish genuine labour contract in accordance with the
provisions of the said section. No court including the
industrial adjudicator has jurisdiction to do so.
(ii) If the contract is a sham or not genuine, the workmen of
the so-called contractor can raise an industrial dispute for
declaring that they were always the employees of the
principal employer and for claiming the appropriate service
conditions. When such dispute is raised, it is not a dispute
for abolition of the labour contract and hence the
provisions of Section 10 of the Act will not bar either the
raising or the adjudication of the dispute. When such
dispute is raised, the industrial adjudicator has to decide
whether the contract is a sham or genuine. It is only if the
adjudicator comes to the conclusion that the contract is a
sham, that he will have jurisdiction to adjudicate the
dispute. If, however, he comes to the conclusion that the
contract is genuine, he may refer the workmen to the
appropriate Government for abolition of the contract labour
under Section 10 of the Act and keep the dispute pending.
However, he can do so if the dispute is espoused by the
direct workmen of the principal employer. If the workmen of
the principal employer have not espoused the dispute, the
adjudicator, after coming to the conclusion that the
contract is genuine, has to reject the reference, the dispute
being not an industrial dispute within the meaning of
Section 2(k) of the ID Act. He will not be competent to give
WP(C) No.1980/2008

Page 5 of 9

any relief to the workmen of the erstwhile contractor even if
the labour contract is abolished by the appropriate
Government under Section 10 of the Act.
(iii) If the labour contract is genuine a composite industrial
dispute can still be raised for abolition of the contract
labour and their absorption. However, the dispute will
have to be raised invariably by the direct employees of
the principal employer. The industrial adjudicator, after
receipt of the reference of such dispute will have first
to direct the workmen to approach the appropriate
Government for abolition of the contract labour under
Section 10 of the Act and keep the reference pending. If
pursuant to such reference, the contract labour is
abolished by the appropriate Government, the
industrial adjudicator will have to give opportunity to
the parties to place the necessary material before him
to decide whether the workmen of the erstwhile
contractor should be directed to be absorbed by the
principal employer, how many of them and on what
terms. If, however, the contract labour is not abolished, the
industrial adjudicator has to reject the reference.
(iv) Even after the contract labour system is abolished, the
direct employees of the principal employer can raise an
industrial dispute for absorption of the ex-contractor’s
workmen and the adjudicator on the material placed before
him can decide as to who and how many of the workmen
should be absorbed and on what terms.

The finding of the Tribunal that the agreement between the
respondent and the contractor is not sham does not suffer from any
manifest error. The learned counsel for the petitioners is unable to show
any ground on the basis of which the said finding can be interfered
with.

The finding is that agreement between the respondent and the
contractor is genuine and is not a sham document and the direct
WP(C) No.1980/2008

Page 6 of 9

employees of the respondent have not approached the Industrial
adjudicator

for

abolition

of

contract

labour.

In

the facts

and

circumstances, the petitioners cannot claim any relief on the basis of
ratio of Gujarat Electricity Board, Thermal Power Station, Ukai. The
petitioners

also did not approach the appropriate government for

abolition of the contract labour under Section 10 of the Act nor any
reference has been made to this effect.

The reference made is only

whether the petitioners are entitled to be regularized in the service of
the respondent. If the daily wage employees of the respondent are not
entitled for regularization on account of having worked on contract for
the limited period, the employees of the contractor which contract has
been held to be not sham and is valid, shall also not be entitled for
regularization.

In Gujarat Electricity Board (supra) relied on by the petitioners, it
was rather held that the authority to abolish the contract labor under
section 10 of the Act is exclusively vested in appropriate Government.

The Supreme Court in (2001) 7 SCC 1,Steel Authority of India
Ltd. and ors. Vs National Union Waterfront Workers and ors had held
that where a workman is hired through a contractor, master and
servant relationship exists but where a workman is hired in or in
connection with the work of a establishment to produce a given result
or the contractor supplies workmen for any work of the establishment,
WP(C) No.1980/2008

Page 7 of 9

unless, the contractor is mere camouflage, the workmen cannot be
treated as an employee of the Principal employer. The Apex Court in
Steel Authority of India (supra) on page 55 in para 105 had held as
under:
“105. The principle that a beneficial legislation needs to be
construed liberally in favour of the class for whose benefit it is
intended, does not extend to reading in the provisions of the Act
what the legislature has not provided whether expressly or by
necessary implication, or substituting remedy or benefits for that
provided by the legislature. We have already noticed above the
intendment of the CLRA Act that it regulates the conditions of
service of the contract labour and authorizes in Section 10(1)
prohibition of contract labour system by the appropriate
Government on consideration of factors enumerated in subsection (2) of Section 10 of the Act among other relevant factors.
But, the presence of some or all those factors, in our view,
provides no ground for absorption of contract labour on
issuing notification under sub-section (1) of Section 10.
Admittedly, when the concept of automatic absorption of contract
labour as a consequence of issuing notification under Section 10(1)
by the appropriate Government, is not alluded to either in Section
10 or at any other place in the Act and the consequence of violation
of Sections 7 and 12 of the CLRA Act is explicitly provided in
Sections 23 and 25 of the CLRA Act, it is not for the High Courts or
this Court to read in some unspecified remedy in Section 10 or
substitute for penal consequences specified in Sections 23 and 25
a different sequel, be it absorption of contract labour in the
establishment of principal employer or a lesser or a harsher
punishment. Such an interpretation of the provisions of the
statute will be far beyond the principle of ironing out the creases
and the scope of interpretative legislation and as such, clearly
impermissible. We have already held above, on consideration of
various aspects, that it is difficult to accept that Parliament
intended absorption of contract labour on issue of abolition
notification under Section 10(1) of the CLRA Act.

In the case of the petitioners it has been held that the agreement
between the respondent and the contractor is valid and is not a sham
document and the contract labor has not been abolished, the
WP(C) No.1980/2008

Page 8 of 9

petitioners are not entitled for regularization in the services of the
respondent. In the circumstances, there is no perversity or manifest
error in the award dated 6th November, 2007 so as to entail interference
by this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.

The writ petition is, therefore without any merit and it is
dismissed.

March 12th , 2008.
‘Dev’

WP(C) No.1980/2008

ANIL KUMAR J.

Page 9 of 9

