*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P(C) No.4740/2004

%

Date of decision: 12.03.2008

M/s.Super Auto Corporation
Through:

….… Petitioner
Mr.J.K.Chaudhary, Advocate.

Versus
Govt. of NCT of Delhi & Anr
Through:

....... Respondents
Mr.J.K.Tiwari, Advocate for the
respondent No.2/workman.

CORAM :HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.
CM No. 14116 of 2006 in W.P.(C) No.4740/2004
1.

This is an application by the petitioner applicant seeking

amendment to the petition.

2.

The applicant contended that respondent No.2 in reply to the writ

petition has relied on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Sangham
Tape Company Vs. Hans Raj, (2004) SLT 185 holding that on the expiry
of 30 days from the date of publication the Labor Court delivering the

WP (C) 4740 of 2004

Page 1 of 15

award became functus officio and, therefore, he cannot entertain any
objection to the award.

3.

According to the petitioner he had filed the writ petition prior to

the delivery of the said judgment and, therefore, in the present writ
petition he has only sought quashing of order dated 20th January, 2004
passed by the Labour Court dismissing the application of the petitioner
management under Order 9 Rule 13 for setting aside the ex-parte award
on the ground that it has become functus officio.

4.

The petitioner applicant has contended that since the award

dated 6th October, 2003 has also been passed against the petitioner, the
applicant petitioner seeks to challenge the award also and consequently
wants to carry out amendments to the prayer clause of the writ petition
and also wants to incorporate the facts as to how the petitioner was
proceeded ex-parte and other facts to show that there is sufficient cause
for setting aside the ex-parte order against the petitioner and that the
award passed in favor of respondent No.2 is liable to be set aside.

5.

The amendments sought by the petitioner in the facts and

circumstances are necessary for determination of real controversies
between the parties. The petitioner has already sought the quashing of
order dated 20th January, 2004 whereby the application of the
WP (C) 4740 of 2004

Page 2 of 15

petitioner under Order 9 Rule 13 was not entertained and dismissed
seeking quashing of award dated 6th October, 2003.

6.

The reply to the application has not been filed by the respondent

No.2/non-applicant/workman. The learned counsel for the respondent
No.2 contends that the petitioner should not be allowed to amend the
writ petition so as to challenge the award dated 6th October, 2003 as
allowing the petitioner to seek challenge of the said award will
tantamount to stay of the said award.

7.

The power to allow the amendment is wide and can be exercised

at any stage of the proceedings in the interests of justice on the basis of
guidelines laid down in various precedents. Though the amendment
cannot be claimed as a matter of right and under all circumstances but
the Courts while deciding such prayer do not adopt a hyper technical
approach. The purpose and object of Order 6 Rule 17 is to allow either
party to alter or amend his pleading in such manner and on such terms
as may be just.

Amendments are allowed in the pleadings to avoid

uncalled for multiplicity of litigation. Allowing the application for
amendment in 1998 (5) AD (Delhi) 708, Sushil Kumar Gupta Vs. Anil
Kumar Gupta it was held that amendment necessitated because of
subsequent events should be allowed as no serious injustice or
irreparable loss is caused to the other side as the amendment
WP (C) 4740 of 2004

Page 3 of 15

applications are to be allowed to avoid multiplicity of litigation. A
Division Bench of this Court in 91 (2001) Delhi Law Times 593 (DB),
Bajaj Auto Limited Vs. Vikram Singh Mehta and anther had held that
introduction of subsequent events, resulting into different approach or
set of ideas claiming same relief should be permitted in order to shorten
the litigation and discretion exercised by a Judge to allow amendment
in order to incorporate subsequent events cannot be termed arbitrary,
perverse or irregular. This also cannot be disputed that the correctness
of plea is not to be adjudicated at the time of considering whether the
amendment to a petition should be allowed or not.

8.

The petitioner in a way has already challenged the award dated

6th October, 2003. In any case even if the petitioner is allowed the
amendments sought and petitioner incorporates the plea challenging
the award dated 6th October, 2003, this itself will not result into the
stay of the operation of award dated 6th October, 2003. Whether the
award is to be stayed or not on these grounds, shall be considered only
if an application is filed by the petitioner management for the stay of the
award. Merely allowing the petitioner to incorporate the challenge to the
award dated 6th October, 2003 on these pleas now sought to be taken
by the petitioner will not be the stay of the award on these pleas. The
operation of order dismissing the application of the petitioner under
order 9 rule 13 of the Code of Civil Procedure has already been stayed
WP (C) 4740 of 2004

Page 4 of 15

by order dated 19th April, 2004 of this Court. Consequently, the
objection by the learned counsel for the respondent No.2/workman is
unfounded and on that ground, the petitioner cannot be denied the
right to amend the petition so as to incorporate the challenge to the
award dated 6th October, 2003.

9.

For the foregoing reasons the application for amendment of the

writ petition is allowed and the petitioner is allowed to carry out the
amendments as incorporated in the application. Amended petition be
filed.
CM No.

1.

/2008 (u/s.17B of I.D Act)

The registry is directed to number the application dated 18th

October, 2005 which is at page No.118 of the paper book which is
under Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.

2.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has given a copy of the

reply contesting the application of the respondent no.2, Shri Karan
Singh. A copy of the reply has been given to the counsel for the
respondent/applicant who does not want to file any rejoinder.

3.

The applicant contended that the petitioner has impugned the

award dated 6th October, 2003 with the sole motive to deprive the
WP (C) 4740 of 2004

Page 5 of 15

applicant of his legal entitlement and to harass him by dragging him in
the litigation. The applicant has asserted that he is still unemployed
since the time of his dismissal and despite his best effort he is not able
to find any other regular employment for himself. He has pleaded that
he has a family of more than six persons who are solely dependent
upon him for their survival.

4.

Applicant/respondent no.2 pleaded that he is a trained mechanic

and he was working on the technical post with the petitioner
management and therefore he should be paid at least Rs.4500/- per
month. It is also contended by him that in any case he is entitled for
minimum wages though his monthly salary was Rs. 650 per month.

5.

The petitioner has opposed the application on the ground that the

application is a gross abuse of process of law, as the application has
been filed even without filing the counter affidavit.

It is further

contended in the reply that later on the applicant had filed the reply to
the amended petition. The plea of the petitioner is that the respondent
no.2 is able to maintain himself and his family comprising of six
members. It is stated that the application was filed in 2005 though the
award was passed on 6th October, 2003. The plea of the petitioner is
that the petitioner has a good case and the writ petition is likely to be
WP (C) 4740 of 2004

Page 6 of 15

allowed. Without disclosing as to where the applicant is employed, it is
stated that the applicant is gainfully employed and the application is an
abuse of process of law.

It is stated that it defies the conviction to

believe that the respondent no.2 is not gainfully employed and still he is
maintaining his family comprising of six persons for last many years. It
is pleaded that the applicant is technically qualified and therefore, it is
unbelievable that he is not employed. Relying on the conduct of the
applicant it is the stated that he is not interested in settlement and in
the circumstances he cannot be granted any benefit under section 17B
of the act in the present facts and circumstances.

6.

A single Judge of this Court had culled the principles laid down in

various judicial pronouncement for grant of interim relief under Section
17 B of the Act in 134 (2006) DLT 49, Food Craft Instt. Vs Rameshwar
Sharma & anr which are as under:

(i)
An application under Section 17B can be made only in
proceedings wherein an industrial award directing reinstatement
of the workman has been assailed.
(ii) This Court has no jurisdiction not to direct compliance with
the provisions of Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act if all
the other conditions precedent for passing an order in terms of
the Section 17B of the Act are satisfied [Re : (1999) 9 SCC 229
entitled Choudhary Sharai v. Executive Engineer, Panchayati Raj
Department & Anr.].
(iii)

As the interim relief is being granted in exercise of

WP (C) 4740 of 2004

Page 7 of 15

jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the
High Court can grant better benefits which may be more just and
equitable on the facts of the case than the relief contemplated by
Section 17B. Therefore, dehors the powers of the Court under
Section 17B, the Court can pass an order directing payment of an
amount higher than the last drawn wages to the workman [Re :
(1999) 2 SCC 106 (para 22), Dena Bank v. Kirtikumar T. Patel].
(iv) Such higher amount has to be considered necessary in the
interest of justice and the workman must plead and make out a
case that such an order is necessary in the facts of the case.
(v) The Court can enforce the spirit, intendment and purpose of
legislation that the workman who is to get the wages from the
date of the award till the challenge to the award is finally decided
as per the statement of the objections and reasons of the
Industrial Disputes(Amendment) Act, 1982 by which Section 17B
was inserted in the Act [Re : JT 2001 (Suppl.1) SC 229, Dena
Bank v. Ghanshyam (para 12)].
(vi)
An application under Section 17B should be disposed of
expeditiously and before disposal of the writ petition [Re : 2000
(9) SCC 534 entitled Workman v. Hindustan Vegetable Oil
Corporation Ltd.].
(vii) Interim relief can be granted with effect from the date of the
Award [Re : JT 2001 Supplementary (1) SC entitled Regional
Authority, Dena Bank v. Ghanshyam; 2004 (3) AD (DELHI) 337
entitled Indra Perfumery Company v. Sudarshab Oberoi v.
Presiding Officer].
(viii) Transient employment and self-employment would not be a
bar to relief under Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act [Re :
2000 (1) LLJ 1012 entitled Taj Services Limited v. Industrial
Tribunal; 1984 (4) SCC 635 entitled Rajinder Kumar Kundra v.
Delhi Administration; 109 (2004) DLT 1 entitled M/s. Birdhi
Chand Naunag Ram Jain v. P.O., Labour Court No. IV & Others].
(ix) The Court while considering an application under Section
17B of the ID Act cannot go into the merits of the case, the Court
can only consider whether the requirements mentioned in Section
WP (C) 4740 of 2004

Page 8 of 15

17B have been satisfied or not and, if it is so, then the Court has
no option but to direct the employer to pass an order in terms of
the statute. It would be immaterial as to whether the petitioner
had a very good case on merits [Re : 2000 (5) AD Delhi 413
entitled Anil Jain v. Jagdish Chander].
(x) A reasonable standard for arriving at the conclusion of the
quantum of a fair amount towards subsistence allowance payable
to a workman would be the minimum wages notified by the
statutory authorities under the provisions of the Minimum Wages
Act, 1948 in respect of an employee who may be performing the
same or similar functions in scheduled employments. [Re:
Rajinder Kumar Kundra v. Delhi Administration, (1984) 4 SCC
635; Sanjit Roy v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1983 SC 328; decision
dated 3rd January, 2003 in Writ Petition (Civil) Nos. 3654 &
3675/1999 entitled Delhi Council for Child Welfare v. Union of
India; DTC v. The P.O., Labour Court No. 1, Delhi & Ors., 2002 II
AD (Delhi) 112 (para 12, 13)]
(xi) Interim orders directing payment to a workman can be made
even on the application of the management seeking stay of the
operation and effect of the industrial Award and order. Such
interim orders of stay sought by the employer can be granted
unconditionally or made conditional subject to payment or
deposits of the entire or portion of the awarded amount together
with a direction to the petitioner employer to make payment of
the wages at an appropriate rate to the workman. Such an order
would be based on considerations of interests of justice when
balancing equities.
(xii) For the same reason, I find that there is no prohibition in
law to a direction by the Court to make an order directing
payment of the wages with effect from the date of the Award. On
the contrary, it has been so held in several judgments that this
would be the proper course [Re : Regional Authority, Dena Bank
& Anr. v. Ghanshyam, reported at JT 2001 (Suppl. 1) SC 229 and
Indra Perfumery Co. Thr. Sudershab Oberoi v. Presiding Officer &
Ors., 2004 III AD (Delhi) 337].
(xiii) While passing an interlocutory direction for payment of
WP (C) 4740 of 2004

Page 9 of 15

wages, the Court may also secure the interests of the employer by
making orders regarding refund or recovery of the amount which
is in excess of the last drawn wages in the event of the industrial
award being set aside so as to do justice to the employer.
(xiv) A repayment to the employer could be secured by directing a
workman to given an undertaking or offer security to the
satisfaction of the Registrar (General) of the Court or any other
authority [Re : para 12, 2002 (61) DRJ 521 (DB), Hindustan
Carbide Pvt. Ltd. v. Govt. of NCT of Delhi & Ors.(supra)]
(xv) In exercise of powers under Article 226 and Article 136 of the
Constitution, if the requisites of Section 17B of the Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947 are satisfied, no order can be passed denying
the workman the benefit granted under the statutory provisions
of Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 [Re: 1999 (2)
SCC 106, Dena Bank v. Kirtikumar T. Patel (para 23)].
(xvi) Gainful employment of the workman; unreasonable and
unexplained delay in making the application by the workman
after the filing of the petition challenging the award/order; offer
by the employer to give employment to the workman would be a
relevant factors and consideration for the date from which the
wages are to be permitted.
(xvii)It will be in the interest of justice to ensure if the facts of the
case so justify, that payment of the amount over and above the
amount which could be directed to be paid under Section 17B to
a workman, is ordered to be paid only on satisfaction of terms
and conditions as would enable the employer to recover the same
[para 13 of Regional Manager, Dena Bank v. Ghanshyam].
(xviii)The same principles would apply to any interim order in
respect of a pendente lite payment in favour of the workman.

7.

It cannot be disputed that the provisions of Section 17 B of the

Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 comes into operation when an Award
directing reinstatement of a workman is assailed in further proceedings.
WP (C) 4740 of 2004

Page 10 of 15

The statute requires satisfaction of the following four conditions:
(i)
an Award by a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal
directing reinstatement of a workman is assailed in proceedings
in a High Court or the Supreme Court;
(ii)
during the pendency of such proceedings, employer is
required to pay full wages to the workman;
(iii)
the wages stipulated under Section 17B are full wages last
drawn by him, inclusive of any maintenance allowance admissible
to him under any Rule;
(iv)
such wages would be admissible only if the workman had
not been employed in any establishment during such period and
an affidavit had been filed to such effect.

8.

While considering an application under this provision it is

necessary to bear in mind that the spirit, intendment and object
underlying the statutory provision of Section 17B is to mitigate and
relieve, to a certain extent, the hardship resulting to a workman due to
delay in the implementation of an award directing reinstatement of his
services on account of the challenge made to it by the employer. The
preliminary consideration for making available such a relief to a
workman is to be found in the benevolent purpose of the enactment. It
recognizes a workman’s right to the bare minimum to keep the body
and soul together when a challenge has been made to an Award
directing his reinstatement. The statutory provisions provide no
inherent right of assailing an order or an award by an industrial
adjudicator by way of an appeal. The payment which is required to be
WP (C) 4740 of 2004

Page 11 of 15

made by the employer to the workman has been held to be akin to a
subsistence allowance which is neither refundable nor recoverable from
a workman even if the Award in his favor is set aside by the High Court.
In 1999 (2) SCC 106 (para 22), Dena Bank v. Kiritikumar T. Patel the
Apex Court was of the view that the object under Section 17B of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 is only to relieve to a certain extent, the
hardship that is caused to the workman due to the delay in
implementation of the Award.

9.

While considering an application under Section 17B of the

Industrial Disputes Act, the Court cannot go into the merits of the case
in the writ petition. It was so held in 86 (2000) DLT 510=2000 (5) AD
(Delhi) 413, Anil Jain v. Jagdish Chander. Since the section itself
mentions

‘employment

in

establishment’

self

employment

quite

apparently is not in contemplation. Workman can be denied the
benefits under Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act only when it
is proved to the satisfaction of the Court that the workmen has been
employed and has been receiving adequate remuneration during the
period of pendency of the writ petition. It is thus well settled that
transient employment by the workman does not affect his entitlement to
receive wages pending decision; that is to say that, the benefit of
Section 17B of the Act cannot be denied merely because the workman is
engaged in some activity or in some vocation to eke out his livelihood.
WP (C) 4740 of 2004

Page 12 of 15

Such relief can be denied only if it is proved that the workman is
gainfully employed in some establishment and is receiving adequate
and regular remuneration which is not the case with the applicant.

10.

Whether the applicant is entitled for last drawn wages or

something more. In 1970 1 SCR 51, Town Municipal, Athani v. P.O. LC
Hugli & Ors. it was held by the Apex Court that a workman has a legal
right to wages under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 and cannot be
diverted to a remedy under Section 20 of the Minimum Wages Act for
enforcing such right. In this case, the Apex Court was concerned with
the power of the Act under Section 33(C)(2) of the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947 and the principles laid down by the Court would have a
bearing on the issues raised before this Court as well. From a
conspectus of the authoritative pronouncements of the Apex Court, the
right of a workman to an amount equivalent to the wages notified under
the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 is thus, in fact, recognition of the
constitutional mandate and nothing more. It is undoubtedly, the bare
minimum which is required by the workman to subsist and is nothing
more. Full wages last drawn can therefore only mean all the wages that
have fallen due at least from the date of the Award. This also cannot be
disputed that granting relief under Section 17B of the Act and passing
orders directing payment of wages last drawn, is generally the rule;
refusing to grant relief under Section 17B is an exception, as it could be
WP (C) 4740 of 2004

Page 13 of 15

passed only in the rarest of the rare cases of jurisdictional error where
there is no relationship between the parties.

11.

The plea of the petitioner that respondent no.2 is gainfully

employed is without any basis. On the presumption as has been raised
by the petitioner, it cannot be inferred. The respondent no.2 fulfills all
the requirement for grant of benefit under section 17 B of the Act.

12.

For the reasons stated hereinabove the application of the

respondent applicant under Section 17B of Industrial Disputes Act is
allowed. The petitioner is directed to pay the last drawn wages or
minimum wages whichever is higher from the date of award, 16th
October, 2003. Arrears of last drawn wages or minimum wages be paid
to the respondent No.2/applicant within eight weeks. The petitioner
shall continue to pay last drawn wages or minimum wages by the 15th
of every English Calendar month during the pendency of the writ
petition. The respondent is also directed to give an undertaking that in
case the writ petition is allowed, the respondent No.2 shall refund the
difference of last drawn wages and minimum wages within the time as
shall be permitted by this Court. The undertaking by respondent No.2
be filed within four weeks.

WP (C) 4740 of 2004

Page 14 of 15

With these directions the application is disposed of.

W.P.(C) No.4740/2004
Amended petition dated 14th November, 2006 is taken on
record. The learned counsel for the respondent No.2 states that the
reply to the amended petition has also been filed. The learned counsel
for the petitioner seeks time to file the rejoinder to the reply to the
amended petition during the course of the day. Rejoinder be filed during
the course of the day.
List for hearing on 12th September, 2008.

March 12th, 2008

ANIL KUMAR, J.

'K'

WP (C) 4740 of 2004

Page 15 of 15

