*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP(C) No.677/1999

%

Date of decision : 12.02.2008
DDA

….…
Petitioner
Through:
Mr.Reetesh Singh & Mr.Ranjan
Dubey, Advocates.
Versus

Presiding Officer, Industrial
Tribuanl & ors
Through :

.........
Respondents
Mr.Sanjoy Ghosh, Advocate for
Respondent no.3.

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.
*

1.

The petitioner has impugned the ex parte award dated 30th

July, 1998 of Industrial Tribunal I holding that Shri Sudesh Kumar
son of Late Shri Rajender Kumar, deceased employee of the petitioner
after the demise of his father, is entitled for appointment on
compassionate ground on the post of Beldar or any other equivalent
job with the petitioner.

2.

The facts relevant for adjudication of the present petition are

that the respondent no.3 is the son of the deceased Shri Rajender
WPC No.677/1999

Page 1 of 18

Kumar, who was employed as a Beldar, claimed compassionate
appointment with the petitioner.

On the dispute being raised by

Municipal Employees Union, Aggarwal Bhawan, G.T.Roard, Tis Hazari
Courts, Delhi on behalf of the respondent no.3 about his appointment
on compassionate ground, the Secretary (Labour), Government of NCT
of Delhi, referred the dispute `Whether Shri Sudesh Kumar is entitled
to appointment on compassionate ground and, if so, what directions
are necessary in this regard‟ for adjudication to the Tribunal by
notification dated 23rd August, 1996.

3.

Pursuant to the reference of dispute by the appropriate

Government, notices were issued to the petitioner and the respondent
no.3 for 26th November, 1996. Shri R.D. Tyagi appeared on behalf of
the petitioner and an authorized representative of the workman also
appeared and sought time to file the statement of claim. On the due
date, the statement of claim was filed, however, no written statement
was filed refuting the averments and pleas raised in the claim
petition. The Industrial Tribunal despite no one appearing on behalf
of the petitioner did not proceed ex parte on that date and adjourned
the matter to 9th September, 1997, on which date also no one
appeared on behalf of the petitioner. No written statement was also
filed refuting the claim of the respondent. The Industrial Tribunal,
therefore,

proceeded

Development Authority.
WPC No.677/1999

ex

parte

against

the

petitioner,

Delhi

Thereafter, the respondent no.3 filed his
Page 2 of 18

evidence on affidavit and proved the documents. After considering the
pleas, evidence of the respondent no.3 and other documents, it was
noticed by the Industrial Tribunal that the father of the respondent
no.3, Shri Rajender Kumar, was employed with the Management since
1978 and was made Work Charge – Beldar in 1983 and that he was a
permanent employee of the petitioner. His last posting was with the
Engineering Division – IV, Dilshad Garden, Shahdara and he died on
3rd April, 1990 in harness leaving behind a number of family members
including the respondent no.3.

4.

The respondent no.3 testified that he is 8th class pass and is

entitled to be appointed on compassionate ground on regular basis
with the petitioner in appropriate pay scale and allowance on the post
of Mali/Beldar or any other class IV post. The respondent no.3 also
deposed that there is no other bread winner in the family and none
had been given employment on compassionate ground after the death
of his father, late Shri Rajender Kumar.

It was also deposed and

proved that the family of the deceased, Shri Rajender Kumar, has no
source of income and is facing extreme financial hardship.

5.

The respondent no.3 had proved a copy of the report of the

petitioner which was exhibited as WW1/8 where it was proposed by
the Deputy Director (Personnel) that in view of the cases lingering for
the last many years and the families of the deceased employees being
WPC No.677/1999

Page 3 of 18

distressed, the appointment be made of the legal heirs in each and
every case and for such appointment Work Charge post in the
Division/Circular where the person had served be created.

6.

The Industrial Tribunal also considered the representation of

the respondent no.3 dated 20th May, 1993 seeking appointment on
the compassionate ground and thereafter passed an award directing
the petitioner to appoint respondent no.3 on compassionate ground.
The Industrial Tribunal answered the reference in favor of respondent
no.3 on the ground that the respondent no.3 had appeared before the
Screening Committee and the Screening Committee after considering
his case for compassionate appointment declined it solely on the
ground that his father, deceased employee of the petitioner was not in
regular or work charge regular service of the petitioner, which was
found to be not correct by the Tribunal. Reliance was also placed on a
copy of the report exhibit WW.1/8 for appointment on compassionate
ground whereby it was held that the Deputy Director (Personnel) was
authorized to offer appointment to the legal heirs of the deceased
workman on compassionate ground after creating of work charges
posts in the division/circulars where the persons had served and
whose cases were lingering on for past so many years and the
deceased families were in distress.

7.

Before the Conciliation Officer the petitioner had admitted that

WPC No.677/1999

Page 4 of 18

Late Sh.Rajinder Kumar father of the respondent no.3 was employed
with the petitioner as a beldar and he was posted at Engineering DivIV, Dilshad Garden, Shahdara but it was denied that he was regular
and permanent employee of the petitioner and it was contended that
the case of the respondent no.3 was not covered under the policy for
appointment on compassionate ground. The Industrial Tribunal after
considering the evidence on record has held that the case of the
respondent no.3 is covered under the policy and there is sufficient
merit in the claim of the respondent no.3 for his appointment on the
compassionate ground and, therefore, an ex-parte award dated 30th
July, 1998 has been passed in favor of the respondent no.3.

8.

In the present petition, challenging the ex-parte award passed

against the petitioner, the show cause notice was issued limited to the
ground

whether

the

legal

heir

claiming

appointment

on

compassionate ground is not a `workman‟ within the definition of the
workman in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and whether he is
incapable of raising an industrial dispute.

9.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has relied on 1994 SCC

(L&J) 737, Life Insurance Corporation of India Vs.Asha Ramachandra
Ambekar (Mrs) and Another whereas the learned counsel for the
respondent no.3 has relied on (2007) 8 SCC 549, Mohan Mahto Vs.
Central Coal Field Ltd and Ors. In Life Insurance Corporation of India
WPC No.677/1999

Page 5 of 18

(Supra) it was held that the Courts cannot order appointment on
compassionate ground de hors the provisions of statutory regulations
and instructions and that the hardship of a candidate does not entitle
him to compassionate appointment de hors the statutory provisions.
The Apex Court had held that the Court should endeavor to find out
whether a particular case in which sympathetic considerations are to
be weighed falls within the scope of law and that disregardful of law,
however hard the case may be, it should not be done. In this case the
order granting appointment on compassionate ground was set aside
as the Courts had not examined whether the case had fallen within
the scope of relevant statutory provision as the Life Insurance
Corporation was a statutory corporation and was bound by Life
Insurance Corporation Act as well as the statutory regulations and
instructions. Apparently the case of the respondent no.3 is clearly
distinguishable. After due consideration of the case of the respondent
no.3, the petitioner Screening Committee had denied it on the ground
that the case was not covered under the policy as the father of the
respondent No.3, late Sh.Rajinder Kumar was not a regular employee.
Reference was made regarding this on behalf of the respondent no.3
to the Industrial Tribunal.

The Tribunal after consideration of the

evidence adduced by the respondent no.3 on his behalf which
evidence was not rebutted by the petitioner as the petitioner remained
ex-parte, and after due consideration of all the material placed
regarding the employment of late Sh.Rajinder Kumar passed an award
WPC No.677/1999

Page 6 of 18

in favor of the respondent no.3 on the ground that he is covered
under the policy of the petitioner for compassionate appointment.

10.

The petitioner is unable to show any cogent or sufficient reason

for non appearance before the Industrial Tribunal. Even in the
present writ petition no such facts has been disclosed by the
petitioner which will show that there was sufficient reason or cause
for non appearance of the petitioner and his counsel and that the exparte award passed against the petitioner could be set aside. Rather
this Court did not issue notice on this plea of the petitioner and it was
deemed to be rejected. The ground which has been raised by the
learned counsel for the petitioner is that the legal heir of the
`workman‟ claiming compassionate appointment under the policy of
the petitioner is not a `workman‟ so as to invoke the jurisdiction of the
Industrial Tribunal.

11.

S-2(k) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 states that-

“Industrial dispute" means "any dispute or difference between
employers and employers, or between employers and workmen, or
between workmen and workmen, which is connected with the
employment or non-employment or the terms of employment or with
the conditions of labor, of any person.”

WPC No.677/1999

Page 7 of 18

12.

This definition of Industrial Dispute in S-2(k) has three

components/parts. The first part refers to the factum of a real or
substantial dispute; the second part to the parties to the dispute; and
the third, to the subject matter of that dispute. That subject matter
may relate to any of two matters - (i) employment or non-employment,
and (ii) terms of employment or conditions of labor, of any person.
Apparently the first and second parts of the definition of „Industrial
Dispute‟ are clearly fulfilled in the present case, because there is a
dispute or difference over the non-employment of Respondent No.3,
and the dispute or difference is between the employer, namely, Delhi
Development Authority on one side, and its workmen (Municipal
Employees Union) on the other, as the dispute was raised by the
Union on behalf of the respondent.

13.

As far as the third part is concerned, the import of the words

„any person‟ was considered by the Hon‟ble Apex Court in Workmen of
Dimakuchi Tea Estate v. The Management of Dimakuchi Tea Estate,
AIR 1958 SC 353 . S.K. Das, J. giving the majority decision observed,
“…… the crucial test is one community of interest and the
person regarding whom the dispute is raised must be one
in whose employment, non-employment, terms of
employment or conditions of labour (as the case may be)
the parties to the dispute have a direct or substantial
interest. Whether such direct or substantial interest has
been established in a particular case will depend on its
facts and circumstances.”
The court further held-

“Having regard to the scheme and

objects of the Act, and its other provisions, the expression 'any
WPC No.677/1999

Page 8 of 18

person' in S-2(k)of the Act must be read subject to such limitations
and qualifications as arise from the context; the two crucial
limitations are (1) the dispute must be a real dispute between the
parties to the dispute (as indicated in the first two parts of the
definition clause) so as to be capable of settlement or adjudication by
one party to the dispute giving necessary relief to the other, and (2)
the person regarding whom the dispute is raised must be one in
whose employment, non-employment, terms of employment, or
conditions of labor (as the case may be) the parties to the dispute
have a direct or substantial interest. In the absence of such interest
the dispute cannot be said to be a real dispute between the parties.
Where the workmen raise a dispute as against their employer, the
person regarding whose employment, non-employment, terms of
employment or conditions of labour the dispute is raised, need not be,
strictly speaking, a 'workman' within the meaning of the Act but must
be one in whose employment, non-employment, terms of employment
or conditions of labour the workmen as a class have a direct or
substantial interest.”

14.

In the present case the dispute is regarding the non-

employment of Respondent No.3, the legal heir of a deceased
workman. If the reference was made at the instance of Union of
workers, and if the `workmen‟ can be said to have a direct and
substantial interest in the employment or non-employment of
WPC No.677/1999

Page 9 of 18

respondent no. 3, then the dispute is essentially an industrial
dispute. In the present case there is a scheme of compassionate
appointment which the petitioner was bound to follow. The class of
workmen as a whole can definitely be said to have an interest in the
appointment of the legal heir of a co-worker who dies in-harness. A
decision on whether the management has followed the scheme of
compassionate employment in rejecting respondent No.3‟s application
for employment is certainly in the interest of the other workmen. In
any case, it cannot be inferred that the Union of workers of Municipal
Corporation of Delhi had no interest nor has such a case been setup
by the petitioner. The plea that the respondent no.3 could not raise an
industrial dispute or that a dispute on his behalf could not be referred
by an appropriate Union was never taken by the petitioner at the
Industrial Tribunal.

15.

It has now been well settled that, if after having raised the

dispute, if the workman dies, his legal representatives can further
agitate and prosecute the dispute before the industrial authorities.
This is clear from Section 10(8) of the Industrial Disputes Act. The
said section read as follows:"10(8). No proceedings pending before a Labour Court,
Tribunal or National Tribunal in relation to an industrial
dispute shall lapse merely by reason of the death of any of
the parties to the dispute being a workman, and such
Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal shall
complete such proceedings and submit its award to the
appropriate Government."
WPC No.677/1999

Page 10 of 18

Section 18(3)(b) and (c) also make the position clear, which
reads as follows:"18(3). A settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation
proceedings under this Act or an arbitration award in a
case where a notification has been issued under Subsection (3A) of Section 10A or an award of a Labour
Court. Tribunal or National Tribunal which has become
enforceable shall be binding on …………………………
(b) all other parties summoned to appear in the
proceedings as parties to the dispute, unless the Board,
Arbitrator, Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal,
as the case may be, records the opinion that they were so
summoned without proper cause;
(c) where a party referred to in Clause (a) or (b) is an
employer, his heirs, successors or assigns in respect of
the establishment to which the dispute relates."
16.

The difference in opinion among the various High Courts, on

this point of law was settled by the Supreme Court in Rameshwar
Manjhi

(Deceased)

through

his

son

Lakhiram

Manjhi

v.

Managemenmt of Sangramgarh Colliery and others, (1994) 1 SCC
292. The court had held that,
“on the death of the workman, even when the reference is
of an individual dispute under S- 2A of the Act, the
Tribunal does not become functus officio or the reference
does not abate merely because, pending adjudication, the
workman concerned dies. It is open to the heirs and legal
representatives of the deceased workman to have the
matter agitated and decided.”
The court in this case had agreed with and approved the
reasoning given and conclusions reached by the Kerala High Court
and the Gujarat High Court in Gwalior Rayons, Mavoor v. Labour
Court and Ors. (1978) II LLJ 188 and Bank of Baroda v. Workmen
WPC No.677/1999

Page 11 of 18

(1979)

II

LLJ

57

respectively.

In

the

Gwalior

Rayon‟s

case

Chandrasekhar Menon, J. of the Kerala High Court had observed: “The scope of adjudication by a Tribunal under the
Industrial Disputes Act is much wider than determination
of the legal rights of the parties involved of redressing the
grievances of an aggrieved workman in accordance with
law. As Gajendradkar, J., points out in Cawnpur Tannery
Ltd. v. Guha, (1961) II L.L.J. 110 at p.112, the
adjudication by the Industrial Disputes Act is only an
alternative form of settlement of Industrial disputes on a
fair and just basis. The primary duty of the Industrial
Tribunal is to establish peace in the industry between
employer and workmen. Any unfair action by the
management even against an individual worker might
cast its shadow on the general body of workers who might
get perturbed by such action. A resolution of the dispute
might then become necessary for industrial peace
notwithstanding the death of the workman concerned
pending proceeding. The personal relief to the workman
concerned to a certain extent occupies a subsidiary place
in the scheme of things. Not that it is not important. It is
only a consequential result of the decision primarily
arrived at securing industrial peace settling the
apprehension of the workman without losing sight of the
interest of the industry. As Rajamannar, C.J. stated in
Shree Meenakshi Mills Ltd. v. State of Madras, (1952) II
L.L.J. 326 DB, the essential object of enacting the
Industrial Disputes Act is to provide recourse to a given
form of procedure for the settlement of disputes in the
interest of maintenance of peaceful relations between the
parties without apparent conflicts such as are likely to
interrupt production and entail other damages. In the
circumstances proceedings before the Labour Court or
the Industrial Tribunal under the Industrial Disputes Act
cannot be equated to a personal action in torts in a Civil
Court which would come to an end with the death of the
aggrieved party to the dispute. In the general set up of an
industry, in the nature of the relationship between the
employer and the employees, a dispute between an
employer and even an individual employee generally
affects the entire community of workmen in the industry.
They acquire an interest in the dispute. It ceases to be an
individual dispute and becomes an industrial dispute
affecting the interest of the entire body of workmen. Any
decision of the Labour Court will affect the interest of the
whole body of workmen and the dispute, therefore,
WPC No.677/1999

Page 12 of 18

cannot die with the death of the individual workman……”
It is clear from the abovementioned cases that an industrial
dispute survives even when the workman concerned dies during its
pendency and the proceedings before the Tribunal/Labour Court can
be continued by the legal heirs of the deceased workman.

17.

The question whether the legal heir of a deceased workman

whose services were terminated can validly institute an industrial
dispute was considered by Andhra Pradesh High Court in Anjilamma
and Ors. v. Labour Court-III, Hyderabad and Anr, 1995(2) ALT 683.
The Court had addressed the specific question whether the legal
heirs of a deceased workman whose services were terminated by his
employer as a measure of punishment can validly institute an
industrial dispute before the Labour Court under Section 2-A of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, questioning the validity of the action
of the employer in terminating the services of such workman and
claiming reliefs as provided under the Act. Referring to the decision of
the Supreme Court in Rameshwar Manjhi‟s case (supra) the court
observed:“If according to the Apex Court if a pending proceedings
can be continued by the legal heirs/representatives of the
deceased workman after the death of the workman during
the pendency of the proceedings, there is no good reason
to hold that such legal representatives/heirs are
incompetent to institute the dispute before the Industrial
Court after the death of a workman. If the legal heirs of a
deceased workman have the locus standi to continue an
industrial dispute instituted by such workman in a
WPC No.677/1999

Page 13 of 18

Labour Court in law, then they are also competent to
institute such industrial dispute. The observation of the
Supreme Court in paras 11 and 12 in general and in para
13 in particular read with the views expressed by the
Calcutta (sic. Kerala) High Court in Gwalior Rayon's case
(supra) and that of the Gujarat High Court in Bank of
Baroda's case (supra) which views are affirmed by the
Apex Court in Rameshwar Manjhi's case clearly go to
show that legal heirs/representatives of a deceased
workman can institute an industrial dispute before the
jurisdictional Labour Court after the death of such
workman.”
The court in Anjilamma and Ors. (supra) had further held:“the legal heirs/legal representatives of a deceased
workman are entitled to institute an industrial dispute
before the Labour Court questioning the validity of
termination of services of such workman even after the
death of such workman under Section 2-A of the
Industrial Disputes Act. It is not necessary that such
legal heirs/representatives should be 'workmen' within
the meaning of Section 2(s) of the Act and in fact they are
not and cannot be workmen within the meaning of that
term unless in a given case they are also workmen under
the same employer. The essence of the matter is that if on
the death of a workman any or all causes of action
survives/survive for the benefit of estate left behind by
him, it is competent for the legal heirs of such workman,
as the custodian of the estate of the deceased workman,
either to continue the pending proceedings instituted by
the deceased workman or to institute the proceedings
after the death of the workman before of a Labour Court.
An industrial dispute instituted by him or an industrial
dispute capable of being instituted by him will not die
with him and despite his death such a dispute remains to
be an industrial dispute within the meaning of Section
2(k) of the Act as contemplated under sub-sec.(8) of
Section 10 of the Act and the legal heirs to and the
administrators of, the estate-of the deceased have locus
standi to prosecute such dispute either by continuing the
pending proceedings or by instituting fresh proceedings in
the Industrial Courts as representing the deceased's
estate and for the benefit of the estate.”
18.

In Smt. Dhanalakshmi and Another v. The Reserve Bank of

WPC No.677/1999

Page 14 of 18

India, Bombay and Others 1998 (6) KarLJ 603, a Division Bench of
the Karnataka High Court addressed the question whether the legal
heirs of a deceased workman can initiate and prosecute an industrial
dispute. The court observed: “Under the scheme of the Act, an adjudication of an
individual dispute is preceded by certain statutory
requirements, namely, a raising of the dispute either
under Section 2A, conciliation proceedings under the
provisions of Section 12 and thereafter a reference by the
State Government for adjudication of the dispute. If the
workman is permitted to raise a dispute and initiate
conciliation proceedings in view of the provisions of
Section 2A of the Act, then his right to have an
adjudication of the dispute, in case it is made to the
Labour Court, cannot be taken away by his death since
the award, if made in his favor, would enure to the benefit
of his estate.
Section 18(3) (d) of the Act is an exception to the Law of
Contract. Under the Law of Contract it is only the parties
who are signatories to the contract will be bound by the
terms of the contract. But, under Section 18(3)(d) in the
case of a settlement in the course of conciliation, even
workmen who subsequently become employees of the
employer will get the benefit of the settlement and will be
bound by the terms of the settlement. If this scheme of
the Act is kept in view, the intention of the Parliament
becomes clear. That is, it had no intention to abrogate or
cut down the rights of the workman when it concerned
the benefits due from his employer when he raises an
industrial dispute.”
19.

The court in Smt. Dhanalakshmi and Another (supra) further

had observed that: “the legal heirs of deceased workman can initiate and
prosecute the industrial dispute as there does not exist
any statutory bar for such a course being adopted and
followed. We do not agree with the submission made on
behalf of the employer that in view of the provisions of
Sections 2(k), 2A and 10(8) of the Act, the conciliation
proceedings cannot be initiated or continued after the
death of the workman. We are of the opinion that despite
WPC No.677/1999

Page 15 of 18

a workman's death, the points sought to be settled by his
legal heirs remain an industrial dispute for the purposes
of adjudication under the Act. Section 10(8) is a
beneficiary provision made for the workman prescribing
that despite his death, the proceedings would not lapse
even without the formal application of bringing on record
his legal representatives.”
20.

What emerges from these precedents is that the legal heirs of

deceased `workman‟

can raise an industrial dispute about his

termination, even after his demise because the cause of action for
such challenge will be the facts that the „workman‟ was in the
employment of the employer and there was a relationship of employee
and employer and there was an illegal termination of the services of
the workman, and this cause of action will enure to the workman‟s
legal heirs on his death. In the present the cause of action of
respondent no.3, shall be the employment of his father with the
petitioner and the policy of the petitioner to grant compassionate
appointment and the rejection of his application for employment on
compassionate grounds.

Even though the relief for this cause of

action can be claimed only after the demise of the workman, it
nevertheless remains the right of the workman which can be invoked
only after his demise and which devolves upon the legal heir. The
preferential treatment for appointment as against the general
treatment for appointment, which the legal heirs of a deceased
workman are entitled to is entirely on account of the fact that the
workman has died-in-harness.

WPC No.677/1999

Page 16 of 18

21.

The learned counsel for the respondent, Mr.Sanjoy Ghose has

relied on Mohan Mahto Vs. Central Coal Field Ltd and Ors, (2007) 8
SCC 549 and has contended that the expanding definition of
workman as contained in Section 2(s) of the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947 shall include the legal representatives of a deceased worker who
claims

appointment

on

compassionate

ground.

In

this

case

compassionate appointment provided under the terms of a binding
settlement was claimed. It was held that the settlement shall be
binding and will continue to be in force unless the same is altered.
The Apex Court had held that the right to obtain appointment on
compassionate grounds emanated from the settlement as defined in
section 2(p) of the Act and the expanding definition of the workman as
contained in the section 2(s) of the Act would confer a right upon the
legal heir to obtain appointment on compassionate grounds, subject
to compliance with the conditions precedent contained in the
settlement and grant of such compassionate appointment shall be an
exception to Article 16 of the Constitution of India.

22.

In the case of the respondent No.3 he sought appointment on

compassionate grounds according to the policy of the petitioner.
Appointment on compassionate grounds was declined on the ground
that the father of the respondent no.3 was not in the regular
employment of the petitioner. The industrial tribunal has held that
the respondent no.3 was entitled for appointment in accordance with
WPC No.677/1999

Page 17 of 18

the policy of the petitioner. The cause of action in the case of the
respondent no.3 will be based on the fact that his father was in the
employment of petitioner, the petitioner had a policy to appoint the
legal heir of a deceased employee after the demise of the employee
subject to fulfillment of terms and conditions of policy. In the
circumstances, it cannot be held that the union of municipal
Corporation employees could not invoke the jurisdiction of the
Industrial Tribunal under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 on behalf
of respondent no. 3.

23.

In the facts and circumstances, the plea of the petitioner is not

sustainable and the writ petition is without any merit.

The writ

petition is, therefore, dismissed and the interim order dated 12th
October, 1999 and 21st August, 2000 staying the operation of award
are vacated, entitling the respondent no.3 to enforce the award
against the petitioner.

Parties are however left to bear their own

costs.

February 12th , 2008

ANIL KUMAR, J.

'Dev'

WPC No.677/1999

Page 18 of 18

