IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Date of decision: December 12, 2007
OMP No.576/2006

#
!

Municipal Corporation of Delhi
......... Petitioner
Through: Ms.Smita Shankar, Advocate.
Vs.

$
^

Sh.Madhu Kishan Gupta & Anr
....... Respondents
Through: Mr.Sanjoy Bhaumik, Advocate.

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
YES
YES

ANIL KUMAR, J.(Oral)

+
*

IA No.13733/2006

1.

The petitioner seeks condonation of delay in filing the

petition/objections under Section 34 of the Arbitration & Conciliation
Act, 1996 against the award dated 10th August, 2006 which was
received in the office of the petitioner on 11th August, 2006 and
pursuant thereto objections have been filed on 30th November, 2006.

2.

The petitioner has contended that there is a delay of 14 days

which is neither intentional nor deliberate and, therefore, can be
OMP No.576/2006

Page 1 of 9

condoned. The ground taken by the petitioner is that on account of
necessary procedural steps which were taken the delay occurred. The
ground for condonation of delay as taken in the application in para 2
is as under:“2. That the impugned award dated 10.8.2006 was
received in the office of the petitioner on 11.8.2006 and
thereafter necessary procedural steps were taken for filing
the present OMP which took some time and therefore,
delay of 14 days is there in filing the same, which is
neither intentional nor deliberate and therefore, can be
condoned in the interest of justice.”
3.

The application is contested by the respondent contending that

the alleged “necessary procedural steps” cannot come within the
meaning of the word “sufficient cause” as contemplated under Section
34(3) of Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996. According to the
respondent the limitation for filing the objections for setting aside the
award is three months, however, within 30 days after the expiry of
three months the objections can still be filed provided there is
sufficient cause as contemplated under Section 34(3) of Arbitration &
Conciliation Act, 1996. Section 34(3) of Arbitration & Conciliation Act,
1996 is as under:“34(3):- An application for setting aside may not be made
after three months have elapsed from the date on which
the party making that application had received the
arbitral award or, if a request had been made under
Section 33, from the date on which that request had been
disposed of by the arbitral tribunal.
Provided that if the Court is satisfied that the
applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from making
OMP No.576/2006

Page 2 of 9

the application within the said period of three months it
may entertain the application within a further period of
thirty days, but not thereafter.”

4.

The contention of the respondent is that without specifying as

to what were the procedural steps, merely stating that delay occurred
on account of

necessary procedural steps would amount to

prescribing a different period of limitation in the cases

of the

Government or Governmental Agencies and no such provision is made
under Section 34(3) of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996.
Relying on the judgments of the Apex Court it was contended that no
such privileges can be conferred on the Government or Governmental
Agencies to seek condonation of delay or extension of time merely on
the ground that the delay has been occasioned due to various
channels

involved

in

processing

the

matter.

The

respondent

specifically relied on 106(2003) DLT 617, Union of India & Ors Vs.
Nav Bharat Nirmal Company & Anr.

5.

I have heard the learned counsel for the parties in detail. The

learned counsel for the petitioner has relied on (2005) 4 SCC 239,
Union of India Vs. Tecco Trichy Engineers &

Contractors where a

delay of 27 days in making the application under Section 34 of the
Arbitration & Conciliation Act was condoned. Perusal of the
application filed by the petitioner for condonation of delay, it is

OMP No.576/2006

Page 3 of 9

apparent that no cogent reasons or facts have been disclosed on the
basis of which it can be inferred that the delay is on account of
sufficient reason. What is stated is that the delay occurred on account
of necessary procedural steps. What are those procedural steps, have
not been detailed. In the circumstances there is nothing on record to
show that the delay on account of alleged procedural steps occurred
on account of bonafide reasons and there is sufficient reason. The
judgment relied on by the petitioner Tecco Trichy Engineers &
Contractors (Supra) is clearly distinguishable. In the said judgment it
was held that delivery of arbitral award under Section 31(5) is not a
matter of mere formality but it is a matter of substance, as in this
case the Chief Engineer who had signed the agreement on behalf of
Union of India and had entered into an agreement with the
respondent and who had knowledge about the arbitration matter was
not served with the arbitral award, rather it was sent to the General
Manager of the Railways who had only referred the matter for
arbitration as was required under the contract. In the facts and
circumstances of the case it was held that General Manager could not
be said to be aware of the question involved in the arbitration nor the
factual aspect in detail on the basis of which the arbitral Tribunal had
decided the issue before it and consequently unless all these facts
could be brought to the notice of the officer dealing with the
arbitration who was in charge of those proceedings, the objections to

OMP No.576/2006

Page 4 of 9

the award could not be filed. In these facts and circumstances the
delay of 27 days was condoned under Section 34(3) of the Arbitration
& Conciliation Act holding that there was sufficient reason. In
contradistinction no such ground has been taken by the petitioner
that the award was not served on the person who was aware of the
facts and circumstances of the case or the award did not reach the
concerned person within time so that the objections could be
prepared within time. What has been stated that the delay occurred
on account of necessary procedural steps. A single Judge of this
Court in the case of Union of India Vs Nav Bharat Nirman Company &
anr had held that condoning delays on account of alleged procedural
delays without specifying the reasons for delay will result into
prescribing different period of limitation in the cases where the
Government or Governmental Agencies are the parties to an award. In
was held in Nav Bharat Nirman Company & ors (supra) as under:

6.
………….Now the question is as to whether on the
face of the facts and circumstances disclosed in the
application under Section 34(3) of the Act, the Court
should exercise its discretion vested in it under the said
provisions of law and entertain the present application
filed beyond a period of three months. The Legislature in
its wisdom has prescribed a time limit of three months for
making an application for setting aside an Award and the
starting points of limitation are, (i) date of receipt of
Award; or (ii) date of disposal of application under Section
33, if made. The proviso permits extension of this period
by a further maximum outer limit is three months and 30
OMP No.576/2006

Page 5 of 9

days. In the case in hand the reasons given in the
application under Section 34 (3) are routine and
stereotyped as it is stated that firstly the delay has been
occasioned on account of processing the case at various
levels for taking a decision to challenge the Award and
then in seeking the appointment of the Government
Counsel through the Ministry of Law. Can these reasons
be considered sufficient for extension of time in view of
the fact that the petitioner is a Government and act
through its authorities/officers. In the opinion of this
Court the answer is a plain “No” because if these reasons
of procedural delay or delay in processing the case in the
Government offices is considered to be a sufficient cause
for extending the time for making the application under
Section 34 of the Act, it would amount to prescribing a
different period of limitation in the cases where the
Government or governmental agency is a party to an
award. If that had been the intention of the Legislature it
would have been so reflected in the statute itself. The
Apex Court and this Court has held time and again that
no special privileges is conferred on the Government or
governmental agencies to seek condonation of delay or
extension of time merely on the ground that the delay has
been accessioned due to various channels involved in
processing the matter. In the opinion of this Court the
grounds stated in the application do not afford any
sufficient cause on account of which the petitioner can be
said to have been prevented from making the application
within a period of three months. Accordingly the
application under Section 34 (3) of the Act merits
dismissal and consequently on this short ground alone
the application under Section 34 of the Act can also be
dismissed.

6.

In the circumstances, merely stating that the delay took place

on account of necessary procedural steps will not constitute sufficient
cause as contemplated under Sectin 34 (3) of the Arbitration and

OMP No.576/2006

Page 6 of 9

Conciliation Act, 1996 and the delay cannot be condoned.

7.

The grounds on which the award has been challenged are that

the dispute no. 3B was not referable and the Arbitrator has erred in
referring the dispute which was otherwise time barred and awarded
claim no. 4,6,7,8,9,10,11 in favor of respondent no.1 erroneously.
Award of future interest has also been challenged. Under claim no.
3B, petitioner had claimed an amount of Rs.22,00,000 on account of
various works which were executed by the petitioner under water in
foundation and for the extra items executed but not paid. The
arbitrator has considered this claim in great detail and has only
awarded an amount of Rs. 37,955/-

relating to de-watering by

pumps and has disallowed the claim for doing various works under
water/under foul water and for cutting and straightening of steel and
for extra T iron weight. For dewatering done the Arbitrator has relied
on CPWD manual volume-II. He has also taken into the consideration
the water which must have come on account of rain which was to be
pumped out by the petitioner. The award is not patently in violation of
any statutory provisions. No cogent ground has been made out as to
why this claim could not be referred to the Arbitrator and decided by
him. This Court cannot substitute its own decision and conclusions,
in interpretation of a contract which is a matter for an arbitrator to
decide as appraisement of evidence by arbitrator is never a matter

OMP No.576/2006

Page 7 of 9

which the Court questions and considers because the parties have
selected their own forum and the deciding forum must be conceded
the power of the appraisement of the evidence.

8.

Claim nos. 4,6,7,8,9,10,11 have also been considered in great

detail by the Arbitrator. He rejected claim 3A and therefore held
payment of 10CC against claim no. 3A does not arise and for a claim
of Rs.20,22,137.00, an amount of Rs.8,77,565.32 has been awarded.
It is no more res integra that there are limits for judicial reviewability
and the Courts exercise limited jurisdiction in the proceeding for
setting aside an award under Section 34 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996.

The Courts do not exercise appellate

jurisdiction over the verdict of an arbitrator and as such cannot go
into the merits of the case nor the court should re-appraise and reexamine the evidence led before the arbitrator. The arbitrator has
given sufficient and cogent reasons for deciding the claims of the
claimant. In deciding claim nos. 6,7,8 & 10 facts have been
considered in great detail along with various judgment cited by both
the parties. The award is not in violation of statutory provisions and
cannot be said to be against the public interest. Similarly for claim
no. 9 & 11 it cannot be contended that they are in violation of
statutory provisions or there is any error or the findings are such
which will shock the conscience of this Court.

OMP No.576/2006

Page 8 of 9

9.

In the circumstances, there are no grounds to condone the

delay in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
OMP No.576/2006
Since the application for condonation of delay in filing the
objections have been dismissed, the objections also do not survive.
The objections are dismissed, however, the parties are left to
bear their own costs.

December 12, 2007
'k'

OMP No.576/2006

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 9 of 9

