*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP(C) No.1174/2008

%

Date of decision : 12.03.2008
Sonica Jaggi
Through:

….…
PETITIONER
Mr.Rajiv Aneja, Advocate.

Versus
Lt.Governor & Ors
Through :

......
RESPONDENTS
Mr.Daiyan Hussain, Advocate
for the respondent Nos.2 & 3.
Ms.Shefali Dhawan, Advocate
for the respondent Nos.4 to 6.

CORAM :HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.

1.

The petitioner has sought a direction to respondent Nos.4 to 6,

The Manager, The Principal and The Chairman of Shakti Mandir
Premwati Public School to refix the salary of petitioner in the proper pay
scale of Physical Education teacher as provided by the recruitment
rules and in accordance with Section 10 of Delhi School Education Act.

WP (C) 1174 of 2008

Page 1 of 10

2.

A Division Bench of this Court in Kathuria Public School and Ors

Vs. Director of Education and Anr, 2005 VI AD (Delhi) 893 relying on
T.M.A.Pai Foundation Vs. State of Karnataka, AIR 2003 SC 345 had
held that it is advisable that the specialized Tribunal constituted should
look after the legal matters relating to hearing of grievances of
teachers and employees. The Division Bench relying on T.M.A.Pai
Foundation (Supra) had held that specialized Tribunal should hear any
grievance of the teacher. It was held in Kathuria Public School and Ors
(Supra) that no restriction has been placed on the scope and ambit of
the consideration of the grievances of the teacher or employee by the
Tribunal and consequently the Tribunal should be able to hear all the
grievances including in respect of suspension of a teacher or an
employee and, therefore, the Tribunal constituted under the Delhi
School Education Act should be able to hear all the grievances of the
staff and teachers and not necessarily as restricted to in sub Section (2)
of Section 8 of the said Act. The Division Bench in para 42 at page 910
had held as under:“42. No restriction has been placed on the scope and
ambit of the consideration of the grievances of the teacher
or employee by the Tribunal. Under the said Act in
question, the Tribunal is already constituted. Thus, all that
is to be done is that the Tribunal should be able to hear all
grievances including in respect of suspension by a teacher
or an employee. Taking into consideration the observations
made by the Apex Court in T.M.A.Pai Foundation case
(supra), we are of the considered view that pending
necessary legislative action by the State, the Tribunal
constituted should be able to hear all grievances of the
staff and teacher and not necessarily as restricted to in
sub Section (2) of Section 8 of the said Act. The result
WP (C) 1174 of 2008

Page 2 of 10

would be that if a teacher is aggrieved by a suspension
order or its prolongation, the grievance can be made before
the Tribunal depending upon the fact and circumstances of
the case.”

3.

Consequently, though this Court will have jurisdiction under

Article 226 of the Constitution of India for the relief claimed by the
petitioner, however, the petitioner must exhaust the alternative remedy
available to her to approach the tribunal constituted under the Delhi
School Education Act, 1973 for her grievance regarding re-fixing of her
salary as provided in the recruitment rules.

4.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has relied on 2007 VI AD

(Delhi) 749, Servants of People Society & Ors Vs. Smt.Sudesh Oberoi &
Anr; (2001) 10 SCC 445, Shashi Gaur Vs. NCT of Delhi & Ors; 1978
SCC (L&S) 70, The Principal and Ors Vs. The Presiding Officer & Ors;
43(1991) DLT 139, The Manager, Arya Samaj, Girls Higher Secondary
School & Anr Vs. Sunrita Thakur etc; 2005 SCC (L&S) 966,
Management Committee of Montfort Senior Secondary School Vs. Vijay
Kumar and Ors and 1996 (39) DRJ (DB), Sahdeo Singh Solanki Vs.
Government of NCT of Delhi to contend that the Tribunal does not have
jurisdiction in respect of grievances of the petitioner for re-fixing of her
salary by the respondent Nos.4 to 6 in accordance with the recruitment
rules.

WP (C) 1174 of 2008

Page 3 of 10

5.

Perusal of the judgments relied on by the petitioner, it is apparent

that they are distinguishable and on the basis of the ratio of Kathuria
Public School and Ors (Supra) it cannot be held that Delhi Schools
Tribunal shall not have jurisdiction under the Delhi School Education
Act, 1973. In Servants of People Society and Ors (Supra) a Division
Bench had held that a suit for release of benefits under the 5th Pay
Commission was not barred as jurisdiction of the Civil Court was
excluded by Section 25 of the Act only in respect of any matter in
relation to which the Administrator or the Director or such other person
as mentioned therein is empowered to exercise any power whereas with
regard to matters where authorities are not empowered to exercise their
power as in the case of grant of benefits under the 5th Pay Commission,
the Civil Court shall retain the jurisdiction to entertain a suit and grant
interim orders therein. The Division Bench in Servants of People Society
and Ors had not considered the Kathuria Public School and Ors (Supra)
relying on T.M.A Pai Foundation & ors, holding that Delhi School
Education Tribunal will have jurisdiction in all the matters pertaining to
the employees and teachers and the jurisdiction of the Tribunal cannot
be restricted to as given in sub Section (2) of Section 8 of the said Act.
In any case in Servants of People Society and Ors it was not held that
that Delhi Schools Tribunal shall also not have jurisdiction in the
matters of teachers and employees.

WP (C) 1174 of 2008

Page 4 of 10

6.

A case is only an authority for what it decides. As observed by the

Supreme Court in State of Orissa v. Sudhansu Sekhar Misra
MANU/SC/0047/1967:"A decision is only an authority for what it actually decides.
What is of the essence in a decision is its ratio and not
every observation found therein nor what logically follows
from the various observations made in it. On this topic this
is what Earl of Halsbury, LC said in Quinn v. Leathem,
1901 AC 495:
"Now before discussing the case of Allen v.
Flood (1898) AC 1 and what was decided
therein, there are two observations of a general
character which I wish to make, and one is to
repeat what I have very often said before, that
every judgment must be read as applicable to
the particular facts proved, or assumed to be
proved, since the generality of the expressions
which may be found there are not intended to
be expositions of the whole law, but governed
and qualified by the particular facts of the case
in which such expressions are to be found. The
other is that a case is only an authority for
what it actually decides. I entirely deny that it
can be quoted for a proposition that may seem
to follow logically Page 2009 from it. Such a
mode of reasoning assumes that the law is
necessarily a logical Code, whereas every
lawyer must acknowledge that the law is not
always logical at all."
In Ambica Quarry Works v. State of Gujarat and Ors.
MANU/SC/0049/1986 the Supreme Court observed:"The ratio of any decision must be understood in the
background of the facts of that case. It has been said long
time ago that a case is only an authority for what it actually
decides, and not what logically follows from it."

WP (C) 1174 of 2008

Page 5 of 10

Similarly in In Bhavnagar University v. Palitana Sugar Mills Pvt
Ltd (2003) 2 SC 111 (vide para 59), the Supreme observed:" It is well settled that a little difference in facts or
additional facts may make a lot of difference in the
precedential value of a decision."
The Supreme Court in Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd and
Anr. v. N.R.Vairamani and Anr. (AIR 2004 SC 778) had also held that a
decision cannot be relied on without considering the factual situation.
In the same judgment the Supreme Court also observed:" Court should not place reliance on decisions without
discussing as to how the factual situation fits in with the
fact situation of the decision on which reliance is placed.
Observations of Courts are neither to be read as Euclid's
theorems nor as provisions of the statute and that too
taken out of their context. These observations must be
read in the context in which they appear to have been
stated. Judgments of Courts are not to be construed as
statutes. To interpret words, phrases and provisions of a
statute, it may become necessary for judges to embark into
lengthy discussions but the discussion is meant to explain
and not to define. Judges interpret statutes, they do not
interpret judgments. They interpret words of statutes; their
words are not to be interpreted as statutes.

7.

In Shashi Gaur (Supra) the Supreme Court had explained the

scope and object of Section 8(3) of Delhi School Education Act. In the
said matter the Apex Court had held that the remedy provided by way of
an appeal to the Tribunal is undoubtedly a more efficious remedy to an
employee whose service has been terminated after serving the
institution for number of years and, therefore, even if an appeal is
WP (C) 1174 of 2008

Page 6 of 10

provided under sub Section (3) of Section 8 the writ petition shall be
maintainable. The High Court in the said matter had held that on
account of alternative remedy available, the jurisdiction of the High
Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India was ousted. The
Supreme Court, however, held that there was no infirmity with the
order of the High Court in not entertaining the writ petition in exercise
of his discretion, however, the Apex Court did not agree with the
conclusions that availability of an alternate remedy shall oust the
jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India. Therefore, even if the High Court has jurisdiction under Article
226 of the Constitution of India, if any alternative remedy provided, it is
more appropriate for a party to exhaust the alternative remedy and it
will be the discretion of the High Court to exercise or not the
jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.

8.

Since the alternative remedy is available to the petitioner to

approach Delhi Schools Tribunal, this Court is not exercising its
jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for the relief
claimed by the petitioner, however, this is not the opinion of this Court
that on account of alternative remedy available to the petitioner the
jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India is ousted.

WP (C) 1174 of 2008

Page 7 of 10

9.

In Principal and Ors (Supra) relied on by the petitioner it was held

that under Section 8(3) it is only an employee of a recognized private
school against whom an order of dismissal, removal or reduction in
rank is passed who is entitled to file an appeal against such an order to
the tribunal. As the school in the said case was not a recognized private
school on the relevant date and the order impugned was not an order
for dismissal, removal or reduction in rank but an order of simplicitor
termination of services, the appeal was held to be incompetent. The
case relied on by the petitioner is apparently distinguishable.

10.

In Manager, Arya Samaj Girls Higher Secondary School & Anr

(Supra) it was held by a Single Judge that Tribunal has no jurisdiction
to make any order with regard to the salary and allowances to be paid
to the employees on his/her reinstatement as a result of appeal. It was
further held that the power under sub Section (9) of Section 11 of the
Act cannot be used by the tribunal to encroach upon the powers
specifically conferred upon the employer with regard to the payment of
salary and allowances under Rule 121. Perusal of the said judgments
reveals that neither the ratio of the Supreme Court in T.M.A.Pai
Foundation was considered nor the decision of Kathuria Public School
(Supra) was considered by the learned Single Judge because the
decision was rendered by him much earlier to the decision by the
Supreme Court in T.M.A.Pai Foundation and in Kathuria Public School.
Consequently, on the basis of the ratio of the said judgments it cannot
WP (C) 1174 of 2008

Page 8 of 10

be held that Delhi Schools Tribunal shall not have jurisdiction in the
matter of dispute of re-fixing of her pay scale raised by the petitioner. In
Management Committee of Mortfort Senior Secondary School (Supra)
the Apex Court was concerned whether in an appeal filed before the
Tribunal, it was under any legal obligation to make a reference in view
of an application filed by the school under Section 8(1) of the
Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996. The ratio of the said judgment in
the circumstances is not that the Delhi School Education Tribunal will
have jurisdiction or not in view of T.M.A Pai Foundation and Kathuria
Public School (Supra). Another judgment of the Division Bench in
Sahdeo Singh Solanki (Supra) also has not considered the ratio of the
Supreme Court in T.M.A Pai Foundation. In any case the Division
Bench had only held that sub Section (3) of Section 8 of Delhi School
Education Act, 1973 does not create any absolute power to the
maintainability of the writ petition and it is open to an aggrieved
employee to assail the validity of an order which is patently illegal and
void under the writ jurisdiction.

11.

This court in the facts and circumstances is of the opinion that

though this Court will have jurisdiction under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India, however, since an alternative remedy is also
available to the petitioner to approach Delhi Schools Tribunal for
adjudication of her grievance, it will not be appropriate to exercise
jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India in the present
WP (C) 1174 of 2008

Page 9 of 10

facts and circumstances of the case where the petitioner has sought the
relief of re-fixing of her pay scale according to the recruitment rules.

12.

Consequently, the writ petition is not entertained and disposed of

with liberty to the petitioner to approach Delhi Schools Tribunal under
the Delhi School Education Act, 1973 or to invoke any other remedy
available to her, if the petitioner so desires. With these directions the
writ petition is disposed of. All the pending application are also disposed
of.

March 12th 2008
'K'

WP (C) 1174 of 2008

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 10 of 10

