*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) No.1117/2008

%

Date of decision : 12.02.2008

AIIMS
Through:

….… Petitioner
Mr.Mukul Gupta, Advocate.

Versus
Sh.Satpal Singh & Ors
Through:

......... Respondents
Mr.Vikas Chopra, Advocate for
the respondent/UOI.

CORAM :HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
*
1.

The petitioner has impugned the order dated 10th May, 2006 of

the Labor Court declining to treat the issue whether the management
is an industry or not as a preliminary issue after the workman had
already filed his evidence on affidavit.
2.

The petitioner contended before the Labor Court that a writ

petition CW(Civil) No.896/1999 is pending before the High Court
where the point involved is also whether the All India Institute of
Medical Sciences is an industry or not.

W.P.(C) No.1117/2008

Page 1 of 4

3.

The Labor Court has noted that there is no order of the High

Court staying the proceedings in the case and since the case is still at
the stage of workman’s evidence there was no reason not to proceed
with the matter at that stage. Since the workman had already filed his
evidence by way of affidavit on all the issues, therefore, whether AIIMS
is an industry or not has not been treated as a preliminary issue as
whether AIIMS is an industry or not is not solely a question of law but
also a question of fact.
4.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that in the

claim petition nothing has been stated by the workman whether
AIIMS is an industry or not. This cannot be disputed that a reference
has been made by the concerned Government and pursuant to which
claim has been filed by the respondent. If the claim has already been
filed by the respondent pursuant to a reference, it is for the
respondent to allege and prove that All India Institute of Medical
Sciences is not an industry which cannot be decided merely on the
basis of averments made by the petitioner.
5.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has relied on AIR 1984

SC 516, Workmen of M/s.Hindustan Lever Ltd Vs. Management of
M/s.Hindustan Lever Ltd and (2001) 9 SCC 713, State of Gujarat &
Ors Vs. Pratamsingh Narsinh Parmar to contend that the issue of
jurisdiction ought to have been treated as a preliminary issue and the

W.P.(C) No.1117/2008

Page 2 of 4

burden lies on the person claiming the establishment to be an
industry.
6.

In Workmen of M/s.Hindustan Lever Ltd (Supra) relied on by

the petitioner, the Apex Court had held that adjudication of issues are
of two types. One which are referred by the Government for
adjudication and set out in the order of reference and the other issues
which are incidental issues which are sometimes the issues of law or
issues of mixed law and fact. The Apex Court has not laid down that
the question whether the management is an industry or not has to be
treated as a preliminary issue. It has been held that it is the
discretion of the Tribunal to treat a particular issue as preliminary
issue and generally the question of laws which do not require any
evidence are taken as preliminary issues.
7.

In the present case the evidence of the workman on affidavit

has already been filed and whether All India Institute of Medical
Sciences is an industry is not a pure question of law and will depend
on various facts pertaining to All India Institute of Medical Sciences
also. If an issue is based on mixed question of law and facts, it is not
necessary to first decide the question of jurisdiction which is a mixed
question of fact and law as a preliminary issue and thereafter decide
other issues. In the circumstances, the order of the Labor Court not
treating the issue pertaining to All India Institute of Medical

W.P.(C) No.1117/2008

Page 3 of 4

Sciences/management being an industry or not, does not suffer from
any such manifest error which requires correction in exercise of
jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. In totality
of facts and circumstances there are no grounds to exercise
jurisdiction under Article 226 of Constitution of India against the
order dated 26th July, 2006 declining to treat the issue whether All
India Institute of Medical Sciences is an industry or not as a
preliminary issue.
8.

The writ petition is also filed by the petitioner almost after one

and a half year after the order declining to treat the issue whether the
AIIMS is an industry was passed. The learned counsel for the
petitioner is unable to give any cogent reason or sufficient cause for
filing the writ petition almost after one and a half year after the order
impugned by the respondent was passed.
9.

The writ petition is, therefore, without any merit and it is,

therefore, dismissed.

February 12th, 2008
'k'

W.P.(C) No.1117/2008

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 4 of 4

