*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP(C) No.1800/2008

%

Date of decision : 13.03.2008

Ram Phal
Through:

….… Petitioner
Ms.Rashmeet K.Charya, Advocate.

Versus
DTC & Anr
Through :

.........
Respondents
Mrs.Avnish Ahlawat, Advocate.

CORAM :HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.
1.

The petitioner workman has challenged the order dated 25th

November, 2006 holding that the enquiry officer had not transgressed
the rules of natural justice and had given a reasonable opportunity to
the petitioner to defend himself and thus holding that the enquiry was
conducted according to the principles of natural justice. The petitioner
has also challenged the award dated 9th October, 2007 holding that the
petitioner is entitled for compensation of Rs.75,000/- in lieu of his
reinstatement, back wages and other consequential benefits.
WP (C) 1800 of 2008

Page 1 of 10

2.

I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and has

perused the pleading and evidence produced along with the writ
petition. It is apparent from the cross examination of the petitioner that
it was admitted by him that he had received the charge sheet and the
documents regarding leave which were furnished along with the
chargesheet. He had also stated that the record of leave application and
medical certificates were not called by him as he had admitted the
charge. The Labour Court has also held that there was no violation of
principles of natural justice merely because the enquiry officer had put
certain questions to the petitioner who had admitted his guilt and in the
circumstances it could not be held that the enquiry officer had acted as
a prosecutor or a Judge.

3.

Regarding the circulars of the DTC in respect of which it had been

alleged that they were not provided to the petitioner, reliance was
placed on State Bank of Patiala Vs.S.K.Sharma, 1997 LLR 268 holding
that except cases falling under no notice, no opportunity and no
hearing categories, the complaint of violation of procedural provision
should be examined from the point of view of prejudice viz. whether
such violation has prejudiced the delinquent officer/employee in
defending himself properly and effectively. It was held that if it is found
WP (C) 1800 of 2008

Page 2 of 10

that he has been really prejudiced, appropriate orders could be made to
repair and remedy the prejudice including setting aside the enquiry
and/or the orders of punishment. If no prejudice is established to have
resulted therefrom, it is obvious, no interference is called for. From the
enquiry report it is apparent that the workman was held guilty of
charge on the basis that the petitioner had admitted that he had taken
leave without pay and had not given any proof and reasoning for the
substantial period of his leave. The Labour Court had held that after
going through the report it is apparent that the findings of the enquiry
officers are based on record and he had not considered any extraneous
material and in the circumstances and consequently, it was held that
there was no perversity.

4.

From the perusal of the order dated 25th November, 2006 holding

that the enquiry was just and proper and in compliance of the
principles of natural justice, it is apparent that findings is based on
legal evidence and the material on record. The findings arrived at are
plausible and reasonable. In the circumstances no perversity or
manifest error can be attributed to the order dated 25th November, 2006
deciding the preliminary issue that whether the enquiry was conducted
in accordance with the principles of natural justice or not.

WP (C) 1800 of 2008

Page 3 of 10

5.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has also impugned the

award dated 9th October, 2007 whereby the petitioner was not
reinstated and he was awarded a compensation of Rs.75,000/- in lieu of
reinstatement, back wages and other consequential benefits.

6.

The Labour Court did not award reinstatement on the ground

that it has not been proved by the petitioner that he was unemployed
during the entire period when he was dismissed. The Labour Court
relied on the fact that a period of 31 years has elapsed since his
induction into service and the petitioner himself is nearing the age of
superannuation and no purpose would be served by reinstating into the
service at this stage. Reinstatement was also not awarded on the
ground that the petitioner has not served the management for a long
period after his dismissal.

7.

This is no more res integra that the question as to whether on

setting aside the wrongful dismissal of a workman he should be
reinstated or directed to be paid compensation is a matter within the
judicial discretion of the Labour Court or the Tribunal dealing with the
industrial dispute. In exercising the discretion, fair play towards the
employee on the one hand and interest of the employer including

WP (C) 1800 of 2008

Page 4 of 10

consideration of discipline in the establishment, on the other require to
be duly safeguarded.

8.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the

petitioner will still have about 6 years of service as he is about 54 years.
The Tribunal, however, have considered that the petitioner was
dismissed in 1995 and has remained without being employed with the
petitioner for almost 13 years. Even if the petitioner has few more years,
in the discretion of the Tribunal which cannot be termed to be perverse
or arbitrary, the petitioner is not to be reinstated, then it will not be
appropriate for this Court to exercise jurisdiction under Article 226 of
the Constitution of India and to reinstate the petitioner. From the
perusal of the claim filed by the petitioner before the Labour Court it
appears that he had pleaded in paragraph 10 that he was unemployed.
The plea of the petitioner in para 10 is as under:“10. That order of termination/removal is unjust and
wrongful, punishment is otherwise disproportionate, harsh
and oppressive. It cannot sustain. The workman is
unemployed. He is entitled to reinstatement in service with
full back wages and continuity of service.”

9.

However, in the deposition filed by the petitioner on affidavit the

petitioner has not deposed anything about petitioner being unemployed.
The witnesses of the management/respondent has also not been cross
WP (C) 1800 of 2008

Page 5 of 10

examined regarding unemployment of the petitioner, as no suggestion
was given that the petitioner is unemployed. In these circumstances the
Labour Court had inferred that since the petitioner has not even
deposed that he remained unemployed and since the petitioner was
dismissed from service on 31st July, 1995, it will not be appropriate to
reinstate him almost after 13 years.

10.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has relied on (1971) 3 SCR

774, Management of Panitole Tea Estate Vs The Workmen; AIR 1979 SC
75;

M/s.Hindustan Tin Works

Pvt

Ltd Vs. The Employees of

M/s.Hindustan Tin Works Pvt Ltd and others; 1982(1) All India Services
Law Journal 255; Management of Delhi Transport Corporation Vs.Ram
Kumar and Another, AIR 2001 SC 672 and Vikramaditya Pandey Vs.
Industrial Tribunal

and Another in support of the petitioner‟s

contention for reinstatement. In the case of Management of Panitole Tea
Estate (Supra) on a reference regarding the charge of pilferage, it was
held by the Labour Court that the evidence, chit relied on by the
management was too vague and was procured only to harass the
workman for no fault of his and had also held that the domestic enquiry
was violative of principles of natural justice and its findings were
perverse and without any evidence to support them and in the
circumstances it directed reinstatement of the workman. The said case
is apparently distinguishable from the facts of the case of the petitioner.
WP (C) 1800 of 2008

Page 6 of 10

In the present case, it has not been established that the petitioner was
not gainfully employed.

11.

The Supreme Court in M/s.Hindustan Tin Works Pvt Ltd (Supra)

was concerned regarding the grant of back wages where termination of
service either by dismissal, discharge or retrenchment was held to be
invalid and whether the relief of reinstatement with continuity of service
could be awarded. In the said matter, the Apex Court was concerned
more with the award of back wages than reinstatement because the
reinstatement had already been granted. The ratio of this judgment is
clearly distinguishable and the petitioner cannot claim reinstatement on
the basis of the same.

12.

A decision is only an authority for what it actually decides. What

is of the essence in a decision is its ratio and not every observation
found therein nor what logically follows from the various observations
made in it. The ratio of any decision must be understood in the
background of the facts of that case. It is well settled that a little
difference in facts or additional facts may make a lot of difference in the
precedential value of a decision. In Ambica Quarry Works v. State of
Gujarat and Ors. MANU/SC/0049/1986 the Supreme Court
observed:WP (C) 1800 of 2008

Page 7 of 10

had

"The ratio of any decision must be understood in the
background of the facts of that case. It has been said
long time ago that a case is only an authority for
what it actually decides, and not what logically
follows from it."

In Bhavnagar University v. Palitana Sugar Mills Pvt Ltd (2003) 2
SC 111 (vide para 59), the Supreme Court had observed:" It is well settled that a little difference in facts or
additional facts may make a lot of difference in the
precedential value of a decision."

13.

The Division Bench of this Court in the case of Management of

Delhi Transport Corporation (Supra) had rejected the plea of loss of
confidence for grant of compensation to the employee instead of
reinstatement. In this matter another conductor of the respondent
Corporation was charged which related to having collected the fare from
the passengers but not giving them the tickets and in the enquiry two
charges were proved, however, in respect of the third charge no finding
was recorded. During the pendency of the industrial dispute the
Corporation had filed an application under Section 33(2)(b) of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and the application was allowed and
approval was accorded. In the peculiar facts and circumstances of this
case the workman conductor was reinstated. In this case it was also
held that no presumption of being gainfully employed could be raised.
WP (C) 1800 of 2008

Page 8 of 10

14.

However, in the present case the petitioner pleaded that he is not

gainfully employed in a paragraph in the claim but thereafter did not
state in his deposition that he is not gainfully employed nor the fact
that he is not gainfully employed was even put to the witnesses of the
management. This factor has been considered by the Labour Court in
denying him the reinstatement and granting him a consolidated amount
on account of reinstatement, back wages and other benefits. The
findings of the Labour Court in the facts and circumstances cannot be
held to be perverse or suffering from manifest error as the finding is
based on the lack of evidence on the part of the petitioner and it cannot
be said that the finding is without any legal basis. This Court in
exercise of its jurisdiction is not to substitute its own inferences with
the inferences drawn by the Labour Court in the present facts and
circumstances of the case.

15.

It is a settled position of law that in exercise of jurisdiction under

Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the Court should not interfere
with factual findings of the lower courts and should restrain itself from
re-appreciating evidence while exercising powers of judicial review.
Reliance for this proposition can be placed on the judgment of the
Supreme Court, Government of A.P. and Ors. v. Mohd. Nasrullah Khan
WP (C) 1800 of 2008

Page 9 of 10

reported as (2006) 2 SCC 373. Writ court should refrain from interfering
with the orders of an inferior tribunal or subordinate court unless it
suffers from an error of jurisdiction or from a breach of the principles of
natural justice or is vitiated by a manifest or apparent error of law. The
objective of judicial review is that a person receives a fair treatment and
objective is not to re-appreciate the entire pleas and evidence and draw
inferences again. Judicial review is not an appeal from a decision but a
review of the manner in which the decision is made. Power of judicial
review is meant to ensure that the individual receives fair treatment and
not to ensure that the conclusion which the authority reaches is
necessarily correct in the eye of the court.

16.

Consequently, there is no perversity or manifest error or denial of

principles of natural justice granting the compensation in lieu of
reinstatement and back wages and other benefits to the petitioner.
There are no grounds to interfere in the facts and circumstances and
the writ petition is, therefore, dismissed.

March 13th , 2008

ANIL KUMAR J.

„k‟
WP (C) 1800 of 2008

Page 10 of 10

