IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Date of decision : November 13, 2007
OMP No.251/2007

#
!

Fertilizer Corporation of India Limited
......... Petitioner
Through: Mr.Sushant Kumar and
Mr.Gaurav Sahah, Advocate.
Vs.

$
^

Haldor Topsoe A/S.
Through:

..........Respondent
Nemo.

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
ANIL KUMAR, J.(Oral)
*
1.

The petitioner has impugned the award dated 15th July, 2006

passed by the Arbitral Tribunal consisting of Hon'ble Mr. Justice
H.L. Agrawal, Former Chief Justice of Orissa High Court, Hon'ble
Mr. Justice J.K. Mehra, Former Judge of Delhi High Court and
Mr.R.K. Pandey, Former Executive Director, Delhi Stock Exchange.

2.

The petitioner is a government company as defined under the

provisions of Section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 and has its
OMP No.251/2007

Page 1 of 10

manufacturing

unit

located

at

Sindri,

District

Dhanbad

(Jharkhand) and is engaged in the business of manufacturing
fertilizer, urea, ammonia, etc.

3.

The contention of the petitioner is that the despite being

declared a sick company by BIFR, it continued its business
operation and entered into an agreement with respondent vide
purchase order dated 18th October, 2000 for supply of S-200
Ammonia Converter Baskets. According to the petitioner, general
conditions of purchase order contemplated that the time of
delivery was the essence of the contract and was to be made by or
before 1st July, 2001. It was agreed between the parties that 80%
of the agreed price shall be paid by the petitioner to the respondent
on the delivery of the said S-200 Ammonia Converter Baskets and
balance 20% of the price was payable by the petitioner through a
confirmed irrevocable letter of credit after successful test run and
fulfillment of guarantee and payable against the submission of
'Acceptance Certificate'.

4.

The respondent in order to secure the petitioner against

performance of the Baskets and to secure that the Baskets were
free from any mechanical defects, furnished two bank guarantees.
According to the petitioner, the Baskets had to be installed before

OMP No.251/2007

Page 2 of 10

1st July, 2001 whereas the respondent supplied the Baskets only
on 3rd November, 2001 and on supply of Baskets, the petitioner
released the payment of Euro 7,49,000 towards 80% of the total
cost of the Baskets.

5.

The grievance of the petitioner is that despite the receipt of

Baskets, the respondent did not come forward for the installation
of the Baskets and thus failed to comply with the obligation under
which it was to be supplied before July 2001 and consequently the
dispute arose and were referred to the Arbitral Tribunal.

6.

The Arbitral Tribunal has awarded Euro 187,250 along with

interest at 7% per annum from 1st April, 2003 up to the date of
payment with the cost of the arbitral proceedings and the cost has
been assessed at Rs.7.10 lakhs, the breakup of which was also
given in the award.

7.

The Arbitral Tribunal has considered the terms of payment,

clause 5.2 regarding guarantee test run and clause 7 of AnnexureII of the commercial terms of the contract which contemplated that
the delivery will be the essence of the contract and Ammonia
Synthesis Converter Baskets S-200 will be delivered FOB within 10
months from the date of fax of intent.

OMP No.251/2007

Page 3 of 10

8.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has led emphasis on

the fact that the petitioner was declared a sick company within the
meaning of SICA by order passed by BIFR in Case No.515/92(II) of
1992 way back in 1992 and notification dated 10th September,
2002 was issued by the Ministry of Chemical and Fertilizers,
Government of India, directing to close all the existing units of the
petitioner and the award is in complete violation of the said
notification. Great emphasis has also been led on the fact that the
award is contrary to fundamental policy of India and interest of
India and justice and morality and the petitioner cannot be held
responsible for an act which has been committed without their
attribution to the same.

9.

The award is also impugned on the ground that the Arbitral

Tribunal has held the petitioner liable for an act which has not
been committed by them and the sole responsibility for nonperformance of the contract is only attributable to the respondent.

10.

The Arbitral Tribunal has considered that despite the

petitioner being declared a sick company, the petitioner placed the
purchase order on the respondent without knowledge or obtaining
necessary orders from the BIFR.

It was also held that despite

pendency of the case before BIFR and appointment of operating

OMP No.251/2007

Page 4 of 10

agency, contractual rights and obligation of the parties were
neither suspended nor could be put in abeyance and there is no
evidence to show that proceedings under SICA was disclosed to the
respondent at the time of the entering into the contract.

11.

Regarding the petitioner failing to perform their contractual

obligation under purchase order dated 18th October, 2000, it was
held that the guarantee test run was to be conducted within two
months from the date of installation of the baskets and petitioner
was obliged to take the guarantee test run preceded by installation
and commissioning of the baskets with the technical support and
supervision of the respondent.

The Arbitral Tribunal has noted

that the parties never contemplated at the time of entering into the
contract that the petitioner would take more than six months to
install the baskets.

The reliance has also been placed on the

statement of the witness, Shri A.K. Ghosh

who clearly deposed

that acceptance certificate could be issued only after installation of
successful commissioning of the baskets and that the baskets were
purchased for replacement of the existing baskets in the converter
and new baskets were purchased primarily to enhance the capacity
of the petitioner company.

The said witness has also deposed

categorically that there is no letter or document in the record
calling upon the respondent company to supervise the installation

OMP No.251/2007

Page 5 of 10

and commissioning of the baskets as pleaded by the petitioner or
that no supervision work has been done by the respondent.
Reliance has also been placed to a response to the question put to
the witness that there was no moratorium of BIFR on subsisting
contracts between the petitioner and the respondent company.
Another witness of the respondent, Mr.D.K. Dutta, had stated that
the respondent's obligation was to give technical/supervisory
services for installing, erecting/commissioning of the new baskets
which was not possible unless petitioner would have removed old
catalyst and the old converter shell which was not done by the
petitioner. Taking all these factors into consideration, the Arbitral
Tribunal held that the petitioner failed and neglected to perform his
obligation under the contract and not the respondent.

12.

Regarding

the

mechanical

warranty-cum-defect

liability

guarantee and performance guarantee ceased to have effect, it was
held that performance guarantee, mechanical warranty/defect
liability bank guarantee ceased to have any effect and this finding
has not been challenged by the petitioner's counsel during the
argument.

13.

The Arbitral Tribunal has also considered the effect of BIFR

proceeding on the contract for purchase of baskets and the fact

OMP No.251/2007

Page 6 of 10

that Section 22 of SICA clearly lays down that only suits or
proceedings for recovery of monies shall remain suspended and the
arbitration was not a suit nor any proceeding for recovery for
money was pending before the Court.

14.

Examination of the pleas raised by the Council for the

petitioner in view of the findings of the arbitrator cannot be said to
be of such a nature which either shocks the conscience of the
court or are contrary to law or the contract. The arbitrators have
succinctly set out crucial issues and recorded findings in respect of
them which findings, in my view, cannot be called perverse. The
award is not contrary to any substantive provision of law or against
the terms of the contract and therefore, there is no patent illegality.

15.

In Hindustan Iron Co. V. K. Shashikant & Co., AIR 1987 SC

81, the Court held that the award of the Arbitrator ought not to be
set aside for the reason that, in the opinion of the Court, the
Arbitrator reached wrong conclusions or failed to appreciate the
facts.

This well settled proposition of law was reiterated in the

decision of the Apex Court in Coimbatore District Podu Thozillar
Sangam vs. Balasubramania Foundary & Ors., AIR 1987 SC 2045
where it has been opined that it is only an error of law and not a
mistake of fact committed by the arbitrator which can be

OMP No.251/2007

Page 7 of 10

adjudicated in the application/objection before the Court. If there
is no legal proposition either in the award or in any document
annexed with the award which is erroneous and the alleged
mistakes or alleged errors, are only mistakes of fact and if the
award is made fairly, after giving adequate opportunity to the
parties to place their grievances in the manner provided by the
arbitration agreement, the award is not amenable to corrections of
the Court. In Hind Builders vs. Union of India, AIR 1990 SC 1340
the Court cautioned that where two views were possible it could
not be predicated that there was an error apparent on the face of
the award. In Bijendra Nath Srivastava vs. Mayank Srivastava &
Ors. AIR 1994 SC 2562 the view expressed was that the
reasonableness of reasons given by the arbitrator were not open to
challenge and that the proper approach would be for the Court to
support the award. Similarly, in Hindustan Construction Co. Ltd.
vs. Governor of Orissa & Ors., AIR 1995 SC 2189 it was repeated
that the Court cannot re-appreciate the material on the record. In
the present facts and circumstances, it cannot be inferred that the
award per se is preposterous or absurd. It is also no more res
integra that the reasons vary in its conclusion according to
idiosyncracy of the individual and the times and the circumstances
in which he thinks. The Supreme Court in Gujrat Water Supply &
Sewerage Board Vs Unique Erectors (Gujrat) P. Ltd and another,

OMP No.251/2007

Page 8 of 10

AIR 1989 SC 973 in para 11 had observed:
“11…………Reasonableness as such of an award
unless the award is per se preposterous or absurd is
not nat a matter for Court to consider. Appraisement
of evidence by the arbitrator is ordinarily not a matter
for the court. It is difficult to give an exact definition of
the word `reasonable’. Reason varies in its conclusions
according to the idiosyncrasy of the individual and the
times and the circumstances in which he thinks. The
word `reasonable’ has in law prima facie meaning of
reasonable in regard to those circumstances of which
the actor, called upon to act reasonably, knows or
ought to know. “

16.

In AIR 1993 Delhi 78; M/s Narain Dass R. Israni Versus

Union of India it was held that an arbitrator is not required to give
a detailed judgment just like a Civil Court. What is expected of the
arbitrator is simply this much that he must cull out the trend of
his thought process.

In 1999

(3) Arbitration Law Reports 310

(S.C.); Arosan Enterprises Limited Versus Union of India it was
held that it is now a well settled principle of law that reappraisal of
evidence by the Court is not permissible and as a matter of fact
exercise of power by the Court to reappraise the evidence is
unknown to a proceeding. In the event of there being no reasons
in the award, question of interference of the Court would not arise
at all. In the event, however, there are reasons, the interference
would still be not available within the jurisdiction of the Court,
unless of course, there exist a total perversity in the award or the
OMP No.251/2007

Page 9 of 10

judgment is based on a wrong proposition of law. In the event,
however, two views are possible on a question of law as well, the
Court would not be justified in interfering with the award.

17.

In the facts and circumstances there is no patent illegality or

the award being so unfair and unreasonable that it will shock the
conscience of the Court. The award does not seem to be opposed
to the public policy and is not to be re-adjudicated in the facts and
circumstances. There is no merit in the objections raised by the
petitioner and the objections are not maintainable.
The petition is, therefore, dismissed.

November 13, 2007

ANIL KUMAR, J.

'Dev'

OMP No.251/2007

Page 10 of 10

