IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Date of decision : November 13, 2007
AA No.194/2003

#
!

M/s.Pt.Munshi Ram & Associates
......... Petitioner
Pvt Ltd
Through: Mr.Sudhir Nandrajog, Advocate.
Vs.

$
^

Jhang Co-operative Group Housing
........ Respondents
Society Ltd & Anr
Through : Mr.Pranay Ranjan, Advocate.

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

YES

2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?

NO

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.(Oral)

1.

This is a petition under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration &

Conciliation Act, 1996 for the appointment of an arbitrator.

2.

The contention of the petitioner is that respondent No.1 is a

society which had invited bids and had floated a notice inviting
tenders. The petitioner had submitted the bid and its bid was
AA No.194/2003

Page 1 of 10

accepted for the construction of 490 dwelling units at Plot No.40,
Sector 13, Rohini, New Delhi. An agreement dated 26 th February,
1988 was also executed between the petitioner and the respondent
No.1.

3.

According to the petitioner an administrator of respondent No.1

was also appointed and the work for construction of 420 dwelling
units was completed, however, the work of 70 flats could not be
completed on account of change of original designs of isolated footing
to raft foundation because of soil condition. The agreement between
the parties was rescinded unilaterally by respondent No.1 and on
account of rescinding the contract the disputes have arisen between
the parties.

4.

The petitioner has contended that clause 38 in the agreement is

the arbitration agreement which is as under:“Clause No.38:
(i) In the event of any dispute or differences between the
parties the hereto as to the construction or operation of
this contract on the respective rights and liabilities of the
parties on any matter in question disputes and
differences on any account or of the employer fails to
make decision within a reasonable time, then and in any
such case, but except in any of the “excepted matters”
referred to in Clause 36 of these condition, the contractor
subject to sub-clause (vi) of this Clause shall demand in
writing that the disputes or differences be referred to
arbitration. Matters in question dispute or differences to
be arbitrated upon shall referred for decision to a sole
AA No.194/2003

Page 2 of 10

arbitrator of a person appointed by the employer, person
so appointed will be a fellow of the Indian Institute of
Architect or a retired Engineer of State/Central
Government not below the rank of S.E. The appointment
of the arbitrator shall be at the absolute discretion of the
society.
(ii) If the sole arbitrator appointed under sub-clause (i)
above resigns his appointment or is unable or unwilling
to act for any reason whatsoever or dies, the President,
Doctor's Cooperative Group Housing Society Ltd, may
appoint a new arbitrator to act in his place in accordance
with the provisions of sub-clause (i) above. Such
arbitrator shall be entitled to proceed with the reference
from the stage at which was the previous arbitrator.
(iii) The Arbitrator shall have power to call for such
evidence by way of affidavits or otherwise as the
Arbitrator shall think proper, or it shall be the duty of the
parties here to do or cause to be done all such things as
may be necessary to enable the Arbitrator to make the
award without any delay.
(iv) Subject as aforesaid the provisions of the Arbitration
Act, 1940 or any statutory modification or reenactment
thereof and the rules made thereunder and for the time
being in force shall apply to the arbitration proceedings
under this Clause.
(v) It is also a term of the contract that the party involving
arbitration shall specify that dispute or disputes to be
referred to arbitration under this clause together with the
amount or amounts claimed in respect of each such
dispute.
(vi)
It is also a term of the contract that if the
contractor(s) do/does not make any demand for
arbitration in respect of any claim(s) in writing within 90
days of receiving the intimation from the employer that
the final bill is ready for payment, the claim of the
contractor(s) will be deemed to have been waived and
absolutely barred and the employer shall be discharged
sand released of all liabilities under the contract in
respect of these claims.
(vii)
AA No.194/2003

The arbitrator may inform time to time with consent
Page 3 of 10

of the parties enlarge the time, for making and publishing
the award.
(viii) In all cases where the amount of the claim of he
dispute is Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees One Lac only) and
above, the arbitrator shall give reasons for award.”
5.

Since the disputes have arisen, the petitioner prayed for

appointment of an arbitrator for adjudication of disputes which have
arisen between the parties. The petitioner had sought appointment of
arbitrator by letter dated 28th June, 2003, however, within 30 days of
the demand being raised for appointment of the arbitrator and before
the filing of the petition, the respondent No.1 failed to appoint an
arbitrator and thus the respondents have lost their right to appoint an
arbitrator in terms of clause 38 of the agreement.

6.

The application is contested by the respondents contending

inter-alia that Sh.J.B.Karamchandani, Architect was appointed as an
arbitrator in terms of a letter of appointment dated 20th November,
2003 who has proceeded with the arbitration proceedings. It is also
contended that in terms of the arbitration agreement only an architect
who fulfills the agreed condition of being an architect engineer could
be appointed by the parties as an arbitrator.

7.

The respondents have also contended that no confidence could

be reposed in Sh.D.N.Kathuria as the said sole arbitrator had mis-

AA No.194/2003

Page 4 of 10

conducted

himself.

The

allegation

of

the

petitioner

that

the

respondents society failed in its obligation under the contract was
denied. It was contended that the petitioner is exploiting the
respondent society and its member and extracting money without
doing the construction work and discharging its own obligation and
there has not been any breach of agreement on the part of the
respondent society. The respondents also contended that letters dated
13.6.2003 and 28.6.2003 do not appear to have been received by the
respondents and, therefore, the respondent No.2 could not appoint an
arbitrator and since now an arbitrator has been appointed who is
holding the arbitration proceedings in accordance with law, it will not
be just and appropriate to appoint another arbitrator. It is also
contended that since the award rendered by Mr.D.N.Kathuria is
already under challenge, therefore, the said person cannot be
appointed as an arbitrator.

8.

This is not disputed that there has been an arbitration

agreement between the parties. Though the respondents have denied
that the letter dated 28.6.2003 demanding the respondents to appoint
an arbitrator was received, however, the postal receipt shows that the
registered article was sent in the ordinary course on 30.6.2003. This
postal receipt has not been denied nor such facts have been disclosed
which will rebut the presumption of service which arises in the facts

AA No.194/2003

Page 5 of 10

and circumstances. The respondents have also not produced anything
to show as to how they could appoint an arbitrator without giving
notice

to

the

petitioner

and

how

they

could

appoint

Sh.

Sh.J.B.Karamchandani, Architect as a sole arbitrator without a notice
to the petitioner. The registered

postal article that is letter dated

28.6.2003 was sent by registered post in the ordinary course and in
the circumstances there is a presumption that the article must have
been served which has not been rebutted properly by the respondents
except the bare denial. In the circumstances the probable inference is
that the registered article, the letter dated 28.6.2003 was served on
the respondents and they failed to appoint an arbitrator within 30
days of the notice demanding them to appoint an arbitrator in terms
of arbitration agreement between the parties and before filing of the
present petition. The present petition under Section 11(6) of the
Arbitration & Conciliation Act was also filed by the petitioner on
30.8.2003 and admittedly according to the plea of the respondents,
Sh.J.B.Karamchandani

was

appointed

as

an

arbitrator

by

communication dated 20.11.2003 after filing of the present petition.

9.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has relied on (2006) 2

SCC 638, Punj Lloyd Ltd Vs.Petronet MHB Ltd; Datar Switchgears Ltd
Vs.Tata Finance Ltd, (2000) 8 SCC 151 and (2007) 5 SCC 304, Ace
Pipeline Contracts (P) Ltd Vs. Bharat Petroleum Corpn. Ltd to contend

AA No.194/2003

Page 6 of 10

that since the respondent failed to appoint an arbitrator within 30
days of the demand and had also failed to appoint an arbitrator before
the petitioner moved the Court under Section 11 of the Arbitrator and
Conciliation Act, 1996, the right for the appointment of an arbitrator
by the respondent was forfeited. According to the petitioner's counsel
the Supreme Court in Punj Lloyd (Supra) had followed the ratio laid
down by the Supreme Court in Datar Switchgear (Supra).

10.

There has been disputes between the parties in respect of

another agreement regarding development work pertaining to external
sewerage, water supply, roads and storm water drains which was also
awarded to the petitioner and the agreement executed between the
petitioner and the respondents also had an arbitration clause where
also the disputes had arisen and the petitioner had demanded
appointment of an arbitrator. Since the respondents failed to appoint
an arbitrator another petition being AA No.177/2003 has also been
filed which is also pending adjudication. Pertaining to the disputes in
the said arbitration the respondents have appointed Sh.S.S.Aggarwal,
263, Rajouri Apartments, Rajouri Garden, New Delhi-110064 as an
arbitrator. The learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that
Sh.S.S.Aggarwal also could not proceed with the arbitration unless
appointed by the Court in the present facts and circumstances.

AA No.194/2003

Page 7 of 10

However, considering various facts, the petitioner is agreeable for
appointment of Sh.S.S.Aggarwal as an arbitrator provided he starts
the arbitration proceedings afresh pursuant to the appointment made
by this Court.

11.

The respondents have lost their right to appoint an arbitrator as

pursuant to notice dated 28.6.2003 which is held to have been served
on the respondents, they failed to appoint an arbitrator within 30
days and even before filing of the petition which was filed on
30.8.2003. Admittedly the present arbitrator Sh. J.B.Karamchandani
who was appointed on 20.11.2003 could not act as an arbitrator and
it will be for this Court to appoint an arbitrator.

12.

This is no more rest Integra that once a party files an

application under section 11 (6) of the act, the other party
extinguishes its right to appoint an arbitrator in terms of the
arbitration agreement thereafter. The right to appoint an arbitrator
under the arbitration agreement ceases after section 11 (6) petition
has been filed by the other party before the court seeking
appointment of an arbitrator. This was held by the Supreme Court in
2007 (3) Arb.L.R 282 (SC), Bharat Battery Manufacturing Co. (P) Ltd
Vs Union of India following the ratio of the decision of three judge
bench in Punj Lloyd Ltd. Vs Petronet MHB Ltd., (2006) 2 SCC 638.

AA No.194/2003

Page 8 of 10

The Supreme Court had held that once the period of 30 days had
lapsed, and the party had moved the chief justice under section 11
(6), the other party, having right to appoint an arbitrator under an
Arbitral agreement loses the right to do so. In Datar Switchgears
Ltd. Vs Tata Finance Ltd. and anr, (2000) 8 SCC 151 at page 168,
para 19 the Apex Court had held:

19. So far as cases falling under Section 11(6) are concerned — such as the one before us — no time limit has
been prescribed under the Act, whereas a period of 30
days has been prescribed under Section 11(4) and Section
11(5) of the Act. In our view, therefore, so far as Section
11(6) is concerned , if one party demands the opposite
party to appoint an arbitrator and the opposite party does
not make an appointment within 30 days of the demand,
the right to appointment does not get automatically forfeited after expiry of 30 days. If the opposite party makes
an appointment even after 30 days of the demand, but
before the first party has moved the court under Section 11
, that would be sufficient. In other words, in cases arising
under Section 11(6), if the opposite party has not made
an appointment within 30 days of demand, the right to
make appointment is not forfeited but continues, but an
appointment has to be made before the former files application under Section 11 seeking appointment of an arbitrator. Only then the right of the opposite party ceases.
We do not, therefore, agree with the observation in the
above judgments that if the appointment is not made
within 30 days of demand, the right to appoint an arbitrator under Section 11(6) is forfeited.

13.

The notice dated 28th June, 2003 was given to the respondents

seeking appointment of the arbitrator. The present petition was filed
AA No.194/2003

Page 9 of 10

on 30th August, 2003 and the arbitrator, Sh. J.B.Karamchandani was
appointed

by

the

respondents

on

20.11.2003.

Therefore,

the

respondents could not appoint him as the arbitrator and consequently
the said arbitrator cannot act as an arbitrator and it will be for this
Court to appoint an arbitrator. Since the petitioner has agreed to
appoint Sh.S.S.Aggarwal, 263, Rajouri Apartments, Rajouri Garden,
New Delhi (Mobile No.9811239155) as an arbitrator who is also an
arbitrator between the parties in another matter, it will be just and
appropriate to appoint him as an arbitrator.

14.

Consequently,

Sh.S.S.Aggarwal,

263,

Rajouri

Apartments,

Rajouri Garden, New Delhi (Mobile No.9811239155) is appointed as
an arbitrator for adjudication of the disputes between the parties. The
fees of the arbitrator shall be Rs.50,000/- to be paid by the petitioner
in the first instance. Parties are directed to appear before the
arbitrator on 3rd December, 2007 at 3 PM. A copy of the order be sent
forthwith to the learned arbitrator. The parties are also directed to
produce the copy of the order before the learned arbitrator. Copies of
the order be given dasti to the parties.

November 13, 2007
'k'

AA No.194/2003

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 10 of 10

