*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CM No.6357/2007 in WP(C) No.16894/2006

%

Date of decision : 13.03.2008
Punjab National Bank
….… PETITIONER
Through: Mr.Jagat Arora, Advocate.
Versus
Harish Chopra

...... RESPONDENT
Through : Mr.Piyush Sharma, Advocate.

CORAM :HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.

1.

This is an application filed by the respondent/workman under

Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 seeking direction to
the petitioner to pay wages to the respondent/workman from the date
of the Award dated

27th July, 2006 and continue to pay the last

drawn wages during the pendency of the present writ petition.

CM No 6357/2007 in WP(C) 16894 of 2006

Page 1 of 11

2.

The contention of the applicant was that by the Order dated

12th September, 2000 a punishment of compulsory retirement with
superannuation benefits was imposed upon the applicant. A reference
was made pertaining to punishment imposed on the respondent. An
award dated 27th July, 2006 was passed in favor of the respondent
under the punishment imposed on the applicant was set aside and the
applicant was reinstated with all consequential benefits with full back
wages from the date of the punishment Order dated 12th September,
2000.

3.

This award is impugned by the petitioner in the above noted

present petition. The applicant submitted that since his compulsory
retirement he is unemployed and not working anywhere. He stated
that he had stated so even before the Tribunal which had set aside his
order of compulsory retirement.

The applicant has also contended

that it has been held by the Supreme Court of India as well as various
Division Benches of this Hon‟ble Court that when the award directing
reinstatement is challenged by the management, then the payment of
wages under section 17B is to be granted by the Higher Courts from
the date of the Award to skilled , semi-skilled and unskilled workman.
The applicant submitted that he should be reinstated as he is also a

CM No 6357/2007 in WP(C) 16894 of 2006

Page 2 of 11

skilled workman. An affidavit is also filed by the respondent in which
it was stated that he has not been employed anywhere after his
termination of services by way of compulsory retirement with effect
from 12th September, 2000.

4.

The petitioner has opposed the application on the ground that

the award is contrary to evidence on the record and is perverse and is
liable to be set aside. It is contended that the punishment awarded
has been set aside merely on the ground that the original documents
had not been produced by the petitioner. It is asserted by the
petitioner that the charge can be proved on the basis of the copies of
the documents which were made available to the respondent during
the enquiry proceedings. The petitioner also pleaded that reasonable
opportunity was not given to the management to lead evidence.

5.

The petitioner/non-applicant submitted that after the order of

the punishment respondent was given a sum of Rs.1,07,400.00 as
Gratuity and Rs. 76,657.00 as his PF dues. The petitioner opposed the
application on the ground that the applicant had opted for the pension
which is being paid to him @d Rs.2484.00/- from July 2001 to July
2007 a total sum of Rs.258474/- has been paid as pension and
Rs.5,000/- by this court as litigation expenses. It has been asserted

CM No 6357/2007 in WP(C) 16894 of 2006

Page 3 of 11

in the circumstances that since the applicant has received sufficient
remuneration and he has sufficient means to support himself
therefore, he should not be awarded the benefits under section 17B as
it can be presumed that the applicant is gainfully employed.

6.

This cannot be disputed that granting relief under Section 17B

of the Act and passing orders directing payment of wages last drawn,
is generally the rule; refusing to grant relief under Section 17B is an
exception, as it could be passed only in the rarest of the rare cases of
jurisdictional error where there is no relationship between the parties.
In the present case the this has not been disputed that there is
relationship of employee and employer between the petitioner and the
applicants. While considering an application under this provision it is
necessary to bear in mind that the spirit, intendment and object
underlying the statutory provision of Section 17B, is to mitigate and
relieve, to a certain extent, the hardship resulting to a workman due
to delay in the implementation of an award directing reinstatement of
his services on account of the challenge made to it by the employer.
The preliminary consideration for making available such a relief to a
workman is to be found in the benevolent purpose of the enactment. It
recognizes a workman‟s right to the bare minimum to keep body and
soul together when a challenge has been made to an Award directing

CM No 6357/2007 in WP(C) 16894 of 2006

Page 4 of 11

his reinstatement. The statutory provisions provide no inherent right
of assailing an order or an award by an industrial adjudicator by way
of an appeal. The payment which is required to be made by the
employer to the workman has been held to be akin to a subsistence
allowance which is neither refundable nor recoverable from a
workman even if the Award in his favor is set aside by the High Court.
In 1999 (2) SCC 106 (para 22), Dena Bank v. Kiritikumar T. Patel the
Apex Court was of the view that the object under Section 17B of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 is only to relieve to a certain extent, the
hardship that is caused to the workman due to the delay in
implementation of the Award. While considering the payment which is
required to be made by the employer to the workman in this behalf,
the Apex Court observed as follows:
“21. As indicated earlier Section 17B has been enacted by
Parliament with a view to give relief to a workman who
has been ordered to be reinstated under the Award of a
Labour Court or the Industrial Tribunal during the
pendency of proceedings in which the said award is under
challenge before the High Court or the Supreme Court.
The object underlying the provision is to relieve to a
certain extent the hardship that is caused to the workman
due to delay in the implementation of the award. The
payment which is required to be made by the employer to
the workman is in the nature of subsistence allowance
which would not be refundable or recoverable from the
workman even if the award is set aside by the High Court
or this Court. Since the payment is of such a character,
Parliament thought it proper to limit it to the extent of the
wages which were drawn by the workman when he was in

CM No 6357/2007 in WP(C) 16894 of 2006

Page 5 of 11

service and when his services were terminated and
therefore used the words „full wages last drawn‟. To read
these words to mean wages which would have been drawn
by the workman if he had continued in service if the order
terminating his services had not passed since it has been
set aside by the award of the Labour Court or the
Industrial Tribunal, would result in so enlarging the
benefit as to comprehend the relief that has been granted
under the award that is under challenge. Since the
amount is not refundable or recoverable in the event of
the award being set aside, it would result in the employer
being required to give effect to the award during the
pendency of the proceedings challenging the award before
the High Court or the Supreme Court without his being
able to recover the said amount in the event of the award
being set aside. We are unable to construe the provisions
contained in Section 17B to cast such a burden on the
employer. In our opinion, therefore, the words „full wages
last drawn‟ must be given their plain and material
meaning and they cannot be given the extended meaning
as given by the Karnataka High Court in Visveswaraya
Iron & Steel Ltd. or the Bombay High Court in Corona
Sahu Co. Ltd.
22. xxxx
23. As regards the powers of the High Court and the
Supreme Court under Articles 226 and 136 of the
Constitution, it may be stated that Section 17B, by
conferring a right on the workman to be paid the amount
of full wages last drawn by him during the pendency of
the proceedings involving challenge to the award of the
Labour Court, Industrial Tribunal or National Tribunal in
the High Court or the Supreme Court which amount is
not refundable or recoverable in the event of the award
being set aside, does not in any way preclude the High
Court or the Supreme Court to pass an order directing
payment of a higher amount to the workman if such
higher amount is considered necessary in the interest of

CM No 6357/2007 in WP(C) 16894 of 2006

Page 6 of 11

justice. Such a direction would be dehors the provisions
contained in Section 17B and while giving the direction,
the Court may also give directions regarding refund or
recovery of the excess amount in the event of the award
being set aside. But we are unable to agree with the view
of the Bombay High Court in Elpro International Ltd. that
in exercise of the power under Articles 226 and 136
granted under Section 17B. The conferment of such a
right under Section 17B cannot be regarded as a
restriction on the powers of the High Court or the
Supreme Court under Articles 226 and 136 of the
Constitution.”

7.

The provisions of Section 17 B of the Industrial Disputes Act,

1947 comes into operation when an Award directing reinstatement of
a workman is assailed in further proceedings. The statute requires
satisfaction of the following four conditions:
(i)

an Award by a Labour Court, Tribunal or National
Tribunal directing reinstatement of a workman is
assailed in proceedings in a High Court or the
Supreme Court;

(ii)

during the pendency of such proceedings, employer
is required to pay full wages to the workman;

(iii)

the wages stipulated under Section 17B are full
wages last drawn by him, inclusive of any
maintenance allowance admissible to him under
any Rule;

(iv)

such wages would be admissible only if the
workman had not been employed in any
establishment during such period and an affidavit
had been filed to such effect

CM No 6357/2007 in WP(C) 16894 of 2006

Page 7 of 11

8.

In the present case the workman has categorically averred in

the application that he has been unemployed since the date of his
compulsory retirement. While considering an application under this
provision it is necessary to bear in mind that the spirit, intendment
and object underlying the statutory provision of Section 17B is to
mitigate and relieve, to a certain extent, the hardship resulting to a
workman due to delay in the implementation of an award directing
reinstatement of his services on account of the challenge laid to it by
the employer. The contention of the workman/applicant is that he is
not gainfully employed in any establishment. “Gainful employment in
an establishment‟ has been held by the Apex Court as not a self
employment. Since the section itself mentions „employment in
establishment‟,

self

employment

quite

apparently

is

not

in

contemplation. Workman can be denied the benefits under Section
17B of the Industrial Disputes Act only when it is proved to the
satisfaction of the Court that the workmen have been employed and
have been receiving adequate remuneration during the period of
pendency of the writ petition. It is thus well settled that transient
employment by the workman does not affect his entitlement to receive
wages pending decision; that is to say that, the benefit of Section 17B
of the Act cannot be denied merely because the workman is engaged
in some activity or in some vocation to eke out his livelihood. If the

CM No 6357/2007 in WP(C) 16894 of 2006

Page 8 of 11

workman cannot be denied the benefit under this section if he is
engaged in some activity or in some vocation to eke out his livelihood,
a fortiori, he cannot be denied the benefit under this section if the
petitioner has been paid some amount on account of his compulsory
retirement or some amount is being paid to him as pension. In any
case the learned counsel for the applicant has contended that while
considering the last drawn wages or minimum wages whichever is
higher which is payable to the applicant, the amount of pension per
month already paid be deducted and he be paid balance last drawn
wages or minimum wages whichever is higher. In view of this
submission of the counsel for the respondent/applicant, the plea of
the petitioner that the respondent is paid pension per month and the
applicant cannot be awarded any relief under Section 17 B of the Act,
cannot succeed. This is also not res integra that while considering an
application under Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act, the
Court cannot go into the merits of the case in the writ petitioner. It
was so held in 86 (2000) DLT 510=2000 (5) AD (Delhi) 413, Anil Jain
v. Jagdish Chander.

9.

In the facts and circumstances, the applicant fulfills the criteria

for availing the benefit under section 17B of the act and the order

CM No 6357/2007 in WP(C) 16894 of 2006

Page 9 of 11

granting benefit cannot be denied to the respondent on the grounds as
has been raised by the petitioner.

10.

For the foregoing reasons, the application of the workman/

respondent under Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 is
allowed. The petitioner is directed to pay the last drawn wages or
minimum wages whichever is higher from the date of the award, 27th
July, 2006 after deducting the amount of the pension of Rs.2484 /per month. Arrears be paid to the respondent within eight weeks. The
petitioner shall continue to pay the last drawn wages or minimum
wages whichever is higher and after deducting the amount of pension
per month already paid as detailed hereinabove by the 15th of every
English Calendar month during the pendency of the writ petition. The
respondent is also directed to give an undertaking that in case the
writ petition is allowed, the respondent shall refund the difference of
last drawn wages and minimum wages within the time as shall be
permitted by this Court.

The undertaking by respondent be filed

within four weeks.
With these directions the application is disposed of.

CM No 6357/2007 in WP(C) 16894 of 2006

Page 10 of 11

WP(C) No.16894/2006
List

for

hearing

in

the

category

of

“After

Notice

Misc.Matters” on 24thSeptember, 2008.

March 13th, 2008.

ANIL KUMAR J.

„Dev‟

CM No 6357/2007 in WP(C) 16894 of 2006

Page 11 of 11

