IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Decision: May 14, 2007
+

CP No.82/2006

Focus Management Consultants Pvt. Ltd.
........
Petitioner
Through:
Mr.Neeraj Chaudhary and
Mr.Biju Mattam, Advocates
Versus
Second Foundation India Pvt. Limited
Through:

........

Respondent

Mr.Sandeep Prabhakar and
Ms.Prerna Mehta, Advocates.

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
YES
in the Digest?

YES
YES

ANIL KUMAR, J.
*
1.

This order shall dispose of petitioner’s petition under Section 433(e)

read with Section 434 and 439 of the Companies Act, 1956 for winding up
of the respondent company and for appointment of Official Liquidator as
the provisional liquidator in respect of the affairs and assets of the
respondent company and for restraining the respondent company from

CP 82 of 2006

Page 1 of 28

disposing of transferring, selling, alienating or parting with its assets in
any manner whatsoever.

2.

The petitioner contended that company was established for the

purpose of developing and sourcing manpower by recruiting, educating
and employing, bringing up and giving intensive training to professionals in
various disciples of manufacturing and service related to information
technology, marketing, accounting and other services and to act as
consultant for recruitment services and to provide recruitment solutions
and various other services.

3.

According to the petitioner, respondent company was incorporated

at Delhi and is having its registered office at Bombay House 4/47,
Safdarjung Enclave, New Delhi. According to the petitioner, respondent
company is indebted to the petitioner company for a sum of Rs.3,66,416/together with interest at the rate of 16% per annum from 31st March, 2005
till the date of filing of the petition.

CP 82 of 2006

Page 2 of 28

4.

It is contended by the petitioner company that some time in

November 2004, the petitioner company made arrangements and
conducted a series of interviews and selected required candidates for
recruitment in the respondent company on specific requests made by
Mr.Radhakrishnan, Managing Director (Europe) and Mr.Ravi Grewal.
According to the petitioner, the fee structure for its services was
communicated to the respondent company and as it was not protested or
refuted, is deemed to have been admitted. The petitioner carried out the
recruitment process and short listed three candidates, Mr. Anand Joshi,
Mr.Rami Reddy and Mr.Harsh Bhatnagar for the respondent company.

5.

The persons recommended by the petitioner company were

appointed by the respondent company in a project at Prague, Czech
Republic, and appointments letters were issued and appointments were
made and copies of which have been produced by the petitioner. The
plea of the petitioner company is that since the respondent company was
fully satisfied, the petitioner was again asked to initiate the process for
recruiting more personnel for the respondent company at Chandigarh and
on such request being received by the petitioner company, process of

CP 82 of 2006

Page 3 of 28

short-listing was initiated and two candidates, namely, Ankur Aggarwal
and Mr.Uday Aggarwal were recommended and appointment letters were
also issued to them.

6.

The petitioner claims the amount on the basis of invoices dated 16th

February, 2005 which were in respect of Mr.Ankur Aggarwal, Mr.Harsh
Aggarwal and thereafter the petitioner company sent other invoices dated
23rd February, 2005 for the recruitment of Mr.Uday Kumar, Mr.Rami Reddy
and Mr.Anand Joshi.

According to the petitioner, these invoices were

accepted by the respondent without any protest, therefore, the amount of
the invoices is deemed to have been accepted . The respondent has
failed to pay the amount of Rs.3,66,416/0 with interest @ 16% per annum
from 31st March, 2005.

The notice of demand sent to the respondent

company was received by its office at New Delhi, however, no reply was
received and thereafter the petition has been filed by the present
petitioner.

Contending that the respondent company is commercially

insolvent and unable to pay its debt and, therefore, it is liable to be wound
up and it would be just fair and equitable in the facts and circumstances to
wind up the respondent company and it has also been prayed for

CP 82 of 2006

Page 4 of 28

appointment of Official Liquidator as the Provisional Liquidator in respect
of assets of the company.

7.

The petition was opposed by the respondent contending inter alia

that there was no written or oral agreement agreeing to pay commission at
the rate of 12.5% on annual gross and for payment of interest on any
amount or on the late payment.

According to the respondent the rate of

12.5% claimed by the petitioner is arbitrary, whimsical and much higher
than the rate at which similar services were availed by the respondent
from other organizations. The claim in the petition is objected to on the
ground that there is no ascertained debt payable by the respondent
company. The amount claimed by the petitioner is in dispute and the
petition is based only on invoices which were not accepted and which
cannot be the basis for a winding up petition.

Refuting the allegation

made in the petition, it is contended that the winding up petition cannot be
an alternative for recovery of money for which a civil suit is ordinarily the
remedy and the company court cannot be used as a forum by the creditor
to establish its rights either regarding the debt or regarding the interest.

CP 82 of 2006

Page 5 of 28

8.

The respondent company refuted the claim of the petitioner for

respondent's winding up on the ground that the respondent does not owe
a definite and ascertained amount and the petitioner is not entitled for any
interest at any rate. Even in the email sent to the respondent, varied rate
of interest had been claimed either @ 8% or 18% and no rate of interest,
in any case, was agreed between the parties for the alleged payment due
from the respondent to the petitioner.

The respondent refuted the

allegations that any specific request was made by Mr.Radhakrishnan,
Managing Director (Europe) and Mr.Ravi Grewal to recruit 20 personnel
for the respondent company’s project in Europe. The rates as quoted by
the petitioner company were only a proposal which were never accepted
as the respondent company had been availing similar services from
several other organizations and were paying the standard rate @ 8.33%
of annual gross. It is averred that rather, the petitioner had agreed in oral
conversation to provide the services @ 8.33% of the annual gross. On
the basis of emails sent by the petitioner company, it is contended that
there were no consensus ad idem between the parties and the fee structure
offered by the petitioner company was not accepted. The respondent,
however, admitted that Mr.Anand Joshi, Mr.Rami Reddy and Mr.Harsha
Bhatnagar were short listed by the petitioner, were appointed by the

CP 82 of 2006

Page 6 of 28

respondent company in its project at Prague, Czech Republic and the
allegation that these individuals also reported to the respondent
company’s office at Chandigarh was denied. According to the respondent,
these individuals soon after joining the respondent company left the
services except Mr.Harsh Bhatnagar and the concern was expressed to
the petitioner company about their non-commitment to the work and the
replacement were sought for these people which has not been honored by
the petitioner company.

Relying on an email dated 10 th April, 2005, it is

contended that the Director of the respondent company had considered
the rate of 8.33% for Mr.Uday Kumar, however, when the invoices were
received, they were received on a higher rate which were different from
what was agreed upon orally between the parties. The petitioner was
asked to sent the invoices at the revised rate which has not been done.
According to the respondent company, it had agreed to make the payment
@ 8.33% of annual gross for Mr.Ankur Aggarwal and Mr.Uday Kumar,
however, the petitioner company refused to accept the same.

The

respondent denied that a notice was duly served with the signatures and
seal affixed on the acknowledgment card, as no legal notice was served
on the respondent company at Chandigarh where the invoices were raised
and sent by the petitioner company.

CP 82 of 2006

In these circumstances, the

Page 7 of 28

respondent company has sought dismissal of the petition of the petitioner
company for winding up of respondent company.

9.

An affidavit of Col..T.S. Bakshi (Retd.) has been filed in support of

respondent company giving the names and addresses of the Directors of
the respondent company and the places where the statutory records
including the books of accounts of the respondent company are kept. The
respondent also filed the copies of the audited balance sheet for the year
2005-2006.

10.

The petitioner filed a rejoinder refuting the averments and pleas

raised by the respondent company. The petitioner rather raised a new
plea in the rejoinder that there was an oral contract between the parties
and since the rates were quoted by the petitioner and the respondent went
ahead and availed the services, therefore, there was a deemed
acceptance of such rates.

Reliance was placed on various

correspondences alleging that the respondent has admitted in those
correspondences that he is liable to make payments and made false
assurances. Relying on Section 8 of the Contract Act, it was contended
CP 82 of 2006

Page 8 of 28

that an offer is made subject to a condition that the offeree cannot accept
the benefit without accepting the condition and, in the circumstances, it
was contended that there is a deemed liability of the respondent to make
the payments of the amounts claimed by the petitioner on the basis of
invoices. The emphasis was also made on the fact that the legal notice
was not replied in which interest was claimed @ 16% from 31 st Mach,
2005 till the full payments were to be made to the petitioner and, in the
circumstances, it was claimed that the admitted debt is Rs.3,66,416/- from
March 2005.

11.

The petitioner has relied on (2006) 129 Comp Cas 343 (Madras),

Vivek Hire Purchase and Leasing Limited vs. Paisapower.Com P. Ltd to
contend that if the Court comes to the conclusion that the dispute sought
to be raised is not bonafide and is only manufactured or created for the
purpose of resisting the petition, then grant of any relief to such a
company is to be declined and such a company should be wound up. The
petitioner also relied on (1994) 3 Supreme Court Cases 348, Pradeshiya
Industrial

&

Investment

Corporation

of

U.P.

Vs.

North

India

Petrochemicals Ltd. and Another and (1971) 3 Supreme Court Cases 632,

CP 82 of 2006

Page 9 of 28

M/s.Madhusudan Gordhandas & Co. Vs. Madhu Woollen Industries Pvt.
Ltd. to contend that if the debt is bonafide and where there is no doubt
that the company owes the creditor a debt, then this will entitle the creditor
to a winding up order even if the exact amount of the debt is disputed and
the court will make a winding up order without requiring the creditor to
quantify the debt precisely.

12.

Per contra, the respondent have relied on 2000 (34) Company

Cases Vol. 101 33, United Construction Company vs. Piccadily Agro
Indsutries Ltd.; 2004 (001)-CLJ – 481 – MP, Astha Textile Co. Ltd.
Hyderabad Vs. Indo Ram Synthetics (I) Ltd., Dhar

(M.P.); 1995(083)-

COMPCAS-0135-MAD, Elmeh India Vs. Hi-Sound Corder Private Ltd. and
(1965) 34 Comp Cases 456 (SC), Amalgamated Commercial Traders (P.)
Ltd. Vs. A.C.K. Krishnaswami and Anr. to contend that, in the facts and
circumstances, there are bonafide disputes about the alleged debt claimed
by the petitioner in the company petition and the respondent company can
not be wound up as it is also solvent and the petition is liable to be
dismissed.

CP 82 of 2006

Page 10 of 28

13.

I have heard the learned counsel for the parties in detail and have

perused the petition, reply and the rejoinder and documents filed by the
petitioner.

The copy of the balance sheet of the respondent company

filed for the year 2005-2006 have also been perused and from the balance
sheet, it cannot be inferred that the respondent company is insolvent or
will be unable to pay its debt to the petitioner company.

Though the

balance sheet was filed by the respondent company pursuant to the
direction of the Court, no reply to the audited balance sheet has been filed
nor there is any averment by the petitioner company that from the balance
sheet it can be shown that the respondent company is insolvent company
or in such a financial state that it will be unable to pay the alleged debt of
the petitioner.

14.

The petitioner has also taken divergent stands. In the petition, it is

contended that since the invoices were sent which were not refuted and
were accepted, the amount of invoices is deemed to have been accepted
where as in the rejoinder, the stand taken by the petitioner is that there
was an oral contract between the parties and since the rates were quoted
for providing services and respondent had availed all such services,

CP 82 of 2006

Page 11 of 28

therefore, there was a deemed acceptance of such rates. Perusal of the
communication referred to by the petitioner especially the email which is at
page 43 of the paper book as Annexure 'P3', it is apparent that a proposal
was given for person to be recruited who were to be located in India at
12.5% annual gross on CTC basis, and for people located in the rest of
world at a flat fee of Rs.1.25 lakh for vanilla skills and 1.75 lakh for
premium skills.

15.

From the correspondences produced by the petitioner, it is difficult

to infer that the parties were ad idem in respect of rates payable by the
respondent company to the petitioner. Rather from another email which
is dated 1st April, 2005 sent at 11.16 am, it is inferable that Vipul,
petitioner's representative, had represented that he would consider the
rate of 8.33% for people placed in Chandigarh for programmer level. It
was also specified that the same rates cannot be agreed for hiring of
people for senior level.

By the same email, it is apparent that the

petitioner company agreed to reduce the rates to 8.33% for Uday Kumar,
however, sought clearance of other amounts by 10th April at least. From
the plethora of correspondences, emails exchanged between the parties

CP 82 of 2006

Page 12 of 28

what emerges is that whether the commission should be 12.5% or 8.33%
was not finalized and

it cannot be inferred conclusively that the rate

agreed by the respondent was 12.5% commission on the annual gross. If
the rate at which the payment had to be made was not agreed
conclusively, a fortiori, it cannot be inferred that the respondent had agreed
to pay the amount of invoices raised by the petitioner on the annual gross
on CTC basis for the employees, Ankur Aggarwal, Harsh Bhatnagar, Uday
Kumar and Rami Reddy and Mr.Anand Joshi. Rather in one of the e-mail,
the petitioner representative had agreed to charge 8.33% on annual
gross.

16.

The invoices raised by the petitioner do not indicate that in case the

amount of invoices sent was not paid within a certain time, the respondent
shall be liable to pay interest at any particular rate.

From the

correspondences exchanged between the parties, which is alleged to be
the basis for a concluded contract between the parties it also cannot be
inferred that the respondent had agreed to pay interest at the rate of 16%
per annum as has been demanded by the petitioner company.

CP 82 of 2006

Page 13 of 28

17.

It has been held in number of cases that an order under Section

433(e) of the Companies Act is discretionary. There must be a debt due
and the company must be unable to pay the same. A debt under this section must be a determined or a definite sum of money payable immediately or at a future date and that the inability referred to in the expression unable to pay its debts in Section 433(e) of the Companies Act should be
taken in the commercial sense and that the machinery for winding up will
not be allowed to be utilized merely as a means for realizing debts due
from a company. At the stage of admission of the petition, the Court is
concerned to see whether the respondent-company has been unable to
pay its debts. The amount claimed must be one which is legally due and
recoverable debt. The debt must be payable prima facie. The onus to a
great extent is placed upon the petitioner to satisfy the Court prima facie.
In this regard, to my mind the petitioner has not been able to discharge its
primary onus to show that the above debt is rightly due to the petitioner
much less that it was an admitted liability. The Court would refuse to admit
a petition where there is a bona fide dispute raised by the respondentcompany. Once the stand of the respondent-company prima facie is bona
fide and is of substance then it would be difficult for the Court to direct admission of such a petition. The Bombay High Court has laid down the fol-

CP 82 of 2006

Page 14 of 28

lowing principles in Softsule (P) Ltd., Re, (1997) 47 Company Cases 438:
(Comp Cas pp. 443-44)

Firstly, it is well settled that a winding-up petition is not legitimate means of seeking to enforce payment of a debt which
is bona fide disputed by the company. If the debt is not disputed on some substantial ground, the court/Tribunal may
decide it on the petition and make the order.
Secondly, if the debt is bona fide disputed, there cannot be
neglect to pay within the meaning of Section 433(1)(a) of the
Companies Act, 1956. If there is no neglect, the deeming
provision does not come into play and the winding up on the
ground that the company is unable to pay its debts is not
substantiated.
Thirdly, a debt about the liability to pay which at the time of
the service of the insolvency notice, there is a bona fide dispute, is not due within the meaning of Section 434(1)(a) and
non-payment of the amount of such a bona fide disputed
debt cannot be termed as neglect to pay the same so as to
incur the liability under Section 433(e) read with Section
434(1)(a) of the Companies Act, 1956.
Fourthly, one of the considerations in order to determine
whether the company is able to pay its debts or not is
whether the company is able to meet its liabilities as and
when they accrue due. Whether it is commercially solvent
means that the company should be in a position to meet its
liabilities as and when they arise.

CP 82 of 2006

Page 15 of 28

18.

The Madras High Court in Tube Investments of India Ltd. v. Rim

and Accessories (P) Ltd, (1993) 3 Company Law Journal 322, (Comp LJ
at p. 326) has evolved the following principles relating to bona fide disputes:

(i) if there is a dispute as regards the payment of the sum
towards the principal, however small that sum may be, a
petition for winding up is not maintainable and the necessary forum for determination of such a dispute existing between parties is a civil court;
(ii) the existence of a dispute with regard to payment of interest cannot at all be construed as existence of a bona
fide dispute relegating the parties to a civil court and in
such an eventuality, the Company Court itself is competent
to decide such a dispute in the winding-up proceedings;
and
(iii) if there is no bona fide dispute with regard to the sum
payable towards the principal, it is open to the creditor to
resort to both the remedies of filing a civil suit as well as filing a petition for winding up of the company.

19

The rules as regards the disposal of winding-up petition based on

disputed claims are thus stated by the Apex Court in Madhusudan Gordhandas & Co. v. Madhu Woollen Industries (P) Ltd., (1971) 3 SCC 632.
The Supreme Court has held that if the debt is bona fide disputed and the

CP 82 of 2006

Page 16 of 28

defense is a substantial one, the court will not wind up the company. The
principles on which the court acts are:

(i) that the defence of the company is in good faith and one
of substance;
(ii) the defence is likely to succeed in point of law; and
(iii) the company adduces prima facie proof of the facts on
which the defence depends.

20.

Generally speaking, an admission of debt should be available

and/or the defense that has been adopted should appear to the Court not
to be dishonest and/or a moonshine, for proceedings to continue. If there
is insufficient material in favour of the petitioner, such disputes can be
properly adjudicated in a regular civil suit. It is extremely helpful to draw
upon the analogy of a summary suit under Order XXXVII of the Code of
Civil Procedure. If the Company Court reaches the conclusion that, had it
been exercising ordinary original civil jurisdiction it would have granted
unconditional leave to defend, it must dismiss the winding-up petition or if
there are such admissions on the basis of which a decree can be passed
in favor of the petitioner under Order 12 rule 6 of the Code of Civil
Procedure. In M/s.Madhusudan Gordhandas & Co.(supra) relied on by the

CP 82 of 2006

Page 17 of 28

petitioner, it was held by the Apex Court that if the debt is bonafide disputed
and the defence is substantial one, the court will not wind up the company.
In this case, a creditor had claimed a sum for goods sold to the company
and the company had contended that no price had been agreed upon and
the sum demanded by the creditor was unreasonable.

A petition for

winding up by a creditor who claims payment of agreed sum for work done
for the company when the company contended that the work had not been
done properly was disallowed by the Supreme Court. In the present facts
and circumstances, the petitioner company is unable to show conclusively
that it had been agreed that the respondent company is liable to pay the
amount at 12.5% of the annual gross. The respondent company has also
raised a dispute that it has taken similar services from other companies at
the rate of 8.33% which rate was agreed to be considered by and on
behalf of petitioner company, which is apparent from some of the emails.
The respondent company has also raised concern about the noncommitment to the work by the persons recommended by the petitioner
company and those who left the services of the respondent company,
replacement was also sought which was also agreed to be considered by
the petitioner. Taking entire facts and circumstances, the defense of the
respondent cannot be termed illusory or not bonafide.

CP 82 of 2006

Page 18 of 28

21

In Pradeshiya Industrial & Investment Corporation of U.P. (supra), it

was held by the Apex court that an order under Section 433 (e) is
discretionary and the debt claimed by the petitioner against a company
whose winding up is sought must be a determined or a definite sum of
money payable immediately or at a future date. It was further observed by
the Apex Court that the inability referred to in the expression “unable to
pay its dues” and Section 433(e) should be taken in commercial sense
that is to say that its assets are such and its existing liabilities are such so
as to reasonably ascertain that the assets would be insufficient to meet
the existing liabilities. Perusal of the balance sheet of the respondent
company for the year 2005 and 2006 negate this contention of the
petitioner. Rather the petitioner had not even adverted to the financial
position of the respondent company on the basis of the balance sheet for
the year 2005-2006.

22.

In Vivek Hire Purchase and Leasing Limited (supra) relied on by the

petitioner, a suit was filed by the company for the limited relief, however,
the fact shows that the respondent was unable to pay its debt and rather

CP 82 of 2006

Page 19 of 28

in one of the communications, the respondent had admitted its inability to
pay its debt and in view of that matter it was held that the suit was not a
bar to proceeding against the respondent company for winding up. It was
held in that case that the defence of the respondent company was not in a
good faith and one of substance and was not likely to succeed and no
prime facie proof of the facts on which the defence depended was made. In
contra distinction, the defence of the respondent that there was no
consensus ad idem between the parties seems to plausible. Though the
petitioner has tried to impute the liability on the basis of a concluded
contract on the ground that the invoices were raised which were not
objected to or protested and so there is a deemed acceptance, however,
in the rejoinder, it was stated that there was an oral agreement. In case,
there was an oral agreement, the petitioner ought to have substantiated
as to what were the exact terms and conditions orally agreed between the
parties. The respondent has taken a plea that the petitioner is not entitled
for any charges in respect of those persons recommended by the
petitioner who left the services of the respondent soon after the joining.
Various factors inevitably reflect that the parties, petitioner and
respondent, were not ad idem in respect of alleged oral agreement. The
terms and conditions of oral agreement have not been spelled out by the

CP 82 of 2006

Page 20 of 28

petitioner but whatsoever terms can be culled, there does not seem to be
consensus with the respondent nor on the basis of correspondence it can
be inferred as to what terms of oral agreement were finally settled. On the
basis of pleadings only without substantial evidence, the petitioner cannot
contend that the amount claimed by the petitioner is definite and
ascertained and in the circumstances it is difficult to infer that the defence
of the respondent is not bonafide. There is neither admission of debt nor
the defense seems to be moon shine and on the basis of alleged deemed
admission that is that the respondent did not protest to the invoices raised
by the petitioner. From the e-mails exchanged between the parties, even
this can not be inferred that the respondent did not protest to the amount
claimed by the petitioner in the invoices. As already observed a winding
up petition can not be a legitimate means of seeking to enforce payment
of debt which is bona fide disputed. When a creditor comes forward with a
prayer for winding-up a company on the ground of non-payment of dues,
then the creditor has to establish that the debt owed by the company is
clear, valid in law, unimpeachable and cannot be disputed.

CP 82 of 2006

Page 21 of 28

23.

The case relied on by the petitioner (2003) 45 SCL 429 (Calcutta),

New Red Bank Tea Co. (P) Ltd. Vs. Jahar Roy is clearly distinguishable
from the facts of the case of the respondent. In that case while replying to
the statutory notice, debt was not bonafide disputed and the defense
taken was not substantial one and all the points of defense was not
disclosed initially but was taken for the first time in the affidavit of
opposition and it was held that where a defense is disclosed by a
company in reply to the notice, then all the points should be disclosed. It
was held where the defense is not taken in reply to statutory notice but is
taken alternatively in the affidavit, it cannot be accepted that the
company’s refusal to pay is based on bonafide defense. The case of the
respondent is clearly distinguishable inasmuch as this is the case of the
respondent company that the notice was not served on the office of the
respondent company at Chandigarh where the invoices were raised.
Though an AD card has been produced about the service of notice at
Delhi address, however, it does not bear any seal of the company and is
initialed by someone and no reply to notice was given, not raising all the
disputes raised in the reply to the petition. The case of the respondent is
different as no reply was filed whereas in the case relied on by the
petitioner reply was given but all the defense was not taken in the reply at

CP 82 of 2006

Page 22 of 28

the first instance and new defenses were taken in the reply to the petition
filed before the Court.

24.

In Amalgamated Commercial Traders (P.) Ltd. (supra) relied on by

the respondent, the Apex Court had held that winding up petition is not
legitimate means for seeking to enforce payment of debt which is bonafide
disputed by the company. It was held that a petition presented ostensibly
for a winding up order but related to exercise pressure should be
dismissed. In this case, the debt in respect of which notice was given was
bonafide disputed and it was held that the question whether the
declaration of dividend dated December 30, 1959 was valid or not raised a
substantial question as to interpretation of Section 207 of the Companies
Act, 1956 and in the circumstances it was held that there was no neglect
to pay within section 434(1)(a) of the Companies Act. In Astha Textile Co.
Ltd. Hyderabad (supra), it was held that in case of enforcement of some
agreement entered into between the parties, it requires civil adjudication in
civil court, i.e., where the rights and obligations of the parties vis-a-vis
each other whether they were performed or breached as per the terms of
the so called agreement or not requires proper civil adjudication as such

CP 82 of 2006

Page 23 of 28

disputes can be decided more appropriately, effectively and suitable by
the civil court in a civil suit and not by the Company Court under the
Companies Act in winding up petition. It was held that merely because the
traders happen to be a company in itself is not a ground to file and
entertain a company petition for its winding up. In Elmeh India (supra) relied
on by the respondent, it was held that the agreement to pay the interest
on the basis of oral agreement which was not pleaded in the petition and
in respect of which no details were given, there could not be any
presumption that for every such loan given or advanced, the interest was
payable. In the case of petitioner also though no specific oral agreement
has been contended in the petition except that the invoices were raised
which were not refuted and were accepted without protest and, therefore,
there is a deemed acceptance, there is nothing to show as to how the oral
agreement was arrived at between the parties and who were the
witnesses in whose presence the oral agreement was arrived at and what
were the exact terms and conditions of the oral agreement relied on by
the petitioner. From the correspondences, which are emails mainly, the
terms and conditions in respect of which there could be consensus ad idem
between the parties cannot be inferred. In Elmeh India (supra), a single
Judge had held that it is not the legislative intent that the company court

CP 82 of 2006

Page 24 of 28

should convert itself into a ordinary civil court and proceed to held a trial at
the instance of every petitioner claiming to be a creditor of the company
nor can proceed to pass a decree and thereafter order the winding up of
the company on the ground that it is unable to satisfy the decree. Similarly
in United Construction Company (supra), a single Judge had dismissed the
petition holding that it was clear from the pleadings that the parties were
not ad idem in regard to any factum, right from the execution of the alleged
agreement till its execution.

25.

What will be the ramification of not replying to statutory notice. The

respondent has alleged that the notice was not sent at Chandigarh office
where the invoices were raised. This is no more res integra that where no
response to a statutory notice has been made, winding up order must
invariable be passed. Where no reply to the statutory notice is given, the
respondent company runs a risk of winding up petition being admitted for
hearing at the threshold itself. This aspect was dealt with by a single
Judge of this Court in Resham Singh & Co P. Ltd. Vs Daewoo Motors
India Ltd, 102 (2003) DLT 188 where it was held as under:

CP 82 of 2006

Page 25 of 28

"

I shall first deal with the consequences of the

respondent’s failure to send a reply to the statutory notice.
The reliance of Mr. Valmiki Mehta, learned Senior Advocate
appearing for the petitioner on the above-mentioned
decisions of my learned Sister Usha Mehra, J. is somewhat
exaggerated. The decisions do not inexorably lead to the
conclusion that winding-up orders must unvariably be
passed where no response to a statutory notice has been
made. From my understanding of the judgment my learned
Sister had taken the failure to reply to the notice as an
important factor in determining whether a bona fide defence
had been put forward. In the circumstances of both the
cases, she preferred to view the defence as an after-thought
and as being bereft bona fide. In CP 220/2001 entitled H.B.
Stock Holdings Ltd. v. Associated Infotech Ltd., I have
favoured the opinion that where no response had been
made to the statutory notice the respondent company runs
the risk of a winding-up petition being admitted for hearing at
the threshold stage itself. Normally, the Company Judge
consider it prudent in first instance to issue notice to the
respondent so that its defence to the possible far-reaching
and fatal winding-up orders can be considered. The
admission of the petition at its first hearing is possible
because, by virtue of Section 434 of the Companies Act, a
presumption of the indebtedness can be legitimately drawn
by the Court where no reply to the statutory notice is
forthcoming. The risk of the admission of the petition, as well
as the appointment of a Provisional Liquidator is thus
broodingly and ominously present in all those cases where
the respondent company neglects to send any reply to the
winding-up notice. But this is as far as the danger extends.
My attention has been justifiably drawn to the decision of the
Single Judge of this Court in Vimco Ltd. v. Sidvink Properties
(P) Ltd., 1996 Vol. 86 Company Cases 610, where it has

CP 82 of 2006

Page 26 of 28

been held by P.K. Bahri, J. that where a bona fide dispute
had been shown to the Court, the question of applying the
deeming provision should not automatically arise. I continue
to be in respectful agreement with this view. Applying this
ratio to the facts of the present case, without in any manner
diluting or undermining the significance of the failure of the
respondent company to respond to the statutory notice, this
factor will be duly kept in perspective when the conspectus
of facts is considered.”

26.

In the totality of facts and circumstances and on the basis of the

ratio of various judgments cited by the parties, it is inevitable to infer that
the disputes raised by the respondent are bonafide and prima facie it is not
apparent that there was a concluded contract between the parties and in
the circumstances the amount claimed by the petitioner cannot be held to
be ascertained. Even there is no agreement for payment of interest nor
the rate at which it has been claimed.

The copy of balance sheet filed by

the respondent company also does not reflect that the respondent
company is unable to meet its debt.

27.

In the facts and circumstances, the petition for the winding up of the

respondent company is without any merit and it is dismissed. However,

CP 82 of 2006

Page 27 of 28

considering the facts and circumstances, the parties are left to bear their
own cost.

May 14, 2007
'sdp'

CP 82 of 2006

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 28 of 28

