*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

%

Date of decision: January 14th , 2008

+

C.W.P.No.1108 of 2001

SHRI DHARAMPAL
Through:

…
PETITIONER
Ms. Rekha Aggarwal Advocate.
Versus

DELHI TRANSPORT CORPORATION
....
RESPONDENTS
& ANR.
Through:
Mr.Vinay Sabharwal Advocate for
respondent No.1/DTC and
Mr.K.N.Dutta, Advocate for
respondent No. 2.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
YES
YES

Anil Kumar, J.
*
1.

The petitioner in this writ petition claims compensation of

Rs.5 Lakhs each from both the respondents on account of the
death of his wife due to electrocution on account of alleged
negligence on the part of respondents.
2.

Petitioner is an employee, a driver with the Delhi Transport

Corporation and he was allotted a government accommodation
bearing house number E-78, DTC Colony, Shadipur, New Delhi

CWP No. 1108 of 2001

Page 1 of 22

where he was living with his wife, since deceased, and four
children. According to him the residents of this colony dry their
clothes on roofs/terraces of the houses. It is contended that on
19th July, 1999 at about 10.45 AM, the petitioner's wife, Smt.
Bimla, went to the terrace of her house to dry the clothes on an
iron wire which was tied to sewer pipes on the terrace floor. The
iron wire had electricity and the wife of the petitioner, got
electrocuted and died.

The petitioner alleged that his wife got

electrocuted on account of negligence of the respondents as the
electric lines are very old and in dilapidated conditions because of
which short circuit occurred. It was contended that the other
persons in the colony had also suffered electric shocks earlier.
These dilapidated lines were not changed or replaced by the
respondents despite various request by the resident Association. It
is pleaded that had the respondents been cautious and repaired
the lines, the wife of the petitioner could have been saved from
electrocution.

The

allegation

of

the

petitioner

is

that

the

respondents were quite negligent and irresponsive to their legal
duties.

3.

The deceased was stated to be high secondary pass and had

a diploma in Cutting and tailoring from National trade Council for

CWP No. 1108 of 2001

Page 2 of 22

training in vocational trades, Ministry of Labor, Government of
India. It was contended that she was hale and hearty and she was
earning about Rs. 4500.00 per month and she would have lived for
another 30 to 40 years. The deceased left behind, petitioner, her
husband, three daughters and one minor handicapped son. On
account of the death of late Smt. Bimla Devi, petitioner and his
family members have suffered immensely.

The petitioner had

made two representations for maintenance of old and dilapidated
electric lines, however, the respondents remained unresponsive.
The petitioner had also made a representation for grant of
compensation which was duly received but the representation was
neither replied nor any compensation has been paid. On the death
of petitioner's wife on account of electrocution for the alleged
negligence of the respondents, a first information report was also
registered, a copy of which has been produced by the petitioner. A
copy of post-mortem report of the deceased has also been produced
by the petitioner along with other documents in support of his
claim for compensation on account of the death of his wife owing to
negligence on the part of respondents imputable to them. The
petitioner averred that no amount of compensation is sufficient for
the sufferings of the petitioner and his children, however, he
claimed an amount of Rupees Five lakhs.

CWP No. 1108 of 2001

Page 3 of 22

4.

The petition is contested by the respondents. Delhi Transport

Corporation, Respondent no.1, contended that this court does not
have jurisdiction to decide the questions raised in the writ petition
and the petitioner should approach the appropriate civil court. It
was denied that the wife of the petitioner was electrocuted on
account of wrongful and negligent acts on the part of the officials of
the respondent no.1. It was not admitted that the electric lines of
the colony were old and in dilapidated condition. Regarding
representations made to the respondent no.1, it was stated that the
representations were to replace the old fans and not to replace the
electric wires and the pipes. The respondent no.1 also refuted its
liability on the ground that maintenance and up keeping was
carried out from time to time. Liability of the respondent no.1 was
also refuted on the ground that its officials were carrying out and
performing their duties with the utmost care and caution and there
was no dereliction of duties. Regarding the representation dated
15th May, 1999 it was contended that the same was regarding
minor repairs of appliances like cooling fans etc.

It was also

contended that for the alleged fault imputable to the electric line of
Delhi Vidyut board, the respondent no.1 cannot be made liable.

CWP No. 1108 of 2001

Page 4 of 22

5.

Delhi Vidyut Board, respondent no.2 also contested the

petition on the ground that it raises disputed facts as to on
account of whose negligence, the wife of the petitioner was
electrocuted. The said respondent contended that a senior mistri
had immediately reached there and had disconnected the electric
line.

It was also pleaded that on investigation by the police

authorities no fault was found and no action was initiated against
respondent no.2. The said respondent also refuted its liability on
the ground that an electric inspector had also visited the site and
as per his report, the death was due to the defect in the internal
wiring of the flat and there was no fault on the part of Delhi Vidyut
Board. Relying on the facts stated in the first information report it
was

pleaded

that

the

allegations

were

made

only

against

respondent no.1 and not against respondent no.2. It was also
contended that to claim damages and compensation one has to
prove the case in a suit and not to claim compensation under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India.

6.

The allegations of the respondents were refuted by the

petitioner in his rejoinder. It was contended that the colony is very
old as it was constructed in 1954 and the electric lines were
damaged which are not replaced despite repeated reminders and

CWP No. 1108 of 2001

Page 5 of 22

request to the respondents. The petitioner pleaded that the liability
of the respondents is joint and several and the averments made in
the petition were reiterated.

7.

During the pendency of the petition, the respondent no.2 was

divided into various different companies. The rights and liabilities
of respondent no.2 pertaining to the petitioner came under North
Delhi Power Ltd, which company was substituted in place on Delhi
Vidyut Board and amended memo of parties dated 11th July, 2003
was filed. The said substituted respondent adopted the defense of
the Delhi Vidyut Board and did not file a separate reply.

8.

An additional affidavit was also filed on behalf of respondent

no.1 contending that an inquiry office is functioning in the said
colony from 9.30 to 18.00 hrs and one employee is deputed to
register the complaints of the residents. It was also contended that
service line for individual quarter are provided and maintained by
respondent no.2 and no expenditure was incurred by respondent
no.1 on it. The respondent no.1 was stated to maintain only
internal wiring and switches and details of expenditure incurred in
various years was given.

It was also stated that on the day of

incident there was no complaint of leakage of electricity nor any

CWP No. 1108 of 2001

Page 6 of 22

such complaint was lodged in the near past. The petitioner also
filed an additional affidavit deposing that an inspection was carried
out on 12th August, 1999 and report dated 30th August, 1999 was
submitted. In the report it was stated that the insulation resistance
of the electrical installation was tested with 500 volts insulation
tester & leakage of current was observed. The main switch board,
sub main switch and distribution board were found to be burnt out
and the wires were joint directly with incoming electric line without
any protective device such as cut out fuse/MCB. The insulation of
wires of the main switch board and sub main switch board were
found worn out/damaged and the conductor were exposed in
certain areas. It was stated that the staff of Respondent no.2 had
visited the premises on the day of incident and they found one of
the live conductor of the worn out inter connection VIR wire in
contact with the metallic main switch board of the flat of the
petitioner and it was electrically charged and the sewer pipes were
also electrically charged. According to the petitioner, the report
indicated that the provisions of Indian Electricity Act had not been
complied with by the staff of respondent no.1.

9.

The parties also relied on Chairman, Grid Corporation of

Orissa Limited (GRIDCO) Vs. Smt. Sukamani Das, (1997) 7 SCC

CWP No. 1108 of 2001

Page 7 of 22

298;

Sanchalakshri Vs. Vijayakumar Raghuvirprasad Mehta,

(1998) 2 SCC 245; Shakuntala Devi Vs. Delhi Electric Supply
Undertaking, (1995) 2 SCC 369; Tamil Nadu Electricity Board Vs
Sumathi, (2000) 4 SCC 543; Nilabati Behera Vs State of Orissa,
(1993) 2 SCC 746; Chairman Railway Board Vs Chandrima Das,
(2000) 2 SCC 465; West Bengal State Electricity Board Vs Sachin
Banerjee, (1999) 9 SCC 21; Haryana State Electricity Board Vs.
Ram Nath,

(2004) 5 SCC 793; SDO, Grid Corporation of Orissa

Limited Vs. Timudu Oram MANU/SC/ 0445/2005; Rudal Sah Vs
State of Bihar, (1983) 3 SCR 508; D.K.Basu Vs State of West
Bengal, (1997) 1 SCC 416; Smt. Shobha Vs Govt. of NCT of Delhi,
2003 IV AD (Delhi) 492; Poonam Sharma Vs. Union of India, 2003
VI AD (Delhi) 373; A.V.V.N.L. Vs. Smt. Sarli, AIR 2005 Raj 248;
Bihar of Electricity Board Vs. Ram Swaroop Yadav, AIR 2007
PATNA 30; M.P Electricity Board. Vs. Smt. Sunder Bai AIR 2006
Madhya Pradesh 137;

Suni Manoj Mathew Vs. BSES Rajdhani

2006 (1) LRC 339 (Delhi) and Ramesh Singh Pawar Vs. Madhya
Pradesh Electricity Board, 2005 ACJ 894 in support of their
contentions. The petitioner contended that the writ petition is
maintainable and he is entitled for compensation whereas the
respondents contended that the writ petition is not maintainable as
it raises disputed question of facts which cannot be decided in a

CWP No. 1108 of 2001

Page 8 of 22

writ petition and consequently no amount can be awarded to the
petitioner by the respondents.
10.

Considering the facts and contentions and the laws cited by

the parties what is to be determined is, whether there are disputed
questions of fact and whether it will be appropriate for this court to
award compensation to the petitioner in the writ petition under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
11.

First it will be appropriate to consider the precedents relied

on by the parties in the present facts and circumstances. One of
the decision relied upon by the respondents is Chairman, Grid
Corporation of Orissa Limited (GRIDCO) v. Smt. Sukamani Das,
(1997) 7 SCC 298. In this case one Pratap Chandra Das, while
returning to his village from another village in Amara in Orissa,
came in contact with an electric wire which was lying across the
road. According to the claimants in that case, the electric wire had
snapped on account of the negligence of GRIDCO and its officers
who were required to maintain the electricity transmission line.
Therefore, the legal representatives of the deceased claimed
compensation of a sum of Rs. 3 lakhs against the GRIDCO and
filed a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The electricity Corporation GRIDCO denied the liability on the

CWP No. 1108 of 2001

Page 9 of 22

ground that 12 WLT line had snapped on account of thunderbolt
and lightning and not because of negligence as proper guarding
was provided for the electricity line and the death in the
circumstance could not be due to negligence and the defense of an
act of God was raised. It was also contended that since the matter
involved the disputed questions of fact, the writ petition was not
maintainable. The writ petition was, however, allowed by the High
Court and the petitioners were awarded compensation in the sum
of Rs. 1 lakh. In appeal to the Hon'ble Supreme Court, the decision
was reversed and it was held at page 301 by the Apex Court as
under:
“6. In our opinion, the High Court committed an error
in entertaining the writ petitions even though they
were not fit cases for exercising power under Article
226 of the Constitution. The High Court went wrong in
proceeding on the basis that as the deaths had taken
place because of electrocution as a result of the
deceased coming into contact with snapped live wires
of the electric transmission lines of the appellants, that
"admittedly prima facie amounted to negligence on the
part of the appellants". The High Court failed to
appreciate that all these cases were actions in tort and
negligence was required to be established firstly by the
claimants. Mere fact that the wire of the electric
transmission line belonging to the appellant No. 1 had
snapped and the deceased had come into contact with
it and had died was not by itself sufficient for awarding
compensation. It also required to be examined whether
the wire had snapped as a result of any negligence of
the appellants and under which circumstances the
deceased had come into contact with the wire. In view
of the specific defences raised by the appellants in
each of these cases they deserved an opportunity to

CWP No. 1108 of 2001

Page 10 of 22

prove that proper care and precautions were taken in
maintaining the transmission lines and yet the wires
had snapped because of circumstances beyond their
control or unauthorised intervention of third parties or
that the deceased had not died in the manner stated
by the petitioner. These questions could not have
been decided properly on the basis of affidavits
only. It is the settled legal position that where
disputed questions of facts are involved a petition
under Article 226 of the Constitution is not a
proper remedy. The High Court has not and could not
have held that the disputes in these cases were raised
for the sake of raising them and that there was no
substance therein. The High Court should have
directed the writ petitioners to approach the Civil
Court as it was done in OJC No. 5229 of 1995.
12.

The Supreme Court had also held in Sukamani Das that the

power under Article 142 was not available to the High Court while
exercising the powers under Article 226 of the Constitution, which
was held in Sanchalakshri v. Vijayakumar Raghuvirprasad Mehta
(1998) 2 SCC 245. The Apex Court also distinguished its earlier
decision in Shakuntala Devi v. Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking,
(1995) 2 SCC 369 holding that the question of negligence can be
properly examined in a suit where correct facts can be established,
however, an amount was awarded ex gratia in exercise of the
powers of the Supreme Court under Article 142 of the Constitution
which power is not available to the High Court.
13.

In Tamil Nadu Electricity Board Vs Sumathi, (2000) 4 SCC

543 the question which arose for consideration was whether the

CWP No. 1108 of 2001

Page 11 of 22

High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution can award
compensation for death caused due to electrocution on account of
improper maintenance of electric wires or equipment by an
Electricity Board and can appoint an Arbitrator under Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, 1996 to decide the quantum of compensation.
While deciding this case the Supreme Court took note of the
decisions in Nilabati Behera Vs State of Orissa, (1993) 2 SCC 746
and Chairman Railway Board Vs Chandrima Das, (2000) 2 SCC
465 and Chairman, Grid Corporation of Orissa Limited (GRIDCO)
v. Smt. Sukamani Das, (1997) 7 SCC 298 and held on page 552 as
under:
“Since disputed questions of facts arose in the present
appeals the High Court should not have entertained
writ petitions under Article 226 of the Constitution and
then referred the matter to arbitration in violation of
the provisions of the new Act. There was no arbitration
agreement within the meaning of Section 7 of the new
Act. Under the new Act award can be enforced as if it
is a decree of a court and yet the High Court passed a
decree in terms of the award which is not warranted by
the provisions of the new Act. The appellant had also
raised the plea of bar of limitation as in many cases if
suits had been filed those would have been dismissed
as having been filed beyond the period of limitation. In
our opinion exercise of jurisdiction by the High Court
in entertaining the petitions was not proper and the
High Court in any case could not have proceeded to
have the matter adjudicated by an arbitrator in
violation of the provisions of the new Act.”

CWP No. 1108 of 2001

Page 12 of 22

14.

A two judges Bench of the Supreme Court in West Bengal

State Electricity Board Vs Sachin Banerjee, (1999) 9 SCC 21
though declined to interfere with the finding of the High Court had
deleted the finding of fact that the victims had died because of
negligence of the State Electricity Board and had also allowed the
compensation to be retained and not refunded. The Apex Court
had held:
“Looking to the fact that the two victims were
electrocuted because of an illegal hooking for the
purpose of theft of electricity, the petitioners cannot be
held guilty of negligence although they may have
stated that there is a need for conducting de-hooking
raids more frequently”
15.

The principle of strict liability to award compensation in a

case of death due to electrocution was applied in M.P. Electricity
Board Vs Shail Kumari, (2002) 2 SCC 162 which was a case arising
out of judgment in a civil suit filed by the heirs of victim for
compensation. Thus the Supreme Court had distinguished the
ratio of Nilabati Behera (supra) and Chandrima Das (supra)

in

their application to the claim of compensation for death due to
electrocution especially where facts were disputed.

16.

In Haryana State Electricity Board Vs Ram Nath

(2004) 5

SCC 793, on the facts which were not disputed the compensation

CWP No. 1108 of 2001

Page 13 of 22

was awarded. In this case a five-year old child died as a result of
coming into contact with a high- tension wire which passed over
the roof of the house. The pleas raised in the petition were not
denied in the counter affidavit except stating that "the entire colony
was an unauthorized colony and that un-authorizedly the height of
the houses had been raised." The Supreme Court had observed:
“ To the categoric averments set out hereinabove that
the wires had become loose and were drooping and
touching the roof of the houses, there is no denial. To
the categoric averments that complaints had been
made, both in writing and orally, requesting that the
wires had to be tightened, there is no denial. A mere
vague statement to the effect that the height was as
per the prescribed limit does not detract from the facts
that there is a deemed admission that the wires were
drooping and touching the roofs.
17.

In Ram Nath (supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court noticed the

judgment of Sukamani Das but impliedly distinguished it on the
ground that the case being decided by it (i.e. Ram Nath) did not
involve disputed questions of fact. The Court observed on (SCC, p
795)
“...the unauthorized constructions have been put up
close to their wires it is their duty to ensure that the
construction is got demolished by moving the
appropriate authorities and if necessary, by moving the
court of law. Otherwise, they would take the
consequences of their inaction. If there are complaints
that these wires are drooping and almost touching
houses, they have to ensure that the required distance
is kept between the houses and the wires, even though
the houses be unauthorized.

CWP No. 1108 of 2001

Page 14 of 22

18.

The question of maintainability of a writ petition for claiming

compensation for death due to electrocution was again examined
by a two-Judges Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in SDO, Grid
Corporation of Orissa Limited Vs Timudu Oram MANU/SC/0445/
2005. The petitions were in fact part of a batch of writ petitions
that were disposed of by the judgment in Sukamani Das. However,
for some reason, they were not taken up along with that batch. The
facts were more or less similar. A co-villager of the deceased had
taken power supply to his LI point. Some other villagers had
illegally taken power supply from this line by using a hook from the
LI point to their houses by means of an un-insulated GI pipe. The
unauthorized line got disconnected and fell on the ground. On
22.8.1978 when the father of the respondent was coming along
that way, his bullock came in contact with the live GI wire and got
electrocuted. His wife came to his rescue and hearing her cries, her
father while trying to rescue her also got electrocuted. A writ
petition

under

Article

226

of

the

Constitution

claiming

compensation was filed. In the counter affidavit GRIDCO denied its
negligence pointing out that the electric wire got snapped on
account of the illegal hooking. In Timudu Oram, an attempt was
made to get the Hon'ble Supreme Court to distinguish its earlier
ruling in Sukamani Das by referring to the decisions in Shail

CWP No. 1108 of 2001

Page 15 of 22

Kumari (supra) and Ram Nath (supra). Nevertheless, the Supreme
Court held that the case would be covered by Sukamani Das since
it involved disputed questions of fact. It was held that the High
Court erred in entertaining the writ petition under Article 226 of
the Constitution after a lapse of ten years.
19.

Where the compensation had been claimed on account of

death and injury on the basis of constitutional wrong but not due
to electrocution, the approach of the Supreme Court has been
different. Some of the prominent decisions are Rudal Sah Vs State
of Bihar (1983) 3 SCR 508; Nilabat Behera (supra); D.K.Basu Vs
State of West Bengal (1997) 1 SCC 416 and Chairman Railway
Board Vs Chandrima Das (supra). However, it has been held that
in cases of electrocution involving disputed question of facts, a writ
petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is not
maintainable. It is in the electrocution cases as can be seen from
the discussion hereinabove, that the approach has been different.
In Ram Nath, the Hon'ble Supreme Court upheld the award of
compensation by distinguishing Sukamani Das. Later, in Timudu
Oram, after noticing and distinguishing Ram Nath the Supreme
Court reiterated and followed the decision in Sukamani Das
holding

that

a

writ

petition

under

Article

226

was

not

maintainable. The decision in Sumathi (supra) is also to the same

CWP No. 1108 of 2001

Page 16 of 22

effect. All these decisions are of two- Judges bench. Timudu Oram,
being the most recent decision, and consistent with Sukamani Das
(supra) and Sumathi (supra) must be held to express the present
status of the law and is binding. The net result is that in cases
involving claim for compensation on account of death due to
electrocution, where the facts are disputed, the Supreme Court has
held that a writ petition for payment of compensation is not
maintainable under Article 226 of the Constitution. The remedy in
such cases will obviously be only before the Civil Court.

20.

The petitioner has relied on some of the judgments of the

High Courts, including this Court, where compensation has been
awarded in a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution.
Reference has been made to the judgments in Smt. Shobha v. Govt.
of NCT of Delhi 2003 IV AD (Delhi) 492, Poonam Sharma v. Union
of India 2003 VI AD (Delhi) 373, A.V.V.N.L. v. Smt. Sarli AIR 2005
Raj 248; Bihar of Electricity Board v. Ram Swaroop Yadav AIR
2007 PATNA 30; M.P Electricity Board. v. Smt. Sunder Bai AIR
2006 Madhya Pradesh 137, Suni Manoj Mathew v. BSES Rajdhani
2006 (1) LRC 339 (Delhi) and Ramesh Singh Pawar v. Madhya
Pradesh Electricity Board

2005 ACJ 894. On a appropriate

consideration of these it is apparent that these precedents relied on

CWP No. 1108 of 2001

Page 17 of 22

by the petitioner are distinguishable. In A.V.V.N.L. v. Smt. Sarli
(supra), a reference has been made to the decision in Shail Kumari
in order to justify the award of the compensation. However the case
was an appeal before the High Court against the judgment of the
Additional District Judge in a civil suit. Likewise, in M.P. Electricity
Board v. Smt. Sunder Bai (supra), also the case came up by way of
an appeal from a judgment in a civil suit. Neither decision therefore
considered the issue of maintainability of a writ petition claiming
compensation for death due to electrocution. The judgment of the
Division Bench of the Patna High Court in Bihar Electricity Board
v. Ram Swaroop Yadav (supra) does not advert to the question of
maintainability of the writ petition under Article 226 of the
Constitution. Therefore, no reference has been made to any of the
judgments of the Supreme Court in the electrocution cases referred
to above. The judgment in Suni Manoj Mathew v. BSES Rajdhani
(supra) was rendered by a learned Single Judge of this Court in a
writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution. The Court
granted compensation to the petitioner for the death as a result of
a heavy metal ladder used for repairing street lighting rolling down
the pavement and colliding with a motorcycle being driven by the
victim. It was not a case of death due to electrocution. That
perhaps explains why no reference was made to any of the

CWP No. 1108 of 2001

Page 18 of 22

judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the electrocution
cases. Ramesh Singh Pawar v. Madhya Pradesh Electricity Board
(supra) is a judgment by a learned Single Judge of the Madhya
Pradesh High Court in a writ petition under Article 226 of the
Constitution. The learned Single Judge referred to both judgments
Sukamani Das (supra) and Shail Kumari (supra) and sought to
distinguish Sukamani Das on the reasoning that the judgment in
Shail Kumari is a later one. However the learned Single Judge
appears to have overlooked the fact that Shail Kumari was not a
decision arising out of the writ petition under Article 226 of the
Constitution but in an appeal against a decision in a civil suit.
While, as has been pointed out in this decision, it is true that the
principle of strict liability enunciated in Nilabati Behera (supra)
had not been considered by the Supreme Court in Sukamani Das,
the subsequent decision in Sumathi does notice those decisions
and yet adopts the same line as Sukamani Das. Further, the
judgment in Sukamani Das has been followed by the subsequent
judgment in Timudu Oram. For all the above reasons, none of the
judgments of the different High Courts relied upon by the counsel
for petitioner can help petitioner’s case.

CWP No. 1108 of 2001

Page 19 of 22

21.

Are the facts, as alleged by the petitioner, admitted or

disputed is to be ascertained to decide whether the compensation
can be awarded to petitioner on account of death of his wife by
electrocution. The petitioner contended that the electric lines are
very old and in dilapidated conditions resulting into electric short
circuit and the negligence is in not repairing the faulty lines and in
being unresponsive. The respondent no.1 contended that internal
wiring is maintained properly as maintenance is carried out from
time to time and the officials were carrying out and performing
their duties with the utmost care and caution and there was no
dereliction of duty. To substantiate this plea it is contended that an
inquiry office is functioning in the said colony from 9.30 to 18.00
hrs and one employee is deputed to register the complaints of the
residents. It was also contended that service line for individual
quarter are provided and maintained by respondent no.2 and no
expenditure was incurred by respondent no.1 on it. The respondent
no.1 was stated to maintain only internal wiring and switches and
details of expenditure incurred in various years was given. It was
also stated that on the day of incident there was no complaint of
leakage of electricity nor any such complaint was lodged in the
near

past.

Regarding

complaints

being

not

attended

for

replacement of allegedly old and dilapidated electric lines, it was

CWP No. 1108 of 2001

Page 20 of 22

stated

that

representations

made

were

of

repair

of

some

appliances, like ceiling fans etc. and not for replacement of internal
electric lines. The respondent no.2 has refuted its liability by
contending that on investigation on complaint filed by the
petitioner with police reflected that the complaints were made
against the respondent no.1 for internal wiring and not against the
respondent no.2. In the circumstances, it is not admitted that the
death occurred on account of negligence of respondents. Whether
the respondents were negligent, if so what was their negligence and
whether both were negligent or only one of them was negligent and
whether their liabilities are joint or several is to be determined
which is not admitted. In the circumstances, apparently there are
various disputed question of facts, some of which are discussed
herein above. The Supreme Court has held that in electrocution
cases, if the facts are disputed, the High Court will not be justified
in awarding compensation in such cases.

22.

In the light of these binding decisions of the Supreme Court

as detailed and discussed herein above, this court cannot possibly
entertain this writ petition and grant compensation on the basis of
the principle of strict liability or res ipsa loquitur though sending
the petitioner to civil court will delay the resolution of his claim.

CWP No. 1108 of 2001

Page 21 of 22

Therefore, this court has no other option but to hold that the writ
petition in the facts and circumstances which involves disputed
questions of facts is not maintainable and the petitioner will have
to approach the appropriate Civil Court to claim the compensation
for the death of his wife on account of alleged negligence of the
respondents. It is, however, made clear that the petitioner shall be
entitled to avail all legal remedies available to him in accordance
with law and he will be entitled to claim the benefit of section 14 of
the Limitations Act, 1963 to avail the legal remedies available to
him.

23.

The writ petition is, therefore, dismissed as not maintainable

and with no order as to cost, however, petitioner will be entitled to
avail any other legal remedy available to him.

January 14, 2008
'sdp'

CWP No. 1108 of 2001

ANIL KUMAR J.

Page 22 of 22

