IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of decision: May 14, 2007
+

R.A. NO.7/2000 in C.R.P.No.605/1997

AVTAR SINGH

.....
PETITIONER
Through: Mr.I.D. Tyagi, Advocate.
VERSUS

GURBUX SINGH

.....
RESPONDENT
Through: Mr.C.L.Dhawan, Advocate.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be allowed to
see the judgment?

YES

2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?

NO

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

NO

Anil Kumar, J.
1.

The petitioner has sought review of order dated 6.8.1999 dismissing

the Revision Petition of the petitioner against the order dated 6.3.1997
passed against the petitioner declining leave to defend to him and passing an
order of eviction under Section 14(1)(e) read with Section 25 B (3) of the
Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958.

2.

The petitioner has sought review of the order on the ground that there

RA 7 of 2000 in CRP-605 of 1997

Page 1 of 19

is a mistake apparent on the face of record in considering the ratio of the
judgement cited by the petitioner being Precision Steel Engineering Works
and another vs. Prem Deva Niranjan Rana Tayal AIR 1982 SC 1518; that the
impugned order does not disclose that any effort had been made to show that
justice was done to the petitioner as the contentions of the petitioner in his
affidavit seeking leave to defend and contest the Eviction Petition have not
been considered properly; that while deciding the application for leave to
defend the Court should have confined only to the facts placed by the
petitioner before the court in the form of an affidavit. The petitioner has also
sought review of the order on the ground that both the daughters of the
respondent had got married during the pendency of the trial though the
counsel for the respondent/landlord had admitted the marriage of only one
daughter.

3.

The petitioner has also sought review of the order on the ground that

during the pendency of eviction proceedings the residential accommodation
available with the landlord in House No. 8977, Naya Mohalla, Pul Bangash,
Delhi was sold and the after the sale of the said House on 26.11.1996
another three and half storey built house on a 40 sq. yard land was
purchased on power of attorney basis in the name of his wife and one

RA 7 of 2000 in CRP-605 of 1997

Page 2 of 19

brother. It is stated that this fact came to the notice of the petitioner recently
and on the basis of these new facts the petitioner has sought review of the
order dismissing his revision petition.

4.

The petitioner has also contended that it is well settled that any order

obtained by fraud is a nullity and cannot be executed and has relied on
(1994) 1 SCC Page 1, S.P. Chengalvaraya Naidu vs. Jagannath and 1995
Rajdhani Law Reporter (SC) 1, Chander Shashi vs. Anil Kumar to contend
that non-disclosure of relevant and material document with a view to obtain
advantage amounts to fraud and a decree obtained by non-disclosure of the
relevant documents amounts to fraud on court,

and any decree thus

obtained by concealing the documents is liable to be set aside.

5.

The application for review is contested by the respondent contending,

inter alia, that the property bearing No. XII/8977, Naya Mohalla, Gali Bush
Wali, Pul Bangash, Delhi was owned by his father, who died on 4.1.1987 and
the rights in the said property devolved upon respondent and his two
brothers, namely, Sh. Bhupinder Singh and Sh. Surinder Singh. The
respondent had only one room in that property and the said property was
sold by all the three co-owners, the respondent and his two brothers, by sale

RA 7 of 2000 in CRP-605 of 1997

Page 3 of 19

deed dated 16.9.1996. From the sale consideration received from the sale of
that house another property bearing no. 86, Village Khyala, Navyug Block,
Vishnu Garden, New Delhi constructed on a plot of 40 sq. yards was
purchased in the name of the wife of the respondent and his brother
Sh. Surinder Singh. The said property was purchased by the respondent in
the name of his wife from Sh. Sukh Chain Singh, S/o Sh. Pyara Singh, R/o B5, J.J.Colony, Khyala, New Delhi-18 by a registered attorney dated
26.11.1996 as a document No. 53507 Additional Book No. 4, Volume 4134
pages 140 to 142.

6.

The respondent asserted that since he and his brother Sh.Surinder

Singh were not having sufficient income and because a considerable amount
was required by the respondent for the treatment of illness of his wife Smt.
Daljeet Kaur, who was a cancer patient, therefore, even this house at Vishnu
Garden, the respondent was compelled to sell to Sh. Anil Kumar, S/o Sh.
Baldev singh, R/o F-8, Vishnu Garden, New Delhi for a sum of Rs.75,000/-.
After selling the property at Vishnu Garden the respondent has shifted to a
tenanted property situated at property No. 62-B/A1, Paschim Vihar, New
Delhi w.e.f. 7.4.2003 and till date the respondent is living in the tenanted
property.

RA 7 of 2000 in CRP-605 of 1997

Page 4 of 19

7.

The respondent in his affidavit filed in support of the reply filed to the

review petition has deposed that he has been living in the rented premises
with his wife, who was a cancer patient and his unmarried daughter, namely,
Ms. Sarabjeet Kaur. It has been admitted by the respondent that his elder
daughter Smt. Davinder Kaur has got married to Sh. Charandeep Singh.
During the arguments, it has also been stated by the respondent counsel that
the wife of the respondent Smt. Daljeet Kaur, who was a cancer patient, has
died during the pendency of this review petition after the affidavit dated
28.10.2005 was filed by the respondent.

8.

The respondent has also opposed the application for review of the

order dated 6.8.1999 dismissing the revision petition of the petitioner on the
ground that the same is barred by time and the petitioner has failed to make
out any ground as to how it is within time as no date has been disclosed as to
when the alleged subsequent facts came to his knowledge.

9.

The respondent has categorically deposed that his wife, who was a

cancer patient was undergoing treatment at National MRI Scan Centre,
Punjabi Bagh, New Delhi, Apollo Hospital and at G-1, Mala Hospital and he

RA 7 of 2000 in CRP-605 of 1997

Page 5 of 19

also produced the record pertaining to the treatment of his wife at these
hospitals, who was discharged in July, 2005 being a terminal patient and
thereafter she was looked after by respondent and his daughters at his
rented house. In these circumstances, the respondent has contended that his
requirement for the tenanted premises is bona fide, even considering the
subsequent events and the petitioner is not entitled for review of order
dismissing the petition of the petitioner filed by him against the eviction order
passed against him because even subsequent events do not disclose such
facts which will disentitle the respondent from an order of eviction in respect
of demised premises. It is contended that petitioner has been able to delay
the recovery of possession from him and even the application for review was
filed on 6.1.2000 and has been got adjourned by the petitioner on one ground
or other. The petitioner also died during the pendency of review petition and
his legal representatives were substituted in his place.

10.

The respondent had filed the eviction petition on 20.9.1995 on the

ground of his bona fide requirement, contending that petitioner is a tenant in
respect of two rooms, one kitchen and bathroom on the ground floor of
property No. 6779, Ward No. XV, Mohalla Nabi Karim, Pahar Ganj, New
Delhi and he is the owner and the premises was let out for residential

RA 7 of 2000 in CRP-605 of 1997

Page 6 of 19

purposes and is required bona fine by him. As he was in occupation of only
one room on the first floor of his father’s property at 8977, Naya Mohalla, Pul
Bangash, Delhi he required the demised premises for himself and his family
members dependent upon him which included his wife and two unmarried
daughters. The leave to defend application was filed on 28.11.1995 and the
reply was filed by the respondent to leave to defend application on 25.1.1996.
On the date the reply to leave to defend application was filed, the respondent
had not sold the property of his father where he was in occupation with his
two brothers at Pul Bangash and, therefore, this fact about the sale of
property at Pul Bangash could not be incorporated in reply to leave to defend
as the property was sold on 16.9.1996 much after filing the reply to leave to
defend application.

11.

After consideration of respective pleas the Additional Rent Controller

dismissed the application for leave to defend and passed an eviction order
under Section 14 (1) (e) of Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958. Against the said
order the petitioner filed the revision petition and while dismissing the revision
petition, the arguments advanced by the petitioner were considered. While
deciding the revision petition of the petitioner, the fact pertaining to sale of
property at Pul Bangash was also considered and considering that the said

RA 7 of 2000 in CRP-605 of 1997

Page 7 of 19

property had been sold, it was held that the requirement of the respondent in
respect of himself, his wife and one unmarried daughter and one married
daughter is not extinguished. The Court considered the requirement of the
respondent as bona fide and in the circumstances the revision petition was
dismissed.

12.

This is no more res integra that subsequent facts can be considered by

the Court especially when the petitioner has been able to delay the disposal
of his review petition by one means or others by taking adjournments on
different dates. During this period, if the respondent had to sell even the
house at Vishnu Garden, which was purchased by the respondent in the
name of his wife and his brother on account of illness of his wife Smt. Daljeet
Kaur who was suffering from cancer, the sale of the property at Vishnu
Garden and the respondent moving to a rented premises cannot be termed
mala fide, nor the subsequent facts have erased the requirement of the
respondent for himself and his family members or these subsequent events
disclose such facts which will disentitle him from an order of eviction.

13.

The petitioner while filing the application for review on 6.1.2000 had

contended that he came to know recently about the subsequent facts,

RA 7 of 2000 in CRP-605 of 1997

Page 8 of 19

however, he did not disclose the date when he came to know about the
subsequent events about the sale of the property by the respondent
alongwith his two brothers at Pul Bangash. In any case the fact pertaining to
sale of property at Pul Bangash was raised before this Court on 6.8.1999
when the revision petition of the petitioner was considered and dismissed.
The petitioner in his application for review has relied on the acquisition of
another house at Vishnu Garden which is a house constructed on a plot of 40
sq. yards, which was purchased by the respondent in the name of his wife
and his brother on 26.11.1996. As to when the petitioner came to know about
this fact has not been disclosed in the application for review of order dated 6th
August, 1999. If the petitioner is seeking review of the order passed on
6.8.1999 dismissing his revision petition, he was liable to make out a case
when he filed the application for review on 6.1.2000 that he could not be
aware of the acquisition of another property by the respondent on 26.11.1996
earlier.

14.

In the present case, since the respondent was to disclose that the

property at Pul Bangash has been sold on account of financial necessities
and another house at Vishnu Garden has been acquired, the review petition
of the petitioner is not rejected on the ground that it was filed after the period

RA 7 of 2000 in CRP-605 of 1997

Page 9 of 19

of limitation expired for getting the order of dismissal dated 6.8.1999
reviewed, however, all the subsequent events contended by the parties are
considered.

15.

Considering all the facts in the proper prospective it cannot be inferred

that there has been such non-disclosure of relevant and material documents
which would amount to fraud because of which the eviction order passed in
favor of respondent is liable to be set aside. The respondent was having one
room in the house at Pul Bangash, where he was a co-owner with his two
brothers and where he had only room. On account of extreme paucity of
accommodation and financial hardship, that property had to be sold. The
other house which was purchased from consideration of the sale of the house
at Pul Bangash was also having a very small residential accommodation
compared to his requirement which also he had to sell on account of financial
hardship which the petitioner faced on account of his wife suffering from
cancer, who ultimately died and because of which he even had to sell the
property at Vishnu Garden also and had to shift to a tenanted
accommodation. These are subsequent facts and are being considered by
the Court and because of these subsequent events, it can not be inferred that
the respondent has committed a fraud because of which the eviction decree

RA 7 of 2000 in CRP-605 of 1997

Page 10 of 19

passed against the petitioner would be liable to be set aside. The subsequent
events also do not disclose such facts which will disentitle the respondent
from an order of eviction which has already been passed in his favor.

16.

The Judgments relied on by the petitioner S.P.Chengalvaraya Naidu

(Supra) is distinguishable from the facts of the present case. In that case a
suit

was filed by the respondent without disclosing the deed of release

executed by him relinquishing his rights in the property and he had obtained
a preliminary decree for partition. Since the respondent had relinquished the
rights in a property he could not seek partition of a property in which he did
not have any right and in the circumstances on account of non-disclosure of
facts which would have disentitled the respondent to get any decree, the
preliminary decree obtained by the respondent was set aside on the ground
of fraud. In Chander Shashi (Supra) it was held that anyone who takes
recourse to fraud and deflects the course of judicial proceedings and the
same interferes with the administration of justice, such persons are required
to be properly dealt with not only to be punished for the wrong done but also
to deter others from indulging in similar acts which shake the faith of people
in the system of administration of justice. This was observed by the Apex
Court on account of false, forged and fabricated documents produced to

RA 7 of 2000 in CRP-605 of 1997

Page 11 of 19

obstruct or defeat justice and the contempt proceedings were initiated against
such person. Apparently, the case relied on by the petitioner are
distinguishable. The petitioner had to sell his father’s property where he was
a co-owner with his two brothers and where he had only one room on
account of various factors which fact has been considered at the time of
disposal of the revision petition and the fact pertaining to the sale of said
property could not be incorporated in the reply to leave to defend application
filed on 25.1.1996 because by that time the property had not been sold which
was sold subsequently on 16.9.1996. In the circumstances on this account it
cannot be inferred that there has been any fraud committed by the
respondent because of the time taken in disposal of the eviction petitions
even on the ground of bona fide requirement. The non-disclosure of the fact
that the property at Vishnu Garden has also been sold by the respondent on
account of illness of his wife, who was suffering from cancer who died
subsequently and shifting of the respondent to a tenanted premises will not
be such a non-disclosure so as to tantamount to a fraud in the present facts
and circumstances.

17.

The ratio of the cases relied on by the petitioner are distinguishable. It

is no more res integra that decision is only an authority for what it actually de-

RA 7 of 2000 in CRP-605 of 1997

Page 12 of 19

cides. What is of the essence in a decision is its ratio and not every observation found therein nor what logically follows from the various observations
made in it. The ratio of any decision must be understood in the background of
the facts of that case. It has been said long time ago that a case is only an
authority for what it actually decides, and not what logically follows from it. It
is well settled that a little difference in facts or additional facts may make a lot
of difference in the precedential value of a decision. Circumstantial flexibility,
one additional or different fact may make a world of difference between conclusions in two cases. The Supreme Court in Bharat Petroleum Corporation
Ltd and Anr. v. N.R.Vairamani and Anr., AIR 2004 SC 778 had observed:" Court should not place reliance on decisions without discussing as to how the
factual situation fits in with the fact situation of the decision on which
reliance is placed. Observations of Courts are neither to be read as Euclid's
theorems nor as provisions of the statute and that too taken out of their
context. These observations must be read in the context in which they appear to
have been stated. Judgments of Courts are not to be construed as statutes. To
interpret words, phrases and provisions of a statute, it may become necessary
for judges to embark into lengthy discussions but the discussion is meant to
explain and not to define. Judges interpret statutes, they do not interpret
judgments. They interpret words of statutes; their words are not to be
interpreted as statutes.

18.

The petitioner while contesting the eviction petition by filing leave to

defend application apparently took incorrect pleas that the property, which
was owned by the respondent with his brothers, had been devised by his
father to someone else by a will and besides the property of respondent’s
RA 7 of 2000 in CRP-605 of 1997

Page 13 of 19

father at Pul Bangash where he was in occupation of only one room with his
other three brothers, there is another property at Pul Bangash owned by the
respondent without giving the particulars thereof.

19.

The application for review was also filed by the petitioner on 6.1.2000

and he has been able to delay the disposal of the same by seeking
adjournments and by other methods. The application for review was also
dismissed in default, however, subsequently it was restored.

20.

The facts as has been disclosed by the respondents in reply to the

averments made in the application for review by his affidavit dated
28.10.2005 have not been refuted by raising such pleas on the basis of which
eviction order passed in favor of respondent and approved by this Court by
dismissal of the revision petition of the petitioner, will be liable to be reviewed.
Even on account of subsequent facts, which can be taken into consideration,
it cannot be inferred that bona fide requirement of the respondent and family
member has extinguished. The respondent requires one room for himself,
one room for his unmarried daughter and a room even for his married
daughter besides one drawing room. The respondent is living in a tenanted
premises with his unmarried daughter and his wife who was suffering from

RA 7 of 2000 in CRP-605 of 1997

Page 14 of 19

cancer has died because of her illness the respondent had to sell his house
and move to the rented accommodation and a copy of the rent agreement
has been produced by the respondent.

21.

In the circumstances even on the basis of subsequent facts, the bona

fide requirement of the respondent has not extinguished and there are no
grounds to review the order dated 6.8.1999 dismissing the revision petition of
the petitioner against the order of eviction dated 6.3.1997 passed by the
Additional Rent Controller against the petitioner on the ground of bona fide
requirement on account of subsequent facts.

22.

The petitioner has sought review of the order on the ground that there

is a mistake apparent on the face of record in considering the ratio of the
judgement cited by the petitioner being Precision Steel Engineering Works
and another vs. Prem Deva Niranjan Rana Tayal AIR 1982 SC 1518; that the
impugned order does not disclose that any effort had been made to show that
justice was done to the petitioner as the contentions of the petitioners in his
affidavit seeking leave to defend and contest the Eviction Petition have not
been considered properly; that while deciding the application for leave to
defend the Court should have confined only to the facts placed by the

RA 7 of 2000 in CRP-605 of 1997

Page 15 of 19

petitioner before the court in the form of an affidavit.

23.

It is well settled that review of an order cannot be exercised as an “ap-

peal in disguise”. A distinction has been drawn between a review of an order
and an appeal and that there is no overlapping between the two. A review
can be filed only when there is an error apparent on the face of record. In
MANU/SC/0705/1999 Ajit Kumar Rath v. State of Orissa and Ors it was held
that the power to review is not an absolute power and is circumscribed by the
restriction indicated in Order 47 of the Code of Civil Procedure. Such power
can be exercised on account of some mistake or error apparent on the face
of the record or for any other sufficient reason. A review cannot be sought
merely for fresh hearing or arguments or correction of an erroneous view taken earlier. The power of review can be exercised only for correction of a
patent error of law or fact which stays in the face without any elaborate argument being needed for establishing it. In the case of Parsion Devi and Ors. v.
Sumitri Devi and Ors. MANU/SC/1360/1997 the Supreme Court has held as
under:
" It is well settled that review proceedings have to be strictly
confined to the ambit and scope of Order 47 Rule 1 CPC. Under
Order 47 Rule 1 CPC a judgment may be open to review inter
alia if there is a mistake or an error apparent on the face of the
record. An error which is not self evident and has to be detected

RA 7 of 2000 in CRP-605 of 1997

Page 16 of 19

by a process of reasoning, can hardly be said to be an error
apparent on the face of the record justifying the court to
exercise its power of review under Order 47 Rule 1 CPC. In
exercise of the jurisdiction under Order 47 Rule 1 CPC it is not
permissible for an erroneous decision to be reheard and
corrected. A review petition, it must be remembered has a
limited purpose and cannot be allowed to be an appeal in
disguise.

An error which is not self evident and has to be dictated by a
process of reasoning can hardly be said to be an error apparent
on the face of the record.

24.

The concept of finality of judgment has to be enforced with its normal

rigor. If the practice adopted by the applicant in the present case, is permitted
to grow, it will amount to undermining the concept of finality as in every case,
the party who is not satisfied with the order, would seek a rehearing of the
matter in the disguise of review. Merely because a party is not satisfied with
the order of the court or it is possible to take another view on reasonable
interpretation on law and facts, would by itself be no ground for review of a
judgment/order. The petitioner wants reconsideration of facts disclosed by
him on the basis of ratio of Prem Deva Niranjan Rana Tayal AIR 1982 SC
1518. He wants that the order of Additional Rent Controller declining leave to

RA 7 of 2000 in CRP-605 of 1997

Page 17 of 19

defend to him and passing an order of eviction against him be reconsidered
as justice has not been done to him and contentions raised by him in leave to
defend application has not been considered properly. The petitioner is
entitled for fresh arguments or fresh hearing. The errors alleged by the
petitioner are not self evident and has to be detected by a process of
reasoning which is not permissible and which can not be resorted to in the
facts and circumstances. Therefore, there are no grounds for the review of
order dated 6th August, 1999 dismissing the revision petition of the petitioner
against the order of eviction passed against him.

25.

Therefore, in the present facts and circumstances the application of

the petitioner for review of an order dated 6.8.1999 is dismissed. Since an
eviction order was passed against the petitioner on 6 th March, 1997 which
was confirmed in the revision petition by order dated 6th August, 1999 the
petitioner shall be liable to be restored the vacant possession of the premises
comprising of two rooms, one kitchen, bathroom on the ground floor in
property No. 6779, Ward No. XV, Mohalla Nabi Karim, Pahar Ganj, New
Delhi as detailed in the eviction petition to the respondent forthwith. However,
considering the facts and circumstances, parties are left to bear their own
costs.

RA 7 of 2000 in CRP-605 of 1997

Page 18 of 19

May 14, 2007
'mw'

RA 7 of 2000 in CRP-605 of 1997

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 19 of 19

