IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of decision : November 14, 2007
Test Case No.47/2006
# B.P.Trehan
Through:

..... PETITIONER
Mr.V.K.Jhanji, Sr.Advocate with
Ms.Mandakini Sharma, Advocate.

Versus
$ State
Through:

..... RESPONDENT
Ms.Jyoti Mendiratta, Advocate for
the legal heirs.

CORAM :*

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
*
1.

This is a petition under Section 276 of Indian Succession Act,

1925 read with Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure for grant of
probate of Will dated 1.8.2004 executed by Late Smt. Gianwati,
mother of the petitioner.

2.

The petitioner averred that he is one of the son of Late Sh.Jai

Gopal Trehan and Late Smt. Gianwati. Late Smt. Gianwati, mother of
the petitioner expired in Delhi on 20th October, 2004 at 31/31, Old
Test Case No.47/2006

Page 1 of 8

Rajinder Nagar, New Delhi and left behind legal heirs namely Sh.
R.P.Trehan (Son), Sh. B.P.Trehan (Son), Sh. C.P.Trehan (Son), Sh.
A.K.Trehan (Son) and Smt. Raj Ahuja (Daughter).

3.

According to the petitioner Smt. Gianwati, wife of Sh. Jai Gopal

Trehan was the owner of property bearing House No.3/78, Old
Rajinder Nagar, New Delhi by virtue of Conveyance Deed dated
9.12.1999 as well as agricultural land at village Bandhawari under
Tehsil Sohna, District Gurgaon, Haryana which was purchased by
sale deed dated 12.5.1990.

4.

According to the petitioner, Smt. Gianwati during her lifetime

executed a Will dated 1st August, 2004 which was attested by two
witnesses Sh. V.K.Mehra and Dr. Pankaj Jain who signed the Will as
attesting witnesses in presence of Late Smt. Gianwati. The Will dated
1st August, 2004 executed by Late Smt. Gianwati was also registered
at the office of Sub Registrar II New Delhi having registration
No.389429 in Additional Book No.III Volume No.1789 on pages 41 to
43 on 1st August, 2004. The Will was executed by Late Smt. Gianwati
at her own free will and at the time of execution of the Will she was
hale and hearty and the Will has been executed by her devising the
property in favor of petitioner without any coercion, pressure, threat,
undue influence, fraud and misrepresentation of any person and of

Test Case No.47/2006

Page 2 of 8

any kind.

5.

Before the demise of Late Smt. Gianwati, mother of the

petitioner, she was residing with the petitioner at house No.31/31,
Old Rajinder Nagar for more than 17 years till 20th October, 2004
when she died. The petitioner is a co-executor of the Will dated 1st
August, 2004. The petitioner, therefore, filed the present petition as a
co-executor and a beneficiary. In the petition the details of the
property of the deceased were disclosed and the petition was
supported by the affidavit of the petitioner and was also verified by
Dr. Pankaj Jain one of the attesting witness to the Will dated 1st
August, 2004 of Late Smt. Gianwati. The other attesting witness of
the Will is Mr.V.K.Mehra.

6.

The notice of the petition was sent to the respondent and

general citations were also published in Tribune in its Chandigarh
and New Delhi edition and the notice was also issued to Chief
Revenue Controlling authority for submission of valuation report in
respect of estate of Smt. Gianwati.

7.

Pursuant to the notice issued by the Court no objections in the

shape of affidavits were filed on behalf of respondent Nos.1,3,4 & 5.
Sh. R.P.Trehan filed the affidavit dated 31st October, 2006 admitting

Test Case No.47/2006

Page 3 of 8

that the Will was executed by Late Smt. Gianwati dated 1st August,
2004 and which is the last Will and testament and at the time of
execution of the Will Smt. Gianwati was in sound disposing mind and
it was executed

by her,

without

any force, fraud,

coercion,

misrepresentation or undue influence, in favour of Sh. B.P.Trehan
and Smt. Shashi Trehan. Similar affidavits were

filed by Sh.

C.P.Trehan, Sh. A.K.Trehan and Sh. Raj Ahuja.

8.

The valuation report was also filed by the Office of Sub

Divisional

Magistrate

(Karol

Bagh)

by

his

communication

No.SDM/KB/Probate/2007/788 dated 4th July, 2007.

9.

The evidence on affidavit was filed by the petitioner. The

petitioner filed his evidence on affidavit dated 18th August, 2007
reiterating that Smt. Gianwati was her mother and she was the owner
of the properties as detailed in the petition and she executed a legal
and valid Will with sound disposing mind dated 1st August, 2004
which was signed by her and in the presence of two attesting
witnesses namely Sh. V.K.Mehra and Dr. Pankaj Jain. The deponent,
petitioner deposed that there is no impediment in granting probate to
him in respect of the legal and valid Will dated 1 st August, 2004 and
that Smt. Gianwati died on 20th October, 2004. The certified copy of
the death certificate of Late Smt. Gianwati was proved and exhibited

Test Case No.47/2006

Page 4 of 8

as Ex. PW 1/1 and the copy of Conveyance Deed in respect of
property No.3/78, Old Rajinder Nagar was proved and exhibited as
Ex.PW.1/2, the provisional sale deed in respect of the land of the
deceased was also produced. The Will dated 1.8.2004 duly registered
with the Sub Registrar was also proved and exhibited as Exh.PW1/4.
The attesting witness of the Will of Late Smt. Gianwati, Dr. Pankaj
Jain also filed his evidence on affidavit deposing inter-alia that he
knew Smt. Gianwati since 1988 as she is the mother of Sh.
B.P.Trehan who is his friend. He deposed that Smt. Gianwati executed
a Will dated 1st August, 2004 which is signed by her in his presence
and after the signatures of Smt. Gianwati the Will was signed by
another attesting witness, Mr. V.K.Mehra. It was deposed that at the
time of execution of the Will the testatrix was of sound disposing mind
and the Will was executed by her without any force, fraud, coercion,
misrepresentation and undue influence. The deposition of the
attesting witness of the will has remained un-rebutted and on the
basis of the evidence led by the petitioner and the attesting witness it
is inevitable to infer that Will dated 1st August, 2004 executed by Late
Smt. Gianwati, mother of the petitioner in his favor has been proved.

10.

In R. Venkatachala Iyengar v. B.N. Thimmajamma and Others,

(1959) Supp. 1 SCR 426, the Supreme Court has laid down the
following propositions bearing on the nature and standard of evidence

Test Case No.47/2006

Page 5 of 8

required to prove a Will:
1.
Stated generally, a Will has to be proved like any
other document, the test to be applied being the usual
test of the satisfaction of the prudent mind in such
matters. As in the case of proof of other documents, so in
the case of proof of Wills, one cannot insist on proof with
mathematical certainty.
2.
Since Section 63 of the Succession Act requires a
Will to be attested, it cannot be used as evidence until, as
required by Section 63 of the Evidence Act, one attesting
witness at least has been called for the purpose of proving
its execution, if there be an attesting witness alive and
subject to the process of the Court and capable of giving
evidence.
3.
Unlike other documents, the Will speaks from the
death of the testator, and therefore, the maker of the Will
is never available for deposing as to the circumstances in
which the Will came to be executed. This aspect
introduces an element of solemnity in the decision of the
question whether the document propounded is proved to
be the last Will and testament of the testator. Normally,
the onus which lies on the propounder can be taken to be
discharged on proof of the essential facts which go into
the making of the Will.
4.
Cases in which the execution of the Will is
surrounded by suspicious circumstances stand on a
different footing. A shaky signature, a feeble mind, an
unfair and unjust disposition of property, the propounder
himself taking a leading part in the making of the Will
under which he receives a substantial benefit and such
other circumstances raise suspicion about the execution
of the Will. That suspicion cannot be removed by the
mere assertion of the propounder that the Will bears the
signature of the testator or that the testator was in a
sound and disposing state of mind and memory at that
time when the Will was made, or that those like the wife
and children of the testator who would normally receive
their due share in his estate were disinherited because
the testator might have had his own reasons for excluding
them. The presence of suspicious circumstances makes
the initial onus heavier and therefore, in cases where the
Test Case No.47/2006

Page 6 of 8

circumstances attendant upon the execution of the Will
excite the suspicion of the Court, the propounder must
remove all legitimate suspicions before the document can
be accepted as the last Will of the testator.
5.
It is in connection with Wills, the execution of which
is surrounded by suspicious circumstance that the test of
satisfaction of the judicial conscience has been evolved.
That test emphasize that in determining the question as
to whether an instrument produced before the Court is
the last Will of the testator, the Court is called upon to
decide a solemn question and by reason of suspicious
circumstances the Court has to be satisfied fully that the
Will has been validly executed by the testator.
6. If a caveater alleges fraud, undue influence, coercion
etc. in regard to the execution of the Will, such pleas have
to be proved by him, but even in the absence of such
pleas, the very circumstances surrounding the execution
of the Will may raise a doubt as to whether the testator
was acting of his own free Will. And then it is a part of the
initial onus of the propounder to remove all reasonable
doubts in the matter.
11.

Considering the facts and circumstances, it is apparent that the

testator was of sound disposing mind at the time of execution of his
last testament. There are no suspicious circumstances regarding the
last testament of the deceased testator. All the yardsticks and test laid
down by the Apex Court in

R. Venkatachala Iyengar (supra) are

fulfilled. There are no suspicious circumstances and this Court is
satisfied that the will dated 1st August, 2004 is the last will of Late
Smt. Gianwati.

12.

Consequently the petitioner has been able to prove that the

deceased late Smt. Gianwati executed her last will dated 1st August,
Test Case No.47/2006

Page 7 of 8

2004 and consequently the probate of the will of Late Smt. Gianwati
her will dated 1st August, 2004 is granted to the petitioner under
Section 276 read with Section 289 of the Indian Succession Act and
the Probate be issued to the petitioner in respect of properties detailed
in para 8 of the petition in the Form set forth in Schedule VI of the
Indian Succession Act subject to petitioner furnishing of requisite
Court-fees and necessary Bond with one surety. Accordingly, the
petition is allowed.

13.

The petitioner shall appear before the Joint Registrar for

furnishing bond and surety and for paying the Court fees on 10th
December, 2007 .

November, 14th, 2007
‘k/sdp’

Test Case No.47/2006

ANIL KUMAR J.

Page 8 of 8

