*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P(C) No.1853/2008

%

Date of Decision : 15.05.2008

S.M. Arya Public School & Another
Through:

….… Petitioners
Mr.Anshul Tyagi, Advocate.

Versus

Rita Saklani & Another
Through :

......... Respondents
Mrs.Rita Saklani, respondent No.1
in person.
Mr.Neeraj Yadav, Advocate for the
respondent No.2

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.
*
1.

The petitioner has challenged the order dated 29th October, 2007

of Delhi School Tribunal setting aside the order of termination dated 6th
April, 1998 of the respondent No.1 and directing the petitioners to
reinstate her with all consequential benefits and holding that the
respondent No.1 shall be entitled 50% of the arrears of salary from 6th
April, 1998 till 29th October, 2007 and full salary and other benefits
from 29th October, 2007, the date of the order of Delhi School Tribunal.
W.P(C) No.1853/2008

Page 1 of 8

2.

The respondent No.1 was appointed as a Post Graduate Teacher

with effect from 15th July, 1991 and was confirmed on 16th July, 1992,
however, she was terminated vide letter dated 6th April, 1998. While
terminating the services of the respondent No.1, the petitioners relied
on a term of the contract stipulating that after confirmation of the
services of the respondent No.1 she could be terminated by giving her a
three months’ notice.
3.

Aggrieved

by

her

termination,

respondent

No.1

made

a

representation dated 7th April, 1998 and the petitioners in response
sent a letter dated 13th April, 1998 informing the respondent No.1 that
a cheque had been deposited in her account. Respondent No.1 accepted
payment of bonus only and did not accept the arrears of increment as
only part payment was made and challenged her termination on the
ground that the termination clause in the appointment letter was void
under Section 23 of the Contract Act, 1872 and the petitioners could
not resort to the same in contravention of the provisions of the Delhi
School Education Act and that a confirmed teacher of a public school is
not a contract employee only and prior approval of the Director of
Education was required and the termination clause of giving only a
notice even if it was valid could be invoked only in very exceptional
circumstances.

The

respondent

no.1

also

contended

that

her

termination is not simple termination as various allegations have been
made against her.
W.P(C) No.1853/2008

Page 2 of 8

4.

The respondent No.1 challenged the order before Delhi School

Tribunal under Section 8(3) read with Section 11 of Delhi School
Education Act, 1973.

The petitioners before the Tribunal contended

that the respondent No.1 has not come to the Tribunal with clean
hands as her record shows her conduct while in service as she had
been frequently defying the code of conduct meant for teachers and she
was responsible for spoiling the discipline and work atmosphere
amongst other teachers in school and she was in the habit of writing
letters and submitting representations on one pretext or the other and
her letters/representations were never considered by the Managing
Committee because they were all against the rules for the working
teachers. It was also alleged that the respondent No.1 was in the habit
of clashing with the Principal, sending representations and replies in a
language not known to the discipline of the school and because of her
misconduct and filthy language used by her, it was decided to terminate
her services vide letter dated 6th April, 1998. It was also alleged against
the respondent No.1 that she was keeping the entire staff at ransom by
her misconduct and for her removal all the formalities were followed
and thereafter valid decision for her termination was taken and a
cheque for three months’ salary was also enclosed with the letter of her
termination which was returned by the respondent No.1 without any
reason so the cheque was deposited in her bank account.

W.P(C) No.1853/2008

Page 3 of 8

5.

After considering the respective contentions of the parties, the

Tribunal has held that major penalty of removal of service could not be
awarded by the petitioners/school without following the procedure
prescribed in Rule 120 of Delhi School Education Rule, 1973. It was
also held that the Rule 120 of DSER, 1973 is applicable to the case of
the respondent no.1 and, therefore, set aside the order of termination
and reinstated the respondent No.1.
6.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended relying on

Kathuria Public School and Others v. Director of Education & Another,
2005 VI AD (Delhi) 893 that the termination of the respondent No.1 was
termination simplicitor as no allegations have been made against the
respondent No.1 in the letter of termination dated 6th April, 1998 and
there is no need for private unaided non-minority educational
institutions to seek approval of any government authority before taking
such action. Consequently in accordance with terms, a domestic inquiry
was not taken up under the provisions of Delhi School Education Act,
1973 and Delhi School Education Rules, 1973 and the petitioners had
right to terminate the services of respondent No.1 by giving three
months’ notice.
7.

The Tribunal has relied on the decisions of this Court in case of

Ms.Leela Ajwani, another teacher of the petitioners' school whose
services were terminated after she had worked for 15 years. The school
in her case also had invoked terms and conditions of the appointment
W.P(C) No.1853/2008

Page 4 of 8

letter. In the appeal filed by the said teacher, her termination was held
to be invalid and she was reinstated with consequential benefits.
Against the order of the Tribunal in case of Ms.Leela Ajwani, another
writ petition being W.P.C. No.1/1999 titled The Management of S.M.
Arya Public School v. Government of NCT of Delhi & Others was filed.
The writ petition was, however, dismissed holding that termination of
the teacher by the petitioner school was contrary to the decision of
Supreme Court in Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Limited
v. Broio Natha Gangully, AIR 1986 SC 1571 and Delhi Transport
Corporation v. D.T.C. Mazdoor Congress and Others, AIR 1991 SC 101.
The writ petition filed by the petitioners in the case of Smt. Leela Ajwani
was dismissed holding that the orders passed by the Tribunal in the
case of Smt.Leela Ajwani did not require any interference. Similar
grounds as raised by the petitioners in the present petition were
declined and their earlier writ petition was dismissed.
8.

The learned counsel for the petitioner relying on the Kathuria

Public School (supra) has contended that no permission from the
Director of Education was required and the services of the respondent
no.1 could be terminated merely by giving notice, though there had
been allegation of the misconduct which were not referred to while
terminating her services.
9.

In Kathuria Public School (supra), a division bench of this Court

had rather held that though in case of a private institution the
W.P(C) No.1853/2008

Page 5 of 8

relationship between the management and the employee is contractual
in nature, however, any action which is to be taken should be in
pursuance to a fair disciplinary inquiry. Regarding the question as to
who would judge as to whether inquiry is fair or not, it was held that
aggrieved teachers could file an appeal against the decision of the
management concerning the disciplinary action or termination of
service.

Regarding the restriction of the jurisdiction of the Tribunal, it

was held that “no restriction has been placed on the scope and ambit of
the consideration of the grievance of the teachers or employees of the
Tribunal”. The Division Bench on page 907 had held as under:
33. ……….. It has been emphasised that in case of a
private
institution,
the
relationship
between
the
management and employees is contractual in nature. The
action has to take place in pursuance to a fair
disciplinary enquiry. The question, however, remains
as to who would judge as to whether the enquiry is fair
or not. For this purpose, it has been observed that the
State Government shall determine in consultation with the
High Court, the judicial forum, in which the aggrieved
teacher can file an appeal against the decision of the
management concerning disciplinary action or termination
of services. Thus, to facilitate the redressal of grievances of
teachers and employees, a special forum is required to be
provided not leaving such a person to the recourse of
normal civil proceedings. In the enactment in question,
such a Tribunal is already provided though the power is
restricted as aforesaid only to dismissal, removal or
reduction in rank. However, it is in these cases only that
sub-section (2) of Section 8 provides for prior approval of
the Director. This is, of course, apart from the issue of
suspension where also such prior approval or ex-post facto
approval within the stipulated time is required. Thus, the
remedy has been provided through a judicial forum and it
is not the State Authorities which have to act as an
intervening confirming authority. In fact, the Supreme
Court has gone as far as to state that where there are no
such Tribunals in existence, the judicial forum shall be
W.P(C) No.1853/2008

Page 6 of 8

provided and till such a specialised Tribunal is set up, the
right of filing the appeal would lie before the District Judge
or the Additional District Judge as notified by the
Government.
Thus, the judgment itself ensures the
creation of a judicial forum.
10.

The Tribunal has considered the pleas and contentions and has

rejected the plea of the petitioners that the termination of the
respondent No.1 is a termination simplicitor. As per the order of the
Tribunal, it is apparent that the petitioner school made the allegations
against the respondent No.1 that she had been defying the code of
conduct meant for teachers and she was in the habit of writing letters
and submitting representations and she was clashing with the Principal
and the language used by her was filthy and because of her misconduct
the termination letter dated 6th April, 1998 was issued. In view of the
petitioners’ specific allegations about the respondent No.1’s misconduct
the plea now raised before this Court that the petitioner’s termination
was simplicitor in terms of the contract cannot be accepted nor the
termination can be justified that this is termination simplicitor.
11.

The petitioners have made the allegations of misconduct and

major penalty of removal from service could not be awarded by
petitioners/ school without following the procedure prescribed in Rule
120 of Delhi School Education Rules, 1973 or without conducting a fair
inquiry. In the circumstances, the plea of the petitioner of alleged
simplicitor termination is contrary to their own stand and cannot be
accepted.
W.P(C) No.1853/2008

Page 7 of 8

12.

Learned counsel for the petitioner is unable to show any manifest

error or perversity in the order of Delhi School Tribunal dated 29th
October, 2007 so as to entail interference by this Court under Article
226 of the Constitution of India. The writ petition is, therefore, without
any merit and it is dismissed.
CM No.5529/2008
In view of the orders passed in the writ petition, the application
for interim direction is, therefore, also dismissed.

May 15, 2008.
‘Dev’

W.P(C) No.1853/2008

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 8 of 8

