IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of decision : January 16th, 2008
WP(C) No.9271/2007
#
!

Shri Lalji

….… PETITIONER
Through: Mr.Sanjay Ghose, Advocate.
Versus

$
^

The New India Assurance Co.Ltd
......... RESPONDENT
Through: Mr.Kanwal Chaudhary, Advocate.

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
*
The petitioner has impugned the award dated 18th April, 2007
holding that the petitioner has not been able to establish that he
worked for 240 days in any of the year on the basis of vouchers which
related to the year 2001 in different names and consequently held
that his termination from services with effect from 27th December,
2001 is just, fair and legal.

W.P (C) 9271 of 2007

Page 1 of 6

The Industrial Tribunal has considered the pleas and the
evidence of the parties and has drawn plausible inferences on the
basis of the evidence. The petitioner has not filed any documents to
show that he worked regularly for 240 days in all the years of alleged
employment. The vouchers which were filed by the petitioner were for
2001. The petitioner had been paid different amounts on different
days for different work alleged to have been performed by him. The
vouchers also bear the names of different persons. The Industrial
Tribunal has noticed that the workman has not filed any other
document except the vouchers and on the basis of the same it cannot
be inferred that the petitioner is a workman and he worked for more
than 240 days in any of the year.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has referred to the
statement of claims categorically pleading that the management has
been giving salary to the workman by different names in different
months by way of issuance of vouchers in different names. The
attention is also drawn to the cross examination of the workman
where a suggestion was given that he had been collecting money in
names of different persons. On the basis of this the learned counsel
for the petitioner contends that it is to be inferred that the petitioner

W.P (C) 9271 of 2007

Page 2 of 6

is a workman and he worked for more than 240 days in a year. The
vouchers which have been filed by the petitioner are of 2001. The
vouchers are for different amounts as is apparent from the award of
the Industrial Tribunal and for different work. If the petitioner himself
is claiming money for some of the works carried out by him in
different names and collecting different amounts, the inferences
drawn by the Tribunal cannot be held to be perverse so as to be
interfered by this Court in exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226 of
Constitution of India.

The learned counsel for the petitioner is unable to point out any
other perversity or manifest error in the award of the Industrial
Tribunal nor there is any violation of principles of natural justice so
as to entail interference in a writ petition under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has also relied on AIR
2007 SC 1370, M/s.Sriram Industrial Enterprise Ltd Vs. Mahak
Singh & Ors. In the said case relied on by the petitioner it was held by
the Supreme Court that Section 2(g) of the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947 does not require workman to prove that he had worked for 240
days continuously, during the preceding period of 12 months prior to

W.P (C) 9271 of 2007

Page 3 of 6

termination of his services and that the workmen discharge their
initial onus on their producing whatever documents are in their
custody to show that they have continuously worked for 240 days and
non production of its registers and muster rolls by employer, an
adverse inference should be taken against the management for
withholding the material and relevant evidence.

The learned counsel for the petitioner, however, has admitted
that the plea of the respondents is that petitioner was not a workman
and no record was maintained by the respondent in respect of
petitioner as he was not working with the respondent except
supplying tea to some of the officials or perhaps doing some odd jobs.
From the vouchers which have been produced, the finding of the
Industrial Tribunal is not that the petitioner did not work for 240
days continuously prior to his termination but that the workman has
failed to establish that he worked for 240 days in any of the year. In
Sriram Industries (Supra) the documents relating to attendance for
the year 1991 onwards were not considered as being irrelevant and
the Tribunal had also accepted the said plea which was held to be
suffering from manifest error and orders were interfered with. In
contradistinction in the present case where the vouchers of 2001 were
produced by the workman, had been considered and on the basis of

W.P (C) 9271 of 2007

Page 4 of 6

those vouchers it had been held that it has not been proved that the
petitioner/workman worked for 240 days not only before his alleged
termination but in any of the years. It is apparent that the case relied
on by the learned counsel for the petitioner is distinguishable.

The Supreme Court rather, in 2000 Lab. I.C. 1495, Indian
Overseas Bank vs. I.O.B. Staff Canteen Workers' Union and another
had held

that inference drawn by the Tribunal and the finding of

facts given are not to be interfered by the High Court under Article
226 of the Constitution of India. It is a settled position of law that in
exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India,
the Court should not interfere with factual findings of the lower courts
and should restrain itself from re-appreciating evidence while
exercising powers of judicial review. Reliance for this proposition can
be placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court, Government of A.P.
and Ors. v. Mohd. Nasrullah Khan reported as (2006) 2 SCC 373. Writ
court should refrain from interfering with the orders of an inferior
tribunal or subordinate court unless it suffers from an error of
jurisdiction or from a breach of the principles of natural justice or is
vitiated by a manifest or apparent error of law. The objective of
judicial review is that a person receives a fair treatment and objective
is not to re-appreciate the entire pleas and evidence and draw

W.P (C) 9271 of 2007

Page 5 of 6

inferences again. Judicial review is not an appeal from a decision but
a review of the manner in which the decision is made. Power of
judicial review is meant to ensure that the individual receives fair
treatment and not to ensure that the conclusion which the authority
reaches is necessarily correct in the eye of the court.

For the foregoing reasons

there is no perversity or manifest

error in the award of the Tribunal nor there is denial of principles of
natural justice so as to entail interference by this Court. There are no
grounds to interfere with the industrial award and the writ petition
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is without any merit and
is, therefore, dismissed.

January 16, 2008
'k'

W.P (C) 9271 of 2007

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 6 of 6

