THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Date of decision :November 16, 2007
Civil Suit (Original Side) No.783/2006
M/s.Info Edge (India) Ltd & others ......... Plaintiffs
Through:
Mr. Mr.U.Hazarika with Mr.Sudeep
Chatterjee, Advocates

!

Vs.
$
^

*

Mr.Sanjeev Goyal
Through :

.......... Defendant
Mr. Mr.A.K.Singh with Mr.Vimal Dubey
and Ms.Dhirity Phookan, Advocates

CORAM :HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?

YES

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES

YES

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)

IA No. 6066 of 2007

1.

This is an application by the defendant seeking condonation of

delay in filing the written statement alleging that there are exceptional
circumstances in the facts and circumstances for condonation of
delay.

CS(OS) No.783/2006

Page 1 of 27

2.

The defendant specifically contended that he had not been

served properly by the plaintiff till the date of filing of the written
statement. It is contended that the plaintiff had been sending emails
to him without serving him with the entire paper book of the suit.

3.

The defendant/applicant asserted that he is the Registrar with

NIXI and he came in contact with Mr.Rishi Chawla, Advocate, who
informed him that he has been working in the High Court of Delhi
with Mr.C.V. Francis, Advocate, and he with his senior will be able to
look after the matter properly. A vakalatnama of Mr.C.V. Francis was
sent by Mr.Rishi Chawla, Advocate, for signing and then sending it
back to Mr.C.V. Francis which was done by the defendant. The
applicant further asserted that Mr.Rishi Chawla, Advocate, was paid
Rs.25,000/- by the defendant for contesting the suit on his behalf and
for making the payment to Mr.C.V. Francis, Advocate, which amount
was withdrawn by the defendant/applicant from an ICICI Bank’s ATM
at Connaught Place, Delhi. Mr.Rishi Chawla, Advocate had assured
the applicant that Mr.C.V. Francis, Advocate, shall look after the
matter and will intimate him as to whatsoever is to be done. The
defendant/applicant had also sent some relevant documents to the
said advocate through courier.
CS(OS) No.783/2006

Since the documents had been
Page 2 of 27

received by Mr.C.V. Francis, Advocate, and since nothing was
demanded from him, the defendant remained under the bonafide
impression that everything is being taken care of in the suit, as
defendant was not aware of the legalities involved.

The applicant

categorically contended that at no point of time he was called upon to
appear in the court or to take any further steps though he had been
in continuous touch with Mr.Rishi Chawla, Advocate. It is contended
by the defendant that he had been visiting Delhi regularly on account
of his professional activities and had been meeting Mr.Rishi Chawla,
Advocate, in this regard who always represented that the counsel is
appearing on his behalf as a power of attorney had already been
signed by the defendant and sent to him.

4.

The applicant has contended that he received the letter dated

24th February, 2007 from Francis and George, Advocates and
Consultants, of Mr.C.V. Francis, Advocate, asking him to make
suitable arrangement for defending the applications before the court
since he was not in the picture and not able to defend the defendant.
This letter completely surprised the defendant because he was under
the bona fide impression that since he has paid the fees and sent the
document, the case is being contested on his behalf. The said counsel
had also written a letter dated 16th February, 2007 to the counsel for

CS(OS) No.783/2006

Page 3 of 27

the plaintiff stipulating that he is not a counsel for Mr.Sanjiv Goel,
defendant/applicant although a colleague of Mr.C.V. Francis had
appeared in the court on account of telephonic information. In his
letter to the counsel for the plaintiff, it was also stated that he has not
received any vakalatnama nor he has been instructed by the applicant
to represent before the court and he is helpless to deal with the
situation and, therefore, the plaintiff was asked to deal directly with
the defendant since the counsel, Mr.C.V. Francis alleged that he was
not in the picture. The said counsel, however, never intimated the
defendant that he had not received the vakalatnama signed and sent
by the defendant and that he has not been instructed and paid fees
by Rishi Chawla advocate.

5.

The applicant contended that on receipt of such a letter from

Mr.C.V. Francis, Advocate, he tried to contact Mr.Rishi Chawla a
number of times but could not contact him for considerable time as
his mobile number was either out of reach or switched off and,
therefore, the defendant came personally to Delhi and contacted
Mr.Rishi Chawla, Advocate, who after persistence enquiry by the
applicant

brought

a

file

consisting

of few

documents

placed

haphazardly and delivered it to him against a receipt about the receipt
of case file by the applicant. The said counsel, Mr.Rishi Chawla,

CS(OS) No.783/2006

Page 4 of 27

Advocate, also refused to return the money which was paid by the
defendant to him and any other information about the progress of
case and as to what was done on his behalf in the case. The applicant
also contended that in the meantime a police man approached his
place at Mumbai with bailable warrants issued by this court.
Therefore, another counsel was engaged by the applicant who
inspected the file when it transpired that no steps were taken by the
counsel who appeared on behalf of the applicant nor filed the power of
attorney or any memorandum of appearance nor the written
statement on behalf of the applicant. Therefore, the new counsel
immediately prepared the written statement and filed the same along
with the present application for condonation of delay dated 15th May,
2007.

The defendant/applicant has also filed the application for

vacation of the stay under Order XXXIX Rule 4 read with Section151
of the Code of Civil Procedure after stopping his web site as an interim
injunction

order

was

passed

against

him

which

was

not

communicated to him earlier.

6.

The applicant has also filed a number of documents showing

that the website of the plaintiff ‘Naukri.com’ in the list of job sites has
also included the website of the applicant ‘Noukri.com’. A copy of this
document was taken from the Internet by the defendant on 15th June,

CS(OS) No.783/2006

Page 5 of 27

2006 showing that the plaintiff’s website had relied on the URL
address of the defendant till that date. The applicant also relied on
the appraisal of domain names reflecting that a combined domain
name appraisal value secured by plaintiff was 442 and the estimated
domain name value of the plaintiff was $ 170,612.00 in contradiction
to the domain name appraisal value of 2056 of the defendant with
estimated domain name value of $ 680,536. The applicant, therefore,
contended that the suit has been filed merely with a view to usurp the
goodwill and the reputation of the defendant and there was no reason
for the defendant not to contest the suit or delay the suit as later on it
transpired that an ex parte order had been obtained by the plaintiff by
misstating the facts. The defendant stated that he has closed his
website on account of interim order passed by the Court and is
suffering substantially. The applicant/defendant also contended that
the written statement could not be filed as he was not aware that it
had to be filed within 30 days nor the counsel had informed him
about the same and he has been misled by the counsel to whom
consideration demanded by him was paid. Despite the fact that the
counsel engaged by the defendant, Mr.Rishi Chawla, Advocate, was
paid the fees and the vakalatnama was sent to Mr. Francis Advocate
though he alleged that he has not been paid any consideration and
that he had not received the vakalatnama and only on account of
telephonic information to him, one of his colleagues had appeared in

CS(OS) No.783/2006

Page 6 of 27

the case. The applicant contended that he bona fide believed that the
counsel will look after his interest and will advise him as to what is to
be done. He had entrusted some of the relevant papers and had also
paid the fees and had also sent the vakalatnama. The applicant
contended that in these circumstances, the loss which will be caused
to the applicant shall be immense which cannot be compensated in
terms of money, in case his right to file the written statement is closed
compared to the loss to the plaintiff, as he already has an ex parte
order because of which the defendant business has come to a knot
and the delay, if any, in filing the written statement can be
compensated by awarding cost to the plaintiff.

7.

The application is contested by the plaintiff alleging inter alia

that the written statement has been filed one year after the institution
of the present suit and consequently it is beyond the period of 30 days
and 90 days as contemplated under the Code of Civil Procedure. The
plaintiff/non-applicant also contended that the summons were served
by courier and an affidavit of the clerk of the plaintiff counsel was
filed on 10th October, 2006 along with courier receipt and report from
the site of the courier intimating that the article had been delivered to
the defendant on 8th September, 2006.

CS(OS) No.783/2006

Page 7 of 27

8.

It is further contended that the Joint Registrar on 11th October,

2006 had recorded that the service had been effected upon the
defendant and placed the matter before the court on 18th December,
2006 on which date Mr.C.V. Francis, Advocate, appeared for the
defendant and sought time to file the written statement and he was
given time to file the written statement within the time prescribed by
the law.

9.

The plaintiff also contended that the pending applications IA

Nos.1784 and 1785/2007 were filed under Order 39 Rule 2A for
continued breach of injunction order for transfer of the domain name
and the Court issued notice for 1st March, 2007 directing the presence
of defendant in person. On 1st March, 2007 since the defendant did
not appear, as the counsel, Mr.C.V. Francis, stated that he has not
received any instructions and sought his discharge, therefore, the
bailable warrants were issued against the defendant for 16th May,
2007. On 16th May, 2007, defendant appeared through a counsel and
the bailable warrants were discharged. According to the plaintiff, the
defendant has willfully dis-obeyed the order of injunction passed on
8th May, 2006 and he stopped operating his website on 11th May, 2007
though he was served on 8th September, 2006 and consequently the
conduct of the defendant dis-entitles him for any condonation of delay

CS(OS) No.783/2006

Page 8 of 27

as there are no bonafide reasons. The plaintiff also contended that
the allegations by the defendant against his erstwhile counsel are
false, as it is evident from the order dated 1st March, 2007 where the
learned counsel made a statement that he had not received any
instructions and therefore, he had sought a discharge. The plaintiff
has also contended that defendant himself was sending emails to the
plaintiff admitting that he had come to know about the suit, which
clearly discloses that the defendant was clearly posted about the
present matter and proceedings and, therefore, the defendant cannot
blame his lawyer and there are no grounds for condonation of delay in
filing the written statement.

10.

The written statement has since been filed by the defendant on

15th May, 2007. For the defendant to file a written statement within
time contemplated under order VIII rule 1 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, it is not only the knowledge of the pendency of the suit
which is material but also the fact that the entire copy of the paper
book has also been supplied to the defendant and received by him.
The plaintiff contesting the application for condonation of delay in
filing the written statement must disclose that the copy of the plaint
and the documents had been served on the defendant and despite
that the written statement has not been filed. In the present case, the

CS(OS) No.783/2006

Page 9 of 27

plaintiff has relied on a copy of the e-mail dated 14th June, 2006, the
print for which was taken on 1st October, 2007. It is alleged that a
copy of the interim order passed against the defendant was sent along
with the e-mail as an attachment. However, the same has not been
filed in compliance with Section 65(B) of the Indian Evidence Act,
1872. Section 65(B) of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 is as under:Section 65-B.Admissibility Of Electronic Records(1)“Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any
information contained in an electronic record which is printed
on a paper, stored, recorded or copied in optical or magnetic
media produced by a computer (hereinafter referred to as the
computer output) shall be deemed to be also a document, if the
conditions mentioned in this section are satisfied in relation to
the information and computer in question and shall be
admissible in any proceedings, without further proof or
production of the original, as evidence of any contents of the
original or any fact stated therein of which direct evidence
would be admissible.
(2)The conditions referred to in the subsection (1) in respect to
the computer output shall be following, namely:
(a)
the computer output containing the information
was produced by computer during the period over which
computer was used regularly to store or process
information for the purposes of any activities regularly
carried on over that period by the person having lawful
control over the use of computer.
(b)
during the said period the information of the kind
contained in the electronic record or of the kind from
which the information so contained is derived was
regularly fed into the computer in the ordinary course of
the said activities.
(c)
throughout the material part of the said period,
the computer was operating properly or, if not, then in
respect of any period in which it was not operating
properly or was out of operation for that part of the

CS(OS) No.783/2006

Page 10 of 27

period, was not such to affect the electronic record or
the accuracy of its contents.
(d)
The information contained in the electronic
record reproduces or is derived from such information
fed into computer in ordinary course of said activities.
(3)
Where over any period, the function of storing and
processing information for the purposes of any activities
regularly carried on over that period as mentioned in clause (a)
of subsection (2) was regularly performed by the computers,
whether(a)
by a combination of computer operating over that
period, or
(b)
by different computers operating in succession
over that period; or
(c)
by different combinations of computers operating
in succession over that period of time; or
(d)
in any other manner involving successive
operation over that period, in whatever order, of one or
more computers and one or more combinations of
computers,
all the computers used for that purpose during that
period shall be treated for the purpose of this section as
constituting a single computer and any reference in the
section to a computer shall be construed accordingly.
(4)
In any proceeding where it is desired to give a statement
in evidence by virtue of this section, a certificate doing any of
the following things, that is to say, a)
identifying the electronic record containing the
statement and describing the manner in which it was
produced;
b)
giving such particulars of such device involved in
the production of electronic record as maybe appropriate
for the purpose of showing that the electronic record
was produced by a computer.
c) Dealing with any of the matters to which the
conditions mentioned in subsection (2) relates,

CS(OS) No.783/2006

Page 11 of 27

and purporting to be signed by the person occupying a
responsible official position in relation to the operation of the
relevant device or management of relevant activities (whichever
is appropriate) shall be evidence of any matters stated in the
certificate; and for the purpose of this section it shall be
sufficient for a matter to be stated to best of knowledge or best
of belief of the person stating it.
(5)

For the purpose of this section,(a)
information shall be taken to be supplied to a
computer if it is supplied thereto in any appropriate
form and whether it is so supplied directly ( with or
without human intervention) by means of any
appropriate equipment.
(b)
whether in course of activities carried on by any
official information is supplied with a view to its being
stored or processed for the purpose of those activities by
a computer operated otherwise than in course of those
activities, that information, if duly supplied to that
computer, shall be taken to be supplied to the computer
in course of those activities.
(c)
a computer output shall be taken to have been
produced by a computer whether it was produced by it
directly or (with or without human intervention) by
means of any appropriate equipment.

Explanation - For the purpose of this section any references to
information being derived from another information shall be a
reference to it’s being derived therefrom by calculation,
comparison or any other process.”

11.

Though it is alleged that a copy of the interim order dated 8 th

May, 2006 was scanned and was attached with the e-mail, however,
from the copy of the e-mail it is not apparent as to what was sent
along with alleged e-mail.

No report or affidavit has been filed

fulfilling the condition contemplated under Section 65 (B) of the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 to show that e-mail was sent to the
CS(OS) No.783/2006

Page 12 of 27

defendant and was received by him along with any attachment. On
the basis of alleged e-mail, it could not be expected that the defendant
could file the written statement refuting the pleas and contentions
raised by the plaintiff and refuting or admitting the documents relied
on by the plaintiff.

12.

The plaintiff has also contended that the summons of the suit

were served on the defendant by courier and a copy of courier receipt
along with the affidavit of Mr.Kamal Mehra, clerk of the counsel for
the plaintiff has been filed. From the index of the plaint, it appears
that there are 63 pages in the plaint which include list of documents,
list of reliance, applications and vakalatnama and the documents
which have been filed by the plaintiff along with the suit also run into
about 188 pages out of which documents which are on pages from
183 to 188 are the folders of thick paper and quite heavy. From the
courier receipt, it appears that the weight of the paper book which
was sent was only 1.500 kg. There is no acknowledgment receipt that
the articles sent by courier were served and received by the defendant
except the alleged copy of status report of courier article taken by the
plaintiff from the Internet which is again not in compliance with
Section 65(B) of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 nor it is in compliance
with Order V Rule 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

CS(OS) No.783/2006

In the

Page 13 of 27

circumstances, there is nothing to show that defendant was served
with the copy of the plaint, applications and copies of the documents
relied on by the plaintiff which was filed along with the plaint. In the
circumstances, this cannot be accepted to be a valid service on the
defendant so as to make him liable to file the written statement within
thirty days from the alleged date of service.

13.

Mr. C.V. Francis, learned counsel, appeared on behalf of

defendant on 18th December, 2006 and sought time to file the written
statement. However, neither the vakalatnama of Mr.C.V. Francis is
on record nor any memo of appearance has been filed by the said
counsel appearing on behalf of defendant. The counsel had alleged in
his letter to the counsel for the plaintiff and in the letter to the
defendant that he had appeared in the case on account of telephonic
instructions and he had no other knowledge about the matter. From
the order dated 18th December, 2006 it does not appear that a
complete set of paper book was given to the said counsel in the Court.
The case of the defendant is that he had engaged Mr.Rishi Chawla,
Advocate, who was also associated with NIXI where the defendant is a
Registrar.

It has also been contended specifically that Mr.Rishi

Chawla, Advocate, was paid Rs.25,000/- which fact cannot be
doubted in the present facts and circumstances. The defendant has

CS(OS) No.783/2006

Page 14 of 27

categorically contended that he has not been served properly till the
time of filing the written statement. According to the defendant, he
had sent all relevant documents to Mr.C.V. Francis, through courier,
however, Mr.C.V. Francis, Advocate, had stated in a letter written to
the counsel for the plaintiff that the vakalatnama has not been
received by him. Without the vakalatnama or memo of appearance
filed by the counsel who appeared only on account of telephonic
instruction given to him by another counsel, he could not seek time to
file the written statement on behalf of the defendant nor it will be
appropriate to compute the time from the date when Mr. Francis
sought time to file written statement in the present facts and
circumstances of the case. Mr Francis did not know whether

the

defendant has been served with the complete paper book or not. The
case is very peculiar because Mr.C.V. Francis was not engaged by the
defendant but he was entrusted brief by Mr.Rishi Chawla, Advocate,
telephonically and it seems Mr. Rishi Chawla also did not pay any fees
to Mr. Francis though he had received the fees from the defendant.
Mr.C.V. Francis communication stipulates that he appeared in the
court on account of the telephonic message received by him perhaps
from Mr.Rishi Chawla, Advocate, without any further authorization.
He has categorically contended that he is not the counsel for the
defendant.

The said counsel had also intimated the defendant by

letter dated 24th February, 2007 that he is not his counsel as he had

CS(OS) No.783/2006

Page 15 of 27

appeared on account of telephonic instructions from Mr.Rishi Chawla
and defendant should make suitable arrangement for defending the
suit as he is not in the picture.

On receiving this communication

from Mr.C.V. Francis, Advocate, who appeared without proper
authorization on behalf of defendant and sought time to file the
written statement without knowing whether the defendant has been
served with a copy of full paper book. The plaintiff thereafter, engaged
Mr.A.K. Singh, Advocate who filed the written statement dated 15th
May, 2007. If the time is computed after 24th February, 2007 when
the intimation was sent by Mr.C.V. Francis, Advocate, to the
applicant/defendant that he is not representing him and is not his
counsel, then written statement has been filed within 90 days and
there is sufficient cause for condonation of delay in filing the written
statement.
14.

The learned counsel for the plaintiff has also emphasized on an

application for rectification filed by the defendant before the
Intellectual Property Office in June 2006 stipulating about the case
filed by the plaintiff against the defendant.

I think, in the present

facts and circumstances, mere knowledge of the filing of the case will
not be sufficient nor will impute the liability on the defendant to file
the written statement within 30 days of such knowledge, unless the
copies of the plaint, applications and documents were served on the

CS(OS) No.783/2006

Page 16 of 27

defendant. Merely on the basis of the knowledge of the pendency of
the case, it is not expected from the defendant to comprehend the
allegations made against him and the documents which have been
filed and to file a written statement within 30 days of such knowledge.
Even on this ground, the plaintiff cannot succeed and contend that
the right of the defendant to file the written statement be closed as he
did not file the written statement within 30 days of such knowledge.

15.

In any case, considering various other pleas, on the merit of the

case, where the defendant has shown that his domain name appraisal
value was much more than the plaintiff and the other factors, it
appears that the defendant would not have gained anything from
delaying the suit as an interim order had already been passed against
him. Whether the defendant has violated the interim order or not, is
to be decided separately, as an application for alleged violation of the
interim order is pending and in the present application, in the present
facts and circumstances, on the ground of alleged violation of the
order, the right of the defendant to file the written statement should
not be closed in the interest of justice.

16.

The defendant has contended that he had not been served

though he had knowledge of the pendency of the suit and only after
CS(OS) No.783/2006

Page 17 of 27

the counsel Mr.C.V. Francis’s letter that he will not represent him and
he should employ a new counsel, Mr.A.K. Singh was appointed who
probably inspected the file, got the documents and prepared the
written statement within 90 days.

In the circumstances, as the

defendant was not properly served by courier or by any other mode,
therefore, it cannot be held that the period for counting the time will
commence from18th December, 2006 when Mr.C.V. Francis, Advocate
who did not file his vakalatnama and who also did not file his memo
of appearance on behalf of defendant, had sought time to file the
written statement. Even if, it is presumed for some reason that the
time should commence from 18th December, 2006, still, in the facts
and circumstances, the defendant has been able to make out a case of
exceptional circumstances for condonation of delay in filing the
written statement. The plaintiff has already obtained an ex parte order
pursuant to which the website of the defendant has been closed.

17.

It is no more res integra that in spite of the time limit

contemplated by Rule 1 under Order VIII of the Code of Civil
Procedure having expired, the Court is not powerless to permit a
written statement being filed, if the Court may require such written
statement. The Court also need not necessarily pronounce judgment
against the defendant who fails to file the written statement as
required by Rule 1 or Rule 9 and may still make such other order in
CS(OS) No.783/2006

Page 18 of 27

relation to the suit as it thinks fit. If the written statement is not filed
within ninety days no penal consequences as such has been provided
and relying on these features the Supreme Court in Kailash v.
Nanhku,(2005) 4 SCC 480 , at page 495 had held:
28. All the rules of procedure are the handmaid of justice.
The language employed by the draftsman of processual
law may be liberal or stringent, but the fact remains that
the object of prescribing procedure is to advance the
cause of justice. In an adversarial system, no party
should ordinarily be denied the opportunity of
participating in the process of justice dispensation.
Unless compelled by express and specific language of the
statute, the provisions of CPC or any other procedural
enactment ought not to be construed in a manner which
would leave the court helpless to meet extraordinary
situations in the ends of justice. The observations made
by Krishna Iyer, J. in Sushil Kumar Sen v. State of Bihar
10 are pertinent: (SCC p. 777, paras 5-6)
“
The mortality of justice at the hands of law
troubles a judge’s conscience and points an angry
interrogation at the law reformer.
The processual law so dominates in certain
systems as to overpower substantive rights and
substantial justice. The humanist rule that
procedure should be the handmaid, not the
mistress, of legal justice compels consideration of
vesting a residuary power in judges to act ex debito
justitiae where the tragic sequel otherwise would be
wholly inequitable. Justice is the goal of
jurisprudence — processual, as much as
substantive.”

18.

The Apex Court in Nankhu (supra) had thus held that the

provision has to be construed as directory and not mandatory and in
CS(OS) No.783/2006

Page 19 of 27

exceptional circumstances, the Court may extend the time for filing
the written statement though the period of 30 days and 90 days as
contemplated in the provision has expired. The extension can be only
by way of an exception and for reasons assigned by the defendant and
also recorded in writing by the Court to its satisfaction and if required
in the interest of justice and if grave injustice would be occasioned if
the time is not extended. This was also held that the Court may
extend time by imposing costs for dual purpose: (i) to deter the
defendant from seeking any extension of time just for asking and (ii)
to compensate the plaintiff for the delay and inconvenience caused to
him. A two Judges Bench of the Apex Court in Rani Kusum v.
Kanchan Devi,(2005) 6 SCC 705 , at page 712 had relied on the ratio
of three Judges bench in Nanhko (supra) and had held that Order 8
Rule 1 of Code of Civil Procedure is a part of procedural law and
hence directory, keeping in view the need for expeditious trial of civil
causes which persuaded Parliament to enact the provision in its
present form. It was held that ordinarily the time schedule contained
in the provision is to be followed as a rule and departure there from
would be by way of exception. A prayer for extension of time made by
the defendant is not to be granted just as a matter of routine and
merely for the asking, more so when the period of 90 days has
expired. Extension of time may be allowed by way of an exception, for
reasons to be assigned by the defendant and also be placed on record

CS(OS) No.783/2006

Page 20 of 27

in writing, howsoever briefly, by the court on its being satisfied.
Extension of time may be allowed, if it is needed to be given for
circumstances which are exceptional, occasioned by reasons beyond
the control of the defendant and grave injustice would be occasioned
if the time is not extended. Costs may be imposed and affidavit or
documents in support of the grounds pleaded by the defendant for
extension of time may be demanded, depending on the facts and
circumstances of a given case. This ratio was again reiterated by
another bench of two Hon’ble Judges of Supreme Court in Sk. Salim
Haji Abdul Khayumsab v. Kumar,(2006) 1 SCC 46 , at page 53
relying on Nanhku ( supra ) and Rani Kusum (supra) holding that the
Extension of time can be allowed, if it is needed to be given for
circumstances which are exceptional, occasioned by reasons beyond
the control of the defendant and grave injustice would be occasioned,
if the time is not extended and for this costs may be imposed and
affidavit or documents in support of the grounds pleaded by the
defendant for extension of time may be demanded, depending on the
facts and circumstances of a given case. It was held as under:
“19. Learned counsel for the respondent submitted that
the court could not have granted time beyond 90 days.
This plea is untenable in view of what has been stated in
Kailash case and Rani Kusum case. Additionally a party
cannot be made to suffer if the court has committed a
mistake, if for the sake of argument it is held that the
court had mistakenly granted time.”

CS(OS) No.783/2006

Page 21 of 27

19.

This also cannot be disputed that in certain circumstances, a

party cannot be allowed to suffer for misdemeanor or inaction of his
counsel. Reliance can be placed on Rafiq v. Munshilal, (1981) 2 SCC
788 , where at page 790 the Apex Court had held as under:
“3. …………………After engaging a lawyer, the party may
remain supremely confident that the lawyer will look after
his interest. At the time of the hearing of the appeal, the
personal appearance of the party is not only not required
but hardly useful. Therefore, the party having done
everything in his power to effectively participate in the
proceedings can rest assured that he has neither to go to
the High Court to inquire as to what is happening in the
High Court with regard to his appeal nor is he to act as a
watchdog of the advocate that the latter appears in the
matter when it is listed. It is no part of his job. Mr A.K.
Sanghi stated that a practice has grown up in the High
Court of Allahabad amongst the lawyers that they remain
absent when they do not like a particular Bench. Maybe,
we do not know, he is better informed in this matter.
Ignorance in this behalf is our bliss. Even if we do not put
our seal of imprimatur on the alleged practice by
dismissing this matter which may discourage such a
tendency, would it not bring justice delivery system into
disrepute. What is the fault of the party who having done
everything in his power expected of him would suffer
because of the default of his advocate. If we reject this
appeal, as Mr A.K. Sanghi invited us to do, the only one
who would suffer would not be the lawyer who did not
appear but the party whose interest he represented. The
problem that agitates us is whether it is proper that
the party should suffer for the inaction, deliberate
omission, or misdemeanour of his agent. The answer
obviously is in the negative. Maybe that the learned
Advocate absented himself deliberately or intentionally.
CS(OS) No.783/2006

Page 22 of 27

We have no material for ascertaining that aspect of the
matter. We say nothing more on that aspect of the matter.
However, we cannot be a party to an innocent party
suffering injustice merely because his chosen advocate
defaulted. Therefore, we allow this appeal, set aside the
order of the High Court both dismissing the appeal and
refusing to recall that order. We direct that the appeal be
restored to its original number in the High Court and be
disposed of according to law. If there is a stay of
dispossession it will continue till the disposal of the
matter by the High Court. There remains the question as
to who shall pay the costs of the respondent here. As we
feel that the party is not responsible because he has done
whatever was possible and was in his power to do, the
costs amounting to Rs 200 should be recovered from the
advocate who absented himself. The right to execute that
order is reserved with the party represented by Mr A.K.
Sanghi. “

20.

Default by a lawyer in not informing the dismissal of the writ

petition to a Corporation which corporation after coming to know
about the default, engaged another lawyer and removed the defaulting
lawyer from the panel and filed an appeal seeking condonation of
delay on account of default of the lawyer, was held to have sufficient
cause for condonation of delay by the Supreme Court in Devendra
Swamy Vs Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation, AIR 2002 SC
2545. In another matter AIR 2003 SC 2164, Municipal Corporation,
Gwalior Vs Ramcharan (D) by L.Rs, the Supreme Court had held that
the counsel and the Revenue Officer, who filed their affidavits, did
not have any personal interest in the matter and the learned advocate

CS(OS) No.783/2006

Page 23 of 27

appearing for the Municipal Corporation was not going to gain
anything either by remaining absent at the time of hearing of the first
appeal or by assigning a false cause for his non-appearance at the
time of hearing. It was held that since the valuable rights of the
parties in an immovable property were involved and therefore, on the
totality of the facts and circumstances of the case, the High Court
ought to have taken a liberal, and not a rigid and too technical a view
of the issue before it, and should have condoned the delay in filing the
appeal and concentrated on examining whether the appeal raised any
substantial question of law worth being heard by the High Court and
therefore, had held that a sufficient cause for condoning the delay in
filing the appeal before the High Court was made out on account of
default of the lawyer. Regarding condonation of delay it was held that
the expression `sufficient cause‘ is adequately elastic to enable the
Courts to apply the law in meaningful manner to subserve the ends of
justice and had enunciated the principles in AIR 1987 SC 1353,
Collector Land Acquisition, Anantnag and anr. Vs Mst. Katiji and ors
for having a liberal approach as follows:
“1. Ordinarily a litigant does not stand to benefit by
lodging an appeal late.
2. Refusing to condone delay can result in a meritorious
matter being thrown out at the very threshold and cause
of justice being defeated. As against this when delay is
condoned the highest that can happen is that a cause
would be decided on merits after hearing the parties.
CS(OS) No.783/2006

Page 24 of 27

3. “Every day’s delay must be explained” does not mean
that a pedantic approach should be made. Why not every
hour’s delay, every second’s delay? The doctrine must be
applied in a rational common sense pragmatic manner.
4. When substantial justice and technical considerations
are pitted against each other, cause of substantial justice
deserves to be preferred for the other side cannot claim to
have vested right in injustice being done because of a
non-deliberate delay.
5.
There is no presumption that delay is occasioned
deliberately, or on account of culpable negligence, or on
account of mala fides. A litigant does not stand to benefit
by resorting to delay. In fact he runs a serious risk.
6. It must be grasped that judiciary is respected not on
account of its power to legalize injustice on technical
grounds but because it is capable of removing injustice
and is expected to do so.

21.

The learned counsel for the plaintiff has relied on 130 (2000)

DLT 629, HTIL Corporation, B.V & ors Vs Ajay Kohli & Ors to contend
that the defendant is not entitled for condonation of delay in filing the
written statement. Apparently the facts of the case relied on by the
plaintiff

are

quite

distinguishable

and

in

those

facts

and

circumstances, it was held that the defendant was not entitled for
condonation of delay in filing the written statement as the defendant
had failed to make out any good ground justifying delay in filing
written statement despite time given by the court.

CS(OS) No.783/2006

Page 25 of 27

22.

In case the delay in filing a written statement is not condoned

in the facts and circumstances it will occasion injustice especially as
the plaintiff already has an ex parte interim order pursuant to which
the defendant has already stopped his web site. Extension of time is
to be allowed in the present facts and circumstances which are
exceptional and are occasioned by reasons beyond the control of the
defendant. The Apex Court in Rafiq (supra) had held that a party
cannot be allowed to suffer for misdemeanor or inaction of his
counsel. The defendant has categorically contended that he had not
been served with the summons of the suit and the applications and
on the basis of his knowledge he had engaged the counsel Shri Rishi
Chawla who further entrusted the brief to Shri C.V.Francis who
however, took a plea that he was informed telephonically only and
had no instructions in the brief and he asked the defendant to engage
some other counsel.

23.

Considering various other factors, it will be just and appropriate

to impose cost on the defendant for the delay in filing the written
statement to be paid to the plaintiff and condone the delay in filing
the written statement.

CS(OS) No.783/2006

Page 26 of 27

24.

For the reasons stated hereinabove, the application is allowed

subject to cost of Rs.10,000/- payable by the defendant to the plaintiff
to be paid within four weeks and delay in filing the written statement
by the defendant is condoned and the written statement is taken on
record.
CS(OS) No.783/2006
Written statement is taken on record. Replication, if any, be
filed within four weeks.
Parties are directed to file their original documents or certified
copies thereof within 8 weeks.
List before the Joint Registrar for admission/denial and
marking of documents on 25.1.2008.
List before the Court on 7.3.2008 for framing of issues.
IA Nos.6065 and 6067 of 2007
List for hearing on 7.3.2008.
Interim orders to continue.

November 16, 2007
‘as/Dev’
CS(OS) No.783/2006

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 27 of 27

