IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Date of decision : January 17th, 2008
W.P.(C).No.3720/2006

+

KRISHAN KUMAR SODHI
....
PETITIONER
Through: Mr.S.R.Singh, Sr.Advocate with
Mr.Gulab Chandra, Advocate.
Versus
THE FOOD CORPORATION OF INDIA
....
RESPONDENTS
& ANR
Through: Mr.Virender Kumar Sharma, Advocate.
W.P.(C).No.14198/2004

+

MS.NIRMALA DEVI
....
PETITIONER
Through: Mr.S.R.Singh, Sr.Advocate with
Mr.Gulab Chandra, Advocate.
Versus
THE FOOD CORPORATION OF INDIA
....
RESPONDENTS
& ANR
Through: Ms.Pinky Anand, Advocate.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
*
1.
The petitioners, Krishan Kumar and Nirmala Devi, seek
direction to the respondents, Food Corporation of India, to re-fix

CWP Nos.3720/2006 & 14198/2004

Page 1 of 17

their seniority giving benefit of past service during the period they
rendered services with the Food Corporation of India as daily wage
typists with consequential benefits of promotion etc.

2.

The petitioner, Krishan Kumar Sodhi, was employed with the

Food Corporation of India as typist on daily wage basis with effect
from 30th December, 1971. Petitioner joined at District Office, Food
Corporation of India, Hapur, U.P.

3.

The services of Krishan Kumar Sodhi were regularized on

29th August, 1972 and he was given status of regular typist and
joined his duties with effect from 29th August, 1972 at District
Office, F.C.I. Saharanpur (U.P). While giving the status of regular
typist the seniority for the period from 30th December, 1971 to 28th
August, 1972 was not given to Krishan Kumar Sodhi despite the
fact that there was continuity of service without any break as typist
till Krishan Kumar Sodhi was regularized.

4.

The said petitioner, Krishan Kumar Sodhi, was promoted to

Assistant Grade II in 1977 and to the post of Assistant Grade I with
effect from 4.10.2000 and is continuing so. Despite the various
letters and representations written by him the seniority has not
been given to him for the period he worked as daily wager. Mr.

CWP Nos.3720/2006 & 14198/2004

Page 2 of 17

Krishan Kumar Sodhi relied on Regulation 15 of the Food
Corporation of India Staff Regulations, 1971 which is as under:“15. Probation:1) Every person regularly appointed to any post
in the Corporation under Sub-Clause (a) of Clause(1) of
Regulation 7 shall be required to be on probation for a
period of one year from the date of appointment.
Provided further that there will be no probation for a
person promoted from one grade to another grade
within the same category except where the promotion
involves a change in the category of post in the same
cadre e.g if an Asstt.Grade III is promoted as
Asstt.Grade II there will be no probation whereas if a
Messenger (Category IV official) is promoted as
Asstt.Grade III (Category III) or an Asstt.Grade-I
(Category III) is promoted as Asstt.Manager (Category
II) normal probation period shall be applicable.
Similarly if an Asstt.Manager (Category II) is promoted
as Deputy Manager (Category I) there will be normal
period of probation and for persons promoted from
Deputy Manager onwards, there will not be any
probation.
(2) The appointing authority may in his
discretion extend the period of probation by a further
period not exceeding one year.
(3) During the period of probation an employee
directly recruited shall be liable to be discharged from
service without assigning any reason by giving him a
notice of 30 days or pay and allowances in lieu thereof.
An employee promoted from a lower post to a
higher post shall be liable to be reverted to the lower
post without notice and without assigning any reason.
(4) An employee who has satisfactorily completed
his probation in any post shall thereafter be confirmed.
(5) Where an employee has rendered continuous
temporary service or continuous service on deputation
in any post immediately preceding his regular
appointment to such post, the period of service so
CWP Nos.3720/2006 & 14198/2004

Page 3 of 17

rendered temporarily or on deputation may be counted
against the period of probation if the appointing
authority so directs.”

5.

The petitioner also relied on the fact that respondents have

given seniority to five typists working on daily wage basis in U.P
region whose services were even terminated at one stage and who
were taken back in their services and were regularized by S.R.M.
Lucknow with effect from 1.8.1983. Reliance was also placed on an
office memorandum No.5(20)/86-94/E-III/NZ dated 11.12.1996
issued from Zonal Office (North) by which Sh.S.K.Bassi, Assistant
Grade II, without any interference of Court or otherwise had been
given seniority with effect from 17th February, 1972, the date Sh.
Bassi was appointed as typist on daily wage basis and was
regularized on 27th February, 1976.

6.

A series of representations were given by the petitioner which

remained

un-replied.

Ultimately

by

office

communication

No.5(16)/98-E-III/VS/CS/132 dated 3rd May, 2000, the petitioner
was intimated by the respondents that zonal office is not
competent to decide and fix the seniority of daily wagers.

7.

The petitioner, Krishan Kumar Sodhi, also placed reliance on

the matter of V.Sekhar who was appointed on daily wage basis

CWP Nos.3720/2006 & 14198/2004

Page 4 of 17

between the period 26th June, 1970 to 15th April, 1971 and whose
writ petition being W.P(C) No.5256/1998, V.Sekhar Vs. FCI was
decided on 17th February, 2000 in his favor and his seniority was
re-fixed from 26th June, 1970 when he joined as daily wager. The
petitioner’s contention is that his case is not different from the
cases of Sh.S.K.Bassi and V.Sekhar and he has been illegally
discriminated without any rationale and justification and only on
the basis of whims of the officials of the respondents.

8.

Petitioner, Krishan Kumar Sodhi, categorically contended

that U.P. region of Food Corporation of India has already given
seniority to all their employees who worked on daily wage basis for
years together at the intervention of Labor Court and they have
been

placed accordingly in Zonal seniority. The petitioner also

made a grievance that the officials of the respondents are acting on
their

whims

and

fancies

in

granting

seniority

taking

into

consideration the work done by the employees on daily wage basis.
Krishan Kumar Sodhi gave more representations after seniority
was given to some on 8th July, 2005, 25th September, 2000 and 28th
April, 2003 and thereafter filed the present petition.

9.

The other petitioner, Smt. Nirmala Devi, contended that she

was appointed as a typist on daily wage basis on 17th June, 1972

CWP Nos.3720/2006 & 14198/2004

Page 5 of 17

at Head Quarters, New Delhi pursuant to letter dated 13th June,
1972 and her services were regularized on 26th February, 1976.
During this period she worked continuously as daily wage typist.
She was promoted to Assistant Grade II on 14th August, 1987 and
promoted to Assistant Grade I in October, 2002. The petitioner,
Smt. Nirmala Devi also relied on the cases of Sh.S.K.Bassi and
V.Sekhar in whose matters, the period during which they had
worked as daily wagers was taken into consideration while fixing
their seniority.

10.

The petitioner, Smt. Nirmala Devi also contended that

despite various representations given by her from time to time, by
office order No.5(16)/98-E-III/VS/CS/132 dated 3rd May, 2000 she
was given an evasive reply that zonal office is not competent to
decide and fix the seniority of daily wagers and she was advised to
approach the concerned appointing authority. The said petitioner,
thereafter, made more representations, however, her seniority has
not been fixed taking into consideration the period during which
she worked as daily wager.

11.

The writ petitions are contested by the respondents. In the

case of Krishan Kumar Sodhi it was contended that there is no
provision under Regulation 16 of the Food Corporation of India

CWP Nos.3720/2006 & 14198/2004

Page 6 of 17

(Staff) Regulation, 1971 for grant of seniority to the persons for the
period he worked on daily wage basis. It was also contended that
for grant of seniority the competent authority is SRM/GM and
since the appointing authority of typist is General Manager, U.P.
Lucknow the zonal seniority list based on requirement of panels of
different regions is issued at zonal level.

12.

Regarding the seniority given to the five typists for the period

they worked as daily wagers, the reply of the respondents was that
it was given on the recommendation of appointing authority.
Though the writ petition has been filed against the Food
Corporation of India and reply has also been filed on its behalf,
however, pleas of the petitioner has been replied only on behalf of
zonal office. How the case of the petitioner is different from the five
other typist who had been recommended by the office letter which
was relied on by the petitioner, no cogent reply has been given.
Regarding the case of Sh.S.K.Bassi it was contended that his case
was decided by the Head Quarters being appointing authority
under Regulation 15(5) of the Food Corporation of India (Staff)
Regulation, 1971. All the appointing authorities are under the Food
Corporation of India but no reply has been given as to why in the
case of the petitioners, the seniority cannot be given.

CWP Nos.3720/2006 & 14198/2004

Page 7 of 17

13.

In the counter affidavit filed by Lachman Sahijwani, DGM (P)

in the case of Mr. Krishan Kumar Sodhi it was pleaded by him that
the power to grant seniority to the persons for the period he worked
on daily wage basis is with the appointing authority to whom the
petitioner has already made representations. Regarding the case of
Sh.V. Sekhar it was contended that his case was also decided by
Head Quarters under Regulation 15(5) being his appointing
authority. In para 13 of the said counter affidavit it was
categorically contended that whosoever got the seniority was given
by the appointing authority as per Regulation 15(5). Para 13 & 14
of the counter affidavit in CWP No.3720/2006 are as under:“13. That para no.13 of the writ petition is wrong and
denied. It is submitted that whosoever got the seniority
was given by the appointing authority as per
Regulation 15(5) mentioned supra. It is submitted that
once the service of daily wager were terminated and
later on taken back and regularized by General
Manager (UP) being the appointing authority
w.e.f.1.8.1983 as sequel to settlement before ALC (C)
Kanpur UP, he is not entitled to seniority. All other
contents of para under reply are wrong and denied.
14. That para no.14 of the writ petition is wrong and
denied. It is submitted that there is no provision under
Regulation 16 of the FCI (Staff) Regulation, 1971, for
grant of seniority to the person for the period he
worked on daily wages basis. His case can only be
considered by General Manager (UP) Lucknow as per
Regulation 15(5) mentioned supra. All other contents
of para under reply are wrong and denied.”
14.

In the case of Nirmala Devi the counter affidavit was filed by

CWP Nos.3720/2006 & 14198/2004

Page 8 of 17

Sh.R.P.Goel working as Joint Manager, Finance Accounts in the
Food Corporation of India, Regional Office, Rajendra Place, New
Delhi. He contended that the petition is bad on account of delay of
more than 28 years. Regarding the employment of the petitioner on
daily wage basis since 1972 it was contended that the records have
been destroyed and, therefore, the case of the petitioner cannot be
considered. Relying on Regulation 15(5) it was contended in the
case of Smt. Nirmala Devi that the period she worked on daily wage
basis cannot be counted for fixing her seniority as under the said
regulation only temporary service on deputation is to be counted.

15.

I have perused both the writ petitions, counter affidavits filed

in them and the rejoinder affidavit and heard the counsel. The
learned counsel for the respondents Mr.Virendra Kumar Sharma
has argued that appointing authority has not been impleaded as a
party and the discretion is with the appointing authority to take
into consideration the period an employee has worked on daily
wages, to grant seniority considering the said period.

16.

The petitioners have filed the writ petition against the Food

Corporation of India which is a statutory body. Once the Food
Corporation of India has been sued, the respondents cannot
contend that the Food Corporation of India does not represent the

CWP Nos.3720/2006 & 14198/2004

Page 9 of 17

concerned appointing authorities. No reply has been given in the
counter affidavits filed on behalf of the Food Corporation of India
as to why the appointing authorities have not granted seniority to
the petitioners for the period they worked as daily wager and how
the cases of the petitioners are different from other persons whose
period for which they worked as daily wager has been computed to
grant seniority. The plea of the petitioners has remained unrebutted.

17.

The different appointing authorities of the Food Corporation

of India cannot grant seniority to the daily wagers on the basis of
their alleged discretion which is not circumscribed by a uniform
criterion. Granting seniority to some of the daily wagers and
denying the seniority to others in these facts and circumstances
suffers from the vice of arbitrariness.

18.

The

plea

of

the

petitioners

that

Sh.S.K.Bassi

and

Sh.V.Sekhar also worked as daily wagers and while fixing their
seniority the work done by them as daily wagers has been
considered has not been denied in the counter affidavits filed on
behalf of respondents. What is stated in the counter affidavits filed
in the two writ petitions is that the seniority has been fixed by the
Head Quarters and/or appointing authority. The writ petitions

CWP Nos.3720/2006 & 14198/2004

Page 10 of 17

have not only been filed against Zonal Manager (North) in case of
Krishan Kumar Sodhi and the Executive Director (P) in case of
Nirmala Devi but has also been filed against the Food Corporation
of India. The plea raised on behalf of the respondents is based on
the premise that not only the Food Corporation of India is a
statutory authority, but its officials are also distinct and different
statutory authorities such as Executive Director (P) and the Zonal
Manager (North). Since the writ petition has been filed against the
Food Corporation of India, all the authorities referred in the
counter affidavits come under the Food Corporation of India and it
was for the respondent, Food Corporation of India to explain how
some of the daily wagers have been given the benefit of service for
fixing seniority for the period of employment as daily wager and
why the same benefit has not been extended to the petitioners.

19.

The respondents are also unable to explain as to how the

seniority have been granted to some of the employees such as
Sh.S.K.Bassi, Sh.V.Sekhar and five other typists and not to the
petitioners in these two writ petitions. The plea taken that the
discretion is with the appointing authority is no justification to the
discrimination and arbitrary acts indulged by the appointing
authorities of the Food Corporation of India.

CWP Nos.3720/2006 & 14198/2004

Page 11 of 17

20.

The learned counsel for the respondents Corporation, Mr.

Sharma,

who

had

contended

that

the

Regulation

15(5)

contemplates grant of seniority to only those employees who had
been granted 'Temporary Status' has also contended that the
appointing authority has the discretion which has been exercised
in case of others and he is unable to explain as to on what grounds
the same discretion could not be exercised in case of petitioners.
The case of the respondent is not that under Regulation 15(5) the
period for which an employee has worked on daily wages cannot at
all be taken into consideration but that it is to be considered and
decided by the appointing authority only.

21.

In the circumstances, the apparent case of the respondents

is that though the period during which an employee has worked on
daily wage basis can be considered for grant of seniority but it is to
be done by the appointing authorities and it can be granted at their
discretion. Why that discretion has not been exercised has not
been pleaded or explained. The learned counsel for the respondents
are also unable to explain how the appointing authorities of Food
Corporation of India can exercise their discretion in such an
arbitrary manner. For the exercise of discretion there should have
been some relevant consideration. In the facts and circumstances
it seems, the respondent's have unfettered discretion. The whole

CWP Nos.3720/2006 & 14198/2004

Page 12 of 17

concept of unfettered discretion is inappropriate to a public
authority, which possesses powers solely in order that it may use
them for the public good. Refusing to grant benefit of the period
during which the employees have worked on daily wages to some
and granting to others infuses arbitrariness in their action which
requires correction in exercise of jurisdiction by this Court under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India. From the arguments of the
counsel for the respondents it appears that the Appointing
authority of respondent has unfettered discretion which cannot be
permitted in the facts and circumstances. In Kumari Srilekha
Vidyarthi & ors Vs State of U.P and ors, (1991) 1 SCC 212 , the Supreme
Court relying on Wade’s Administrative Law 6th edition on pages
237 had held as under:
25 . In Wade: Administrative Law (6th edn.) after indicating that ‘the powers of public authorities are essentially different from those of private persons’, it has
been succinctly stated at pp. 400-01 as under:
“... The whole conception of unfettered discretion is inappropriate to a public authority, which possesses powers solely in order that it may use them for the public
good.
There is nothing paradoxical in the imposition of such
legal limits. It would indeed be paradoxical if they were
not imposed. Nor is this principle an oddity of British
or American law: it is equally prominent in French law.
Nor is it a special restriction which fetters only local
CWP Nos.3720/2006 & 14198/2004

Page 13 of 17

authorities: it applies no less to ministers of the
Crown. Nor is it confined to the sphere of administration: it operates wherever discretion is given for some
public purpose, for example where a judge has a discretion to order jury trial. It is only where powers are given for the personal benefit of the person empowered
that the discretion is absolute. Plainly this can have no
application in public law.
For the same reasons there should in principle be no
such thing as unreviewable administrative discretion,
which should be just as much a contradiction in terms
as unfettered discretion. The question which has to be
asked is what is the scope of judicial review, and in a
few special cases the scope for the review of discretionary decisions may be minimal. It remains axiomatic that all discretion is capable of abuse, and that legal
limits to every power are to be found somewhere.”
(emphasis supplied)

22.

In the facts and circumstances the unfettered discretion

exercised by the appointing authority of the respondents denying
the benefit of the period during which they worked as daily wager
cannot be permitted in the facts and circumstances of the present
cases. If the seniority has been granted taking into consideration
the period during which the employees have worked on daily wages
to some of the employees as has been detailed by the petitioner in
these two writ petitions, the same cannot be denied to the
petitioners in the facts and circumstances. This is not the case of
the respondents that seniority for the period during which the
employees have worked on daily wages cannot be granted at all in
accordance with rules but that it is the discretion of the appointing

CWP Nos.3720/2006 & 14198/2004

Page 14 of 17

authority of food Corporation of India. Consequently the action of
the respondents in denying to the petitioners the seniority for the
period during which they worked as daily wager cannot be
sustained in the facts and circumstances. The petitioners, in these
two writ petitions, therefore for fixing of their seniority shall be
entitled for the period during which they worked as daily wager.

23.

The learned counsel for the respondents Ms. Pinky Anand

has also raised a plea that the petition of Smt.Nirmal Devi suffers
from delay and laches. However, considering all the pleas in their
entirety it is apparent that there is not such a delay that the said
petitioner should be deprived of the relief claimed by her. The
various representation of the petitioners were not considered for
considerable period and thereafter were replied taking a vague plea
that the matter of seniority for the period during which she worked
as daily wager has to be considered by the appointing authority or
the Head Quarter and the representation should be made to them.
This reply was given in 2000. Thereafter the representations have
been made which have not been replied. Though the seniority has
been granted to some of the employees for the period they worked
on daily wage basis also but the petitioners have been denied the
same relief without any justifiable and legal cause or reason except
that it is the unfettered discretion of the appointing Authority. In

CWP Nos.3720/2006 & 14198/2004

Page 15 of 17

the case of Smt. Nirmala Devi this ground has been raised on
behalf of the respondents, however, in the case of other petitioner
Shri Krishan Kumar Sodhi, this plea has not been taken. In the
circumstances, it will not be appropriate to dismiss one petition on
the ground of delay and laches and allow another petition. In any
case considering the entirety of pleas and contentions and the fact
that the seniority of others daily wagers has also been considered
till recently, it also cannot be inferred that the petition suffers from
delay and laches.

24.

In the case of Smt. Nirmala Devi, another plea of the

respondents is that they do not have the record of the said
petitioner about her working as daily wager. The said petitioner has
produced the copy of her appointment letter appointing her on
daily wage basis. The plea of the respondents that they do not have
the record cannot be accepted. To counter the plea of the said
petitioner, it was for the respondents to locate the record. The
respondents cannot be allowed to take shelter under the plea that
the record is very old. The respondents have failed to aver and
show that the efforts were made by the respondents in consonance
with the rules of the Food Corporation of India about keeping the
record and that the record had been destroyed being old. The
petitioner has discharged her onus by producing the copy of the

CWP Nos.3720/2006 & 14198/2004

Page 16 of 17

letter by which she was appointed as typist on daily wage basis. It
was for the respondents to rebut the same by tracing the record
and producing the same. This is not the case of the respondents
that there are rules for the destruction of the record and the record
of the petitioner, Smt. Nirmala Devi has been destroyed. Since
destruction of the record is not the plea of the respondents, they
cannot deny the copy of the appointing letter produced by said
petitioner on the ground that the record is very old and not
traceable. So even on this plea the petitioner Smt. Nirmala Devi
cannot be denied the relief sought by her.

25.

Therefore in the facts and circumstances the rule is made

absolute and the writ petitions are allowed. The respondents are
directed to fix the seniority of the petitioners taking into
consideration their appointment as daily wager, i.e for petitioner,
Smt. Nirmala Devi from 17.6.1772 and for Shri Krishan Kumar
Sodhi from 30.12.1971. Considering the facts and circumstances,
the parties are however, left to bear their own costs.

January 17th, 2008
‘k’

CWP Nos.3720/2006 & 14198/2004

ANIL KUMAR J.

Page 17 of 17

