IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Date of decision : April 17, 2007
WP(C) No. 3647/1995

#
!

Rajdhani Motor Training School
Welfare Society (Regd.)
….. Petitioner
Through :
Mr.Anil Kumar Sangal, Advocate
Versus

$
^

The Commissioner Cum
Secretary Transport & Ors.
Through :

....... Respondents
Ms. Avinash Ahlawat Advocate.

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO

NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.
*
1.

The petitioner is aggrieved by the alleged discrimination of State

Transport Authority with the members of petitioner, Motor Driving Training
Schools, in obtaining learners as well as permanent driving licenses for the
candidates who obtain training from the respective schools and the
respondent no.11.

WP(C) 3647 of 2005

The petitioner is also aggrieved by the directions

P age 1 of 18

stipulated in annexure P-1 to P-4 banning the entry of the members of the
school to the motor licensing offices and still allowing respondent no.11 not
only entry in the offices but also permitting it to issue learner’s licenses for its
trainees and others.

2.

The petitioner also alleged that a number of motor training school are

functioning un-authorizedly without approval/licenses with the connivance of
the functionaries of Transport Department whereas the respondents 1 to 10
are not allowing various other motor car training institutes, members of the
petitioner, to get the learner license and permanent licenses for their
candidates.

3.

Brief facts to comprehend the disputes are that the petitioner is a

society established under the provisions of Societies Registration Act XXI of
1860 read with Rule 24 of Central Motor Vehicles Rules 1989 for carrying on
the business of imparting instructions to the candidates in driving of motor
vehicles and matter connected therewith.

According to the petitioner, its

members hold genuine licenses in prescribed form 11 of the rules.

The

members of the petitioner are stated to be maintaining records including the
registration in form 14 under the mandate of Rule 27. Rule 24 of the Central

WP(C) 3647 of 2005

P age 2 of 18

Motor Vehicle Rules, 1989 is as under:

"24. Driving Schools and Establishments:-1) No person shall
establish or maintain any driving school or establishment for
imparting instructions for hire or reward in driving motor vehicles
without a licence in Form 11 granted by the licensing authority.
2) An application for the grant or renewal of a licence
under sub-rule (1) shall be made in Form 12 or Form 13, as the
case may be, to the licensing authority having jurisdiction in the
area in which the school or establishment is situated and shall
be accompanied by appropriate fee as specified in rule 32.
Explanation:- For the purpose of this rule and rules 25 to
28 "licensing authority" means an officer not below the rank of
the Regional Transport Officer of the Motor Vehicles
Department established under Section 213.
3) The licensing authority shall, when considering an
application for the grant or renewal of a license under this rule,
have regard to the following matters, namely:i) the applicant and the staff working under him are of
good moral character and are qualified to give driving
instructions.
ii) the premises where the school or establishment is
proposed to be conducted is either owned by the applicant or is
taken on lease by him or is hired in his name and it has
adequate provision for conducting lecture and demonstration of
models besides adequate parking area for the vehicles meant
to be used for imparting instructions in driving:
Provided that in respect of schools or establishments
imparting instructions in driving of motor vehicles or matters
connected therewith immediately before the commencement of
these rules, the licensing authority may permit the conducting of
instruction facilities in the same premises where the school or

WP(C) 3647 of 2005

P age 3 of 18

establishment is housed for a period of six months,
notwithstanding the fact that the premises do not satisfy the
conditions laid down in this clause;
iii) the financial resources of the proposed school or
establishment are sufficient to provide for its continued
maintenance;
iv) the applicant owns and maintains a minimum of one
motor vehicle each of the type in which instruction is imparted in
the school or establishment;
v) the vehicles are available exclusively for purposes of
imparting instruction and all such vehicles, except motorcycles,
are fitted with dual control facility to enable the instructor to
control or stop the vehicle;
vi) the applicant maintains the following apparatus,
equipments and other requirements namely:a) a black board,
b) a road plan board with necessary model signals and
charts;
c) traffic signs chart,
d) chart on automatic signals and signals given by traffic
controllers where there are no automatic signals,
e) a service chart depicting a detailed view of all the
components of a motor vehicle.
f) engine gear box, (brake shoe and drums) (except
where the applicant desires to impart instruction in the driving of
motor cycles only),
g) puncture kit with tyre lever, wheel brace, jack and tyre
pressure gauge,
h) spanners (a set each of fix spanners, box spanners,

WP(C) 3647 of 2005

P age 4 of 18

pliers, screw drivers, screw spanners, and hammer),
i) driving instructions manual,
j) benches and tables for trainees and work bench,
k) (* * *)
l) (* * *)
Provided that where the applicant is unable to maintain a
projector and screen, it shall be sufficient if arrangements are
made by the applicant for audio-visual demonstration or road
safety by means of pre-recorded video cassettes through
television or other similar display equipment,
m) a collection of books on automobile mechanism, driving,
road safety, traffic regulations, laws relating to motor vehicles
and related subjects
n) a fully equipped first-aid box for use in emergency at the
premises;
vii) (* * *)
viii) the applicant or any member of the staff employed by him
for imparting instructions possesses the following qualifications,
namely:a) a minimum educational qualification of a pass in the
10 standard,
th

b) a minimum driving experience of five years in addition
to a certificate in a course in motor mechanics or any other
higher qualification in mechanical engineering from an
institution established by the Central or a State Government or
from an institution recognized by the Board of Technical
Education of a State Government,
c) thorough knowledge of traffic signs specified in the
Schedule to the Act and the regulations made under Section

WP(C) 3647 of 2005

P age 5 of 18

118,
d) ability to demonstrate and to explain the functions of
different components, parts of the vehicles,
e) adequate knowledge of English or the regional
language of the region in which the school or establishment is
situated:
Provided that any person who has served as an
instructor for a period of not less than five years immediately
before the commencement of these rules, is exempted from the
requirements of this sub-clause.
4) The licensing authority may, on receipt of an application
under sub-rule (2) and after satisfying that the applicant has
complied with the requirements of sub-rule (3), grant or review a
license in Form 11.
5) No application for licence shall be refused by the licensing
authority unless the applicant is given an opportunity of being
heard and reasons for such refusal are given in writing by the
licensing authority.

4.

The petitioner contended that its members for carrying on the license

business of imparting instructions in driving of motor vehicles have invested
huge amounts of money in procuring and maintaining various types of
vehicles and in employing trained drivers, training instructors and training
equipments and other establishments like class rooms and other requisite
facilities. The training schools have to observe conditions as stipulated in
Rule 27 of the Central Motor Vehicle Rules, 1989 which is as under:

WP(C) 3647 of 2005

P age 6 of 18

"27. General conditions to be observed by the holder of a
licence-The holder of a licence granted under rule 24 shall,a) maintain on an annual basis, a register in Form 14
and an alphabetical list of the names of the students admitted
during the year;
b) conduct the training course according to the syllabus
specified in rule 31;
(* * *)
d) issue to every student who has completed the course
a certificate in Form 5;
e) submit to the licensing authority which granted the
licence such information or return as may be called for by it from
time to time for the purposes of this Chapter;
f) not shift the school or establishment from the premises
mentioned in the licence without the prior approval in writing of
the licensing authority, which granted the licence;
g) keep the premises of the school or establishment and
the record and registers maintained by it at all reasonable times
open for inspection by the licensing authority or by any person
authorized in this behalf by the licensing authority;
h) exhibit in a conspicuous manner on all the motor
vehicles used for imparting instructions the names, full address
of the school or establishment and the telephone number, if
any, in bold letters;
i) maintain a record separately for each trainee showing
the number
of driving hours spent every day in Form 15;
j) display at a prominent place in its office the following:-

WP(C) 3647 of 2005

P age 7 of 18

(i) the licence in original issued to the school or
establishment by the licensing authority, and
(ii) the names and addresses of instructors employed
by the school or establishment;
k) not act in a manner calculated to mislead any person
making an application to receive instructions from the school or
establishment as to his ability to procure a licence for such
person other than in accordance with these rules or to connive
with any person in acts of commission or omission with a view
to circumventing the provisions of this Chapter.

5.

According to the petitioner, the schools for imparting training in motor

driving are established and regulated in accordance with section 12 of Motor
Vehicle Act. According to petitioner all the motor driving training schools
have to comply with the same terms and conditions as stipulated in the Motor
Vehicle Act and the rules framed there under. In the circumstances, banning
the entry of the officials of various motor driving training schools and allowing
the officials of respondent no.11 to enter various offices and obtain the
licenses for its students is discriminatory and there is no rational basis for
discrimination between the members of petitioner society and the respondent
no.11. According to petitioner such discrimination is hit by article 14 of the
Constitution of India. The petitioner's grievance is that despite the statutory
restrictions that the motor vehicles licenses can be issued only by respondent
Nos.1 to 10, the powers have been given to respondent No.11 to issue

WP(C) 3647 of 2005

P age 8 of 18

licenses and to conduct the test of non-transport licenses and such licensees
have been exempted from further test on the basis of driving certificate
issued by respondent No.11.

6.

The petitioner contended that by extending such powers to respondent

No.11, members of the petitioner's society have been discriminated and
restrictions on the members of the petitioner society not to enter into the
public offices of the Zonal office of Transport Department for having the
licenses of its candidates, the members of the petitioner have been deprived
of their livelihood. It was asserted by the petitioner that a notice dated 4th
September, 1995 was given to Commissioner-cum-Secretary, Transport
Department, but instead of correcting his action, the members of the
petitioner's society are subjected to acts of reprisal and as a retaliation the
respondent no.1 has totally discarded the members of the petitioner's society
for issue and renewal of licenses without any justification. In order to enforce
such actions, rather guidelines have been issued and under instructions the
driving licenses are to be made only by the respondents no.1 to 10.
According to the petitioner, adherence to the directions, a number of schools
of the petitioners society are suffering grave business losses on account of
the acts of omission and commission and the acts of respondents are placing

WP(C) 3647 of 2005

P age 9 of 18

unreasonable restrictions on the petitioner's right to carry on trade and
business and violating the fundamental rights of the members of the
petitioner's society whereas respondents are giving extra advantage the
respondent No.11 and are also harassing the members of the petitioner
society.

7.

In these circumstances, the petitioners have impugned the action of

respondents, the banning of entrance of the proprietor or various
representatives of the members of petitioner's society into the offices of
respondents for procuring the learner licenses and permanent licenses of its
candidates and not allowing them to take the test of competence and not
allowing the members of the petitioner's society to process the application of
their respective trainees and candidates for procuring licenses.

8.

The writ petition was contested by respondents and an affidavit of Shri

Rajesh Somal, Joint Director, Transport, on behalf of respondent Nos.1 to 10
was filed. It was contended that under the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988, licenses
can be granted in accordance with the rules. Motor driving training schools to
impart training to the public for driving proficiencies in various types of motor
vehicles can also be run in accordance with the provision of the Act and the

WP(C) 3647 of 2005

P age 10 of 18

rules framed there under. It was contended that rule 24 of 1989 Rules does
not permit motor training schools to issue the licenses themselves. Relying
on Form 11 of 1989 rules, it was asserted that the licenses are limited to
imparting of instructions in driving for the category of vehicles for which the
licenses are issued.

9.

According to respondent Nos.1 to 10, for the purpose of obtaining a

driving license under the Act and Rules, a practical test under Rule 30 is
contemplated of any person seeking to obtain a driving license which is
mandatory except for those individuals who possesses a driving certificate
issued by an institution recognized in this regard by the State Government in
terms of the proviso to Section 9(3) of Motor Vehicle Act, 1988.

It was

categorically stated in 1996 by the respondent nos. 1 to 10 when the counter
affidavit was filed that no such institution has been recognized by the Delhi
Government though for this purpose the respondent No.11 was under
consideration.

10.

The respondents also pleaded that for the purpose of practical test, the

rules do not permit for providing a motor vehicle by the licensing authority to
take the test rather the person taking the test is liable to bring his own vehicle

WP(C) 3647 of 2005

P age 11 of 18

and for those persons who do not have a motor vehicle and who desire to
take a test for obtaining a license, the facilities are provided at the
Government Motor Training School at Loni Road, Shahadara. On
successfully taking the practical test, applicant becomes entitled for a driving
license in terms of section 14 of the Act, 1988.

11.

Regarding some of the alleged motor training institutes which were

not licensed and which were allegedly functioning in connivance with the
officials of the respondents, it was stated that 79 establishments were
inspected out of which seven establishments were found to be functioning
more or less properly and 64 establishments were found not to be
maintaining their records properly as per the rules and regulations and
irregularities were noticed in maintenance of statutory form No.14 and 15
under the Rule of 1989. The allegation of discrimination and running of the
institutions in connivance of the respondent nos. 1 to 10 was not admitted.

12.

Refuting the pleas raised by respondents, a rejoinder affidavit was filed

by the petitioner and reliance was also placed on a decision of Central
Administrative Tribunal in OA NO.1875 of 1994, titled Shri I.S. Khanna and
Others vs. Government of NCT of Delhi and Others where the question

WP(C) 3647 of 2005

P age 12 of 18

involved was for the promotion of Chief Motor Vehicle Inspector and Motor
Licensing Officer.

13.

Pursuant to order passed by this Court, the respondents have filed

additional affidavits and reports. I have heard the learned counsel for the
parties and have perused the petition, counter affidavit, rejoinder affidavit,
additional affidavit, report and documents filed by the parties. The learned
counsel for the petitioner, Mr. Rungta, has restricted his submission to no
action being taken against the unauthorized motor driving schools and that
the respondents should check the running of unauthorized motor driving
schools which is the statutory duty of the respondents. He contended that
from the record it is evident that there are unauthorised motor driving training
schools but no steps have been taken to ensure that these schools are not
being run. Learned counsel also contended that the petitioner cannot be
discriminated with respondent No.11 as respondent No.11 has been
authorized to issue even driving licenses contrary to statutory requirement of
Motor Vehicle Act, 1988.

14.

Regarding the permission granted to respondent No.11 to issue the

licenses for motor driving vehicles, the respondent Nos.1 to 10 in their

WP(C) 3647 of 2005

P age 13 of 18

counter affidavit dated 8th January, 1996 categorically asserted that
respondent No.11 does not have power to issue licenses or to represent
licensee and these powers delegated to respondent No.11 were withdrawn
with effect from 14th November, 1994 by the Act 54 of 1994 and
consequently respondent No.11 is being treated like any and other licensees.
The relevant assertion of respondent Nos.1 to 10 is as under:" It is submitted that the respondent no.11 has not been given
the power to issue licence or to represent licensee and section
9 subsection 3 (b) under which the powers were given, under
motor vehicle act, to conduct the test of non transport licensees
and such licensees were exempted from further tests under rule
13 if they possess driving certificate issued by AAUI; these
powers delegated to AAUI have now been withdrawn by the Act
54 of 1994 section 7 w.e.f 14.11.1994. Consequently the
respondent no.11 is being treated alike with the other
licensees."

15.

From the perusal of the record it is apparent that by order dated

November 3, 1998 respondents were directed to identify the unauthorised
schools/colleges which were continuing imparting instructions in driving of
motor vehicles and to submit a report in this regard. The respondents filed a
report dated January 30, 1999 stipulating that a survey was carried out in
association with the Delhi traffic police, Delhi police authorities, officers of the
Department of Transport and of the Enforcement Wing in the said department

WP(C) 3647 of 2005

P age 14 of 18

in addition to the motor licensing officers of the Department of Transport.
During the course of inspection 37 schools were identified which had been
established without an appropriate approval/licenses under the Central Motor
Vehicle Rules, 1989. It was also stated in the report that the process of
identification of such schools is the continuing process and consequent upon
identification, the action as contemplated under law including, seizure of
vehicles, prosecution and cancellation/cancellation of registration of the
vehicle being used for imparting training shall be taken.

16.

A report dated 21st April, 1999 was also filed stipulating that 30 more

schools have been identified which had been established without an
appropriate approval/licenses under the act. And it was stated that the total
number of such schools is 67 and a list of such schools will also produced. It
was also contended that letters have been issued to the Deputy
Commissioner of police to initiate a time bound action to ensure the closure
of these unauthorised schools.

17.

An additional affidavit dated February 25, 2002 has been filed

deposing that letters have been received from Deputy Commissioners of
police indicating that no school is running unauthorisedly and in some areas

WP(C) 3647 of 2005

P age 15 of 18

the schools have already applied for proper approval and have filed
application for grant of licenses. It was also disclosed that 48 vehicles were
identified for imparting training unauthorisedly which have been Challaned by
the Enforcement wing of the Transport Department and the persons who
were being trained on these vehicles have also been challaned because such
persons were learning without the learner's license. Copies of such challans
were also produced by the respondents.

18.

In fresh inspection conducted by the respondents it transpired that

many unauthorised schools were closed and their number was reduced to
only 32 schools. Further action was taken by the respondents to identify their
vehicles on which the training was imparted for taking action against them in
accordance with law.

19.

From this it is apparent that it cannot be inferred that the unauthorised

schools were running with the connivance of respondent nos. 1 to 10. A
driving School is required to have a vehicle with dual controls, qualified
instructors and maintenance of apparatus and equipments as mentioned in
the rules. The respondents have already taken action against the schools
which are unauthorised and consequently no further directions are required

WP(C) 3647 of 2005

P age 16 of 18

against the respondents in this regard.

20.

Regarding the discrimination in allowing respondent no.

11, the

respondents have already stated that the said respondent has not been given
power to issue licence or to represent licensees and the power delegated has
been withdrawn by the Act 54 of 1994.

Consequently the prayer of the

petitioner regarding discrimination and to be treated alike with the respondent
number no.11 also does not survive. It is also to apparent that the motor
driving training school which has a licence under rule 24 is not permitted to
issue licences. Consequently the petitioner cannot claim that its members
are entitled to issue licenses. If the members of the petitioners are not
entitled to issue licences, they are not entitled to go to the offices of the
respondent nos. 1 to 10 to get licenses for their trainees. Consequently the
petitioner is not entitled to get the notifications issued by the respondents.

21.

Under section 9 (3) of Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 no permission or

exemption has been granted to any of the members of the petitioner.
Consequently the petitioner is also not entitled to conduct the driving tests in
accordance with the provisions of the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 in the present
facts and circumstances.

WP(C) 3647 of 2005

P age 17 of 18

22.

Consequently the petitioner is not entitled for any of the relief prayed

by him. There has not been any discrimination between the member of the
petitioner and the respondent no.11 in the facts and circumstances nor can it
be inferred that the respondents have not taken any action against the
unauthorized motor driving training schools. The writ petition is therefore,
without any merit and it is dismissed. The parties are however, left to bear
their own costs.

April 17, 2007
'sdp'

WP(C) 3647 of 2005

ANIL KUMAR J.

P age 18 of 18

