*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P(C) No.1838/2008

%

Date of decision: 17.03.2008

M/s.Kalamkari Design Ltd
Through:

….… Petitioner
Mr.Ashim Vachher, Advocate.

Versus
Sh.Hareram Paswan

....... Respondent
Through:

Nemo.

CORAM :HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.
1.

The petitioner management has challenged the award dated 21st

September, 2007 of Labour Court awarding an amount of Rs.75,000/as compensation to the workman in lieu of reinstatement and back
wages.

2.

The

Government

of

No.F.24(3660)/01/Lab./703-7

NCT
dated

of

Delhi

14.01.2002

had

by
made

order
the

following reference to the Labour Court:W.P(C) No.1838/2008

Page 1 of 10

“Whether the services of Sh.Hare Ram Paswan s/o.Sh.Shiv
Bachan Paswan have been terminated illegally and/or
unjustifiably by the management, and if so, to what sum of
money as monetary relief along with consequential benefits
in terms of existing laws/Govt. Notifications and to what
other relief is he entitled and what directions are necessary
in this respect?”

3.

The respondent workman had claimed before the Labour Court

that he was engaged by the management on 15th July, 1990 and his
last drawn wages were Rs.2700/- per month. He contended that he was
not granted legal benefits and when he returned after leave on 8th
October, 2002, the petitioner without any chargesheet, notice etc.
terminated his services from 8th October, 1999. He also alleged that he
was not paid the earned wages for the month of August and September,
1999.

4.

The claim of the respondent workman was contested on the

ground that the Labour Court at Delhi did not have jurisdiction as the
management had shifted to Udyog Vihar, Gurgaon in the year 2002. It
was alleged that the respondent was irregular in joining duties as he
went on leave from 15th February, 1999 to 25th February, 1999 but he
did not join thereafter. It is alleged that he again proceeded on leave on

W.P(C) No.1838/2008

Page 2 of 10

3rd August, 1999 when 10 days leave was granted, however, no
intimation was received from him till September, 1999.

5.

The petitioner alleged that letters dated 7th September, 1999, 25th

September, 1999 and 23rd October, 1999 were sent to the respondent
asking him to join the duty and ultimately his name was struck off from
the roll of the company with effect from 4th November, 1999 and in the
circumstances,

it

is

contended

that

the

respondent/workman

voluntarily abandoned his job. The petitioner also relied on the letter
dated 25th November, 1999 sent to the Principal Secretary, Delhi Legal
Services Authority showing the willingness of the management to take
the workman on duty.

6.

The Labour Court on the basis of the pleadings and evidence on

record held that the management had terminated the job of the
respondent on 4th November, 1999. It was admitted that no chargesheet
or show cause notice was given to the respondent workman. The plea of
the management/petitioner that the respondent was asked to join the
services before Delhi Legal Services Authority was rejected on the
ground that the management has failed to show anything that the
services of the respondent workman could be transferred to Gurgaon or

W.P(C) No.1838/2008

Page 3 of 10

that the respondent workman had consented to his transfer to Gurgaon
from New Delhi.

7.

The plea of the petitioner management that the respondent has

abandoned the job and the petitioner was entitled to strike off the name
of the respondent from the roll was rejected on the ground that no
consent was taken from the respondent for his transfer nor there was
anything to show that the services could be transferred to Gurgaon and
that the account of the workman was not settled at the time of
termination of his services on 4th November, 1999. The Labour Court
took an adverse inference against the petitioner on account of non
production of record of wages for the period claimed by the respondent.

8.

This cannot be disputed that none of the letters dated 7th

September, 1999, 25th September, 1999 and 23rd October, 1999 were
served on the respondent. The address on the envelopes sent by the
petitioner was correct, however, they were returned and in the
circumstances it cannot be inferred that the respondent did not join the
services despite notice to the respondent to come and join the services.
The petitioner has not made any allegation that the respondent did not
accept the notice and avoided to receive the notice so as not to join the
services. If the notices were not served and were returned by the postal
W.P(C) No.1838/2008

Page 4 of 10

authorities and the address of the respondent was correct, it was for the
petitioner to serve the respondent with the notices directing him to join
the services. Before terminating his services, the dues of the respondent
had to be tendered by the petitioner. In the circumstances the plea of
the petitioner that the respondent did not join the services despite due
intimation to the respondent/workman cannot be accepted nor it can
be inferred that the services of the respondent were terminated validly
in the facts and circumstances.

9.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has emphatically relied on

the fact that the respondent accepted the letter dated 25th November,
1999. Perusal of the copy of the letter dated 25th November, 1999
reveals that this is a letter allegedly written by the petitioner to the
Principal Secretary, Delhi Legal Services Authority, Patiala House
Courts, New Delhi. The workman is an illiterate person and in the cross
examination he had stated that he does not know anything about the
said letter. He had denied the suggestion that the management had
agreed to take him back by the said letter after he had sought
condonation of his fault. Perusal of the deposition of the witness of the
management on affidavit also reveals that even this letter dated 25th
November, 1999 has not been proved. It cannot be disputed that mere
exhibition of a document is not the proof of the document. The
W.P(C) No.1838/2008

Page 5 of 10

deposition is only that the management had issued the letter to the
Principal Secretary, Delhi Legal Services Authority without specifying as
to who had signed the letter and how this letter was sent to the Member
Secretary, Delhi Legal Services Authority. Merely stating that the
management had sent the letter to Delhi Legal Services Authority is not
the proof of the said letter dated 25th November, 1999 which was
exhibited in the affidavit as MW.1/6.

10.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has also relied on (2004) 12

SCC 360, Food Corporation of India Vs. Assam State Cooperative
Marketing & Consumer Federation Ltd & Ors to contend that the letters
forming part of chain of correspondence and official record which are
not objected to by the opposite party should be held to be proved and
their contents can be read in evidence. Apparently the judgment relied
on by the petitioner is quite distinguishable. In the said case the
documents were tendered in evidence without any demur by the
defendants and the same came from proper custody and formed part of
the official record of the Food Corporation and thus their contents were
relied on by the Apex Court. In contradistinction the letter dated 25th
November, 1999 is alleged to have been written by the management to
the Delhi Legal Services Authority. There is no deposition on behalf of
the management as to under whose signatures the said letter was sent
W.P(C) No.1838/2008

Page 6 of 10

and how the letter was delivered to Delhi Legal Services Authority. The
workman who is an illiterate person had denied that letter and had
stated that he does not know anything about the said letter dated 25th
November, 1999 and had also denied the suggestion that he is aware of
the letter dated 25th November, 1999. The petitioner failed to prove the
said letter and merely put an exhibit mark. Had the petitioner proved
the said letter the same could be relied on. In the facts and
circumstances of the case, therefore, it cannot be held that the letter
formed the part of the chain of the correspondence and was not denied
by the respondent and could be considered. The petitioner in the facts
and circumstances is not entitled to rely on the ratio of Food
Corporation of India (Supra) of the Supreme Court.

11.

Consequently, the reliance on the said letter by the petitioner is of

no avail to substantiate the plea that the respondent did not join the
services despite intimation to Delhi Legal Services Authority. In the
circumstances the findings of the Labour Court that the services of the
respondent workman were dispensed with illegally cannot be faulted
and there is no such manifest error in the findings of the Labour Court
which will entail interference by this Court under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India.

W.P(C) No.1838/2008

Page 7 of 10

12.

The findings and inferences of the Tribunal are based on evidence

and documents on record and there does not appear to be any manifest
errors in them. This court in exercise of its jurisdiction under article
226 of Constitution of India is not to substitute its own inferences with
the inferences drawn by the Labor Court. In (2006) 2 SCC 373 , at page
378 Govt. of A.P. v. Mohd. Nasrullah Khan the Supreme court had held:

11. By now it is a well-established principle of law that the
High Court exercising power of judicial review under Article
226 of the Constitution does not act as an appellate
authority. Its jurisdiction is circumscribed and confined to
correct errors of law or procedural error, if any, resulting in
manifest miscarriage of justice or violation of principles of
natural justice. Judicial review is not akin to adjudication
on merit by reappreciating the evidence as an appellate
authority.

13.

Thus it is a settled position of law that in exercise of jurisdiction

under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the High Court is not
interfere with factual findings of the lower courts and should restrain
itself from re-appreciating evidence while exercising powers of judicial
review.

Writ court is not to interfere with the orders of an inferior

tribunal or subordinate court unless their order suffers from an error of
jurisdiction or from a breach of the principles of natural justice or is
vitiated by a manifest or apparent error of law. The objective of judicial
review is that a person receives a fair treatment and objective is not to
re-appreciate the entire pleas and evidence and draw inferences again.
W.P(C) No.1838/2008

Page 8 of 10

Judicial review is not an appeal from a decision but a review of the
manner in which the decision is made. Power of judicial review is meant
to ensure that the individual receives fair treatment and not to ensure
that the conclusion which the authority reaches is necessarily correct in
the eye of the court. In the present facts and circumstances, the learned
counsel for the petitioner is unable to point out any such manifest error
or denial of principal of natural justice which shall entitle the petitioner
for exercise of jurisdiction by this Court under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India.

14.

The learned counsel for the petitioner had also raised the dispute

about the Labour Court at Delhi not having jurisdiction to decide the
reference made by the Government of NCT of Delhi on the ground that
the management/petitioner had shifted to Udyog Vihar, Gurgaon from
New Delhi in 2002. The learned counsel, however, after some argument
did not press this ground that the Labour Court did not have
jurisdiction to try the reference. In any case the reference was made by
the Government of NCT of Delhi and no evidence has been led by the
petitioner that the reference could not be made or reference is not valid
and on shifting of address of the management the appropriate
Government shall not be the Government of NCT of Delhi. No other

W.P(C) No.1838/2008

Page 9 of 10

ground as been raised by the petitioner assailing the award impugned
on behalf of the petitioner.

15.

In the facts and circumstances there is no perversity or such

error which will entitle the petitioner for interference by this Court
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. The award of the Labour
Court cannot be assailed and set aside as has been alleged by the
petitioner. The writ petition in the facts and circumstances is without
any merit and it is dismissed.

March 17th, 2008

ANIL KUMAR, J.

‘K’

W.P(C) No.1838/2008

Page 10 of 10

