*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP(C) No.2112/2008

%

Date of decision : 17.03.2008

R.M. Bansal

….…
Petitioner
Through: Mr.Umesh Singh, Advocate.

Versus

State Bank of India

......
Respondent
Through : Nemo.

CORAM :HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.

1.

The petitioner has impugned the award dated 23rd January, 2006

of Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court II
upholding the action of the respondent/management in terminating the
service of the petitioner with effect from 19th August, 1994 and further
holding that the petitioner is not entitled to any relief.

W.P(C) No.2112/2008

Page 1 of 11

2.

The Ministry of Labour had referred by letter dated 22nd January,

1999 the following point for adjudication:
“Whether the action of the Management of State Bank of
India in terminating the service of Sh.R.M. Bansal, Clerkcum-Cashier w.e.f. 19.08.1994 is legal and justified? If not,
to what relief the said workman is entitled?”

3.

The petitioner contended that he was appointed as Clerk-cum-

Cashier on 3rd April, 1980 and all of a sudden he was suspended on
17th June, 1985 and a charge sheet dated 16th September, 1987 was
served upon him about 27 months after the suspension.

4.

It is also stated that an FIR was also lodged against the petitioner

with Police on 28th May, 1985 on the same charges and the criminal
case was tried by the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate till 4th
October, 1993. The petitioner alleged that he raised an objection about
continuation of inquiry proceedings as the criminal case was pending
and, therefore, the inquiry officer adjourned the inquiry in order to
ascertain the latest position of the case. The inquiry officer did not give
his verdict on his objection, however, conducted ex parte inquiry, later
on without intimation and notice to him and the inquiry report was
given against him which was accepted by the disciplinary authority and
an appeal filed by the petitioner against the decision of the disciplinary
authority was also dismissed.
W.P(C) No.2112/2008

Page 2 of 11

5.

The respondent/management had contended that the petitioner

was suspended by order dated 12th June, 1985 with effect from 19th
June, 1985 pending disciplinary action and charge sheet dated 16th
September, 1987 was issued to the petitioner. Regarding the criminal
case, the management clarified that the customers had lodged an FIR
against the petitioner and not the Bank and the allegations made
against the petitioner in the FIR lodged by the customers of the Bank
were different from the charges leveled against the workman by the
respondent. According to the management, reasonable opportunity was
given to the petitioner and he was found guilty of mis-conduct in
departmental inquiry, of obtaining thumb impression of the customers
on different blank papers and obtaining drafts in different names which
were later on were not be en-cashed due to technical fault.

6.

It was also contended that despite various opportunities given to

the petitioner and the petitioner having admitted the knowledge of
different dates of proceedings from 10th April, 1989 to 10th July, 1989,
he did not participate in the inquiry proceeding thus declined to take
part in the proceedings.

The petitioner was also given show cause

notice before imposing punishment and only after hearing his pleas and
contentions the punishment of termination of his services was imposed

W.P(C) No.2112/2008

Page 3 of 11

which punishment has been upheld by the appellate authority by a
reasoned order.

7.

The plea of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the

inquiry was pre determined and biased to punish the petitioner and he
has been punished on account of a conspiracy.

The disciplinary

authority and the appellate authority have held relying on AIR 1976
Supreme Court 1080 that departmental proceedings do not stand on
the same footing as criminal prosecution in which higher degree of proof
is required and consequently merely on account of acquittal on
technical grounds, the petitioner was not entitled to be discharged from
the departmental proceedings initiated against him on account of
obtaining thumb impression of the customers of the Bank and on the
basis of that obtaining drafts in different names from their accounts.

8.

Learned counsel for the petitioner is unable to point out as to how

the petitioner has been prejudiced on account of departmental inquiry
also being conducted for some time during the pendency of criminal
case filed against the petitioner by the customers of the Bank. Learned
counsel is also unable to show any rule that on account of his acquittal
in the criminal case, the departmental proceedings are liable to be
quashed as the charges before the departmental inquiry were not
exactly the same. The petitioner had knowledge of the different dates on
W.P(C) No.2112/2008

Page 4 of 11

which the departmental inquiry was conducted, however, petitioner
opted to remain absent. In the circumstances, the petitioner cannot
contend that the principles of natural justice has not been complied
with.

9.

The findings and inferences of the Tribunal are based on evidence

and documents on record and there does not appear to be any manifest
errors in them. This court in exercise of its jurisdiction under article
226 of Constitution of India is not to substitute its own inferences with
the inferences drawn by the Tribunal. In (2006) 2 SCC 373 , at page 378
Govt. of A.P. v. Mohd. Nasrullah Khan the Supreme Court had held:

11. By now it is a well-established principle of law that
the High Court exercising power of judicial review under
Article 226 of the Constitution does not act as an appellate
authority. Its jurisdiction is circumscribed and confined to
correct errors of law or procedural error, if any, resulting in
manifest miscarriage of justice or violation of principles of
natural justice. Judicial review is not akin to adjudication
on merit by reappreciating the evidence as an appellate
authority.

10.

Thus it is a settled position of law that in exercise of jurisdiction

under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the High Court is not
interfere with factual findings of the lower courts and should restrain
itself from re-appreciating evidence while exercising powers of judicial
W.P(C) No.2112/2008

Page 5 of 11

review.

Writ court is not to interfere with the orders of an inferior

tribunal or subordinate court unless their order suffers from an error of
jurisdiction or from a breach of the principles of natural justice or is
vitiated by a manifest or apparent error of law. The objective of judicial
review is that a person receives a fair treatment and objective is not to
re-appreciate the entire pleas and evidence and draw inferences again.
Judicial review is not an appeal from a decision but a review of the
manner in which the decision is made. Power of judicial review is meant
to ensure that the individual receives fair treatment and not to ensure
that the conclusion which the authority reaches is necessarily correct in
the eye of the court.

11.

The other plea raised by the petitioner is that he was not given

sufficient opportunity to cross-examining the departmental witnesses
and the inquiry was held ex parte and he has been punished and he
was not intimated regarding the dates of inquiry. From the perusal of
the record, it is apparent that the petitioner had been sending the
applications for postponement of inquiry proceedings and, therefore, it
cannot be held that the petitioner was not aware of the dates on which
the inquiry proceedings were listed and were taken up.

From the

record, it is also apparent that the petitioner was intimated about the
various dates on which the inquiry proceedings were to be conducted,
however, the petitioner remained absent despite having the knowledge
W.P(C) No.2112/2008

Page 6 of 11

of the same. If the petitioner was not in a position to attend the inquiry
proceedings on some of the dates, no reason has been disclosed as to
why an authorized representative on behalf of the petitioner could not
appear before the inquiry officer. The petitioner was intimated about
the inquiry proceedings to be conducted on 24th July, 1989 and since
the petitioner did not appear even on the said date, ex parte inquiry was
held as it was held that the sufficient opportunities have already been
given to the petitioner. The petitioner was unable to make sufficient
cause for setting aside the ex-parte proceedings against him even before
the Tribunal.

The petitioner has not filed the copies of the alleged

medical certificate produced before the inquiry officer or any other
letters addressed to the inquiry officer to show that there was sufficient
cause for non-appearance of the petitioner before the inquiry officer and
the inquiry officer could not proceed ex parte against the respondent.
The petitioner, in the facts and circumstances, is not entitled for any
relief.

12.

Perusal of the case law on the issue of the scope of interference in

a domestic enquiry and applicability of the strict and sophisticated
rules of evidence to the domestic enquiry clearly establishes that once a
domestic tribunal based on the evidence arrives at a particular
conclusion, normally it is not open to the Appellate Tribunals and
courts to substitute their subjective opinion in the place of the one
W.P(C) No.2112/2008

Page 7 of 11

arrived at by the domestic tribunal. Thus if an enquiry held is
consistent with the rules and in accordance with the principles of
natural justice and the misconduct is proved, then the Tribunal has no
power to substitute its own discretion for that of the said disciplinary
authority, unless it is mala fide, arbitrary or the findings are quite
perverse. If an enquiry is properly conducted, then the departmental
authorities are held to be the sole judges of the facts and if there be
some legal evidence on which the findings can be based, the adequacy
or reliability of that evidence is not a matter which can be argued upon
or disputed before the Tribunal. The following judgments rendered by
the Supreme Court fortify the aforesaid conclusion:
(i) Martin Burn Ltd. v. R.N. Banerjee 1958 SCR 514.
(ii) State of Orissa v. Bidyabhushan Mohapatra MANU/SC/0361/1962.
(iii) State of A.P. v. S. Sree Rama Rao MANU/SC/0222/1963.
(iv) State Bank of India and Ors. v. Samarendra Kishore Endow and
Anr. MANU/SC/0655/1994.
(v)
Regional
Manager,
MANU/SC/0841/2004.

Rajasthan

SRTC

v.

Sohan

Lal

(vi) Bharat Forge Co. Ltd. v. Uttam Manohar Nakate (2005) 2 SCC 489.
(vii) Divisional Controller,
MANU/SC/0832/2004.
(viii)
Muriadih
Colliery
MANU/SC/0131/2005.

KSRTC
v.

Bihar

(NWKRTC)
Colliery

v.

A.T.

Kamgar

Mane
Union

(ix) V. Ramana v. AP. SRTC MANU/SC/0539/2005.

W.P(C) No.2112/2008

Page 8 of 11

(x) Hombe Gowda Educational Trust and Anr. v. State of Karnataka and
Ors. MANU/SC/2522/2005.
(xi) L.K. Verma v. H.M.T. Ltd and Anr. MANU/SC/0703/2006.

13.

The petitioner was given charge sheet and inquiry was conducted

after intimating the dates to the petitioner. Despite knowledge the
petitioner opted not to appear and was proceeded ex-parte. Even before
the Tribunal the petitioner has not made out any sufficient reason for
his non appearance. In the circumstances, on the grounds raised by the
petitioner, the award of the Industrial Tribunal cannot be faulted on the
grounds as has been raised by the petitioner.

14.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has also contended that the

punishment awarded does not commensurate with the charges made
against the petitioner as no loss to the Bank was caused as the draft
prepared by the petitioner were not encashed. This cannot be disputed
by the petitioner that he got the draft of Rs.11,000/- and Rs.10,000/prepared in the name of Md.Hasan and draft of Rs.3,500/- in the name
of the Md. Yusuf from the account of Shri Umar Daraj after obtaining
his thumb impression on different paper. He also got prepared a draft
of Rs.10,000/- in the name of Mr.Imamuddin from Branch Skotty Tada
and another draft of Rs.9,000/- in the name of Saroj Singh and the
amount was deducted from the account of Qizad and Smt.Mumti.
Before the inquiry officer it was established that the thumb impression
W.P(C) No.2112/2008

Page 9 of 11

of the customers of the Bank were taken on blank papers on the basis
of which drafts were got prepared by the petitioner which tantamount to
a misconduct. The conduct of the petitioner is of breach of faith which a
customer reposes in an official of the bank. Merely because the drafts
were not en-cashed and finally no monetary loss was suffered by the
customers, does not mitigate the severity of the offence committed by
the petitioner. The punishment awarded to the petitioner is on account
of his gross misconduct and there is no perversity or manifest error in
awarding the punishment for his gross misconduct.

15.

Unless the punishment imposed by the disciplinary authority or

the appellate authority shocks the conscience of the Court/Tribunal,
there is no is scope for interference. In the present case the punishment
awarded to the petitioner cannot be construed to be shocking in the
facts and circumstances. The Apex Court in B.C. Chaturvedi v. Union of
India (1995) 6 SCC 749 had observed on (SCC p.

762, para 18) as

under
“ 18 . A review of the above legal position would establish
that the disciplinary authority, and on appeal the appellate
authority, being fact-finding authorities have exclusive
power to consider the evidence with a view to maintain
discipline. They are invested with the discretion to impose
appropriate punishment keeping in view the magnitude or
gravity of the misconduct. The High Court/Tribunal, while
exercising the power of judicial review, cannot normally
substitute its own conclusion on penalty and impose some
other penalty. If the punishment imposed by the
disciplinary authority or the appellate authority shocks the
W.P(C) No.2112/2008

Page 10 of 11

conscience of the High Court/Tribunal, it would
appropriately mould the relief, either directing the
disciplinary/appellate authority to reconsider the penalty
imposed, or to shorten the litigation, it may itself, in
exceptional and rare cases, impose appropriate punishment
with cogent reasons in support thereof.”

16.

In the facts and circumstances, the punishment imposed is not

shockingly disproportionate. This Court in exercise of the jurisdiction
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India will not be justified in
substituting its own perception of the penalty to be imposed with the
decision taken by the respondent in awarding the punishment of
termination of service on account of gross misconduct on the part of the
petitioner.

17.

There are no grounds to interfere, in the facts and circumstances,

or to invoke jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The writ petition is, without any merit and is, therefore, dismissed.

March 17th, 2008.
‘Dev’

W.P(C) No.2112/2008

ANIL KUMAR J.

Page 11 of 11

