IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Date of decision :September 17th , 2007

+

#
!

Test Case No.8/1994

Mr. Subroto Ghosh .

......... PETITIONER
Through: Mr.Rajiv Endlaw, Advocate
Vs.

$
^

State & ors

.........RESPONDENTS
Through : Nemo.

CORAM :* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)

1.

This judgment shall dispose of the petition under Section 276 of the

Indian Succession Act for the grant of probate of the Will dated 19th
November, 2005 of late Shri Himadri Narayan Ray. The petitioner filed the
probate as an executor of the last Will and testament of late Shri Himadri
Narayan Ray contending inter alia that the Will dated 19th November, 2005
was executed by

late Shri Himadri Narayan Ray which was attested by

Sh.Steven Joseph Grey; Kan Fatt Lee and Emily Yee Lan Lee.
Test Case No.8/1994

Page 1 of 11

2.

The testator, late Shri Himadri Narayan Ray, died on 16th February,

2006. He had a fixed place of abode at C-18, Friends Colony East, New
Delhi and moveable properties of the deceased are within the jurisdiction of
this Court.

3.

According to the executor/petitioner, the moveable assets which are

likely to come into the hands of the petitioner are approximately
Rs.1,00,00,000/- (Rupees One Crore only) the details of which are given in
Schedule-A annexed with the petition.

The petitioner has also given the

liabilities of the deceased which are stipulated in Schedule-B annexed with
the petition. According to Schedule-B annexed with the petition approximately
Rs.4,75,000/- is payable. In the circumstances, the petitioner has prayed for
the grant of probate in respect of the Will of late Shri Himadri Narayan Ray.
The petitioner has filed death certificate of late Shri Himadri Narayan Ray
along with various other documents pertaining to moveable assets of the
deceased with various banks.

4.

The notice of the petition for the general public was published in the

newspaper “The Statesman” and no one has filed any objections to the grant

Test Case No.8/1994

Page 2 of 11

of probate of the Will dated 19th November, 2005 of late Shri Himadri Narayan
Ray.

Respondent Nos.2 and 3, son and daughter of the deceased

respectively, filed the replies to the probate petition contending that they have
no objection to the grant of probate to the petitioner in respect of Will of late
Shri Himadri Narayan Ray dated 19th November, 2005.

5.

The petitioner, thereafter, filed his evidence on affidavit dated 15th May,

2007. The executor/petitioner deposed that the deceased was the husband
of his eldest sister Smt. Manjuli Ray who had pre-deceased her husband.
According to the petitioner's deposition, late Shri Himadri Narayan Ray died
in Ontario, Canada when he was visiting his son, respondent No.2 on 16th
February, 2006. However, at the time of his demise he had a fixed place of
abode at C-18, Friends Colony East, New Delhi and he also has all his bank
accounts, investments, etc. in Delhi within the jurisdiction of this Court.

6.

The petitioner proved the medical certificate and death certificate

issued by the Office of the Registrar General, Ontario, Canada which were
exhibited as PW-1/1 and PW-1/2. It was deposed that the deceased testator
was born Hindu and he died as a Hindu and his mother and his wife had predeceased him. The deceased testator had two children, one son and one

Test Case No.8/1994

Page 3 of 11

daughter, respondent Nos.2 and 3 respectively and he did not have any other
legal heir. The petitioner deposed that the last Will and testament dated 19 th
November, 2005 executed by the late Shri Himadri Narayan Ray at Ontario,
Canada was forwarded to him by Mr.Steven Joseph Grey along with his
affidavit which has been proved as Exhibit PW-1/3. A certificate was also
sent from Ontario, Canada which has been proved as PW-1/4. The witness
deposed that he has seen late Shri Himadri Narayan Ray writing and signing
on account of his long association of about 50 years and he identified the
signatures of deceased/testator late Shri Himadri Narayan Ray on the Will
dated 19th November, 2005 on each page. The Will dated 19th November,
2005 was Exhibited as PW-1/5.

He also proved the replies filed by

respondent Nos.2 and 3 as PW-1/6; PW-1/7 & PW-1/8; PW-1/9. He stated
that he has seen respondent Nos.2 and 3 signing and writing. The letters
received in respect of moveable properties of the deceased were proved and
exhibited by the petitioner as Exhibit PW-1/10 to PW-1/29.

7.

The petitioner deposed that the information regarding the movable

properties of the assets given in Schedule-A are correct and Schedule-A is
based on the information available from Exhibit PW-1/10 to PW-1/29, various
correspondence with the various banks and other institutions. Schedule-A is

Test Case No.8/1994

Page 4 of 11

Exhibited as PW-1/30 and the detail giving the liability of the deceased in
schedule B was also proved as Exhibit PW-1/31. The petitioner deposed on
affidavit which has been exhibited as PW-1/A.

8.

The deposition of the attesting witness Kan Fatt Lee was also proved

as Exhibit PW-2/A. In his deposition the said attesting witness deposed that
he has witnessed the last Will and testament dated 19 th November, 2005 of
late Shri Himadri Narayan Ray. The attesting witness deposed that he is a
Chartered Accountant by profession and he is practicing at Werbar
Investments, 63 Alness St., Unit No.5, Toronto, Ontario M3J2H2.

The

attesting witness also sought permission to be examined through video
conferencing which was allowed by order dated 25th April, 2007.

The

attesting witness attached his photograph and proved the same as Exhibit
PW-2/1. He also attached a copy of his passport and proved the same as
Exhibit PW-2/2. He also filed an affidavit notarized by a Notary Public in
order to prove his identity. The attesting witness has proved the copy of the
Will as Exhibit PW-2/3 on which he identified the places where late Shri
Himadri Narayan Ray had signed at point 'A' on each and every pages of
Exhibit PW-2/3 and also identified the signatures of the deceased at point 'A'
on the last page. He deposed that late Shri Himadri Narayan Ray had signed

Test Case No.8/1994

Page 5 of 11

in his presence. According to him, besides him his wife Ms.Emily Yee Lan
Lee also witnessed the Will and he identified and proved the signatures of his
wife. He also identified and proved the signatures of Mr.Steven Joseph Grey,
Solicitor who was present at the time of execution of the Will. He also stated
that all the attesting witnesses had signed the Will after the testator had
signed the Will and the Will was signed in the presence of each other.
According to the attesting witness, the deceased was of a sound disposing
mind at the time of execution of the Will.

9.

The photograph of the attesting witness was proved as Exhibit PW-2/1

and his passport was proved as Exhibit PW-2/2 and a copy of the Will was
proved as Exhibit PW-2/3.

He was also examined through video

conferencing on 21st July, 2007 where he deposed that he has given the
affidavit which is signed by him and which was Exhibit as PW-2/A along with
the documents. He identified his photograph and his passport. He also saw
the original Will Exhibit PW-1/5 and identified the places where late Shri
Himadri Narayan Ray had signed the Will and the places where Mr.Steven
Joseph Grey, his wife and he had signed in the presence of the deceased
testator. He deposed that his statement is correct.

Test Case No.8/1994

Page 6 of 11

10.

From the perusal of the evidence produced by the petitioner on his

behalf and the attesting witness, it is inevitable to infer that the deceased late
Shri Himadri Narayan Ray was of a sound disposing mind on 19th November,
2005 when he executed the Will. It has been established that the deceased
testator had signed the Will Exhibit PW-1/5 which was attested by three
witnesses. Consequently, it has been established that the deceased late Shri
Himadri Narayan Ray executed a legal and valid Will dated 19th November,
2005 which is Exhibit PW-1/5.

11.

The son and daughter of the deceased have not filed any objection nor

there any other document on record to dispute the veracity of the Will and the
averments made by the executor of the Will/petitioner.

12.

Though the Administrative sub-Judge is competent to grant succession

certificate under the Indian Succession Act, however, the jurisdiction of the
High Court is concurrent to grant probate in respect of the Will of the
deceased. In 37 (1989) Delhi Law Times 324, it was held that the provision
for grant of succession certificate does not exclude the right to obtain letter of
administration.

Consequently this Court is competent to grant probate in

respect of the Will dated 19th November, 2005 of the deceased in respect of

Test Case No.8/1994

Page 7 of 11

debts and securities also.

13.

In R. Venkatachala Iyengar v. B.N. Thimmajamma and Others, (1959)

Supp. 1 SCR 426, the Supreme Court has laid down the following
propositions bearing on the nature and standard of evidence required to
prove a Will:

1.
Stated generally, a Will has to be proved like any other
document, the test to be applied being the usual test of the
satisfaction of the prudent mind in such matters. As in the case
of proof of other documents, so in the case of proof of Wills, one
cannot insist on proof with mathematical certainty.
2.
Since Section 63 of the Succession Act requires a Will to
be attested, it cannot be used as evidence until, as required by
Section 63 of the Evidence Act, one attesting witness at least
has been called for the purpose of proving its execution, if there
be an attesting witness alive and subject to the process of the
Court and capable of giving evidence.
3.
Unlike other documents, the Will speaks from the death of
the testator, and therefore, the maker of the Will is never
available for deposing as to the circumstances in which the Will
came to be executed. This aspect introduces an element of
solemnity in the decision of the question whether the document
propounded is proved to be the last Will and testament of the
testator. Normally, the onus which lies on the propounder can
be taken to be discharged on proof of the essential facts which
go into the making of the Will.
4. Cases in which the execution of the Will is surrounded by
suspicious circumstances stand on a different footing. A shaky
signature, a feeble mind, an unfair and unjust disposition of
property, the propounder himself taking a leading part in the
Test Case No.8/1994

Page 8 of 11

making of the Will under which he receives a substantial benefit
and such other circumstances raise suspicion about the
execution of the Will. That suspicion cannot be removed by the
mere assertion of the propounder that the Will bears the
signature of the testator or that the testator was in a sound and
disposing state of mind and memory at that time when the Will
was made, or that those like the wife and children of the testator
who would normally receive their due share in his estate were
disinherited because the testator might have had his own
reasons for excluding them. The presence of suspicious
circumstances makes the initial onus heavier and therefore, in
cases where the circumstances attendant upon the execution of
the Will excite the suspicion of the Court, the propounder must
remove all legitimate suspicions before the document can be
accepted as the last Will of the testator.
5.
It is in connection with Wills, the execution of which is
surrounded by suspicious circumstance that the test of
satisfaction of the judicial conscience has been evolved. That
test emphasize that in determining the question as to whether
an instrument produced before the Court is the last Will of the
testator, the Court is called upon to decide a solemn question
and by reason of suspicious circumstances the Court has to be
satisfied fully that the Will has been validly executed by the
testator.
6. If a caveater alleges fraud, undue influence, coercion etc. in
regard to the execution of the Will, such pleas have to be
proved by him, but even in the absence of such pleas, the very
circumstances surrounding the execution of the Will may raise a
doubt as to whether the testator was acting of his own free Will.
And then it is a part of the initial onus of the propounder to
remove all reasonable doubts in the matter.

14.

Considering the facts and circumstances, it is apparent that the

testator was of sound disposing mind at the time of execution of his last

Test Case No.8/1994

Page 9 of 11

testament. There are no suspicious circumstances regarding the last
testament of the deceased testator. All the yardsticks and test laid down by
the Apex Court in R. Venkatachala Iyengar (supra) are fulfilled. There are no
suspicious circumstances and this Court is satisfied that the will dated 19th
November, 2005 is the last will of Late Shri Himadri Narayan Ray.

15.

Consequently the petitioner has been able to prove that the deceased

late Shri Himadri Narayan Ray executed his last will dated 19th November,
2005 and consequently the probate of the will of Late Shri Himadri Narayan
Ray for his will dated 19th November, 2005 is granted to the petitioner as the
executor of the said Will under Section 276 read with Section 289 of the
Indian Succession Act and the Probate be issued to the petitioner in respect
of Schedule A & B annexed with the petition in the Form set forth in Schedule
VI of the Indian Succession Act subject to petitioner furnishing of requisite
Court-fees and necessary Bond with one surety. Accordingly, the petition
stands disposed of.

16.

The petitioner shall appear before the Joint Registrar for furnishing

bond and for paying the Court fees on 28th September, 2007 .

Test Case No.8/1994

Page 10 of 11

September 17th, 2007
‘Rav’

ANIL KUMAR J.

Test Case No.8/1994

Page 11 of 11

