IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Date of decision April 17, 2007

+

IA No. 9343 of 2005 in CS(OS) No.441 of 2005

# PFIZER INC.
!

Through:

......... Plaintiff
Mr.Saikrishna Rajagopal and
Mr.Sidharth Chopra, Advocate.
Vs.

$ PIFER PHARMACEUTICALS PVT. LTD.
.......... Defendants
^
Through :
Mr.Sunil Magon, Advocate.
CORAM :* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?

YES

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

NO

NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.

1.

This order shall dispose of plaintiff's application under Order 6 rule 17

read with section 151 of the Code of Civil procedure seeking amendment to
the plaint.

2.

The plaintiff has filed this suit for injunction against the defendant

seeking a restraint from manufacturing, selling, advertising, marketing or in
any other manner whatsoever using PIFER, PIFOL or PIFSER or any other
CS(OS) No.441 of 2005

Page 1 of 16

mark or name which is deceptively or confusingly similar to the plaintiff's trade
mark and name PFIZER, either as a trademark or as the corporate or trade
name or trading style, or part of a trademark, corporate name, trade name or
trading style, as the case may be, or in any other manner whatsoever
infringing the registered trademark PFIZER of the plaintiff or passing off its
goods or business as and for the goods and business of the plaintiff. The
plaintiff also sought a decree for mandatory injunction seeking the direction
that the defendant should recall all the products and marketing, promotional
and advertising material (including the web site at www.piferpharma.com)
that bear or incorporate the offending marks/name PIFER, PIFOL or PIFSER
and for a rendition of accounts and costs of the suit.

3.

In the plaint filed by the plaintiff it was categorically contended that

recently it was brought to the attention of the plaintiff that the defendant is
carrying on business under the name and style of Pifer Pharmaceuticals Pvt.
Ltd. and selling its products under the trade mark PIFOL and PIFSER. The
plaintiff also contended that a search on the Internet disclosed that the
defendant has a web site at www.piferpharma.com and the word PIFER has
been written in a manner to take an unfair advantage of the goodwill and
reputation of the plaintiff.

CS(OS) No.441 of 2005

The plaintiff also categorically contended that

Page 2 of 16

though the defendant is claiming to be in business since October 1994, the
plaintiff believes that this is an exaggerated claim, as otherwise plaintiff would
have acquired knowledge of the defendant had he been in business.

4.

In paragraph 26 of the plaint the plaintiff categorically contended that it

recently came to know of the defendant's activities and filed the plaint on 5th
April, 2005. Along with the plaint, the plaintiff also filed an application for an
interim injunction and and ex parte injunction order in terms of prayer A & B
made in the application which are as under:
"A. the Defendant, its directors, principles, proprietor, partners,
officers,
employees,
agents, distributors,
franchisees,
representatives and assigns be restrained by an ad interim exparte temporary injunction from manufacturing, selling,
advertising, marketing or in any other manner whatsoever using
PIFER, PIFOL or PIFSER or any other mark or name which is
deceptively or confusingly similar to the Plaintiff's trade mark
and name PFIZER, either as a trade mark or as a corporate or
trade name or trading style, or part of a trade mark, corporate
name, trade name or trading style, as the case may be, or in
any other manner whatsoever infringing the registered trade
mark PFIZER of the Plaintiff or passing off its goods or business
as and for the goods and business of the Plaintiff;
B. The Defendant including its directors, agents,
representatives and assigns be ordered to forthwith, recall all
the products and marketing, promotional and advertising
materials (including the website at www.piferpharma.com) that
bear or incorporate the offending marks/name PIFER, PIFOL or
PIFSER which have been manufactured, distributed, sold or
shipped by it, as the case may be, and to reimburse all
customers from which said materials are recalled and to deliver
CS(OS) No.441 of 2005

Page 3 of 16

to the Plaintiff's attorneys or representatives for destruction all
products, labels, signs, prints, packages, moulds, plates, dies,
wrappers, receptacles, and advertisements in its possession or
under its control, bearing the PIFER, PIFOL or PIFSER marks
or any other trade mark similar to PFIZER."

5.

The defendant contested the suit and filed a written statement dated

26th April, 2005 contending inter alia that the plaintiff has suppressed the
material facts in order to secure an ex-parte order.

It was stated that

defendant was incorporated on 18th April, 1994. On 26th November, 1996 a
legal notice was received on behalf of plaintiff regarding the trademark of a
pharmaceutical product `PLAGYL-FL' under the mark `PIFER'. A reply to the
said notice was given on 25th December, 1996 and on 23rd April, 1997 an
undertaking was given on behalf of defendant. The terms and conditions of
the aforesaid undertaking are extracted as under:-

"a.
We admit that the trdemark 'PIFER' (word per se and
logo) used by us was identical with and/or deceptively similar to
the registered trademark 'PFIZER' of Pfizer inc.USA. We hereby
tender our apology for having used the trademark 'PIFER' upon
or in relation to their pharmaceutical products.
b.
We hereby inform you that we have discontinued the use
of the impugned trademark 'PIFER' forthwith upon or in relation
to any pharmaceutical product or any other goods and agree
and undertake that we will not hereafter either by ourselves or
through our servants, agents, distributors, licensees or any
other person, manufacture, market, distribute, sell, offer for
sale, advertise or otherwise use upon or in relation to

CS(OS) No.441 of 2005

Page 4 of 16

pharmaceutical products the impugned trade mark 'PIFER'
(word per se and/or logo).
c.
We hereby undertake and agree that we will not
hereinafter by ourselves, or through our servants, agents,
distributors, licensees or any other persons, manufacture,
market, distribute, sell, offer for sale, advertise, export or
otherwise howsoever deal in pharmaceutical products bearing
the impugned trade mark or use and/or issue any letters,
circulars, price-lists, advertisement, literature, or any other
material bearing the impugned trade mark or any other trade
mark, deceptively similar to your registered trade mark
'PFIZER'.
d.
We further agree and undertake that we shall not at any
time hereinafter adopt and/or use or cause to be adopted
and/or used any trade mark which is identical with and/or
deceptively similar to your trade mark 'PFIZER' or any
colourable imitation thereof so as to infringe your trade mark
'PFIZER' registered in class 5 of the Fourth Schedule of the
Trade & Merchandise Marks Rules, 1959 of the Trade and
Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 bearing the registration
No.168312.
e.
It is understood that in consideration of our fulfilling the
foregoing obligations, you will not take any legal proceedings
against us, but that the concession shall cease immediately on
the failure on our part to perform any of the obligations or any of
the terms of this Undertaking.
f.
We further agree that this undertaking is binding upon
ourselves and our servants, agents, successors and assigns
and on all other corporates and/or firms with which we are
connected and/or associated with directly or indirectly through
ownerships, control, management, partnership or otherwise.

CS(OS) No.441 of 2005

Page 5 of 16

In the circumstances it was pleaded on behalf of defendant that the
plaintiff did not have any objection to the name of the defendant company
and therefore did not take any action for the next eight years. The defendant
stated that he is obliged under law under Drugs and Cosmetic Rules, 1945 to
write the name of the drug, the net contents, active ingredients and the name
and address of the defendant on the label of packing. The defendant also
categorically pleaded that before filing the suit no legal notice was sent to the
defendant. It was also pleaded that Indian Drug Review (IDR) is a necessary
party and the Hon'ble Court has been deprived of the correct version.

6.

Despite these categorical pleas raised by the defendant, no replication

was filed by the plaintiff taking the plea about not having the knowledge of the
earlier notice given to the defendant and the undertaking given by the
defendant at the time of filing the present suit.

7.

By order dated 13th May, 2005 the ex-parte interim order was modified

on the assurance of the defendant that the corporate name of the defendant
shall not be written in the manner as set out in paragraph 14 and 15 of the
plaint and consequently the defendant was allowed to use corporate name
`PIFER PHARMACEUTICALS PVT. LTD.' subject to writing the same on all

CS(OS) No.441 of 2005

Page 6 of 16

products in a straight line and in the same font and not in the manner as it is
being written as set out in Para 14 and 15 of the plaint.

8.

Thereafter a number of dates were taken for filing the documents and

for admission and denial of these documents. After admission and denial of
these documents, before the framing of issues, the present application for
amendment of the plaint has been filed. By amendment to the plaint the
plaintiff seeks to substitute Para 14, 15 and 26 of the plaint.

9.

The application for amendment is contested by the defendant on the

ground that the information now sought to be given by the plaintiff was
suppressed intentionally in order to get an ex-parte interim order. It was
contended that the entire controversy has emanated from the web site of
Indian drug review. In the book printed by them the name of the defendant
has been correctly mentioned however, mischief has been done in the
compact disc. It has been further contended that plaintiff was fully satisfied
with the reply given to the plaintiff's notice dated 26th November, 1996 and
the undertaking given by the defendant.

The defendant objected to the

amendment on the ground that the same are neither consequential nor
imperative but tend to prejudice the case of the defendant and change the

CS(OS) No.441 of 2005

Page 7 of 16

complexion of the suit to the detriment of the defendant and the proposed
amendment would enlarge the scope of the suit and raise additional
controversies and issues not pleaded earlier by the plaintiff. The defendant
contended that the plaintiff has contended that it recently came to know about
the offending activities of the defendant and by the proposed amendment, the
plaintiff wants to put the clock back to the year 1996. The objection of the
defendant is also that by amendment the plaintiff is setting up an altogether
new suit and wants to deprive the defendant a valuable right which has
accrued to the defendant.

10.

In the plaint plaintiff contended that he was shocked when it was

recently brought to his attention in 2005 that the defendant is carrying on
business under the name and style of PIFER PHARMACEUTICALS LTD and
marketing two of its products under the trademark PIFOL and PIFSER. The
plaintiff wants to replace this paragraph completely and substitute it with
another paragraph contending that around November 1996 defendant was
manufacturing and marketing the product's with the marks PIFER.

The

plaintiff wants to withdraw his plea `that he was shocked to know recently in
2005 about the plaintiff using deceptively and confusingly similar trademark'
on the ground that due to passage of time and intervening mergers and

CS(OS) No.441 of 2005

Page 8 of 16

numerous changes in the staff did not at the time of institution of the present
proceedings had the record of notice given in 1996 and the undertaking
tendered by the defendant in 1997. Withdrawal of the plea is also made on
the ground that nondisclosure of the facts is neither deliberate or intentional
and because over the years the legal representations of the plaintiff has
shifted to different trademark attorneys.

11.

The plaintiff in paragraph 15 of the plaint also wants to delete the

sentence 'additionally, on the web site, though the defendant is claiming to be
in business since October 1994, the plaintiff believes that this is an
exaggerated claim, as the plaintiff would have acquired knowledge of the
defendant had they been in business'. The plaintiff by this plea contended
that defendant was not in business since 1994 because had he been in
business plaintiff would have known about the same.

12.

The plaintiff also wants amendment in the clause of cause of action.

In the plaint cause of action is based on the activities of the defendant in
using deceptively and confusingly similar trademark and name PFIZER of the
plaintiff. By amendment the plaintiff wants to change the cause of action and

CS(OS) No.441 of 2005

Page 9 of 16

wants to rely on the alleged breach of undertaking given by the defendant in
1997.

13.

This cannot be disputed that the law of amendment to the pleadings

have become very liberal. The following principles can be culled regarding
exercise of the discretion in allowing the amendment.

The amendment

however, should not work injustice to the other side. If the injury to the other
side can be compensated by costs then it is not treated as injustice. The
amendment should be allowed to avoid multiplicity of proceedings as far as
possible.

Amendments should not be allowed which are impliedly or

expressly prohibited by law. Amendments which are malafide should not be
allowed. The amendments which deprive the other party a valuable right
accrued to them should not be allowed.

14.

In (1976) 4 SCC 320 = AIR 1977 SC 680, Modis Spinning and

Weaving Mills Co. Ltd. Vs Ladha Ram & Co amendment to the written
statement was disallowed as the proposed amendment in that case entailed
depriving the plaintiff of a valuable right accrued on account of admission
already made by the defendant in the written statement. In the un-amended
written statement it was contended that pursuant to agreement with the

CS(OS) No.441 of 2005

Page 10 of 16

defendant, plaintiff worked as stockiest cum distributor but the agreement
was not applicable to the transactions in which the plaintiff acted as principal.
By amendment the defendant wanted to contend that the plaintiff was
appointed as mercantile agent and the plaintiff acted in that capacity in
placing order on the defendant and wanted to deny that the plaintiff placed
order on the defendant in plaintiff's capacity as purchaser. This was held to
be completely displacing the plaintiff from the admissions made by the
defendant.

15.

In (1998) 1 SCC 278, Heeralal Vs Kalyan Mal & ors. The appellant-

plaintiff had filed a civil suit for partition of 10 items of immovable properties
mentioned in Schedule A of the plaint and also for partition of other properties
listed in Schedule B of the plaint. The contesting Respondents 1 and 2, who
are Defendants 1 and 2 in the suit, being real brothers of the plaintiff filed a
joint written statement and a definite stand was taken by the contesting
defendants that out of the listed properties in Schedule A only three
properties at Items 4, 9 and 10 were exclusively belonging to the contesting
defendants and were not joint family properties of the plaintiff and Defendants
1 and 2 and impliedly other seven properties listed in Schedule A were
admitted to be joint family properties. It was also contended that the plaintiff

CS(OS) No.441 of 2005

Page 11 of 16

is only entitled for partition regarding the properties of Schedule A except
Items 4, 9 and 10 and all the properties mentioned in Schedule B”. In these
properties 1/3rd share of the plaintiff was admitted. After a number of
hearing, the plaintiff filed an application for appointment of receiver and at
that stage Defendant 1 came forward with an amendment application to
amend his written statement. In the amendment application it was submitted
that because of incomplete information supplied by him to his counsel the
written statement came to contain the so-called admissions regarding 5 out of
7 items of the properties in Schedule A and that he had suffered a heart
attack in 1989 and therefore when the written statement was moved in 1993
this error crept in. He also wanted to insert a further averment in the written
statement regarding Schedule B properties that they had ceased to remain in
possession of Defendant 1 and were in possession of trespassers. The trial
judge dismissed the application on the ground that the defendant no.1 was
trying to get out of the admissions made by Defendants 1 and 2 in connection
with the relevant suit properties. In revision High Court allowed the
application for amendment. The Supreme Court set aside the order of the
High Court holding that order passed by the High Court under Section 115
CPC, allowing withdrawal of earlier admissions of Defendants 1 and 2 in their
original written statement about 5 out of 7 items of Schedule A properties

CS(OS) No.441 of 2005

Page 12 of 16

could not be sustained. It was stated that the reason is obvious because as
far as Schedule A properties were concerned, a clear admission was made
by Defendants 1 and 2 in their joint written statement in 1993 that 7
properties out of 10 were joint family properties wherein the plaintiff had 1/3rd
share and they had 2/3rd undivided share. Once such a stand was taken,
naturally it must be held that there was no contest between the parties
regarding 7 items of suit properties in Schedule A. It was held by the Apex
Court that right which had accrued to the plaintiff, as noted earlier, would be
irretrievably lost if such amendment is allowed qua five of these seven items
in Schedule A of the plaint for which by the impugned amendment the earlier
admissions were sought to be recalled. Consequently it was held that when
the amendment sought in the written statement was of such a nature as to
displace the plaintiff’s case it could not be allowed.

16.

The Apex Court has again relied on Modis Spinning and Weaving Mills

Co Ltd. (supra) and Heeralal (supra) regarding amendment to the pleadings
and had held in Sangramsinh P.Gaekwad Vs Shantadevi P.Gaekwad,
((2005) 11 SCC 314 that order 6 Rule 17 of the Code of Civil Procedure
postulates amendment of pleadings at any stage of the proceedings but
before an amendment can be carried out in terms of Order 6 Rule 17 of the

CS(OS) No.441 of 2005

Page 13 of 16

Code of Civil Procedure the court is required to apply its mind on several
factors including viz. whether by reason of such amendment the claimant
intends to resile from an express admission made by him. In such an event
the application for amendment may not be allowed.

17.

Thus one has to see and keep in mind that the amendment sought

does not purport to set up a new case or substitute one cause of action or the
nature of claim for another in the original plaint. Similarly introduction by
amendment of inconsistent or contradictory allegation in negation on the
admitted petition of facts, or mutual destructive allegations of facts are not
permissible.

18.

By proposed amendment the plaintiff wants to completely withdraw his

plea that in 2005 it was brought to his attention that the defendant is using
deceptively and confusingly similar trademark and the name of the plaintiff.
The plaintiff could have retained this plea and could file replication detailing
therein the circumstances in which at the time of filing the plaint, the facts
pertaining to 1996 and 1997 about the notice given to the defendant and the
undertaking executed by the defendant could be explained.

The plaintiff

could seek amendment which could be clarificatory and explanatory by

CS(OS) No.441 of 2005

Page 14 of 16

retaining original plea. The plaintiff, however, wants to completely withdraw
his plea that it was brought to his attention in 2005 that the defendant is using
deceptively and confusingly similar trademark and the name of the plaintiff.
After defendant filed the written statement categorically denying that the
defendant has come to know in 2005, a right has accrued to the defendant,
which the plaintiff wants to take away by completely withdrawing the said
plea. Similarly in Para 15 the plaintiff wants to completely withdraw the plea
that had the defendant been in business since October, 1994 the plaintiff
would have acquired the knowledge of the same. In the clause of cause of
action also the plaintiff wants to rely on the undertaking executed by the
defendant in 1997. Applying the principles enunciated in the precedents it is
apparent that the amendments as has been sought by the plaintiff should not
be permitted in the facts and circumstances of the case because the injury
which will be caused to the defendant will not be capable of being
compensated by way of cost.

19.

In these facts and in totality of circumstances it will not be appropriate

to allow the plaintiff to amend the plaintiff in a manner as proposed by him
leading to withdrawal of admissions made by him which have given some

CS(OS) No.441 of 2005

Page 15 of 16

rights to the defendant.

Consequently the application must fail and the

amendment sought by the plaintiff should not be permitted.

20.

Therefore, the application of the plaintiff for the amendment of the

plaint is dismissed. However, considering the facts and circumstances of the
case the parties are left to bear their own costs.

April 17, 2007
'sdp'

CS(OS) No.441 of 2005

ANIL KUMAR J

Page 16 of 16

