IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Date of decision : September 18, 2007
IA Nos.2143 & 13308/2006 in CS(OS) No.1056/1998

#
!

Sh.Sanjay Kumar & Anr
......... PLAINTIFFS
Through: Mr.Vijay Choudhary, Advocate
Vs.

$
^

Smt.Sita Rani Khanna & Ors
……..DEFENDANTS
Through: Mr.P.K. Rawal & Mr.Ajay Bahl,
Advocates
CORAM :* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?

YES

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES

YES

ANIL KUMAR, J.
IA Nos.2143/2006 & 13308/2006

1.

The applications of the plaintiffs are for setting aside the order dated

28th April, 2005 dismissing the suit for non prosecution under Order 9 Rule 9
read with Section 151 of Code of Civil Procedure and for condonation of
delay under Section 5 of the Limitation Act in filing the application under
Order 9 Rule 9 read with Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

2.

The plaintiffs have filed the above noted suit for specific performance

CS(OS) No.1056/1998

Page 1 of 22

of agreement to sell executed between the parties in respect of agricultural
land admeasuring 164 bighas, 13 biswas situated in revenue estate of village
Quadipur, Delhi. The agreement contemplated sale of land at the rate of 4.5
lakhs per acre which rate was enhanced to Rs.5.25 lakhs per acre.

3.

The plaintiffs paid a total sum of Rs.37 lakhs to the defendants out of

which Rs.17 lakhs was paid at the time of agreement and Rs.20 lakhs was
paid later on, receipts of which amounts have been admitted by the
defendants.

4.

According to the plaintiffs after filing of the suit, the pleadings were

completed and on 3.9.2002 issues were framed. Thereafter, plaintiffs filed
their evidence on affidavit on 14.2.2003. The contention of the plaintiffs is that
they had been pursuing their case diligently and had been approaching and
contacting their

counsel Sh.Deepak Khosla, Advocate at his chamber

No.422, Civil Wing, Tis Hazari Court, Delhi.

5.

The

plaintiffs/applicant

have

contended

that

they

had

been

approaching Sh.Deepak Khosla, Advocate regularly but they were falsely told
by the said counsel that he had been regularly attending the case of the

CS(OS) No.1056/1998

Page 2 of 22

plaintiffs though later on it transpired that the matter was listed before the
Joint Registrar on 19th March, 2004, 31st March, 2004, 29th April, 2004 and
21st March, 2005, however, their counsel did not appear before the Joint
Registrar. The suit was finally dismissed for non-prosecution and for non
appearance of counsel for the plaintiffs on 28th April, 2005.

6.

The plaintiffs contended that they had met their counsel Sh.Deepak

Khosla, Advocate on number of occasions personally and they were always
told that the case is being looked after and only on 7th February, 2006 when
the counsel told the plaintiffs that an application is to be filed for hearing the
case when the plaintiffs got suspicious and engaged the services of another
advocate on the same date who enquired about the case and then
communicated to the plaintiffs that the suit had already been dismissed by
the Court for non-prosecution on 28th April, 2005.

7.

The plaintiffs/applicant categorically contended that their counsel had

misguided them. In these circumstances the plaintiffs have contended that
their non appearance and non-prosecution was neither deliberate nor
intentional but on account of non appearance of their counsel who had failed
to discharge his responsibility and duty honestly and diligently. On the same

CS(OS) No.1056/1998

Page 3 of 22

grounds the application has been filed under Section 5 of the Limitation Act
seeking condonation of delay in filing the application for setting aside the
order dated 28th April, 2005 dismissing the suit of the plaintiff for non
appearance though on that date also no one had appeared on behalf of the
plaintiffs.

8.

The applications are contested by the defendants contending inter-alia

that the application is barred in law as it was filed 30 days after the dismissal
of the suit for non-prosecution on 28th April, 2005. The application is also
opposed on the ground that a conditional stay was granted to the petitioner
on 25th May, 1998 and the plaintiff failed to comply with the terms of the order
dated 25th May, 1998 whereby he had undertaken to file the Court fees
before the next date of hearing which was 15th September, 1998. According
to the defendants the plaintiff failed to pay Court fees by 15 th September,
1998 and, therefore, the order dated 25th May, 1998 granting interim order to
the plaintiffs have been vacated. The defendants stated that since the order
was vacated they have also executed a registered sale deed in favor of
purchaser which fact is within the knowledge of the plaintiffs/applicant. The
defendants/non-applicant has referred to the hearing on different dates prior
to dismissal of the suit to contend that there is no sufficient cause for setting

CS(OS) No.1056/1998

Page 4 of 22

aside the order of dismissal dated 28th April, 2005.

9.

The learned counsel for the plaintiff/applicant has relied on 1999(50)

DRJ

822,

Karnataka

Handloom

Development

Corporation

Ltd

Vs.

B.S.Chopra; AIR1988 Delhi 213, Gloria Chemicals Vs. R.K.Cables and
others; 2002 (64) DRJ 416, Sunder Kukreja & Ors Vs. Mohan Lal Kukreja &
Ors; AIR 1981 SC 1400, Rafiq and another Vs. Munshilal and another to
show that on account of the lapses on the part of the counsel who had been
misleading the plaintiffs/applicants, they should not be allowed to suffer in as
much as the plaintiffs have paid Rs.37 lakhs already and even if the
allegation of the defendants are accepted the defendants were liable to
execute the conveyance in respect of proportionate area of the land as the
agreement was for Rs.5,25,000/- per acre and in case the suit is not restored
the defendants will appropriate an amount of Rs.37 lakhs which they are not
entitled to in the facts and circumstances. The learned counsel for the
defendant, Mr.Rawal has relied on AIR 2001 Karnataka 104, Syed Mujibur
Rahman Vs. Abdul Azeez; 2007 VI AD (Delhi) 126, Inder Industries Vs.
M/s.Gemco Electrical Industries; 2003 IV AD (Delhi) 299, Badri Bhagat
Jhandewalan Temple Vs. Delhi Development Authority and (1993) 2 SCC
185, Salil Dutta Vs. T.M and M.C. Private Limited to contend that improper

CS(OS) No.1056/1998

Page 5 of 22

advice of advocate cannot as a rule be accepted as a sufficient cause and on
account of the negligence on the part of the counsel for the plaintiff, it cannot
be inferred that sufficient cause is made out for condonation of delay in filing
the application and for setting aside the order of dismissal dated 28 th April,
2005.
10.

I have heard the learned counsel for the parties in detail and have

perused the applications and replies and the record of the case. Issues were
framed in the suit on 3rd September, 2002 and it was directed that the
examination in chief of witnesses be filed on affidavits and only those
witnesses were to be summoned who were required for cross examination by
other parties. It was also ordered that the official witnesses will be summoned
for examination in accordance with law. Plaintiff was directed to file his
evidence on affidavit in regard to examination in chief within eight weeks and
the matter was adjourned to 25th November, 2002. On 25th November, 2002
further time was sought by the counsel for the plaintiff to file the affidavit of
examination in chief and the matter was adjourned for the cross examination
for 20th May, 2003.

11.

On 14th February, 2003 the affidavit of examination in chief of the

plaintiff had been filed and the cross examination could not be conducted on

CS(OS) No.1056/1998

Page 6 of 22

20th May, 2003 as the presiding officer was on leave on that date and the
matter was adjourned to 28th July, 2003. On 28th July, 2003 an adjournment
was sought as the witnesses whose examination in chief on affidavit was filed
were not present and, therefore, the matter was re-notified for 19th March,
2004. On 19th March, 2004 the cross examination could not recorded as the
counsel for the plaintiff, Mr.Deepak Khosla was busy in the election of the bar
and the matter was adjourned to 31st August, 2004. On 31st August, 2004 the
witnesses could not be cross examined as the counsel for the defendants
contended that he had not been supplied with the copy of the affidavit filed by
the plaintiff towards examination in chief. Consequently, it is apparent that the
counsel for the defendants knew that an affidavit of evidence has already
been filed on behalf of the plaintiff. On the next date 29th November, 2004 as
the witness was not present and the copy of the affidavit had not been
supplied the plaintiffs were burdened with a cost of Rs.1000/- to be deposited
with Delhi High Court Legal Services Committee and the matter was
adjourned to 21st March, 2005. On 21st March, 2005 as the cost in terms of
order dated 29th November, 2004 had not been paid at the request of counsel
for the defendants, the matter was placed before the Court and also because
no one was present on behalf of plaintiffs on 21 st March, 2005. Therefore, the
matter was put before the Court for 28th April, 2005 and the suit was

CS(OS) No.1056/1998

Page 7 of 22

accordingly dismissed for non-prosecution though no one was present for the
plaintiff on 21st March, 2005 and 28th April, 2005.

12.

The plaintiffs/applicant have categorically contended that they had

been contacting their counsel regularly and they were assured that the matter
is being looked after. As to why counsel did not appear on 19th March, 2004,
31st August, 2004, 29th November, 2004 and 21st March, 2005 is not known to
them. The plaintiffs/applicants have contended that when they met their
counsel on 7th February, 2006 and they were told by their counsel that he had
to file another application for hearing of the case when they became
suspicious and asked another counsel to inspect the file who intimated the
plaintiffs/applicants that the case had already been dismissed on 28 th April,
2005.

13.

In these circumstances on account of lapses on the part of the counsel

for the plaintiffs whether it can be inferred that there is sufficient cause for
non-appearance of plaintiffs and for not taking steps as the suit has been
dismissed for non prosecution also.

14.

From the averments made in the application which is supported by the

CS(OS) No.1056/1998

Page 8 of 22

affidavit, the inevitable inference is that the plaintiffs had been contacting
their counsel and they had been assured that the matter is being looked after
and attended. If counsel had been representing to the plaintiffs that the
matter is being looked after I find no reason for the plaintiffs to doubt the
representations made by their counsel as the affidavit of evidence had been
filed and on the next date the Joint Registrar was on leave. It was only on 7th
February, 2006 when they were asked to file another application that the
plaintiffs became suspicious about their counsel leading to engaging another
counsel who inspected the record and it transpired that the counsel,
Mr.Deepak Khosla had not been attending the case and the case had already
been dismissed on 28th April, 2005.

15.

The Supreme Court had held that a party who has selected his advo-

cate, briefed him and paid his fee can remain confident that his lawyer will
look after his interest and such an innocent party who has done everything in
his power and expected of him to look after his case, should not be made to
suffer for inaction, deliberate omission or misdemeanor of his counsel. The
Apex Court in Rafiq and another (Supra) 1981) 2 SCC 788 , at page 790 in
para 3 had held as under:-

CS(OS) No.1056/1998

Page 9 of 22

“3. The disturbing feature of the case is that under our present adversary legal system
where the parties generally appear through their advocates, the obligation of the parties
is to select his advocate, brief him, pay the fees demanded by him and then trust the
learned Advocate to do the rest of the things. The party may be a villager or may belong
to a rural area and may have no knowledge of the court’s procedure. After engaging a
lawyer, the party may remain supremely confident that the lawyer will look after his interest. At the time of the hearing of the appeal, the personal appearance of the party is
not only not required but hardly useful. Therefore, the party having done everything in
his power to effectively participate in the proceedings can rest assured that he has neither to go to the High Court to inquire as to what is happening in the High Court with
regard to his appeal nor is he to act as a watchdog of the advocate that the latter appears in the matter when it is listed. It is no part of his job. Mr A.K. Sanghi
stated that a practice has grown up in the High Court of Allahabad amongst the lawyers that they remain absent when they
do not like a particular Bench. Maybe, we do not know, he is
better informed in this matter. Ignorance in this behalf is our
bliss. Even if we do not put our seal of imprimatur on the alleged practice by dismissing this matter which may discourage
such a tendency, would it not bring justice delivery system into
disrepute. What is the fault of the party who having done everything in his power expected of him would suffer because of the
default of his advocate. If we reject this appeal, as Mr A.K.
Sanghi invited us to do, the only one who would suffer would
not be the lawyer who did not appear but the party whose interest he represented. The problem that agitates us is whether it is proper that the
party should suffer for the inaction, deliberate omission, or misdemeanour of his agent.
The answer obviously is in the negative. Maybe that the learned Advocate absented himself deliberately or intentionally. We have no material for ascertaining that aspect of
the matter. We say nothing more on that aspect of the matter. However, we cannot be a
party to an innocent party suffering injustice merely because his chosen advocate defaulted. Therefore, we allow this appeal, set aside the order of the
High Court both dismissing the appeal and refusing to recall
that order. We direct that the appeal be restored to its original
number in the High Court and be disposed of according to law.
If there is a stay of dispossession it will continue till the disposal
of the matter by the High Court. There remains the question as
CS(OS) No.1056/1998

Page 10 of 22

to who shall pay the costs of the respondent here. As we feel
that the party is not responsible because he has done whatever
was possible and was in his power to do, the costs amounting
to Rs 200 should be recovered from the advocate who absented himself. The right to execute that order is reserved with the
party represented by Mr A.K. Sanghi. “

16.

In a case where no steps were taken for restoration for over six

months and the proceedings had been pending for more than three years it
was held that on account of negligence of the counsel, the defendant should
not be completely barred and another chance was given for setting aside the
ex-parte proceedings subject to payment of the cost in Karnataka Handloom
Development Corporation Ltd (Supra) by a Single Judge of this Court. The
Apex Court in N.Bala Krishnan Vs. M.Krishnamurthy, 1988 VI AD (SC) 465
had held that the rules of limitation are not meant to destroy the right of
parties and are to be used to see that the parties do not resort to dilatory
tactics and the object of providing a legal remedy is to repair the damage
caused by reason of legal injury. In this matter the observation was made by
the Supreme Court while dealing with the application for condonation of delay
under Section 5 of the Limitation Act. The Apex Court had held that the
length of delay is not that much material rather acceptability of the
explanation for delay is the only criterion, as sometimes delay of the shortest
CS(OS) No.1056/1998

Page 11 of 22

range may be uncondonable due to want of acceptable explanation whereas
in certain other cases delay of very long range can be condoned as the
explanation thereof is satisfactory. Another Single Judge of this Court in
Sunder Kukreja (Supra) had held that a party cannot be allowed to suffer for
latches and lapses on the part of the lawyers. In this case the suit of the
plaintiff was dismissed for default and an application for restoration of the suit
was filed under Order 9 Rule 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure with a
supporting affidavit of the counsel. In these circumstances it was held that
there was sufficient reason for condonation of delay and the order of
dismissal of the suit was set aside.

17.

In Gloria Chemicals (Supra) it was held that even if the counsel is

found to be negligent the plaintiff should not be allowed to suffer because of
the innocence of the agent both in the facts and circumstances. In para 15 it
was held that word 'sufficient cause' should receive liberal construction so as
to advance substantial justice when no negligence or inaction or want of
bonafide is imputable to a party. The Apex Court in Salil Dutta (Supra) which
is relied by the defendant had held that improper advice of advocate as a rule
cannot be accepted as a sufficient cause and it depends on particular facts
and circumstances of the case. In this case the suit was posted for final

CS(OS) No.1056/1998

Page 12 of 22

hearing seven years after institution and the defendant had alleged that he
did not appear on final hearing on account of advice of advocate. Since the
defendant firm was a limited company having its registered office in the same
city managed by educated businessman, it was held that the defendants
conduct and explanation was not acceptable and the Court also held that the
defendant was adopting delaying tactics and in the circumstances the
application of the defendant under Order 9 Rule 13 was not allowed and
dismissed. In contradistinction the case of the plaintiff is distinguishable in as
much as after the issues were framed the examination in chief of the plaintiff
was filed and thereafter the matter was adjourned from time to time and the
plaintiffs have contended that they had been contacting their counsel who
had been assuring them that the matter was being looked after and,
therefore, it cannot be held that there was a doubt in those facts and
circumstances for the plaintiffs to disbelieve their counsel. According to the
plaintiffs they realized something suspicious only in February, 2006 when
counsel asked them about filing of another application for hearing of the case
when they got the file inspected through another counsel when it transpired
that the earlier counsel had not appeared on various dates and the suit had
been dismissed on 28th April, 2005. The other judgment relied on by the
defendant is Badri Bhagat Jhandewalan Temple (Supra) which was also

CS(OS) No.1056/1998

Page 13 of 22

regarding the application under Order 9 Rule 13 whereby the defendant had
sought setting aside of the ex-parte judgment passed against him. In this
matter the defendant was proceeded ex-parte on 8th August, 1988 in a suit for
injunction seeking restraint against the defendant applicant not to interfere
with the possession, management and control of the plaintiff. The Court had
considered the fact that the plaintiff had been in possession for more than 12
years and the applicant/defendant had woken up after more than 50 years
and had started digging the grave. In the peculiar facts and circumstances it
was held that even the witnesses had not been produced by the applicant
and, therefore, the Court had held that the applicant Delhi Development
Authority cannot justify its rights by placing the entire blame on their advocate
for ex-parte proceedings, judgment and decree. It was also held that although
mistake of counsel in certain circumstances could be taken into account yet
the negligence of advocate was not sufficient to allow the application. The
Single Judge, however, held that words “sufficient cause” for non appearance
should, however, be given liberal construction so as to advance substantial
justice when no negligence or inaction or want of bonafide is imputable to a
party.

18.

In Inder Industries (Supra) another Single Judge had not allowed an

CS(OS) No.1056/1998

Page 14 of 22

application under Order 9 Rule 13 as the applicant had failed to produce any
evidence and alleged that on account of financial crisis he could not
approach his advocate as was recovering from losses suffered by him during
torrential rains. The present case of the plaintiffs/applicant are apparently
distinguishable in as much as the plea of the plaintiffs is that they had been
approaching their counsel and had filed his examination in chief on affidavit
and thereafter it was represented to them that their case is being looked
after. In the circumstances it is not that the plaintiffs had not approached their
counsel but it was the inaction on the part of the counsel and counsel
misleading the plaintiffs which resulted into dismissal of the suit and for delay
in filing the application for condonation of delay.

19.

Learned counsel for the defendant, Mr.Rawal has also placed reliance

on Syed Mujibur Rahman (Supra) where the applicant was seeking setting
aside of order of dismissal on the ground that he was attending the office of
the counsel regularly and the negligence was on the part of the counsel,
which was disapproved on account of the fact that the applicant/plaintiff was
not even living in India as he was working in Gulf countries and living abroad
during pendency of the proceedings and, therefore, it was inferred that he
was not attending and meeting his counsel. The facts of the case relied on by

CS(OS) No.1056/1998

Page 15 of 22

the learned counsel for the defendant are completely distinguishable. The
Single Judge of Karnataka High Court had also held that notwithstanding the
negligence or misdemeanor of the advocate where the Court finds that the
client was not innocent litigant then as an absolute rule it cannot be held that
such a party can disown its advocate and seek relief as no such absolute
immunity is either permissible under the law nor has been recognized. It was
held that whether on account of the negligence on the part of the counsel
sufficient cause is

made out or not, will depend on the facts and

circumstances of each case.

20.

A decision is only an authority for what it actually decides. What is of

the essence in a decision is its ratio and not every observation found therein
nor what logically follows from the various observations made in it. The ratio
of any decision must be understood in the background of the facts of that
case. It has been said long time ago that a case is only an authority for what
it actually decides, and not what logically follows from it. It is well settled that
a little difference in facts or additional facts may make a lot of difference in
the precedential value of a decision. A decision is only an authority for what it
actually decides. What is of the essence in a decision is its ratio and not every observation found therein nor what logically follows from the various obCS(OS) No.1056/1998

Page 16 of 22

servations made in it. The ratio of any decision must be understood in the
background of the facts of that case. It is well settled that a little difference in
facts or additional facts may make a lot of difference in the precedential value
of a decision. In Ambica Quarry Works v. State of Gujarat and Ors.
MANU/SC/0049/1986

the Supreme Court had observed:-

"The ratio of any decision must be understood in the
background of the facts of that case. It has been said
long time ago that a case is only an authority for what it
actually decides, and not what logically follows from it."

Similarly in Bhavnagar University v. Palitana Sugar Mills Pvt Ltd (2003)
2 SC 111 (vide para 59), the Supreme Court had observed:-

" It is well settled that a little difference in facts or additional facts may make a lot of difference in the precedential value of a decision."

21.

What emerges from the judgments cited by the parties is that whether

on account of the negligence on the part of the counsel sufficient cause is
made out or not, will depend on the facts and circumstances of each case. A
CS(OS) No.1056/1998

Page 17 of 22

party who has selected his advocate, briefed him and paid his fee can remain
confident that his lawyer will look after his interest and such an innocent party
who has done everything in his power and expected of him to look after his
case, should not be made to suffer for inaction, deliberate omission or
misdemeanor of his counsel and a party cannot be allowed to suffer for
latches and lapses on the part of the lawyers. The rules of limitation are not
meant to destroy the right of parties and are to be used to see that the parties
do not resort to dilatory tactics and the object of providing a legal remedy is to
repair the damage caused by reason of legal injury. Therefore the length of
delay is not that much material rather acceptability of the explanation for
delay is the only criterion, as sometimes delay of the shortest range may be
uncondonable due to want of acceptable explanation whereas in certain other
cases delay of very long range can be condoned as the explanation thereof is
satisfactory. It has also been held that words “sufficient cause” for non
appearance should be given liberal construction so as to advance substantial
justice when no negligence or inaction or want of bonafide is imputable to a
party.

22.

In the present case as already discussed hereinabove the plaintiffs

after framing of issues filed their evidence on affidavit when the matter was

CS(OS) No.1056/1998

Page 18 of 22

listed for the cross examination of the plaintiffs, however, the Joint Registrar
was on leave on 20th May, 2003 and therefore the cross examination could
not be recorded. The plaintiffs have contended that they had been meeting
their counsel who had been assuring them that the matter is being attended
and looked after and, therefore, it cannot be inferred that the plaintiff had
reasons to disbelieve their counsel and did not do something which they
ought to have done in the facts and circumstances. Since the evidence on
affidavit had also been filed, normally the suit should not have been
dismissed for non-prosecution but it was dismissed at the instance of the
defendant who contended that the orders have not been complied with. The
plaintiffs got suspicious about the representation made by counsel that
another application is to be filed on 7th February, 2006 and, therefore, they
promptly engaged another lawyer and it transpired that the suit had already
been dismissed on 28th April, 2005. In the facts and in these circumstances if
one has to give liberal construction to `sufficient cause’, the inevitable
inference is that plaintiffs have been able to show that there is sufficient
cause for non appearance and for delay in not filing the application within 30
days of dismissal of the suit on 28th April, 2005. The non prosecution of the
case also resulted on account of non appearance of counsel for the plaintiffs.
The plaintiffs had filed their examination in chief on affidavit and thereafter

CS(OS) No.1056/1998

Page 19 of 22

they had to appear for cross examination and on one occasion, the Joint
Registrar was on leave and on another date the counsel for the plaintiffs was
busy in bar elections. In these circumstances, it was reasonable for the
plaintiffs to assume that their counsel will intimate them whenever they will
have to appear in the Court. If the counsel has not appeared and not given
the copy of the affidavit of examination of the plaintiffs to the defendants, it
will be on account of the counsel non appearance. In the totality of
circumstances and considering that liberal meaning has to be given to the
`sufficient cause’, I am of the view that the plaintiffs have been able to make
out sufficient cause in the facts and circumstances.

23.

The learned counsel for the defendant has opposed the application for

restoration also on the ground that the plaintiff did not comply with one of the
directions on which interim injunction was granted. Perusal of the order
granting interim injunction and subsequent orders it is apparent that since
plaintiff did not comply with one of the conditions to pay the remaining
amount of the Court fees the injunction order granted on 25 th May, 1998
stood vacated on 15th September, 1998 but that will not negate the
sufficiency of cause for not appearing on 28th April, 2005 and sufficient
reason for condonation of delay. The application of the plaintiff for setting

CS(OS) No.1056/1998

Page 20 of 22

aside the order of dismissal also cannot be disallowed on the alleged ground
that the defendants have already sold the suit property. The defendants have
contended in their reply that they executed a registered lease deed in favor of
purchaser, however, without specifying the particulars of the sale deed and
the lands which have been sold by the defendants. The plaintiff has filed the
suit for specific performance of the lands detailed in the plaint at the rate of
Rs.5,25,000/- per acre. The learned counsel for the plaintiffs has also drawn
my attention to para 9 of the agreement to sell dated 27th July, 1994
stipulating that if plaintiffs do not perform their part of the contract within the
stipulated period even then the sale deed in respect of the land for Rs.37
lakhs paid by plaintiffs to the defendants had to be executed.

24.

In the circumstances the plaintiffs have been able to make out

sufficient cause for condonation of delay in filing the application for setting
aside the order dated 28th April, 2005 and has also been able to show
sufficient reason for non appearance of plaintiffs and for non prosecution.
Consequently, the delay in filing the application under Order 9 Rule 9 being
IA No.13308/2006 is allowed and delay in filing the application under Order 9
Rule 9 is condoned and the order dated 28th April, 2005 dismissing the suit of
the plaintiff is set aside. The suit is restored to its original number subject to a

CS(OS) No.1056/1998

Page 21 of 22

cost of Rs.20,000/- payable by plaintiffs to the defendants. Costs be paid
within four weeks

September 18, 2007
'k'

CS(OS) No.1056/1998

ANIL KUMAR, J

Page 22 of 22

