IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Date of decision: December 19, 2007
AA No.349/2006

# M/s Harcharan Das Gupta
......... Petitioner
!
Through: Mr.V.K.Sharma, Advocate
Vs.
$ Government of NCT of Delhi & Anr.
.......... Respondent
^
Through : Mr.Sirish Kumar, Advocate.
CORAM :* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?

YES

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

NO

NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
1.

This is a petition under Section 11 of Arbitration & Conciliation

Act, 1996 for appointment of an arbitrator for adjudication of disputes
which have arisen between the parties.

2.

The petitioner is a registered partnership firm and the petition

has been signed, verified and instituted by Sh.D.R. Mittal, registered
partner of the petitioner.

AA No.349/2006

Page 1 of 12

3.

The petitioner contended that the work of “Construction of

Sports Complex at Village Bawana in Kanjhawala Block, Phase II,
Delhi, SH: Construction of RCC Main stand in Sports Complex at
Village Bawana” was

awarded to the petitioner by work order

no.F.3.(178)SDD-IV/98-99/ACS/93-104 dated 4th June, 1999 and an
agreement

bearing

no.F.12/5/AB/CD-VIII/1999-2000

was

duly

executed between the parties.

4.

The petitioner contended that as per the terms of the

agreement, the date of commencement of the work was 11th June,
1999 and date of completion was 10th December, 2000. According to
the petitioner, under the contract there were reciprocal promises to be
performed by the respondents like handing over the site, drawings
etc. Since the respondents failed in fulfilling its obligation under the
contract, resultantly, there was delay in the completion of work which
could only be completed on 23rd April, 2003 for reasons not
attributable to the petitioner.

5.

Despite completion of the work on 23rd April, 2003 the final bill

was prepared by the respondents only in November, 2005. The copy of
the final bill was supplied to the petitioner only on 20 th January,
2006. On perusal of the copy of the final bill it is revealed that the

AA No.349/2006

Page 2 of 12

respondents had denied the petitioner numerous lawful dues
including damages on account of prolongation of the contract. The
petitioner has detailed its various claims in para K of the petition
which are due to the petitioner from the respondent under different
heads.

6.

Consequently

disputes

have

arisen

between

the

parties.

According to the petitioner clause 25 of the agreement entered into
between the petitioner and the respondents contained an Arbitration
agreement.

Clause 25 of the agreement containing the arbitration

agreement is as under:“SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES AND ARBITRATION
Clause 25.
Except where otherwise provided in the contract all
questions and disputes relating to the meaning of the
specifications, design, drawings and instructions here-inbefore mentioned and as to the quality of workmanship or
materials used on the work or as to any other question,
claim, right, matter or thing whatsoever in any way
arising out of or relating to the contract, designs,
drawings, specifications, estimates, instructions, orders
or these conditions or otherwise concerning the works or
the execution or failure to execute the same whether
arising during the progress of the work or after the
cancellation, termination, completion or abandonment
thereof shall be dealt with as mentioned hereinafter:i).
If the contractor considers any work demanded of
him to be outside the requirements of the contract, or
disputes any drawings, record or decision given in writing
by the Engineer-in-Charge or any matter in connection
with or arising out of the contract or carrying out of the
AA No.349/2006

Page 3 of 12

work, to be unacceptable, he shall promptly within 15
days request the Superintending Engineer in writing for
written instruction or decision. Thereupon, the
Superintending Engineer shall give his written
instructions or decision within a period of one month
from the receipt of the contractor's letter.
ii).
Except where the decision has become final,
binding and conclusive in terms of Sub Para(i) above
disputes or difference shall be referred for adjudication
through arbitration by a sole arbitrator appointed by the
Chief Engineer, DSIDC, in charge of the work or if there
be no Chief Engineer, the administrative head of the said
DSIDC.
If the arbitrator so appointed is unable or
unwilling to act or resigns his appointment or vacates his
office due to any reason whatsoever another sole
arbitrator shall be appointed in the manner aforesaid.
Such persons shall be entitled to proceed with the
reference from the stage at which it was left by his
predecessor.
It is a term or this contract that the party invoking
arbitration shall give a list of disputes with amounts
claimed in respect of each such dispute alongwith the
notice for appointment of arbitrator and giving reference
to the rejection by the Chief Engineer of the appeal.
It is also a term of this contract that no person other than
a person appointed by such Chief Engineer DSIDC or the
administrative head of the DSIDC, as aforesaid should act
as arbitrator and if for any reason that is no possible, the
matter shall not be referred to arbitration at all.
It is also a term of this contract that if the contractor does
not make any demand for appointment of arbitrator in
respect of any claims in writing as aforesaid within 120
days of receiving the intimation from the Engineer-inChief that the final bill is ready for payment, the claim of
the contractor shall be deemed to have been waived and
absolutely barred and the D.S.I.D.C. shall be discharged
and released of all liabilities under the contract in respect
of these claims.
The arbitration shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of the Indian Arbitration Act, 1940, or any
statutory modifications or re-enactment thereof and the

AA No.349/2006

Page 4 of 12

rules made thereunder and for the time being in force
shall apply to the arbitration proceedings under this
clause.
The arbitrator may from time to time with the consent of
the parties enlarge the time for making and publishing
the award.
It is also a term of this contract that the arbitrator shall
adjudicate on only such disputes as are referred to him
by the appointing authority and give separate award
against each dispute and claim referred to him and in all
cases where the total amount of the claims by any party
exceeds Rs.1,00,000/- the arbitrator shall give reasons
for the award.
It is also a term of the contract that if any fees are
payable to the arbitrator these shall be paid equally by
both the parties.
It is also a term of the contract that the arbitrator shall be
deemed to have entered on the reference on the date he
issues notice to both the parties calling them to submit
their statement of claims and counter statement of
claims. The venue of the arbitration shall be such place
as may be fixed by the arbitrator in his sole discretion.
The fees, if any, of the arbitrator shall, if required to be
paid before the award is made and published, be paid half
and half by each of the parties. The cost of the reference
and of the award (including the fees, if any, of the
arbitrator) shall be in the discretion of the arbitrator who
may direct to any by whom and in what manner, such
costs or any part thereof shall be paid and fix or settle the
amount of costs to be so paid.

7.

The petitioner thereafter issued a letter dated 13th April, 2006,

addressed to the Chief Engineer (Flood and Irrigation) with a copy to
the Executive Engineer, thereby invoking the arbitration clause in the
agreement between the parties. However, no reply was given to the
letter dated 13th April, 2006 nor any arbitrator was appointed in terms

AA No.349/2006

Page 5 of 12

of arbitration agreement between the parties within the stipulated
time.

8.

Consequently, the petitioner has filed the present petition.

Notice was issued to the respondent and a reply has been filed by the
respondent objecting to the appointment of the arbitrator on the
ground that there is no valid dispute as the payments against the
final bill were accepted by the petitioner in all respect and that the
dispute now raised is an afterthought. The respondents also stated
that the procedure as specified in clause 25 of the agreement is
mandatory and a pre-requisite for referring the dispute to arbitration
and that the same has not been followed by the petitioner. The
respondent has placed reliance on Wipra Finance Limited versus SRG
Infotech (India) Limited & Anr. and AIR 1999 Kerala 440 Nirman
Sindia versus M/s Indal Electromelts Ltd., Coimbatore to contend
that the arbitrator cannot be appointed by the Court as the procedure
as contained in the arbitration agreement has not been exhausted by
the petitioner for seeking appointment of the arbitrator by the
nominated authority under the contract.

AA No.349/2006

Page 6 of 12

9.

The petitioner has placed reliance on Sh.Jagbir Singh versus

MCD and Anr. Arb. Petition 3/2005 decided on 3rd January, 2005;
AIR 1999 Supreme Court 950, M/S M.K.Shah Engineers and
Contractors versus State of Madhya Pradesh to contend that non
performance of the pre-requisite obligation under the contract does
not invalidate the applicability and operation of an arbitration clause.

10.

There is no dispute in relation to the existence of an arbitration

agreement under clause 25 of the agreement between the parties. The
respondents have failed to appoint the arbitrator within 30 days from
the receipt of the notice invoking the arbitration agreement and even
before filing the present petition. The learned counsel for the
respondents is unable to point out as to how the appointment of an
arbitrator can be denied on the ground of non compliance of the
procedure by the petitioner for appointment of an arbitrator as laid
down under clause 25 of the agreement between the parties.

11.

In exercise of power under section 11 of the Arbitration and

Conciliation Act, 1996 what the court is to see is whether their existed
a valid arbitration agreement between the parties and once the court
comes to the conclusion that there exists a valid arbitration

AA No.349/2006

Page 7 of 12

agreement between the parties then on the request of any of the party
to such an agreement the Court may appoint an arbitrator to
adjudicate the disputes between the parties. It is not for this Court to
adjudicate or make observation on the merits of the case as to
whether the payments against the final bill were accepted by the
petitioner “in all respect”. The existence of the Arbitration agreement
has not been disputed by the respondent and nothing has been
shown contrary to agreement. Since the respondent failed to appoint
an arbitrator within 30 days of the demand and had also failed to
appoint an arbitrator before the petitioner moved the Court under
Section 11 of the Arbitrator and Conciliation Act, 1996, the right of
the respondent to appoint an arbitrator stands forfeited. Consequently
it is for this Court to appoint an arbitrator to adjudicate the disputes
between the parties.

12.

The Apex Court in Datar Switchgears Ltd. v. Tata Finance Ltd.

& Anr., IV (2000) CLT 191 (SC)=VII (2000) SLT 543=JT 2000 (Suppl.
2) SC 226 had held that if the vacancy of an arbitrator is not filled till
a party approaches the Court and files a petition for appointment by
the designated authority of the Chief Justice of that Court under
Section 11(6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, the right to
supply vacancy by the opposite party is extinguished. This ratio of

AA No.349/2006

Page 8 of 12

Datar Switchgear Ltd.(supra) was approved by the Supreme Court in
Punj Lloyed Ltd. Vs Petronet MHB Ltd., (2006) 2 SCC 628 and it was
reiterated that once period of notice had lapsed and the petitioner had
moved under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
1996, the party having right to appoint arbitrator under arbitral
agreement loses the right to do so.

13.

A learned Single Judge in Haryana Telecom Ltd. v. Union of

India & Anr., 112 (2004) DLT 339=2004 (3) RAJ 147, had held that if
the respondent fails to appoint an Arbitrator within the stipulated
time of 30 days of the notice, and even after filing of the petition
under Section 11 of the Act, it is for the Court to appoint an
Arbitrator. A Division Bench of this Court in Delkon (India) Pvt. Ltd.
v. G.M., Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd., 120 (2005) DLT 542 (DB),
relying on Datar Switchgears Ltd Vs Tata Finance Ltd has held in
para 4 as under:
“4. We have given our careful consideration to the
arguments advanced by learned Counsel for both the
parties. In view of the law laid down in the case of Datar
Switchgears Ltd. v. Tata Finance Ltd. & Anr., IV (2000)
CLT 191 (SC)=VII (2000) SLT 543=JT 2000 (Suppl. 2) SC
226 it is no more res integra that the vacancy can be
supplied by a party pursuant to the arbitration agreement
even after thirty days of the receipt of the notice. However,
once a party approaches the Court and files a petition for

AA No.349/2006

Page 9 of 12

appointment by the designated authority of the Chief
Justice of that Court under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, the right to supply vacancy by the
opposite party is extinguished. If that right stood
extinguished on filing of the petition under Section 11(6)
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, in September
1998 the appointment of an Arbitrator on 3rd May, 1999
could not be made, therefore in our view, the order
passed by the learned Single Judge on 7th May, 1999
suffers from patent illegality. Therefore, the submission of
the respondent that the petitioner had appeared before
the Arbitrator and the application of the petitioner raising
preliminary objections is pending adjudication which
inter alia challenges the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator to
decide the dispute is of no consequence as from the order
reproduced above it was pursuant to the directions
passed by the learned Single Judge that the parties were
directed to appear before the Arbitrator. The petitioner
had no other option but to appear before the Arbitrator
and after appearing before the Arbitrator the petitioner
has not submitted to the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator,
rather has at first opportunity taken the objection that
the Arbitrator had no jurisdiction to proceed with the
matter.

14.

In Union of India v. M/s. R.R. Industries, 120 (2005) DLT 572

(DB) also it was held that once a party does not supply the vacancy or
fails to supply the vacancy before filing of a petition under Section
11(6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, such a party forfeits the
right to supply the vacancy in terms of the arbitration clause and
what remains is only the arbitration clause, i.e. the dispute has to be
resolved under the mechanism of alternative dispute redressal

AA No.349/2006

Page 10 of 12

scheme but no right survives to the respondent to supply the named
Arbitrator in the arbitration clause.

15.

The letter dated 13th April, 2006 invoking the arbitration

agreement between the parties was sent by registered AD post receipt
of which has not been denied by the respondent. Despite the receipt
of the letter dated 13th April, 2006 demanding appointment of an
arbitrator, the respondent did not appoint an arbitrator within 30
days of receipt of notice nor was any arbitrator appointed prior to
filing of the present petition. Thus the respondent has forfeited its
right to appoint an arbitrator in terms of clause 25 as there is a valid
arbitration agreement between the parties. The learned counsel for
the respondent contended that a retired engineer may be appointed as
an arbitrator. The learned counsel for the petitioner has no objection
to the appointment of an retired engineer as the Arbitrator.

16.

Considering

the

facts

and

circumstances,

I

appoint

Mr.J.P.Singhal, Retd. Chief Engineer, CPWD, resident of 79, Munirka
Enclave,

New

Delhi-110067

(Ph:26169531;

26108170)

as

an

Arbitrator to adjudicate all the disputes between the parties. The fees
of the arbitrator shall be as per the rules of Arbitration of Indian

AA No.349/2006

Page 11 of 12

Council of Arbitration. The parties are directed to appear before the
arbitrator on 21st January, 2008. A copy of this order be sent to the
arbitrator forthwith. Parties are also directed to produce the copy of
the order before the arbitrator.
Dasti to the counsel for the parties.

December 19, 2007
'k'

AA No.349/2006

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 12 of 12

