*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP(C) No.687/2008

%

#
!

Date of decision : 19.02.2008

Shri H.S. Lamba
Through:

….…
Petitioner
Mr.V.P.S. Tyagi & Mr.Amit
Kumar, Advocates.

Versus
$
^

The Punjab & Sind Bank & Ors.
.........
Respondents
Through : Ms.Kittu Bajaj, Advocate.

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.
*
The petitioner has impugned the order dated 30th December,
2005 of the Disciplinary Authority awarding reduction of two
increments to a lower stage in the time scale of pay and refund of
entire amount of housing loan in five years in 60 equal monthly
installments to be deducted from his salary and the order dated 17 th
August, 2007 of the Appellate Authority dismissing the appeal.
The petitioner, an employee of the respondent, was sanctioned
WP(C) No.687/2008

Page 1 of 4

housing loan of Rs.1.50 lakh on 3rd June, 1991 and further Rs.1.50
lakh on 31st August, 1998 for construction of a house.
The petitioner did not take the possession of the plot and did
not carry out any construction on the portion of the plot allegedly
purchased by the petitioner. There was also a dispute of about
Rs.40,000/- which was not paid to the seller. The petitioner was also
charged with giving false information by letter dated 27th May, 1998.

After the charge sheet was issued to the petitioner and after
giving due opportunity, the Inquiry Officer found that the charges
against the petitioner were proved.

The Disciplinary Authority also

agreed with the finding of the Inquiry Officer except regarding
possession of the plot.
The Disciplinary Authority had held that the possession of the
plot was never taken by the petitioner from Smt.Lakshmi Devi who
had filed a suit against Shri H.S. Lamba, petitioner.
Learned

counsel

for

the

petitioner

admitted

that

no

construction was carried out by the petitioner as two rooms already
constructed were handed over to the petitioner which were later on
demolished by the seller.

The petitioner is unable to show any

evidence which has not been considered by the Inquiry Officer or
Disciplinary Authority which will make the inferences drawn by them
perverse or will reflect manifest error in the findings. Learned counsel
WP(C) No.687/2008

Page 2 of 4

for the petitioner is unable to disclose whether any stay was granted
against any construction to be carried out by the petitioner on
account of pendency of the suit filed by the seller on a portion of the
plot which was sold to the petitioner.

Learned counsel for the

petitioner is also unable to point out that after taking loan the
petitioner had intimated to the respondent Bank that construction
cannot be carried out by the petitioner on account of pendency of the
dispute with the purchaser, before the issuance of show cause notice
to the petitioner.
In the circumstances, there are no such findings which can be
termed as perverse or suffers from manifest error. There is no denial
of principle of natural justice in conducting the inquiry against the
petitioner and awarding the punishment of reduction of two
increments to a lower stage in the time scale of pay. The Appellate
Authority has also held that the petitioner has mis-utilized the
housing loan and the penalty awarded commensurate with the
misconduct of the petitioner and no grounds were found by the
Appellate Authority to interfere with the decision of the Disciplinary
Authority.

It is a settled position of law that in exercise of jurisdiction
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the Court should not
interfere with factual findings of the lower courts and should restrain
itself from re-appreciating evidence while exercising powers of judicial
WP(C) No.687/2008

Page 3 of 4

review. Reliance for this proposition can be placed on the judgment of
the Supreme Court, Government of A.P. and Ors. v. Mohd. Nasrullah
Khan reported as (2006) 2 SCC 373. Writ court should refrain from
interfering with the orders of an inferior tribunal or subordinate court
unless it suffers from an error of jurisdiction or from a breach of the
principles of natural justice or is vitiated by a manifest or apparent
error of law. The objective of judicial review is that a person receives a
fair treatment and objective is not to re-appreciate the entire pleas
and evidence and draw inferences again. Judicial review is not an
appeal from a decision but a review of the manner in which the
decision is made. Power of judicial review is meant to ensure that the
individual receives fair treatment and not to ensure that the
conclusion which the authority reaches is necessarily correct in the
eye of the court.

In the facts and circumstances, the learned counsel for the
petitioner is also unable to point out any perversity or manifest error
or denial of principle of natural justice which will entail interference
by this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The writ petition is, therefore, without any merit and it is
dismissed.

February 19, 2008
'Dev'

WP(C) No.687/2008

ANIL KUMAR, J.
Page 4 of 4

