IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of decision:19th July, 2007
CM(M) No.257/2006
# Shri Nikhil Gupta

..... PETITIONER
Through:
Mr.Y.K. Jain, Sr. Advocate with
Mr.Abhinav Jain, Advocate.
Versus

$ M/s.D.P. Gupta and Company Pvt. Ltd. ..... RESPONDENT
Through:
Ms.Anjoo Jain and Mr.Hitesh
Sachar, Advocates.
CORAM :* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be allowed to YES
see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?

NO

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

NO

Anil Kumar, J. (Oral)
1.

This is a petition under Section 433(e) and Section 434(1)(a) of

Companies Act, 1956 seeking winding up of M/s.D.P.Gupta and Company
Pvt. Ltd.

2.

The petitioner contended that respondent is a company registered

under the Companies Act having its registered office at 1/9B, Asaf Ali Road,

CM(M) No.257/2006

Page 1 of 12

New Delhi. The respondent company is alleged to be indebted to the
petitioner for a sum of Rs.1,06,123/- besides interest at the rate of 18% per
annum with effect from 1st April, 2003 till the date of realisation. The amount
became due to the petitioner as the respondent company used to raise loans
as deposit and the petitioner had advanced loans as deposit to the
respondent company which was payable on demand along with interest at
18% per annum.

3.

The petitioner contended that in the books of accounts of the

respondent company an account was opened in the name of petitioner and
the amount deposited by the petitioner with the respondent company was
credited. In the balance sheet of the respondent company ending on 31 st
March, 2003, a sum of Rs.1,06,123/- was indicated to be due as unsecured
loan to the petitioner and a copy of the relevant portion of the balance sheet
was filed along with petition.

4.

The plea of the petitioner is that though the amount was due from the

respondent company to the petitioner which is reflected even in the balance
sheet of the respondent company, on demand being raised by the petitioner
on the respondent company, it failed to pay the amount due to the petitioner.

CM(M) No.257/2006

Page 2 of 12

Notice of demand dated 11th July, 2006 was sent under the Companies Act
which was served on the respondent company on 15 th July, 2006.

The

petitioner produced along with the petition a copy of the notice dated 11th
July, 2006 along with the copy of the postal receipt and the registered
acknowledgement card giving the correct address of the respondent
company and the signatures on behalf of respondent company as an
endorsement for the receipt of notice. The petition was filed by the petitioner
along with affidavit of Shri Robin Gupta who contended that the petitioner is
his elder brother and he is in Chicago, USA, on account of his business and
in his absence he is looking after all his financial interests and he is aware of
the facts and circumstances of the case.

5.

Later on another affidavit dated 11th December, 2006 was filed by the

petitioner who deposed in the affidavit that he is the plaintiff in the suit and
competent to swear the affidavit. The petitioner in the petition also disclosed
in the affidavit that he is the petitioner in the company petition and he is,
therefore, competent to swear the affidavit and paras 1, 6, 7, 9, 10, 12 of the
petition are true to his knowledge and paras 2,3,4,5, 11 and 13 are true upon
information received by him and believed to be correct.

CM(M) No.257/2006

Page 3 of 12

6.

The reply to the notice dated 11th July, 2006 was not given by the

respondent, however, reply to the petition was filed by the respondent as well
as the reply to the additional affidavit filed on behalf of petitioner.

The

respondent in the reply asserted that the petition is misconceived and not
maintainable and no cause of action accrued in favour of the petitioner and
against the respondent.

The respondent contended that the respondent

company is one of the group companies of M/s.D.P.Gupta and Company Pvt.
Ltd. which was initially incorporated in the year 1979 and the shareholders as
on 30th March, 1979 were Shri D.P. Gupta, Shri R. Gupta and Shri Raj Kumar
Gupta.

After the demise of Shri D.P. Gupta on 7th August, 1986, the

shareholding was divided equally between his two sons. The shareholding
pattern of the respondent company when the petition was filed was detailed
in para 1 of the reply. It was contended that other entities of the group
companies are Lotus Enterprises Pvt. Ltd. and Lotus Industries. Lotus
Enterprises Pvt. Ltd. is a company duly registered under the Companies Act,
1956 and Lotus Industries is partnership business of Shri D.P. Gupta and
family HUF, 25% share; Purnima Gupta, 25% share; Shashi Gupta, 25%
share, Sanjeev Gupta, 12.50% and Nikhil Gupta (petitioner), 12.50% share.
It was contended that the petitioner is also a shareholder of D.P. Gupta and
Company Pvt. Ltd., the respondent company and is holding 10 shares and

CM(M) No.257/2006

Page 4 of 12

the petition has been filed so that the group of Shri R.Gupta succumbs to the
pressure and gives in to the irrational demands of his brother Shri R.K.
Gupta. The respondent led evidence on the fact that Lotus Industries owes
about Rs.5,99,723/-to the respondent company and Rs.12,00,000/- to the
respondent company as the company deposits are lying with Lotus Industries
and the accounts of the entities owned by the families are yet to be settled.
The respondent also detailed various litigations pending between different
companies and partnership business. It was contended that the relief sought
in the civil suits and the other petitions are similar to the one sought in the
present petition.

Along with the reply, a copy of the suit for recovery of

Rs.6,39,475/- filed by Shri Robin Gupta against M/s.Lotus Industries and the
parters was also filed.

In reply to para 8 of the petition where it was

categorically contended that an amount of Rs.1,06,123/- is shown in the
balance sheet of the respondent company, it was denied that the petitioner
has advanced any loan to the respondent company, however, it was admitted
that it is an inter deposit qualifying it to be in the management. A copy of the
partnership deed of M/s.Lotus Industries was also filed where the petitioner is
also a partner.

7.

In the reply filed to the additional affidavit filed by the petitioner in

CM(M) No.257/2006

Page 5 of 12

support of the averments made in the petition, it was contended that
according to Rule 21 of Companies (Court) Rules, 1959, an affidavit verifying
the petition is mandatory and if there is no proper verification according to law
then there is no winding up petition. Reliance was also placed on reply to CP
No.269 of 2007 filed by the respondent company seeking condonation of
delay, contending that the reply was accompanied by an affidavit of Shri
Radhey Shyam Singh stating himself to be an authorised representative of
the petitioner. Emphasis was also led that in the affidavit filed by Shri Nikhil
Gupta, the petition has also been referred to as suit and para 8 of the petition
has not been verified. The respondent also raised an issue that dissolution of
the firm, M/s.Lotus Industries, and rendition of accounts is pending where the
petitioner is also a partner and the firm, M/s.Lotus Indsutries, owes
Rs.19,11,408/- to the respondent company and the share of the petitioner in
the liability towards the company comes to Rs.2,38,926/-.

It was also

disclosed that an arbitrator has been appointed who is proceeding with the
arbitration. A copy of the balance sheet of Lotus Industries was also filed and
in the circumstances, it is contended that respondent company is entitled to
recover Rs.2,38,926/- from the petitioner and is not liable to pay any amount
to the petitioner.

CM(M) No.257/2006

Page 6 of 12

8.

I have heard the learned counsel for the parties in detail and have

perused the documents. The petitioner has categorically contended in the
petition that in the account of the petitioner in the books of respondent a sum
of Rs.1,06,123/- has been shown as the amount due to petitioner and a copy
of detail of investment in business (of respondent company as on 31 st March,
2003) has been filed showing the deposit by the petitioner which fact has not
been denied by the respondent though the respondent has stated that this is
not a loan but inter deposit by the management nevertheless the amount
which is shown in the credit of the petitioner has not been disputed.

9.

The sole dispute which has been raised on behalf of respondent

company is that the HUF of Managing Director of the respondent company is
also a partner with the petitioner in M/s.Lotus Industries and on rendition of
accounts an amount of Rs.2,38,926/- shall be found due.

Though the

arbitrator has been appointed, however, the accounts have not been
rendered nor the firm has been dissolved. Merely because the HUF of
Managing Director of the respondent company claims an amount of
Rs.2,38,926/-from the petitioner, a partner in respect of a partnership firm, the
liability of the respondent company to the petitioner for the deposit made by
the petitioner cannot be denied. In the partnership business where the HUF

CM(M) No.257/2006

Page 7 of 12

of Managing Director of the respondent and the petitioner and other persons
who are family members are the partners, unless the accounts are rendered
and the firm is dissolved, the amount as claimed by the HUF of the Managing
Director of the respondent shall not be payable by the petitioner. For the
alleged amount which may become due to the HUF of Managing Director, as
a partner, from the petitioner, the liability of the respondent company to the
petitioner cannot be denied nor this will constitute such a dispute on behalf of
the respondent company not to pay the amount due to the petitioner.

10.

The objection of the respondent that the petition has not been filed in

conformity with Rule 21 of the Companies (Court) Rules, 1959, is also not
sustainable in view of the affidavit filed by the petitioner verifying all the
paragraphs except para 8 of the petition.

Because the petitioner in his

affidavit dated 11th December, 2006 has also stated that the present petition
is a suit, it will not make the affidavit verifying the facts invalid because the
same affidavit also stipulates about the present petition and the deposition of
the petitioner that he is aware of the facts and circumstances of the case and
competent to swear this affidavit can not be ignored. Para 8 of the petition
has not been verified but the annexure annexed with the petition which also
includes the details of investments in business as on 31st March, 2003 by the

CM(M) No.257/2006

Page 8 of 12

respondent company has been verified. The said document was thus verified
by virtue of affidavit dated 11th December, 2006 and, therefore, it cannot be
inferred that the affidavit with the petition has not verified those facts on
which the winding up of the respondent company has been sought. Learned
counsel for the respondent has also relied on Tayal Potteries Vs. Macroplast
(P) Ltd., 2001 Vol.29 SEBI and Corporate Laws – Reports 315 to contend
that the petition has not been verified in accordance with the Rule 21 of the
Act. A perusal of the said judgment reflects that the judgment relied on by
the respondent is distinguishable. In Tayal Potteries (supra) the affidavit was
not filed by the petitioner creditor but by a pariokar who was admittedly on
inimical terms with the respondent company as he had been removed from
the Board of Directors who had been litigating against the respondent
company and nothing was filed to show that the pariokar was authorised by
the petitioner to file the petition. In contra distinction, the present petition was
filed by younger brother of the petitioner, Shri Robin Gupta, however, later on
the petitioner has also filed an affidavit dated 11th December, 2006 verifying
the contents of the petition and the copies of annexures filed with the petition.
On the basis of the ratio of the judgement of the said case, it cannot be held
that the petition has not been filed in accordance with the Rule 21 of the
Companies (Court) Rule, 1959.

CM(M) No.257/2006

No further plea has been raised by the

Page 9 of 12

respondent. In the circumstances, it is apparent that according to the books
of account of the respondent company, an amount of Rs.1,06,123/-was due
from the respondent to the petitioner as on 31st March, 2003 which the
respondent company has failed to pay to the petitioner despite statutory
demand notice dated 11th July,2 006 and consequently it is deemed that the
company is unable to pay its debt.

11.

For a winding up petition under Section 433(e), there must be a debt

due and the company must be unable to pay the same and that due must be
determined or definite sum of money should be payable immediately or at a
future date.

From the facts stated hereinabove, it is apparent that the

respondent company has acknowledged the amount due to the petitioner
have failed to show that the said amount is not payable. The disputes raised
by the respondent company are not bonafide nor the defence can be
considered to be substantial. The defence which has been raised by the
respondent company is not likely to succeed on any point of law. In the
totality of facts and circumstances, it cannot be held that the defence has
been raised by the respondent company in good faith and that the defence is
likely to succeed in the point of law. In the circumstances, the inevitable
inference is that the respondent has a debt due to the petitioner company

CM(M) No.257/2006

Page 10 of 12

which the respondent company failed to pay despite opportunities and
despite a statutory notice which was duly served on the respondent company
and consequently the respondent company is unable to pay its debts.

12.

It is no more res integra that failure to pay is presumption of proof of

insolvency. Under Section 434(1) (a), there is a deeming provision which
gets attracted when notice is given and the company does not act within the
statutory

period

of

three

weeks

and

neglects

to

make

payment.

Consequently, the inevitable inference is that the respondent company is
indebted to pay a sum of Rs.1,06,123 as on 31.03.2003 with interest on the
deposit which the respondent company failed to pay and therefore, it is
deemed that the respondent company is unable to pay its debits. The
respondent is liable to pay the interest as the amount of interest was claimed
in the notice which notice had not been replied. The respondent company
has itself admitted that it was a management deposit. If it was a deposit, the
petitioner is entitled for interest on it till the amount of deposit is repaid. Thus
the said

amount the respondent company has not paid to the petitioner

despite statutory notice of demand and the respondent company is unable to
pay the debt due from him to the petitioner. Consequently, the said amount
is the debt due and payable by the respondent company to the petitioner.

CM(M) No.257/2006

Page 11 of 12

Hence, in the facts and totality of circumstances, the present petition for
winding up is to be admitted.

13.

Consequently, for the foregoing reasons, the petition is admitted.

Citations be published in the newspapers, namely, “The Statesman” (English)
and “Jansatta” (Hindi) and in the Official Gazette on petitioner taking steps.
The Official Liquidator attached to this Court is appointed as a Provisional
Liquidator.

However, I defer this order for appointment of provisional

liquidator and for issue of citation for a period of one month within which
period, if the respondent shall make the payment of the amount due to the
petitioner, no further order will be passed and present winding up petition will
be treated as disposed of. However, in case, the amount due is not paid
within one month, the official liquidator of this court will be appointed as
provisional liquidator and citations will be published on the petitioner taking
steps.
List on 4th October, 2007

July 19, 2007
'sdp'

CM(M) No.257/2006

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 12 of 12

