*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P(C) No.2214/2008

%

Date of decision: 19.03.2008

Volga Metal Industries

….… Petitioner
Through: Mr.K.A.Dewan, Advocate.
Versus

Govt. of NCT of Delhi & Another
Through: Nemo.

....... Respondents

CORAM :HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.
1.

The petitioner/management has impugned the award dated 2nd

February, 2008 awarding 50% back wages to the respondent workman
from the date of disengagement of his services with effect from 15th
June, 2004 and reinstatement.

2.

On the dispute being raised by the respondent/workman, the

following reference was made by the appropriate government:

W.P(C) No.2214/2008

Page 1 of 6

“Whether services of Sh.Virender Singh S/o Sh.Surinder
Singh been terminated by the management illegally and/or
unjustifiably and if so to what sum of money as monetary
relief alongwith consequential benefits in terms of existing
laws/Government notifications and to what other relief is
he entitled, and what directions are necessary in this
respect?”

3.

Before the Labour Court, the petitioner had claimed that he had

been employed with the management since April 1998 as Karigar and
his last drawn salary was Rs.4,200/- per month. According to him, the
management

was

not

providing

legal

facilities

nor

had

issued

appointment letter, attendance card, leave book, earned leave, casual
leave etc. despite the demands being made by the workman which
annoyed the petitioner and the services were terminated on 15th June,
2004

without

issuing

any

notice

or

charge

sheet.

The

respondent/workman contended that he is unemployed since the date
of termination of his services.

4.

The claim of the respondent/workman was contested by the

petitioner contending inter alia that the respondent was not in the
employment of the management since April 1998 as Karigar and that
his last drawn salary was not Rs.4,200/- per month. It was pleaded
that the respondent was appointed with effect from 26th April, 2001 at
the salary of Rs.2,419/- per month and he was on probation for a
W.P(C) No.2214/2008

Page 2 of 6

period of six months which period expired on 25th October, 2001, the
petitioner asserted that the conduct of workman was unsatisfactory and
he was absenting without intimation to the management and, therefore,
he collected his dues in full and final after making verbal request for
resignation from the services of 10th April, 2004 and he executed a
receipt after collecting his dues on 8th May, 2004 in presence of
witnesses. The claim of the workman was also resisted on the ground
that he had not completed 240 days of continuous service in 12 months
preceding the date of termination, i.e., 15th June, 2004.

5.

The Labour Court on the basis of pleadings and evidence

produced held that the plea of the petitioner that the workman had
voluntarily resigned is false. The Labour Court had relied on the copy
of wages payment register for the month of May 2004 and the copy of
muster roll for the month of May 2004 showing that the respondent had
performed his duties in the months of May 2004 and, therefore, the
claim of the petitioner that the workman had voluntarily resigned on
10th April, 2004 is not correct. The alleged receipt alleged to have been
executed by the respondent on collection of sum of Rs.10,662/- was
also disbelieved as the attesting witnesses, namely, Shri Vijay Goal and
Shri Harish Kumar, were not examined nor any cogent explanation was
given for not examining them.

An adverse inference has also been

taken by the Labour court against the petitioner for non-production of
W.P(C) No.2214/2008

Page 3 of 6

the account books to show that in fact amount of Rs.10,662/- was paid
to the workman in full and final settlement or not.

6.

The findings of the Labour Court that the workman had not

voluntarily resigned is based on evidence and cannot be termed
perverse or suffering from any manifest error. It cannot be disputed
that if the Labour court had drawn some inference based on cogent
evidence, the High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226
of Constitution of India is not substituted its inference with the
inference drawn by the Labour Court. In the present case, I do not find
any reason to differ with the inferences drawn by the Labor Court that
the respondent workman had not voluntarily resigned on 10th April,
2004 because the petitioner’s

own record showed that he worked

during May 2004. The alleged voucher for Rs.10,622/- cannot be relied
on as the attesting witnesses have not been examined nor any cogent
explanation has been given for not examining them and the payment of
the alleged amount of Rs.10,662/- has not been established by the
petitioner by producing the relevant evidence such as their account
books etc.

7.

Regarding the respondent having not worked for 240 days, the

reliance has been placed on the fact that the respondent was paid
gratuity and the amount of gratuity could not be paid, had the
W.P(C) No.2214/2008

Page 4 of 6

workman not worked for 12 months in a year. The respondent had
pleaded that he worked for more than 240 days and the petitioner did
not produce any record to rebut the plea of the respondent.

8.

The petitioner before the Labour Court showed their willingness

to reinstate the workman and consequently as the termination of the
services of the respondent was illegal, the petitioner was directed to
reinstate the workman and 50% back wages have also been awarded to
the respondent from the date of his disengagement by the petitioner on
15th June, 2004.

The petitioner has not been able to prove that the

respondent remained employed during the period after the termination
of his services and since the burden was on the respondent, considering
the material before the Labour Court the inference was drawn regarding
award of 50% back wages from the date of his termination which
cannot be termed perverse or suffering from any manifest error.

9.

While exercising its powers of judicial review under Article 226 of

the Constitution of India this Court is not to re-appreciate the evidence.
It is a settled position of law that in exercise of jurisdiction under Article
226 of the Constitution of India, the Court does not interfere with
factual findings of the lower courts and restrain itself from reappreciating evidence while exercising powers of judicial review. The
objective of judicial review is to ascertain that a person received a fair
W.P(C) No.2214/2008

Page 5 of 6

treatment and objective is not to re-appreciate the entire pleas and
evidence and draw inferences again. The findings and inferences of the
Labor Court are based on evidence and documents on record and there
does not appear to be any manifest errors in them. Judicial review is
not an appeal from a decision but a review of the manner in which the
decision is made. Power of judicial review is meant to ensure that the
individual receives fair treatment and not to ensure that the conclusion
which the authority reaches is necessarily correct in the eye of the
court.

10.

For the foregoing reasons, there are no ground to invoke the

jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
as there is no manifest error or perversity in the award dated 2nd
February, 2008 and consequently the petition is without any merit and
the same is dismissed.

March 19th, 2008.

ANIL KUMAR, J.

‘Dev’

W.P(C) No.2214/2008

Page 6 of 6

