IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Date of decision : September 20th , 2007
CS(OS) No.1710/2006

#
!

Archana Rastogi

......... PLAINTIFF
Through: Mr.Sanjeev Sahay, Advocate.
Vs.

$
^

Vivek Rastogi

........ DEFENDANT
Through: Mr.D.K.Monga, Advocate.

CORAM :* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?

YES

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES

YES

ANIL KUMAR, J. (ORAL)
+
*
1.

IA No.8007/2007 in CS (OS) No.1710/2006
This is an application by defendant under Order IX Rule 7 read with

Section 151 of Code of Civil Procedure for setting aside the ex-parte order
dated 7th May, 2007 passed against him. The applicant/defendant contended
that he is working with M/s.W.S.Global Services Pvt. Ltd. which has its
registered office at Mumbai. According to the applicant, he was posted at

CS (OS) No.1710/2006

Page 1 of 15

Gurgaon prior to 1st August, 2006 where after he was transferred to Pune
(Maharashtra) and he is working and residing at Pune.

2.

The applicant contended that by order dated 29th September, 2006,

the summons and notices in the suit and the applications filed by his wife,
plaintiff, were issued and thereafter on 13th November, 2006 when the
summons and notices were again issued, neither applicant nor any member
of his family were residing at Gurgaon. According to the defendant, at all
relevant times, the plaintiff/non-applicant knew that the defendant has been
transferred to and was working and residing at Pune and was not working
and residing at Gurgaon. According to the applicant, he never avoided to
accept service of summons and notice issued by this Court.

3.

According to the applicant, publication of the summon and notice of

the suit in “Tribune” is not a service as “Tribune” newspaper in which the
summon and notice were published does not have circulation in Maharashtra
nor he received the copy of the News paper. The applicant has also denied
service of notice by affixation. Regarding the suit pending in the court at
Gurgaon for partition and permanent injunction filed by the plaintiff, applicant
contended that he had put his first appearance on 1st June, 2007 before the

CS (OS) No.1710/2006

Page 2 of 15

Civil Judge, Senior Division, Gurgaon, Haryana, and on that date he came to
know about the filing of the suit by the plaintiff.

4.

After coming to know about the pendency of the suit, he engaged the

services of a local advocate and as the courts remained closed from 1st June,
2007 to 1st July, 2007, therefore, the present application dated 18th July, 2007
was filed on 18th July, 2007 for setting aside the ex parte order passed
against him.

5.

The applicant also contended that he had nothing to gain and had no

intention of keeping away from the proceedings in the case and the
application for setting aside the ex-parte order is made bonafide.

6.

The application is opposed by the plaintiff/non-applicant contending

inter alia that the application is a gross abuse of process of law and the
applicant has not come to the Court with clean hand and is trying to mislead
this Court.

According to the plaintiff, the defendant/applicant was trying

deliberately to avoid acceptance of summons and he has been duly served
by substituted service by publication and by affixation.

CS (OS) No.1710/2006

Page 3 of 15

7.

The non-applicant contended that the notices were sent by registered

A.D. post as well as by other means on several dates which the defendant
avoided to accept. According to the plaintiff summons were sent pursuant to
order dated 29th September, 2006 returnable for 13th November, 2006,
however, the registered AD card did not come back and hence the said
service is valid under Order V Rule 9 sub-rule 3 of Code of Civil Procedure as
registered AD sent was not received back and after a period of 30 days it is
valid service. According to the non-applicant, summons were sent by an
abundant precaution on 13th November, 2006 for 20th February, 2007 and as
the registered AD again did not come back, the same is also a valid service in
law in view of the said provision. According to the plaintiff/non-applicant,
fresh

summons

were

again

ordered

on

20th

February,

2007

by

pasting/substituted service and the pasting was effected on 14th March, 2007
at the office of the defendant where he is a Senior Vice President.

8.

The non-applicant has also contested the application on the ground

that the respondent continues to be employed in WNS and has deliberately
shifted to Pune to be with his lady friend Priya Mishra. It has also been
contended that on 6th March, 2007 it was tacitly accepted by the defendant's
office that he was still working at WNS, Gurgaon, because office report was

CS (OS) No.1710/2006

Page 4 of 15

that he has gone out and reception did not know as to when he will come
back.

9.

The plaintiff has also relied on a email dated 23rd May, 2007 addressed

to the counsel for the plaintiff stipulating that the defendant want to support
the plaintiff and therefore it is best that defendant and the counsel start the
High Court proceedings.

The stipulation made in the alleged email

addressed to the counsel for the plaintiff is as under:“Hi Geeta,
Hope this finds you well. I am okay but not too happy as
I think of how things have shaped up. I have been hesitating to
not have positive response to the offer you last made for a
mutual compromise. Hence, unless you have some other mo we
need to go the legal way.
I look forward to supporting Archana and hence it is best
we start the High Court proceedings. My office or I have not resummoned.

Could you pleas have them sent to me on the

address given below. I will accept them asap and Arun/I will on
this case.”
Reliance has also been placed on other email dated 28th May, 2007
sent by the counsel for the plaintiff to the defendant.

10.

I have heard the learned counsel for the parties in detail. The notices

CS (OS) No.1710/2006

Page 5 of 15

were sent to the defendant pursuant to order dated 29 th September, 2006 for
13th November, 2006. Admittedly, the notices and summons sent for 13th
November, 2006 were not received back.

Despite the notices sent by

registered post and AD cards were not received back even after thirty days,
this Court had not proceeded ex parte after 30 days of sending of summons
and notices by registered post under Order V rule 9 sub-Rule 3 of Code of
Civil Procedure and had ordered fresh notice on 13th November, 2006.

11.

On 13th November, 2006, fresh summons and notices were issued for

20th February, 2007. The summons and notices sent pursuant to the order
dated 13th November, 2006 by registered post were also not received back,
however, on 20th February, 2007, the Court had not proceeded ex parte
against the defendant under Order V Rule 9 sub-Rule 3 of Code of Civil
Procedure on the ground that the notices sent by registered post had not
been received back after a period of 30 days.

12.

Though the reports about these registered articles sent could be

obtained from the concerned post office, however, no such report was
obtained, rather an application under Order V rule 20 for substituted service
was filed which was allowed and the defendant was ordered to be served by

CS (OS) No.1710/2006

Page 6 of 15

substituted service by publication in newspaper ‘Tribune; as well as affixation
at the office address of the defendant by order dated 20th February, 2007.

13.

Since the court had not proceeded ex parte against the defendant

under Order V rule 9 sub-Rule 3 of Code of Civil Procedure on the basis of
notice sent pursuant to order dated 29th September, 2006 and 13th November,
2006; the plaintiff cannot contend that the notices were deemed to be served
now and the ex-parte order is not liable to be set aside. Even after filing of
application by the defendant for setting aside the ex parte order, though the
plaintiff could have obtained the report from the concerned post office about
the service of summons sent pursuant to order dated 29th September, 2006
and 13th November, 2006, even though the notices were sent by this Court,
therefore on the alleged ground it cannot be inferred that the defendant had
knowledge about the pendency of the case and notices sent by registered
post had been served on the defendant. The summons had been ordered to
be served by all modes prescribed, however, the summons were sent only by
registered post and not by ordinary process through the process server,
through courier and through e-mail.

14.

The substituted service has been done by publication in ‘Tribune’. The

CS (OS) No.1710/2006

Page 7 of 15

defendant/applicant has contended that the ‘Tribune’ does not have any
circulation in Maharashtra as he had been transferred to Pune and this fact
was within the knowledge of the plaintiff/non-applicant. The allegation of the
plaintiff is that defendant has shifted to Pune in order to be with his friend,
Priya Mishra. In the circumstance, therefore, it cannot be denied that the
publication of the notice and summons in ‘Tribune’ which does not have
circulation in Maharashtra will not be a sufficient service. In any case, the
non-applicant/plaintiff has failed to show that ‘Tribune’ has circulation in
Maharashtra.

15.

A division Bench of this Court in AIR 1996 DELHI 259 in Ganga Ram

Agarwal Vs. National Small Industries Corporation Ltd. had held that if the
substituted service is carried out by publication in the News paper which does
not have circulation in the area where the defendant resides, then substituted
service carried out by publication will not be effective service.

16.

Order V of the Code relates to service of summons. Rule 12 of the

Code contemplates that wherever it is practicable, service should be made on
the person concerned unless the person has an agent empowered to accept
service. Therefore the attempt should be made to serve notice personally on

CS (OS) No.1710/2006

Page 8 of 15

the party unless there is an agent empowered to accept service. Rules 13
and 14 of the Code stipulates that the summons can be served on agent in
certain circumstances. Order V, Rule 15 of the Code empowers the process
server to serve summons on any adult male member of the family, if the party
is found to be absent when service of summons is sought to be effected on
him at his residence and there is no likelihood of the party being found at the
residence within reasonable time and he has no agent empowered to accept
service. Explanation to the said Rules clarifies that a servant is not regarded
as a member of the family within the meaning of Order V, Rule 15 of the
Code. However, while effecting service under Order V, Rule 15 of the Code,
process server has to record a specific finding that the party is absent from
his residence and there is no likelihood of the party being found at the
residence within reasonable time. The service can be effected only on an
adult member of the family of the party. Process server has therefore, to take
care and caution on noting down the name and details of the adult member of
the family. In the present case, there was no attempt to send the summons
through the process server though the Court had ordered so. Order V, Rule
16 of the Code requires that a person on whom copy of the summons has
been tendered or delivered shall affix his signatures on the copy. In this case
there is nothing to show that the defendant was tendered summons and he

CS (OS) No.1710/2006

Page 9 of 15

had affixed his signatures on the summons. Order V, Rule 17 of the Code
stipulates that where a party or his agent or any adult member of the family
refuses to sign/acknowledge or where the process server after using all due
and reasonable diligence is unable to find the party as he is absent and there
is no likelihood of the party being found at the residence within reasonable
time, the process server shall affix a copy of the summon on the outer door or
some other conspicuous part of the house where the party ordinarily resides
or carries on business or works. The process server thereafter is required to
file a report containing necessary details and circumstances necessitating
service by affixation. Order V, Rule 19 of the Code requires that where
summons has returned under Rule 17 without affidavit of the process server,
the process server shall be examined on oath by the Court and on such
further enquiry the Court can declare that the summon has been duly served.
Where a process server has furnished an affidavit, the Court still has power
to examine the process server and conduct such enquiry and thereafter
decide whether the summon is duly served.

17.

The notice alleged to be affixed on 13th March, 2007 for 23rd April,

2007 cannot be a proper service in accordance with rules. The report of the
Bailiff is that at the office one clerk read the summons and talked on mobile

CS (OS) No.1710/2006

Page 10 of 15

phone and said that the respondent has gone and consequently the
summons were affixed at office. The report of Bailiff is not witnessed by any
independent person nor does it gives the name of the alleged clerk to whom
the summon was tendered nor the place where he has affixed the summons.
The Bailiff has alleged that the summons were affixed, however, it is not
mentioned whether the summons were affixed inside the office or outside the
office. The affidavit filed along with the alleged report of the Bailiff is also of
Shri Hira Prasad, clerk of the counsel for the plaintiff, which only stipulates
that the dasti notices were taken and handed over to Bailiff in Gurgaon.
Consequently, on the basis of such a report and the affidavit of the clerk of
the counsel which does not even contend that all the facts stated in the
affidavit are true to his knowledge, it cannot be inferred that there is a valid
service on the defendant.

18.

The plaintiff has also relied on printed copy of the email dated 23 rd

May, 2007 sent to the counsel for the plaintiff. The email was allegedly
addressed to the counsel for the plaintiff and nothing has been filed in
compliance with the provisions of Section 65(B) of the Evidence Act
stipulating about admissibility of electronic record. Consequently, on the basis
of alleged emails, the inference as has been sought to be drawn on behalf of

CS (OS) No.1710/2006

Page 11 of 15

plaintiff cannot be drawn. Even if, the alleged email is considered, it only
reflects defendant's admission to support the plaintiff and a request to the
plaintiff counsel to start the High Court proceedings. It does not show that
defendant had been aware of the pendency of the High Court proceedings
which according to defendant came to his knowledge on or about 1 st June,
2007 in a suit filed in the Court at Gurgaon. For the same reason, the alleged
email dated 28th May, 2007 alleged to have been sent by the counsel for the
plaintiff to the defendant cannot be relied on. In any case, the alleged
knowledge of the pendency of the case cannot be termed as a service of
summons and notices on the defendant.

19.

After amendment to the Code of Civil Procedure, a defendant has to

file the written statement within 30 days from the date of service. Merely on
the basis of the knowledge of the pendency of the case, the defendant is not
expected to file the written statement within 30 days and consequently, in my
opinion, mere knowledge of the pendency of the case will not be a deemed
service so as to take action against such a party.

20.

Consequently in the above facts and circumstances, it is apparent that

the defendant had not been served. The plaintiff and defendant are wife and

CS (OS) No.1710/2006

Page 12 of 15

husband. Not giving adequate opportunity to any of the parties can result in
injustice. At times it is difficult to prove and establish the facts, allegations and
counter allegations without going deeper into the matter and giving
opportunity to the parties to examine witnesses and cross-examine them.
Sometimes it can become difficult for the Court to decide the question of
"sufficient cause" conclusively as required under the provisions of Order IX of
the Code without recording evidence, thus delaying the matter and
prolonging the litigation. In such circumstances on weighing and balancing
the equities on both sides and with a view to expedite the progress of the
case and not to stall the same by asking the parties to lead evidence, the exparte order can be set aside subject to payment of Costs also. The case is
still at the initial stage and if the e-mail dated 23 rd May, 2007 relied on by the
plaintiff is considered, it reflects the willingness of the defendant to support
the plaintiff. In the totality of circumstances, therefore, there is sufficient
reason for setting aside the ex-parte order passed against the defendant
subject to the cost of Rs.10,000 payable by the defendant to the plaintiff.

21.

Consequently, the application of the defendant is allowed and the ex-

parte order dated 7th May, 2007 proceeding ex-parte against the defendant is
set aside subject to a cost of Rs.10,000/- payable by the defendant to the

CS (OS) No.1710/2006

Page 13 of 15

plaintiff.

CS (OS) No.1710/2006
A complete set of paper book be given to the counsel for the
defendant within one week. Written statement be filed within 30 days.
Replication, if any, be filed within four weeks thereafter.
Parties are also directed to file their original documents or certified
copies thereof within ten weeks.
List before the Joint Registrar for admission/denial and marking of
documents on 30.11.2007.
List before the Court for framing of the issues on 15.2.2008.

IA No.1511/2007
Copy of the application be given to the counsel for the defendant who
seeks time to file the reply. Reply be filed within four weeks. Rejoinder, if any,
before the next date of hearing.
List on 2.11.2007.
Parties are also directed to be present on the next date of hearing.

September 20, 2007
'Dev'

ANIL KUMAR, J.

CS (OS) No.1710/2006

Page 14 of 15

CS (OS) No.1710/2006

Page 15 of 15

