*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

%

Date of Decision: February 20, 2007

+

W.P.(C).No.9327/2006

M/s.Nawab Consultants for Ideas
.....
PETITIONER
Through: Mr.N.K.Kaul, Sr.Advocate with
Ms.Shobna Takiar, Advocate.
Versus
Govt.of NCT of Delhi & Others
....
RESPONDENTS
Through: Mr.J.R.Midha and Mr.Ashish Gupta,
Advocates.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

YES

2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?

YES

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES

Anil Kumar, J.

1.

The main dispute in this writ petition is whether the petitioner was awarded

the contract for supply of Godrej chairs or chairs equivalent to Godrej chairs. The
allegation of the petitioner is that he was awarded contract for supply of chairs
equivalent to Godrej and consequently on supplying the chairs equivalent to Godrej
his EMD could not be forfeited by letter dated 8.5.2006 nor the agreement could be
rescinded by rejection letter dated 12.5.2006 and in the circumstances the petitioner
has prayed that the respondents be directed to recall the tender permit and petitioner

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 1 of 41

be allowed to participate in the fresh tender.

2.

Brief facts to comprehend the controversies between the parties are that the

petitioner is a sole proprietorship firm of Sh.Subhash Ahuja who is in the business of
manufacturing furniture of all kinds and he is alleged to have a pool of talented
artisans with expertise in the area of manufacturing furniture and he has successfully
completed various projects since he started his business.

3.

Respondent vide public notice dated 29.3.2006 invited item rate tenders from

the enlisted contractor of CPWD, Class I, Furniture category contractor or specialized
agencies having adequate experience in furniture. The tender was invited for
providing movable furniture for Judge's library cum lounge, Judge's conference room,
canteen, bar room and three branches etc. in District Courts of Rohini, Delhi.

4.

The tender for work for providing movable property was to be submitted by

16 hours on 21st April, 2006 to Executive Engineer, PWD, Civil Division-II, DCE(P),
PWD, Bawana Road, Delhi. The estimated cost of the work was Rs.96,15,673/- and
earnest money was Rs.1,92,313/- and the tenderer was liable to give performance
guarantee equivalent to 5% of the tender value and security deposit equal to 5% of
the tender value. The time allowed for carrying out the work was 3 months from the
10th day after the date of issue of letter of acceptance of tender or from 1 st day of
handing over the site whichever was later. The tender form had conditions of work
for execution. Some of the relevant terms are as follows:-

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 2 of 41

“1.5:- In the event of any difference or discrepancy in the
description of any item or its specifications, the same shall be resolved
in the following sequence and decision of the Engineer-in Charge shall
be conclusive, final and binding on the contractor:a) The nomenclature of the item shall take precedence over all
and anything stated elsewhere.
b) The conditions and specifications attached to the tender
document shall take preference over the provisions of CPWD
specification 1996 (Vol. 1 to VI) with upto date correction slip and
relevant IS codes.
c) The CPWD specification 1996 Vol.1 to VI shall take
precedence over provisions of relevant IS Codes.
d) In case, it is not possible to resolve the dispute with the help
of tender documents the provision of relevant IS codes shall be relied
upon.
e) In case, it is not possible to resolve the dispute with the help
of any of the above documents, the decision and direction of the
Engineer-in-Charge shall be followed for execution and completion of
any item of work.”
5.

The general specifications of the tender provided for Chair. The `Chair' was

defined under clause 16 as under:“16:

Chair

Chair shall be steel chairs manufactured from approved manufacturer
as per their specification and as approved by the Engineer-in-Charge.
The seat shall have interwoven waving with 12 mm thick ply, unless
otherwise indicated, seats shall be with 75 mm thick heavy duty fire
retardant foam and back shall be with 40 mm thick heavy duty fire
retardant foam upholstered on both sides.”

6.

The document also had a list of approved make or material and item 19

described revolving chair and its make was specified as Godrej or equivalent which is
as under:-

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 3 of 41

Sr.No.

MATERIAL

19 REVOLVING CHAIR

7.

MAKE
GODREJ OR EQUIVALENT

The schedule of quantities were also given along with the tender which

categorically stipulated for supply of chair as under:-

42

Supplying and placing chairs of required
size and shade as per direction of
Engineer-in-Charge

Qty

Rate

(a) Godrej revolving chair, ULTIMA
PCH-9101R for PP Chamber
2
(b) Godrej Chair 'STAQ' 4012 XW Shape
as per manufacturer MPC-101 for canteen
(c) Godrej Chair 'STAQ 4002 XW for
canteen

Amount

Each
Each
168
Each
36

(d) Godrej revolving chair 'ULTIMA
PCH-9102 R for PP Chamber

40

(e) Godrej Chair 'SYPDER' 9602 A mesh
fabric for training room

Each

70

Each

(f) Godrej revolving chair 'HALO' PCH
9200 R for conference hall

5

(g) Godrej revolving chair “HALO' PCH
9201 R for conference hall

122

(h)Godrej Chair ' Preimum Executive'
PCH 7003 for PP Chamber

8.

Unit

Each
Each
Each
88

The tender document also provided specification for super premium chairs.

The specification for super premium chairs was also categorically provided for
Godrej PCH-9200R/9201R. The specifications for Synchro chair Godrej, Premium
Executive chair Godrej PCH-7003, STAQ chairs PCH-4012XW, Godrej PCH9602A, Godrej JT 104 and Godrej JT 9 were also provided in detail. On receiving the
WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 4 of 41

tender the petitioner categorically filled in schedule of quantities, the rates offered by
him which are as under:-

Supplying and placing chairs of required
size and shade as per direction of
42
Engineer-in-Charge

Qty

(a) Godrej revolving chair, ULTIMA
PCH-9101R for PP Chamber
2

Rate in Rs.

Unit

Amount in
Rs.

10990.80
Eac
/- h

21981.6
0/-

1788.3
Eac
/- h

300434
.4

(c) Godrej Chair 'STAQ 4002 XW for
canteen
36

2314
Eac
/- h

8330
4/-

(d) Godrej revolving chair 'ULTIMA
PCH-9102 R for PP Chamber
40

10465
Eac
/- h

41860
0/-

(e) Godrej Chair 'SYPDER' 9602 A mesh
fabric for training room
70

6784/
Eac
- h

47488
0/-

(f) Godrej revolving chair 'HALO' PCH
9200 R for conference hall
5

24190
Eac
/- h

12095
0/-

(g) Godrej revolving chair “HALO' PCH
9201 R for conference hall
122

23663 Eac
/- h

288688
6/-

(b) Godrej Chair 'STAQ' 4012 XW Shape
as per manufacturer MPC-101 for canteen 168

(h)
Godrej
chair
“PREMIUM
EXECUTIVE' PCH 7003 for PP Chamber 88

9.

Eac
4101/- h

36088
8/-

The tender of the petitioner was accepted by letter dated 28.4.2006. the tender

of the petitioner for an amount of Rs.7386277 was lower than the estimated cost of
Rs.9615673. The petitioner along with the acceptance letter was requested to submit
performance guarantee of Rs.369314/- within 15 days of issue of the acceptance letter
in the prescribed form and the time for supply of the material was reckoned three
months after 22 days from the date of issue of the letter.

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 5 of 41

10.

The petitioner supplied the chairs by a delivery challan dated 29.4.2006,

however, in the delivery challan instead of Godrej chairs he mentioned about supply
of chairs equivalent to various models of `Godrej' chairs stipulated in the tender and
not of make `Godrej.

11.

The respondents communicated to the petitioner by letter dated 8.5.2006 that

in the nomenclature of item No.42 for chairs, Godrej chairs of particular make, being
revolving chairs only had been mentioned and therefore, the petitioner has to supply
the revolving chairs as mentioned in the nomenclature of item No.42 of make
`Godrej'. It was also intimated to the petitioner that nomenclature of the item will
prevail and, therefore, the petitioner has to supply the particular make of Godrej
revolving chairs only and not its equivalent.

12.

The petitioner responded to letter dated 8.5.2006 by his reply dated 11.5.2006

and categorically admitted that though in the nomenclature it was mentioned only
Godrej make but since the nomenclature is a part of the contract and the most
important portion is the approved list so the petitioner was misled in the process and
the petitioner had quoted only on account of his ability to compete in the system. The
relevant portion of the petitioner's communication dated 11.5.2006 is as under:“Though in the Nomenclature it was mentioned only
Godrej make since the Nomenclature is a part of the contract and the
most important portion is approved List so we are misled in the
process. We have quoted only on account of our ability to compete in
the system.................
That further, there is also a provision for settlement of
dispute under clause 25 “Dispute and Arbitration.

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 6 of 41

That as per this clause, the matter can be decided by the
Superintendent Engineer in case of any dispute and failing which the
matter can be settled in appeal by the Hon'ble Chief Engineer. Further,
there is a provision regarding action where no specifications are
specified under clause 28.
That our case falls under category 28 also, because the
issue is open and both the parties are under confusion regarding the
make of the goods. During our final meeting, we were under the
impression that the goods equivalent to the Godrej can be supplied but
as a matter of surprise now it has been observed by us that you are
insisting for goods of Godrej make only which is not possible for us to
be supplied at the quoted rates as our incidental charges are also
involved. In that case order could have been placed directly by PWD
on the Godrej and the question of going to open markets absolutely
uncalled for as it is a monopoly item. The Government has provided
for tenders to avoid monopoly in the system to meet statutory
requirement......
That however, in case our contention is not found
acceptable then we will request Hon'ble Chief Engineer to appoint a
Sole Arbitrator in the matter as earliest as possible, though apparently
there appears to be no justification because the contact has not been
put in operation.”

13.

In reply to the petitioner's reply, respondents by communication dated

12.5.2006 intimated to the petitioner that the contentions raised by the petitioner in
reply dated 11.5.2006 are not convincing and acceptable. The petitioner was asked to
supply the revolving chairs of Godrej make only as stipulated in nomenclature of
item No.42. By letter dated 19.5.2006 the petitioner communicated to the respondent
that due to unavoidable circumstances he would be unable to submit the performance
guarantee by 20.5.2006 and so another 10 days time for submission of performance
guarantee without prejudice was sought. The petitioner did not communicate to the

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 7 of 41

respondents that he can not furnish performance guarantee as he can not supply
`Godrej' chairs. Rather apprehending forfeiture of EMD and terming the letters dated
8.5.2006 and 12.5.2006 being arbitrary, unreasonable and irrational the present writ
petition was filed.

14.

The petitioner asserted that he has been asked to deposit performance

guarantee without approval of samples and without sorting out discrepancies and that
he has been threatened with forfeiture of EMD which is unlawful and in violation of
the rights of the petitioner. According to the petitioner he fully met and satisfied the
requirements of the terms and conditions of the tender and in the event of any
difference or discrepancy in the description of any item or its specification same
ought to have been resolved by the decision of the Engineer-in-charge and not as per
the manual of CPWD.

15.

The petitioner categorically pleaded that condition and specification attached

to the tender document had preference over the provisions of CPWD Specification
1996 and the decision of the Engineer-in-Charge has to be followed for execution and
plan of any item of work. Relying on list of approved make or material at serial
No.19 it was contended that the word `or' in "Godrej or equivalent” is disjunctive
article used to express an alternative and to give a choice of one among two or more
things and consequently the petitioner was entitled to supply chairs equivalent to
Godrej and not of `Godrej' only. According to the petitioner this was the
nomenclature of the goods to be supplied and not the quantity mentioned at serial

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 8 of 41

No.42 in schedule of quantities which could not be given preference in case of
discrepancy. According to the petitioner if `Godrej' make items were required then
the order could be placed simplicitor on Godrej company itself. The petitioner
contended that he had participated under the confidence that it could supply better
quality of material at cheaper rates than Godrej and that may be of better quality even
than Godrej.

16.

The writ petition had come up for hearing on 26.5.2006 and the following

order was passed by this Court:CM No. 6916/2006
Allowed, subject to all just exceptions.
The Application stands disposed of.
W.P.(C) 9327/2006
Issue notice to the Respondents to show cause as to why
rule nisi be not issued, returnable on 30.05.2006.
Mr. J.R. Midha, Standing Counsel accepts notice on
behalf of the Respondents.
Counsel for the Respondent to explain why only Godrej
Products are sought to be purchased by the Respondents, especially
where detailed specifications have been notified by them and,
therefore, the Respondents are in a position to inspect and accept
quality products of other parties also. It is not controverted that the
Petitioner's products do not conform to the said specifications.
CM No. 6915/2006
Issue notice to the Respondents for the date fixed.
Mr. J.R. Midha, Standing Counsel accepts notice on
behalf of the Respondents.
No coercive step be taken till the next date of hearing.”

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 9 of 41

17.

The writ petition is contested by the respondents and a counter affidavit of

Sh.Arab Singh, Executive Engineer (C), Civil Division-II, DCE(P), PWD, Bawana
Road, Delhi dated 30.5.2006 was filed. In reply to the averments made by the
petitioner and the query raised by the Court by this order dated 26.5.2006, the
respondents pleaded that after receipt of sanction, samples of various furniture were
shown to the Judge Incharge, Rohini Courts and other Judges at Rohini Courts. After
inspection of various samples and discussions with PWD officers, various makes of
Godrej revolving chairs in conference room, PP chamber, Canteen, Training room
were approved and the approved samples were kept at site by the respondents and
thereafter the tender was invited for providing `Godrej' revolving chairs as per
approved samples along with other movable furniture. The respondents in their reply
also contended as to why only `Godrej' furniture was choosen. The relevant portion
of the reply of the respondents is as under:“Respondent No.4 received sanction from District & Session Judge,
Delhi for providing movable furniture in Judge's Library cum
Lounges, Conference room, Canteen, Bar rooms, 3 Nos. branches in
District Courts Rohini, Delhi vide order dated 16.2.2006. After receipt
of sanction, samples of various furnitures were shown to Judge in
Charge, Rohini and other Judges at Rohini. After inspection of
various samples and discussions with PWD Officers, the Judge in
Charge, Rohini approved various makes of Godrej revolving chairs in
conference room, PP chamber, Canteen, Training room. These
approved samples were kept at site by respondents. Respondent No.4
invited tenders for providing Godrej revolving chairs as per approved
samples along with other movable furniture. Approved samples of
Godrej chairs and other furniture were also shown to the interested
tenderers.”

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 10 of 41

18.

The respondent categorically pleaded that the nomenclature of an item has to

take precedence over all and in case of a dispute being not resolved with the help of
tender documents and ISI codes, the decision and direction of the Engineer-in-Charge
has to be followed for execution and completion of any item of work. Relying on
General Condition of Contract, 2005 it was contended that discrepancies and
adjustments of errors were to be resolved by having several documents forming the
part of the contract as mutually explanatory to one another and detailed drawings
being taken in preference to small scale drawings and figure dimensions in preference
to scale and special conditions. The order of preference to be observed was as under:“(i)

Description of Schedule of Quantities

(ii)

Particular specification and special condition, if any.

(iii)

Drawings

(iv)

CPWD specifications

(v)

19.

Indian Standard specification of BIS

Relying on para 8.2 it was contended that if there was varying or conflicting

provisions, the accepting authority was the deciding authority in regard to the
intention of the document and his decision was to be final and binding on the
contractor.

20.

On the basis of condition 1.5 at page 16 of tender document and para 8.1 at

page 13 of General Conditions of Contract, 2005 it was asserted that both provisions
stipulated that the details given in schedule of quantities would have precedence over

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 11 of 41

condition and specification attached with the tender documents and as
description/nomenclature of item 42 of Schedule of Quantity clearly stipulated the
particular make of `Godrej' chair any other description could not be taken in
preference to whatsoever was given in nomenclature at item No.42.

21.

According to the respondents, nine tenders were received and opened on

21.4.2006. The tender of the petitioner for supply of `Godrej' chairs was the lowest.
The respondents categorically asserted that though the tender was for the supply of
Godrej chairs and the petitioner had filed the tender for supply of `Godrej' chairs,
however, later on after the petitioner mentioned equivalent chairs in the delivery
challan and not `Godrej' chairs, the petitioner had given samples of equivalent chairs
and he had made a request for the approval of his samples alleged to be equivalent to
the `Godrej' chairs, however, the committee of Judges from District Courts, Rohini
inspected the samples along with the PWD Officers and rejected the samples and the
decision was communicated to the petitioner by the respondents vide letter dated
8.5.2006.

22.

The respondents also pleaded that the petitioner did not give performance

guarantee in terms of the agreement and sought extension of time on 20.5.2006 and
again requested to extend the time for depositing the performance guarantees by 10
days. However as the respondent failed to give performance guarantee and also
failed to supply the tender items, the respondents forfeited the earnest money on
25.5.2006 and sent the decision to the petitioner vide letter dated 25.5.2006 which

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 12 of 41

was posted by speed post on 26.5.2006.

23.

The petitioner filed the rejoinder refuting the averments made by the

respondents and contended that respondent was informed by the petitioner that he
would submit the performance guarantee amounting to Rs.3,69,314/- only on
approval of samples as sent by the petitioner. The rejection of samples submitted by
the petitioner later was also denied. The petitioner also contended that on the first
date of hearing of the writ petition on 26.5.2006 the department representative was
present in the Court with the instruction and that the letter forfeiting the EMD was
posted contemporaneously in order to abuse the process of the Court and the letter of
forfeiture was dispatched after the hearing which was received by the petitioner on
29.5.2006.

24.

An additional affidavit was filed by the respondents categorically contending

that the case was attended by the respondents counsel on 26.5.2006 who had
informed the Executive Engineer (Civil) that he had appeared and accepted the notice
on behalf of the respondent and had sought time to take instructions. It was
categorically stated that no representative of the respondents met the standing counsel
on or before the date of hearing on 26.5.2006 nor had any representative of the
respondent had attended the Court on 26.5.2006. According to the respondents the
letter dated 25.5.2006 forfeiting the EMD was posed on 26.5.2006 prior to the
information of the order of the Court not to take any coercive steps. The letter
forfeiting the EMD was delivered to the petitioner on 27.5.2006. A copy of the

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 13 of 41

dispatch register was produced as well as a certificate issued by the postal department
stipulating the date of delivery of the letter as 27.5.2006 which were also produced
along with a photocopy of the receipt slip showing the signature for receipt of the
said letter bearing item No.EE 204604617. A copy of the letter dated 25.5.2006 was
also produced with the endorsement by the respondents on the same that since the
petitioner has filed a writ petition no further action for forfeiture be taken till further
direction on the matter and in view of the order passed by the Court and order of
Executive Engineer be kept in abeyance till then.

25.

The petitioner filed the response to the additional affidavit filed by the

respondents and also produced the receipt slip of postal articles showing receipt of
postal article bearing No.EE 204 604617 IM on 29.5.2006 with an endorsement
without prejudice. The petitioner also relied on a notice inviting tender given by the
respondents during the pendency of the writ petition stipulating that the tender be
issued to various dealers of Godrej and Boyce manufacturing company only.

26.

The respondents contended that the writ petition is barred under section 14 (1)

and 41 (e) of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 and the petitioner is not entitled for
specific performance of the agreement which is determinable in a writ petition. It was
also contended that there is a valid arbitration agreement and the petitioner has an
alternate remedy of Arbitration and the writ petition is not maintainable. The
respondents relied on Indian oil Corporation ltd. Versus Amritsar Gas Service
(1991)1 Supreme Court Cases 533; Percept D’Mark (India) Pvt. Ltd. Versus Zaheer

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 14 of 41

Khan and Another

2006(2) Arb LR 34 (SC); Bareilly Development Authority

Versus Ajay Pal Singh AIR 1989 SC 1076; Kerala State Electricity board & Anr.
versus Kurien E. Kalathil And Ors. JT 2000 (8) SC 167; National Textile
Corporation Limited and Others Versus Haribox Swalram and ors. (2004) 9 Supreme
Court Cases 786; State of Jammu and Kasmir Versus Ghulam Mohd. Dar and Anr
AIR 2004 Supreme Court 510; State of UP and others Versus Ram Sukhi Devi
(2005) 9 Supreme Court Cases 733; Libra Bus Service P. Ltd & Anr. Versus D.T.C
129(2006) Delhi Law Times 516; Ashok Kumar Chhabra Versus Govt of NCT of
Delhi,

87(2000) Delhi Law Times 755; Sai Electrical Power Supply Pvt. Ltd

Versus Delhi Electricity Regulatory Commission & Ors. 114(2004) Delhi Law Times
78 and Mrs. Sharda Nath Versus Delhi Administration & Ors. 65(1997) Delhi Law
Times 351.

27.

The petitioner, on the other hand contended that writ petition is maintainable

as judicial review is permissible under Article 226 of the Constitution of India where
the action of the State, though purely commercial in nature, is arbitrary and illegal. It
was contended that the principle that a contract which is determinable can not be
enforced, is applicable primarily to commercial contracts. The petitioner also
contended that the matter can not be referred to Arbitration as there is no arbitration
clause in tender document. The petitioner relied on Kumari Shrilekha Vidyarthyi and
Others Versus State of U.P. and others

(1991) 1 Supreme Court Cases 212; Style

(Dress land) Versus Union Territory, Chandigarh (1999) 7 Supreme Court Cases 89;
M/s Dwarkadas Marfatia and sons Versus Board of the Trustees of the Port of

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 15 of 41

Bombay (1989) 3 Supreme Court Cases 293; Harbans lal Sahnia and Another Versus
Indian oil Corporation limited, ( 2003) 2 Supreme Court Cases 107; Mahabir Auto
Stores and others Versus Indian oil Corporation & Ors, JT (1990) 1 Supreme Court
363; LIC of India & Anr. Versus Consumer Education & Research Centre & Ors.
(1995)5 SCC 482; Verigamto Naveen Versus Govt. of A.P and Ors.

(2001) 8

Supreme Court Cases 344; Gujarat State Financial Corporation Versus M/s Lotus
Hotels Pvt. Limited, (1983)3 Supreme Court Cases 379; Union of India and Others
Versus Dinesh Engineering Corporation and Another, (2001)8 Supreme Court Cases
491; Ashish Gupta Versus IBP Co. Ltd and Anr,

2005(85) DRJ 395; Atlas

Interactive India Pvt. Ltd. Versus Bharat Sanchar Nigam limited, 126(2006) Delhi
Law Times 504 and Pioneer publicity Corporation versus Delhi transport Corporation
2003(1) Arb. LR 672(Delhi) in support of his pleas and contentions.

28.

I have perused the writ petition, counter affidavits and other affidavits filed by

the parties and have heard their learned counsel in detail and has also considered the
judgments and orders relied on by them.

29.

What is the nomenclature of the item? Nomenclature has been defined as a

system of norms assigned to objects or items in a particular science or art. It is also
defined as a system of words used in a particular discipline; “legal terminology”; “the
language of sociology”. The chair has been defined in general specification under
clause 16. It states that the chair shall be a steel chair manufactured from approved
manufacturer as per their specification and as approved by the Engineer-in-Charge.

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 16 of 41

The schedule of quantities as given in the tender categorically stipulates the
manufacturer. The schedule of quantities also gives the other details and
specifications of the chair of an approved manufacturer, `Godrej'. On receiving the
tender form, the petitioner filled the schedule of quantities and in item No.42
categorically stipulated the price of `Godrej' chair and not of chairs equivalent to
`Godrej' Chairs. While filling price in the schedule of quantities, the petitioner did
not mention that the price quoted is of a chair equivalent of Godrej Chair and is not
of Godrej chair. The tender of the petitioner was accepted by letter dated 28th April,
2006 and before the acceptance of the tender, the petitioner did not indicate in any
manner that the prices quoted by him at item No.42 in the schedule of quantities were
of chairs equivalent to Godrej chairs and not of `Godrej' chairs.

30.

Relying on the dimensions given in specification for super premium chairs,

the learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the dimensions were given
because the chair equivalent to the chair manufactured by Godrej could be supplied
because if the chair was of the make “Godrej” and its model number was given then
that would have been sufficient to procure a Godrej chair and there was no need to
give any dimension. It has also been contended that if the chairs to be procured were
only to be those manufactured by the Godrej Company, probably there was no need
to have an open tender as in that case the chair should have been acquired from the
Godrej Company.

31.

The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is based on

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 17 of 41

assumption that chairs manufactured by Godrej Company can be sold only by the
said company and only said company or its dealers could supply the Chairs of said
company at the cheapest rate. The said company has dealers and distributors and also
sells its products to any person or company. The discounts and other benefits are
given by the company to distributors, dealers and other purchasers of large scale
quantities and it is for the distributors, dealers or the purchasers of large scale
quantities from the said company to decide to whom to sell the products of the
company and at what price. This has not been established by the petitioner that the
products of Godrej Company could be sold only at the prices fixed by the company.
If that be so, it logically follows that even for purchasing the products manufactured
by Godrej Company, an open tender could be given for purchasing from any of the
persons or firms dealing with the `Godrej' products. A person or a firm may have
stock of earlier purchased chairs at cheaper price which he may decide to sell at a
price which may be cheaper than the price of the company manufacturing the
product. The plea of the petitioner that if only `Godrej' chairs were to be acquired,
then the chairs could be procured from the company only, is based on his own
assumption and seems to be a justification for not supplying the `Godrej' chairs for
which he had filled the tender and which was accepted. The plea raised by the
petitioner is an after thought, after his tender for supply of `Godrej' chairs was
accepted. The plea raised by the counsel for the petitioner that if Godrej products
were to be purchased and the model number was given, then giving dimension
reflects that other equivalent chairs could be supplied is also not acceptable in the
facts and circumstances of this case. If the nomenclature of the furniture supplied is

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 18 of 41

clear and the name of the Manufacturer was also given and the petitioner himself
quoted the rates of Godrej Chairs, then the petitioner plea that giving dimension with
model number entitles him to supply equivalent chairs is nothing but an after thought
and can not be permitted. The nomenclature of the items to be procured, a chair
manufactured from approved manufacturer as per specification and approved by the
Engineer-in-Charge and user, was given in the schedule of quantities along with the
name of the approved manufacturer. The petitioner himself had filled the rates of the
items to be supplied, categorically stipulating the prices of the chairs manufactured
by Godrej. In the circumstances there is no element of ambiguity nor the petitioner
can be allowed to raise the plea that along with the model number, the specifications
of the chair were given, to get the supply of the chairs equivalent to the Godrej chairs.
Such a plea is not an honest plea. This is also apparent from the fact that the
petitioner had supplied the chairs equivalent to Godrej and the fact that he intended to
supply the chairs equivalent to Godrej and not the Godrej chairs was mentioned for
the first time in the delivery challan dated 29th April, 2006 and not before that. After
filing the tender specifically mentioning the price of `Godrej' Chairs, the petitioner
never intimated that he has quoted the rate of Godrej Chairs by mistakes but he
intends to supply the Chairs manufactured by him or procured by him which are
equivalent to the Godrej Chairs. There is nothing to disbelieve the plea of the
respondents that after receipt of sanction, samples of various furnitures were shown
to Judge in Charge, Rohini and other Judges at Rohini and after inspection of various
samples and discussions with PWD Officers, the Judge in Charge, Rohini approved
various makes of `Godrej' revolving chairs in conference room, PP chamber,

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 19 of 41

Canteen, Training room which approved samples were kept at site by respondents. It
is more probable that the samples were kept after approval which were seen by the
petitioner and that is why the petitioner quoted the rates of `Godrej' Chairs in the
tender and not the rates of chairs equivalent to `Godrej' Chairs. The word `Godrej' in
his tender has been used by the petitioner not just once or twice but a number of
times. The probable inference in the facts and circumstances, considering the
respective pleas, is that samples were shown and seen by the petitioner and he quoted
the rates of `Godrej' chairs and later on for the reasons known to the petitioner, the
plea has been raised about the confusion and being misled when the petitioner
committed the breach of the terms of the contract by not supplying the chairs.

32.

Even under the conditions of work, the nomenclature of the item has to take

precedent over all and anything stated elsewhere. If the chair has been defined as a
steel chair manufactured from the approved manufacturer as per the specifications
and approved by the Engineer-in-Charge, the nomenclature, as given in the schedule
of quantities giving the name of the approved manufacturer and the model number
which was also approved by the Engineer-in-Charge which is specific shall take
precedent over the general nomenclature. Had the nomenclature not given in the
schedule of quantities, the plea raised by the petitioner may have been relevant but in
view of specific nomenclature included in the schedule of quantities, the pleas raised
by the petitioner are not sustainable and can not be accepted.

33.

The petitioner himself in his letter dated 11th May, 2006 had admitted that he

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 20 of 41

was misled because in the nomenclature, it was mentioned only Godrej make. The
stipulation made by the petitioner in the letter dated 11th May, 2006 is as under:“Though in the nomenclature it was mentioned only Godrej make,
since the nomenclature is a part of the contract and the most important
portion is the approved lists so we are misled in the process. We have
quoted only on account of our ability to compete in the system. The
schedule of quantities categorically stipulates the model number of the
Godrej chair and the number of the chairs of the make “Godrej” which
were to be supplied.”
Though the learned Senior Counsel Shri Kaul insisted that the entire letter
dated 11th May, 2006 will give a different meaning to the admission made by the
petitioner, but in my opinion, it is clear that after failure to supply the `Godrej' Chairs
at the rates quoted by the petitioner, the plea has been raised that he had been misled
merely with a view to justify his breaches and non supply of `Godrej' chairs for which
the tender was filled by the petitioner and which was accepted. The plea of the
petitioner that the both the parties were under confusion is also not sustainable. There
was no confusion on the part of the respondents. Rather the petitioner has tried to
take shelter under the plea of confusion in order to wriggle out of his contractual
obligations. This is also born out from the fact that the petitioner had written that he
was under impression that the goods equivalent to `Godrej' could be supplied. There
is no rational for the petitioner to have such an impression, after quoting the rate of
`Godrej' chairs for the goods mentioned in the schedule of quantity as Godrej chairs.

34.

The petitioner filled the tender giving the prices of the chairs in the schedule

of quantities and nowhere indicated that he would be supplying his own chairs which
are alleged to be equivalent to the chairs of the make “Godrej”. The tender of the

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 21 of 41

petitioner had been accepted on his specific stipulation that he would be supplying
the chairs of make “Godrej” at the price quoted by him and not equivalent chairs.
Prior to acceptance of the tender of the petitioner, it was not indicated in any manner
by him that he would be supplying chairs equivalent to Godrej and not of make
‘Godrej’ and he had been misled or there was any confusion. If the samples were
shown to the petitioner and other tenderer, their could not be any confusion and the
alleged confusion and being misled has been resorted to by the petitioner to wriggle
out of his contractual obligations. The petitioner had been seeking time to furnish
performance guarantee and even at that time, he did not contend that he would be
supplying chairs equivalent to `Godrej' and not `Godrej' chairs. The petitioner could
not seek modification of the term of the tender to furnish the performance guarantee
and could not insist that the performance guarantee would be given by him on
approval of his sample. After taking part in the process of tender for supply of
`Godrej' Chairs which were approved by the users, and after acceptance of his tender
for the supply of the `Godrej' chairs, the petitioner could not raise the dispute that the
respondents are liable to accept the chairs which are equivalent to the Godrej Chairs
and which are also the quality products. The tender was specific about the supply of
various models of `Godrej' chairs. The petitioner did not challenge the tender at that
time contending that since his products are equally good, the respondents can not
restrict the purchase of chairs of make `Godrej' only.

35.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has also emphasized that by an interim

order dated 26th May, 2006, the respondents were directed to explain why only

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 22 of 41

Godrej products were sought to be purchased especially when detailed specifications
had been notified by them and this plea raised by the Court has not been answered by
the respondents. Perusal of the pleas and contentions raised by the respondents it is
apparent that this plea of the petitioner that the respondents have not answered the
plea raised is not correct.

36.

It has been categorically contended that the respondent No.4 had received the

sanction from the District and Sessions Judge, Delhi, for providing movable furniture
in Judges' Library-cum-Lounge, Conference Room, canteen, Bar Room. After the
receipt of the sanction, the samples of various furniture were shown to the Judge-inCharge and after inspection of various samples and discussions with PWD Officers,
the Judge-in-Charge approved various makes of `Godrej' revolving chairs in the
Conference Room, PP Chamber, Canteen and these approved samples were kept at
site by the respondents and after perusing various samples of chairs, it was decided
that the respondent had to purchase the Godrej chairs. The petitioner after quoting the
rate of the Godrej chairs cannot turn back and contend that the chairs equivalent to
Godrej chairs should also have been considered and purchased by the respondent. If
the petitioner was aggrieved by the decision of respondents to float the tender only
for the purchase of the chairs of make “Godrej” on the ground that his chairs were
superior on account of gauge of steel used, make of steel and finishing process of the
chair and the tender could not be restricted only to the chairs of the make `Godrej' as
detailed in the schedule of quantities, the petitioner ought to have challenged the
tender issued only for the purchase of chairs of make `Godrej' and not after

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 23 of 41

participating in the tender, quoting price of the chairs of make 'Godrej” and after the
acceptance of his tender for the supply of the chairs of make `Godrej' and after
seeking extension of time to furnish performance guarantee. The inevitable inference
in the circumstances is that the tender was for the purchase of chairs of make `Godrej'
and the petitioner categorically quoted the rates of chairs of make `Godrej' and the
tender was not for the chairs equivalent to chairs of make`Godrej'.

37.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has also emphasized on the basis of a

photocopy of the extract of the postal department showing that a postal article which
was booked on 26th May, 2006 was received `without prejudice' by the petitioner on
29th May, 2006 whereas the respondents have produced another photocopy of Speed
Post Center, New Delhi, showing that the article which was booked on 26th May,
2006 was delivered on 27th May, 2006. The counsel contended that the respondent
have manipulated the report from the postal department. The postal article in respect
of which the photocopy of the extract of the postal department has been produced by
the respondent bears No.EE-222215278IN/SPA whereas the extract of postal
department which has been produced by the petitioner is in respect of EE204604617IN/SPA. It is thus apparent that contradiction about the date of receipt is
on account of postal articles being different. In any case, the emphasis made by the
counsel for the petitioner, Mr.Kaul, is not relevant as what is relevant is as to when
the letter dated 25th May, 2006 seeking forfeiture of EMD on account of non
submission of performance guarantee despite maximum time given by the
respondents, was posted. From the documents produced, it cannot be disputed that

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 24 of 41

the said letter was posted on 26th May, 2006. There is nothing on record to show that
the said letter was posted after the order dated 26th May, 2006 was passed by the court
directing the respondents not to take any coercive steps till the next date of hearing.
The copy of the letter produced by the respondents rather has an endorsement dated
29th May, 2006 stipulating that no further action for forfeiture of EMD be taken till
further directions on the matter is issued by the court. Consequently, on the basis of
the said plea of the petitioner he is not entitled for any relief against respondents.

38.

Considering the various judgments relied on by the respondents and petitioner

about the maintainability of the writ petition, what emerges is as under. In Indian oil
Corporation Ltd. (supra) relied on by the respondents, the distributorship contract
was terminated by the appellant, a State instrumentality. The distributor therefore,
had sought relief against breach of contract and the remedies flowing there from. The
matter was referred to arbitration and an award was rendered by the arbitrator on that
basis alone. In these circumstances, it was held by the Supreme Court that the suit
was based on breach of contract and the arbitral award was passed on that basis
alone. Therefore the questions of public law based on Article 14 of the Constitution
had not arise for decision and it was held that the matter was to be decided in the
realm of private law rights governed by the general law relating to contracts with
reference to the provisions of the Specific relief act. In Percept D’Mark (India) Pvt.
Ltd. (supra) relied on by the respondents a promotion agreement was entered into
between the respondent no.1 and the appellant which had a negative covenant.
Enforcement of negative covenant was sought by the appellant even beyond the term

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 25 of 41

of the agreement. In these circumstances, the Apex Court had held that no case was
made out by the appellants for compelling respondent no. 1 to appoint the appellant
as his agent in perpetuity. In view of the personal nature of the service and
relationship between the contracting parties, a contract for agency /management such
as the one entered into between the appellants and respondent, it was held will be
incapable of specific performance and to enforce the performance thereof would be
inequitable. The Supreme Court had held that a negative covenant can be operative
during the term of the agreement. But if it sought to be enforced beyond the term of
the agreement, then it constitutes unlawful restriction on the respondent no. 1’s
freedom to enter into fiduciary relationship with the persons of his choice and the
same will be void under section 27 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872. The facts of
present case are apparently distinguishable.

39.

In Bareilly Development Authority versus Ajay Pal Singh, AIR 1989 SC

1076, the respondents had challenged the subsequent increase in the price of the
houses, amount of installment and interest after the registration for allotment was
done by the appellants. The prices were increased in terms of the conditions clearly
stipulated in the brochure issued by the appellants. In these facts and circumstances,
it was held by the Supreme Court that there was no fraudulent concealment of the
information in the brochure and the respondents had voluntarily accepted the terms
imposed thereby entering into the realm of concluded contract with the petitioner and
could not claim the right conferred upon them by the said contract unless the statute

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 26 of 41

steps in and confers some special statutory obligations on the part petitioner in the
contractual field. It was further held that when the State enters into a contract which
is non statutory and purely contractual then the rights of the parties inter se are
governed by the terms of the contract and not by the provisions of the Constitution
and the parties can only claim rights conferred upon them by the contract and that no
writ or order can be issued under Article 226 of the Constitution to compel an
authority to remedy a breach of contract pure and simple. In Kerala State Electricity
board & Anr. versus Kurien E. Kalathil And Ors. JT 2000 (8) SC 167 it was held by
the Apex Court that the interpretation and implementation of a clause in a contract
cannot be a subject matter of a writ petition which is a matter for adjudication by the
civil court or in arbitration if provided under the contract and if the terms of a
contract is violated, ordinarily the remedy is not a writ petition under Article 226 of
the Constitution. The Supreme Court had further held that every act of a statutory
body need not necessarily involve exercise of statutory power and a contract will not
become statutory merely because it is for construction of a public utility and it has
been awarded by a statutory body. Dispute arising out of the terms of a non statutory
contract falls in the realm of private law and have to be settled by the ordinary
principles of law of contract and just because one of the parties is an statutory body
will not of itself affect the principles to be applied.

40.

In National Textile Corporation Limited and Others Versus Haribox Swalram

and ors. (2004) 9 Supreme Court Cases 786, it was held that in order that a
mandamus can be issued to compel authorities to do something, it must be shown

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 27 of 41

that a statute imposes a legal duty and the aggrieved party has a legal right under the
statute to enforce its performance. In this case prayer was seeking issuance of
mandamus to the appellants for supply of goods which was rejected on the ground
that it was a case of pure and simple business contract. In the matter of State of
Jammu and Kashmir Versus Ghulam Mohd. Dar and Anr (supra) the respondents
had sought a direction for payment of 42% escalation rates in respect of certain items
as approved under the Supplementary agreement and in these circumstances it was
held that a writ of mandamus cannot be issued for enforcement of terms and
conditions of the contract qua contract and it can be issued only when a question
involving public law character comes up for consideration. The Apex Court had held
that High Court should not entertain Writ petition involving disputed Questions of
fact. Similarly in the State of UP and others Versus Ram Sukhi Devi (supra) relied on
by the respondents, it was held that whether the writ petitioner was entitled to any
relief in the writ petition has to be adjudicated at the time of final disposal of the writ
petition and the final relief sought in the writ petition can not be granted at an interim
stage just because a prima facie case has been made out without taking into
consideration the balance of convenience, public interest and host of other factors. In
Libra Bus Service P. Ltd & Anr. Versus D.T.C 129(2006) Delhi Law Times 516 the
petitioner had challenged the cancellation of the contract for plying buses on inter
state routes on account of losses by the respondent on the ground that it was a fixed
term contract. This Court had held that the writ petition was not maintainable for
purposes of enforcement of the terms of a contract. In Ashok Kumar Chhabra Versus
Govt of NCT of Delhi, 87(2000) Delhi Law Times 755 relied on by the respondents,

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 28 of 41

the petition sought quashing of letter of termination as also for restraint on
withholding other payment for recovery of earnest money. This writ petition was
dismissed on the ground that the Writ petition was not maintainable when the relief
sought were based on the enforcement of contractual rights. Similarly in Sai
Electrical Power Supply Pvt. Ltd Versus Delhi Electricity Regulatory Commission &
Ors. 114(2004) Delhi Law Times 78 this Court had held that writ court is not a
proper forum for adjudication of the rights and obligations arising out of the contract
executed between the parties. In Mrs. Sharda Nath Versus Delhi Administration &
Ors. 65(1997) Delhi Law Times 351 this Court had held that if there is an arbitration
clause for the settlement of the disputes and the parties have agreed to incorporate
such a clause with their eyes wide open, in that eventuality, in case of a dispute the
Court should decline to interfere and the remedy of the parties is by way of
arbitration.

41.

Per contra the reliance has been placed by the petitioner on Kumari Shrilekha

Vidyarthyi and Others Versus State of U.P. and others, (1991) 1 Supreme Court
Cases 212 in which the Government of State of the Uttar Pradesh had terminated by
a general order the appointments of all Government counsel in all the districts of the
States of U.P and directed preparation of fresh panels to make appointments in place
of the present incumbents. The validity of this order was challenged by the
petitioners. In these circumstances the Apex Court had held that if there is a contract
of the state with the private party, then in some circumstances the State’s action is
amenable to judicial review to determine violation of Article 14 irrespective of the

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 29 of 41

scope of review in this sphere. The Supreme Court had held that State’s
constitutional obligation coexists with the contractual obligation and the State acts
for public good and in public interest and its public character is not changed merely
because statutory or contractual rights are also available to the other party. It was
further held that in States' contractual actions, public element is always present so as
to attract Article 14 of the constitution of India. There was a sharp increase in the rent
of the leased commercial premises (shops) by the respondents which was challenged
by the petitioner on the ground that the power has been unfairly and arbitrarily
exercised in the case of Style (Dress land) Versus Union Territory, Chandigarh
(supra). In these circumstances it was observed by the Supreme Court that the
Government cannot act like a private individual in imposing the conditions solely
with the object of extracting profit from the lessees. It was further held that the
Governmental actions are to be based on standards which are not arbitrary or
unauthorized and non-arbitrariness, being a necessary concomitant of the rule of law,
it is imperative that all the actions of every public functionary in whatever sphere
must be guided by reason and not humour, whim, caprice or personal predilections of
the persons entrusted with the task on behalf of the State and exercise of all powers
must be for public good instead of being an abuse of power. The State action which is
not informed by reason cannot be protected as it would be easy for citizens to
question such an action as being arbitrary and in such circumstance it was held that
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India the contractual transactions of a public
body are covered. In another judgment relied on by the respondent being M/s
Dwarkadas Marfatia and sons (supra), the eviction proceeding were initiated by the

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 30 of 41

Port Trust terminating the appellants contractual tenancy which was challenged on
the ground that it had a public law character and hence subject to Judicial Review.
The Supreme Court had held that all the actions including contractual dealings of the
State are subject to judicial review and that the Court can examine whether the body
has followed the statutory purpose and acted in public interest and not in malafide or
arbitrary manner or for a collateral purpose. In Harbans lal Sahnia and Another
Versus Indian oil Corporation limited (supra) it was held by the Apex Court that in
some contingencies the High Court could exercise writ jurisdiction inspite of
availability of alternative remedy and three contingencies were laid down by the
Court:(i) where the writ petition seeks enforcement of Fundamental Rights;
(ii) where there is failure of principles of natural justice; or
(iii) where the orders or proceedings are wholly without jurisdiction or
the vires of an Act is challenged.

In this case termination of petitioners’ dealership of petroleum products was
challenged on the ground that the sample taken from the appellants outlet were not as
per the specifications. The apex court quashed the order terminating dealership since
the sample test was carried out in violation of the instructions contained in the
Governments orders and hence the failure of the sample taken from the appellants’
outlet became an irrelevant and non-existent fact which could not have been relied on
for canceling the appellants' license. Similarly in Mahabir Auto Stores and others
Versus Indian oil Corporation & Ors. (supra) there was discontinuance of supply of

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 31 of 41

lubricants to the appellants who had been selling the product for over 18 years by the
respondents without informing the appellants. The Apex Court had held that actions
uninformed by reason may be questioned as arbitrary in the proceedings under Article
226 of the Constitution of India.

42.

In another judgment relied on by the petitioner, LIC of India & Anr. Versus

Consumer Education & Research Centre & Ors, (1995)5 SCC 482, the appellants
had sought policies under Table 58 which request was turned down by the
respondents. The respondents then had challenged the decision of HC upholding the
prescription of policy under table 58 on the ground that the writ petition as filed was
not maintainable as the HC was not justified in interfering with the matters based on
economic criteria and commercial contracts. In these circumstances, the Apex Court
had held that even if the State/Instrumentality /Authority enters into a contract with
private persons and the writ petition is filed by contracting private parties challenging
the terms of contract as being arbitrary, unjust and unfair, then the writ petition will
be maintainable. It was observed that it should be no answer for the State that its
Instrumentality, public authority or persons whose acts have the insignia of public
element to say that their actions are in the field of private law and that they are free to
prescribe any condition or limitations in their actions as private citizens simplicitor
do in the field of private law. The Supreme Court had held that actions of public
authority must be based on rational and relevant principles and that the court has the
power to mould the relief appropriately to remedy injustice. In Verigamto Naveen
Versus Govt. of A.P and Ors. (2001) 8 Supreme Court Cases 344 there was illegal

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 32 of 41

termination of sub lease by the state government which power was vested on the
Central Government under section 4 A of the Mines and minerals (Regulation and
Development) Act, 1957. In these circumstances it was held by the Apex Court that
interference by Court under Art. 226 of the Constitution of India in contractual
matters is permissible where breach of contract involves breach of statutory
obligation and the order complained of has been made in exercise of statutory power
by an statutory authority. There was arbitrary refusal to grant sanctioned loan by
State Financial Corporation to an entrepreneur who incurred expenditures and
liabilities acting on the basis of the sanction in the matter of Gujarat State Financial
Corporation Versus M/s Lotus Hotels Pvt. Limited (supra). It was held by the Apex
Court that writ petition under Art. 226 will be maintainable against a Government
undertaking as there was arbitrary refusal to grant sanctioned loan by State Financial
Corporation. In Union of India and Others Versus Dinesh Engineering Corporation
and Another (supra) relied on by the petitioner, tender was submitted by the
petitioner for supply of spare parts, which was rejected without taking into
consideration that the writ petitioner were supplying spare parts for a period of 17
years, on the ground that a new policy has been adopted by the railway administration
and that they possessed the power to reject the application without assigning any
reason. The Supreme Court in these circumstances had held that any decision, be it
simple administrative decision or a policy decision, if taken without considering the
relevant facts, can only be termed as an arbitrary decision and violative of the
mandate of Article 14 of the Constitution and that if the power has been vested then
the same should be exercised within the realm of the object for which the enabling

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 33 of 41

clause has been incorporated. In Ashish Gupta Versus IBP Co. Ltd and Anr (supra)
where dealership was terminated without affording any opportunity of hearing and
bypassing the remedy of arbitration for redressal of grievances as provided under the
contract and where the maintainability of the writ petition was challenged on the
ground that the dispute fell within the realm of private contract and that there was an
arbitration clause in the agreement, this Court had quashed the impugned order
holding that the order was unreasonable as the Principles of Natural Justice had been
ignored and had issued the writ. In Atlas Interactive India Pvt. Ltd. Versus Bharat
Sanchar Nigam Limited (supra) franchisee agreement entered into for providing
Broad Band services had contained an arbitration clause signed by the parties. This
Court had held that under section 9 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 the
court was not in a position to order specific performance of contract as it can be
ordered by the arbitral tribunal only. This Court had held that the court can only
restrain respondent no.1 from terminating the agreement till the Arbitral Tribunal
adjudicates the controversies. In Pioneer publicity Corporation Versus Delhi transport
Corporation (supra) the termination clause was invoked by Delhi Transport
Corporation. Since DTC was not able to adequately justify its action of terminating
the contract before the time it was otherwise determinable, this Court had restrained
DTC from taking down or defacing advertisements observing that where the power to
terminate the contract is to be employed, the same should be founded on good and
expressed reasons and should be unbiased.

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 34 of 41

43.

It is also no more res integra that a decision is only an authority for what it ac-

tually decides. What is of the essence in a decision is its ratio and not every observation found therein nor what logically follows from the various observations made in
it. The ratio of any decision must be understood in the background of the facts of that
case. It has been said long time ago that a case is only an authority for what it actually
decides, and not what logically follows from it. It is well settled that a little difference
in facts or additional facts may make a lot of difference in the precedential value of a
decision. The Supreme Court in Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd and Anr. v. N.R.Vairamani and Anr., AIR 2004 SC 778 had observed:" Court should not place reliance on decisions without discussing as to
how the factual situation fits in with the fact situation of the decision
on which reliance is placed. Observations of Courts are neither to be
read as Euclid's theorems nor as provisions of the statute and that too
taken out of their context. These observations must be read in the
context in which they appear to have been stated. Judgments of Courts
are not to be construed as statutes. To interpret words, phrases and
provisions of a statute, it may become necessary for judges to embark
into lengthy discussions but the discussion is meant to explain and not
to define. Judges interpret statutes, they do not interpret judgments.
They interpret words of statutes; their words are not to be interpreted
as statutes.
A case is only an authority for what it decides. As observed by the Supreme
Court in State of Orissa v. Sudhansu Sekhar Misra MANU/SC/0047/1967:"A decision is only an authority for what it actually decides. What
is of the essence in a decision is its ratio and not every observation
found therein nor what logically follows from the various observations made in it. On this topic this is what Earl of Halsbury,LC
said in Quinn v. Leathem, 1901 AC 495:
"Now before discussing the case of Allen v. Flood (1898)
AC 1 and what was decided therein, there are two observations of a general character which I wish to make, and one
is to repeat what I have very often said before, that every

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 35 of 41

judgment must be read as applicable to the particular facts
proved, or assumed to be proved, since the generality of
the expressions which may be found there are not intended
to be expositions of the whole law, but governed and qualified by the particular facts of the case in which such expressions are to be found. The other is that a case is only
an authority for what it actually decides. I entirely deny
that it can be quoted for a proposition that may seem to
follow logically Page 2009 from it. Such a mode of reasoning assumes that the law is necessarily a logical Code,
whereas every lawyer must acknowledge that the law is not
always logical at all."

In Ambica Quarry Works v. State of Gujarat and Ors. MANU/SC/0049/1986
the Supreme Court observed:"The ratio of any decision must be understood in the background of the facts of that case. It has been said long time ago
that a case is only an authority for what it actually decides, and
not what logically follows from it."

Similarly in Bhavnagar University v. Palitana Sugar Mills Pvt Ltd (2003) 2
SC 111 (vide para 59), the Supreme observed:" It is well settled that a little difference in facts or additional
facts may make a lot of difference in the precedential value of
a decision."

44.

Circumstantial flexibility, one additional or different fact may make a world

of difference between conclusions in two cases. Disposal of cases by blindly placing
reliance on a decision is not proper and appropriate. The following words of Lord
Denning in the matter of applying precedents have become locus classicus:
"Each case depends on its own facts and a close similarity between one case and anr. is not enough because even a single

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 36 of 41

significant detail may alter the entire aspect, in deciding such
cases, one should avoid the temptation to decide cases (as said
by Cordozo) by matching the colour of one case against the
colour of Anr.. To decide therefore, on which side of the line a
case falls, the broad resemblance to Anr. case is not at all decisive."

45.

Precedent should be followed only so far as it marks the path of justice, but

one must cut the dead wood and trim off the side branches, else one will find oneself
lost in thickets and branches, yet some of the precedents relied on by the parties
require consideration and have been considered. In view of this it is apparent that
most of the decision relied on by the parties may not be strictly relevant for the
purpose of decision of the disputes involved in this mater.

46.

This is admitted by the petitioner that he had been misled in the process

though in the schedule of quantities in the tender he categorically mentioned the word
'Godrej' a number of times and quoted the rates of Godrej chairs. If the petitioner
himself was misled and after filling the tender and its acceptance, if modification of
terms of the tender was sought by the petitioner by giving different samples which
were not approved, non approval of the samples given by the petitioner contrary to
the terms of contract, cannot be termed arbitrary or illegal or concealment of
information by the respondents or a breach of contract on the part of the respondents.
The letter forfeiting EMD of the petitioner dated 25th May, 2006 was posted on 26th
May, 2006 and had been received by the petitioner. He had been given extended
maximum time of seven days for depositing the performance guarantee. Within the
stipulated/extended time the petitioner failed to give performance guarantee and

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 37 of 41

therefore, the earnest money deposited by the petitioner was liable to be forfeited and
such a forfeiture cannot be termed illegal and arbitrary in the present facts and
circumstances.

47.

By the present writ petition, the petitioner is not seeking enforcement of his

fundamental rights nor there is failure of principle of natural justice in the facts and
circumstances nor the order passed by the respondents forfeiting his EMD by letter
dated 25th May, 2006 on his failure to give the performance guarantee even after
giving him maximum extended period, be termed wholly without jurisdiction or
suffering from such an illegality for which the writ jurisdiction is to be invoked by
this Court. The actions of the respondents in the present facts and circumstances
cannot be held to be based on whims, caprice or personal predilection of the officials
or the same being not for public good and an abuse of power. From the details as
detailed hereinabove, it is difficult to infer that the action taken by the respondents in
forfeiting EMD of the petitioner for not submitting the performance guarantee is not
based on reasons. Apparently, the facts of the present case of the petitioner are
clearly distinguishable from the ratio of Kumari Srilekha Vidyarthi & Other (supra)
and style “dress land” (supra) relied on by the petitioner. The forfeiture of the EMD
of the petitioner is not with the objective of extracting unlawful profits from the
petitioner nor it can be termed malafide or arbitrary in any manner. Similarly, the
ratio of other cases relied on by the petitioner are also clearly distinguishable.

48.

There is no fraudulent concealment of any information by the respondents and

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 38 of 41

the petitioner had voluntarily accepted the terms of the tender to supply the chairs of
the make 'Godrej' and later on, the petitioner could not contend that he was misled
and in the circumstances chairs equivalent to the chairs of the make 'Godrej' be
accepted. The petitioner had entered into the contract with open eyes as in the
schedule of quantities the detailed description of various models of chairs of the
make 'Godrej' was given and even the name of the manufacturer 'Godrej' was
categorically stipulated not at one place but at number of places with every product
and the petitioner had quoted the rates of the chairs of the make 'Godrej' and,
therefore, it cannot even be accepted that the petitioner was misled. Such a contract
as in the present case cannot be termed statutory as the disputes between the
petitioner and the respondent is purely contractual and an attempt has been made by
the petitioner to justify the breach committed by him and such a breach by the
petitioner cannot be rectified by the explanation given. On non supply the material of
tender recession of the agreement can not be termed illegal and unlawful nor the
petitioner is entitled for directions to the respondents to recall the tender and direct
the respondents to issue fresh tender and allow the petitioner to participate in the
same in the present facts and circumstances of the case. The petitioner is not entitled
for any of the relief sought in the present writ petition.

49.

In any case as was held by the Apex Court in Kerala State Electricity Board

and Another (supra) that the interpretation and implementation of a clause in a
contract cannot be a subject matter of a writ petition which is a matter for
adjudication by the civil court. The petitioner is trying to contend that the

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 39 of 41

nomenclature of the article was `Godrej or equivalent chairs' and not Godrej chairs
only and, in the circumstances, it is difficult to infer that the writ petition, in the facts
and circumstances, for the relief claimed by the petitioner is maintainable. There is
no statute to compel the respondents that they must purchase the chairs equivalent to
Godrej nor the petitioner has such a legal right that the respondent must purchase the
chairs of the petitioner which are not of make Godrej but as alleged by him
equivalent to the quality of the chairs of the make Godrej. The disputes raised by the
petitioner do not involve question involving public law character and a writ petition
will not be maintainable for the purpose of avoiding the consequences of breach of
such a contract by the petitioner. As has already been held in various cases, as
detailed hereinabove, that the writ court is not a proper forum for adjudication of the
rights and obligations arising out of the contract executed between the parties,
consequently the petitioner also can not avoid the consequences of breach of contract
committed by him by not supplying the tendered article in the present facts and
circumstances. There are no questions of law based on Article 14 of the Constitution
of India and, consequently, if there are any breaches, the same have to be decided in
the realm of private law governed by the general law relating to the contracts with
reference to the provisions of Specific Relief Act or any other Act. Whether the relief
claimed by the petitioner are barred under section 14 (1) and 41 (e) of the Specific
Relief Act, 1963 and the petitioner is not entitled for specific performance of the
agreement which is determinable, will be decided in case any civil remedies will be
invoked by the parties. Similarly whether there is a binding and valid arbitration
agreement, the same is to be finally adjudicated in such proceedings as may be

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

Page 40 of 41

initiated by the parties. Consequently, there is no merit in the writ petition and it is
not maintainable and, therefore, the writ petition merits dismissal.

50

Considering the facts and in totality of the circumstances, the writ petition is

dismissed as not maintainable. The interim order dated 26th May, 2006 directing the
respondents not to take any coercive steps against the petitioner is vacated.
Considering the facts and circumstances the petitioner will be liable to pay a cost of
Rs.10,000/- to the respondents.

February 20, 2007
'sdp'

WP (C) 9327 of 2006

ANIL KUMAR J.

Page 41 of 41

