*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP(C) No.20773/2005

%

Date of decision : 20.02.2008

M/s.East India Transport Agency
Through:

….…
Petitioner
Mr.M.Rajan, Advocate.

Versus
Govt of NCT of Delhi & Ors.
Through :

.........
Respondents
Mr.L.N.Yadav, Advocate for the
respondent No.3.

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.
Rule.
With the consent of the parties the matter is taken up for final
disposal.

The petitioner/management has impugned the order dated 16th
August, 2005 dismissing his application for amendment of the written
statement seeking correction of the date of chargesheet as 28th April,
1998 in place of 8th May, 1998 given in para 5(i) of the written
statement.
W.P(C) No.20773/2005

Page 1 of 7

The petitioner company is stated to be in the transport business
having branches all over India and registered office at Calcutta. A
charge sheet was issued to respondent No.2, employee of the petitioner,
since deceased, now represented by his son Sh.Nagender Yadav. The
services of the deceased respondent had been terminated by letter dated
31st December, 1998 after serving charge sheet and conducting an
enquiry. On his termination he raised a dispute for reinstatement which
was referred for adjudication by the Government of NCT of Delhi.

The statement of claim was filed by the respondent which was
replied by the petitioner by filing a written statement. Before the
evidence of the respondent could be recorded, he died and the evidence
of his son was recorded after he was substituted in place of deceased
respondent Sh.Ram Darash Chaudhary. The petitioner/management
also concluded their evidence on 4th March, 2005 and the case was
fixed for arguments.

Thereafter an application was filed by the petitioner contending
that in the documents filed by the petitioner, there is no charge sheet
dated 8th May, 1998 rather the charge sheets filed by the petitioner are
28th April, 1998 and in the written statement the date of chargesheet
mentioned as 8th May, 1998 is on account of a typographical error. The
petitioner, therefore, moved an application under Order 6 Rule 17 of the
W.P(C) No.20773/2005

Page 2 of 7

Code of Civil Procedure for correcting the date of charge sheet from 8th
May, 1998 to 28th April, 1998 which was dismissed by the Labour Court
holding that issues have been framed and parties have already led their
evidence and since the matter was fixed for final arguments therefore,
there was no plausible justification for seeking amendment to the
written statement.

I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have perused
the petition, reply and the documents relied on by the parties. From the
perusal of the record it is apparent that two chargesheets dated 28th
April, 1998 were filed by the petitioner on which the reliance has been
placed for taking action against the deceased respondent. The
chargesheets are dated 28th April, 1998 and not 8th May, 1998.

The learned counsel for the respondent has, however, pointed out
that the chargesheets dated 28th April, 1998 were issued to Sh.Ram Brij
and not to the respondent and consequently the petitioner is not
entitled for amendment of the written statement.

This is not disputed that the chargesheets are dated 28th April,
1998 and not 8th May, 1998 as has been mentioned in the written
statement. Whether on the basis of the chargesheets dated 28 th April,
1998 which were against Sh.Ram Brij, the petitioner was entitled to
take action against the deceased Sh.Ram Darsh Chaudhary is to be
W.P(C) No.20773/2005

Page 3 of 7

adjudicated. The parties have already led their evidence. The learned
counsel for the petitioner has contended that by correcting the
typographical error in the written statement, no further evidence is to
be led by the petitioner. In case the petitioner does not want to lead
any evidence after correcting the date of chargesheet in the written
statement from 8th May, 198 to 28th April, 1998, the plea of the
respondent that amendment is sought merely with a view to delay the
disposal of the claim of the respondent, does not survive. This also
cannot be disputed that at the time of consideration whether the
amendment should be allowed or not, the falsity or correctness of the
plea normally is not to be considered by the Court.

The object of amendment of the pleadings is to allow either party
to alter or amend his pleading in such manner and on such terms as
may be just. The power to allow the amendment is wide and can be
exercised at any stage of the proceedings in the interests of justice on
the basis of guidelines laid down in various precedents. It is true that
the amendment cannot be claimed as a matter of right and under all
circumstances.

But it is equally true that the Courts while deciding

such prayer should not adopt a hyper technical approach.

Liberal

approach should be the general rule particularly in cases where the
other side can be compensated with costs. Technicalities of law cannot
be permitted to hamper the Courts in the administration of justice
between the parties. Amendments are allowed in the pleadings to avoid
W.P(C) No.20773/2005

Page 4 of 7

uncalled for multiplicity of litigation. Mere delay usually cannot be a
ground for refusing a prayer for amendment because merits of
amendment sought to be incorporated by way of amendments are not to
be judged at the stage of allowing prayer for amendment. It is also fairly
settled in law that the amendment of pleadings is to be allowed, if such
an amendment is required for proper and effective adjudication of
controversy between the parties and to avoid multiplicity of judicial
proceedings, subject to certain conditions such as allowing the
amendment should not result in injustice to the other side. Normally a
clear admission made conferring certain right on a party is not allowed
to be withdrawn by way of amendment by opposite party resulting in
prejudice to such a right on the facts and circumstances of a given
case. Mere delay in making an amendment application itself is not
enough to refuse amendment, as the delay can be compensated in
terms of money. Amendment is to be allowed when it does not cause
serious prejudice to the opposite side.

In the present case this is not disputed that two chargesheets
dated 28th April, 1998 were produced by the petitioner which are
addressed to Sh.Ram Brij. The petitioner wants to correct the date of
the chargesheets from 8th May, 1998 to 28th April, 1998. The learned
counsel for the petitioner contends that no other chargesheets other
than what have already been produced on the record of the case are to
be filed by the petitioner and since evidence has already been concluded
W.P(C) No.20773/2005

Page 5 of 7

by the parties and the matter is listed for arguments, no evidence will
be led by the petitioner, in case the amendment to the written
statement of the petitioner is allowed. If that be so, it is apparent that
no serious prejudice shall be caused to the respondent in case
amendment to the written statement is allowed correcting the date of
charge sheets already filed by the petitioner.

In the circumstances in order to correct the typographical
mistake in the written statement, the Labour Court ought to have
allowed the amendment to the written statement allowing the petitioner
to correct the date of chargesheet from 8th May, 1998 to 28th April,
1998.

Consequently, the rule is made absolute and the order dated 16th
August, 2005 dismissing the application of the petitioner/management
for amendment of the written statement is set aside and the application
of the petitioner for amendment of the written statement so as to correct
the date of chargesheets from 8th May, 1998 to 28th April, 1998 is
allowed subject to a cost of Rs.5000/- payable by the petitioner to the
respondent workman. Amended written statement be filed within two
weeks and the replication, if any, to the amended written statement be
filed within one week thereafter. Learned counsel for the petitioner has
agreed that after the amendment to the written statement, no additional
evidence shall be led by the petitioner/management. Parties are
W.P(C) No.20773/2005

Page 6 of 7

directed to appear before the Labour Court VI, Karkardooma Courts on
24th March, 2008. Considering the facts and circumstances, the parties
are left to bear their own costs.

February 20th , 2008.
'k'

W.P(C) No.20773/2005

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 7 of 7

