IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Date of decision : December 20, 2007
CS(OS) NO.806/2005

#
!

M/S.AHMED OOMERBHOY & ANR
......... PLAINTIFFS
Through: Mr. Praveen Anand, Advocate
Vs.

$
^

SHRI GAUTAM TANK & ORS
.......... DEFENDANTS
Through : Ms.Pratibha M.Singh and
Mr.M.K.Minglani, Advocates.
CORAM :-

*

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?

YES

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES

YES

ANIL KUMAR, J.(Oral)
IA No.4575/2005 & IA 4820/2005

1.

This order will dispose of plaintiffs' application under Order

39 Rules 1 & 2 read with Section 151 of Code of Civil Procedure
seeking

restraint against the defendants from using the mark

“Super Postman” for sale of edible groundnut oils or any other
cognate products and the application of the defendant nos. 1 & 2
under Order 39 Rule 4 read with Section 151 of Code of Civil

CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 1 of 35

Procedure for vacation of ex-parte interim order dated 30th May,
2005 whereby the defendants were restrained from using the mark
'Super Postman' or any other mark deceptively similar thereto for
sale of edible groundnut oils or any other cognate products.

2.

The suit on behalf of plaintiff No.1, a partnership firm was

filed by a Court receiver appointed by High Court of Judicature at
Mumbai by order dated 6.7.2000 in Suit No.4913/2000 titled
Majid A Oomerbhoy Vs. Rashid S.Oomerbhoy and others, who had
taken over the possession of partnership business assets which
was trading as M/s.Ahmed Mills. It is contended that plaintiff No.1
is a registered partnership firm which was trading in the name of
M/s.Ahmed Mills. The suit is also filed against defendants Nos.3 to
8 who are partners of the partnership firm though no relief has
been prayed against them.

3.

Plaintiff No.1 is carrying on business of manufacture,

distribution, sale and dealing in edible oils for last more than 50
years under its various trade marks including Postman, Tilola,
Mastaan, Sona, Oomda, A.O.Coconut Oil etc. The marks are
registered under the Trade and Merchandise Act, 1958. The firm
also has a copyright for the artistic labels under the Copyright Act,
1957. The edible oils of the plaintiff No.1 are sold since 1949 under
the brand name `Postman' in containers and bottles of distinctive

CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 2 of 35

design, shape, color, scheme, lay out and appearance. It is asserted
on behalf of plaintiffs that postman is a completely arbitrary word
for edible oil and the design of plaintiff No.1 belonged exclusively to
plaintiff No.1. The trade marks of the plaintiff No.1 are registered in
respect of refined groundnut oil, edible, in Class 29 in Part A of
the register in India which registrations are still valid. It is also
emphasized that shape and design of the product packs of the
plaintiff No.1 are also registered with Controller General of Patents
and Design. Though the design registered with effect from 29th
March, 1989 expired in 2004, however, the shape of the Postman
groundnut oil bottle has become distinctive and is associated with
the products of the plaintiff No.1. The mark and device of Postman
have acquired substantial reputation and goodwill in the market on
account of use of its mark continuously and extensively up to the
year 2000.

4.

The contention of the plaintiff is that despite the disputes

between the partners

of the plaintiff No.1, on account of vested

statutory and common law rights, the trade mark `Postman' and
device of `Postman' as adopted by the plaintiffs for the first time,
plaintiff No.1 is legally entitled to use the same to the exclusion of
others. Plaintiffs gave the details of large sums of money spent by
plaintiff No.1 in popularizing the trademark/brand name `Postman'
from 1990-91 up to 1999-2000. The plaintiffs averred that

CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 3 of 35

sometime in December, 2004 it came to their knowledge that
`Jagdamba Vegetable Products Private Limited', defendant No.2
had commenced manufacture, distribution, sale and marketing of
refined groundnut oil under the name and device of `Super
Postman’. Defendants No.1 & 2 were also using, according to the
averments made by the plaintiffs, similar color scheme, label and
container shape without the consent and authorization of plaintiff
No.1, amounting to infringement of the trademark of the plaintiffs
for identical goods and infringing the copyright of the plaintiff No.1
by using a color scheme of blue and yellow which is distinctive of
blue color of the Postman on the groundnut pack and the yellow
color used in the device of Postman on the plaintiffs' pack.

5.

The plaintiffs asserted that by using prefix “Super” with their

mark Postman, defendant Nos.1 & 2 are taking unlawful advantage
of reputation, goodwill of plaintiffs under the mark `Postman’ and
the acts of the defendants amount to misrepresentation to the
consumer public and the traders, aimed at passing off their goods
as those of or connected with the plaintiffs in some manner. It is
contended that the defendant Nos.1 & 2 could not have any
plausible reason for adoption of the mark `Super Postman’ which
comprises plaintiff's No.1 well known mark `Postman'. Plaintiffs
showed

their

apprehensions

regarding

edible

groundnut

oil

marketed under the trade name `Super Postman' made not under

CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 4 of 35

very strict quality control and high standards of hygiene and thus
leading to erosion of reputation and goodwill of plaintiff No.1.

6.

This Court by order dated 30th May, 2005 had granted an

interim injunction in favor of plaintiffs and against defendant Nos.1
& 2 observing that a prima facie case was made out for grant of exparte ad interim injunction and delay occasioned by putting the
defendants to notice was likely to defeat the purpose of injunction
and, therefore, the defendants Nos.1 & 2 were restrained from
using the mark `Super Postman' for sale of edible groundnut oils or
any other cognate products.

7.

The defendant Nos.1 & 2 have contested the application of

the plaintiff for interim injunction contending inter-alia that they
adopted trademark "Super Postman" in the year 2002 honestly and
bonafide knowing well that there was no such or similar trademark
in use and or in existence in respect to the said goods. According to
the said defendants the mark was put to commercial use on
14.4.2004 and thereafter, defendant Nos.1 & 2 have carried out
huge sales of said goods under the trademark "Super Postman" in
different containers of different sizes and shapes. According to the
said defendants the artistic label, title `Super Postman' is the
original artistic work of defendants and they have used extensively
the said trademark and have advertised the same openly, widely

CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 5 of 35

through various modes of advertisements since then to the
complete knowledge of the plaintiffs and their partners. Despite the
knowledge of use by the defendants, the plaintiffs' partners had not
raised any objection to the same nor had issued any desist letter
and consequently have acquiesced in the use of trademark by the
defendant Nos.1 & 2.

8.

Regarding the registration of the trademark "Super Postman"

by the plaintiffs, it is stated that the said registration wrongfully
remains on the register as the plaintiffs have not used the
trademark since 2000 and there has been a complete non use and
consequently the registration of the trademark "Postman" is
contrary to the provisions of the Trademarks Act, 1999. The
defendants pleaded that they have already filed petitions for
cancellation/rectification of said registrations which are pending
consideration before the Intellectual Property Appellate Board,
Chennai. Consequently, the trademark "Postman" has ceased to
exist and perform functions of a trademark and since the goods of
the plaintiff are not in the market, the trademark "Postman" cannot
distinguish the goods of the plaintiff. As the entire purpose of a
trademark is to distinguish the goods of a particular trader and as
there are no goods, therefore, there is no trademark. Consequently,
there is no confusion among public and trade and plaintiffs are
also left with no goodwill and reputation which is to be protected

CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 6 of 35

by way of a passing off action.

9.

According to the defendant Nos.1 & 2 the extensive use of the

trademark "Super Postman" since April, 2004 has established their
goodwill and reputation and the writing, style, design, get up,
arrangement, placement, container, labels of the defendants which
are absolutely different and distinct and as the products bear the
name and address of defendants and there is added matter
sufficient to avoid any confusion or deception, therefore, the
plaintiff is not entitled for any injunction. The goods of the
defendants are also stated to be of a superior quality. On account
of conduct of the plaintiffs and the false statements on account of
concealment of material facts, it is claimed that the application for
injunction be dismissed and the application of the said defendants
for vacation of interim injunction be allowed.

10.

The

defendants

also

produced

the

notice

issued

by

Intellectual Property Appellate Board to the plaintiff on the
application for rectification/removal of registrations of trademark
No.213353 in Class 21; trademark No.258918 in class 29;
trademark No.162666 in class 29; trademark No.312898 in class
29; trademark No.415564 in class 29 and trademark No.260538 in
class 29.

CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 7 of 35

11.

The defendants categorically contended that their total sales

since April, 2004 is more than 2 crores and they were openly
selling the groundnut oil under the trademark "Super Postman".
The defendants contended that they have invested a large amount
of money in advertising the mark. Various press clippings have
been produced and relied on to show that the mark "Super
Postman" of the defendants have acquired a reputation and is
associated with defendants. It is stated that the capacity of
production of the factory of the defendant is approximately 30
tonnes per day and defendants employ a large number of people for
production and marketing of the products. Defendants are also
stated to have distributors, dealers in Delhi and also in other parts
of the country namely U.P, Haryana, M.P. Gujarat and Rajasthan.

12.

It is also stated that the groundnut oil is a food product and

if not consumed within the prescribed period, it becomes unfit for
human consumption and any injunction would cost financial loss
to the defendants and will also result in destruction of food
products. It was highlighted that there has been no complaint from
any consumer about the quality of the goods of the defendants who
have installed fully automated machinery in their factory for
processing of the groundnut oil.

13.

The defendants pleaded categorically that they have adopted

CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 8 of 35

the mark "Super Postman" clearly under the impression that if a
mark is not used for more than 5 years the defendants will become
legally entitled to use the same. According to them their quality is
excellent because of which they have been able to acquire ISO
9001-2000

certification

and

have

also

AGMARK

certificate.

According to the defendants they may be one of the only few of the
companies with an AGMARK certification for edible oils. The said
defendants contended that they have taken all steps required for
obtaining rights in the mark "Super Postman" and they have no
bad intention in using the said mark in as much as they were
legally advised that if the mark is not used for more than 5 years,
anyone can adopt the said mark. It was also contended that the
plaintiffs' partners have launched other brands namely PRO,
Premio etc and the mark is neither used nor advertised. Regarding
balance of convenience it was contended that groundnuts are
sourced from farmers in and around Rajasthan and huge
purchases have been made by the defendants. According to them
the farmers have to be all paid for the said stocks which have been
purchased and there is a huge stock lying in the defendants'
premises as well as in the premises of the dealers and distributors
and it will not be in the public interest to allow them to perish.

14.

The plaintiffs have refuted the allegations and pleas of the

defendants and have contended that the defendants did not adopt

CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 9 of 35

the trademark "Super Postman" bona fide. It was, however,
admitted that the defendants put the infringing material to
commercial use on 19th April, 2004 but the sales made on account
of trademark of the defendants was denied rather it was asserted
that the defendants have been able to sell their goods on account of
residual goodwill resting in the Postman. The plea of the
defendants that the plaintiffs have not used the trademark since
the year 2000 was denied and it was categorically contended that
the disputes between the partners of plaintiff arose in December,
2000 and the products of the plaintiff were sold in the market till
2001. Complete non use of the trademark by the plaintiff was
denied and it was contended that the objections to the petition filed
for rectification of the plaintiffs mark by the defendant has been
filed. It was stated that the factory of the plaintiffs has been sealed
and is in possession of the receiver with all the goods. It is asserted
that mere factum of writing address on the product is not sufficient
to avoid confusion or deception created on account of trademark
"Super Postman" used by the defendants.

15.

The plaintiff emphasized that the defendants have concealed

the fact that they filed an affidavit before the Registrar of
Trademarks that in case of any objection they would withdraw
their application and despite that they are contesting the present
suit. Regarding the present suit it was stated that leave was taken

CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 10 of 35

on March 22, 2005 to file the present suit which was thereafter
filed on 27th May, 2005.

16.

The plaintiffs have produced the photographs of their

product as well as that of the defendants' product. The plaintiff
has also produced the copies of the invoices since 1977 as well as
the copies of the various advertisements since November, 1987 and
the copies of the certificate of registration as well as the copies of
the orders passed in the

suit for dissolution of plaintiff no.1

pending in the High Court of Judicature at Bombay. A copy of the
affidavit filed in Suit No.4913/2000 in Chamber Summons
No.381/2005 in the High Court of Judicature of Bombay of Rashid
Sattar Oomerbhoy, defendant No.4 has also been produced
stipulating clause 19 of order dated 30.7.2001 whereby it was held
that the partners of the suit firm shall not carry on any business
on the basis of the trademark of the suit firm and the Court
receiver shall be entitled to take steps that may be necessary to
safeguard the trademark of the firm as also take action against the
persons who may be unauthorizedly using the trademark of the
firm.

17.

The defendants have also filed original labels stipulating the

name of the defendant No.2, copies of the labels of PRO used by
other partners of the plaintiff firm as well as ISO 9001 certificate

CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 11 of 35

and AGMARK certificate and some of the advertisements and the
press clippings and the invoices issued by the defendants. A copy
of the application for rectification of the registration under Section
47/57/125 of the Trademarks Act, 1999 has also been produced
dated June, 2005 alleging inter-alia that the trademark "Postman"
has not been used for a period of five years and three months prior
to the filing of the application for registration of the trademark
"Postman" was made without any sufficient cause and there are no
special circumstances or any other factor in favour of the plaintiffs.

18.

The application of the defendants for rectification or removal

of the trademark of the plaintiff from the register is based on the
premise that the trademark has not been used for more than 5
years and three months. The receiver had been appointed on 6th
July, 2000 and order clearly stipulates that the Court receiver shall
be entitled to take steps that may be necessary to safeguard the
trademarks of the plaintiff firm and shall also take action against
the persons who would be using the trademark unauthorizedly.
Clause 19 of the order dated 30.7.2001 is as under:"19:- It is also agreed that the partners of the suit firm
shall not carry on any business on the basis of the
trademark of the suit firm. The Court receiver shall,
however, be entitled to take steps that may be
necessary to safeguard the trademarks of the firm as
also take action against the persons who may be
unauthorizedly using the trademark of the firm."

CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 12 of 35

The plaintiff has categorically asserted that though the
disputes between the partners arose in December, however, their
goods have been sold in the market till 2001.

19.

The plaintiff has relied on Kerly’s Law of Trade Marks and

Trade Names, Ninth Edition by T.A. Blanco White, London Sweet &
Maxwell 1966 pages 867-868; 1967 The Bombay Law Reporter (Vol
LXXVI) 146, Hindustan Embroidery Mills Pvt. Ltd. Vs. K. Ravindra
& Co.; (1972) R.P.C. 673, Ad-Lib Club Limited V. Granville; 189
UPSQ 759, Abercrombie & Fitch Company Vs. Hunting Wolrd,
Incorporated; 1986 Rajdhani Law Reporter 165, Lalson Machines
Vs. Sachar E & M Stores; Suit No.706/1990 in the High Court of
Calcutta decided on 4th April, 1991; AIR 1991 DELHI 22, M/s. Avis
International Ltd. Vs. M/s.Avi Footwear Industries and another.;
AIR 1993 BOMBAY 237, Poddar Tyres Ltd. Vs. Bedrock Sales
Corporation Ltd.; 1993 PTC 129, M/s. Jindal Industries Limited
Vs. M/s. Samana Steels Limited; 1994 PTC 1, M/s. Garden
Perfume (P) Ltd. Vs. M/s. Anand Soaps & Detergents; 56 (1994)
DLT 102, M/s. Polson Limited vs. M/s.Polson Dairy Ltd. & Others;
(1995) 5 Supreme Court Cases 545, Gujarat Bottling Co. Ltd. &
Others Vs. Coca Cola Co. and Others.; 1996 PTC (16) 583, N.R.
Dongre Vs. Whirlpool Corp.; 2003 (27) PTC 241 (SC), Hardie
Trading Ltd and anr. Vs. Addisons Paint and Chemicals Ltd. ;
2003 (27) PTC 580 (DB) (Bom), R.R. Oomerbhoy Pvt. Ltd. Vs. Court

CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 13 of 35

Receiver, High Court, Bombay and Anr. and (2004) 3 Supreme
Court Cases 90, Midas Hygiene Industries (P) Ltd. and Another Vs.
Sudhir Bhatia and Others and 2004 (28) PTC 566 (SC), Satyam
Infoway Ltd. Vs. Sifynet Solutions Pvt. Ltd. in support of plaintiff's
contentions stipulated herein above in the different paragraphs.

20.

Per contra, the defendant nos. 1 & 2 have relied on 2005

(30) PTC 353 (Del-DB), Fedders Lloyd Corporation Ltd. & Anr. Vs.
Fedders Corporation; AIR 1953 Supreme Court 357, National
Sewing Thread Co. Ltd Chidambaram Vs. James Chadwick and
Bros. Ltd.; AIR 1965 Supreme Court 980, Kaviraj Pandit Durga
Dutt Sharma Vs. Navaratna Pharmaceutical Laboratories; AIR
1971 Supreme Court 898, National Bell Co. and Gupta Industrial
Corporation Vs. Metal Goods Mfg. Co.Ltd. And Another; 1981 PTC
260, S.Karam Singh Trae as M/s.Mankoo Engg. Works Etc. Vs.
Master Machine and Service and Ors; 1981 PTC 14, M/s. Sarwan
Singh & Sons. Vs. M/s. Rico Industries & Ors,;

1996 PTC (16)

236 (DB),Franz Zaver Huemer Vs. New Yash Engineers and 2000
PTC 326, Om Prakash Gupta Vs. Parveen Kumar & anr. in support
of its pleas and contentions.

21.

I have heard the Learned counsel for the Plaintiff, Mr.

Praveen Anand and Ms. Pratibha M.Singh for the defendant nos. 1
& 2 in detail and have perused the pleadings and documents filed
CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 14 of 35

by the parties and the judgment relied on by them. It is no more
res integra that a decision is only an authority for what it actually
decides. What is of the essence in a decision is its ratio and not every observation found therein nor what logically follows from the
various observations made in it. The ratio of any decision must be
understood in the background of the facts of that case. It has been
said long time ago that a case is only an authority for what it actually decides, and not what logically follows from it. It is well settled
that a little difference in facts or additional facts may make a lot of
difference in the precedential value of a decision. Considering the
present facts and circumstances, it may not be necessary to deal
with judgments in detail relied on by the parties in the facts and
circumstances of the present case as the present case is apparently
distinguishable from the fact situation of the most of the decisions
relied on by the parties. The Supreme Court in Bharat Petroleum
Corporation Ltd and Anr. v. N.R.Vairamani and Anr., AIR 2004 SC
778 had observed:" Court should not place reliance on decisions without
discussing as to how the factual situation fits in with
the fact situation of the decision on which reliance is
placed. Observations of Courts are neither to be read as
Euclid's theorems nor as provisions of the statute and
that too taken out of their context. These observations
must be read in the context in which they appear to
have been stated. Judgments of Courts are not to be
construed as statutes. To interpret words, phrases and
provisions of a statute, it may become necessary for
judges to embark into lengthy discussions but the
discussion is meant to explain and not to define. Judges
interpret statutes, they do not interpret judgments. They
CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 15 of 35

interpret words of statutes; their words are not to be
interpreted as statutes.

In Bhavnagar University v. Palitana Sugar Mills Pvt Ltd
(2003) 2 SC 111 (vide para 59), the Supreme had observed:" It is well settled that a little difference in facts or
additional facts may make a lot of difference in
the precedential value of a decision."
Similarly In Ambica Quarry Works v. State of Gujarat and
Ors.

MANU/SC/0049/1986

the

Supreme

Court

had

also

observed:"The ratio of any decision must be understood in
the background of the facts of that case. It has
been said long time ago that a case is only an authority for what it actually decides, and not what
logically follows from it."

Circumstantial flexibility, one additional or different fact may
make a world of difference between conclusions in two cases and
disposing of a case by blindly placing reliance on a decision is not
proper. The counsel for the parties have mainly relied on a few observations made in these cases.

22.

The plea of the plaintiffs is that `Postman' is an arbitrary

mark for edible oil and as such an invented word for the edible oil
and therefore, will entail highest degree of protection whereas the

CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 16 of 35

defendant nos.1 & 2 has countered it by alleging that `Postman' is
an ordinary English word in use since centuries and in case of
plaintiff since there is nonuser, nature of mark is irrelevant. This
can not be disputed that the trademarks can be categorized in
different categories as generic, descriptive, suggestive and arbitrary
or fanciful. There may be over-lapping in the categories on account
of various factors. In accordance with the usage through times and
as meaning of user may differ from group to group, the category of
trademark may change its group. For example 'postman' may be
generic if used by a courier agency but it will be arbitrary, if
applied to edible oils. Generic term is one that refers or has come
to be understood as referring to genus of which a particular
product is a species. Generic and merely descriptive terms cannot
become valid trademarks at common law. Neither generic nor
merely descriptive marks are entitled to trademark protection
unless they are subject to exclusive use. User of a generic term
cannot deprive competing persons right to call article by its name,
no matter how much money or effort user poured into promoting
merchandise and what success it achieved in securing public
identification. Term may become generic in one mark and
descriptive, suggestive or fanciful in another. Reliance for this can
be placed on Abercrombie & Fitch Company Vs. Hunting World,
Incorporated, `89 USPQ 759 (supra)

holding that categories of

terms that have been identified with respect to trademark

CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 17 of 35

protection arrayed in ascending order that roughly reflects their
eligibility for trademark status and degree of protection accorded
are generic, descriptive, suggestive and arbitrary or fanciful. It was
held that the term which is descriptive but not generic stands on a
better basis. Giving an example it was held that `ivory' would be
generic name for use for products made from elephant tusk but it
will be arbitrary if applied to soap. It was observed that categories
of terms that have been identified with respect to trademark
protection, arrayed in ascending order reflects their eligibility for
trademark status and degree of protection accorded are generic,
descriptive, suggestive and arbitrary or fanciful. The lines of
demarcation between these categories may not always be very
bright and fine, as a product may shift from one category to the
other category according to use. It was observed that a term is
suggestive if it requires imagination, thought and perception to
reach a conclusion as to the nature of the goods. A term is
descriptive if it forthwith conveys immediate idea of the ingredients,
qualities or character of goods. In these circumstances, the plea of
the defendants that the word `Postman'

is an ordinary English

word and the trademark will be generic can not be accepted, prima
facie. In these facts and circumstances, the word `Postman' for the
edible oils will be arbitrary. Therefore, the trade mark for edible oils
`Postman' can not be termed not an invented word and being an
ordinary English word.

CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 18 of 35

23.

The plea of the defendants is that this trademark has been

abandoned by the plaintiffs and after the abandonment the
defendants are entitled to use the said trade mark. Relying on
Hardie's case (supra) the learned counsel for the plaintiffs had
submitted that no intention to abandon the trade mark can be
culled from the present facts and circumstances as the trade mark
has been kept, revived and enforced. Relying on 2003 (27) PTC
555, R.R. Oomerbhoy Pvt. Ltd. Vs. Court Receiver, High Court,
Bombay and another,. it is contended that even the partners have
been restrained from using it exclusively on the ground that the
proprietary right, title and interest of partnership firm in its trade
marks is an intrinsic part of goodwill and the essential foundation
of an action for passing off will also be the protection of goodwill.
The goodwill of the business that may be destroyed or prejudiced
by a misrepresentation on the part of a competitor that the goods
which he sells are those of the other. The object of an action for
passing off is, therefore, to protect the goodwill of the business of
the owner who complains that the goodwill would be seriously
affected by a misrepresentation by another who sells goods of a
deceptively similar nature.

The goodwill of the business is

something which has an important value in the sale of the assets of
the firm upon dissolution. It was father held that mere cessation of
the business does not destroy the goodwill of the firm or for that
matter, the property in the trademark which is an integral

CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 19 of 35

component of the goodwill of the business. The disputes between
the partners of the plaintiff no.1 had arisen in December, 2000 and
according to them the products were sold in the market till 2001.
Whereas the plea of the defendant nos. 1 & 2 is that there is a
complete non use since 2000. If the disputes had arisen between
the partners of the firm in December, 2000, prima facie, it cannot
be inferred that the production of oils and sale thereof had stopped
immediately and since 2000 the goods have not been sold in the
market. Whether the mark has not been used for five years is to be
adjudicated and the defendants on their own could not decide that
the mark has not been used for five years and so they are legally
entitled to use the same. The defendant nos. 1 & 2 also cannot
contend that since the application for rectification on account on
alleged abandonment and non user is pending, therefore, the trade
mark has already been abandoned. Since the defendant nos. 1 & 2
were aware of the trade mark of the plaintiffs, before using the
same on account of alleged abandonment they should have got it
rectified. The defendant nos. 1 & 2 were aware of this they could
not use the trade mark `Super Postman’ and therefore, they had
given an undertaking that if the plaintiff will raise any objection to
trade mark `Super Postman’ then they would withdraw their
application for registration.

CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 20 of 35

24.

The defendants are manufacturing, distributing, marketing

and selling ground nut oil under the mark `Super Postman' whereas the mark of the plaintiff is `Postman'. From the photographs of
the products of the plaintiffs and the defendants, what appears is
that the container shape, color scheme and label are similar.
Though there are minor differences but overall appearance and color scheme are quite similar. The difference is only prefix `Super'.
In the plaintiffs' product the word `postman' is in red colour and
the device of postman is in yellow colour with an outer oval in deep
blue and inner oval in light blue whereas the word `postman' is in
yellow and prefix `super' is in white in the background of light and
dark blue. The color combination of two products is quite similar
and so is the shape of the bottle. What is to be seen is whether
these trademarks are likely to deceive or cause confusion? The test
will be how a purchaser with an ordinary mind and intelligence
would react to these trademarks and what association he would
form by looking at them and in what respect he would connect the
trademark with the goods which he would be purchasing. In National Sewing Thread Company Ltd (Supra) the Supreme Court had
held that an application made to the Registrar which is likely to deceive or to cause confusion has to be refused notwithstanding the
fact that the mark might have no identity or close resemblance
with any other trademark. It was held that the Registrar has to
come to a conclusion on this point independently. What is to be

CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 21 of 35

seen is whether looking at the circumstances of the case particular
trademark is likely to deceive or to cause confusion and the real
test is as to how a purchaser will look upon it with an average
mind of ordinary intelligence and would react to a particular trademark and what association he would form by looking at the trademark and in what respect he would connect the trademark with
the goods which he would be purchasing. The test for comparison
of the two word marks was formulated by Lord Parker in Pianotist
Co. Ltd.’s application 23 RPC 774 as follows:
“You must take the two words. You must judge
them, both by their look and by their sound. You
must consider the goods to which they are to be
applied. You must consider the nature and kind of
customer who would be likely to buy those goods.
In fact, you must consider all the surrounding
circumstances; and you must further consider what
is likely to happen if each of those trade marks is
used in a normal way as a trade mark for the goods
of the respective owners of the marks. If,
considering all those circumstances, you come to
the conclusion that there will be a confusion, that
is to say, not necessarily that one man will be
injured and the other will gain illicit benefit, but
that there will be a confusion in the mind of the
public which will lead to confusion in the goods —
then you may refuse the registration, or rather you
must refuse the registration in that case.”
25.

The mark used by the defendants is similar, the goods are

the same and the area of trade is also common. If these three
factors are same or quite similar, then the second manufacturer
should not be allowed to sell its product under the same name.
This principle which is also termed as triple identity principle has

CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 22 of 35

been invoked in a number of cases. A Single Judge of this Court in
Lal Sons Machines Vs. Sachar E & M Stores, 1986, Rajdhani Law
Reporter, 165 had held that in case of triple identity where the
mark used by defendant is the same, the goods are the same and
also the trade area it is the duty of the Court to protect the
registered trademark. Another Single Judge of Calcutta High Court
in Kalyani Breweries Ltd Vs. Khoday Brewing and Distilleries
Industries Ltd had invoked the triple identity rule. It was explained
that where after marks were identified, the goods were identified
and the areas over which the goods are going to be sold are
identified, a second manufacturer can not be

allowed to sell its

product under the same trade name. Comparison of two marks,
prima facie, show that the essential features of the trademark of
the plaintiffs have been adopted by the defendant nos. 1 & 2. In
these circumstances the minor differences in the getup, packaging
and other writings on the goods or on the packets in which the
goods are sold by the defendants indicating clearly the different
trade origin different from the registered proprietor of the mark of
the plaintiff would not be very material. The added matter, prima
facie, will not be sufficient to avoid any confusion or deception. The
alleged superior quality of goods of the defendants also does not
entitle the defendants to any such rights as has been claimed by
the defendants. The

learned counsel for the defendants has not

shown any precedents which has laid down that in case the quality

CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 23 of 35

of product of the offender is allegedly superior, then such an
offender is entitled for consideration of his claim differently vis-àvis the monopoly conferred upon the registered owner of the trade
mark. In in M/s.A.V International Ltd Vs. A.V.Footwear Industries,
AIR 1991, Delhi 22 it was held that the statutory monopoly which
is conferred upon the registered owner in connection with the use
of mark Avis for footwear is to have primary precedence over any
other consideration in relation to grant or non grant of an
independent stay when the matter is at an interlocutory stage as
the statutory registration establishes prima facie case in favor of
plaintiff. The defendants can not claim any rights, prima facie as
they had given an undertaking contending categorically that they
will withdraw their application for registration of the name `Super
Postman', if the plaintiffs will raise any objection or opposition in
future against the applied trade mark of the defendants. The
undertaking given by the defendants in the affidavit is extracted as
under:
“2:
That I state that if M/s.Ahmed Oomerbhay, Adbul
Sattar Ahmedbhoy and/or M/s.Bombay Soap Factory
All kept Address at Bombay (Mumbai) will raise any
objection or opposition in future against my applied
Trademark, I will withdraw my application for
registration under Trademark “Super Postman” at once
and without any cause of delay.”
In the circumstances, on the basis of the differences which
have been highlighted by the counsel for the defendants, in my

CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 24 of 35

opinion, the defendants can not contend that the plaintiffs do not
have a prima facie case in their favor. The defendants should also
be not allowed at this interim stage their claim of registration of
their trade mark `Super Postman' on account of undertaking given
by them and which fact was not disclosed by them till this was
pointed out by the plaintiffs and the defendant nos.1 & 2
deliberately concealed the said fact. Comparison of two marks,
prima facie, show that the essential features of the packaging, color
scheme and label has been copied by the defendant nos. 1 & 2 in
violation of the copy right of the plaintiffs which they cannot be
allowed to do in the facts and circumstances. The minor differences
in the getup, packaging and other writings and color scheme does
not absolve the defendant nos. 1 & 2 from violating of the copyright
of the plaintiffs.

26.

What are the ramification of an application for rectification of

the trade mark of the plaintiffs filed by the defendants on the
ground that the plaintiffs have abandoned their trade mark and on
other grounds. The suit is at a stage when the existence of the
rights of the plaintiffs and their violations are contested and
uncertain. The rights of the defendants are still to be established
after the trial on evidence. Considering the long time the plaintiff
had been using his trade mark and the sale of edible oils by the
defendants since 2004, however, in large quantity, the Court will

CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 25 of 35

have to go by the principle of `balance of inconvenience’ which will
be as to who will be more inconvenienced in case the injunction as
prayed for by the plaintiff is granted or not granted and who will
suffer irreparable loss. The principle enunciated by the Apex Court
in the case of Wander Ltd and anr. Vs Antox India (P) Ltd can be a
guiding principle to resolve this controversy. In this case it was
held by the Supreme Court as under:
“Usually, the prayer for grant of an interlocutory injunction is at a stage when the existence of the legal
right asserted by the plaintiff and its alleged violation
are both contested and uncertain and remain uncertain till they are established at the trial on evidence.
The Court, at this stage, acts on certain well settled
principles of administration of this form of interlocutory remedy which is both temporary and discretionary.
The object of the interlocutory injunction stated:
"...is to protect the plaintiff against injury by violation of his rights for which he could not adequately be compensated in damages recoverable
in the action if the uncertainty were resolved in
his favor at the trial. The need for such protection must be weighed against the corresponding
need of the defendant to be protected against injury resulting form his having been prevented
from exercising his own legal rights for which he
could not be adequately compensated.

27.

In the circumstances, this Court must weigh plaintiffs’ need

against the defendants’ and determine where the 'balance of
convenience lies and preserve the status quo in respect of rights of
the parties which will appear on a prima facie case. This task is

CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 26 of 35

slightly more difficult because the defendants have already
commenced his enterprise. But while applying for registration of
their trade mark, the defendants had undertaken that if the
plaintiffs will raise any objection or opposition in future against
their applied Trademark `Super Postman' they will withdraw their
application for registration under Trademark “Super Postman” at
once and without any cause of delay.

28.

This fact that the defendants had got their trade mark `Super

Postman' registered subject to the undertaking as detailed
hereinabove

was

not

disclosed.

Consequent

to

such

an

undertaking and conditional registration, the defendants can not
claim any rights, prima facie, on the basis of registration of their
trade mark `Super Postman'. Section 28(3) and 30 (1) (d) deal with
the rights of the registered proprietors of similar trade marks and
bar action of infringement against each other as their reading show
that the proprietor of registered trade mark can not file an
infringement action against a proprietor of an identical or similar
trade mark. However, section 27 (2) deals with passing off action
and the rights for passing off are not affected by section 28 (3) and
section 30 (1) (d). This position can not be disputed in view of
N.R.Dongre & ors. Vs Whirlpool Corporation & ors, AIR 1995 Delhi
300 holding:

CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 27 of 35

“ A reading of Section 28(3) with Section 30 (1) (d)
shows that the proprietor of a registered trademark
can not file an infringement action against a proprietor
of an identical or a similar trademark. While section 28
(3) and 30 (1) (d) on the one hand deal with the rights
of registered proprietors of identical trade marks and
bar action of infringement against each other. Section
27 (2) on the other hand deals with the passing off
action. The rights of action under section 27 (2) are
not affected by section 28 (3) and section 30 (1) (d).
Therefore, registration of a trade mark under the Act
would be irrelevant in an action for passing off.
Registration of a trade mark in fact does not confer any
new rights on the proprietors thereof then what
already existed at common law without registration of
the mark. The right of goodwill and reputation in a
trade mark was recognised at common law even before
it will subject of statutory law. Prior to codification of
trademark law there was no provision in India for
registration of a trade mark.
The right in the
trademark was acquired only by their use. This right
has not been affected by the act and is preserved and
recognised by sections 27 (2) and 33.”

29.

Defendants also defend action against them on the ground

that they have challenged the registration of the trademark of the
plaintiffs by filing the required application for rectification and
removal before the Registrar. The fact that the application for
removal and rectification of the trade mark has been filed by the
defendants before the Trade Mark Registry is not denied.
Admittedly the rectification application for the registered trade
mark `Postman’ of the Plaintiffs was filed and which is pending
adjudication. Since the application for rectification of Plaintiffs'
mark filed by the defendants is pending, what will be the

CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 28 of 35

ramification for the same. Mere pendency of their application will
not give any right to the defendants to sustain their action for
infringement of plaintiffs' registered trade mark. Mere filing of the
application for invalidity of the trade mark of the plaintiffs does not
ipso facto results into stay of the registration or putting of any
fetters on the rights of the registered owner of the trade mark
flowing from the registration of the mark. If the rights of a
registered owner of the trade mark are not clouded on account of
pendency

of

the

application

of

rectification,

a

fortiori

the

application for rectification also can not validate his action of
infringement of registered trade mark of the plaintiffs who have a
prior registered trade mark. A Division Bench of this Court in
Jagan Nath Prem Nath Vs. Bhartiya Dhoop Karyalaya, Khari Baoli,
Delhi, AIR 1975, Delhi 149 had held that despite the pendency of
an application for rectification of the trademark, interim injunction
can be granted which will, however, be subject to the decision of
the Registrar of the application for rectification. It was held that in
an action for infringement a registered trademark holder can
succeed not only when he proves that whole of his registered
trademark has been copied but can also succeed if he shows that
the defendant's mark is similar to the plaintiff's mark as it would
be remembered by persons possessed of an average memory when
its usual imperfection or when its essential particulars or the
distinctiveness or essential feature has been copied. Similarly in

CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 29 of 35

M/s.A.V International Ltd Vs. A.V.Footwear Industries, AIR 1991,
Delhi 22 it was held that the statutory monopoly which was
conferred upon the registered owner in connection with the use of
mark Avis for footwear is to have primary precedence over any
other consideration in relation to grant or non grant of an
independent stay when the matter is at an interlocutory stage as
the statutory registration establishes prima facie case in favor of
plaintiff. Merely on account of rectification sought

by the

defendant it cannot be assumed that the defendant would be able
to prove his case on account of non user by the registered
trademark owner.

30.

In Poddar Tyres Ltd Vs. Bedrock Sales Corporation Ltd, AIR

1993 Bombay 237 it was held that it is not possible to accept the
contention that an application for rectification can prevent the
registered proprietor from ascertaining his rights as registered
proprietor of the trademark under Section 28 of the Act as long as
the trademark continues on the register. It was held relying on the
judgment in Hindustan Embroidery Mills Pvt Ltd Vs. K.Ravindran
and Company, (1974) 76 Bombay Law Reporter, 146 that it is not
the practice to consider the validity of the registration of a
trademark on a motion for interlocutory injunction taken out by
the person who has copied the mark registered in his name. It was
held that while a mark remains on the register, even if wrongfully,

CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 30 of 35

it is not desirable that others should imitate it and consequently
pendency of rectification application cannot prevent the plaintiff
from exercising the statutory rights under the Trademarks Act or
from seeking interim relief based thereupon. In Jindal Industries
Ltd Vs. Samana Sales Ltd, 1993-PTC-129 it was held that if a
trademark is registered in the name of more than one person they
may contest the registration inter-se but as against other persons
each one of them can initiate action if the said registration is being
used by a third party and it cannot be a valid defense by a person
using the trademark to plead that since more than one person is
having the registered trademark in his favor he could use the
same. The plaintiff no.1 is a partnership firm which is nothing but
the compendious name of the partners. Despite the disputes
between the partners of the plaintiffs, the defendants in the
present facts and circumstances will not be entitled to claim that
they have a right to use a similar trade mark. If a person adopts a
mark which to his knowledge is also used by another for the same
product, reflects that the adoption is not honest and such a person
who subsequently adopts a mark cannot claim any proprietary
rights over the said trademark. It was also held by a Single Judge
of this Court in M/s.Garden Perfumes (P) Ltd Vs. Anand Soaps and
Detergents that mere fact that the plaintiff did not manufacture
soap under the trademark “Rainy” for three years does not in any
way take away or dilute their claim to the proprietorship of the

CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 31 of 35

mark being the first one to invent and use the same and thus it
was held that the prima facie case was in favor of the plaintiff and
the balance of convenience being also in favor of the plaintiff,
interim injunction was granted restraining the defendant from
using the trademark “Rainy” till disposal of the suit.

31.

Therefore,

the

plea

of

the

defendants

regarding

the

registration of the trademark "Super Postman" of the plaintiffs
allegedly remaining wrongfully on the register, as the plaintiffs
have not used the trademark since 2000 and there has been
alleged complete non use and consequently the registration of the
trademark

"Postman"

is

contrary

to

the

provisions

of

the

Trademarks Act, 1999 can not be sustained, prima facie in the
present facts and circumstances. A fortiori

the plea of the

defendants that on account of pendency of rectification petition
the trademark "Postman" has ceased to exist and perform
functions of a trademark and since the goods of the plaintiff are
not in the market, the trademark "Postman" cannot distinguish the
goods of the plaintiffs, as the entire purpose of a trademark is to
distinguish the goods of a particular trader and as there are no
goods, therefore, there is no trademark and consequently, there is
no confusion among public and trade and plaintiffs are also left
with no goodwill and reputation which is to be protected by way of
a passing off action, cannot be sustained prima facie in the facts

CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 32 of 35

and circumstances.

32.

For the reasons stated hereinabove the defendants are also

not entitled to pass off their goods or violate the trade mark of the
plaintiffs on the ground that the defendants were under the bona
fide impression that if a mark is not used for more than five years
they will become legally entitled to use the same. The defendants
also cannot arrogate to themselves the right to use the similar
trademark and pass off their goods as that of plaintiffs on the
ground that they have acquired ISO certification and they also have
AGMARK certificate and they are of one of the few companies who
have such certifications.

The defendants in the facts and

circumstances also cannot be allowed to take shelter under the
plea that they were legally advised that if the mark is not used for
more than five years anyone can adopt the said Mark. The said
plea of the defendants is also under challenge and has been refuted
by the plaintiffs.

33.

The defendants prima facie also cannot sustain their action

on the ground that the injunction will result into destruction of
food products. As already held, prima facie the added matter is not
sufficient to distinguish the goods of the defendants from the goods
of the plaintiff applying the test of purchaser with an ordinary
mind and intelligence.

CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 33 of 35

34.

Consequently, the application of the defendant nos. 1 & 2

under order 39 Rule 4 read with section 151 of the Code of Civil
Procedure being IA no. 4820 of 2005 for vacation of interim order
dated 30th May, 2005 is dismissed and the application of the
plaintiffs for interim injunction against defendant nos. 1 & 2 under
Order 39 Rules 1 & 2 read with Section 151 of Code of Civil
Procedure being IA no. 4575 of 2005 is allowed and the interim
order dated 30th May, 2005 is confirmed and the defendant nos. 1
& 2 their partners, proprietors and any person acting through
them are restrained from selling or offering for sale edible oils
under the mark `Super Postman’ so as to infringe the trade mark
nos. 162666, 213353, 260538, 258918, 312898 and 415564 in
class 29 and from passing off their goods and business as that of
plaintiff no.1. The defendant nos. 1 and 2 are further restrained
from violating the copyright of the plaintiff no.1 in the packaging,
label, color and scheme of the POSTMAN product during the
pendency of the present suit. The parties are left to bear their own
costs.

It is, however, clarified that anything stated herein above

and any expression or opinion made is not the final adjudication of
the disputes between the parties.

CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 34 of 35

IA No.4821/2005
Allowed, subject to just exceptions. The translation of the
vernacular language documents be filed within eight weeks.
CS(OS) No.806/2005
The documents or certified copies thereof, if not already filed
be filed within eight weeks.
List on March 18, 2008 before the Joint Registrar for admission/denial and marking of documents.
List on July 11, 2008 before the Court for framing of issues.

December 20, 2007

ANIL KUMAR, J.

'Dev'

CS(OS) 806 of 2005

Page 35 of 35

