*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP(C) No.3530/2008

%

Date of decision: 20.05.2008

Mrs.Parveen Thakran
Through:

….…
Petitioner
Mr.G.B. Bhandari, Advocate

Versus
Govt. of NCT of Delhi & Ors
Through :

........
Respondents
Mr.Madan, Advocate for the
respondent No.1.

CORAM :HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
1.

The petitioner has sought directions to the respondents to make

her payments of the salaries and allowances in accordance with the
prescribed scale of pay and for quashing the memo dated 21st April,
2008 seeking the explanation of the petitioner for not issuing the receipt
of Rs.910/-. The petitioner has also sought direction to the respondent
not to pass any adverse order without due process of law.

W.P(C) No.3530/2008

Page 1 of 7

2.

The petitioner contended that she is working as clerk and the

respondents are only paying basic salaries and other facilities are not
extended to the petitioner despite specific and unambiguous terms and
conditions laid down in the appointment letter. The petitioner has
claimed in the circumstances ancillary allowances like HRA, DA, CCA
etc. The petitioner has also claimed yearly increments.

3.

The petitioner has also contended that even other employees of

the schools were not granted ancillary allowances and for various other
grievances, other writ petitions by the teachers and employees are
pending where notices have been issued.

4.

The petitioner has also contended that in another petition being

W.P(C) No.5075/2003 by order dated 11th May, 2004 the respondent
school was directed not to take any action without the approval and
permission of the Director of Education which writ petition is still
pending. It is also alleged by the petitioner that the trustee of the school
management committee are divided into groups and are involved in a
chain of litigation for the purpose of controlling the school and other
institution established by Sir Chottu Ram Educational Trust and the
staff is picked up for harassment and victimization based on their
allegiance to one or the other groups.

W.P(C) No.3530/2008

Page 2 of 7

5.

The petitioner in the circumstances has challenged the memo

dated 21st April, 2008 whereby the petitioner has been asked to give
explanation regarding non issuance of a receipt of Rs.910/- received by
her on the ground that respondent No.5 is not competent to issue the
said memo to the petitioner.

6.

A Division Bench of this Court in Kathuria Public School and Ors

Vs. Director of Education and Anr, 2005 VI AD (Delhi) 893 relying on
T.M.A.Pai Foundation Vs. State of Karnataka, AIR 2003 SC 345 had
held that it is advisable that the specialized Tribunal constituted should
look after the legal matters relating to hearing of grievances of
teachers and employees. The Division Bench relying on T.M.A.Pai
Foundation (Supra) had held that specialized Tribunal should hear any
grievance of the teacher and employees. It was further held that no
restriction has been placed on the scope and ambit of the consideration
of the grievances of the teacher or employee by the Tribunal and
consequently the Tribunal should be able to hear all the grievances
including in respect of suspension of a teacher or an employee and,
therefore, the Tribunal constituted under the Delhi School Education
Act should be able to hear all the grievances of the staff and teachers
and not necessarily as restricted to in sub Section (2) of Section 8 of the
said Act. The Division Bench in para 42 at page 910 had held as
under:W.P(C) No.3530/2008

Page 3 of 7

“42. No restriction has been placed on the scope and
ambit of the consideration of the grievances of the teacher
or employee by the Tribunal. Under the said Act in
question, the Tribunal is already constituted. Thus, all that
is to be done is that the Tribunal should be able to hear all
grievances including in respect of suspension by a teacher
or an employee. Taking into consideration the observations
made by the Apex Court in T.M.A.Pai Foundation case
(supra), we are of the considered view that pending
necessary legislative action by the State, the Tribunal
constituted should be able to hear all grievances of the
staff and teacher and not necessarily as restricted to in
sub Section (2) of Section 8 of the said Act. The result
would be that if a teacher is aggrieved by a suspension
order or its prolongation, the grievance can be made before
the Tribunal depending upon the fact and circumstances of
the case.”

7.

In the circumstances all the disputes raised by the petitioner can

be adjudicated by Delhi School Tribunal. The learned counsel for the
petitioner is unable to point out anything to the contrary as to why this
Court should exercise its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India when the disputes can be adjudicated and
resolved by a competent Tribunal.

8.

There cannot be any doubt whatsoever that the question as to

when a discretionary jurisdiction is to be exercised or refused to be
exercised by the High Court has to be determined having regard to the
facts and circumstances of each case where for no hard-and-fast rule
can be laid down. But normally, the High Court should not entertain
W.P(C) No.3530/2008

Page 4 of 7

writ petitions unless it is shown that there is something more in a case,
something going to the root of the jurisdiction, something which would
show that it would be a case of palpable injustice to the writ petitioner
to force him to adopt the remedies provided by the statute. To the
doctrine of exhaustion of alternative remedy there are two exceptions.
One is when the proceedings are under a provision of law which is ultra
vires which will entail quashing of same on the ground that the
proceedings are incompetent without a party being obliged to wait until
those proceedings run their full course. The other exception is when an
order is made in violation of principles of natural justice and the
proceedings itself are an abuse of process of law. A Division Bench of
the Supreme Court in ABL International Ltd. v. Export Credit Guarantee
Corpn. of India Ltd. ((2004) 3 SCC 553 : JT (2003) 10 SC 300 [12])
observed that the High Court having regard to the facts of the case, has
a discretion to entertain or not to entertain a writ petition and it is the
Court that has imposed upon itself certain restrictions in the exercise of
this power. The Supreme Court had held on page 572 in para 28 as
under:
“28. However, while entertaining an objection as to the
maintainability of a writ petition under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India, the court should bear in mind the
fact that the power to issue prerogative writs under Article
226 of the Constitution is plenary in nature and is not
limited by any other provisions of the Constitution. The
High Court having regard to the facts of the case, has
a discretion to entertain or not to entertain a writ
petition. The Court has imposed upon itself certain
W.P(C) No.3530/2008

Page 5 of 7

restrictions in the exercise of this power. (See Whirlpool
Corpn. v. Registrar of Trade Marks13.) And this plenary
right of the High Court to issue a prerogative writ will not
normally be exercised by the Court to the exclusion of other
available remedies unless such action of the State or its
instrumentality is arbitrary and unreasonable so as to
violate the constitutional mandate of Article 14 or for other
valid and legitimate reasons, for which the Court thinks it
necessary to exercise the said jurisdiction.”

9.

Though the show cause notices have been issued in some other

writ petitions, however, that in itself will not be a ground for this Court
to exercise jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India in
the present facts and circumstances. The order challenged by the
petitioner directing her to reply to the allegation of not issuing receipt
despite collecting a certain amount, is not under a provision which is
ultra vires nor it is in violation of the principles of natural justice. The
non payment of certain allowances as claimed by the petitioner is also
not such a situation where this Court should exercise its jurisdiction
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India in the present facts and
circumstances.

10.

Therefore, in the facts and circumstances this Court is not

exercising its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
for the relief claimed by the petitioner and it is for the petitioner to
exhaust her alternative remedy available to her under the Delhi School
Education Act and Rules, 1973 and to approach Delhi School Tribunal.
W.P(C) No.3530/2008

Page 6 of 7

11.

The writ petition is therefore, disposed of in terms hereof. All the

applications filed with the writ petition are also disposed of.

May 20th , 2008

ANIL KUMAR, J.

‘K’

W.P(C) No.3530/2008

Page 7 of 7

