IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Decision: November 21, 2007
CS(OS) No.1478/2007
#
!

Lt.Gen.C.K. Kapur (Retd.) & Others
......... PLAINTIFFS
Through: Mr.Chetan Sharma and
Mr.Siddharth Mridul,
Sr.Advocates with Mr.Vineet
Malhotra, Advocates
Vs.

$

Guruji Ka Ashram & Others

^

Through:

……..DEFENDANTS
Mr.Sanjay Jain, Sr. Advocate with
Mr.Amresh Mathur and Mr.Arjun
Mitra, Advocates for defendant
Nos.1 to 3.

CORAM :*

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR. J, (Oral)

IA No.9232/2007 in CS(OS) No.1478/2007

1.

This is an application by the plaintiffs under Section 92 of the

Code of the Civil Procedure seeking leave to institute the present suit

CS(OS) No.1478/2007

Page 1 of 29

under Section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure praying inter alia a
declaration that appointment of defendant No.3 by the defendant No.2
as an additional trustee of defendant No.1 “Guru Ka Ashram Trust” is
bad and non est being in contravention to the terms and conditions of
trust deed dated 14th May, 1999 and first (amended) trust dated 11 th
January, 2007; to remove defendant No.3 as an additional trustee; a
declaration that defendant Nos.2 and 3 or their nominee/agents,
attorneys from taking any decision in respect to the expenditure of
trust funds of the defendant No.1/Trust

and to approve the draft

scheme for running the affairs of the defendant No.1/Trust and to
direct the Advisory Committee of defendant No.1/Trust to continue to
oversee and administer the legal and financial administration of the
defendant No.1/Trust till such time the court approves the scheme of
Trust/Management committee of the defendant No.1/Trust in the
spirit of original trust deed and draft scheme placed before the court
for

effective

legal

and

financial

administration

of

defendant

No.1/Trust.

2.

The applicant/plaintiffs contended that they have not filed the

present suit under Section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure for their
personal interest or to settle any personal score against defendant
Nos. 2 and 3, but as devotees of defendant No.1/Trust and since they
are seeking a relief under Section 92 (a) (b) (cc) and (g), it will be just

CS(OS) No.1478/2007

Page 2 of 29

and appropriate to grant them leave to institute the present suit.

3.

The application is contested by defendant Nos.2 and 3

contending that appointment of defendant No.3 as a co-trustee is in
consonance with the provisions of trust deed and Act and in
furtherance of the wishes and desires of the settler. According to the
non-applicant, after a few days of working of defendant No.3, it
cannot be inferred by the plaintiffs who are not even aware of the
activities of the trust in the past that appointment of defendant No.3
will defeat the very purpose of the Trust.

According to the defendant

Nos.2 and 3, the suit is outcome of ulterior personal motives and
malafide designs of plaintiffs and their accomplice. It is averred that
Trust is not a living person so as to invite any devotees and plaintiffs
may have been devotees of late Guruji, i.e., Nirmal Singhji, the settler
of the Trust and they were only associated to the extent of seeking his
blessings on account of his personal siddhies and they never had any
association with the Trust or any of its activities.

In the

circumstances, it is prayed that the leave as prayed by plaintiffs be
not granted to them and the application be dismissed.

4.

The object of Section 92 is to enable two or more persons

interested in any trust created for a public purpose of a charitable or

CS(OS) No.1478/2007

Page 3 of 29

religious nature to file a suit for the relief set out in the said section
without having to join all the beneficiaries as it would be highly
inconvenient and unpractical for all the beneficiaries to join in the
suit. Therefore, any two or more of them are given right to institute a
suit for the relief mentioned in the Section 92 of the Code of Civil
Procedure.

It is also considered desirable to prevent a public trust

from being harassed or put to legal expenses by reckless or frivolous
suit being brought against the trustees and, therefore, a provision has
been made for obtaining leave of the Court before the suit is
instituted.

A plain reading of Section 92 of the Code of Civil

Procedure indicates that leave of the court is a pre-condition or a
condition precedent for institution of a suit against the public trust
for the reliefs contemplated in the said section.

5.

In the present case, since the notice was given to the

defendants and they are opposing the grant of leave, what is to be
considered is whether the plaintiffs have applied for leave merely with
a view to harass the Trust or plaintiffs have such antecedents that it
would be undesirable to grant them leave.

What is also to be

considered is whether delay in grant of leave will cause loss of the
public trust or not.

It also cannot be doubted that it is only the

allegations in the plaint that have to be looked into, in the first
instance, to see whether the suit falls within the ambit of Section 92

CS(OS) No.1478/2007

Page 4 of 29

and for this the reliance can be placed on Association of R.D.B. Bagga
Singh Vs. Gurnam Singh, AIR 1972 Rajasthan 268; Sohan Singh Vs.
Acchar Singh, AIR 1968 Punjab & Haryana 463 and Radha Krishna
Vs. Lakshmi Narayan, AIR 1948 OUDH 208.

6.

The pleas of the plaintiffs are that revered Guruji, late Nirmal

Singh Ji, son of Shri Mast Ram, executed a Trust Deed dated 14th
May, 1999 at New Delhi thereby creating a public charitable Trust by
the name of “Guruji Ka Ashram”. The said trust deed was registered
with the office of the Sub Registrar – VI, Vikas Sadan, New Delhi and
as per clause 4, the settler had appointed Smt. Surjit, wife of Shri
Mast Ram, mother of the settler, as the first Trustee of the Trust who
expired on 10th May, 2001 and to fill up the said vacancy the settler
appointed Shri Mast Ram, his father, as an additional Trustee vide
Trust (Amendment) Deed on 11th January, 2007.

7.

The disputes have arisen after the demise of the settler on 21st

May, 2007 as on his demise there was only one Trustee left,
defendant No.2. The defendant No.2 is stated to be 75 years of age
and has frail health.

8.

According to the plaintiff, the sole authority to appoint trustees

vested with Settler and defendant No.2, as a Trustee or additional

CS(OS) No.1478/2007

Page 5 of 29

Trustee,

has

no

authority

to

appoint

such

co-trustee.

The

appointment of defendant No.3 as co-trustee by defendant No.2 has
aggrieved the plaintiffs and Sangat/devotees/regular followers of the
charitable Trust. It is not disputed that the charitable Trust was
created with the objects as enumerated hereinafter:“a.
To conduct research in the field of the arts,
philosophy, history and culture relating to Indology,
Indian Culture, Meditation and Yoga and to establish an
institution or institutions for the same.
b.
To establish an institution or institutions for the
conservation, development and exhibition and culture
and environment.
c.
To establish libraries, reading room, screen, art
collection centers, museums and other similar centers;
d.
To grant financial help, scholarships, stipends and
to provide books, instruments and appliances and other
aids to students and provide for their education for
fulfilling the primary objects of the Trust;
e.
To give donations, contributions, gift, monetary or
financial assistance to individuals and/or any other
institutions or organizations for the fulfillment of primary
objects of the trust;
f.
To establish, run maintain or grant aid or financial
assistance to any dispensary, hospital, nursing home,
sanatorium, aftercare clinic, maternity home and/or any
other institution for dispensing or distributing medicines
at any place or places in India for the benefit and use of
the poor, needy, sick and the suffering and to provide aids
and to meet their expenses for the same or incidental
thereto;
g.
To grant aid for exhibitions, fair, public functions
and to cultural activities for attainment of main objects of
the Trust;
h.
CS(OS) No.1478/2007

To raise funds by borrowing on such terms and
Page 6 of 29

within limits as provided in the Indian Trust Act, 1882,
and sanctioned by the trustees in the manner provided
herein;
i.
AND Generally to do all other acts, deeds and
things, as may be conducive to the attainment and
furtherance of any object of public utility not involving the
carrying on any such activity for profit.”

9.

Perusal of the Trust Deed reveals that the appointment of

additional trustees and the increase or reduction had to be made by
and at the sole discretion of the Settler. Even during the lifetime of
the Settler, the management and exercise of powers referred to in
clauses 9 to 15 vest solely with the Settler or such other Trustee or
Trustees whom the Settler may have authorized to perform.

10.

The Trust Deed contemplated that the total strength of the

Trust at given time shall not exceed 11 and shall not be less than 7
and the Trustees collectively were to be referred as Board of Trustees
and the power of appointing new or additional trustees had to vests
with the Board of Trustees.

11.

What also emerges in the facts and circumstances is that on the

demise of Settler, there was only one Trustee which admittedly did not
constitute the Board of Trustee. Prima facie, the surviving additional
Trustee/Trustee could neither appoint an additional Trustee of the

CS(OS) No.1478/2007

Page 7 of 29

Trust nor can administer the Trust.

12.

Learned counsel for the defendant Nos.2 and 3 has very

emphatically urged that since the Settler, on the demise of another
Trustee, his mother, could appoint defendant No.2 as a Trustee,
therefore, on the demise of the Settler, even defendant No.2 could
appoint the Trustee, i.e., defendant No.3. This is strongly disputed by
the plaintiffs. This dispute raised by the plaintiffs cannot be termed as
only an attempt to harass the Trust, in the facts and circumstances of
the case. There are no such allegations against the plaintiffs which
will lead to any such inference that the antecedents of the plaintiffs
are such so as to decline them leave as contemplated under Section
92 of the Code of Civil Procedure. Except the bald allegation that the
suit is outcome of personal motives and malafide designs of plaintiffs
and their accomplice, nothing substantial has been disclosed.

13.

The plaintiffs have categorically contended that there is a

vacuum

with

regard

to

the

management

of

the

Trust

and

consequently a group of conscientious follower had taken the
initiative before a large number of Sangat at the Bhog of revered
Settler at his birth place, Village Durgi, Malerkotia, District Sangrur,
Punjab, on 10th June, 2007, and a resolution was passed electing 75
eminent and regular follower of the Settler as the members of an

CS(OS) No.1478/2007

Page 8 of 29

Advisory Board which also filed a complaint dated 18th June, 2007 to
the Regional Manager, Syndicate Bank, for freezing the bank account
of defendant No.1.

14.

Learned counsel for defendant Nos.2 and 3 contends that the

attempt to freeze the accounts of defendant No.1 is nothing but a
malafide act by the plaintiffs, however, considering the disputes which
have arisen and inadequacy of the Trust settled by the Settler to deal
with all the situation that has arisen on the demise of the Settler, it
cannot be termed as a malafide attempt by the plaintiffs and other
followers of the Guruji so as to draw an inference that the attempt is
to harass the Trust and the defendant Nos.2 and 3.

15.

Considering the charitable purpose settled by the Settler, the

funds and the income of the Trust are to be utilized properly and
cannot be left to the whims of defendant No.2 who is 75 years old and
defendant No.3, son of the brother of the settler, in the present facts
and circumstances.

16.

The learned counsel for defendant Nos.2 & 3, Mr.Sanjay Jain

has relied on AIR 1993 Punjab & Haryana 231, Duttgir Mahant Vs.
Rishi Ram etc to contend that the suit under Section 92 of the Code of

CS(OS) No.1478/2007

Page 9 of 29

Civil Procedure will not be maintainable for removal of defendant No.3
who has been appointed validly. The learned counsel contended that
there are no substantial allegations of breach of trust against the
defendants and in the circumstances the plaintiffs have failed to make
out a case for direction for proper administration which is the very
foundation of the suit and, therefore, the suit filed under Section 92 is
not maintainable and consequently the relief should not be granted to
the petitioners nor the petitioners are entitled to leave under section
92 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

17.

No doubt it is true that if a trustee is validly appointed and only

the removal of the trustee is sought it will be beyond the purview of
Section 92 but the facts of the present case are distinguishable. In
Duttgir Mahant (Supra) the plaintiffs in that case had impliedly
admitted that the trustee was validly appointed in contradistinction to
the present case where the main contention of the plaintiffs is that
defendant No.3 cannot be and has not been appointed validly. This
cannot be

disputed

that

a

suit

under

Section

92 shall

be

maintainable, if the directions are required for administration of the
trust and the reliefs claimed are those which are mentioned in the
said section.

18.

The other judgments relied on by the defendant Nos.2 & 3 are

CS(OS) No.1478/2007

Page 10 of 29

Rahul Jain & Anr Vs. Sh.Pradeep Kumar & Ors, 138 (2007) DLT 329;
Mayer Simon Parur Vs. Advocate General of Kerala & Ors, AIR 1975
Kerala

57;

Hari

Jhandewalan

Bhagwan

Temple

Sharma

Society,

&

Ors

27(1985)

Vs.Badri

DLT

68;

Bhagat
Swamy

Parmatmanand Saraswati & Anr Vs. Ramji Tripathi & Anr, AIR 1974
SC 2141 and State of Uttar Pradesh Vs. Bansi Dhar & Ors (1974) 1
SCC 446 to contend that the suit under Section 92 is not
maintainable and consequently leave should not be granted to the
plaintiffs under Section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

19.

In Swamy Parmatmanand Saraswati (Supra) the Supreme Court

had held that only the allegations made in the plaint should be looked
into in the first instance to see whether the suit falls within the ambit
of Section 92. It was also held that if after evidence is taken it is found
that the breach of trust alleged has not been made out and that the
prayer for direction of the Court is vague and is not based on any
solid foundation in facts and for reason but is made only with a view
to bring the suit under the Section, then a suit purporting to be
brought under Section 92 must be dismissed. In paras 9 and 10 at
page 2144 the Supreme Court had held as under:-

“9. It is clear from the allegations in the plaint that the
plaintiffs primarily wanted a declaration from Court that
Krishnabodhashram
was
duly
installed
as
the
Shankaracharya of the Math on June 25, 1953, that he
CS(OS) No.1478/2007

Page 11 of 29

came into possession of the properties of the Math and,
therefore, the Court should appoint him as the
Shankaracharya of the Math. In order to enable the Court
to give that declaration, the plaintiffs wanted a declaration that the Will nominating Respondent 1 as successor
of Brahmanand was not executed by Brahmanand when
he was in a sound disposing state of mind and that even
if the Will was validly executed, Respondent 1 did not
have the requisite learning in Sanskrit and the Vedas and
so, he was not qualified to be nominated as the Head of
the Math and therefore, his installation as the
Shankaracharya of the Math on June 12, 1953, was invalid. There was no allegation in the plaint questioning or
even casting any doubt on the validity of the installation
of Krishnabodhashram as the Shankaracharya of the
Math and there was also no allegation against him as respects his management of the Trust properties. Then,
how was it that the plaintiffs prayed in the alternative for
appointment of some other person as Shankaracharya?
The relief for the appointment of Krishnabodhashram as
the Shankaracharya of the Math by the Court and the alternative relief to appoint some other person as the
Shankaracharya, without any allegation as to the circumstance which would invalidate the installation of Krishnabodhashram and without impleading him as a party to
the suit would show the strain of the draftsman to dress
up the plaint with prayers to make it appear that the
plaintiffs were the disinterested champions of the right of
the public and not the mere partisan advocates of the
personal cause of Krishnabodhashram.
10. A suit under Section 92 is a suit of a special nature
which presupposes the existence of a public Trust of a religious or charitable character. Such a suit can proceed
only on the allegation that there was a breach of such
trust or that the direction of the court is necessary for the
administration of the trust and the plaintiff must pray for
one or more of the reliefs that are mentioned in the section. It is, therefore, clear that if the allegation of breach
CS(OS) No.1478/2007

Page 12 of 29

of trust is not substantiated or that the plaintiff had not
made out a case for any direction by the court for proper
administration of the trust, the very foundation of a suit
under the section would fail; and, even if all the other ingredients of a suit under Section 92 are made out, if it is
clear that the plaintiffs are not suing to vindicate the right
of the public but are seeking a declaration of their individual or personal rights or the individual or personal
rights of any other person or persons in whom they are
interested, then the suit would be outside the scope of
Section 92 (see N. Shanmukham Chetty v. V.M. Govinda
Chetty 1 , Tirumalai Devasthanams v. Udiavar Krishnayya
Shanbhaga 2 , Sugra Bibi v. Hazi Kummu Mia 3 and Mulla: Civil Procedure Code (13th edn.) Vol. 1, p. 400). A suit
whose primary object or purpose is to remedy the infringement of an individual right or to vindicate a private
right does not fall under the section. It is not every suit
claiming the reliefs specified in the section that can be
brought under the section but only the suits which, besides claiming any of the reliefs, are brought by individuals as representatives of the public for vindication of public rights, and in deciding whether a suit falls within Section 92 the court must go beyond the reliefs and have regard to the capacity in which the plaintiffs are suing and
to the purpose for which the suit was brought. This is the
reason why trustees of public trust of a religious nature
are precluded from suing under the section to vindicate
their individual or personal rights. It is quite immaterial
whether the trustees pray for declaration of their personal
rights or deny the personal rights of one or more defendants. When the right to the office of a trustee is asserted
or denied and relief asked for on that basis, the suit falls
outside Section 92.

20.

From the above it is clear that if a case has not been made out

for a direction for proper administration of the trust, the very
foundation of suit under this section fails, if it is clear that the
CS(OS) No.1478/2007

Page 13 of 29

plaintiffs are not suing to vindicate the right of the public but are
seeking a declaration of their individual or personal rights or the
individual or personal rights of any other person or persons in whom
they are interested.

21.

This has not been disputed by defendant Nos.2 & 3 that the

settler

of

the

trust,

Guruji

had

divine

powers

and

was

a

compassionate soul who started the trust. A bare reading of the trust
deed reveals that the power to appoint the trustee was with the settler
only. Though the contention of the learned counsel for defendant
Nos.2 & 3 is that if the settler (Guruji) could appoint his father as a
trustee, the father after the demise of settler, the surviving trustee,
who is not a settler could also appoint defendant No.3 as a trustee.
What is to be considered is whether the settler who was stated to be
having divine powers nominated his father on the premise that his
father would also have the divine powers and he would be discharging
the same functions as settler and whether he can be deemed to have
similar power under the trust deed as the settler and can this be also
pre supposed in case of defendant no.3.

22.

Reliance has also been placed by the Respondents on AIR 1923

Bombay 67, Nilkanth Devrao Nadkarni & Ors. Vs. Ramkrishna Vithal
Bhat to contend that unless a suit falls clearly within the scope of

CS(OS) No.1478/2007

Page 14 of 29

Section 92, the mere fact that it resembles in certain respects a suit
which may be properly brought under Section 92, can afford no good
ground for holding that Section 92 should apply. In this suit only a
declaration was sought that the defendant Nos.1 to 4 were not
properly appointed trustees of the temple and for an injunction
appropriate to the declaration. This was not a case where the trust
could not function in absence of the four trustees nor it was the case
that directions were required for running and administration of the
trust.

This case is clearly distinguishable from the facts of the

present case.

23.

In Ambica Quarry Works v. State of Gujarat and Ors.

MANU/SC/0049/1986

the Supreme Court observed:-

"The ratio of any decision must be understood in the
background of the facts of that case. It has been said long
time ago that a case is only an authority for what it actually decides, and not what logically follows from it."

Similarly in Bhavnagar University v. Palitana Sugar Mills Pvt
Ltd (2003) 2 SC 111 (vide para 59), the Supreme observed:" It is well settled that a little difference in facts or additional facts may make a lot of difference in the precedential value of a decision."

CS(OS) No.1478/2007

Page 15 of 29

In Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd and Anr. v. N.R.Vairamani
and Anr. (AIR 2004 SC 778), it was held that a decision cannot be relied on without disclosing the factual situation. The Apex Court had
also observed:" Court should not place reliance on decisions without
discussing as to how the factual situation fits in with the
fact situation of the decision on which reliance is placed.
Observations of Courts are neither to be read as Euclid's
theorems nor as provisions of the statute and that too
taken out of their context. These observations must be
read in the context in which they appear to have been
stated. Judgments of Courts are not to be construed as
statutes. To interpret words, phrases and provisions of a
statute, it may become necessary for judges to embark
into lengthy discussions but the discussion is meant to
explain and not to define. Judges interpret statutes, they
do not interpret judgments. They interpret words of
statutes; their words are not to be interpreted as statutes.
The decision cited and relied on by the defendants have been
carefully examined and it is apparent that the reliance placed by the
counsel for the defendants is quite misplaced and they do not further
the case of the defendants.

24.

The reliance of the learned senior counsel, Mr.Jain on Hari

Bhagwan Sharma (Supra) can also be clearly distinguished. In this
case the leave was granted subject to just exceptions and it was held
that these words were added by way of abundant caution and in these
circumstances the prayer of the plaintiffs to amend the plaint before
the rejection of the plaint under Order 7 Rule 11 was allowed. The
CS(OS) No.1478/2007

Page 16 of 29

learned Single Judge of this Court while allowing the application for
amendment

had also considered whether the plaint discloses any

cause of action to institute a suit under Section 92 of the Code of Civil
Procedure and had referred to a full Bench decision of Madras High
Court, T.R.Ramachandra Iyer and Another Vs. Ponniath Akathuthu
Parameswaran Hunbu and others, (1919) 50 Indian Cases 693 where
it was held that a plaintiff who was a brahmin and who had visited
the temple at Tellicherry and who was likely to visit the temple again
for worship did not have existing and substantial interest so as to
confer on him the right to bring a suit under Section 92 of Code of
Civil Procedure. It was held that it is not only for a person who is a
Hindu by religion to have interest in any of the Hindu temple and its
trust as there are millions of Hindus in this country. The full Bench
was of the opinion that there must be special relation in which the
plaintiff stands to endowment in question as compared with the whole
body of religious community throughout the country and he must be
in a position to derive some benefits from the trust in respect of which
the suit is to be filed. In this case the judgment of Privy Council in
Vaidyanatha Ayyar and Anr. Vs. Swaminatha Ayyar and Another, AIR
1924 PC 221 was also referred to, holding that the interest
contemplated by Section 92 must be substantial and existing interest
and not just a sentimental or a remote interest. What emerges in the
circumstances is that the interest must be substantial and existing

CS(OS) No.1478/2007

Page 17 of 29

and not remote or contingent. In Hari Bhagwan & Ors (Supra) since
the plaintiffs were not only votaries of Sanathan Dharam and
believers in Idol worship but they were residents of the same town,
Delhi, in which the endowment in question was situated. It was held
that the claims of the plaintiff could not be brushed aside on the facile
plea that the plaint does not disclose any cause of action and the
Court held that it must look to substance and not mere form of
averments made in the plaint and since the plaintiffs by way of
abundant caution had also moved an application for amendment
under Order 6 Rule 17 read with Section 151 of CPC for amendment
of the plaint and, therefore, the same was allowed. It is apparent that
the case relied on by the learned counsel for the defendants, Mr.Jain
is clearly distinguishable and rather supports the plea of the
plaintiffs. It has been contended that about ten thousand people,
devotees of Guruji congregated after settler attaining mahasamadhi
and in order to perpetuate legacy of the settler recommended
constitution of an advisory body as a collective body to consider and
the decide the ways to carry forward settler’s legacy. This cannot be
compared with the locus of one Brahmin in the temple as in the case
of T.R.Ramachandra Iyer (supra). This advisory body was comprised
in presence of Deputy Commissioner and District Magistrate, District
Sangrur, Punjab; Sub Divisional Magistrate, Malerkotla, Punjab and
the advisory body also comprises of eminent devotees from Delhi,

CS(OS) No.1478/2007

Page 18 of 29

Punjab and Chandigarh. A committee of judges comprising of three
eminent retired judges of Punjab and Haryana High Court including a
former Chief Justice of India was also constituted to analyze the
various situations and advise was also constituted. In view of this the
allegation of the defendants that the suit is the outcome of personal
motive and malafide designs of the plaintiff and their accomplice
cannot be relied on for the purpose of granting leave to the plaintiffs
to institute the present suit.

25.

A full Bench of Kerala High Court in Mayer Simon Parur (Supra)

placed reliance on AIR 1930 Madras 129 and on the decision of the
Supreme Court in Chairman Mada-ppa Vs. Mahanthadevaru, AIR
1966 SC 878 and referred to the following passage:
“The main purpose of Section 92(1) is to give protection
to public trusts of a charitable or religious nature from
being subjected to harassment by suits being filed against
them. That is why it provides that suits (under that
section can only be filed either by the Advocate-General
or two or more persons having an interest in the trust
with the consent in writing of the Advocate General. The
object is that before the Advocate General files a suit or
gives his consent for filing a suit, he would satisfy himself
that there is a prima facie case, either of breach of trust
or of trust necessity for obtaining directions of the Court.”

26.

In the circumstances it was held that the interest of the

plaintiffs in a suit under Section 92 must be real and not remote and

CS(OS) No.1478/2007

Page 19 of 29

must be substantial and not illusory and it must be an existing
interest and not a contingent one and the action contemplated under
the Section is one in the interest of the public and not merely for the
vindication of the individual's personal rights. Another Single Judge of
this Court in Rahul Jain and anr. (Supra) had also reiterated that the
plaintiffs under Section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure must have
clear, present and a substantial interest and not merely remote,
fictitious or purely illusory interest. It was further held that the
question whether any given person has or has not an interest as was
defined, is a pure question of fact which the Court should decide on a
consideration of the particular circumstances of each case. The
“interest” which is required of a person wishing to sue under Section
92 must be substantial and not a sentimental or remote interest. In
this case one person namely Bholanath had created a charitable trust
and his sons Sh.Triloki Nath, Amarnath and Bishambhar Nath were
the founder trustees and on the demise of founder trustee, Amar
Nath, his sons Surender Kumar claimed that his appointment was
communicated to other two trustees, Triloki Nath and Bishambhar
Nath and on assuming his duties and responsibilities as a trustee, he
realized and found out that the properties of the trust were being
mismanaged and were not being kept properly by the defendants and
even defendant No.1 was neither a trustee nor had any authority to
deal with the trust property and, therefore, the plaintiff had filed the

CS(OS) No.1478/2007

Page 20 of 29

petition under Section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure. In these
circumstances the order earlier granting leave to institute the suit in
favor of the plaintiff was revoked. In Rahul Jain (Supra) admittedly
Sh.Surender Kumar one of the trustee was claiming rights not in the
interest of public but rather for vindication of his personal rights and
therefore, the leave already granted to him was revoked.

27.

Mr.Sanjay Jain, learned senior counsel for the defendant Nos.2

& 3 have also contended that the provisions of Indian Trust Act, 1982
though did not apply proprio vigore to the case of each charitable trust
but since there are common area of legal principle which cover all
trust, therefore, some of them apply even in respect of public trust.
The counsel for the plaintiffs refuted this and relied on 21 (1982)
Delhi Law times 404, Shanti Devi Vs. State (Delhi Administration) and
Ors. where a Division Bench of this Court had held that an
application pending under Section 34 of the Trusts Act, 1882 was not
maintainable because the trust created in that case was a public
charitable trust and not a private trust and public charitable trust is
outside the scope of the Trusts Act, 1882.

It was held that in a

private trust the beneficiaries are defined and ascertained individuals
or who within a definite time can be definitely ascertained but in the
public trust the beneficial interest must be vested in an uncertain and

CS(OS) No.1478/2007

Page 21 of 29

fluctuating body of persons, either the public at large or some
considerable portion of it answering a particular description.

The

learned counsel for the defendants has contended that the ratio of the
Division Bench judgment of this Court is not in consonance with the
ratio of the Supreme Court in (1974) 1 SCC 446, State of U.P. Vs.
Bansi Dhar & ors. holding that the principle of private trust and the
provisions of Trust Act, 1882 are applicable to the public charitable
trusts.

Perusal of two judgments reflects that there is no

contradiction as has been perceived on behalf of the defendants. In
Bansi Dhar (supra) the Supreme Court had held at page 454 in para
18 as under:
“18. ……………………The next question is whether the Indian Trust Act, 1882, applies to the present case. The
Courts below have argued themselves into an application
of Section 83 of the Trust Act. Sri Dixit rightly objects to
this course because that Act relates only to private trusts,
public charitable trusts having been expressly excluded
from its ambit. But while these provisions proprio vigore
do not apply, certainly there is a common area of legal
principles which covers all trusts, private and public, and
merely because they find a place in the Trusts Act, they
cannot become “untouchable” where public trusts are involved. Care must certainly be exercised not to import by
analogy what is not germane to the general law of trusts,
but we need have no inhibitions in administering the law
by invoking the universal rules of equity and good conscience upheld by the English judges, though also san
ctified by the statute relating to private trusts. The Court
below have drawn inspiration from Section 83 of the
Trusts Act and we are not inclined to find fault with them
on that score because the provision merely reflects a rule
of good conscience and of general application. The details
of the argument on the basis of this principle will be discussed a little later.”
CS(OS) No.1478/2007

Page 22 of 29

28.

In Shanti Devi (supra), the Division Bench was concerned

with the maintainability of the application under Section 34 of the
Trusts Act, 1882 in respect to a public trust and it was rightly held
that the application was not maintainable and in this respect it was
held that the provisions of the Trusts Act, 1882 do not apply to the
public trust. The Division Bench did not hold that the principles of
the private Trust do not apply to the public trust. The Apex Court
had rather held that there are common principles which covers all the
trusts, private and public, and merely because they find a place in the
Trusts Act, 1882 they cannot become untouchable where public
trusts are involved. Therefore though the principle may apply but the
provisions of Trusts Act, 1882 will not apply prorio vigore to the public
trusts and therefore, the defendants can not contend that the
appointment of defendant No.3 will be in consonance with Section 73
of the Trusts Act, 1882.

In any case, whether the defendant No.3

could be appointed as an additional trustee under Section 73 of the
Trusts Act, 1882 is to be ascertained and if he could not be appointed
and if he is running the trust, the suit will be maintainable as it is not
a case where the appointment of the defendant No.3 has been
admitted and his removal has been sought for personal reasons as are
the cases in the precedents relied on by the defendants. The learned

CS(OS) No.1478/2007

Page 23 of 29

counsel for the defendants have also relied on AIR 1960 Bombay 438,
Phulchand Lakhmichand Jain & Ors. vs. Hukumchand Gulabchand
Jain and Anr. and AIR 1958 Madras 307, Sundaralingam Chettiar
and Ors. Vs. S. Nagalingam Chettiar & Ors.

I have examined the

aforesaid decisions and I am of the view that the reliance placed by
the counsel for the defendants on the aforesaid decisions in entirely
misplaced as the same do not in any manner further the case of the
defendants and therefore, they are not referred to in detail here.

29.

The learned counsel for the plaintiffs has contended that to

decide whether the leave should be granted or not, the contentions
and pleas raised in the suit has to be adverted to and not the
respective contentions of the parties. Relying on the observation of
the Supreme Court he contended that there cannot be trial before the
trial. It is also contended that it is not merely the case of the removal
of the defendant No.3 who could not be appointed as a trustee but
also for the directions for administration of the public charitable
trust, as the settler of the charitable trust, Guruji, has since deceased
and the defendant Nos.2 and 3 cannot take his place.

Reverence

which the followers of the Guruji had for him, cannot be for defendant
No.3. Had the intentions of the Guruji be to run it as a charitable
trust within the control of the family, he would have made the
provision for the same. Appointment of mother and then father as the

CS(OS) No.1478/2007

Page 24 of 29

trustees by the Guruji seems only the reverence which he had for his
father and mother and the same reverence cannot be extended to the
son of the brother of the settler after his demise. In any case, in these
circumstances, without admitting the valid appointment of the
defendant No.3 and in whose absence, there will not be a board of
trustee, the direction to administer the trust has also been sought
and the suit is not merely for the removal of the defendant No.3. The
learned counsel has contended that even notice was not required to
be given to the defendant Nos.2 and 3 for ascertaining and deciding
whether the leave should be granted or not because the Court has to
consider the averment and pleas raised in the plaint. Reliance was
placed on AIR 2004 SC 3448, B.S. Adityan & Ors. vs. B.
Ramachandran Adityan & Ors. and (1991) 1 SCC 48, R.M. Narayana
Chettiar & Ors. Vs. N. Lakshmanan Chettiar & Ors.

The Supreme

Court had held that the Court is not bound to give notice to the
defendants in all cases in all circumstances and non issuance of
notice would not render the suit bad or non maintainable. The Apex
Court in Ram Narayana Chettiar (supra) in para 17 on page 56 had
held:“17 . A plain reading of Section 92 of the Code indicates
that leave of the court is a pre-condition or a condition
precedent for the institution of a suit against a public
trust for the reliefs set out in the said section; unless all
the beneficiaries join in instituting the suit, if such a suit
is instituted without leave, it would not be maintainable
at all. Having in mind the objectives underlying Section
CS(OS) No.1478/2007

Page 25 of 29

92 and the language thereof, it appears to us that, as a
rule of caution, the court should normally, unless it is impracticable or inconvenient to do so, give a notice to the
proposed defendants before granting leave under Section
92 to institute a suit. The defendants could bring to the
notice of the court for instance that the allegations made
in the plaint are frivolous or reckless. Apart from this,
they could, in a given case, point out that the persons
who are applying for leave under Section 92 are doing so
merely with a view to harass the trust or have such antecedents that it would be undesirable to grant leave to
such persons. The desirability of such notice being given
to the defendants, however, cannot be regarded as a
statutory requirement to be complied with before leave
under Section 92 can be granted as that would lead to
unnecessary delay and, in a given case, cause considerable loss to the public trust. Such a construction of the
provisions of Section 92 of the Code would render it difficult for the beneficiaries of a public trust to obtain urgent
interim orders from the court even though the circumstances might warrant such relief being granted. Keeping
in mind these considerations, in our opinion, although,
as a rule of caution, court should normally give notice to
the defendants before granting leave under the said section to institute a suit, the court is not bound to do so. If
a suit is instituted on the basis of such leave, granted
without notice to the defendants, the suit would not
thereby be rendered bad in law or non-maintainable. The
grant of leave cannot be regarded as defeating or even seriously prejudicing any right of the proposed defendants
because it is always open to them to file an application for
revocation of the leave which can be considered on merits
and according to law.”

30.

The Supreme Court reiterated the ratio of R.M. Narayanan

Chettiar (supra) in B.S. Adityan & Ors. vs. B. Ramachandran Adityan
& Ors. and also relied on the recommendations of law commission
recommending that to expect the Court to issue notice and then to try

CS(OS) No.1478/2007

Page 26 of 29

the several points of details before granting leave in the light of the
objections put forth by the respective defendants, would mean that
there will be trial before trial and this would not be desirable. The
Supreme Court in para 9 had held as under:“9. …………………………..Although as a rule of caution,
court should normally give notice to the defendants before granting leave under the said section to institute a
suit, the court is not bound to do so. If a suit is instituted
on the basis of such leave, granted without notice to the
defendants, the suit would not thereby be rendered bad
in law or non-maintainable. Grant of leave cannot be regarded as defeating or even seriously prejudicing any
right of the proposed defendants because it is always
open to them to file an application for revocation of the
leave which can be considered on merits and according to
law or even in the course of suit which may be established that the suit does not fall within the scope of Section 92 CPC. In that view of the matter, we do not think,
there is any reason for us to interfere with the order made
by the High Court.”

31.

In the circumstances all the pleas which has been raised by the

defendants are not to be adjudicated conclusively though they have
been considered in determining whether leave should be declined to
the plaintiffs or not. For granting leave their cannot be trial before trial as has been observed and held by the Supreme Court. The suit by
the plaintiffs in the present facts and circumstances cannot be termed
as a suit for a vindication of personal rights of the plaintiffs.

The

large congregation decided to have an advisory board comprising of
respectable persons to administer the trust according to the legacy of
CS(OS) No.1478/2007

Page 27 of 29

the settler and prayer has been made in the suit by the plaintiffs. The
other reliefs which have been prayed under the suit are also within
the purview of section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure. Merely because there is no substantial allegation of the breach as has been alleged by the defendants, they cannot administer the trust contending
that the defendant no.3 has been appointed according to the trust
deed despite absence of specific stipulation in the trust deed for the
appointment of trustees by the surviving trustee. There are no such
allegations in the suit which will reflect that the allegations have been
made merely with a view to bring the suit under section 92 of the
Code of Civil Procedure. The plaintiffs are suing to vindicate the rights
of followers who gathered after mahasamdhi of the setter and not for
their personal rights. The suit does not reflect the infringement of individual rights of the plaintiff or to vindicate such private rights which
do not fall under section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

32.

Although a number of submissions pertaining to the merits of

the case were made in the course of hearing of the present application, however, this Court refrain from recording any findings to avoid
prejudice to either party and any observations made herein before will
not affect the merits of the case.

CS(OS) No.1478/2007

Page 28 of 29

33.

For the forgoing reason the application of the plaintiffs to insti-

tute the suit under section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure is allowed and the Plaintiffs are granted leave to institute the present suit.

CS(OS) 1478 of 2007 & IA No.9233 of 2007
Issue summons to defendants.

Mr.Mathur accepts summons

on behalf of defendants and seeks time to file the written statement.
Written statement be filed within four weeks. Replication, if any, be
filed within four weeks thereafter.
Parties are also directed to file their original documents or
certified copies thereof within eight weeks.
List on February 6, 2008 before the Joint Registrar for
admission/denial and marking of documents.
List on May 9, 2008 before the Court for framing of issues.
IA No.9233/2007
The statement given on behalf of defendant Nos.2 and 3 on 17th
September, 2007 shall continue till the next date of hearing.
List for hearing on January 9, 2008.

November 21, 2007

ANIL KUMAR, J.

'Dev'

CS(OS) No.1478/2007

Page 29 of 29

