IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Date of decision :November 21, 2007
Civil Suit (Original Side) No.2208/1995

#
!

Hindustan Times Ltd.
Through:

......... Plaintiff
Mr.Rajiv Nayar, Sr. Advocate
with Mr.Sandeep Mittal and
Mr.Darpan Wadhwa, Advocates
Vs.

$
^

Compagnie International Pour
.......... Defendants
Le Radiotelephone & Others
Through : Mr.A.K. Matta, Sr. Advcoate with
Mr.Apoorve Karol and Mr.Chirag
Shroff, Advocates for defendant
No.1

CORAM :* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?

YES

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES

YES

ANIL KUMAR, J.
IA No.-12300 of 2000

1.

This is an application by the defendant No.5, Mr.Vipin Malik,

seeking dismissal of the plaint under Order I Rule 3, 6 and 9 of the
Code of Civil Procedure on account of legal fatality of non-joinder of
necessary parties and for rejection of plaint under Order VII Rule 11
CS(OS) No.2208/1995

Page 1 of 22

on account of non disclosure of any cause of action against the
applicant/defendant no.5 and for passing a judgment against the
plaintiffs in terms of Order XII Rule 6 of the Code of Civil Procedure
dismissing the suit of the plaintiff on the basis of admissions made by
the plaintiff in the suit. (After withdrawal of suit against Defendant
nos. 1 to 4, the defendant no.5 has become defendant no.1, however,
he has been referred as defendant no.5 in the present order as in the
present order the effect of deletion of defendant nos. 1 to 4 is
considered.)

2.

The plaintiff filed the above-noted suit against defendants

contending that on 5th May, 1995, the consortium consisting of
defendant Nos.1 to 4 was formed in terms of a Joint Venture
Agreement (hereinafter referred to as ‘JVA’) entered into by and
between the parties and the purpose of JVA was to put in a bid
pursuant to Tender No.II-28/94-MMT(TM) floated by the Department
of

Telecommunications,

Government

of

India,

for

cellular

telecommunication infrastructures and services in India in one or
more of the States of Punjab, Haryana, Kerala and Karnataka. The
bid was to be made through a company known as PROTEL in terms of
the tender. Under the terms of the joint venture agreement, it was
made clear that the first defendant which

CS(OS) No.2208/1995

had the eligibility

Page 2 of 22

requirement for the project for which defendant No.1 had to take and
maintain a direct shareholding of at least 10% of Protel.

3.

The plaintiff in the plaint contended that the Department of

Telecommunication had clarified on 15th May, 1995 that the eligibility
as regards the net-worth was to be made by the bidder company or
the promoter company and the promoter company could not rely
upon their affiliates/parent companies/subsidiaries for meeting the
criteria of net-worth. In the circumstances, according to the plaintiff,
it became clear to all the parties by the end of May 1995 that the
entire bid would fail because of the inability of the first defendant to
meet the criteria of minimum net-worth as was required under the
tender.

In these circumstances, plaintiff alleged that he was

deceitfully tried to be roped in by defendant No.1 to 3 and defendant
No.5 as a party to joint venture agreement so that the criteria of
minimum net-worth could be met and bid could be made on 7th June,
1995.

4.

The

assertion

of

the

plaintiff

is

that

since

defendant

No.5/applicant had a direct personal interest in ensuring that the bid
does not fail, he approached Mrs.Shobna Bhartia over the telephone
on 3rd June, 1995, however, it was made absolutely clear to him that
CS(OS) No.2208/1995

Page 3 of 22

only commitment of the plaintiff was to purchase/subscribe up to a
maximum of 1000 equity shares in Protel and the plaintiffs were not
to be made liable in any manner whatsoever under the joint-venture
agreement.

On

3rd

June,1995,

the

defendant

No.5/applicant

committed the plaintiff for purchase of up to 1000 equity shares in
Protel though he did not at the relevant time had any power or
authority letter issued by plaintiff enabling or authorizing the
applicant to commit the plaintiffs to the JVA or to amend the JVA so
as to make the plaintiff, a party to the JVA. It has also been asserted
by the plaintiff that plaintiff at any time thereafter has not ratified the
conduct of the applicant nor any authority was orally conveyed to the
applicant in Paris. Despite this, according to the plaintiff, defendant
No.5/applicant in an unauthorized manner acted as an authorized
representative of plaintiff to enter into an agreement on behalf of
plaintiff with defendant Nos.1 to 4 and joint venture agreement dated
5th May, 1995 was amended and plaintiff was subjected to all the
terms and conditions of joint-venture agreement as an initial investor.

5.

In these circumstances, plaintiff filed the present suit seeking

various declarations that the plaintiff being not a party to the jointventure agreement dated 5th May, 1995 is not bound by the terms
thereof including the arbitral agreement and that the amendment

CS(OS) No.2208/1995

Page 4 of 22

dated 3rd June, 1995 to the joint-venture agreement dated 5th May,
1995 being illegal and void ab initio and that defendant Nos.1 to 3
being not entitled to initiate arbitration proceedings against the
plaintiff or to proceed with the same before the ICC or at all.

The

plaintiff categorically sought the relief of declaration that the 5th
defendant/applicant had no power or authority in face or in law to
make the plaintiff a party to joint-venture agreement as illegally,
deceitfully and unauthorisedly sought to be made a party by the
applicant on 3rd June, 1995 acting in concert with defendant Nos.1 to
3.

The plaintiff also sought the relief of delivery of amended

agreement dated 3rd June, 1995 so that the same may be cancelled
and has also sought for a permanent injunction against defendant
Nos.1 to 3 from proceeding with the arbitration against the plaintiff
before the ICC or at all besides cost etc.

6.

The suit was contested by defendants including defendant

No.5/applicant.

However, an application being IA No.11932/2000

was filed by the plaintiff whereby plaintiff sought withdrawal of suit
unconditionally against defendant Nos.1 to 4 and 6.

7.

The said application was disposed of by order dated 17th

November, 2000 which is as under:CS(OS) No.2208/1995

Page 5 of 22

“17.11.2000
Present:

Mr.Rajiv Nayyar, Sr.Advocate with Mr.Sanjiv
Mittal, Advocate for the plaintiff.
Mr.V.P.Singh, Sr.Advocate with Ms.Anju
Bhattacharya for the defendant Nos.1 to 3.
Mr.R.S.Suri, Sr.Advocate with Mr.Rohit
Aggarwal for the defendant No.4.

IA No.4885/2000 in S.No.2208/1995
Learned counsel for the plaintiff seeks leave to
withdraw the application.
The application is dismissed as withdrawn.
IA No.11932/2000
This is an application filed under Order XXIII Rule
1 for the unconditional withdrawal of the suit in respect
of Defendant Nos.1 to 4 and 6. Mr.Suri, learned senior
counsel appearing for the sole surviving defendant No.5,
seeks an opportunity to file a reply. It is his contention
that the suit was filed with a view to thwart the ICC
proceedings and that a settlement involving foreign
exchange has unaccountedly left the country. He further
submits that the plaintiff has dropped the claims against
alleged “co-conspirators” of defendant No.5 but is
continuing the action against defendant No.5 only to
harass him.
In my considered opinion these are objections that
would properly be taken by way of defence to the present
suit. If necessary parties have been deleted from the array
of defendants, this may be a ground for the rejection of
the suit but would not be an impediment in the way of
allowing this application. Learned counsel for defendant
No.5 is unable to disclose any reason indicative of this
Defendant having been placed at a disadvantage in the
conduct of his defence. For these reasons I have not
considered it necessary to grant time to defendant No.5 to
file a reply in opposition to the present application. I am
unable to discern any prejudice that would be caused to
defendant No.5 by the withdrawal of the suit against the
other defendants.

CS(OS) No.2208/1995

Page 6 of 22

Mr.V.P.Singh, learned senior counsel appearing for
defendant Nos.1 to 3 has no objection to the application
being allowed. Mr.Vipin Malik, who had earlier filed the
written statement on behalf of defendant No.6 states that
he objects to the withdrawal as against defendant No.6.
He submits that no consent terms have been arrived at
between the plaintiff and defendant No.6.
In these circumstances the suit, as against
defendant Nos.1 to 4 is dismissed as withdrawn
unconditionally. Amended Memorandum of parties be
filed within four weeks.
Suit No.2208/1995
Renotify on 14th May, 2001.”
November 17th, 2000

8.

sd/-“

Pursuant to the application being allowed by order dated 17th

November, 2000, the suit was withdrawn unconditionally against
defendant Nos.1 to 4 and the plaintiff was directed to file amended
memo of parties whereafter the present application for rejection of the
plaint

and

dismissal

of

the

suit

has

been

filed

by

the

applicant/defendant No.5 mainly on the ground that defendant Nos.1
to 4 are necessary parties to the suit and, therefore, the suit could not
be withdrawn against them as withdrawal of the suit against
defendant Nos.1 to 4 prejudicially affects the interest of defendant
No.5 and it is a fraud being played by plaintiff, upon the court as well
as defendant No.5.

The applicant also contended that the plaintiff

has dropped the claim against the alleged co-conspirators of
CS(OS) No.2208/1995

Page 7 of 22

defendant No.5/applicant and the lis is being continued against
defendant No.5 only to harass him.

The dismissal of the suit is

claimed on the ground that the suit is bad for non-joinder of parties
as it is clearly provided, according to the defendant No.5/applicant,
that all persons may be joined in one suit as defendants where any
right to relief in respect of or arising out of the same act or
transaction or series of acts or transactions is alleged to exist against
such persons, whether jointly, severally or in the alternative and if
separate suits are brought against such persons, any common
question of law or fact would arise.

9.

According to applicant from the averments made in the plaint, it

is apparent that the allegations of the plaintiff are that defendant
Nos.1 to 3 acted in concert with defendant No.5/applicant and,
therefore, defendant Nos.1 to 3 and the applicants are necessary
parties to the suit more so because defendant Nos.1 to 4 and
defendant no.6 were the part of consortium and the applicant was
merely a consultant to the consortium.

10.

Since the main relief in the suit was against the consortium and

defendant Nos.1 to 4, the relief against the applicant was only a

CS(OS) No.2208/1995

Page 8 of 22

consequential relief merely on the ground that the applicant was not
authorized to sign joint-venture agreement on behalf of plaintiff.

11.

The applicant/defendant No.5 contended that since the role

attributable to defendant Nos.1 to 4 is taken away nothing remains as
against defendant No.5/applicant and nothing survives against the
applicant after withdrawal of the suit against defendant Nos.1 to 4.

12.

The applicant further contended that it is clear that the plaintiff

has made unequivocal admissions in the plaint and documents that it
authorized the defendant No.5 to purchase 1000 shares of the 6th
defendant with a view to bail out the consortium from the emergency
situation which occurred due to the failure of the consortium in
meeting the mandatory condition of the net-worth criteria for biddings
for the tender issued by the Department of Telecommunications and
in the circumstances the plaintiff cannot be allowed to resile from his
express undertakings and in the circumstances no declaration can be
sought by the plaintiff only against defendant No.5/applicant that the
joint-venture agreement was illegal, ineffective or void ab initio or that
the plaintiff was not a party to JVA or that applicant had no authority
or power in fact or in law to make the plaintiff a party to JVA. The
defendant Nos.1 to 4 had been deleted as parties and the claims
CS(OS) No.2208/1995

Page 9 of 22

against them have been withdrawn pursuant to the order dated 17th
November, 2000. The claim which survives against defendant No.5 in
the plaint is a declaratory decree that the defendant No.5/applicant
had no power or authority in fact or in law to make the plaintiff a
party to the joint venture agreement as illegally, deceitfully and
unauthorisedly has been sought to be done by the applicant on 3rd
June, 1995 acting in concert with defendant Nos.1 to 3 and the same
can not be granted in absence of other alleged co-conspirators who
have been deleted as parties to the suit.
13.

While allowing the plaintiff to withdraw the suit against

defendant Nos.1 to 4, direction was given to amend the memo of
parties but no directions were given to carry out the consequential
amendment to the plaint on account of withdrawal of the suit against
defendant Nos.1 to 4.

A application for amendment of plaint on

account of withdrawal of the suit against the defendant nos. 1 to 4 is
also

pending,

however,

the

learned

counsel

for

defendant

No.5/applicant has insisted that first the application for rejection of
the plaint be decided as on withdrawal of the suit against coconspirators, the suit has become non maintainable which right can
not be denied by incorporating amendment to the plaint.

CS(OS) No.2208/1995

Page 10 of 22

14.

The main plank of the submission of the applicant is that the

defendant Nos.1 to 3 were co-conspirators and if they have been
deleted as a party, i.e., the suit has been withdrawn against them, the
suit cannot be proceeded against defendant No.5/applicant. Whether
the defendant Nos.1 to 4 against whom the suit has been withdrawn
are necessary parties is to be decided on the basis of the facts and law
and it is one of the defense of the applicant. Had this suit been filed
by the plaintiff only against the defendant No.5 alleging that the
defendant Nos.1 to 3 also colluded with the applicant, the plaint could
not be rejected on the defense being raised by the applicant that the
suit is bad for non-joinder of parties.
15.

It is no more res integra that for rejection of the plaint, pleas

and allegations raised in the plaint only have to be considered. From
the perusal of the plaint, it is apparent that there have been various
assertions against the applicant that there was no authorization orally
or otherwise to enter into joint-venture agreement on behalf of
plaintiff. Some of the specific allegations made in the plaint against
defendant no.5 are in paragraph 7, 8 and 10

16.

To decide under Order VII Rule 11 of the Code of Civil

Procedure, averments in the plaint have to be read without looking at
the defense and thereupon it has to be seen whether on the
CS(OS) No.2208/1995

Page 11 of 22

averments made in the plaint, Order VII Rule 11 gets attracted or not
and from the averments made in the plaint it has to be seen whether
the jurisdiction of the Court is made out or not and whether the suit
is barred by any law or plaint does not disclose any cause of action.
Rejection of a plaint is a serious matter as it non suits the plaintiff
and kills the cause of action. It cannot be ordered cursorily without
satisfying the requirement of the said provision.

Reliance for this

proposition can be placed on 2005 (4) AD (Delhi) 541, Kanwal Kishore
Manchanda Vs S.D.Technical

Services

Pvt.

Ltd.;

2005 (2) AD

(Delhi) 430, Arvinda Kumar Singh Vs Hardayal Kaur; 2005 (116) DLT
191, Asha Bhatia Vs. V.L.Bhatia; 2003 (5) AD (Delhi) 370, Punam
Laroia Vs Sanjeev Laroia 2004 (111) DLT 121, Condour Power
Products Pvt. Ltd. Vs Sandeep Rohtagi. A cause of action is a bundle
of facts which are required to be pleaded and proved for the purpose
of obtaining relief claimed in the suit. For the aforementioned
purpose, the material facts are required to be stated but not the
evidence except in certain cases where the pleading relies on any
misrepresentation, fraud, breach of trust, willful default, or undue
influence. Whether a plaint discloses a cause of action or not is
essentially a question of fact. But whether it does or does not must be
found out from reading the plaint itself. For the said purpose the
averments made in the plaint in their entirety must be held to be
correct. The test is, if the averments made in the plaint are taken to

CS(OS) No.2208/1995

Page 12 of 22

be correct in their entirety, a decree would be passed or not. In
ascertaining whether the plaint shows a cause of action, the court is
not required to make an elaborate enquiry into doubtful or
complicated questions of law or fact. By the statute the jurisdiction of
the court is restricted to ascertaining whether on the allegations a
cause of action is shown. In Vijai Pratap Singh v. Dukh Haran Nath
Singh (AIR 1962 SC 941) the Supreme Court held: (AIR pp.943-44,
para 9)
“
By the express terms of Rule 5 clause (d), the court
is concerned to ascertain whether the allegations made in
the petition show a cause of action. The court has not to
see whether the claim made by the petitioner is likely
to succeed: it has merely to satisfy itself that the
allegations made in the petition, if accepted as true,
would entitle the petitioner to the relief he claims. If
accepting those allegations as true no case is made
out for granting relief no cause of action would be
shown and the petition must be rejected. But in
ascertaining whether the petition shows a cause of
action the court does not enter upon a trial of the
issues affecting the merits of the claim made by the
petitioner. It cannot take into consideration the
defences which the defendant may raise upon the
merits; nor is the court competent to make an
elaborate enquiry into doubtful or complicated
questions of law or fact. If the allegations in the petition,
prima facie, show a cause of action, the court cannot
embark upon an enquiry whether the allegations are true
in fact, or whether the petitioner will succeed in the
claims made by him.”

17.

Therefore, if the plaint discloses some cause of action or raises

some questions which require to be adjudicated or decided by the
judge, the mere fact that the case is weak and not likely to succeed is
no ground for striking it out. The purported failure of the pleadings to
CS(OS) No.2208/1995

Page 13 of 22

disclose a cause of action is distinct from the absence of full
particulars. In ascertaining whether the plaint shows a cause of action
the court does not enter upon a trial of the issues affecting the merits of
the claim made by the plaintiff. It cannot take into consideration the
defenses which the defendant may raise upon the merits; nor is the
court competent to make an elaborate enquiry into doubtful or
complicated questions of law or fact.

18.

In D. Ramachandran Vs. R.V. Janakiraman and Others, (1999)

3 SCC 267 the Apex Court had held that effect of dismissal of a suit is
altogether different and distinct from the effect of rejection of the
plaint. For consideration whether the plaint discloses cause of action or
not the pleas and documents of the defendants are not to be
considered. The Apex Court had held as under:“Learned Single Judge fell in error in placing reliance
upon the material supplied by the defendant, which alone
is sufficient to set aside the impugned order. Learned
Single Judge instead of proceeding to reject the plaint
dismissed the suit, which approach is also erroneous.
The effect of dismissal of suit is altogether different and
distinct from the effect of rejection of the plaint. In case
plaint is rejected under Order 7 Rule 11, CPC, filing of a
fresh plaint in respect of the same cause of action is
specifically, permitted under Rule 13 of Order 7, CPC.
Altogether different consequence follows in the event of
dismissal of suit, which has the effect of precluding the
plaintiff to file a fresh suit on the same cause of action.
Rejection of plaint takes away the very basis of the suit
CS(OS) No.2208/1995

Page 14 of 22

rendering as if there was no suit at all or that no suit was
instituted. Order of dismissal of suit while recognising the
existence of a suit indicates its termination. While
deciding the application under Order 7 Rule 11, CPC,
learned Single Judge ought not and could not have
dismissed the suit. Even in the decision of the Supreme
Court in T.Arvindandam's case (Supra), relied upon by
learned Counsel for the appellant, it was held that if on a
meaningful-not formal-reading of the plaint it is
manifestly vexatious and merit-less, in the sense of not
disclosing a clear right to sue, the Trial Court should
exercise his power under Order 7 Rule 11, CPC taking
care to see that the ground mentioned therein is fulfilled.
In order to fulfill that ground bare allegation made in the
plaint and documents filed therewith were required to be
looked into, which in the instant case clearly disclosed at
least a cause of action against the defendant that
defendant was liable for damages for its acts of omission
and commission. It would be an altogether different
situation that the plaintiff might not ultimately succeed
in obtaining a decree against the defendant or that Court
might come to the conclusion that suit would not be
maintainable against the defendant and that plaintiff had
a cause of action only against defendant's principal and
its parent until in Hong Kong, but such aspect could not
have been gone into at this stage. Three paragraphs of
the plaint quoted above in our view do clearly disclose
cause of action for the plaintiff to claim damages.”
19.

Learned counsel for the applicant has relied on (2006) 1 SCC

141, Sudhir G. Angur and Others vs. M. Sanjeev and Others to
contend that the plaint is liable to be rejected. In the case relied on by
the applicant, the suit filed under Section 92 of the Code of Civil
Procedure and the leave was granted to the plaintiff in the suit to
institute the suit under Section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure. In
these circumstances, it was held that once the leave was granted, the
CS(OS) No.2208/1995

Page 15 of 22

question of rejecting the plaint under Order VII Rule 11 will not arise
and such an application for rejection of the plaint should have been
made prior to the leave having been granted or at the time when the
grant of leave was opposed. After losing the opposition to the grant of
leave, it was not open to the applicant to rely under Order VII Rule 11
for rejection of the plaint. Apparently, the ratio of the case is clearly
distinguishable from the present facts and circumstances.

20.

In Ambica Quarry Works v. State of Gujarat and Ors.

MANU/SC/0049/1986 the Supreme Court observed:"The ratio of any decision must be understood in
the background of the facts of that case. It has
been said long time ago that a case is only an
authority for what it actually decides, and not what
logically follows from it."
Similarly in Bhavnagar University v. Palitana Sugar Mills Pvt
Ltd (2003) 2 SC 111 (vide para 59), the Supreme observed:" It is well settled that a little difference in facts or
additional facts may make a lot of difference in the
precedential value of a decision."
In Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd and Anr. v. N.R.Vairamani
and Anr. (AIR 2004 SC 778), it was held that a decision cannot be
relied on without disclosing the factual situation. The Apex Court had
also observed:-

CS(OS) No.2208/1995

Page 16 of 22

" Court should not place reliance on decisions without
discussing as to how the factual situation fits in with the
fact situation of the decision on which reliance is placed.
Observations of Courts are neither to be read as Euclid's
theorems nor as provisions of the statute and that too
taken out of their context. These observations must be
read in the context in which they appear to have been
stated. Judgments of Courts are not to be construed as
statutes. To interpret words, phrases and provisions of a
statute, it may become necessary for judges to embark
into lengthy discussions but the discussion is meant to
explain and not to define. Judges interpret statutes, they
do not interpret judgments. They interpret words of
statutes; their words are not to be interpreted as statutes.

21.

In the present facts and circumstances, whether the defendant

Nos.1 to 4 were co-conspirators and necessary parties will be a
question of fact and law which can be decided only after trial of
respective pleas and contentions of the parties.

In view of the

allegations of the plaintiff which will survive even after the withdrawal
of the suit against defendant nos.1 to 4, the applicant cannot assert
that since the defendant Nos.1 to 4 were co-conspirators, the plaint
should be rejected. Learned counsel for the applicant is unable to
show any statutory provisions which make the co-conspirators a
necessary party in a suit for declaration. The applicant cannot deny
his role, however, the defense of the applicant is that he was
authorized which fact has been denied by the plaintiff. Whatsoever
was the role of the defendant No.5/applicant and whether the same
was justified or not and whether the plaintiff shall be entitled for a

CS(OS) No.2208/1995

Page 17 of 22

decree of declaration as claimed by the plaintiff has to be adjudicated.
It will not be appropriate to take into consideration the defense which
has been raised by the applicant that the plaint is liable to be rejected
on account of non-joinder of parties. In case, the suit is bad for nonjoinder of parties, after trial, the suit may be dismissed and in a case
where the damages are claimed, it may result into mitigation of
damages to be awarded against one of the co-conspirators. In absence
of other alleged co-conspirators, defendant nos. 1 to 4 who have been
deleted, the case of the plaintiff may become weak but on the basis of
this defense raised by the applicant, plaint is not to be rejected.

22.

The suit of the plaintiff also cannot be dismissed on the basis of

alleged admissions of the plaintiff under Order XII Rule 6 in the plaint
and the documents.

Perusal of the plaint reflects that it has been

specifically averred that there was no authorization to defendant
No.5/applicant even orally to make the plaintiff a party to the jointventure agreement. For passing any judgment or decree on the basis
of the admissions made by a party, the same should be clear and
specific.

In the plaint, the averments of the plaintiff are rather

contrary and there are no such admissions on the basis of which any
judgment against the plaintiff can be passed.

CS(OS) No.2208/1995

Page 18 of 22

23.

The admissions made in the pleadings have to be taken as a

whole and not in part.

The provisions of Order XII Rule 6 are

discretionary and not mandatory and it is not incumbent on the
courts in all cases to pass a judgment upon admission especially, if a
case involves questions which cannot conveniently be disposed of. In
an application under this rule, if the case is such that it is not safe to
pass a judgment on admission, the court may in exercise of its
discretion refuse the motion. It is no more res integra that before a
court can act under Order XII Rule 6, admissions must be clear and
unambiguous. When the admission is not clear and unequivocal and
the pleadings of the parties raise serious preliminary pleas which are
likely to non-suit a party, a court in its discretion can refuse to pass a
decree.

It can also be not disputed that the court is vest with

discretion to ask for independent corroboration of a fact not
specifically denied in the pleadings considering the peculiar nature of
the facts and circumstances of the case. At the same time, the court
can suo moto pass judgment under Order XII Rule 6 where the parties
have conceded the rights of other parties.

24.

In AIR 1986 SUPREME Court 1509, Dudh Nath Pandey Vs.

Suresh Chandra Bhattasali the Apex Court had held that the
admission must be taken as a whole and it is not permissible to rely

CS(OS) No.2208/1995

Page 19 of 22

on a part of admission ignoring the other.

In this matter, the

appellate court had given a finding that the plaintiff’s claim was
barred by limitation and had dismissed the suit and plaintiff feeling
aggrieved took up the matter to the High Court.

This finding was,

however, reversed by the High Court relying on an admission of the
defendant in the written statement and the evidence of the witnesses
produced on behalf of defendant. The Supreme Court on merits had
held that High Court was not right in relying upon the alleged
admission as the admission ought to have been taken as a whole and
it was not permissible to rely on a part of the admission. In AIR 1971
SUPREME COURT 1542, Chikkam Koteswara Rao Vs. Chikkam
Subbarao and others the Apex Court had held that the admissions
must be clear in their meaning holding that before right of a party can
be considered to have been defeated on the basis of an alleged
admission by him, the implication of the statement made by him must
be clear cut and conclusive. In 1997 (V) AD (DELHI) 627, Madhav
Leasing Finance (P) Ltd. Vs. Erose Educational Infotech Pvt. Ltd. a
single Judge of this Court had held that a decree under Order XII
Rule 6 cannot be passed unless the admission made is clear cut and
unambiguous.

CS(OS) No.2208/1995

Page 20 of 22

25.

There are no such admission on behalf of the plaintiff which will

entail dismissal of his suit for declaration against defendant
no.5/applicant in the facts and circumstances. The application in the
facts and circumstances, is without any merit and, therefore, it is
dismissed.
IA No.4905/2004

Learned counsel for the applicant, on instructions, does not
press the application.
The application is dismissed as not pressed.

IA No.7486/2005

Issue notice to the non-applicant. Mr.Mittal accepts notice on
behalf of plaintiff and seeks time to file the reply. Reply be filed within
four weeks. Rejoinder, if any, be filed before the next date of hearing.
List on May 13, 2008.

IA No.10590/2001

After some arguments, learned counsel for the applicant seeks
to withdraw the application with liberty to file a fresh application for
amendment.
CS(OS) No.2208/1995

Page 21 of 22

The application is dismissed as withdrawn with the liberty as
prayed for without prejudice to the rights and contention of
defendants.

November 21, 2007
'Dev'

CS(OS) No.2208/1995

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 22 of 22

