IN THE HIGH COUR T OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of decision: August 21, 2007
+

C.R.P. N o . 4 0 2/ 2 0 0 0

SHRI TULSI RAM

.....
PETITIONER
Through:
Mr.Keshav Dayal, Sr.Advocate
with Mr.Arun K.Beriwal, Advocate
VERSUS

SHRI RAM KISHAN DASS & OTHERS .....
RESPONDENTS
Through:
Nemo.
CORAM:
HON'B L E MR. J U S T I C E ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
YES
YES

ANIL KUMAR, J.
*

1.

The petitioner has challenged the order dated 18th November, 1999 of

the Additional Rent Controller dismissing his application for leave to defend
and contest the eviction petition filed by the respondents under Section 25B
of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958.

C. R . P . N o . 4 0 2 / 2 0 0 0

P a g e 1 of 2 8

2.

The respondents filed the eviction petition against the petitioner under

Section 14(1)(e) read with Section 25B of Delhi Rent Control Act for eviction
of petitioner on the ground that the respondents bona fide require the
premises in dispute for their residence. The respondents contended that Smt.
Rama Devi, predecessor-in-interest of respondents Nos.1 to 6 and
respondent No.7, Smt. Shakuntala Devi had earlier filed another eviction
petition being E-220/95 against the petitioner under Section 14(1)(e) read
with Section 25B of Delhi Rent Control Act. During the pendency of earlier
eviction petition filed by Smt. Rama Devi, she expired on 18th March, 1996
and her legal heirs, respondents Nos.1 to 6 did not file the application for
substitution as the legal representatives in the eviction petition and
consequently the petition abated and the petition was, thereafter, withdrawn
on 29th January, 1997. The order passed while withdrawing the eviction
petition on 29th January, 1997 is as under:“29.01.1997
Present: Counsel for Petitioner
L.R.Mohinder Kumar in person
Shri Aggarwal, wants to make a statement. Let it be
recorded.
Statement of Shri O.P.Aggarwal, counsel for the L.Rs of
the deceased petitioner and the other petitioners. I on behalf of
the LRs of the deceased petitioner withdraw the petition as they

C. R . P . N o . 4 0 2 / 2 0 0 0

P a g e 2 of 2 8

want to file a fresh petition. Rama Devi died on 19.03.1996.
Additional Rent Controller
RO&AC
In view of the statement of the counsel for the LRs,
petition is dismissed as withdrawn.
A.R.C”
3.

The respondents Nos.1 to 6 contended that after the demise of Late

Smt.Rama Devi they had become the co-owners along with respondents
No.7. The eviction petition was filed by the respondents contending that
respondent No.1 is an aged man and he requires one room and one kitchen
for himself and for his married daughter Mrs. Suman, who usually comes and
stays with the respondent No.1. The requirement of three rooms, one kitchen
and one store was pleaded for respondent No.2, his wife and his two sons
namely Navin aged 23 years and Anil aged 22 years and two daughters
namely Ms.Anita and Savita alleged to be of marriageable age whose
marriage had not been possible on account of paucity of accommodation.
The requirement of respondent No.3 pleaded was of three rooms for himself,
his wife and his three sons namely Sunil 21 years, Praveen 23 years and
Nitin 18 years and one daughter Babita aged 24 years. Respondent No.3
pleaded that all the children are of marriageable age and they require
premises urgently. The requirement of respondent No.4 Laxmi Narain was
pleaded for three rooms, one kitchen for himself, his wife, two sons namely
C. R . P . N o . 4 0 2 / 2 0 0 0

P a g e 3 of 2 8

Amit 20 years and Nitesh 18 years and one married daughter who comes and
usually resides with respondents No.4. The requirement of respondent No.5
Mahender Kumar was pleaded for two rooms and a kitchen for two daughters
namely Neha and Kumari Sonal and one son namely Chintu aged 4 years.
The requirement of respondent No.6 was pleaded for two rooms and one
kitchen for himself, his wife and one son namely Vikalp and one daughter
namely Kumari Khushboo. Two rooms were pleaded for respondent No.7 for
herself and her husband and two more rooms for respondent No.7's married
son namely Satish Kumar and his one son namely Tapan.

4.

The respondent No.2 also pleaded two rooms for her other married

son namely Sunil Kumar and his wife and his two daughters namely Kumari
Mrinal aged 8 years and Kumari Deepika aged about 5 years and respondent
No.7 also pleaded for one room for her married daughter namely Smt.Anita.
The respondents, therefore, pleaded at least 14 rooms, 6 kitchens and one
store for respondents Nos.1 to 6 and seven rooms and a kitchen for
respondents No.7 and thus total requirement of 21 rooms, three kitchens and
two stores was pleaded, whereas respondents Nos.1 to 6 have only six
rooms, one kitchen and respondents No.7 has only seven rooms and one
kitchen. The portion shown in yellow colour in the plan filed by the

C. R . P . N o . 4 0 2 / 2 0 0 0

P a g e 4 of 2 8

respondents is with respondents Nos.1 to 6 and the portion in green colour
was stated to be in possession of respondents No.7 and the portion in
possession of the petitioner was shown in red colour. The petitioner is stated
to be in possession of one room, one kitchen and a small verandah on the
ground floor.

5.

The application for leave to defend was filed by the petitioner who also

filed an affidavit along with an application under Section 25B contending
inter-alia that he had always been a tenant under Smt. Shakuntala and there
is no relationship of landlord and tenant between the petitioner and
respondents Nos.1 to 6. The petitioner also raised an issue that sons and
husband of respondents No.7 are the necessary parties. The ownership of
the respondents was not admitted and it was contended that the respondents
have concealed the facts in as much as the date of death of Smt.Rama Devi
was not disclosed and the name of the person who had withdrawn the earlier
eviction petition filed by Smt. Rama Devi had also not been given.

6.

The petitioner disclosed in the affidavit seeking leave to defend and

contest the eviction petition that he is a tenant only under the respondent
No.7 on a monthly rent of Rs.35/- per month in respect of one big room, one

C. R . P . N o . 4 0 2 / 2 0 0 0

P a g e 5 of 2 8

small room, one kitchen, verandah with other common amenities. According
to the petitioner the property was partitioned during the life time of Smt.Rama
Devi between her and Smt.Shakuntala Devi, respondents No.7 in presence
of the petitioner. Relying on the fact that there are two chowks and four stair
cases in the property, it has been contended that in the portion which has
fallen in the share of Late Smt.Rama Devi now there is one chowk and in the
portion of Smt.Shakuntala Devi there is another chowk and two staircases. In
the circumstances it was contended that the portion under the tenancy of the
petitioner, lies exclusively in the portion which is of Smt.Shakuntala Devi.

7.

In support of the plea of partition of the property between Smt.Rama

Devi and Smt. Shakuntala Devi, the petitioner contended that there was
another tenant namely Sh. Naurang Lal who is in the portion which has fallen
to the tenancy of Smt.Rama Devi and after her demise he is paying rent
exclusively to respondents Nos.1 to 6 and not to Smt.Shakuntala Devi and
rent receipts were issued by Sh.Ram Kishan Dass, husband of Smt.Rama
Devi, respondents No.1. The petitioner also disclosed on affidavit that
another tenant Sh.Ram Lal who is in the portion which has fallen in the share
of Smt.Shakuntala Devi is paying rent exclusively to Smt. Shakuntala Devi
and rent receipts are being issued to him by her husband and not by

C. R . P . N o . 4 0 2 / 2 0 0 0

P a g e 6 of 2 8

respondents Nos.1 to 6. The petitioner also produced photocopies of six rent
receipts and he contended that all the rent receipts are signed by the
husband and sons of Smt. Shakuntala Devi, respondent no.7 and not by
respondent nos. 1 to 6.

8.

The petitioner also disclosed the fact that earlier the property was

having only two floors that is ground floor and first floor and later on the
mezzanine floor and second floor were added by Smt.Shakuntala Devi,
respondents No.7 in her portion at her cost and expense and Smt.Rama Devi
had also constructed another mezzanine floor in her portion and she had also
fixed an iron staircase to reach the mezzanine floor. According to the
petitioner the plan of the property filed by the respondents is incomplete and
does not disclose the full accommodation. The petitioner also filed another
plan of the entire property bearing No.1734, Nai Basti, Naya Bazar, Delhi
showing the portion in possession of respondent Nos.1 to 6 in yellow and the
portion occupied by Smt.Shakuntala Devi, respondent No.7 in green. The
petitioner categorically contended that a person living in the portion of Smt.
Shakuntala Devi, respondents No.7 cannot go to the portion of respondents
Nos.1 to 6 either on the first floor or on the second floor or on the roof of the
second floor, as the two portions are separate and similarly no person can

C. R . P . N o . 4 0 2 / 2 0 0 0

P a g e 7 of 2 8

come from the portion which is in occupation of respondents Nos.1 to 6 to the
portion which is in occupation of respondents No.7 to substantiate his plea
that there had been partition between Smt.Rama Devi and Smt.Shakuntala
Devi and that the petitioner is a tenant only under Smt.Shakuntala Devi.

9.

The petitioner contended that respondent Nos.1 to 6 have been

impleaded as a party with a view to create paucity of accommodation and to
make out a false case of bona fide requirement and the need of respondent
Nos.1 to 6 cannot be considered and the accommodation available with
respondent No.7, landlord of the petitioner, is more than sufficient for herself
and her family members dependant on her. The petitioner also filed the
copies of rent receipts of Sh.Naurang Lal who is a tenant in the portion of
respondents Nos.1 to 6 and all the rent receipts are signed by Sh.Ram
Kishan Dass. The petitioner also filed the copies of the rent receipts issued to
him which are signed exclusively by Smt.Shakuntala Devi or her husband or
by sons to contend that there have been partition between respondent Nos.1
to 6 and respondent No.7.

10.

The petitioner in his application for leave to defend and contest the

eviction petition contended that a lease deed was duly got signed from the

C. R . P . N o . 4 0 2 / 2 0 0 0

P a g e 8 of 2 8

petitioner by the previous owner and the lease deed was kept by the previous
owner and no copy thereof was given to the petitioner and according to the
said lease deed the premises was let out for residential cum commercial
purpose.

11.

The petitioner also sought leave to defend and contest the eviction

petition on the ground that there has been no change in circumstances when
the earlier eviction petition was filed by Smt.Shakuntala Devi and Smt. Rama
Devi and after the demise of Smt. Rama Devi the present eviction petition,
thereafter, had been filed by respondents Nos.1 to 6 & 7 without the
permission of the rent controller to file another eviction petition on the same
cause of action.

12.

The respondents contested the leave to defend and contest the

eviction petition on the ground that neither the petitioner nor any member of
his family is residing in the suit premises and only the servant of the petitioner
and his paying guest are residing in the suit premises. Regarding the petition
of the respondents being barred by res judicata it was contended that after
the death of Late Smt. Rama Devi, respondents No.7, Smt. Shakuntala Devi
had withdrawn the petition for filing the fresh petition as the legal

C. R . P . N o . 4 0 2 / 2 0 0 0

P a g e 9 of 2 8

representatives of Late Smt. Rama Devi, present respondent Nos.1 to 6 were
not impleaded as a party in the earlier eviction

petition bearing No.E-

220/1995.

13.

Regarding the accommodation with respondent Nos.1 to 6 and

respondent No.7 they contended that they have only one chowk in the
property and the two staircases are present since the date of purchase of the
property and they are used jointly and there is no separation in the property.
The respondents also pleaded that they are collecting the rent jointly and
there is no division of the property between the respondents Nos.1 to 6 on
one side and respondents No.7 on the other. The respondents admitted that
construction was raised by them, however, they stated that joint construction
was raised due to great paucity of accommodation and all the respondents
are struggling hard due to the paucity of the accommodation. Regarding the
plan filed by the petitioner it was stated that a copy of the plan filed by the
petitioner has not been supplied and the plan filed by the respondents was
reiterated.

14.

The respondents opposed the application for leave to defend and

contest also on the ground that all the respondents are the co-owners/

C. R . P . N o . 4 0 2 / 2 0 0 0

P a g e 1 0 of 2 8

landlord of the property and the premises is purely residential and the same
was let out only for residential purposes. It was also contended that the
ground in the previous petition was the same as in the present petition.

15.

The learned Additional Rent Controller considered the pleas and

contentions of the petitioner and the respondents and dismissed the
application for leave to defend and contest the eviction petition on the ground
that the seven respondents are co-owners of the suit premises and reliance
was placed by the Controller on the photocopy of the sale deed in respect of
the property where the premises in dispute is situated which is in favour of
Smt.Rama Devi and Smt.Shakuntala Devi. The learned Additional Rent
Controller also relied on the fact, in disbelieving partition between
respondents Nos.1 to 6 and respondents No.7, that not a single document in
support of the partition between them has been filed. Regarding the purpose
of letting it was contended that there is a bald statement by the petitioner that
the premises was let out for residential-cum-commercial purposes, however,
what commercial activity has been carried out by the petitioner from the
premises in dispute, has not been spelt out and, therefore, it was held that
the premises was let out for residential purpose only. Disregarding the plan
filed by the respondents and considering the plan filed by the petitioner, it

C. R . P . N o . 4 0 2 / 2 0 0 0

P a g e 1 1 of 2 8

was inferred that there are 23 rooms which include mezzanine floor. Out of
the said 23 rooms, two rooms are with the petitioner even according to the
allegation of the petitioner there are two more tenants namely Sh.Naurang
Lal and Sh.Ram Lal, therefore, for the minimum requirement of the
respondents for 21 rooms, the respondents have 19 rooms only and the
accommodation available with the respondents is insufficient.

16.

The petitioner filed the present petition aggrieved by the order of the

learned Rent Controller dated 18th November, 1999. Notice was issued to the
respondents. Initially Mr.O.P. Aggarwal, Advocate appeared on behalf of the
respondents. The matter was adjourned from time to time for the arguments.
For last number of hearings none had appeared on behalf of respondents.

17.

The petitioner also filed an application dated 21st November, 2005 for

taking into consideration the subsequent facts. According to the petitioner the
respondents have constructed a portion of the second floor of the suit
premises during 2004-2005 and with the present accommodation constructed
on the second floor the total accommodation available with the respondents
is 22 rooms, one open Courtyard, two terraces comprising of 8 rooms and
one open Courtyard on ground floor, seven rooms and open terrace on the

C. R . P . N o . 4 0 2 / 2 0 0 0

P a g e 1 2 of 2 8

first floor and seven rooms and one open terrace on the second floor out of
which five new rooms were constructed in 2004-2005. The petitioner also
filed the photograph showing the newly constructed five rooms on the second
floor. The petitioner also filed another plan showing the five new rooms
constructed on the second floor and showing the entire accommodation
available

with

the

respondents.

Accommodation

available

with

the

respondents Nos.1 to 6 was shown in yellow colour and accommodation
available with respondents No.7 was shown in green colour. During the
pendency of the petition, petitioner also expired and it has been pleaded that
after the demise of the petitioner, Tulsi Ram his wife Smt. Sumitra Devi who
is aged about 70 years is staying in the premises in dispute comprising of
only one room and one small room in front thereof and a small kitchen along
with a domestic help.

18.

The application filed by the petitioner for taking into consideration the

subsequent facts has not been contested and no reply to the application has
been filed. No one has appeared on behalf of the respondents.

19.

I have heard the counsel for the petitioner in detail. The application

filed by the petitioner for taking into consideration the subsequent facts has

C. R . P . N o . 4 0 2 / 2 0 0 0

P a g e 1 3 of 2 8

not been contested by the respondents. Whether the subsequent facts about
the construction on the second floor of five more rooms can be taken into
consideration or not, for deciding whether the petitioner is entitled for leave to
defend and contest the eviction petition. Though the basic rule is that the
rights of the party should be determined on the basis of the facts as disclosed
on the date of the institution of the petition and the proceedings and the petition should be tried at all stages on the cause of action as it existed at the
time of commencement of the petition. This, however, does not mean that
the events happening after institution of a petition cannot be considered at all.
The court has the power and duty to consider changed circumstances. This
would be more appropriate in cases where the relief originally claimed has by
reason of subsequent change of circumstances has become in appropriate.
In order to shorten litigation, it is required and considered necessary to take
into consideration subsequent event which is also necessary to do complete
justice between the parties. The Supreme Court considered about consideration of changed circumstances and subsequent facts considering various previous judgments in Kedar Nath Agrawal v. Dhanraji Devi,(2004) 8 SCC 76
,and held at page 83 at under :
1 8. Before about a century in Ra m Rata n S a h u v. Bis h u n Ch a n d , 11
C W N 732 the High Court of Calcutta observed that there are certain
exceptions to the general rule that a suit must be tried in all stages on
the cause of action as it existed at the date of its commencement. In
C. R . P . N o . 4 0 2 / 2 0 0 0

P a g e 1 4 of 2 8

La c h m e s h w a r Pra s a d S h u k ul v. K e s h w a r Lal Ch a u d h u ri (AIR 1940 F C
5) the Federal Court took into account the provisions of the new Act
which came into force during the pendency of appeal before the Federal Court.
1 9. In the leading decision of P a s u p u l e ti V e n k a t e s w a r l u v. Motor &
G e n e r al Trad e r s ( 1975) 1 S C C 770, this Court considered a subsequent event. The plaintiff filed a suit for possession on the ground of
personal requirement for starting business and an order was passed in
his favour. An appeal against the said order was also dismissed. The
tenant filed a revision petition in the High Court. During the pendency
of revision petition, the plaintiff acquired possession of another nonresidential building. An application for amendment, therefore, was
made by the tenant. The High Court allowed the amendment. The
landlord challenged the order in this Court. It was contended by the
landlord that the High Court had committed an error in taking cognizance of subsequent event which was “disastrous”. This Court, however, held that the High Court did not commit any illegality in considering the subsequent event.
2 0. Following La c h m e s h w a r Pra s a d 4 law of “ancient vintage”, Krishna Iyer, J. stated: (SCC pp. 772-73, para 4)
“ 4 . We feel the submissions devoid of substance. First
about the jurisdiction and propriety vis- is circumstances which come into being subsequent to the commencement of the proceedings. It is basic to our processual jurisprudence that the right to relief must be judged
to exist as on the date a suitor institutes the legal proceeding. Equally clear is the principle that procedure is
the handmaid and not the mistress of the judicial process. If a fact, arising after the lis has come to court and
has a fundamental impact on the right to relief or the
manner of moulding it, is brought diligently to the notice
of the tribunal, it cannot blink at it or be blind to events
which stultify or render inept the decretal remedy. Equity
justifies bending the rules of procedure, where no specific provision or fair play is not violated, with a view to promote substantial justice — subject, of course, to the absence of other disentitling factors or just circumstances.
Nor can we contemp late any limitation on this power to
C. R . P . N o . 4 0 2 / 2 0 0 0

P a g e 1 5 of 2 8

take note of updated facts to confine it to the trial court. If
the litigation pends, the power exists, absent other special circumstances repelling resort to that course in law or
justice. Rulings on this point are legion, even as situations for applications of this equitable rule are myriad.
W e affirm the pro p o s iti o n that for m a kin g the right or
re m e d y clai m e d by the party just an d m e a n i n gf ul a s als o
legally and factu ally in ac c o r d with the curr e n t realitie s,
the C o u rt ca n, and in m a n y ca s e s m u s t, tak e ca utio u s
co g niz a n c e of e v e n t s an d d e v e l o p m e n t s su b s e q u e n t to
the institution of the pro c e e d i n g pro vid e d the rule s of fair n e s s to both sid e s ar e s cr u p ul o u s l y o b e y e d .” (emphasis supplied)
2 1. P a s u p u l e ti V e n k a t e s w a r l u was followed in many cases. In G ula b bai v. Nalin Nar si Vo hr a (1991) 3 S C C 483, an order of eviction was
passed against the tenant on the ground of bona fide need of the landlord. Subsequent event of shifting family of the landlord to a spacious
bungalow constructed by him during the pendency of appeal, was considered by this Court.
2 2. In Ra m e s h Ku m a r v. K e s h o Ra m ( A I R 1992 S C 700) this Court observed that a court can mould relief taking “cautious cognizance” of
subsequent events. The Court also observed that all these depend on
factual and situational differences and “there can be no hard-and-fast
rule governing the matter”.
2 3. In S h a di Sin g h v. Ra k h a (1992) 2 S C C 55 a landlord sued a tenant for ejectment on the ground that the building required thorough repair. During the pendency of the suit, the tenant carried out necessary
repair. Taking note of the event, this Court dismissed the suit of the
landlord.
2 4. In S u p e r For gin g s & St e e l s (S al e s ) (P) Ltd. v. Thy a b ally Ra s u lj e e
(1995) 1 S C C 410 dealing with power of this Court to take note of subsequent events in an appeal under Article 136 of the Constitution, this
Court stated that: (SCC pp. 417-18, para 16)
“[T]he power of this Court in an appeal under Article 136
of the Constitution to take cautious cognizance of events
and developments subsequent to institution of eviction
proceeding and grant, deny or mould the relief sought by
a party, in consonance with justice and fair play is not reC. R . P . N o . 4 0 2 / 2 0 0 0

P a g e 1 6 of 2 8

stricted merely because it is exercising its power to deal
with an appeal conferred upon it by the Constitution.”
2 5. In P. Srira m a m u r t h y v. Va s a n t h a Ra m a n (1997) 9 S C C 654 an order of eviction was passed in favour of the landlord and against the
tenant on the ground of non-payment of rent. During the pendency of
appeal before this Court, husband of the landlady retired from service
and they needed the premises for personal occupation also. Though
the ground was not set up earlier, taking note of subsequent event,
this Court allowed the ground to be raised and granted the relief.
2 6. In Le k h Raj v. Muni Lal (2001) 2 S C C 762 this Court indicated
that the law on the subject is well settled. The court should not shut its
door on noticing subsequent events. All laws and procedures including
functioning of courts are all in aid to confer justice on those who knock
its door. The court should interpret the law not in derogation of justice
but in its aid. Bringing on record subsequent event, which is relevant,
should, therefore, be permitted to render justice to a party. But the
court in doing so should be cautious not to permit it in a routine manner. It should refuse the prayer where a party is doing so to delay the
proceedings and to harass the other party or doing so for any other ulterior motive. The court should also examine whether the alleged subsequent event has any material bearing on issues involved or would
materially affect the result of the suit.
2 7. In O m Pra k a s h Gu pta v. Ra n bir B. G o y al (2002) 2 S C C 256 this
Court stated: (SCC pp. 262-63, para 11)
“ 11 . The ordinary rule of civil law is that the rights of the
parties stand crystallised on the date of the institution of
the suit and, therefore, the decree in a suit should accord
with the rights of the parties as they stood at the commencement of the lis. However, the Court has power to
take note of subsequent events and mould the relief accordingly subject to the following conditions being satisfied: ( i ) that the relief, as claimed originally has, by reason of subsequent events, become inappropriate or cannot be granted; ( ii ) that taking note of such subsequent
event or changed circumstances would shorten litigation
and enable complete justice being done to the parties;
and ( iii ) that such subsequent event is brought to the
notice of the court promptly and in accordance with the

C. R . P . N o . 4 0 2 / 2 0 0 0

P a g e 1 7 of 2 8

rules of procedural law so that the opposite party is not
taken by surprise.”
2 8. Strong reliance was placed by the contesting respondents on a
decision of this Court in Ra m e s h w a r v. J ot Ra m ( 1 9 7 6) 1 S C C 194 before the High Court as well as before us. In Ra m e s h w a r the tenant had
become “deemed purchaser” under the Punjab Security of Land
Tenures Act, 1953. During the pendency of appeal, the “large”
landowner died and his heirs became “small” landowners. It was,
therefore, contended on behalf of the landowners in appeal that since
appeal is continuation of suit, subsequent event of death of the original
owner should be considered. This Court, however, refused to take
note of subsequent event on equitable considerations. Keeping in view
the agrarian reforms, this Court said: (SCC p. 201, para 10)
“To hold that, if the landlord dies at some distant date after the title has vested in the tenant, the statutory process would be reversed if by such death, his many children, on division, will be converted into small landholders, is to upset the day of reckoning visualised by the Act
and to make the vesting provision ‘a teasing illusion’, a
formal Festschrift to agrarian reform, not a flaming programme of ‘now and here’. Th e s e surr o u n di n g fact s driv e
ho m e the n e e d not to allo w futuris m , in a da w dlin g litiga tive s c e n e , to foul the quick legi sl ativ e go al s .” (emphasis supplied)
2 9. In G a y a Pra s a d v. Pra d e e p Sriva s t a v a (2001)2 S C C 604 an eviction petition was filed in 1978 by the landlord on the ground of bona
fide need for use as a clinic by his son. The petition was allowed by
the Rent Controller in 1982 and the order was confirmed by the Appellate Authority in 1985. During the pendency of the petition in the High
Court, however, the son joined medical service. Relying on the said
development, it was contended by the tenant before the High Court
that the landlord was no more in need of the premises and the petition
was liable to be dismissed. The High Court dismissed the revision petition. The aggrieved tenant approached this Court. It was contended on
behalf of the tenant that a subsequent development could not have
been ignored by the High Court, particularly when the eviction was
sought for personal use and the need no more continued in view of acceptance of service by the son of the landlord. This Court, however,
negatived the contention and stated: (SCC p. 609, para 10)

C. R . P . N o . 4 0 2 / 2 0 0 0

P a g e 1 8 of 2 8

“ 10 . We have no doubt that the crucial date for deciding
as to the bona fides of the requirement of the landlord is
the date of his application for eviction. The antecedent
days may perhaps have utility for him to reach the said
crucial date of consideration. If every subsequent development during the post-petition period is to be taken into
account for judging the bona fides of the requirement
pleaded by the landlord there would perhaps be no end
so long as the unfortunate situation in our litigative slowprocess system subsists. During 23 years, after the landlord moved for eviction on the ground that his son needed the building, neither the landlord nor his son is expected to remain idle without doing any work, lest, joining any
new assignment or starting any new work would be at
the peril of forfeiting his requirement to occupy the building. It is a stark reality that the longer is the life of the litigation the more would be the number of developments
sprouting up during the long interregnum. If a young entrepreneur decides to launch a new enterprise and on
that ground he or his father seeks eviction of a tenant
from the building, the proposed enterprise would not get
faded out by subsequent developments during the traditional lengthy longevity of the litigation. His need may get
dusted, patina might stick on its surface, nonetheless the
need would remain intact. All that is needed is to erase
the patina and see the gloss. It is pernicious, and we
may say, unjust to shut the door before an applicant just
on the eve of his reaching the finale, after passing
through all the previous levels of the litigation, merely on
the ground that certain developments occurred pendente
lite, because the opposite party succeeded in prolonging
the matter for such unduly l ong period.”

20.

From the facts of this case it is apparent that the petitioner is not

pleading subsequent facts in order to delay the proceedings or to harass the
respondents or for any other ulterior motives. The respondents have not ap-

C. R . P . N o . 4 0 2 / 2 0 0 0

P a g e 1 9 of 2 8

peared and has contested the application for consideration of subsequent
events about the construction of five rooms on the second floor by them. The
Supreme Court had held that the subsequent events which are relevant
should be allowed to be brought on record in order to render justice to the
parties. While deciding whether the subsequent events should be considered
or not what also has to be seen is whether subsequent events have any material bearing on issues involved and consideration of subsequent events
would materially affect the result of the petition. The petitioner is challenging
the order declining leave to defend and contest the eviction petition filed by
the respondents on the ground that the total number of rooms available with
them are insufficient for them and their family members dependent upon
them. The respondents have contended that they have 19 rooms. In case
the subsequent events as alleged by the petitioner are correct that the respondents have constructed five rooms on the second floor then their requirement of 22 rooms will be satisfied and the respondents shall not be entitled for an order of eviction against the petitioner in respect of one-room, one
small room, kitchen and veranda. Therefore the application of the petitioner
for taking into consideration the subsequent events is allowed and petitioner's
plea that the respondents have constructed five rooms on the second floor
shall also be taken into consideration for deciding whether the leave to de-

C. R . P . N o . 4 0 2 / 2 0 0 0

P a g e 2 0 of 2 8

fend and contest the eviction petition should be granted to the petitioner or
not.

21.

This is no more res integra that the scheme of section 25B of Delhi

Rent Control Act, 1958 does not contemplate a trial for determining whether
leave to defend and contest the eviction petition should be granted to the
tenant or not. The jurisdiction to grant leave to contest or refuse is to be
exercised on the basis of the affidavit filed by the tenant. In 57 (1995) DLT
781, Ishwari Devi Vs Rallia Ram it was held that while browsing through the
affidavit of the tenant, if there emerges averments of facts which on a trial, if
believed, would non suit the landlord, the leave ought to be granted. What is
to be considered is whether the affidavit for leave to defend and contest the
eviction petition is clear, specific, positive and defense raised is bonafide and
prime facie not untenable and untrue. While granting or declining leave to
defend the disputed questions of facts are not to be determined conclusively
by the Court. The inquiry before the court when leave is sought is, therefore,
of a limited nature and is intended to determine a very narrow question on the
grounds on which leave is sought, whether based on an assertion of fact or of
law, would non suit the landlord, if they could ultimately prevail. In 60 (1995)
DLT 310; Raj Bahadur Baweja Vs Narender Singh Sahni & ors it was held

C. R . P . N o . 4 0 2 / 2 0 0 0

P a g e 2 1 of 2 8

that it is distinctly possible that a tenant may fail to make good the defence
raised by him. Plausibility of the defence raised and proof of the same are
materially different from each other and one cannot bring in the concept of
proof at the stage when plausibility has to be shown.

22.

The procedure prescribed under section 25B of Delhi Rent Control Act,

1958 is a drastic measure for eviction of tenants particularly, in a statute intended to provide protection to tenants against arbitrary and whimsical action
of unscrupulous landlords for their eviction. This was held by the Supreme
Court in Manoj Kumar vs Biahri Lal. (2001) 4 SCC 655 at page 659. Therefore, strict interpretation of the provisions is necessary. On a reasonable and
purposeful interpretation of the statute, it is clear that if from a perusal of the
petition for leave to contest and the affidavit filed with it, the Controller finds
that the tenant has pleaded a triable case, then he shall not refuse leave to
contest the case, otherwise the provision is liable to be mis-utilized by unscrupulous landlords to get their tenants evicted easily.

23.

The petitioner has contended that the requirement of the respondents

is artificial and arbitrary inasmuch as the respondent no.7, the landlord of the
petitioner, has sufficient accommodation for herself and her family members.

C. R . P . N o . 4 0 2 / 2 0 0 0

P a g e 2 2 of 2 8

The requirement of other respondents has been pleaded to create the insufficiency of accommodation. In support, petitioner has contended that there
had been a partition between Late Smt. Rama Devi and Smt. Shakuntala
Devi in his presence. In support of his plea for partition between the two, the
petitioner has produced the rent receipts and has contended that they are
signed either by Smt. Shakuntala Devi or her husband or son though all of
them bear the printed name of Smt. Rama Devi and Smt. Shakuntala Devi.
The petitioner has also contended that another tenant in the portion of respondent nos. 1 to 6 is issued receipts by other respondents and not by Smt.
Shakuntala Devi. The petitioner has also contended and asserted that there
are two chowks in the property and after partition, one chowk has fallen to the
share of respondent nos.1 to 6 whereas other chowk has fallen to the share
of the respondent no.7. The respondents have denied that there are two
chowks and have asserted that the property has only one chowk. The petitioner has also asserted in his affidavit that after partition and on account of
construction carried out, it is not possible to go from one portion to other portion of the respondents from inside the property. The learned Additional Controller has declined leave to defend and contest the eviction petition on this
ground that the respondent nos. 1 to 6 and respondent no.7 are the co-owners.

C. R . P . N o . 4 0 2 / 2 0 0 0

P a g e 2 3 of 2 8

24.

The assertion of the petitioner is clear and specific that there had been

a partition between respondent nos.1 to 6 and respondent no.7 and the rent
is collected only by respondent no.7, her husband and her sons. The petitioner has also given the instances of other tenants from whom the rent is collected by respective landlords. If there is partition and respondent no.7 is the
landlord and not other respondents, then their requirement is not to be considered and the accommodation available with respondent no.7 is sufficient
for herself and her family members. The plea raised by the petitioner, if
proved, shall disentitle the respondents for an order of his eviction. The plea
for consideration is not whether they are co-owners but whether the requirement of respondent nos. 1 to 6 can be considered on account of partition between the respondent nos. 1 to 6 and the respondent no.7. Plausibility of the
defense raised and proof of the same are materially different from each other
and one cannot bring in the concept of proof at the stage when plausibility
has to be shown.

25.

The petitioner/tenant has also contended and has raised a plea of ad-

ditional accommodation acquired by the respondents during the pendency of
this revision petition. The petitioner has filed the photographs and has con-

C. R . P . N o . 4 0 2 / 2 0 0 0

P a g e 2 4 of 2 8

tended that five more rooms have been constructed by the respondents on
the second floor. The petitioner has also filed a detailed plan showing the accommodation available with the respondents on different floors. Whether the
plan filed by the petitioner is correct and whether the respondents have acquired additional accommodation is a clear, specific and a positive plea
which, if proved, shall disentitle the respondents from an order of eviction
against the petitioner.

26.

The petitioner has also raised the plea about no permission being

granted by the Additional Rent Controller while withdrawing the earlier eviction petition filed by late Smt. Rama Devi, predecessor of respondent nos. 1
to 6 on the ground of bona fide requirement. The petitioner has contended
that the requirement of the respondents as propounded in the earlier eviction
petition was the same as has been alleged in the present eviction petition
and since there has been no change in the requirement and circumstances,
the present subsequent petition could not be filed without the permission of
the Additional Rent Controller before whom the earlier petition was pending
and which was withdrawn, as the petition had abated on account of non impleadment of respondent nos. 1 to 6 after the demise of Smt. Rama Devi.
This plea of the petitioner also requires consideration on the basis of the

C. R . P . N o . 4 0 2 / 2 0 0 0

P a g e 2 5 of 2 8

averments made in the earlier eviction petition and evidence, if any, led by
the respondents in that petition.

27.

In AIR 1977 Delhi 129, Prahlad Dass Vs Bhagirath Lal a single judge

of this Court had held Order 23 Rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure is applicable to the proceedings under Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958. In AIR 1977
Delhi 121, Aftab Ahmad & anr. Vs Nairuddin & anr it was held that if an application seeking relief is not pressed and got dismissed under order 23 Rule 1,
the effect of it would be that the second application seeking same relief would
not be maintainable. It was held:
“ The effect of Order 23 Rule 1 read with section 141 is that
once an application has been presented claiming a relief and it
is not pressed and is dismissed a subsequent application on the
very same ground is barred.”

28.

In the circumstances the inevitable inference is that the petitioner has

been able to prime facie make out a case by disclosing such facts which will,
if proved shall disentitle the respondents an order of eviction against him.
The petitioner was not to prove his pleas on the basis of his affidavit and the
documents filed by him. Plausibility of the defense raised and proof of the
same are materially different and one cannot bring in the concept of proof at

C. R . P . N o . 4 0 2 / 2 0 0 0

P a g e 2 6 of 2 8

the stage when plausibility has to be shown. Consequently it is apparent that
the Additional Rent Controller has committed an error in declining leave to
defend and contest the eviction petition to the petitioner.

In the circum-

stances the impugned order dated 18th November, 1999 passed by the Additional Rent Controller in E-111/1997 titled Sh.Ram Kishan & ors Vs Sh. Tulsi
Ram declining leave to defend and contest the eviction petition and passing
an order of eviction in respect of tenanted premises in house no.1734, Nai
Basti, Naya Bazar, Delhi 110006 is set aside. Revision petition in the present
facts and circumstances is allowed and petitioner is granted unconditional
leave to defend and contests the eviction petition of the respondents on the
ground of bona fide requirement under section 14 (1) (e) read with section
25B of Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958.

29.

Parties are directed to appear before the concerned Rent controller on

3rd September, 2007.

Record of the eviction petition E-111/1997 titled

Sh.Ram Kishan & ors Vs Sh. Tulsi Ram be sent forthwith to the concerned
Rent Controller. Considering the facts and circumstances of the present revision petition, the parties are also left to bear their own costs.

August 21, 2007
C. R . P . N o . 4 0 2 / 2 0 0 0

ANIL KUMA J.
P a g e 2 7 of 2 8

‘K’

C. R . P . N o . 4 0 2 / 2 0 0 0

P a g e 2 8 of 2 8

