IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CS(OS) No.1360/2005
Hallmark Cards Incorporated & Anr
....
Plaintiffs
Through:
Mr.Pravin Anand, Advocate.
Versus
Verma Cards and Posters Pvt Ltd
Through:
Nemo.

....

Defendant

CORAM :* HON'BLE Mr. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
1.

This is a suit for permanent injunction by the plaintiff seeking

restraint against the defendant from infringement of the plaintiff’s
trademark and defendant passing off his goods as those of the
plaintiff’s and for rendition of accounts.

2.

The averment of the plaintiff is that it is a company organized

and existing under the laws of the State of Missouri and Mr.Charles
J.Egan is authorized to institute the present suit and sign and verify
the pleadings on behalf of the plaintiff. The plaintiff was founded in
January, 1910 and it was known as Hall Brothers, Incorporated till

CS(OS) No.1360/2005

Page 1 of 15

1954 and the name of the company was changed to, Hallmark Card,
Incorporated with effect from 1st April, 1954.

3.

The plaintiff stated that since 1915 it is engaged in

manufacturing

and selling

greeting

cards

and

other

personal

communications products such albums, calendars, personalized
greeting cards, gifts and gift wrappings, home decorations, plush toys,
stickers, writing papers and pens, and jigsaw puzzles, Christmas
ornaments, ribbons and bows, baby keepsakes, mugs, wedding
products, art supplies, collectables, party

goods etc. and each of

these products were sold under individual trade mark, namely,
HALLMARKS, AMBASSADOR, SPRINGBOOK and others. The plea of
the plaintiff is that the trademark HALLMARK, in relation to greeting
cards, has distinguished the goods of the plaintiff from those of other
manufacturers since the year 1925.

4.

The plaintiff has averred that it publishes greeting cards in

more than 20 languages which are distributed in more than 100
countries. He has given details of its annual sales figures since the
year 1989 and in 1993. The plaintiff has also detailed the expenses
incurred on advertising in the United States since 1989 and the
expenditure incurred on the publicity and sales promotion of
HALLMARK cards in other countries of the world in Para 4 of the

CS(OS) No.1360/2005

Page 2 of 15

plaint. Copies of the advertisement cuttings in various magazines and
newspapers along with other promotional material has also been filed
by the plaintiff.

5.

According to the plaintiff, it is a registered proprietor of the

trademark HALLMARK in India since 1st December 1982 in class 16
as detailed in para 7 of the plaint in respect of “greeting cards,
stationary, printed publications and printed matters” in Part ‘A’ of the
register and has acquired distinctiveness of the word ‘HALLMARK’.
The plaintiff averred that the trademark HALLMARK is written in
distinctive lettering in running hand wherein the initial ‘H’ consists of
two thin vertical parallel lines, the right one longer than the left and a
horizontal paint brush kind of a stroke like line completing letter ‘H’.
The device of a crown appears in the exact centre directly above the
word HALLMARK. The special manner of representing the said mark
along with the device of a crown is now exclusively identified with the
cards manufactured by the plaintiff. Since 1992, Vintage Cards and
Creations, being the erstwhile licensee of the plaintiff has been
manufacturing and selling ‘HALLMARK’ greeting cards in India. The
plaintiff has also filed the computer printouts detailing the trademark
registrations in various countries of the world. The plaintiff has
further detailed the various distributors of the plaintiff’s product at
Delhi in India in para 10 of the plaint to contend that use of an

CS(OS) No.1360/2005

Page 3 of 15

identical/deceptively similar mark by any party who is not a licensee,
subsidiary or franchisee of the plaintiff in India would in addition to
violating

the

statutory

rights

of

the

plaintiff,

would

cause

confusion/deception leading to passing off their goods as that of the
plaintiff.

6.

According to the plaintiff, the defendant was also engaged in the

manufacture and sale of greeting cards and other personal products,
such as posters, calendars, writing pads, fancy stationary and
wrapping paper. The allegation of the plaintiff is that in the month of
April, 1990, the company by means of a letter written by M/s
Phoenix: Promotion, 18, Chowringhee Mansion, 30 Chowringhee
Road, Calcutta-700016 learnt that the defendant, who had come out
with greeting cards under the brand ‘HALLMEX’ holding out the same
to be the trademark of the defendant. A cease and desist letter was
sent on 6th July, 1990 on behalf of the plaintiff to the defendant. Reply
to the letter was received on behalf of the defendant from Punjab
Registration Service, on 16th July, 1990, who responding to the letter
denied the allegations made therein. The plaintiff further sent to the
defendant letter dated 6th August, 1990 and another letter in
November, 1992 asking him to give up the misuse of the HALLMARK
trade mark. However, the defendant continued to infringe its trade
mark , and pass off his goods as those of the plaintiff. In order to

CS(OS) No.1360/2005

Page 4 of 15

confirm the same the plaintiff purchased the cards printed by the
defendant under the impugned trademark by cash memo number
000206 dated 19th of February 1994.

7.

The plaintiff contended that the defendant has adopted the

same mark as that of plaintiff by deleting letters ‘ARK’ and replacing
the same by “EX” and has also inserted a crown like logo atop the
mark HALLMEX and by adopting similar trade mark, the defendant is
trying to pass off its goods as that of plaintiff . According to the
plaintiff

use of the mark HALLMEX in relation to greeting cards,

whether or not represented in identical script and with or without the
device of a crown, amounts to a misrepresentation to the purchasing
public and is an attempt to cash the reputation and goodwill of the
plaintiff . The trade mark “Hallmark” of plaintiff is registered in India
in respect of “greeting cards, stationary, printed publications and
printed matters” with the registration No.398286 in Part A of the
register for well over 7 years and has been duly renewed from time to
time and same is a proof of acquired distinctiveness of the mark
‘HALLMARK’.

8.

The plea of the plaintiff is that the defendant has intentionally

represented its mark in an artistic lettering style, identical to the one
used by the plaintiff and thus the defendant by using a similar mark

CS(OS) No.1360/2005

Page 5 of 15

in relation to identical goods having identical channels of trade as
those of plaintiff, has infringed the trade mark and copyright of the
plaintiff and have also violated the common law rights of the plaintiff.
Since the defendant, according to plaintiff, has violated and infringed
the trade mark of the plaintiff, the suit for injunction was filed by the
plaintiff seeking restraint against the defendant, its partners or
proprietor,

servants,

manufacturing,

agents,

exporting,

dealers

selling,

and

offering

distributors
for

sale,

from

accepting,

advertising, directly or indirectly dealing in greeting cards or other
printed matter under the trade mark “HALLMEX” similar with that of
plaintiff’s mark. The plaintiff has also sought a decree of permanent
injunction against passing off the goods by the defendant as that of
plaintiff and from using trade mark/name “HALLMEX” or any other
mark/name with or without a device of a crown.

The plaintiff has

also sought delivery of all materials and rendition of accounts of
profits.

9.

The summon for the suit filed by the plaintiff was issued on 27 th

October, 1995. Written statement and documents were filed by the
defendant and the admission denial of the documents, filed by the
defendant was carried on 20th February, 1997. The admission denial
of the plaintiff’s document was not done on account of the statement
given by the defendant that the admission/denial is not required. On

CS(OS) No.1360/2005

Page 6 of 15

15th December, 1995 the defendant gave an undertaking that he has
discontinued printing cards with the mark and crown over it and that
he would not use the mark till the next date of hearing. Thereafter on
30th July, 1998 the defendant stated that he would abide with the
undertaking, till the disposal of the present suit and therefore the
order dated 15th December, 1995 was made absolute. Thereafter,
issues were framed on 7th August, which are as under:i)
ii)

Whether the defendant has infringed the trademark of the
plaintiff as, referred to in issue no.1?If so, its effect?.

iii)

Whether the plaintiff is entitled to rendition of accounts?

iv)

Whether the goods of defendant are passing off as that of
the plaintiff?

v)

10.

Whether the plaintiff is the proprietor of trademark
HALLMARK?

Relief.

The matter was listed for cross examination of the plaintiff’s

witnesses on 6th & 7th April, 2004 and defendant’s witnesses on 8th
and 9th April, 2004. Then the suit was transferred to District Courts
on 28.11.2003 as the suit was valued at less than Rs. 20 lakhs. After
the suit was sent to district court the defendant stopped appearing.
An amendment was sought by the plaintiff seeking to the enhance the
valuation

of

suit

from

Rs.5,01,600/-

to

Rs.20,6000/-.

The

amendment sought was allowed and the suit was sent back to the

CS(OS) No.1360/2005

Page 7 of 15

High Court by an order dated 16th September, 2005 on account of
lack of pecuniary jurisdiction of the trial Court. Court notices were
issued to the defendant through counsel on 20th October, 2005, 29th
November, 2005, 18th January, 2006,

23rd February, 2006 & 31st

March, 2006 and since the defendant was not served by way of
ordinary summons and it was not possible to serve the defendant by
ordinary means, therefore, an order for service by way of publication
in newspaper “Statesman” and by way of affixation at the last known
address and on the notice board of the Court was passed. The
defendant was duly served by the substituted service, however, no
one appeared on behalf of defendant and, therefore, defendant was
proceeded ex parte on 26th July, 2006.

11.

As defendant had been proceeded ex parte, the deposition of the

witness of the plaintiff on affidavit dated 8th December, 2006 of
Col.J.K.Sharma, authorized signatory of the plaintiff, was filed.
Col.J.K.Sharma proved the copy of the resolution in his favour as
Exh.PW-1/2. He deposed in detail about the establishment of the
company and various activities carried on by the plaintiff and
registration of various trade marks for different products under
different categories. The witness of the plaintiff also deposed about
the registration of trade mark “HALLMARK” in more than hundred
countries of the world including India in relation to greeting cards

CS(OS) No.1360/2005

Page 8 of 15

which has distinguished the goods of the company from those of other
manufacturers since 1925. The said witness proved certified copies of
the trademark registration in Australia, South Africa, Britain, Hong
Kong and Singapore as Ex.PW-1/3 to PW1/8 and the legal
proceedings certificates as Ex.PW-1/9. The said witness also deposed
about the distinctive logo of the plaintiff’s mark and has proved the
samples of the plaintiff’s card with the distinctive logo as Ex.PW-1/10
to 13. The witness has deposed that since 1992 the plaintiff company
has been selling HALLMARK cards in India through its licensed user,
Vintage House, 33, Nagar Road, Pune-411014. The said witness
deposed that in November 1996, the website of the plaintiff focusing
on the corporate and product information was launched and has
proved the plaintiff’s website along with the domain name registration
details as Ex.PW-1/14. The witness of the plaintiff deposed that since
the trademark and trading style HALLMARK is a well known, any use
of identical and deceptively similar mark by any third party, not being
licensee, subsidiary or franchisee of the company in India, would
violate the plaintiff’s statutory rights and will also cause confusion or
deception leading to passing off defendant’s goods as that of the
plaintiff.

12.

The witness further deposed that on the date of institution of

the suit the company had been manufacturing and selling HALLMARK

CS(OS) No.1360/2005

Page 9 of 15

greeting cards in India through its licensee and that the goods of the
plaintiff were also sold through vast distribution network inter-alia at
Delhi and in other parts of the country. It was further deposed that
the defendant is indulging in manufacturing of greeting cards under
the name HALLMEX holding out the same to be the trademark of the
defendant. The witness has proved the copy of the letter received from
M/s.Phoenix Promotion, disclosing the manufacturing of the cards by
certain local entrepreneurs, including defendant thereby infringing
upon the company’s trademark and copyright, and the same was
exhibited as Ex.PW1/15.

13.

The witness has further proved the cease and desist letter sent

by the plaintiff to the defendant dated 6th July, 1990 and the reply
thereto from Punjab Registration services on behalf of the defendant
and another letter sent by the plaintiff to the defendant asking him to
desist from using the trademark ‘HALLMEX’ by the defendant and
exhibited the same as Ex.D-7, 8 & 6 respectively. The office copy of
another letter sent by the plaintiff in order to settle the matter
amicably filed by the plaintiff has been exhibited as Ex.PW-1/16. The
witness has also proved the cash memo dated 19th February, 1994
evidencing the purchase of cards printed by the defendant bearing the
impugned trademark thereby confirming the continued infringement

CS(OS) No.1360/2005

Page 10 of 15

of the plaintiff’s trademark and passing off its goods as those of the
plaintiff. The cash memo has been exhibited as Ex-PW-1/17.

14.

The witness has also proved an application for registration of

the impugned trademark HALLMEX in the distinctive logo style of the
company and with a crown like device and an extract of the
trademark journal containing the advertisement of the said mark,
which was filed by the defendant and the same was exhibited as
Ex.D-1. The witness has further proved the notices issued by the
plaintiff to the defendant dated 17th February, 1995, 21st march, 1995
and 21st April, 1995 as Ex.D-4, 3 & 2 respectively. The witness has
also proved a letter dated 20th March, 1995 filed by the defendant as
Ex-D-5 wherein the defendant has not denied the copying of the
plaintiff’s copyrighted material.

15.

Issues no. 1, 2 & 4
The pleas and contentions raised by the plaintiff are proved

pursuant

to

the

deposition

of

the

plaintiff

witness,

Col.J.K.Sharma(Retd.), who is the authorized signatory of the plaintiff.
The deposition of the plaintiff witness has remained unrebutted and
consequently the plaintiff has been able to prove that the plaintiff
holds trade mark and copyright in the word “HALLMARK” for its
products inter alia, greeting cards, stationary, printed publications

CS(OS) No.1360/2005

Page 11 of 15

and printed matters and the defendant has no right to adopt the trade
mark and violate the copyright of the plaintiff.

16.

The plaintiff’s mark is a registered trademark in India since

1982 for class 16 goods and a certificate of registration has been filed
by the plaintiff. From the various communications exchanged between
the plaintiff and the defendant it is clear that the defendants have no
where denied the use of the mark HALLMEX in relation to similar
goods as that of the plaintiff. In the reply to the plaintiffs notice dated
6th July, 1990 the defendant, however, stated that HALLMEX is an
invented word and there is no phonetic or visual similarity to the
trademark HALLMARK. There is nothing on record to show that the
mark of the defendant is different from that of plaintiff’s mark. In fact
from the copy of application for registration of the mark HALLMEX
with a crown like device atop filed by the defendant, which documents
has been proved by the plaintiff, it is apparent

that there is a

characteristic

mark

similarity

between

the

plaintiffs

and

the

defendant mark and may cause confusion if the same is used in
respect of similar goods. The plaintiff has demonstrated the use of
mark HALLMEX on greeting cards and has filed the greeting cards on
which the mark has been used. In letter dated 20th March, 1995
which has been proved by the plaintiff, the defendant admitted that
he has used the plaintiff’s copyrighted material, however, stated that

CS(OS) No.1360/2005

Page 12 of 15

those greeting cards were printed by the plaintiff 2 yrs. back and that
he has discontinued in dealing in the same and that the defendant
has devised his own designing for his cards. However no new designs
of the cards have been proved by the defendant.

17.

The defendant had filed a letter from trademark registry dated

29th March, 1995 to establish that the defendant’s application for
registration of the trademark HALLMEX in clause 16 was allowed
subject to a disclaimer to the word ‘Greeting’ which letter has been
denied by the plaintiff. As per the plaintiff the defendant’s trademark
has not been registered yet and the application is pending. There is
nothing on record filed by the defendant to rebut the plaintiff’s
allegation. In the facts and circumstances of the case the plaintiff
has sufficiently proved that the defendant is manufacturing goods
using a mark which is deceptively similar to the plaintiff registered
trademark. There is nothing on record to show the registration of the
mark HALLMEX of the defendant and in fact the defendant has
himself stated that he has used the plaintiff copyrighted material.

18.

Considering the plea of the plaintiff and evidence lead and the

documents filed, it is apparent that the plaintiff has the trade mark in
the word “HALLMARK” and the defendant is not entitled to breach the
same rather the defendant has in one of the correspondences stated

CS(OS) No.1360/2005

Page 13 of 15

that he has used the trademark which is identical to that of the
plaintiff and has discontinued the same. The defendant, has, however,
continued to infringe the trade mark of the plaintiff and has also been
passing of his goods as that of the plaintiff. These issues are
therefore, decided in favor of the plaintiff and against the defendant
holding that the plaintiff is the proprietor of trade mark ‘HALL MARK’
which been infringed by the defendant and he is passing of his goods
as that of the plaintiff. The issues are thus decided accordingly.

19.

Issue no.3
The learned counsel for the plaintiffs Mr. Anand says on

instruction that considering the facts and circumstances, he is no
pressing the relief of rendition of account of profits and for an order
for delivery of material including labels, blocks, dies greeting cards
and stationary or any other printed material bearing the impugned
mark. Therefore, this issue does not require any adjudication.

20.

Therefore, in the facts and circumstances the plaintiff has been

able to make out a prima facie case and balance of convenience is
also in favor of plaintiff. In case the defendant is not restrained from
using the trade mark “HALLMEX” for “greeting cards, stationary,

CS(OS) No.1360/2005

Page 14 of 15

printed publications and printed matters”, plaintiff shall suffer
irreparable loss and injury.

21.

In the circumstances, the suit of the plaintiff is decreed and a

decree for perpetual injunction is passed in favor of plaintiff and
against the defendant restraining him from manufacturing, selling,
offering for sale, advertising, directly or indirectly dealing in greeting
cards or any other printed matter under the trademark HALLMEX
and in any way infringing the trademark of the plaintiff bearing
registration No.398286 in Class 16 and passing off his goods as that
of plaintiff. Cost of the suit is also awarded to the plaintiff against the
defendant. Decree sheet be drawn. All the pending applications are
also disposed of.

October 22, 2007
'k'

CS(OS) No.1360/2005

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 15 of 15

