IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of decision : January 22nd , 2008
WP(C) No.5494/2007
#
!

The Municipal Corporation of Delhi ….…
PETITIONER
Through: Mr.O.P.Saxena, Advocate.
Versus

$
^

Sh.Anil Kumar Sheel
Through : Nemo.

......... RESPONDENT

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
+ CM No.18053/2007 in W.P.(C) No.5494/2007
*
This is an application by the petitioner for placing on record,
some of the record of the trial Court.

For the reasons stated in the application it is allowed and the
certified copies of the documents already on the record of the trial
Court are taken on record of the present writ petition.

The application is disposed of.

WP(C) No.5494/2007

Page 1 of 6

W.P.(C) No.5494/2007
The petitioner has impugned the award dated 20th September,
2006 holding that the termination of the respondent who had worked
from

20th

October,

1995

till

June,

1997

continuously

and

uninterruptedly was contrary to Section 25 F of the Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947 and consequently directing reinstatement with
effect from June, 1997 with 50% back wages as per Minimum Wages
Act with all consequential benefits and continuity of services. By the
same award the prayer of the workman seeking wages at par with his
regular counterparts was declined and the claim of the petitioner for
regularization was also disposed of holding that he will be entitled to
regularization from his initial date of joining, as both the parties have
agreed that there is a phased manner program policy of regularization
of the management whereby the daily wagers are regularized as per
their seniority.
The learned Tribunal has relied on the testimony of the witness
of the petitioner admitting that the respondent workman had been
working with effect from 20th October, 1995 on the post of LDC till
May, 1997 continuously and uninterruptedly and that no notice or
notice pay in lieu of notice was given to the respondent while
terminating his services. The witness also admitted that the petitioner
Corporation does not have any material or document to show that the
workman was gainfully employed somewhere after his termination.
WP(C) No.5494/2007

Page 2 of 6

The Tribunal has relied on Central Bank of India Vs. S.Satyam
& Ors, 1996 SCC (L&S) 1273 and Ghaziabad Development Authority
& Ors Vs. Vikram Chaudhary & Ors, 1995 SCC (L&S) 1226 in support
of the contention that the onus is on the management to prove that
the workman was engaged for a specific period. Adverse inference was
also taken against the petitioner for non production of relevant
documents that is attendance register and muster roll. In the
circumstances it has been held that the petitioner has failed to show
that the workman was terminated with due process of law and
consequently the petitioner was directed to reinstate the respondent
with effect from June, 1997 with 50% back wages.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has relied on the
statement of Mr.B.S.Tolia, Deputy Director (Admn) to contend that the
respondent never worked under the said witness. Even if the
respondent did not work under the said witness, the deposition of the
said witness is categorical that he worked continuously with effect
from 20th October, 1995 on the post of LDC till June, 1997. He also
admitted that no notice or notice pay in lieu of notice was given to the
respondent while terminating her services. Besides the testimony of
the said witness there is no other evidence to show that the
respondent did not work continuously and uninterruptedly. In the
circumstances the inferences drawn by the Court do not suffer from

WP(C) No.5494/2007

Page 3 of 6

any perversity or manifest error nor the learned counsel for the
petitioner is able to point out any such error which will entail exercise
of jurisdiction by this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India.

While exercising powers of judicial review under Article 226 of
the Constitution of India this Court is not to re-appreciate the
evidence. It is a settled position of law that in exercise of jurisdiction
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the Court does not
interfere with factual findings of the lower courts and does not reappreciate evidence while exercising powers of judicial review.
Reliance for this proposition can be placed on the judgment of the
Supreme Court, Government of A.P. and Ors. v. Mohd. Nasrullah
Khan reported as (2006) 2 SCC 373. Reliance may also be placed on
the following judgments rendered by the Supreme Court and this
Court concerning the scope of judicial review by a writ court: Harbans
Lal v. Jagmohan Saran (1985) 4 SCC 333; B.C. Chaturvedi v. Union of
India (1995) 6 SCC 749; Indian Overseas Bank v. I.O.B. staff Canteen
Workers' Union AIR 2000 SC 1508 ; Municipal Corporation of Delhi v.
Asha Ram and Anr.117 (2005) DLT 63 and Filmistan Exhibitors Ltd.
v. N.C.T. Secy. Labour and Ors. 131 (2006) DLT. In all the above
judgments, it has been held that a writ court should refrain from
interfering with the orders of an inferior tribunal or subordinate court

WP(C) No.5494/2007

Page 4 of 6

unless it suffers from an error of jurisdiction, or from a breach of the
principles of natural justice or is vitiated by a manifest or apparent
error of law.
The objective of judicial review is that a person receives a fair
treatment and objective is not to re-appreciate the entire pleas and
evidence and draw inferences again. The Apex Court in (1995) 6 SCC
749 B.C.Chaturvedi Vs Union of India at page 759 in para 12 had
held as under:
“ 12 . Judicial review is not an appeal from a decision
but a review of the manner in which the decision is made.
Power of judicial review is meant to ensure that the
individual receives fair treatment and not to ensure that
the conclusion which the authority reaches is necessarily
correct in the eye of the court. When an inquiry is
conducted on charges of misconduct by a public servant,
the Court/Tribunal is concerned to determine whether
the inquiry was held by a competent officer or whether
rules of natural justice are complied with. Whether
the findings or conclusions are based on some
evidence, the authority entrusted with the power to
hold inquiry has jurisdiction, power and authority to
reach a finding of fact or conclusion. But that finding
must be based on some evidence. Neither the technical
rules of Evidence Act nor of proof of fact or evidence
as defined therein, apply to disciplinary proceeding.
When the authority accepts that evidence and conclusion
receives support therefrom, the disciplinary authority is
entitled to hold that the delinquent officer is guilty of the
charge. The Court/Tribunal in its power of judicial
review does not act as Appellate Authority to reappreciate the evidence and to arrive at its own
independent findings on the evidence. The Court/
Tribunal may interfere where the authority held the
proceedings against the delinquent officer in a manner
inconsistent with the rules of natural justice or in
violation of statutory rules prescribing the mode of
WP(C) No.5494/2007

Page 5 of 6

inquiry or where the conclusion or finding reached by the
disciplinary authority is based on no evidence. If the
conclusion or finding be such as no reasonable person
would have ever reached, the Court/Tribunal may
interfere with the conclusion or the finding, and
mould the relief so as to make it appropriate to the
facts of each case.”

The finding of the tribunal that the respondent worked for more
than 240 days is not based on any assumption by the Court below
but

on

the

specific

deposition

of

the

sole

witness

of

the

petitioner/Corporation. The inferences drawn by the Court below are
inferable considering the facts and circumstances and this Court is
not to substitute its inferences with that of the Court in the present
facts and circumstances of the case.
In the circumstances, the learned counsel for the petitioner is
unable to point out any perversity or manifest error in the award
dated 20th September, 2006 nor there are violation of principles of
natural justice. There are no grounds to interfere with the inferences
drawn by the Court below and the writ petition is without any merit
and is liable to be dismissed. The writ petition is therefore, dismissed,
however, parties are left to bear their own costs.

January 22nd, 2008
'k'

WP(C) No.5494/2007

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 6 of 6

