IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of decision : January 22nd, 2008
WP(C) No.19258/2006
#
!

Devender Kumar

….…
PETITIONER
Through: Ms.Anu Mehta, Advocate.
Versus

$
^

Union of India & Others
.........
RESPONDENTS
Through : Mr.Rekha Palli, Advocate.

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)

1.

The petitioner claims that he was granted temporary status

under the OM No. 51016/2/90-Estt.(C) dated 10th September, 1993 of
Ministry of Personnel, P.G. And Pensions (Department of Personnel
and Training) regarding the scheme qua casual labourers (Grant of
Temporary Status and Regularization) Scheme of Government of India
and on that basis the petitioner seeks regularization of his services
and direction to the respondents to comply with their own rules
(14.6.2 Archaeological Works Code, Rule 1.03) with regard to creation
of posts for the temporary work charge employees by holding annual
review for converting temporary work charged posts into permanent
WP(C) No.19258/2006

Page 1 of 8

ones and clarify their existing policy for regularization of temporary
employees in terms of order dated 17th February, 2006 passed in WPC
No.138/2005.

2.

The petitioner contended that he was appointed by the

respondent in 1980 in Class IV post. It is pleaded that though regular
posts were not sanctioned by the respondents in terms of their office
needs, the petitioner was made to work in regular capacity and the
nature of work performed by him was similar to that of regular
employees.

3.

According to the petitioner, he made various representations to

the respondents against the make-shift arrangement of their work
and sought looking into their service conditions and for redressal of
their grievances and on account of respondents failure to do the
needful, a writ petition being WPC No.138 of 2005 was filed.

4.

The writ petition filed by the Union of workers was disposed of

by order dated 17th February, 2006. During the course of hearing of
the writ petition filed by the workers' Union, it was pointed out that
the Principal Bench of Central Administrative Tribunal has quashed
the notification leading to dis-continuation of the deductions arising
out of new Pension Policy. While disposing of the said petition, it was

WP(C) No.19258/2006

Page 2 of 8

held that as far as various other claims were concerned, they were the
subject matter of jurisdiction of Central Administrative Tribunal,
however, liberty was granted to the workers' Union to approach the
respondents with a comprehensive representation which should also
contain a request for disclosing the relevant information on the
regularization policy which was to be disposed of within the time
granted by the Court.

5.

The petitioner has contended that the respondents have not

examined the contentions/submissions of the petitioner in the
representation made to them and the representation has been
rejected cryptically without dealing with the right of the petitioner for
regularization under the Scheme of Department of Personnel under
which the temporary status was granted to the petitioner. Learned
counsel for the respondent who is present on advance notice has
contended that the petition cannot be entertained in view of Section
14 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985. Learned counsel for the
petitioner has relied on (2003) 6 SCC 581, T.K. Rangarajan vs.
Government of Tamil Nadu and others to contend that under Article
226 of the Constitution of India, the High court is empowered to
exercise

its

extraordinary

jurisdiction

to

meet

unprecedented

extraordinary situations having no parallel though such extraordinary
powers are to be used sparingly.

WP(C) No.19258/2006

In that case, the State Government

Page 3 of 8

had dismissed about two lakh employees for going on strike and the
Administrative Tribunal was manned only by one person. In the
circumstances, it was held by the Supreme Court that the judgment
of the larger Bench in L. Chandra Kumar case, (1997) 3 SCC 271 was
binding, however, if thousands of employees are directed to approach
the Administrative Tribunal, the Tribunal would not be in a position
to render justice to the cause and consequently, it was held that
because of “very very exceptional circumstances” there is sufficient
and justifiable reason for the High Court to entertain the petition
despite an alternative remedy provided under the Administrative
Tribunals Act, 1985.

6.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has also relied on (2004) 7

SCC 166, S.J.S. Business Enterprises (P) Ltd. Vs. State of Bihar and
Others to contend that existence of alternative remedy does not
impinge on the jurisdiction of the High court to hear the matter if it is
otherwise possible. In this case the Writ Petition filed under Article
226 of the Constitution of India was dismissed by the Single bench of
the High Court on the ground of suppression of the fact of the
pendency of another suit which was filed by the said petitioner prior
to the institution of the Writ petition. The appeal against the order of
the single bench was also dismissed by the division bench on the
ground of suppression of material fact. Thereafter SLP was filed and

WP(C) No.19258/2006

Page 4 of 8

the Supreme Court had set aside the order of the High Court and had
observed that the filing of the suit was not such a fact, the
suppression of which could have affected the disposal of the writ
petition on merits. The Apex Court had further held that where party
has initiated an alternative remedy but not pursued it, the High Court
can call upon the party to elect either the alternative remedy or the
writ petition and, consequently, if the party has withdrawn the
alternative remedy, by the time the writ petition was heard, the writ
petition should not be rejected on the ground that the party had not
disclosed the pendency of alternative remedy already taken by such a
party. The petitioner has also relied on (2004) 1 SCC 605, Radha
Raman Samanta Vs Bank of India & ors where the Apex Court had
held that the claim of alternative remedy not having been raised
before the single judge, could not be raised before the Division Bench
and could not be gone into. Reliance has also been place on 1952
SCR 583, G Veerappa Pillai, Proprietor Sathi Vilas Bus Service
Porayar, Tanjor District, Madras Vs Raman and Raman Limited,
Kumbakonam, Tanjore District and others where it was held by the
Supreme Court that erroneous exercise of discretion cannot be
treated as acting without jurisdiction, therefore, remedy should be
sought under the statute from the administrative bodies and in such
case the writ of Mandamus does not lie.

WP(C) No.19258/2006

Page 5 of 8

7.

Apparently the cases relied on by the petitioner do not support

the plea of the petitioner that though the petitioner has remedy under
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985, this Court should entertain the
writ petition. In Ambica Quarry Works v. State of Gujarat and Ors.
MANU/SC/0049/1986 the Supreme Court had observed:"The ratio of any decision must be understood in the
background of the facts of that case. It has been said long
time ago that a case is only an authority for what it actually decides, and not what logically follows from it."
Similarly in Bhavnagar University v. Palitana Sugar Mills Pvt
Ltd (2003) 2 SC 111 (vide para 59), the Supreme observed:" It is well settled that a little difference in facts or additional facts may make a lot of difference in the precedential value of a decision."
A case is only an authority for what it decides. As observed by
the Supreme Court in State of Orissa v. Sudhansu Sekhar Misra
MANU/SC/0047/1967:"A decision is only an authority for what it actually
decides. What is of the essence in a decision is its
ratio and not every observation found therein nor
what logically follows from the various observations
made in it.

8.

Learned counsel for the respondent, on the other hand, relied

on (2002) 4 SCC 145, Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan and another vs.
Subhas Sharma, that under the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985,
the Central Administrative Tribunals has exclusive jurisdiction as

WP(C) No.19258/2006

Page 6 of 8

court of first instance in relation to service matters concerning the
employees of Kendriya Vidyalaya despite the fact that the jurisdiction
of High Court under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India
under corresponding provisions, was not excluded but the High Court
should not and cannot directly entertain a writ petition concerning
service matters of such employees of such organizations in respect of
which there is a notification under Section 14(2) of the Administrative
Tribunals Act, 1985. It was held that the Administrative Tribunals
Act, 1985, Section 1(2)(a) applies to all Central Government servants.

9.

This is not disputed by the petitioner that the provisions of

Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 are applicable to the case of the
petitioner, as he is claiming to be an employee who has been granted
temporary status and who is seeking regularization of his service. In
Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan (supra), it was held by the Apex Court
relying on L. Chandra Kumar case that it is not open for a litigant to
directly approach the High Court even in cases where they question
the vires of statutory legislation by overlooking the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal concerned.

The relevant observation of the Apex Court in

the case of Kendirya Vidyalaya Sangathan page 151 are as under:“ 99. ..... it will not, therefore, be open for litigants
to directly approach the High courts even in cases where
they question the vires of statutory legislations (except
where the legislation which creates the particular
Tribunal is challenged) by overlooking the jurisdiction of
the Tribunal concerned. Section 5(6) of the Act is valid
WP(C) No.19258/2006

Page 7 of 8

and constitutional and is to be interpreted in the manner
we have indicated.”
10.

This petition has been filed by the petitioner after coming into

the force of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985. The petitioner,
therefore, ought to have filed the petition before the Central
Administrative Tribunal.

In terms of the decision of this court,

Mr.T.K. Rangarajan (supra), there are no such “very very exceptional
circumstances” which will entail interference by this Court under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India.

10.

For the foregoing reasons, even if this Court has jurisdiction, I

do not find it to be a fit case to exercise the writ jurisdiction ignoring
and overlooking the jurisdiction of Central Administrative Tribunal
under the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985

which Tribunal is a

court of first instance in relation to service matters. Consequently, the
writ petition is dismissed. The petitioner shall, however, be at liberty
to avail the other remedy available to him, if he so desires. Parties to
bear their own costs.

January 22nd, 2008.
'Dev'

WP(C) No.19258/2006

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 8 of 8

