IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of decision : January 22nd, 2008
WP(C) No.2565/2001
#
!

I.D.Chaudhury
Through:

….…
PETITIONER
Mr.Shyam Moorjani, Advocate.

Versus
$
^

STC of India Ltd & Others
Through :

.........
RESPONDENTS
Mr.M.M. Sudan, Advocate for
respondent No.1.

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
*
CM No.3198 of 2006
1.

This is an application by the petitioner under Section 151 of

the Code of Civil Procedure for seeking modification/review of order
dated 3rd August, 2004 to the effect that the petitioner is entitled for
retiral dues such as gratuity, leave encashment and other benefits
and a direction to the respondent to release all the retiral dues
including gratuity, leave encashment, etc.

WP(C) No.2565/2001

Page 1 of 8

2.

By order dated 3rd August, 2004, the application of the

petitioner

being

CM

No.3511/2002

was

dismissed.

While

dismissing the said application, this Court passed the following
order:CM No.3511/2002
“By this application, petitioner seeks directions to
respondents to supply copies of the documents
mentioned in paras 2 to 4 of the application. Learned
counsel states that this direction has been complied
with. Petitioner has also prayed for release of gratuity,
leave encashment and other benefits mentioned in para
5 of the said application. In reply, respondents have
stated that a case has been registered for which the
petitioner is being prosecuted under the Prevention of
Corruption Act and it is on account of pending
prosecution that the payment of gratuity has not been
released. It is stated by learned counsel for respondents
that the case pertains to the period of employment with
respondents. FIR specifically stated that petitioner
while working with respondent No.1 during the period
from 1979 till date amassed assets to the tune of
Rs.1,06,16,939/- disproportionate to his known
sources of income. In this circumstance, it is stated
that gratuity has not been released pending disposal of
the case. It is further stated that under sub-section (6)
of Section 4 of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, the
gratuity of an employee shall be forfeited to the extent
of the damage or loss so caused.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that
there was an amendment in Rule 30A of STC
Employees (Conduct, Discipline and Appeal) Rules,
1975 which envisages that Disciplinary Authority may
withhold payment of gratuity if an employee is found
guilty in a disciplinary proceedings or judicial
proceedings as mentioned in sub-Section (6) of Section
WP(C) No.2565/2001

Page 2 of 8

4 of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972.
In these circumstances, as noted above, I am not
inclined, in the exercise of writ jurisdiction to grant an
interim direction for payment of gratuity when the FIR
has allegations pertaining to the period of employment
with respondent No.1 during which he is alleged to have
amassed assets to the tune of Rs.1.06 crores.
Application as far as this prayer is concern, is
dismissed.”
3.

While dismissing the application, it was held that the writ

jurisdiction is not to be exercised for an interim direction for
payment of gratuity when the FIR has allegation pertaining to the
period of employment during which the petitioner is alleged to have
amassed assets to the tune of Rs.1.06 crores.
4.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that while

disposing of the application being CM No.3511/2002, the court was
swayed and misled by the arguments of the respondent as if the
petitioner is guilty of having disproportionate assets to the tune of
Rs.1,06,16,939/- as the statement of the respondent was ex facie
wrong as the figures were deliberately exaggerated just to prejudice
the mind of this court because even in the charge sheet filed in the
criminal case before the Trial Court, the figure shown was
Rs.36,19,965/-.
5.

The petitioner in the facts and circumstances is seeking

WP(C) No.2565/2001

Page 3 of 8

review of the order dated 3rd August, 2004. The applicant in the
facts and circumstances is not entitled for review of the order dated
3rd August, 2004 on the ground that while passing the order dated
3rd August, 2004, the Court was misled by the arguments of the
respondent about the amount allegedly due from the petitioner on
the ground that according to the charge sheet the amount claimed
is much less. The plea of the review of the order dated 3rd August,
2004 in any case is barred by time. If the order is to be challenged
on the ground as has been alleged by the petitioner, the other
remedy available to him was to file an appeal, if provided against
the said order.

On the ground that the court was misled by the

arguments of the respondent, the petitioner/applicant is not
entitled for alleged modification seeking review of the said order.
There is neither any error apparent on the face of the record nor
there is such an error which is liable to be corrected in exercise of
review jurisdiction by this Court.
6.

Learned counsel for the applicant have also relied on an order

of the Criminal Court dated 11th November, 2005 whereby the CBI
was directed to write a letter to the Post Office directing the Post
Office to encash the NSCs on maturity when presented to the Post
Office by the NSCs holder. The petitioner has also relied on the

WP(C) No.2565/2001

Page 4 of 8

order of the Criminal Court dated 28th November, 2005 where the
account holder, Shri I.D. Chaudary, petitioner in the present case
was allowed to operate the bank account as per the banking rules.
7.

While dismissing the application of the petitioner for the

release of the gratuity amount, this court had held that in view of
the FIR filed against him and the allegations made, the same
cannot be allowed and it was dismissed.

Admittedly, the

proceedings arising out of the FIR against the petitioner are still
pending and a criminal case against the petitioner has not been
dismissed on the basis of the criminal court's order passed
directing release of NSCs and allowing the petitioner to operate the
bank account. The order dated 3rd August, 2004 is not liable to be
modified thereby directing the respondents to release the gratuity of
the petitioner especially as the Rule 30(A) STC Employees (Conduct
& Discipline) Rules, 1975 envisages that the Disciplinary Authority
may withhold payment of gratuity if any employee is found guilty in
a disciplinary proceeding or judicial proceedings as mentioned in
sub-Section (6) of Section 4 of Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972.
8.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has also relied on a letter

dated 16th February, 2006 issued by the Personnel Manager to the
petitioner intimating him that the Finance & Accounts Division had
WP(C) No.2565/2001

Page 5 of 8

informed that all the recoveries of outstanding amount has been
made from his leave encashment payment and nothing is due from
him.
9.

The gratuity was ordered not to be paid to the petitioner

pursuant to his application on the ground that the criminal case
arising from an FIR is still pending against him. It will be pertinent
to note that the present writ petition is pending seeking a
declaration that the petitioner was appointed/promoted to the post
of Director (Personnel) and that he continued up to the date of
superannuation and seeking a Writ of Mandamus that the
respondents be restrained from removing the petitioner from the
post of Director (Personnel) till the age of his superannuation.
10.

It has also been contended by the respondents that the

petitioner being a Board level appointee, the respondent had
requested the Ministry of Commerce to give vigilance clearance for
the release of gratuity to the petitioner.

It is stated that the

Ministry of Commerce by their letter dated 18th February, 2002 had
directed the respondent No.1 not to release the gratuity to the
petitioner in view of the pendency of a CBI case against him for
possession of disproportionate assets to the source of his income
during the period of his services with respondent No.1 and,
WP(C) No.2565/2001

Page 6 of 8

therefore, the gratuity was withheld and has not been released nor
any communication has been received from the Ministry of
Commerce changing its earlier stand.
11.

On the basis of the objections raised by the respondent, the

application of the petitioner for release of gratuity was dismissed by
order dated 3rd August, 2004. The criminal case is still pending
against the petitioner and there are

no such subsequent

circumstances which will entail modification/review of that order
dismissing his application for release of his gratuity.
12.

If the order dated 3rd August, 2004 could not be passed as

alleged by the petitioner now, the petitioner ought to have
challenged the same either by filing an appeal against the said
order or by seeking the review of the order in case there was any
error apparent. The allegations made by the petitioner in the
application for modification do not infuse an error apparent on the
record in the order dated 3rd August, 2004.
13.

A review cannot be sought merely for fresh hearing or

arguments or correction of an erroneous view taken earlier. The
power of review can be exercised only for correction of a patent
error of law or fact which stays in the face without any elaborate

WP(C) No.2565/2001

Page 7 of 8

argument being needed for establishing it. It is well settled that
review proceedings have to be strictly confined to the ambit and
scope of Order 47 Rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure. Under
Order 47 Rule 1 of CPC, a judgment may be open to review inter
alia if there is a mistake or an error apparent on the face of the
record. An error which is not self evident and has to be detected by
a process of reasoning, can hardly be said to be an error apparent
on the face of the record justifying the court to exercise its power of
review under Order 47 Rule 1 CPC. In exercise of the jurisdiction
under Order 47 Rule 1 CPC it is not permissible for an erroneous
decision to be reheard and corrected. A review petition, it must be
remembered, has a limited purpose and cannot be allowed to be an
appeal in disguise.
14.

There are no ground for review or modification of the said

order dated 3rd August, 2004 dismissing the prayer of the petitioner
for release of gratuity amount in the facts and circumstances and
the application is, therefore, dismissed.

January 22, 2008
'Dev'

WP(C) No.2565/2001

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 8 of 8

