*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP(C) No.1407/2008

%

Date of decision : 22.02.2008
Sh.Pramod Behari Saxena
Through:

….… Petitioner
Mr.N.Safaya, Advocate.

Versus
M/s.Boom Exports & Anr
Through :

.........
Nemo.

Respondents

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.

1.

The petitioner has impugned the award dated 15th November,

2007 holding that there is no relationship of employer and employee
between the petitioner and the respondent and consequently there is no
question of termination of the petitioner being illegal and so the
petitioner is not entitled for any relief.

2.

A reference was made to the Labour Court whether the services of

Sh.Pramod Behari Saxena @ Sh.Ashok Kumar had been terminated
illegally and/or unjustifiably by the management, and if so, to what
WPC No.1407/2008

Page 1 of 7

relief

is he the entitled and what directions are necessary in this

respect?

3.

The

petitioner

respondent,

M/s

contended
Boom

that

Export

he

since

was

employed

September,

by

the

1992

as

Master/Quality Controller and his last drawn salary was Rs.4000/- per
month.

He

alleged

that

his

services

were

terminated

by

the

management suddenly in an illegal and unjustified manner without
giving him any notice.

4.

The petitioner had also contended that on 11th October, 1996 he

was deputed to proceed to Ludhiana to fetch the hosiery goods and the
truck carrying the goods met with an accident near Rajpura on 12 th
October, 1996 resulting in serious bodily injuries to the petitioner. It
was alleged by the petitioner that no service compensation was paid to
him and even his earned wages payment remained due. It was also
asserted that even during the service period he was not paid any salary
according to his designation.

5.

The claim of the petitioner was contested by the respondent

contending that there is no relationship of employer and employee and
the petitioner was only working as a commission agent for management
and for such other companies. It was asserted that the respondent
came into existence in June, 1993 and there was no need for person for
WPC No.1407/2008

Page 2 of 7

the post of quality controller in their trade. It was denied that the
petitioner was working since 1992 on a salary of Rs.4000/- per month.
Regarding the accident it was admitted that it occurred, however, it was
denied that the respondent had deputed him to go to Ludhiana. It was
asserted that the petitioner on his own went to Ludhiana in a tempo
loaded with goods of respondent and other persons and he was acting
as a commission agent on commission basis only. The respondent also
pleaded that they had advanced loans on two occasions to the
petitioner, firstly on 30th July, 1996 a sum of Rs.50,000/- and secondly
on 17th July,1996 a sum of Rs.45,000/-. Since the petitioner failed to
return the amount and thereafter in order to justify non return of this
amount, the present claim has been filed. The respondent also
contended that a legal notice dated 8th November, 1998 was sent to the
petitioner demanding the amount due from him which was never
replied.

6.

Before the Labour Court petitioner proved the copy of demand

notice, copy of postal receipt, copy of complaint, copy of photographs
and some other documents. The petitioner examined Sh.Ramesh Jain
on his behalf whereas management examined Sh.Kamal Bajaj and also
proved other documents.

7.

The Labour Court considered all the documents and concluded

that no document produced by the petitioner reflects that there is any
WPC No.1407/2008

Page 3 of 7

relationship of employer and employee between the parties. It was
categorically held that from the photographs produced by the petitioner,
it cannot be held that there was relationship of employer and employee
between the petitioner and the respondent. The oral and documentary
evidence was considered in detail by the Labour Court and concluded
that even the pleas and contentions raised by the petitioner before the
Conciliation Officer and in the claim petition before the Labour Court
are contradictory in as much as there is no mention of the accidents
mentioned in the claim petition.

8.

Relying on the fact that there is not a single document

establishing relationship of employer and employee though the
petitioner is alleged to have worked for six years and that the petitioner
had executed WW.1/M1 which bears the signatures of the petitioner
and as it is not the case of the petitioner that the said document has
been forged and fabricated where the petitioner has admitted his
financial liability towards Sh.Kamal Bajaj, it was held that there is no
relationship of employer and employee. Another fact which has been
relied on by the Labour Court is that in the cross examination the
workman has admitted that on the day he was cross examined he was
doing

business

of

supplying

goods

from

various

management

companies to others. He had also admitted that he is illiterate and does
not know what quality control means leading to the inference that the
petitioner was not employed as a workman. The witness of the
WPC No.1407/2008

Page 4 of 7

petitioner was also disbelieved as he did not even know as to exactly
what work the petitioner was doing for the management nor any
document had been produced by the said witness and he had also
failed to produce any document to show that he was also employed with
the respondent/management.

9.

In the circumstances, taking the preponderance of probability

and even considering the fact that the management had also not
produced the account books, the inference was drawn that there is no
relationship of employer and employee between the petitioner and the
respondent. On the basis of the entire evidence the inference drawn by
the Labour Court does not suffer from any perversity or manifest error
so as to exercise jurisdiction under Article 226 of Constitution of India
and to set it aside.

10.

While exercising its powers of judicial review under Article 226 of

the Constitution of India this Court is not to re-appreciate the evidence.
It is a settled position of law that in exercise of jurisdiction under Article
226 of the Constitution of India, the Court does not interfere with
factual findings of the lower courts and restrain itself from reappreciating evidence while exercising powers of judicial review.
Reliance for this proposition can be placed on the judgment of the
Supreme Court, Government of A.P. and Ors. v. Mohd. Nasrullah Khan
WPC No.1407/2008

Page 5 of 7

reported as (2006) 2 SCC 373. Reliance may also be placed on the
following judgments rendered by the Supreme Court and this Court
concerning the scope of judicial review by a writ court: Harbans Lal v.
Jagmohan Saran (1985) 4 SCC 333; B.C. Chaturvedi v. Union of India
(1995) 6 SCC 749; Indian Overseas Bank v. I.O.B. staff Canteen
Workers' Union AIR 2000 SC 1508 ; Municipal Corporation of Delhi v.
Asha Ram and Anr.117 (2005) DLT 63 and Filmistan Exhibitors Ltd. v.
N.C.T. Secy. Labour and Ors. 131 (2006) DLT. In all the above
judgments, it has been held that a writ court should refrain from
interfering with the orders of an inferior tribunal or subordinate court
unless it suffers from an error of jurisdiction, or from a breach of the
principles of natural justice or is vitiated by a manifest or apparent
error of law.
11.

The objective of judicial review is to ascertain that a person

received a fair treatment and objective is not to re-appreciate the entire
pleas and evidence and draw inferences again. The Apex Court in (1995)
6 SCC 749 B.C.Chaturvedi Vs Union of India at page 759 in para 12
had held as under:
“ 12 . Judicial review is not an appeal from a decision but
a review of the manner in which the decision is made.
Power of judicial review is meant to ensure that the
individual receives fair treatment and not to ensure that the
conclusion which the authority reaches is necessarily
correct in the eye of the court. When an inquiry is
conducted on charges of misconduct by a public servant,
the Court/Tribunal is concerned to determine whether the
inquiry was held by a competent officer or whether rules of
WPC No.1407/2008

Page 6 of 7

natural justice are complied with. Whether the findings or
conclusions are based on some evidence, the authority
entrusted with the power to hold inquiry has jurisdiction,
power and authority to reach a finding of fact or
conclusion. But that finding must be based on some
evidence. Neither the technical rules of Evidence Act nor of
proof of fact or evidence as defined therein, apply to
disciplinary proceeding. When the authority accepts that
evidence and conclusion receives support therefrom, the
disciplinary authority is entitled to hold that the delinquent
officer is guilty of the charge. The Court/Tribunal in its
power of judicial review does not act as Appellate Authority
to re-appreciate the evidence and to arrive at its own
independent findings on the evidence. The Court/ Tribunal
may interfere where the authority held the proceedings
against the delinquent officer in a manner inconsistent with
the rules of natural justice or in violation of statutory rules
prescribing the mode of inquiry or where the conclusion or
finding reached by the disciplinary authority is based on no
evidence. If the conclusion or finding be such as no
reasonable person would have ever reached, the
Court/Tribunal may interfere with the conclusion or the
finding, and mould the relief so as to make it appropriate to
the facts of each case.”

12.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to make

out any such ground which had resulted into denial of any opportunity
to the petitioner or violation of principles of natural justice. There is no
perversity or manifest error or breach of principles of natural justice so
as to entail interference by this Court in exercise of its power under
Article 226 of Constitution of India. The writ petition in the facts and
circumstances is without any merit and it is dismissed. Parties are,
however, left to bear their own cost.

February 22, 2008.
'k'

WPC No.1407/2008

ANIL KUMAR, J.
Page 7 of 7

