IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of decision : January 23rd, 2008
WP(C) No.5704/2007
#
!

S.Chand & Co. Ltd.
Through:

….…
PETITIONER
Mr. Diwan Singh, Advocate.

Versus
$
^

Nagma Sahar
Through :

.........
RESPONDENT
Mr. M.A.Niyazi with Ms.Ananmika
Ghai, Advocates.

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)

1.

The petitioner-management has impugned the order dated 20th

February, 2007 allowing the application of the workman/respondent
under Order VI Rule 17 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

2.

The respondent/workman filed a claim against the petitioner

contending inter alia that she was in employment of management
since 1st April, 1997 and her services were illegally terminated by
letter dated 30th November, 2001 without assigning any reason and
neither giving any opportunity to her and therefore, her termination is

WP(C) No.5704/2007

Page 1 of 6

illegal.

3.

By the application for amendment under Order VI Rule 17 of

the Code of Civil Procedure, the respondent/workman wanted to
incorporate a plea that after her termination on 30th November, 2001,
she has never been gainfully employed anywhere since then.

4.

The application for amendment was contested by the petitioner-

management on the ground that the respondent-workman is trying to
fill up lacuna and the application is not maintainable in view of
amendment in CPC and the respondent has failed to show sufficient
grounds for amendment after commencing of the trial.

It was also

contended that the workman is raising a new case.

5.

The Labour court held that the workman had been claiming

reinstatement and in the circumstances it was impliedly stated that
she was not employed anywhere. The contention of the petitioner that
the respondent was not setting up a new case was rightly rejected as
the petitioner had cross-examined the respondent extensively about
re-employment after her termination on 30th November, 2000.

6.

Since the workman has been even cross-examined by the

petitioner about her re-employment, it cannot be inferred that the

WP(C) No.5704/2007

Page 2 of 6

respondent-workman is setting up a new case. The power to allow the
amendment is wide and can be exercised at any stage of the
proceedings in the interests of justice on the basis of guidelines laid
down in various precedents. Though the amendment cannot be
claimed as a matter of right and under all circumstances but the
Courts while deciding such prayer should not adopt a hyper technical
approach.

The purpose and object of Order 6 Rule 17 is to allow

either party to alter or amend his pleading in such manner and on
such terms as may be just.

Amendments are allowed in the

pleadings to avoid uncalled for multiplicity of litigation.

7.

In AIR 2001 SC 3295 = (2001) 8 SCC 97, M/s. Estralla Rubber

Vs. Das Estate Pvt. Ltd. the apex Court held that it is open for the
defendant to take an alternative or additional defense and merely
because there was delay in making an amendment application will not
cause any prejudice or shall take away any right accrued and in such
circumstances the amendment should not be rejected. It was held by
the Apex Court as under:
8. It is fairly settled in law that the amendment of
pleadings under Order 6 Rule 17 is to be allowed if such
an amendment is required for proper and effective
adjudication of controversy between the parties and to
avoid multiplicity of judicial proceedings, subject to
certain conditions such as allowing the amendment
should not result in injustice to the other side; normally a
clear admission made conferring certain right on a
plaintiff is not allowed to be withdrawn by way of
amendment by a defendant resulting in prejudice to such
WP(C) No.5704/2007

Page 3 of 6

a right of the plaintiff, depending on the facts and
circumstances of a given case. In certain situations, a
time-barred claim cannot be allowed to be raised by
proposing an amendment to take away the valuable
accrued right of a party. However, mere delay in making
an amendment application itself is not enough to refuse
amendment, as the delay can be compensated in terms of
money. Amendment is to be allowed when it does not
cause serious prejudice to the opposite side.
The Supreme Court in another judgment in B.K. Narayana Pillai v.
Parameswaran Pillai (2000) 1 SCC 712 after referring to a number of
decisions, in para 3 has stated, thus: (SCC p. 715)
“3. The purpose and object of Order 6 Rule 17 CPC is to
allow either party to alter or amend his pleadings in such
manner and on such terms as may be just. The power to
allow the amendment is wide and can be exercised at any
stage of the proceedings in the interests of justice on the
basis of guidelines laid down by various High Courts and
this Court. It is true that the amendment cannot be
claimed as a matter of right and under all circumstances.
But it is equally true that the courts while deciding such
prayers should not adopt a hypertechnical approach.
Liberal approach should be the general rule particularly
in cases where the other side can be compensated with
the costs. Technicalities of law should not be permitted to
hamper the courts in the administration of justice
between the parties. Amendments are allowed in the
pleadings to avoid uncalled-for multiplicity of litigation.”
In para 4 of the same judgment the Court has quoted the
following passage from the judgment in A.K. Gupta and Sons Ltd. v.
Damodar Valley Corpn (1966) 1 SCR 796 (AIR pp.97-98, para 7)
“The general rule, no doubt, is that a party is not allowed
by amendment to set up a new case or a new cause of
action particularly when a suit on new case or cause of
action is barred: Weldon v. Neal. But it is also well
recognized that where the amendment does not constitute
the addition of a new cause of action or raise a different
WP(C) No.5704/2007

Page 4 of 6

case, but amounts to no more than a different or
additional approach to the same facts, the amendment
will be allowed even after the expiry of the statutory
period of limitation: See Charan Das v. Amir Khan (AIR
1921 pc 50) and L.J. Leach and Co. Ltd. v. Jardine Skinner
and Co.(AIR 1957 SC 357)”

8.
error

In the circumstances, the Labor Court has not committed any
in allowing

the

application

of

the

respondent/workman

specifically incorporating in her claim petition that she is unemployed
since the time her services have been terminated. It is a settled
position of law that in exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India, the Court should not interfere with factual
findings of the lower courts while exercising powers of judicial review.
Reliance for this proposition can be placed on the judgment of the
Supreme Court, Government of A.P. and Ors. v. Mohd. Nasrullah
Khan reported as (2006) 2 SCC 373. Writ court should refrain from
interfering with the orders of an inferior tribunal or subordinate court
unless it suffers from an error of jurisdiction or from a breach of the
principles of natural justice or is vitiated by a manifest or apparent
error of law. The objective of judicial review is that a person receives a
fair treatment and objective is not to re-appreciate the entire pleas
and evidence and draw inferences again. Judicial review is not an
appeal from a decision but a review of the manner in which the
decision is made. Power of judicial review is meant to ensure that the
individual receives fair treatment and not to ensure that the
WP(C) No.5704/2007

Page 5 of 6

conclusion which the authority reaches is necessarily correct in the
eye of the court.

9.

In the totality of circumstances, there is no manifest error or

perversity in the order of the Labour court allowing the respondentworkman to incorporate the plea that she has not been gainfully
employed after her illegal termination on 30th November, 2001 and
allowing her application for amendment under Order 6 rule 17 of the
Code of Civil Procedure. The writ petition in the facts and
circumstances is without any merit and therefore, is dismissed.
Parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.

January 23rd, 2008
'Dev'

WP(C) No.5704/2007

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 6 of 6

