IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Decision: July 23rd, 2007
CM(M) NO.746/2007
# M/s.Federal Motors (P) Ltd.
Through:

..... PETITIONER
Mr.A.S. Chandhiok, Sr. Advocate
with Ms.Tatini Bau, Advocate

Versus
$ M/s.Atma Ram Properties (P) Ltd.
..... RESPONDENT
Through:
Mr.Deepak Gupta with Mr.B.B.
Gupta, Advocates.
CORAM :* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
NO
in the Digest?

YES
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
*
1.

The petitioner has impugned the order of Additional Rent Control

Tribunal dated 26th March, 2007 dismissing the application for amendment
filed by the petitioner/applicant after the sixth year of disposal of the eviction
petition which was instituted in 1992.

2.

Some relevant facts are that respondent filed an eviction petition in

1992 against the petitioner on the ground that the petitioner has sublet,

CM(M) No.746/2007

Page 1 of 26

assigned or otherwise parted with the possession of a portion of the suit
premises to M/s.Jay Vee Trading Company Pvt. Ltd. without obtaining the
consent in writing from the petitioner and the said M/s.Jay Vee Trading
Company Pvt. Ltd. is in exclusive possession and occupation of garage
No.13 and a portion in the showroom of the suit premises.

It had been

contended by the respondent that showroom No.9 half portion is commercial
whereas bathroom, kolki and garage are non-commercial.

The eviction

petition was instituted on 26th March, 1992 to which a written statement dated
16th December, 1992 was filed.

3.

The petitioner in reply to the application of subletting or parting with the

possession of the premises to M/s.Jay Vee Trading Company Pvt. Ltd.
categorically contended that M/s.Jay Vee Trading Company Pvt. Ltd. is not in
possession much less in exclusive possession or occupation

of the

premises.

4.

Para 18(a)(ii) of the written statement dated 16th December, 1992 is as

under:“Para 18(a)(ii) of the petition is denied as wrong and incorrect.
It is denied that the respondent had sublet, assigned and/or
otherwise parted with the possession of the whole or any part of
CM(M) No.746/2007

Page 2 of 26

the suit premises or parted with the occupation of Garage No.13
and a portion of the show room as in the site plan filed
alongwith the petition to M/s.Jay Vee Trading Company Pvt.
Ltd. It is further denied that M/s.Jay Vee Trading Company Pvt.
Ltd. is in possession, much less in exclusive possession of
occupation of the said garage or the said portion as alleged or
at all. The respondent/tenant is in full possession, occupation,
control and command of the tenancy premises, which it has
retained with it and M/s.Jay Vee Trading Company Pvt. Ltd. has
not been sublet or assigned the tenancy premises or a part
thereof, and nor has any portion of the tenancy premises been
parted with by the respondent to the said M/s.Jay Vee Trading
Company Pvt. Ltd. as alleged or at all”.

5.

On the plea of the parties, the respondent/landlord led his evidence

and closed his evidence in 1996. Shri Jai Singh, Managing Director of the
petitioner, appeared and deposed on 10th December, 1996 that M/s.Jay Vee
Trading Company Pvt. Ltd. had never been in possession of any portion.
The relevant deposition of the Managing Director of petitioner as on 10 th
December, 1996 is as under:“Jay Vee Trading Company Pvt. Ltd., (Jay Vee Trading
Company Pvt. Ltd.), had never been in possession of any
portion of the portion in control and possession of the
respondent company. It has nothing to do with the portion in
possession of the respondent company. (Counsel for the
respondent is trying to put question regarding the structural
CM(M) No.746/2007

Page 3 of 26

position of the premises of the suit). The same is not being
permitted as the ground of eviction is subletting. It is clarify that
if anything has been said by the witness of the petition in this
regard, the same will not be looked into and merely because the
respondent has not controverted the claim of the petitioner
regarding structural changes, would not mean that the
respondent has accepted the claim of the petitioner with regard
to structural changes. I need not reproduce the claim of the
A.W.1.
The particular observation applies to the crossexamination of A.W.1.”
6.

On 10th December, 1996, the deposition of the petitioner's Managing

Director was deferred and on 13th March, 1997 in the cross-examination he
categorically, on oath, stated that he did not know anything about M/s.Jay
Vee Trading Company Pvt. Ltd. and he had never been its Director or
Managing Director and whether this is a registered company or has a
certificate of incorporation and as to how many Directors are in the M/s.Jay
Vee Trading Company Pvt. Ltd are not known to him. The deposition of the
Managing Director of petitioner recorded on that date is as under:-

“I have no knowledge about JV Trading Co. Pvt. Ltd. I do not
know anything about it. Again said, I have some shares in this
particular company. I had never been its director of M.D. I am
not aware of the fact as to whether this JV Trading Co. Pvt. Ltd.
is a regd. company under the Companies Act or has a
certificate of incorporation issued by any competent authority. I
am not aware as to how many directors are there in JV Trading
Co.Pvt. Ltd., Smt.Geeta Gupta is wife. I have seen her writing
and signing. I can identify her signatures if shown to me. I do
not think that mark 'A' bears signatures of Geeta Gupta, at point
'A' duly encircled.”
CM(M) No.746/2007

Page 4 of 26

7.

Thereafter petitioner sought amendment to his written statement which

was allowed as the respondent/landlord did not contest the amendment
sought by the petitioner. By amendment the petitioner incorporated that the
erstwhile landlords Sardar Khushwant Singh and Sardar Gurbax Singh had
filed two eviction petitions against the respondent before the Rent Control
Tribunal, Delhi, and in one of the eviction petitions which was numbered as
Eviction Petition No.920/1969, the earlier landlord from whom the
respondents claimed title was filed regarding showroom No.9, kolki, bathroom
in the passage in garage No.12 and 13 and the other eviction petition was
filed by earlier landlord being petition No.921 of 1969 regarding garage
Nos.18 and 19 and both the tenancies were considered as separate and
accordingly the independent eviction petitions were filed.

After the

application for amendment was allowed, a written statement was filed. The
amended written statement filed by the petitioner, however, it did not
incorporate the amendments as had been allowed and as had been sought
by the petitioner. Consequently, an application was filed by the petitioner for
filing the amended written statement in terms of order passed on his
application allowing the amendment. On 22nd July, 1999, therefore, another
written statement dated 5th January, 1999 was filed incorporating the

CM(M) No.746/2007

Page 5 of 26

amendments which were allowed.

8.

After the amended written statement was filed, Managing Director of

the respondent again appeared as a witness and stated that the holdings of
both companies, i.e., Mussoorie Trading Company and M/s.Jay Vee Trading
Company Pvt. Ltd. are exclusive with their respective Directors and the
M/s.Jay Vee Trading Company Pvt. Ltd. remained in the premises which was
in the tenancy of Mussoorie Trading Company. The deposition of Managing
Director as recorded on 23rd February, 2002 after the amendment is as
under:-

“It is wrong to suggest that we have sublet, assigned or parted
with possession in favour of J.V. Trading Pvt. Ltd.”.

9.

The petitioner's Managing Director was recalled for further cross-

examination on 27th March, 1997 when he categorically denied that the
possession of the property has been parted with in favour of M/s.Jay Vee
Trading Company Pvt. Ltd. The deposition of the Managing Director of the
petitioner is as under:-

“It is wrong to suggest that we have sublet, assigned or parted
with possession in favour of J.V. Trading Pvt. Ltd. company. It
CM(M) No.746/2007

Page 6 of 26

is correct that Federal Motor was the tenant qua show room
No.9 garage No.12 & 13, 18 & 19 since long. (Volt the tenancy
was separate). It is correct that previous owner was M/s.Sobha
Singh and Sons & thereafter property devolved to
Mr.Khushwant Singh & Gurbux Singh. Thereafter, the property
in suit has been purchased by the petitioner. It is wrong to
suggest that in the year 1990 or their about half of the
showroom No.9 was surrendered to the present petitioner (Volt
In 1990. there was a family settlement in between myself &
younger brother. In order to put the records straight, I
approached Sh.CM Chadha to agree for creation of separate
tenancy with respect to show room No.9 only. Mr.C.M. Chadha
agreed in view of the explanation offered & separate tenancies
were created. A partition wall was raised & the show room was
divided into two portions. The other premises mentioned in
above (super premises) remained with Federal Motors. This
took place in 1990. my brother namely Mr.Virender Singh
became the direct tenant of Mr.C.M. Chadha who is carrying on
business in the showroom. It is wrong to suggest that as such
in the year 1990 the demised premises was re-organised. As
the rent receipts have never been issued since last five six
years, there is no question of showing rent receipts, however
the rent is being sent regularly by two separate cheques for two
separate tenancies. It is wrong to suggest that we have never
sent two different cheques qua payment of rent with respect to
two separate tenancies (volt: the cheques were sent along with
covering letter explaining the position. It is wrong to suggest
that tenancy was always one & two different cheques even prior
to 1990 were being sent for the purposes of audit. It is wrong to
suggest that after 1990 their was only one tenancy i.e. it was
treated as one. It is correct that factum of creation of two
separate tenancies with the director Mr.C.M. Chadha regarding
show room No.9 as deposed by me, was not pleaded in the
court as it was not necessary at any print of time. For the
purpose of Income Tax. Federal Motor & J. Vee Company are
two distinct Company with separate registered offices & distinct
business. However, the Directors & the share holders are the
same and in my previous deposition I was not clear about this
position & was confused. Both my statements as given just
above and the statement to the effect “I have no knowledge
CM(M) No.746/2007

Page 7 of 26

about J.Vee Trading Company Pvt. Ltd. are correct.
Q.
On the last date you statement you had no knowledge
about J.B.Trading whereas today you have depose otherwise.
Please explain.
Answer:It was under confusion as I was confused between
J.V. Agencies & J.V. Trading as the initials are the same. I was
having no shares in J.B. Agency (P) Ltd. on 13.3.97”.

10.

The eviction petition was heard and an order of eviction was passed in

favour of respondent against the petitioner holding that the premises was
sublet by the petitioner to M/s.Jay Vee Trading Company Pvt. Ltd.

The

appeal was filed in 2001 along with an application under Order XLI Rule 27 of
the Code of Civil Procedure seeking production of the following documents:“1.
Certified copy of eviction petition bearing No.E-57/84 filed
by M/s.Atma Ram Properties Private Limited against M.sFederal
Motors Private Limited.
2.
Certified copies of the orders dated 20.9.1984 passed in
the above noted case.
3.
Letter dated 15.10.1990 (carbon copy duly signed)
written by the respondent to M/s.J.V. Agencies Private Limited.
4.
Site plan forming part of the aforesaid letter.
5.
Original letter dated 17.2.1988 written by the respondent
to the appellant.
6.
Photocopy of confirmation of family settlement dated
31.10.1990'.

11.

The application for placing the additional documents in eviction petition

was declined including confirmation of family settlement dated 21.10.1990.

CM(M) No.746/2007

Page 8 of 26

However, the letter dated 15th October, 1990, a site plan annexed thereto and
letter dated 17th February, 1988 which was annexed with the application were
allowed to be taken on record as the same were not disputed by the
respondent on 1st November, 2006.

12.

Thereafter the petitioner filed the application under Order VI Rule 17 of

the Code of Civil Procedure dated 31st January, 2007 contending inter alia
that the alleged sub-tenant company was got incorporated by the Managing
Director of the respondent and Shri Virendra Singh in the year 1976-77 which
is evident from the certificate of incorporation, memorandum of articles of
association. It was also contended that priot to 30th October, 1990, the entire
share holding of M/s.Jay Vee Trading Company Pvt. Ltd. was owned by Shri
Virendra Singh and his wife Smt. Rashmi Gupta and Shri Jai Singh and his
wife Smt.Gita Gupta which is evident from the annual return upto 30 th
September 1991 of M/s.Jay Vee Trading Company Pvt. Ltd. duly filed in the
office of RoC, Delhi and Haryana. Along with the application, the petitioner
also filed following documents including the copy of family settlement which
was disallowed by order dated 1st November, 2006:-

SR. No.

CM(M) No.746/2007

PARTICULARS

Page 9 of 26

1.

Attested true copy of certificate of incorporation, Memorandum
and Articles of Association of M/s. Jay Vee Trading Co. Pvt.
Ltd.

2.

Original office copies of Annual returns of M/s. Federal Motors
Pvt. Ltd. upto September 1991 and upto September 1993 duly
submitted in the office of ROC Delhi & Haryana, showing the
details of its directors and shareholders; along with original
receipt no. 4985 dated 25.2.1992 and original receipt no. 4722
dated 29.10.1993 regarding submission of aforesaid returns.

3.

Original office copies of Annual returns of M/s. Jay Vee
Trading Co. Pvt. Ltd. upto September 1991 and upto
September 1993 and upto September 2006 duly submitted in
the office of ROC Delhi & Haryana, showing the details of its
directors and shareholders; alongwith original receipt no. 4986
dated 25.2.1992 and receipt no. 4723 dated 29.10.1993 and
challan no. AO 434501 dated 14.9.2006 regarding submission
of aforesaid returns.

4.

Original letter dated 12.3.1992 issued by the Asstt. Registrar
of Companies, Delhi & Haryana to M/s. Jay Vee Trading Co.
Pvt. Ltd.

5.

Original letter dated 21.1.1998 by respondent to appellant and
Original letter dated 10.2.1988 by appellant to respondent.

6.

True copy of indenture of confirmation of family settlement
dated 31.10.1990.

13.

In the application for amendment, it was contended by the petitioner

that lapse and/or professional incompetence on the part of his counsel led to
not lifting the corporate veil and not filing the appropriate and complete
written statement and some of the documents filed along with the application
for amendment. Had it been done it would have easily proved that not only
CM(M) No.746/2007

Page 10 of 26

the directors and shareholders of both the companies are same but both the
companies are wholly owned family companies of Sh.Jai Singh and his wife
Smt.Gita Gupta who are the common directors and shareholders in both
companies and the allegation of sub-letting by petitioner to M/s.Jay Vee
Trading Company Pvt. Ltd. is absolutely baseless, false and an eyewash to
somehow evict the petitioner from the tenanted premises which is the prime
commercial premises in Connaught Place, New Delhi and is a source of
livelihood for the petitioner. The relevant portion of averment made by the
petitioner in his application for amendment is as under:-

“The appellant submits that due to lapse and/or professional
incompetence on the part of appellant's counsel before the trial
court which led to improper and incomplete drafting of written
statement no evidence has been led during trial of eviction
petition to lift the corporate veil of the appellant company and
alleged sub-tenant company which would have easily proved
that not only the directors and shareholders of both the
companies are same but both the companies are wholly owned
family companies of Sh.Jai Singh and his wife Smt.Gita Gupta
who are the common directors and shareholders in both
companies and the allegation of sub-letting by appellant to
M/s.Jay Vee Trading Company Pvt. Ltd. are absolutely
baseless, false and an eyewash to somehow evict the appellant
from the tenanted premises which is the prime commercial
premises in Connaught Place, New Delhi and is a source of
livelihood for the appellant. In fact even the evidence led by
respondent where the witness of the respondent states that
common telephone numbers and common seals are being used
by the appellant company and the alleged sub0tenant company,
also proves the aforesaid common characteristic of both the
companies and also the fact that both the companies are in fact
CM(M) No.746/2007

Page 11 of 26

two sides of the same coin rather than two different coins
because of commonality of individuals who are directors and
shareholders of the both aforesaid companies.”

14.

The application by the petitioner for the amendment of written

statement in appeal, six years after the appeal was filed, was contested by
the respondent contending inter-alia that the application is belated and by
filing the application the petitioner is making an attempt to get the same relief
which has already been declined in its earlier application moved under Order
41 Rule 27 of CPC. The application for filing the additional documents had
been declined and the petitioner was not allowed to produce the family
settlement dated 31st October, 1990 and other documents except two
documents which were admitted by the respondent. The respondent
contended that the petitioner is making an attempt to bring a totally new
defence and the petitioner is trying to retract from its earlier stand averred in
its pleadings and the statements made by the Managing Director of the
petitioner.

15.

The respondent also relied on the observations made by the trial Court

in respect of the conduct of Mr.Jai Singh, RW.1, Managing Director of
petitioner as stipulated in judgment dated 19th March, 2001 passed by

CM(M) No.746/2007

Page 12 of 26

Sh.Sunil Kumar Aggarwal, Additional Rent Controller which is as under:-

“I would like to observe that RW 1, who appears to be a
reasonably good educated person tried to be smart while
deposing in the Court. Though he had been a director of M/s
Jay Vee Trading Co (P) Ltd. Along with his wife yet pleaded
blank when asked whether it is a company incorporated under
the Companies Act. In fact he had denied any knowledge about
it. He also pleaded doubt about signatures of his wife on the
letter head of this company on Ex RW 1/P1. In the adjourned
date he pleaded that he was confused as there are two
companies M/s Jay Vee Trading Co (P) Ltd. and M/s Jay Vee
Agencies. The witness was not a stranger to these two names
who could have been confused easily. In fact even after the
removal of alleged confusion he did not recollect whether he
had been director of M/s Jay Vee Agencies of which he in fact
was promoter with Sh.Virender Singh. RW 1 thus tried to sieve
out facts before the Court instead of deposing with a clear hurt.”

16.

The respondent also raised the plea of delay and latches. He

emphasised

that

the

copies

of

annual

returns

of

petitioner

and

M/s.J.V.Trading Company Co.Pvt Ltd for the period upto 1991 and thereafter
are not found on the records of Registrar of Companies. An affidavit of
Mr.Rakesh Kumar Sachdeva, Legal Assistant/General Attorney of the
respondent dated 13th March, 2007 was also filed categorically stating that
the returns of the petitioner company for the period 1991-1993 on which the
petitioner relied in support of his contentions and pleas in the amendment
applications are not on the record of Registrar of Companies and similarly the

CM(M) No.746/2007

Page 13 of 26

returns of M/s.J.V.Trading Company Limited for the year 1991 upto 1993 are
not on the records of the Registrar of Companies. The allegations of
incompetence made by the petitioner against his counsel in order to justify
not seeking these amendments earlier when the written statement was
amended by the petitioner, were also denied by the respondent.

17.

The learned Tribunal in its order dated 26th March, 2007 impugned

before this Court has noted in detail the amendments sought by the petitioner
and the statement of Mr.Jai Singh, Director of the petitioner company
showing complete ignorance about the affairs of M/s J.V.Trading Company
Limited and even the fact that a certificate of incorporation has been issued
by a competent authority. The Tribunal has also referred to the observation of
learned Additional Rent Controller regarding the conduct of Sh.Jai Singh,
Managing Director of the petitioner during his testimony. The Tribunal has
also noted the fact that the copies of annual returns which is also one of the
basis for seeking amendment, are not found in the record of Registrar of
Companies. The Tribunal has considered whether the plea raised by the
petitioner in the application for amendment is a new plea or retraction of the
pleas already raised by him or the explanation of the pleas already raised by
the petitioner. Reliance has also been placed by the Tribunal on various

CM(M) No.746/2007

Page 14 of 26

judgments of the High Court and the Apex Court.

18.

The Tribunal was of the view that the application is neither bonafide

nor shows due diligence on the part of the petitioner as to why the
respondent company filed the application after more than six years of the
filing of the appeal and after a period of 11 years after the last amendment
was sought by the petitioner in 1996. The Tribunal has based its decision to
dismiss the application also on the fact that the facts disclosed in the
amendment application were within the knowledge of the petitioner but no
cogent or reliable explanation has been given by the petitioner as to why the
application was not moved for bringing the alleged facts now disclosed in the
application for amendment. The Tribunal also relied on the fact that there was
no explanation by the petitioner about the non-availability of the documents
relied on by the petitioner in the record of Registrar of Companies and why
the facts were also not disclosed in the earlier applications filed under Order
41 Rule 27.

19.

I have heard learned counsel for the parties in detail and have perused

the pleadings, statements and other relevant material produced along with
this petition. It is no more res integra that piecemeal adjudication of disputes

CM(M) No.746/2007

Page 15 of 26

is to be abjured and avoided. The petitioner had sought amendment of his
written statement 1996 where the facts regarding filing of separate eviction
petitions by erstwhile landlords Sh.Khushwant Singh and Sh.Gurbax Singh
were incorporated. These facts as alleged by the petitioner now were also
within their knowledge. The only excuse given by the petitioner for not
disclosing these facts earlier, is of professional incompetence on the part of
the petitioner's counsel before the trial Court. The Tribunal relying on the
observation of the Controller regarding the conduct of the Director of the
petitioner that he appears to be a reasonably good, educated person who
tried to be smart while deposing in the Court and the fact that the Managing
Director was not a stranger to the names of M/s J.V.Trading Company Pvt
Ltd and M/s J.V.Agencies, as he had given an excuse that the two names
had confused him, has disbelieved the explanation given for seeking
amendment six years after filing of the appeal and 11 years after seeking
earlier amendment on the ground that the facts could not be alleged before
the Court earlier on account of professional incompetence of his lawyer. In
exercise of jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution of India, this
Court is not to substitute the plausible inference drawn by the Tribunal while
deciding an application under Order 6 Rule 17 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
The decision of the Tribunal not believing the plea of the petitioner that the

CM(M) No.746/2007

Page 16 of 26

alleged facts now sought to be incorporated could not be alleged on account
of alleged professional incompetence of their counsel, does not suffer from a
patent or flagrant error so as to entail interference by this Court, nor such an
inference as has been propounded by the petitioner can be drawn from the
facts and circumstances.

20.

The petitioner had earlier sought an amendment to the written

statement in 1996 and these facts were not sought to be incorporated.
Thereafter application was filed for additional documents, however, the
documents other than those which were accepted by the respondent, were
disallowed including the alleged family settlement dated 31st October, 1990
by order dated 1st November, 2006. The attempt by the petitioner to seek
amendment on the basis of family settlement, and to reintroduce the same
family settlement along with the application for amendment does not support
the plea of the petitioner that the amendment sought by him is bonafide.
There is no rational or plausible explanation by the petitioner for not seeking
amendment to the written statement earlier.

21.

A Single Judge of this Court in 2001(59) DRJ 23, Claridges Hotel Pvt

Ltd Vs. M.M.Bhagat and Company had held that piecemeal adjudication of

CM(M) No.746/2007

Page 17 of 26

disputes is to be avoided and the principles articulated in Order 2 Rule 2 and
Section 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure should broadly be applied even to
application. The relevant observations in Claridges Hotel Pvt Ltd (Supra) are
as under:-

“Furthermore, it is firmly established that law requires that a
piecemeal adjudication of disputes is to be abjured and
avoided. This legal principle is articulated in Order II of the
Code of Civil Procedure and exemplified in the principles of
estoppel and res judicata. There seems to be no reason why
these principles should not be broadly applied even to
applications. In the present case the amendments which have
been pleaded in the second application could as easily have
been pleaded in the first one, which was withdrawn without any
reservations or qualifications. In my opinion failure to plead all
amendments at one instance would operate, except in the
rarest of cases, as good and sufficient reason for its rejection.
Rules of procedure, it has been so often stated, are handmaids
of justice. Allowing several applications for amendments to be
filed would have the direct consequence of delay in the
culmination of a lis, and would thus be contrary to interests of
justice. For all these reasons the second application for
amendment of the Written Statement, being I.A. 9066/2000, is
dismissed with costs of Rs.5000/-”

22.

It is apparent that allowing applications for amendment and for

production of additional documents would directly result in delay in
adjudication of the disputes between the parties. An order of eviction on the
ground of subletting has already been passed against the petitioner and in
the appeal before the Tribunal, the attempt seems to delay the disposal as
CM(M) No.746/2007

Page 18 of 26

much as possible. There was no other reason for not filing the application for
production of additional documents and amendment simultaneously. First the
application for additional document was filed after considerable time after the
institution of appeal and on the dismissal of the application, within two
months another application for amendment has been filed with the
documents specially annual returns etc, which are not on the record of
Registrar of Companies and the alleged family settlement, production of
which was already denied by the Tribunal. The learned counsel for the
respondent has also drawn my attention to “The disposal of records (in the
office of the Registrar of Companies) Rules, 2003 specially Section 4 dealing
with the destruction of documents.” Perusal of the relevant rules fortifies the
plea of the learned counsel for the respondent that the application for
amendment relying on certain copies of the reports of the two companies
have been filed after ascertaining that the same must have been destroyed
and not available on the record of the Registrar of Companies. It appears that
before the respondent got the inspection carried out of the record of the
Registrar of Companies, no effort was made on behalf of the petitioner to
communicate that these documents are not available with the record of the
Registrar of Companies. In the circumstances the finding of the Tribunal not
relying on these cannot be termed to be suffering from a mistake of law or

CM(M) No.746/2007

Page 19 of 26

error of law relating to jurisdiction or an inference which is perverse or based
on no material.

23.

From the various judgments referred to by the Tribunal and the

judgments, 2007 III AD (Delhi) 29, Vasudev Vs. Smt.Rupkumari @ Banarso
Devi; 2001(59) DRJ 23, Claridges Hotel Pvt Ltd Vs.M.M.Bhagat and
Company; JT 2003(8) SC 478, Bibi Zubaida Khatoon Vs.Nabi Hassan Saheb
& Anr it can be culled that application for amendment is not to be allowed
ordinarily after the trial has commenced unless the Court comes to the
conclusion that despite due diligence the parties could not have raised the
matter before commencement of the trial. The Court should be reluctant to
allow the amendment, more so when the proposed amendment sought to
introduce an entirely new dimension to the case of the parties and almost
adding a cause of action distinct from the one pleaded and attempting to
claim a relief which was earlier available to the parties seeking amendment
but which was not taken up.

24.

The party seeking amendment may introduce another plea based on

some facts or may elucidate the facts pleaded or even may to some extent
withdraw or explain withdrawal of an admission but such facts have to be

CM(M) No.746/2007

Page 20 of 26

consistent with the plea already taken by the party praying for amendment.
However, while explaining the plea already taken a party should not be
allowed to take such plea which would be destructive of the original case
pleaded by the party and must not cause prejudice to other side. It is also no
more res integra that the provision relating to amendment of pleadings
neither can be permitted to be used as a lever to frustrate the due process of
law nor it can be permitted as an instrument for setting at knot the entire
progress of the case which has already matured into passing of an order of
eviction against the petitioner.

25.

The respondent had been categorical in their plea that J.V.Trading Pvt

Ltd is not in possession much less in exclusive possession or occupation of
the said garage or the said demised premises as had been contended by the
respondent. While taking this plea in the written statement it is apparent that
the emphasis of the petitioner is that the said M/s J.V.Trading Private Limited
Company is neither in exclusive possession nor in possession at all. Thus the
plea of the petitioner is that M/s.J.V.Trading Private Limited Company is not
possession of any portion of the property in dispute. Had the plea of the
petitioner been that the M/s J V Trading Company Ltd is not in exclusive
possession, the plea now sought to be raised could be construed to an

CM(M) No.746/2007

Page 21 of 26

extent, the explanation of that plea that the said company is not in exclusive
possession but permissive possession. However, the specific averment of the
petitioner is that the said company is not at all in possession, which is now
sought to be completely withdrawn and destroyed by the proposed plea that
since M/s.J.V.Trading Company Pvt Ltd is also controlled by the same
persons who are controlling the petitioner and so there is no parting with
possession which has a latent plea that M/s J V Trading Company Pvt Ltd is
also in possession of the demised premises, which plea is destructive of
earlier plea and withdrawal of the original plea, which should not be permitted
in the present facts and circumstances. The Tribunal has considered all these
aspects in detail after hearing the parties and the judgments relied on by
them and the finding of the Tribunal, in my opinion cannot be termed to be
suffering from such jurisdictional error or patent or apparent error which will
require interference by this Court under Article 227 of the Constitution of
India.

26.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has tried to rely on certain

portions of the statement of Sh.Jai Singh where after first denying any
knowledge about whether the certificate of incorporation has been issued; as
to who are the Directors etc. of M/s J.V. Trading Private Limited, he had

CM(M) No.746/2007

Page 22 of 26

deposed that he and his wife were the Directors. The said deposition of the
Managing Director of the petitioner was contrary to the plea taken by them in
the written statement. In the his cross examination recorded on 23rd February,
2002 it was also deposed by the Managing Director that the office of
M/s.J.V.Trading Private Limited Company was also maintained and remains
in the premises which was in the tenancy of Mussoorie Trading Company.
Admittedly the premises which is in the tenancy of Mussoorie Trading
Company is not the premises in dispute. Therefore, to say now that
J.V.Trading Private Limited Company is also in possession, permissive
possession on account of Directors of both the companies being same, is
completely destructive of the plea taken by the petitioner and evidence led
thereon that the said company was not in possession of any part or portion of
the premises in dispute.

27.

The proposed amendment also should not be allowed because the

evidence is led on the basis of the plea, but the evidence which has already
been led contrary to the pleas taken, should not be allowed to be justified by
allowing the amendment for such deposition which was made contrary to the
pleas.

CM(M) No.746/2007

Page 23 of 26

28.

The learned senior counsel for the petitioner, Mr.Chandhiok has

contended that perusal of para 18 (a)(ii) of written statement dated 5 th
January, 1999 and the proposed amendment to para 18(a)(ii) will reflect that
the original plea of the petitioner remains the same and only explanatory
facts are sought to be incorporated. Though para 18(a)(ii) in the written
statement dated 5th January, 1999 has been retained, however, the facts
which are sought to be incorporated are completely in variance with the plea
taken in the earlier amended written statement dated 5th January, 1999 and
also appears to be destructive of those earlier pleas. In the circumstances I
have no hesitation to hold that the amendment sought by the petitioner seeks
to introduce an entirely new dimension to the case of the parties which is very
distinct from their earlier stand that the said M/s J.V.Trading Private Limited
Company Ltd is not at all in possession of the premises, as now the petitioner
intends to contend that the possession of M/s.J.V.Trading Company is
permissive and does not tantamount to parting with possession.

29.

In case of Hira Lal Vs Kalyanmal and others, 1988(1) SCC 278 the

Supreme Court has held as under:-

“.............In the present case, once the defendants in their joint
written statement clearly admitted that 7 properties out of 10
were joint family properties wherein the plaintiff had 1/3rd share
CM(M) No.746/2007

Page 24 of 26

and they had 2/3rd undivided share, it must be held that there
was no contest between the parties regarding 7 items of suit
properties in Schedule A. The trial court was, therefore,
justified in framing the issues concerning only remaining three
items for which there was dispute between the parties............”
Even the grounds made out in the application were not justified.
Consequently, there is no question of taking an inconsistent
stand which would not have affected prejudicially the plaintiff as
wrongly assumed by the High Court. Consequently, it must be
held that when the amendment sought in the written statement
was of such a nature as to displace the plaintiffs' case it could
not be allowed..........”

30.

In the entirety of facts and circumstances and the contentions raised

by the counsel for the parties I do not find any jurisdictional error in the order
of the Tribunal nor it suffers from any patent or flagrant error or that the order
suffers from such findings which are perverse or based on no material. In the
facts and circumstances it also cannot be inferred that the order of the
Tribunal dismissing the application of the petitioner in the present facts and
circumstances can be construed to have caused manifest injustice to the
petitioner. Rather allowing the application will result in manifest injustice to
the respondent. Consequently, I do not find any merit in the petition and it is
dismissed.

July 23rd, 2007
CM(M) No.746/2007

ANIL KUMAR J.
Page 25 of 26

'sdp'

CM(M) No.746/2007

Page 26 of 26

