*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP(C) No.2265/2008

%

Date of decision : 24.03.2008

Sh.Pradeep Kumar

….… Petitioner
Through: Mr.A.K.Jain, Advocate.
Versus

Chaman Prakash & Anr

…..... Respondents
Through: Nemo.

CORAM :HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.
1.

The petitioner management has impugned the award dated

26th July, 2007 holding that the services of the workman were
terminated illegally and unjustifiably and awarding an amount of
Rs.85,000/- to the workman/respondent in lieu of reinstatement and
back wages.
WP (C) 2265 of 2008

Page 1 of 8

2.

The respondent/workman had filed a claim pursuant to the

reference made by the appropriate Governments in the following
terms:“Whether the services of Sh.Chaman Prakash s/o.Hira
Lal have been terminated illegally and/or unjustifiably
by the management, and if so, to what sum of money as
monetary relief along with consequential benefits in
terms of existing laws/Govt. Notifications and to what
other relief is he entitled and what directions are
necessary in this respect.”

3.

The workman contended that he was working as a cutting

machine man since May, 2000 and his last drawn salary was
Rs.2750/- per month. He asserted that he was not given legal
benefits according to his entitlement and when he demanded the
same, the management terminated his service on 14th April, 2001
without following due process of law. It was also asserted that his
salary for February, 2001 to 14th April, 2001 was not paid fully and
he was just given a sum of Rs.2000/-. The respondent workman also
contended that he has remained unemployed since the termination
of his service on 14th April, 2001.

WP (C) 2265 of 2008

Page 2 of 8

4.

The claim was contested by the petitioner contending that the

respondent was never employed by the petitioner as the petitioner
management did not exist in May, 2000 and the petitioner firm was
started in February, 2001 as the petitioner Pradeep, proprietor of the
firm was earlier an employee of Punjab National Bank and he took
voluntary retirement on 24th December, 2000. It was alleged by the
petitioner that his brother Sh.Kuldeep Kumar was using the space
where the petitioner firm was started subsequently and Sh.Kuldeep
Kumar remained in possession till the end of 2000.

5.

The respondent and another co worker Sh.Suresh Kumar were

examined before the Labor Court. Sh.Suresh Kumar, co worker
categorically deposed that the respondent joined the service in first
or second week of May, 2000 and he himself had been working since
Jan, 2000.

6.

The Labour Court had held considering the evidence and the

documents produced by the parties that the respondent was
employed by the petitioner. The Labour Court considered the fact
that the statement of the respondent and the co worker that they
had been employed since 2000 was not challenged at all in the cross
examination by the petitioner/management.
WP (C) 2265 of 2008

Page 3 of 8

7.

The Labour Court has held the relationship between the

employer and employee also on account of contradictory pleas taken
by the petitioner. In the written statement the plea of the petitioner
was that there is no relationship of employer and employee between
him and the respondent. However, he admitted in the cross
examination that in the reply filed by him under his signatures to the
Deputy Labour Commissioner, his stand was that the respondent
was not his regular employee, but used to come as part timer with
other part time employee namely, Arun Kumar. The petitioner also
admitted that the respondent used to be paid Rs.2750/- per month
as salary and he was working as a helper and also that he worked till
12th April, 2001. The petitioner also contradicted himself in his cross
examination and he contended that Arun Kumar who was described
as a part time employee was admitted to be a regular employee.
However, Arun Kumar when he appeared as a witness deposed that
he was not the employee of the petitioner but of another firm M/s
Metro Packaging from 1998 to 2001 which firm was owned by the
brother of the petitioner. The reliance was also placed on a reply
exhibit WW.1/7 which was, however, denied by the petitioner.

WP (C) 2265 of 2008

Page 4 of 8

8.

Relying on pleadings and evidence and the facts established,

the Labor Court inferred that the reply exhibit WW 1/7 was by the
petitioner which stipulated that the respondent had been working
with him for six months on a monthly salary of Rs.2750/- as helper
machine man and he had not been reporting on duties since 14th
April, 2001. With all these evidence it was inferred by the Labour
Court that the respondent was an employee of the petitioner.

9.

The petitioner had contended that he was in employment with

the Punjab National Bank and he took voluntary retirement in
December, 2000 and, therefore, the petitioner was not carrying on
any work where the respondent could be employed. The plea of the
petitioner was rejected on the ground that voluntary retirement by
the petitioner in December, 2000 does not prove conclusively the
business being not carried on by the petitioner prior to January,
2001. On the basis of the voluntary retirement of the petitioner in
December, 2000 it could not be inferred that he was not carrying on
business when he was working with the PNB. The reliance was also
placed on the statement given by the witnesses of the petitioner
management, MW4 who admitted in his cross examination that he
was getting the work done from the petitioner even 7 to 8 years back
and no bill was issued to him. The statement of MW4 was recorded
WP (C) 2265 of 2008

Page 5 of 8

in 2005 which reflects that the petitioner was undertaking printing
work even in 1997-98. The Labour Court also relied on the fact that
Pradeep Kumar, proprietor of the petitioner/management and Sh.
Kuldeep Kumar are real brothers and no evidence has been produced
by the petitioner to show that his brother was carrying on business
separately under the name and style of M/s Metro Packaging. Rather
it has been admitted that earlier business was carried on by the
brother from the same premises. On the preponderance of probability
from the evidence led by the parties and the documents proved, the
inference drawn that the respondent was an employee of the
petitioner does not have any such manifest error which will entail
interference by this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India.

10.

While exercising its powers of judicial review under Article 226

of the Constitution of India this Court is not to re-appreciate the
evidence. It is a settled position of law that in exercise of jurisdiction
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the Court does not
interfere with factual findings of the lower courts and restrain itself
from re-appreciating evidence while exercising powers of judicial
review. The objective of judicial review is to ascertain that a person
received a fair treatment and objective is not to re-appreciate the
WP (C) 2265 of 2008

Page 6 of 8

entire pleas and evidence and draw inferences again. The findings
and inferences of the Labor Court are based on evidence and
documents on record and there does not appear to be any manifest
errors in them. Judicial review is not an appeal from a decision but a
review of the manner in which the decision is made. Power of judicial
review is meant to ensure that the individual receives fair treatment
and not to ensure that the conclusion which the authority reaches is
necessarily correct in the eye of the court. The findings and
inferences of the Labor Court are based on evidence and documents
on record and there does not appear to be any manifest errors in
them. This court in exercise of its jurisdiction under article 226 of
Constitution of India is not to substitute the inferences drawn by the
Labor Court with its own inferences. In (2006) 2 SCC 373 , at page
378 Govt. of A.P. v. Mohd. Nasrullah Khan the Supreme court had
held:
11. By now it is a well-established principle of law that
the High Court exercising power of judicial review under
Article 226 of the Constitution does not act as an
appellate authority. Its jurisdiction is circumscribed and
confined to correct errors of law or procedural error, if
any, resulting in manifest miscarriage of justice or
violation of principles of natural justice. Judicial review
is not akin to adjudication on merit by reappreciating
the evidence as an appellate authority.

WP (C) 2265 of 2008

Page 7 of 8

11.

In the circumstances there are no grounds made out by the

learned counsel for the petitioner showing any perversity or manifest
error in the award dated 26th July, 2007 holding that the respondent
was an employee of the petitioner and his services were illegally
terminated and consequently, granting an amount of Rs.85,000/- as
compensation to the respondent in lieu of reinstatement and his
back wages etc.

12.

The writ petition in the facts and circumstances is without any

merit and is liable to be dismissed. The Writ petition is therefore,
dismissed. All the pending applications are also disposed of.

March 24th, 2008.

ANIL KUMAR, J.

‘K’

WP (C) 2265 of 2008

Page 8 of 8

