*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP(C) No.2308/2008

%

Date of decision : 24.03.2008

Anju
Through:

….… Petitioner
Mr.S.C. Singhal, Advocate.

Versus
Managing Committee,
Shri S.D. Co.Ed. Sec. School & Another
…..... Respondents
Through:
Mr.S.P. Sharma, Advocate for the
respondent No.2.
CORAM :HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.
CM No.4421/2008
Allowed, subject to just exceptions.
WP(C) No.2308/2008
1.

The petitioner has sought a Writ of Mandamus seeking direction

to the respondents to give the petitioner an appointment as an
Assistant Teacher or to any other post of Teacher on existing vacancies

WP(C) No.2308/2008

Page 1 of 5

as per the qualification of the petitioner and on the basis of the
selection committee recommendations made in the year 1996.

2.

The petitioner contended that respondent No.1 is a recognized

aided school which receives aid to the extent of 95% in respect of the
salary of the staff and other aids. The petitioner was appointed as a
Lower Division Clerk with the respondent No.1 with the approval of the
respondent No.2 by appointment letter No.SDS/89/136 dated 12th
June, 1989 and thus the petitioner is an employee of respondent No.1.

3.

According to the petitioner, one post of Assistant Teacher had

fallen vacant for which respondent No.1 had invited applications.
Petitioner had applied as one of the candidates for the said post.

A

selection committee was constituted which made a panel of three
candidates and the petitioner was kept in the waiting list with the
condition that in case of non-joining of any of the candidates, if any
vacancies will occur within a period of six months, the petitioner, a wait
listed candidate, shall be appointed.

4.

The petitioner contended that the recommendation of the

selection committee was not complied with by the respondent No.1
school. The managing committee was ordered to be taken over under
Section 20 of the Delhi School Education Act, 1973 against which a writ
petition was filed by respondent No.1 being W.P. (C) No.1914/2001
WP(C) No.2308/2008

Page 2 of 5

which was disposed of by order dated 6th February, 2004.

5.

In the circumstances, the petitioner contends that the posts are

still available and petitioner being the wait-listed candidate is entitled
for appointment.

6.

A Division Bench of this Court in Kathuria Public School and Ors

Vs. Director of Education and Anr, 2005 VI AD (Delhi) 893 relying on
T.M.A.Pai Foundation Vs. State of Karnataka, AIR 2003 SC 345 had
held that it is advisable that the specialized Tribunal constituted should
look after the legal matters relating to hearing of grievances of
teachers and employees. The Division Bench relying on T.M.A.Pai
Foundation (Supra) had held that specialized Tribunal should hear any
grievance of the teacher. It was held in Kathuria Public School and Ors
(Supra) that no restriction has been placed on the scope and ambit of
the consideration of the grievances of the teacher or employee by the
Tribunal and consequently the Tribunal should be able to hear all the
grievances including in respect of suspension of a teacher or an
employee and, therefore, the Tribunal constituted under the Delhi
School Education Act should be able to hear all the grievances of the
staff and teachers and not necessarily as restricted to in sub Section (2)
of Section 8 of the said Act. The Division Bench in para 42 at page 910
had held as under:“42.
WP(C) No.2308/2008

No restriction has been placed on the scope and
Page 3 of 5

ambit of the consideration of the grievances of the teacher
or employee by the Tribunal. Under the said Act in
question, the Tribunal is already constituted. Thus, all that
is to be done is that the Tribunal should be able to hear all
grievances including in respect of suspension by a teacher
or an employee. Taking into consideration the observations
made by the Apex Court in T.M.A.Pai Foundation case
(supra), we are of the considered view that pending
necessary legislative action by the State, the Tribunal
constituted should be able to hear all grievances of the
staff and teacher and not necessarily as restricted to in
sub Section (2) of Section 8 of the said Act. The result
would be that if a teacher is aggrieved by a suspension
order or its prolongation, the grievance can be made before
the Tribunal depending upon the fact and circumstances of
the case.”

7.

Consequently, though this Court will have jurisdiction under

Article 226 of the Constitution of India for the relief claimed by the
petitioner, however, the petitioner must exhaust the alternative remedy
available to her to approach the tribunal constituted under the Delhi
School Education Act, 1973 for her grievance regarding appointment to
the post of teacher pursuant to the panel recommended by the selection
committee where the petitioner was kept as a wait listed candidate.
Since the alternative remedy is available to the petitioner to approach
Delhi Schools Tribunal, this Court is not exercising its jurisdiction
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for the relief claimed by
the petitioner and it is for the petitioner to exhaust her alternative
remedy.

WP(C) No.2308/2008

Page 4 of 5

8.

Consequently, the writ petition is not entertained and disposed of

with liberty to the petitioner to approach Delhi Schools Tribunal under
the Delhi School Education Act, 1973 or to invoke any other remedy
available to her, if the petitioner so desires. With these directions the
writ petition is disposed of. All the pending application are also disposed
of.

March 24th, 2008.
‘Dev’

WP(C) No.2308/2008

ANIL KUMAR J.

Page 5 of 5

