IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of decision : January 24th , 2008
WP(C) No.9687/2007
#
!

Chandra Bhushan Jha
Through:

….… Petitioner
Mr.Sachin Dutta, Advocate .

Versus
$
^

University of Delhi & Ors.
Through:

......... Respondents
Mr.Anurag Mathur, Advocate for
respondent No.1.
Ms.Pinky Anand and Ms.Aanchal
Mullick, Advocates for
respondent No.3.

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR

1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
*
1.

The petitioner has impugned the inquiry proceedings initiated

against him under Ordinance XV-D of Delhi University and has also
sought direction in case the inquiry proceedings cannot be quashed to
comply with the principle of natural justice and restrain the Inquiry
Committee to proceed with the inquiry without fully complying with
the provisions of principle of natural justice.
2.

The grievance of the petitioner is that the allegation made

WP(C) No.9687/2007

Page 1 of 3

against him for sexual harassment was leaked to Media which
resulted in reporting of the same in several newspapers. According to
the petitioner the committee constituted to look into the matter, could
not be constituted on prima facie satisfaction of sexual harassment
allegation against him.
3.

The petitioner is also aggrieved by the fact that in his entire

reply he has given a complete account of his entire interaction with
the complainant and he has written letters to the Inquiry Committee
raising various objections which letters have not been entertained in
the sense that no response has been given and from the behavior of
the Members of the Committee, it is apparent that they have a preconceived mind and is bend upon indicting the petitioner.
4.

From the allegations made by the petitioner against the

Committee's members, it appears that they are based on his own
apprehensions. In any case, the Committee has still to consider and
decide various objections raised by him. From the allegations made
by the petitioner, it does not appear that the Committee was not ready
to decide the issues raised by the petitioner. The issue as to whether
the alleged crime has been committed by the petitioner within the
campus as contemplated under the relevant rules is also to be
considered and decided.
5.

Since all these issues which have been raised by the petitioner

WP(C) No.9687/2007

Page 2 of 3

before the committee are yet to be decided and prima facie there are
no such facts disclosed or such facts available on the record, on the
basis of which it can be inferred conclusively that the committee is
biased against the petitioner it will neither be appropriate to decide
the issues nor it will be appropriate to change the committee which is
looking into the matter.
6.

Therefore for the foregoing reasons, the writ petition is disposed

of with the direction to the respondents to consider all the objections
raised by the petitioner regarding various aspects of the inquiry at the
appropriate stages expeditiously after giving full opportunity and
decide them in accordance with the rules and regulation. All the
pending applications are disposed of.
Dasti.

January 24th, 2008.
'Dev'

WP(C) No.9687/2007

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 3 of 3

