IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Decision: October 24th, 2007
O.M.P. No.93 of 2005
#
!

MILLAN VIHAR COOP. GROUP HOUSING
SOCIETY LIMITED.
....... Petitioner
Through:
Mr.V.K.Sharma Advocate.
Versus

$
^

M/S.ANSAL HOUSING ESTATES
PVT. LTD & ANR.
........Respondents
Through : Mr. Siddharth Mridul Sr. Advocate with
Mr.Sachin Puri for the respondent
no.1.

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR

1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

YES

2. To be referred to the reporter or not?

NO

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
the Digest?

NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)

1.

On 19.9.2007 it was stated on behalf of the respondent no.1

that he will have no objection to appointment of a new Arbitrator in
place of respondent no.2 and terminating his mandate, in view of
various allegations made without prejudice to his rights and

O.M.P. No.93 of 2005

Page 1 of 3

contentions and because considerable time has already elapsed on
this account. It was also stated that since the parties have already
filed their claims, counter claims and admission and denial of the
documents has also taken place, therefore, new arbitrator to be
appointed be directed to carry on the proceedings further from that
stage and new arbitrator be also directed to conclude the proceeding
expeditiously.

2.

In the facts and circumstances the learned counsel for the

petitioner

on

instruction

also

consents

and

is

agreeable

for

appointment of a new arbitrator who will commence the proceeding
further from the stage of the pending arbitration proceedings.

3.

Considering the facts and circumstances the mandate of the

respondent no.2 is terminated and Mr.Prem Kumar, Advocate (Retd.
Additional District Judge), is appointed as the new Arbitrator in place
of respondent no.2. The fees of the Arbitrator shall be Rs.1.50 lakh to
be shared equally by the petitioner and the respondent no.1. The
respondent no.2, forthwith shall handover all the arbitration record to
new Arbitrator appointed today so that the arbitration proceedings be
carried on further.

Learned Arbitrator shall proceed further in the

arbitration proceedings from the stage the respondent no.2 has

O.M.P. No.93 of 2005

Page 2 of 3

already conducted the arbitration proceedings and shall hear the
arguments on the claims of the parties expeditiously. The parties shall
appear before the learned Arbitrator on 19th November, 2007 at 4.30
PM. Since the arbitration proceedings are pending for considerable
period it will be desirable if the Learned Arbitrator may conclude the
arbitration proceedings preferably within six months.

4.

A copy of this order be sent forthwith to the learned arbitrator

appointed today and the respondent no.2 who has to hand over the
record of the arbitration proceedings to the new Arbitrator. Parties are
also directed to give a copy of this order to the learned arbitrator.
Copies of this order be also given to the parties Dasti. The petition is
disposed of with these direction. All the pending applications, if any,
are also disposed of.

October 24, 2007

ANIL KUMAR, J.

'Dev'

O.M.P. No.93 of 2005

Page 3 of 3

