IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Date of decision : September 24th , 2007
CS(OS) No.305/1996

#
!

Smt. Premvati & Ors.
Through:

......... PLAINTIFFS
Ms. Sunita Harish, Advocate
Vs.

$
^

Smt.Bhagwati Devi & Ors
……..DEFENDANTS
Through:
Mr.Ashish Bhagat Advocate for
Defendant nos.1 to 3 & 5 to 12.
Mr.Pramod Aggarwal
Advocate for the defendant no.4.
CORAM :* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
YES
YES

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)

1.

This order shall dispose of the preliminary issue, whether the suit as

framed is not maintainable in view of the provisions of Sections 397 to 407 of
the Companies Act? (OPD), framed on 14th November, 2002.

2.

The plaintiffs have filed this suit for partition and rendition of accounts

CS(OS) 305 of 1996

Page 1 of 19

contending inter-alia that Sh.Banwari Lal was the common ancestor of
plaintiffs and defendant Nos.1 to 6. Plaintiff No.1 is the grand daughter of
Late Sh.Banwari Lal, daughter of Sh.Bal Kishan Das son of Sh.Banwari Lal.
The plaintiff No.2 is the son, plaintiff No.3 is the widow and plaintiff No.4 is
the daughter of Sh.Gopal Kishan Das, son of late Sh.Bal Kishan Das.

3.

According to the plaintiffs late Sh.Banwari Lal constituted and started

his proprietary concern under the name and style of M/s.Bhana Mal Gulzari
Mal, Chawri Bazar, Delhi. Later on Sh.Bal Kishan Das who was the only son
of Sh.Banwari Lal along with his son constituted six private limited companies
and registered them under the Indian Companies Act for the purpose of
taking over the entire capital, assets and liabilities of M/s.Bhana Mal Gulzari
Mal. Defendant Nos.7 to 12, took over the entire capital, assets and liabilities
of the said sole proprietary concern, M/s.Bhana Mal Gulzari Mal.

4.

According to the Plaintiffs all the share holders of these companies

were and presently are also heirs of late Sh.Banwari Lal and as such these
companies are family concerns.

5.

Plaintiffs contended that out of the funds, money and estate of

CS(OS) 305 of 1996

Page 2 of 19

M/s.Bhana Mal Gulzari Mal, the companies which were created being
defendant Nos.7 to 12, heirs of Sh.Banwari Lal have acquired, purchased,
constructed and built up various movable and immovable properties whose
details are given in Schedule C of the plaint. The plaintiffs’ allegation is that
defendant Nos.2 to 6 are controlling and running the defendant Nos.7 to 12
and they are keeping profits and assets of defendant Nos.7 to 12 to
themselves only and are not rendering any accounts and the plaintiffs have
been deprived of their share. The plaintiffs have also averred that various
premises were acquired under the tenancies and some of them have been
transferred by the defendant Nos.1 to 6 in their own personal names. It has
also been alleged that some of the properties which were owned by
M/s.Bhana Mal Gulzari Mal or defendant Nos.7 to 12 have also been
transferred by the defendant Nos.1 to 6 in their own name or are being used
for their personal use. The plaintiffs have given the details of misuse of
properties of defendant Nos.7 to 12 in para 9 of the plaint where the
allegation has also been made that the house at A-3, Soami Nagar, Delhi
was purchased by defendant No.3, Sh.J.K.Das from the funds of the
companies. Regarding property at Patna it is contended that originally it was
owned by M/s.Banwari Lal & Sons Pvt Ltd, defendant No.10 but later on this
was transferred to defendant Nos.9 & 11 which has been taken at a nominal

CS(OS) 305 of 1996

Page 3 of 19

rent by defendant No.5 at a rate which is much lower than the market rate
and the said property has been sublet at a much higher rate.

6.

The plaintiffs have also made allegations that movable assets of late

Sh.Bal Kishan Das have been transferred by Sh.S.K.Das, defendant No.6 in
his personal name and in the name of his family members. The plaintiffs in
the circumstances have sought partition of the properties as shown in
Schedules. Schedule B gives the details of share in the companies,
defendant Nos.7 to 12 and Schedule C gives the details of movable
properties, Schedule D gives the premises which were taken on rent at
different places, Schedule E gives the details of misused properties of
defendant Nos.7 to 12.which schedules are annexed with the plaint.

7.

The plaintiffs have claimed the following shares in the properties:-

Plaintiff No.1, 1/8th share; Plaintiff No.2, 1/3rd share out of 1/8th share; Plaintiff
No.3, 1/3rd share out of 1/8th share and Plaintiff No.4, 1/3rd share out of 1/8th
share.

8.

The suit is contested by the defendants. The defendant No.4 has

contended that defendant Nos.7 to 12 are limited companies incorporated

CS(OS) 305 of 1996

Page 4 of 19

under the Companies Act and the companies are separate and distinct
entities and cannot be the subject matter of partition and if the plaintiffs are
entitled to transfer of shares inherited by them in their own name and the
companies have denied or refused, for such transfer the remedy lies either
before the Company Law Board or the Company Court.

9.

The defendant No.4 has also opposed the claim of plaintiffs on the

ground that the plaintiffs have not shown any document or proof of
inheritance regarding plaintiffs claim of 1/8th share of plaintiff No.1 and 1/3rd
share of 1/8th shares each of plaintiff Nos.2 to 4. According to the said
defendants the plaintiffs have not specified as to how they own the said
properties or any share in them and why the partition is necessary on account
of alleged mismanagement in the companies by not filing the Income Tax
returns and not holding the AGM. It is contended that the said allegations
cannot be decided in a suit for partition and rendition of accounts and the
remedy available is before Company Law Board or the Company Court. In
reply to para 9 of the plaint making a specific allegation that the plot and
construction of house at A-3, Soami Nagar was done by defendant No.3,
Sh.J.K.Das from the funds of the company it is averred by defendant No.4
that the allegations cannot be looked into in the present proceedings which is

CS(OS) 305 of 1996

Page 5 of 19

for partition and the plaintiffs cannot agitate their grievances vis-a-vis
management of the company and/or company assets in the present
proceedings.

10.

The defendant Nos.7 to 12 have also opposed the claims of the

plaintiffs contending that the defendant Nos.7 to 12 are private limited
companies whose shares are owned by share holders and any relief against
the said companies can be granted only as per the Companies Act. The
allegations regarding mismanagement of the companies was denied by the
said defendants.

11.

The defendants have relied on AIR 2005 SC 809, Sangramsinh

P.Gaekwad and others Vs. Shantadevi P.Gaekwad (Dead) by LRs and
others to contend that this Court does not have jurisdiction in view of Section
397 to 407 of the Companies Act, 1956. The learned counsel for the plaintiff,
Ms.Sunita Harish has relied on 92(2001) DLT 442, Naresh Kumar Aggarwal
& Ors Vs. Davender Kumar Mittal & Ors; (1998) 7 SCC 105, Ammonia
Supplies Corporation (P) Ltd Vs. Modern Plastic Containers Pvt Ltd and Ors;
AIR 1955 SC 74, Mrs.Bacha F.Guzdar Vs. Commissioner of Income Tax,
Bombay; 1982(52) Company Cases 362, Marikar (Motors) and Another Vs.

CS(OS) 305 of 1996

Page 6 of 19

M.I.Ravi Kumar and Ors; 1990(67) Company Cases 691, Pradip Kumar
Sarkar and Ors Vs. Luxmi Tea Co.Ltd and Ors; ILR (1985) II Delhi 459,
M/s.Maharaja Exports & Another Vs.M/s.Apparels Export Promotion Council
and AIR 2003 SC 2696, Dwarka Prasad Agarwal Vs. Ramesh Chandra
Agarwala and Ors to contend that bar of jurisdiction of Civil Court is not to be
readily inferred and the Company Act does not contain any express provision
barring the jurisdiction of the ordinary Civil Courts in matters covered by the
provisions of the Act and only in certain cases the jurisdiction of Civil Courts
is impliedly barred and, therefore, the jurisdiction of this Court is not barred
under Section 397 to 407 of Companies Act, 1956.

12.

I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and have

also perused the pleadings and the documents. It cannot be disputed that
except in cases where the Companies Act, 1956 confers jurisdiction in
Company Court or some other authority like the Central Government or the
Company Law Board, either expressly or by implication, all other disputes
pertaining to a company are to be resolved through a forum of Civil Courts.

13.

In M/s.Maharaja Exports and Another (Supra) a suit for declaration

was filed against the defendant council, a private limited company seeking

CS(OS) 305 of 1996

Page 7 of 19

declaration that notice issued by defendant for Annual General Meeting is
illegal, inoperative and invalid and that the existing members are not entitled
to hold office as they have retired by rotation. The suit was contested on the
ground that the Civil Court has no jurisdiction to entertain the petition and
also on the ground that the notice is invalid. A Single Judge of this Court had
held that Section 10 of the Companies Act defines the jurisdiction of the
Court to entertain the suits. The definition of the “Court” in Section 2(11) and
Section 10 of the Companies Act, 1956, dealing with jurisdiction of Courts,
read together enables the shareholders to decide as to which Court they
should approach for remedy in respect of a particular matter. On the issue
regarding whether the Court had jurisdiction to try the suit it was held that
where wrong is done to an individual member he can insist by recourse to a
civil suit on “strict observance” of the legal rules, statutory provisions and
provisions in the memorandum and articles of Association which cannot be
waived by a bare majority of shareholders. In the suit for declaration filed by
the plaintiff besides other reliefs he had also sought a declaration that all the
27 members of the existing executive committee were not entitled to hold the
respective offices and that 18 members of the executive committee who had
retired by rotation were not entitled to continue in office as members of the
executive committee. In these circumstances it was decided that the Civil

CS(OS) 305 of 1996

Page 8 of 19

Court had jurisdiction. The learned Single Judge in this case had also relied
on R.Prakasam Vs. Sree Narayana Dharma Paripalana Yogem, 1980
Company Cases 611. In which it was held that except in cases where the
Companies Act, 1956 confers jurisdiction on the Company Court or some
other authority like the Central Government or the Company Law Board,
either expressly or by implication, all other disputes pertaining to a company
are to be resolved through a forum of Civil Court.

14.

The Calcutta High Court in Pradip Kumar Sarkar and Ors (Supra) had

held that jurisdiction of Civil Court is not barred expressly or by necessary
intendment by Sections 397 and 398 of the Companies Act. It was held by a
Single Judge of that Court that Sections 397 and 398 of the Companies Act,
1956 conferred a right on the shareholders who have the requisite
qualification under Section 399 of the Act to apply to the Court for appropriate
reliefs and these sections do not, either expressly or by necessary
intendment oust the jurisdiction of the Civil Court to entertain suits on the
same subject matter. In the facts of the case it was held that the conduct of
the company had made it clear that many of the transfers in favour of
defendants had been improperly executed and the company and its Board of
Directors had taken a partisan attitude in the matter of approval of transfer of

CS(OS) 305 of 1996

Page 9 of 19

such shares and that person in whose favour shares were transmitted had
executed the transfer deeds even prior to their becoming the registered
members although they had no absolute interest in the shares on the date
when the transfer deeds were executed which deeds were invalid and not in
compliance with the provisions of Section 108 of the Companies Act, 1956.
The Court had held as under:“

Sections 397 and 398 of the Companies Act, 1956,

confer a right on the shareholders who have the requisite
qualification under section 399 of the Act, to apply to the court
for appropriate reliefs. These sections do no, either expressly
or by necessary intendment, oust the jurisdiction of the civil
court to entertain suits on the same subject-matter.

Where

shareholders complain of mismanagement or oppression and of
acts prejudicial to the interest of the company or prejudicial to
public interest, the civil court may entertain a suit by the
shareholders and grant appropriate reliefs. Moreover, unless a
statute, by express provision or by necessary implication, ousts
the jurisdiction of the civil court, the civil court will have
jurisdiction to try all suits of a civil nature. The ouster of the
jurisdiction of the civil court shall not be readily inferred.
In a proper case, there is no impediment in the exercise
of power by the court to supersede the board of directors of a
company, although it has the support of the majority, if it is
found that it is acting illegally,

mala fide or in a manner

oppressive to the minority shareholders or in a manner
prejudicial to the interests of the company or to the public
interest. The court always has jurisdiction to prevent abuse of
majority power. In fact, it is incumbent on the court to interfere
in such matters and to temporarily take over the management of
CS(OS) 305 of 1996

Page 10 of 19

the company until the legitimate grievance of the shareholders
regarding the management of the affairs of the company are set
right.
The court can temporarily take over the management of
the affairs of the company by the appointment of a receiver or a
special officer.

the court need not appoint a receiver or a

special officer for all times to come but, may, for a limited period
and limited purpose, appoint a receiver or a special officer to
take over the management.”

15.

The proposition that the Companies Act is a complete and self

contained code and only the Company Court could resolve disputes between
a company and its members in proceedings under the Act was not accepted
by a Single Judge of Kerala High Court in Marikar (Motors) and Another
(Supra) holding that a suit would lie by a minority when the grievance is that a
fraud is being perpetrated and they are being oppressed by lack of probity
and fair dealing. It is open for the share holders to sue for restraining a
threatened breach of provisions of the Memorandum or Article of Association
and they can also seek a declaration against the resolution altering the
memorandum or article though passed in proper form on the ground that it is
not in good faith and for the benefit of the members as a whole. Where a
resolution is passed by a general meeting when it should have been passed
CS(OS) 305 of 1996

Page 11 of 19

as a special or extra-ordinary resolution, its validity can likewise be
challenged by the members. Similarly, a representative action to restrain the
company from doing an Act contrary to the provisions of the Companies Act
or the general law or from giving effect to an invalid decision of the general
meeting is also permissible. Five classes of cases have been crystallised
where a suit by a shareholder instead of by the company is considered
permissible:-(i) when it is complained that the company is acting or proposing
to act ultra-vires; (ii) when the act complained of, though not ultra vires the
company, could be effective only if resolved upon by more than a simple
majority vote, i.e, where a special or extraordinary resolution is required and
(it is alleged) has not been validly passed; (iii) where it is alleged that the
personal rights of the plaintiff shareholder have been infringed or are about to
be infringed at any rate if the wrong to the plaintiff could not be rectified by an
ordinary resolution of the company; (iv) where those who control the
company are perpetrating a fraud on the minority and (v) any other case
where the interests of justice require that the general rule, requiring suit by a
company, should be disregarded.

16.

The objection of the defendants is that the suit is barred on account of

Section 397 to 407 of the Companies Act. Section 397 provides that any

CS(OS) 305 of 1996

Page 12 of 19

member of a company having a grievance that its affairs are being conducted
in a manner oppressive to them may apply to the Court for an order under
this sub-Section. Section 398 makes a like provision where the grievance that
the affairs are conducted in a manner prejudicial to the company's interests
can be raised. However, only a group of members having a specified voting
strength under Section 399 could resort to these remedies. Section 408 also
empowers the Central Government to grant some relief from oppression and
mismanagement to the minority, but here again the application must be by a
specified number of shareholders.

17.

If the argument of the defendants is to be accepted that these

provisions exclude recourse to the ordinary course, then plaintiffs who
admittedly do not have the necessary voting strength to proceed under any of
these Sections will be completely excluded because they are not even the
shareholders. If the argument of the defendants is to be accepted then only
those shareholders who have necessary voting strength under the said
provisions of the Companies Act would have a remedy available to them and
other share holders not having necessary strength or those who are not the
shareholders shall be remediless. The plaintiffs are claiming that these
companies were started from the assets of the common ancestor and they

CS(OS) 305 of 1996

Page 13 of 19

have rights in the properties of their common ancestor. Consequently, it
cannot be inferred that the plaintiffs in the present facts and circumstances at
this stage, when the pleas and contentions of the plaintiffs that these
companies were started from the assets of the common ancestor and they
have rights in them and some of the properties have been misappropriated
by the defendant nos. 1 to 6, do not have a right to get their pleas
adjudicated and their relief is barred under Section 397 to 407 of the
Companies Act, 1956 is not tenable. The said sections of the Companies Act,
1956 do not bar the suit of the plaintiff specifically. In absence of words
expressly or clearly barring the jurisdiction of the Civil Court, it will not be
appropriate to hold that the jurisdiction of the Civil Court is barred under
Section 397 to 407 of the Companies Act, 1956 in the present facts and
circumstances.

18.

These inferences are further fortified on account of ratio of the

judgment of the Supreme Court. The Apex Court in Dwarka Prasad Agarwal
(Dead) by LRs and Another (Supra) relying on AIR 1968 SC 620, Lallu
Yeshwant Singh (Dead) by Legal Representatives Vs. Rao Jagdish Singh
and Ors and R.Prakasam (Supra) had held that unlike some other Statutes,
the Companies Act does not contain any express provision barring the

CS(OS) 305 of 1996

Page 14 of 19

jurisdiction of the ordinary Civil Courts in matters covered by the provisions of
the Act. In certain cases like winding up of companies, the jurisdiction of Civil
Courts is impliedly barred. However, where a person objects to the election of
Directors and claims a decree for declaration that he was one of the
Directors, there is no provision which bars the civil Court either expressly or
by implication, from trying such a suit. In the dispute before the Supreme
Court in the said case the plaintiff had sought that all the 27 members of the
existing executive committee were not entitled to hold the respective office in
view of the judgment of this Court and further that the 18 members of the
executive committee who had retired by rotation were not entitled to continue
in office as members of the executive committee. It was held by the Apex
Court that the civil suit was maintainable. The Apex Court in Ammonia
Supplies Corporation (P) Ltd (Supra) had also held that the Company Court
under Section 155 of the Companies Act, 1956 is to adjudicate the facts and
circumstances whether the dispute raised really pertains to rectification or
under the garb of rectification questions of fact involving contentious issues
are raised. If dispute found to be relating to the peripheral field of rectification,
then the Company Court under Section 155 will have exclusive jurisdiction
and jurisdiction of Civil Court will be impliedly barred but if finding is otherwise
then Civil Court shall have jurisdiction. The Supreme Court reiterated that

CS(OS) 305 of 1996

Page 15 of 19

unless jurisdiction is expressly or implicitly barred under a Statute, for
violation or redress of any such right, the Civil Court would have jurisdiction. It
was held that there is nothing under the Companies Act expressly barring the
jurisdiction of the Civil Court but the jurisdiction of the “Court” as defined
under the Act exercising its power under various Sections where it has been
invested with exclusive jurisdiction, the jurisdiction of the Civil Court is
impliedly barred.

19.

A Division Bench of this Court in Naresh Kumar Aggarwal (Supra)

relying on The Ammonia Supplies Corporation (P) Ltd Vs. Modern Plastic
Containers Pvt Ltd and Others, (1998) 7 SCC 105 had held that reference to
“Court” under sub Section 11 of Section 2 and Section 10 of the Companies
Act does not oust the jurisdiction of the Civil Court completely.

20.

Both the parties have also relied on Sangramsinh P.Gaekwad (Supra).

In this case, a class I heir of a majority shareholder had raised a grievance
regarding allotment of shares by inheritance. A pure question of title had
arisen on account of dispute raised in the proceedings and it was held that a
pure question of title is alien to an application under Section 397 of the
Companies Act where the lack of probity is the only test.

CS(OS) 305 of 1996

Page 16 of 19

21.

What emerges in the facts and circumstances is that a dispute as

regard right of inheritance between the parties is imminently a civil dispute
and cannot be said to be a dispute as regards oppression of minority
shareholders by the majority shareholders and/or mismanagement. Plaintiffs
are not even the shareholders. They are seeking partition of properties which
are the companies and their rendition of accounts which will involve
determination whether those properties are the properties acquired from the
common properties of common ancestor or of defendant Nos.1 to 6 which
cannot be adjudicated by a Company Court under the provisions of the
Companies Act, 1956. Whether the shares have been inherited by the
plaintiffs or not and to what extent the shares have been inherited is to be
determined by a Civil Court. Whether some of the properties of the
companies have been misappropriated and transferred by defendant Nos.1
to 6 for their personal use and could not be transferred are also such
disputes which cannot be determined by the Company Court under the
provisions of the Companies Act, 1956. For partitioning of the assets of the
companies, Defendant nos. 7 to 12, after determination that they were started
from the assets of common ancestor and the share of the plaintiff, if
dissolution of the companies is required for which invocation of the Company

CS(OS) 305 of 1996

Page 17 of 19

Court may be required, the Civil suit for partition will not be completely
barred. Therefore it cannot be inferred that the suit of the plaintiffs is barred
under section 397 to 407 of the Companies Act, 1956.

22.

In the circumstances, the preliminary issue framed on 14 th November,

2002 `Whether the suit as framed is not maintainable in view of the provisions
of section 397 to 407 of the Companies Act,’ is decided against the
defendants holding that the suit of the plaintiffs is not barred and is
maintainable. The said issue is thus decided accordingly.

23.

Since it is held that the suit is maintainable, the learned counsel for the

defendants seek time to file the documents.

24.

Original documents or certified copies of documents, if not already filed

be filed within four weeks.

25.

List before Joint Registrar for admission/denial and marking of

documents on 12th November, 2007 and before the Court for framing of
remaining issues on 18th February, 2008.

CS(OS) 305 of 1996

Page 18 of 19

September 24th, 2007.
‘k’

CS(OS) 305 of 1996

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 19 of 19

