*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP(C) No.827/2008

%

Date of decision : February 25th,2008

The Management of
State Bank of Hyderabad & Others
….… Petitioner
Through: Mr.A.V.Rangam, Advocate.

Versus
Roshan Lal

......... Respondent
Through :

Nemo.

CORAM :*

HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
1.

The petitioner has impugned the award dated 28th August, 2007

of the Labor Court reinstating the respondent along with 50% back
wages for non compliance of provisions of section 25 F of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.

2.

The claim of the respondent was that he had worked

continuously from 5th September, 1997at Rs.740/- per month and he
was appointed after interview and he performed his duties from 9 AM
to 6 PM.

The respondent had contended that he was not given

appointment letter, minimum wages, earned leave, casual leave and
WP(C) 827 of 2008

Page 1 of 12

OT though similarly employed persons, Shri Raj Kumar @ Raju,
Pratap Singh and Kartar Singh were taken on regular basis and he
has been deprived of it. He also stated that he was asked not to come
and work as a letter dated 28th April, 2003 was received from the Head
Quarter for not taking him on duty. It was also asserted by the
respondent that the copy of the letter from the Headquarter was not
given to him but his services were terminated.

The respondent

claimed that he had not been given any notice nor any amount nor
retrenchment compensation and earned leave under the provisions of
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and his termination was in violation
of Section 25 F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and therefore, he
is entitled for reinstatement and payment of back wages.

3.

A reference was made by the Ministry of Labour by letter dated

16th November, 2004 to the effect “whether the action of the Regional
Manager, State Bank of Hyderabad, 882, 1st Floor, East Park Road,
Karol Bagh, New Delhi in terminating/discontinuing the service of the
respondent and not giving full salary of Peon from 5th January, 1997
is just, valid and legal and to what relief the respondent shall be
entitled and what directions are necessary in the matter?”

4.

The claim of the respondent was contested by petitioners

contending inter alia that he was not a workman and he was not
WP(C) 827 of 2008

Page 2 of 12

appointed in any permanent vacancy nor any appointment letter was
issued.

It was also asserted on behalf of petitioners that the

respondent never worked continuously even as casual labour/daily
wager

and

considering

the

contingencies

and

exigencies

of

circumstances, he was engaged as a casual labor, therefore, he does
not have any right for regularization. The violation of Section 25 F of
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 was denied by the petitioner.

5.

On the basis of the pleadings and the evidence of the parties,

the Labor Court held that respondent is a workman based on the
documents produced and proved including Ex.WW1/1, Identity Card;
Exh.WW1/2, letter dated 11th January, 1998 regarding regularization
of temporary employees in which the respondent was placed at serial
number 1 as a candidate and his place of work had been shown at
Chandni Chowk which letter was issued by the AGM to the Dy. AGM
for regularization of the services of the workmen. The reliance was
also placed on Ex.WW1/3, the identity card in which the respondent
has been designated as a Peon.

These documents have not been

denied by the petitioners which categorically reflect that the
respondent was initially appointed as a part time worker and in 1998
as Peon and on 22nd January, 2001, the Committee constituted for
regularization

of

temporary

employees/daily

wagers

had

recommended the name of the respondent for regularization.
WP(C) 827 of 2008

Page 3 of 12

6.

Though the petitioners have denied that there is relationship of

employer and employee but from the evidence produced before the
Labor Court, the plea of petitioners has been disbelieved. Nothing has
been shown by the learned counsel for petitioners to negate the
findings of the Labor Court regarding the employment of the
respondent and that the respondent worked for more than 240 days
for a number of years.

Relying on Section 11-A of the Industrial

Disputes Act and on AIR 2002 SC 1313, it has been held that the
respondent is entitled for reinstatement even though he is alleged to
be a daily wager on account of non-compliance of Section 25 F of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.

7.

The Labor Court has categorically held that the reinstatement

should not be mis-construed as regularization which is the sole plea
by the learned counsel for petitioners relying on (2006) 4 SCC 1,
Secretary, State of Karnataka and Others v. Uma Devi and Others.
The Labor Court has held that on reinstatement of the workman on
account of non-compliance of the provisions of Section 25 F of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, the petitioners may be entitled to
retrench him in accordance with first-come-last-to-go principle. It was
also held that the respondent is reinstated on account of violation of

WP(C) 827 of 2008

Page 4 of 12

the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947

and on

reinstatement he is not being regularized.

8.

While exercising its powers of judicial review under Article 226

of the Constitution of India this Court is not to re-appreciate the
evidence. It is a settled position of law that in exercise of jurisdiction
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the Court does not
interfere with factual findings of the lower courts and restrain itself
from re-appreciating evidence while exercising powers of judicial
review. Reliance for this proposition can be placed on the judgment of
the Supreme Court, Government of A.P. and Ors. v. Mohd. Nasrullah
Khan reported as (2006) 2 SCC 373. Reliance can also be placed on
the following judgments rendered by the Supreme Court and this
Court concerning the scope of judicial review by a writ court: Harbans
Lal v. Jagmohan Saran (1985) 4 SCC 333; B.C. Chaturvedi v. Union of
India (1995) 6 SCC 749; Indian Overseas Bank v. I.O.B. Staff Canteen
Workers' Union AIR 2000 SC 1508; Municipal Corporation of Delhi v.
Asha Ram and Anr.117 (2005) DLT 63 and Filmistan Exhibitors Ltd.
v. N.C.T. Secy. Labour and Ors. 131 (2006) DLT. In all the above
judgments, it has been held that a writ court should refrain from
interfering with the orders of an inferior Labor Court or subordinate
court unless it suffers from an error of jurisdiction, or from a breach
WP(C) 827 of 2008

Page 5 of 12

of the principles of natural justice or is vitiated by a manifest or
apparent error of law.

9.

The objective of judicial review is that a person receives a fair

treatment and objective is not to re-appreciate the entire pleas and
evidence and draw inferences again. The Apex Court in (1995) 6 SCC
749, B.C.Chaturvedi v. Union of India at page 759 in para 12 had held
as under:
“ 12 . Judicial review is not an appeal from a decision but
a review of the manner in which the decision is made.
Power of judicial review is meant to ensure that the
individual receives fair treatment and not to ensure that
the conclusion which the authority reaches is necessarily
correct in the eye of the court. When an inquiry is
conducted on charges of misconduct by a public servant,
the Court/Labor Court is concerned to determine whether
the inquiry was held by a competent officer or whether
rules of natural justice are complied with. Whether the
findings or conclusions are based on some evidence,
the authority entrusted with the power to hold inquiry
has jurisdiction, power and authority to reach a
finding of fact or conclusion. But that finding must be
based on some evidence. Neither the technical rules of
Evidence Act nor of proof of fact or evidence as
defined therein, apply to disciplinary proceeding.
When the authority accepts that evidence and conclusion
receives support therefrom, the disciplinary authority is
entitled to hold that the delinquent officer is guilty of the
charge. The Court/Labor Court in its power of judicial
review does not act as Appellate Authority to reappreciate the evidence and to arrive at its own
WP(C) 827 of 2008

Page 6 of 12

independent findings on the evidence. The Court/
Labor Court may interfere where the authority held the
proceedings against the delinquent officer in a manner
inconsistent with the rules of natural justice or in
violation of statutory rules prescribing the mode of inquiry
or where the conclusion or finding reached by the
disciplinary authority is based on no evidence. If the
conclusion or finding be such as no reasonable person
would have ever reached, the Court/Labor Court may
interfere with the conclusion or the finding, and
mould the relief so as to make it appropriate to the
facts of each case.”

10.

From the evidence on record, it is apparent that the finding of

the Court that the respondent worked for more than 240 days for
several years with the petitioners cannot be disputed and it cannot
also be disputed that there is relationship of employer and employee
between the petitioners and the respondent. There is no manifest error
or perversity in the findings of the Labor Court nor there is violation of
principles of natural justice in the facts and circumstances.

11.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has also relied on Indian

Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Ltd. Vs. Workmen, Indian Drugs &
Pharmaceuticals Ltd., (2007) 1 SCC 408 holding that regularization
cannot be a mode of appointment and the rules of recruitment cannot
be relaxed and the Court/Labor Courts cannot direct regularization of
temporary appointees de hors the rules.
WP(C) 827 of 2008

Learned counsel for
Page 7 of 12

petitioners has contended that even if the respondent had worked for
240 days, he could not be reinstated. The judgment relied on by
petitioners is apparently distinguishable. The case of the respondent
is not of regularization nor the Labor Court has directed the
petitioners to regularize the respondent. The case of the petitioners is
not under Section 2(oo)(bb) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. The
petitioners have not produced any documents to show that the
respondent was appointed on the project(s) and his appointment was
short lived or he was appointed for a fixed period and after the expiry
of fixed periods, he was not entitled to continue. Rather no cogent
evidence has been led by the petitioners in this regard. It has rather
been established that the respondent continuously worked during the
years 1997 to 2002. The petitioners have failed to establish as to how
the respondent was not regularized once the letter dated 22nd
November,2001

was

produced

by

the

respondent

stipulating

regularization of the temporary employees/daily wagers in which the
respondent was placed at serial number 1 as a Scheduled Caste
candidate and his place of work had been fixed at Chandni Chowk.

12.

Sub clause (bb) was introduced by amendment in 1984 to take

out a particular class of employment on contract basis under any
project or for some specific period from the ambit of Section 25 F of
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. The petitioners, however, have failed to
WP(C) 827 of 2008

Page 8 of 12

establish that the case of the respondent was covered under Section 2
(oo) (bb) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.

The case of the

petitioners is not that the respondent was appointed purely on casual
and temporary basis for specific work and his work was over and no
extension was given. Rather it has been established by the respondent
that he worked continuously for more than 240 days in a year for a
number of years. Since the termination of the respondent is not in
accordance with any contract and the respondent had worked for
more than 240 days from 1997 to 2003, the provisions of Section 25 F
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 were attracted and for noncompliance of the same, the Labor Court has rightly held that
petitioners are liable to reinstate the respondent and pay 50% back
wages. Labor Court has categorically clarified that reinstatement of
the respondent is not regularization and the petitioners shall be
entitled to resort to first-come-last-to-go principle in case the
petitioners want to retrench the respondent.

13.

It is settled law that the expression “termination of service for

any

reason

whatsoever”

in

the

definition

of

the

expression

“retrenchment” in Section 2(oo) of the Act covers every kind of
termination of service except those not expressly included in Section
25-F or not expressly provided for by other provisions of the Act such
as Sections 25-FF and 25-FFF. Therefore, even striking off the name
WP(C) 827 of 2008

Page 9 of 12

of a workman from the rolls without anything more constitutes
retrenchment within the meaning of the expression “retrenchment” in
Section 2(oo). Thus if termination of service of a workman is brought
about for any reason whatsoever, it would be retrenchment except if
the case falls within any of the excepted categories, i.e. (i) termination
by way of punishment inflicted pursuant to disciplinary action; (ii)
voluntary retirement of the workman; (iii) retirement of the workman
on reaching the age of superannuation, if the contract of employment
between the employer and the workman concerned contains a
stipulation in that behalf; (iv) or termination of the service on the
ground of continued ill health. Once the case does not fall in any of
the excepted categories the termination of service even if it be
according to automatic discharge from service under agreement would
nonetheless be retrenchment within the meaning of expression in
Section 2(oo). The Apex Court in the case of S.M. Nilajkar v. Telecom
District Manager,(2003) 4 SCC 27 had spelt out the cases where
termination of services of a workman will not be retrenchment and
engagement of a workman as a daily wager does not by itself amount
to putting the workman on notice that he has been engaged for a fixed
period and after that he would not be entitled to continue. It was held
at page 37 of S.M.Nilajkar(supra) as under:
13. The termination of service of a workman engaged in a
scheme or project may not amount to retrenchment
within the meaning of sub-clause (bb) subject to the
following conditions being satisfied:
WP(C) 827 of 2008

Page 10 of 12

(i)

that the workman was employed in a project or
scheme of temporary duration;

(ii)

the employment was on a contract, and not as a
daily-wager simpliciter, which provided inter alia
that the employment shall come to an end on the
expiry of the scheme or project;

(iii)

the employment came to an end simultaneously
with the termination of the scheme or project and
consistently with the terms of the contract; and

(iv)

the workman ought to have been apprised or made
aware of the above said terms by the employer at
the commencement of employment.

14. The engagement of a workman as a daily-wager does
not by itself amount to putting the workman on notice
that he was being engaged in a scheme or project which
was to last only for a particular length of time or up to the
occurrence of some event, and therefore, the workman
ought to know that his employment was short-lived. The
contract of employment consciously entered into by the
workman with the employer would result in a notice to
the workman on the date of the commencement of the
employment itself that his employment was short-lived
and as per the terms of the contract the same was liable
to termination on the expiry of the contract and the
scheme or project coming to an end. The workman may
not therefore complain that by the act of the employer his
employment was coming to an abrupt termination. To
exclude the termination of a scheme or project employee
from the definition of retrenchment it is for the employer
to prove the abovesaid ingredients so as to attract the
applicability of sub-clause (bb) abovesaid. In the case at
hand, the respondent employer has failed in alleging and
proving the ingredients of sub-clause (bb), as stated
hereinabove. All that has been proved is that the
appellants were engaged as casual workers or dailywagers in a project. For want of proof attracting
applicability of sub- clause (bb), it has to be held that the
termination of the services of the appellants amounted to
retrenchment.

14.

The respondent has worked for more than 240 days in a year for

a number of years before his termination which has been established
WP(C) 827 of 2008

Page 11 of 12

and nothing has been produced to the contrary. The findings of the
Labor Court in this regard, therefore, cannot be interfered with. Since
the provision of section 25 F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 were
applicable in the case of respondent and were not complied with, the
Labor Court was justified in reinstating the respondent. The Labor
Court has clarified that reinstatement is not regularization. The
reliance of the learned counsel for the petitioner on decisions of the
Supreme Court that the daily wagers cannot be regularized merely on
account of having worked for more than 240 days in a year for a
number of years is thus, not relevant in the facts and circumstances
as the respondent has been reinstated on account of violation of
section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.

15.

The award of the Labor Court does not have any manifest error

or any perversity so as to entail interference by this Court under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India. The writ petition in the facts
and circumstances is without any merit and is liable to be dismissed.
The writ petition, is, therefore, dismissed. The parties are however, left
to bear their own costs.

February 25th , 2008

ANIL KUMAR, J.

'Dev'
WP(C) 827 of 2008

Page 12 of 12

