*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P(C) No.1332/2008

%

Date of decision: 25.02.2008
Delhi Transport Corporation

….… Petitioner

Through: Mrs.Avnish Ahlawat, Advocate.
Versus
Shri Ram Phal

....... Respondent
Through : Nemo.

CORAM :*

HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

YES

2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.
*
1.

The petitioner corporation has impugned the award dated 9th

October, 2007 holding that no purpose will be served by reinstating the
respondent workman at this stage and also holding that he cannot be
awarded

full

back

wages

as

he

has

not

served

the

management/petitioner for a very long period, however, in order to meet
the ends of justice respondent has been awarded a compensation of
Rs.75,000/- in lieu of his reinstatement, back wages and other
consequential benefits.
W.P(C) No.1332/2008

Page 1 of 8

2.

An industrial dispute, “whether the removal of the respondent from

services was illegal and/or unjustified and, if so, what relief could be
granted to the respondent and what directions are necessary?” was
referred to the Labour Court.

3.

The respondent was stated to be inducted as a conductor in the

year 1976 and he was chargesheeted on 14th April, 1988 on the
allegation that he availed 111 days‟ leave without pay during the year
1987 which reflect his lack of interest in the work of the corporation. On
the basis of the allegations made against the respondent, a domestic
inquiry was conducted.

4.

The respondent workman challenged the domestic inquiry on the

ground that it was in violation of principle of natural justice and the
findings given by the Inquiry Officer were perverse.

The Disciplinary

Authority, however, removed him from the services of the Corporation by
order dated 31st July, 1995. The order of removal was challenged by the
respondent on the ground that it was disproportionate to the alleged
misconduct. The respondent workman also contended that he has been
unemployed since his illegal removal from the services and sought his
reinstatement with full back wages and continuity of service.

W.P(C) No.1332/2008

Page 2 of 8

5.

Regarding the inquiry, the Labour Court held that inquiry was

conducted according to the principle of natural justice.

6.

Regarding other issues, the Labour Court considered the record

and held that perusal of the record reflects that major portion of 111
days‟ leave was sanctioned.

The court relied on the statement of

respondent that he had applied for leave and the same were sanctioned
by Depot Manager and at no point of time any part of the leave was
turned down. The respondent had categorically contended that he did
not receive any communication regarding disapproval or non-sanction of
leave or any part thereof as was alleged against him in the impugned
charge sheet.

7.

The petitioner in the cross-examination of the respondent, who had

categorically contended that he had applied for the leave and he had not
received any communication disapproving the sanction of his leave, did
not cross examine the workman regarding this. The Labour Court noted
that the respondent workman was not at all cross-examined regarding
this. From the perusal of the leave record produced by the petitioner, it
was inferred by the Labour Court that out of total leave of 111 days, 96
days‟ leave was sanctioned.

9 day‟s leave was rejected, however, no

communication was sent to the respondent workman regarding nonW.P(C) No.1332/2008

Page 3 of 8

sanctioning of his leave for 9 days.

Out of sanctioned leave, 50 days‟

leave was granted on account of medical certificate whereas 55 days‟
leave was granted despite no medical certificate being produced. In these
circumstances, it has been inferred that since out of 111 days leave, 96
days‟ days leave was sanctioned and the communication regarding nonsanctioning of 9 days‟ leave was not sent, the misconduct cannot be
construed against the respondent in the facts and circumstances and in
any case it could not be inferred that the respondent was negligent and
his conduct reflected lack of interest. In the circumstances, dismissal
from the service for 6 days‟ leave in respect of which there does not
appear to be any application or any medical certificate reflects
disproportionate punishment awarded to the respondent of terminating
from the service.

8.

The Labour Court considered the judgment of the Supreme Court,

DTC vs. Sardar Singh, 2004 LLR 953. It was noted that though prior
permission was required for the leave, however, an exception had been
carved out in case of sudden illness in terms of clause 1. The Labour
court considering the pleas of the workman and held that once, it has
been established by the respondent that 96 days‟ leave was sanctioned,
out of which 50 days‟ was sanctioned on account of medical certificate
and 55 days‟ leave was sanctioned without medical certificate and
therefore, in the facts and circumstances, the burden had shifted on the
W.P(C) No.1332/2008

Page 4 of 8

management/petitioner to establish that the respondent was negligent
and absence of the respondent showed lack of interest.

9.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has emphatically relied on

Sardar Singh (supra) to contend that even if there is a sanctioned leave
without pay, it will tantamount to mis-conduct.

Perusal of the said

judgment rather reflects that the Apex court has noted the exception
carved out in case of sudden illness.

Admittedly, in the case of the

respondent, the leave was sanctioned without pay on the ground of
illness as respondent has produced the medical certificate for the leave of
50 days which was sanctioned.

10.

In these facts and circumstances, it has not been established by

the petitioner corporation that the respondent was negligent and showed
lack of interest and even if the leave is sanctioned without pay, it shall
still be misconduct on the part of the respondent. Fifty days leave was
sanctioned on account of illness for which medical certificates were
submitted by the respondent for which leave was sanctioned and for
remaining days medical certificate were not submitted but it was on
account of illness.

W.P(C) No.1332/2008

Page 5 of 8

11.

While exercising its powers of judicial review under Article 226 of

the Constitution of India this Court is not to re-appreciate the evidence
and findings of the Court unless the same are perverse or there is a
manifest error. It is a settled position of law that in exercise of
jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the Court does
not interfere with factual findings of the lower courts and restrain itself
from re-appreciating evidence while exercising powers of judicial review.
Reliance for this proposition can be placed on the judgment of the
Supreme Court, Government of A.P. and Ors. v. Mohd. Nasrullah Khan
reported as (2006) 2 SCC 373. Reliance can also be placed on the
following judgments rendered by the Supreme Court and this Court
concerning the scope of judicial review by a writ court: Harbans Lal v.
Jagmohan Saran (1985) 4 SCC 333; B.C. Chaturvedi v. Union of India
(1995) 6 SCC 749; Indian Overseas Bank v. I.O.B. staff Canteen Workers'
Union AIR 2000 SC 1508 ; Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Asha Ram
and Anr.117 (2005) DLT 63 and Filmistan Exhibitors Ltd. v. N.C.T. Secy.
Labour and Ors. 131 (2006) DLT. In all the above judgments, it has been
held that a writ court should refrain from interfering with the orders of
an inferior tribunal or subordinate court unless it suffers from an error
of jurisdiction, or from a breach of the principles of natural justice or is
vitiated by a manifest or apparent error of law.

W.P(C) No.1332/2008

Page 6 of 8

12.

The objective of judicial review is to ascertain that a person

received a fair treatment and objective is not to re-appreciate the entire
pleas and evidence and draw inferences again. The Apex Court in (1995)
6 SCC 749, B.C.Chaturvedi Vs Union of India at page 759 in para 12 had
held as under:
“ 12 . Judicial review is not an appeal from a decision but a
review of the manner in which the decision is made. Power of
judicial review is meant to ensure that the individual
receives fair treatment and not to ensure that the conclusion
which the authority reaches is necessarily correct in the eye
of the court. When an inquiry is conducted on charges of
misconduct by a public servant, the Court/Tribunal is
concerned to determine whether the inquiry was held by a
competent officer or whether rules of natural justice are
complied with. Whether the findings or conclusions are
based on some evidence, the authority entrusted with the
power to hold inquiry has jurisdiction, power and authority
to reach a finding of fact or conclusion. But that finding
must be based on some evidence. Neither the technical rules
of Evidence Act nor of proof of fact or evidence as defined
therein, apply to disciplinary proceeding. When the authority
accepts that evidence and conclusion receives support
therefrom, the disciplinary authority is entitled to hold that
the delinquent officer is guilty of the charge. The
Court/Tribunal in its power of judicial review does not act as
Appellate Authority to re-appreciate the evidence and to
arrive at its own independent findings on the evidence. The
Court/ Tribunal may interfere where the authority held the
proceedings against the delinquent officer in a manner
inconsistent with the rules of natural justice or in violation
of statutory rules prescribing the mode of inquiry or where
the conclusion or finding reached by the disciplinary
authority is based on no evidence. If the conclusion or
finding be such as no reasonable person would have ever
reached, the Court/Tribunal may interfere with the
W.P(C) No.1332/2008

Page 7 of 8

conclusion or the finding, and mould the relief so as to make
it appropriate to the facts of each case.”

13.

The Labour Court has considered the ratio of Sardar Singh‟s case

(supra) and exception carved out of illness. The case of the respondent is
not merely of sanctioned leave without pay but the sanctioned leave
without pay on account of illness for which medical certificates for
certain periods were also given by the respondent and remaining period
is also of leave without pay on account of illness for some period for
which medical certificate were not given and for 9 days for which the
leave was not sanctioned but refusal to sanction the leave was not
communicated to the respondent. The cases where the leave is
sanctioned without pay for the purpose of record and absence remain
unauthorized are distinguishable from the facts of the present case.

14.

In the facts and circumstances, there is no perversity or manifest

error or denial of principle of natural justice to the petitioner corporation
which will entail interference by this court under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India. The writ petition is, therefore, dismissed.

February 25th, 2008.

ANIL KUMAR J.

„k‟
W.P(C) No.1332/2008

Page 8 of 8

