*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C.) No.2337/2008

%

Date of decision : 25.03.2008

Ashok Kumar & Others

….…
Petitioners
Through: Mr.Varun Prasad, Advocate.

Versus

Executive Engineer, CPWD
.........
Through : Nemo.

Respondent

CORAM :HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1.
2.
3.

Whether reporters of Local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?
To be referred to the reporter or not?
Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.

1.

The petitioners have impugned the award dated 20th July, 2007

by Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court II declining the reference

WP(C) No.2337/2008

Page 1 of 9

whereby claim of petitioners for regularization in the establishment of
CPWD was declined.

2.

The petitioners raised an industrial dispute pursuant to which

the appropriate Government had made the following reference for
adjudication to the Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court II:“Whether the demand of the All India CPWD Karamchari
Union, New Delhi that S/Shri Ashok Kumar, Rakesh
Kumar and Jaswant who are working as wiremen through
contractor in the establishment of CPWD, Electrical
Division, VIII, New Delhi should be regularized in the
establishment of CPWD w.e.f. 07.10.2002 is legal and
justified? If so, to what relief the workmen are entitled.”?

3.

The petitioners contended that petitioner No.1 was initially

inducted on 7th October, 2002; petitioner No.2 was inducted on 7th
October, 2002 whereas the petitioner No.3 was also inducted on 7th
October, 2002 as wiremen through the private contractor. Petitioners
contended

that

ever

since

their

employment

they

had

been

discharging their jobs diligently and sincerely and were posted at
Shastri Bhawan, Sub Division III under the Executive Engineer,
Electrical Division VIII No.2.

According to petitioners, the job

discharged by them was perennial and permanent in nature and
satisfied all the ingredients contained under Section 10 of the
Contract Labour (Regulation & Abolition) Act, 1970 and, therefore, the

WP(C) No.2337/2008

Page 2 of 9

contract between petitioners and the contractor was bad in law. The
petitioners pleaded that they were placed under direct control and
supervision of the principal employer and the contractor had no role
to play in day-to-day affairs and the working of the workmen and the
nature of job performed by petitioners was similar to job carried on by
the regular employees of the respondent/principal employer. In these
circumstances, the petitioners claimed regularization of their services
with the respondent.

4.

The claim was contested by the respondent contending inter alia

that the petitioners were not engaged by the Department of CPWD and
they were engaged by a contractor who had taken the contract of
running operations of sub Station at Shastri Bhawan. According to
the respondent, the workmen/petitioners were always under the
control, administration and supervision of the contractor who had
employed them.

The respondents asserted that there is already

regular and sufficient staff with the Department of CPWD to carry out
their work. However, the petitioners were employed by the Contractor
to carry out some additional work and in order to meet sporadic need.
The respondent has given specific jobs to the contractor which are
purely temporary and need based.

After taking the contracts, the

contractors employed their personnel and petitioners are such

WP(C) No.2337/2008

Page 3 of 9

personnel.

5.

The respondents opposed the regularization on the ground that

for engagement on permanent basis, there is a definite process of
appointment. After due notification of the vacancies, the names of
appropriate suitable candidates are called from the employment
exchange and the petitioners were never appointed to permanent
posts and they are not entitled for regualisation

in the facts and

circumstances. It was also contended that the petitioners were not
appointed on any substantive vacancy on permanent basis nor their
names were called from the employment exchange nor they had been
issued any appointment letters by the respondent.

6.

I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and perused

the award dated 20th July, 2007 and other relevant depositions and
documents filed by the petitioners.

Learned counsel for petitioners

has contended that the petitioners were under the direct control of the
respondent and have relied on the documents filed along with the writ
petition from page Nos.122 to 230. However, perusal of the evidence
led before the Industrial Tribunal by the petitioner, it is apparent that
none of these documents were proved by the petitioners nor these
documents were put to the respondent in the cross examination. The

WP(C) No.2337/2008

Page 4 of 9

documents which were not proved by the petitioner and not put to the
opposite party cannot be relied on for impugning the award in the
proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.

The

documents now sought to be relied on by the petitioners were in their
power and possession and no ground has been made out for their non
production before the Labor Court. There is no ground canvassed by
the

petitioner

for

consideration

of

additional

documents

and

additional evidence.

7.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has very emphatically relied

on the fact that neither the respondent nor the contractor who had
employed the petitioners were registered under the Contract Labour
(Regulation & Abolition) Act, 1970.

This is also admitted by the

parties that the contract labour had been abolished by a notification
dated 31st July, 2002 and the Ministry of Labour had prohibited the
employment of contract labour for office/establishment of CPWD for
the work of wireman which fact was also accepted by MW1.

8.

The Labour Court has held that the petitioners were engaged in

breach of provisions of Section 7 of the Contract Labour (Regulation &
Abolition) Act, 1970 and, therefore, it was further held that though the
management acted in breach of Section 7 and 12 of the Contract

WP(C) No.2337/2008

Page 5 of 9

Labour (Regulation & Abolition) Act, 1970, however, relying on the
Deena Nath v. National Fertilizers Limited, 1992 LLR 46 (SC) and
National Projects Constructions Corporation Limited v. Labour
Enforcement Officer, (1991) 62 FLR 497 (Calcutta) it was held that the
breach of Sections 7 and 12 of the Act does not entitled the workmen
to be regularized. Consequently, relying on other judgments including
(2001) 7 SCC 1, Steel Authority of India Limited and others v. National
Union Waterfront Workers and Others, it has been held that the
petitioners are not entitled for regularization.

9.

Perusal of the testimonies of the witnesses on behalf of the

petitioner reflects that the petitioners are unable to prove that the
work was of perennial nature and the petitioners were working under
the control and supervision of the officials of the respondent. Merely
because there has been violation of provisions of Contract Labour
(Regulation & Abolition) Act, 1970, the petitioners shall not be entitled
for regularization. The supreme Court in Steel Authority of India and
Others (supra) had held that where a workman is hired through a
contractor, master and servant relationship exists but where a
workman is hired in or in connection with the work of a establishment
to produce a given result or the contractor supplies workmen for any
work of the establishment, unless, the contractor is mere camouflage,

WP(C) No.2337/2008

Page 6 of 9

the workmen cannot be treated as an employee of the Principal
employer. The Apex Court in Steel Authority of India (supra) on page
55 in para 105 had held as under:
“105. The principle that a beneficial legislation needs to be
construed liberally in favour of the class for whose benefit it is
intended, does not extend to reading in the provisions of the Act
what the legislature has not provided whether expressly or by
necessary implication, or substituting remedy or benefits for
that provided by the legislature. We have already noticed above
the intendment of the CLRA Act that it regulates the conditions
of service of the contract labour and authorizes in Section 10(1)
prohibition of contract labour system by the appropriate
Government on consideration of factors enumerated in subsection (2) of Section 10 of the Act among other relevant factors.
But, the presence of some or all those factors, in our view,
provides no ground for absorption of contract labour on
issuing notification under sub-section (1) of Section 10.
Admittedly, when the concept of automatic absorption of contract
labour as a consequence of issuing notification under Section
10(1) by the appropriate Government, is not alluded to either in
Section 10 or at any other place in the Act and the consequence of
violation of Sections 7 and 12 of the CLRA Act is explicitly
provided in Sections 23 and 25 of the CLRA Act, it is not for the
High Courts or this Court to read in some unspecified remedy in
Section 10 or substitute for penal consequences specified in
Sections 23 and 25 a different sequel, be it absorption of contract
labour in the establishment of principal employer or a lesser or a
harsher punishment. Such an interpretation of the provisions of
the statute will be far beyond the principle of ironing out the
creases and the scope of interpretative legislation and as such,
clearly impermissible. We have already held above, on
consideration of various aspects, that it is difficult to accept that
Parliament intended absorption of contract labour on issue of
abolition notification under Section 10(1) of the CLRA Act.
In the case of the petitioner it has been held that the agreement
between the respondent and the contractor is valid and is not a sham
document and the petitioners are the employees of the contractor. On

WP(C) No.2337/2008

Page 7 of 9

the breaches committed by the respondent and contractor of the
provisions of the Act, the petitioners will not become entitled for
regularization in the service of the respondent.

In the circumstances,

there is no manifest error or such an error which will entail
interference by this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India.

10.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has also emphasized that in

view of the violation of Sections 7 and 12 of the Contract Labour
(Regulation & Abolition) Act, 1970, the petitioners have become direct
employees of the respondent.

The reference made by the appropriate

Government was restricted to whether the petitioners are entitled to
be regularized in the services of respondent or not.

Consequently,

neither the Industrial Tribunal has considered about the petitioners
having become the direct employee of the respondent nor it had been
canvassed before the Court. In the circumstances, this Court is not to
give any finding as to whether the petitioners shall be direct
employees of the respondent or not. Even if the petitioners will become
direct employees of the respondent, they will not be entitled for
regularization. If the direct employees of the respondent are appointed
on daily basis or to carry out some specific jobs and who are not
appointed to substantive permanent posts are not entitled for

WP(C) No.2337/2008

Page 8 of 9

regularization, a fortiori, the employees of the contractor who may be
deemed to be direct employees of the respondent on account of certain
breaches of the Act will also not be entitled for regularization.

11.

The writ petition, in the facts and circumstances, is, therefore,

without any merit and is liable to be dismissed. The writ petitioner is
therefore, dismissed.

March 25th, 2008.

ANIL KUMAR J.

‘K/Dev’

WP(C) No.2337/2008

Page 9 of 9

