IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of decision : January 25th , 2008
WP(C) No.449/2008
#
!

Tarun Kumar

….… Petitioner
Through: Mr.Varun Prasad, Advocate.
Versus

$
^

Delhi Golf Club Ltd.
Through: Nemo.

......... Respondent

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
*

1.

The petitioner has impugned the order dated 16th November,

2006 of Labour Court XVIII dismissing the challenge to the inquiry
and upholding the same and holding that the termination of the
petitioner with effect from 28th September, 1998 is legal and the
inquiry conducted was fair and proper and in accordance with
principle of natural justice.
2.

The grievance of the petitioner is that he could not be subject to

a second inquiry on the same charge and the inquiry was conducted
by an advocate who was not a member of the Club and consequently
WP(C) No.449/2008

Page 1 of 4

the same was against the principle of natural justice and, therefore,
his termination was illegal and he sought reinstatement with full back
wages.
3.

The Labor Court has noticed that an inquiry was conducted by

Shri

B.M.Kapoor in which the petitioner and one Shri Satte Singh

were co-delinquent.
inquiry

and

inferred

The Labour Court considered the rules for
that

there

was

no

rule

debarring

the

Management from getting an inquiry conducted by an outsider.

It

was also noticed that requirement was that the Inquiry Officer should
be an independent and unbiased person and should have a valid
authority from the employer. Since there was no allegation against
the Inquiry

Officer

that

as an Advocate he represented

the

Management in any of the cases, it was held that he did not have any
bias and the contention of the petitioner was rejected.
4.

The plea of the petitioner that he could not be subject to two

inquiries has also been negated as the first inquiry was just a
preliminary inquiry and conducted by Shri K.S. Mittal, Financial
Controller and on the basis of that the full inquiry was conducted
under Clause 23.4, 23.21 and 23.41 of the Service Rules.

The

substance of the charge against the workman is that he connived with
two employees of M/s.Kallu & Co., suppliers of Chicken & Broilers
and manipulated the accounts of the Management to show receipt of

WP(C) No.449/2008

Page 2 of 4

more quantity of material than actually received thereby leading to
inflated bills and loss to the Management. It was noticed that the role
of Shri Satte Singh was to approve the bills which were put before him
as the Assistant Manager (Stores) and such bills were to be countersigned by Shri Satte Singh. Since Shri Satte Singh admitted that he
was gross negligent in not verifying the bills himself and did not
conduct the periodic counter checks to detect the bungling, it was
inferred that guilt against the petitioner was different. The charges
against the petitioner were also inferred on the basis of statements of
two employees of the supplier, namely, Mohd. Yakub and Mohd.
Ahmed. The Labour Court has thus held that even if the deposition of
Shri Satte Singh is not used against him, there were sufficient
independent evidence to prove the charges against the petitioner.
5.

It is a settled position of law that in exercise of jurisdiction

under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, this Court is not to
interfere with factual findings of the lower courts nor will reappreciate the evidence while exercising powers of judicial review.
Reliance for this proposition can be placed on the judgment of the
Supreme Court, Government of A.P. and Ors. v. Mohd. Nasrullah
Khan reported as (2006) 2 SCC 373. It was held that the writ court
should refrain from interfering with the orders of an inferior tribunal
or subordinate court unless it suffers from an error of jurisdiction or
from a breach of the principles of natural justice or is vitiated by a
WP(C) No.449/2008

Page 3 of 4

manifest or apparent error of law. The objective of judicial review is
that a person receives a fair treatment and objective is not to reappreciate the entire pleas and evidence and draw inferences again.
Judicial review is not an appeal from a decision but a review of the
manner in which the decision is made. Power of judicial review is
meant to ensure that the individual receives fair treatment and not to
ensure that the conclusion which the authority reaches is necessarily
correct in the eye of the court.
6.

In the facts and circumstances, there is no perversity or

manifest error or denial of principle of natural justice while passing
the order dated 16th November, 2006 so as to entail inference by this
Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. The writ petition
in the facts and circumstances is without any merit and is, therefore,
dismissed.

January 25th, 2008.
'Dev'

WP(C) No.449/2008

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 4 of 4

