IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Decision: July 26th, 2007
CP No.144/2007
# M/s.HDFC Bank Limited

..... PETITIONER
Through:
Mr.Parag Tripathi, Sr. Advocate
with Mr. Kunal Tandon, Advocate
Versus

$ M/s.Neelam (India) Pvt. Ltd.

..... RESPONDENT

Through:

Nemo.

CORAM :* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
1.

This is a petition filed by the petitioner bank under Section 433(e), 434

and 439 of the Companies Act, 1956 for winding up M/s.Neelam India Pvt.
Ltd. The plea of the petitioner is that working capital to the extent of Rs.150
lakh being an inventory finance was sanctioned to M/s.Silver Line Motors Pvt.
Ltd. In order to avail the inventory finance, M/s.Silverline Motors Pvt. Ltd.
submitted various documents including a letter of continuing guarantee dated
30th November, 2005 by the respondent in favor of the petitioner.

CP No.144/2007

Page 1 of 13

2.

The petitioner has produced the letter of continuing guarantee alleged

to be signed on behalf of the respondent by Neelam Sharma as Director of
respondent. The letter of continuing guarantee though signed on behalf of
respondent has various blanks regarding the facilities granted to the borrower
in respect of which the alleged guarantee was executed; the principal amount
granted to the borrower towards the said credit facilities; the Bank branch at
which it was payable; the date on which it was signed. In the beginning of this
letter, the date is given as 30th November, 2005, in the end of the letter of
continuing guarantee no date is given. The letter of continuing guarantee
also has blanks as pursuant to which resolution of the Board the seal of the
respondent company was affixed and in presence of which persons.

3.

According to the petitioner, the borrower, M/s.Silverline Motors Pvt.

Ltd., failed to maintain financial discipline, consequently, was declared as
NPA (Non Performing Asset) on 24th January, 2005 and in accordance with
the guidelines of Reserve Bank of India. It is also alleged by the petitioner
bank that M/s.Silverline Motors Pvt. Ltd. agreed to pay the overdue amount
and issued post-dated cheques to the bank, however, these cheques were

CP No.144/2007

Page 2 of 13

subsequently replaced, the details of which are given in para 3 of the petition.
Later on payment of these cheques was stopped by the drawer.

4.

The petitioner contended that since the respondent company and

M/s.Silverline Motors Pvt. Ltd. did not have any intention to repay the
amounts outstanding of the cheques, complaints under Section 138 read with
Section 141 and 142 of the Negotiable Instruments Act were filed against
M/s.Silverline Motors Pvt. Ltd. Perusal of the copy of the complaints filed
under Section 138 read with Section 141 and 142 of Negotiable Instrument
Act, 1881, before the Metropolitan Magistrate at 33rd Court, Ballard Pier,
Mumbai, which is at page 75 of the paper book, it is apparent that no
complaint has been filed against the respondent company.

5.

In the circumstances, it is apparent that neither any cheque was given

by the respondent company towards repayment of alleged amount from
borrower nor any of the cheques of the respondent company has been
dishonoured entailing proceedings under Section 138 of Negotiable
Instruments Act, 1881 against the respondent company.

CP No.144/2007

Page 3 of 13

6.

According to the allegations of the petitioner, since M/s.Silverline

Motors Pvt. Ltd. failed to pay the alleged amount of Rs.1,39,74,969.59
despite various demands made to them, petitioner bank filed a petition before
Debt Recovery Tribunal which was registered as OA No.200/2006. The plea
of the petitioner is that the Debt Recovery Tribunal has restrained
M/s.Silverline Motors Pvt. Ltd. from disposing, alienating, and/or selling the
properties owned by M/s.Silverline Motors Pvt. Ltd. A copy of the order dated
20th November, 2006 of the Debt Recovery Tribunal has also been produced
whereby interim relief in terms of prayer clauses b (i), c (i) and c (ii) had been
granted against all the defendants. Perusal of the schedule of the properties
annexed with the recovery petition filed before the Debt Recovery Tribunal
reflects that the properties mentioned in Exh.B1, B2 are of defendant No.1
besides the immovable property at Solan shown in Exh.C and another
property at Sainik Farms, New Delhi shown in Exh.D. The list of documents
filed with the petition before the Debt Recovery Tribunal reflects that a letter
of continuing guarantee dated 29th September, 2005 was filed whereas the
copy of the letter of continuing guarantee with the present petition, annexure
5, is dated 30th November, 2005, and in the list of documents no letter of
continuing guarantee by the respondent, M/s.Neelam India Pvt. Limited, has
been filed by the petitioner.

CP No.144/2007

Page 4 of 13

7.

Learned senior counsel for the petitioner has contended that before

the Debt Recovery Tribunal no reply has yet been filed by respondent and
the matter is pending adjudication nor any order has been passed against the
respondent determining his liabilities. A notice dated 22nd December, 2006
was given by the petitioner to the respondent stipulating that an amount of
Rs.1,15,46,489.74 is due from M/s.Silverline Motors Pvt. Ltd. and as the
respondent stood guarantor to the said transaction, therefore, the respondent
is liable to pay the amount along with interest @ 10% per annum and penal
interest @ 9% from 10th October, 2006.

8.

The notice of the petitioner is denied by the respondent contending

specifically that the amount claimed by the petitioner is disputed and the
amount as demanded by the petitioner does not constitute debt admitted by
the respondent. It was also contended that sufficient assets are available
with the principal borrower, namely, M/s.Silverline Motors Pvt. Ltd. and,
therefore, there is no occasion for petitioner to cast the present notice to be
issued to the respondent. The respondent also objected to the admission of
Rs.1,15,46,489.74 on the ground that no statement of M/s.Silverline Motors
Pvt. Ltd. has been provided to the respondent and, therefore, the respondent

CP No.144/2007

Page 5 of 13

cannot even comment as to how this amount has been claimed by the
petitioner from the respondent. The respondent has also contended that the
provisions of winding up machinery is not to be used as a method of recovery
and respondent is solvent and possess current assets which are more than
sufficient to meet the alleged liabilities and, therefore, it cannot be stated that
the respondent is unable to pay its debt.

9.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has also relied on 115 (2004) Delhi

Law times, 453 (DB), Bank of Nova Scotia Vs. RPG Transmission Limited
holding that in case the remedies available to the petitioner under the Debt
Recovery Tribunal Act and under the Companies Act are available, then it is
for the petitioner to choose one of the remedies available to him. It was held
that the claim in petition for winding up a company and for recovery under the
DRT act, both the remedies pertaining to their jurisdiction are mutually
exclusive of each other and there is no inconsistency between two different
remedies. It was also held that it cannot be said that RDB Act covers field for
winding up an insolvent company. The relevant observation of the Division
Bench is as under:"30. Therefore, it cannot be said that RDB Act covers the field
for winding up an insolvent company and, therefore, the
contentions of Mr. Tripathi are misconceived and are
accordingly rejected. The contention that the petitioner could
CP No.144/2007

Page 6 of 13

choose one of the remedies available in case where two or
more than two remedies are available is applicable when the
remedy provided for is one and the same but when two different
remedies are provided for two different reliefs, in that event the
plea of election of remedies is not applicable. We, therefore,
hold that the winding up Court is concerned with the issue as to
whether or not a company could be declared as commercially
insolvent and, therefore, comes within the ambit of provisions of
Section 433 of the Companies Act. The Debt Recovery Tribunal
does not have any jurisdiction to entertain any such application
for winding up of a company whether the same is by any bank
and/or other financial institution. We also hold that both the
remedies and jurisdictions are mutually exclusive of each other
and, therefore, there cannot be any inconsistency between the
two different remedies provided for in two different legislations.
We respectfully agree with the Division Bench decisions of
Bombay and Calcutta High Court referred to above. The legal
issue, which arises for our consideration is answered
accordingly………….."

10.

This is not disputed that the petition under Section 433(e) read with

Section 434 (1)(a) of the Companies Act, 1956 is maintainable despite the
pendency of the recovery proceedings initiated by the petitioner against the
respondent as a guarantor before the Debt Recovery Tribunal. However,
before any proceedings can be initiated for winding up the respondent, the
petitioner must establish that a definite sum of money is payable immediately.
It is also settled that a winding up petition is not legitimate means of seeking
to enforce payment of a debt which is bonafide disputed by the company and
in case there are bonafide disputes, there cannot be neglect to pay within the

CP No.144/2007

Page 7 of 13

meaning of Section 433(1)(a) of the Companies Act, 1956. The Madras High
Court in Tubes India Ltd. Vs. Rim and Accessories (P) Ltd., (1993) 3
Company Law Journal 322 had held that if there is a dispute as regards the
payment of the same towards the principal, however, small that sum may be,
a petition for winding up shall not be maintainable and the necessary forum
for determination of such a dispute existing between the parties shall be the
civil court or appropriate other forum.

11.

The rules as regards the disposal of winding-up petition based on

disputed claims are thus stated by the Apex Court in Madhusudan
Gordhandas & Co. v. Madhu Woollen Industries (P) Ltd., (1971) 3 SCC 632.
The Supreme Court has held that if the debt is bona fide disputed and the
defense is a substantial one, the court will not wind up the company. The
principles on which the court acts are:

(i) that the defence of the company is in good faith and one of
substance;
(ii) the defence is likely to succeed in point of law; and
(iii) the company adduces prima facie proof of the facts on
which the defence depends.

CP No.144/2007

Page 8 of 13

12.

Generally speaking, an admission of debt should be available and/or

the defense that has been adopted should appear to the Court not to be
dishonest and/or a moonshine, for proceedings to continue. If there is
insufficient material in favour of the petitioner, such disputes can be properly
adjudicated in a regular civil suit. It is extremely helpful to draw upon the
analogy of a summary suit under Order XXXVII of the

Code of Civil

Procedure. If the Company Court reaches the conclusion that, had it been
exercising

ordinary

original

civil

jurisdiction

it

would

have

granted

unconditional leave to defend, it must dismiss the winding-up petition or if
there are such admissions on the basis of which a decree can be passed in
favor of the petitioner under Order 12 rule 6 of the Code of Civil Procedure
then the petitioner can be admitted. In (1994) 3 Supreme Court Cases 348,
Pradeshiya Industrial & Investment Corporation of U.P. Vs. North India
Petrochemicals Ltd. and Another it was held by the Apex court that an order
under Section 433 (e) is discretionary and the debt claimed by the petitioner
against a company whose winding up is sought must be a determined or a
definite sum of money payable immediately or at a future date. It was further
observed by the Apex Court that the inability referred to in the expression
“unable to pay its dues” and Section 433(e) should be taken in commercial

CP No.144/2007

Page 9 of 13

sense that is to say that its assets are such and its existing liabilities are such
so as to reasonably ascertain that the assets would be insufficient to meet
the existing liabilities.

13.

For the company court to exercise its discretion for the remedy for

winding up, an admission of debt should be available and/or the defence that
has been put forward should appear to the court not to be dishonest and/or
moonshine. In exercise of discretionary jurisdiction by this court, it has to be
seen that the debt claimed by the respondent is payable, prima facie, and the
onus to a great extent is placed on the petitioner to satisfy the court prima
facie. In every case for winding up which is filed before the company Court,
the notice is not to be issued and the respondent company is to be asked to
show that its defense is bona fide. From the facts pleaded and the
documents produced by the petitioner, if it can not be inferred that the
admission of debt is available, the Court can refuse to exercise its discretion.

14.

The letter of continuing guarantee relied on by the petitioner is dated

30th November, 2005 which has various blanks and it does not spell as to in
respect of which credit facilities the respondent had guaranteed to the
principal borrower. The petitioner has failed to aver and plead as to which of

CP No.144/2007

Page 10 of 13

the credit facilities granted to the principal borrower in respect of which the
alleged letter of continuing guarantee should be construed when the letter of
continuing guarantee is blank about it. Perusal of the copy of the record filed
before the Debt Recovery Tribunal also reflects that alleged letter relied on
for seeking winding up the respondent company does not find mention in the
schedule of list of documents a copy of which is annexed at page 132 of the
present petition. Though in the index filed along with the original application,
the corporate guarantee dated 30th November, 2005 executed by the
defendant No.4 has been referred to. In the petition, the petitioner has mainly
made allegations against the principal borrower, M/s.Silverline Motors Pvt.
Ltd. except that the payment of the cheques given by M/s.Silverline Motors
Pvt. Ltd. has been stopped by the drawer and, therefore, even the
respondent company does not have any intention to repay the amount
outstanding. The complaints for dishonoring of cheques have also been filed
against the principal borrower and Directors and not against the respondent.
The interim order dated 20th November, 2006 passed by the Debt Recovery
Tribunal is also against the principal borrower M/s.Silverline Motors Pvt. Ltd.
as is apparent from para 16 of the petition. The statutory notice given to the
respondent also demands Rs.1,15,46,489.74 without giving any details as to
in which account this amount is due and how the respondent has admitted its

CP No.144/2007

Page 11 of 13

liability.

Merely on the basis of alleged letter of continuing guarantee, it

cannot be inferred that an amount of Rs.1,15,46,489.74 has been admitted
by the respondent even though this may reflect, in case such a letter of
continuing guarantee which has various blanks can be relied on, that the
respondent has a liability. As to how much is the liability of the respondent,
the amount claimed by the petitioner cannot be fastened on the respondent
company without adjudication. If the liability of respondent is not settled, the
petitioner cannot allege that the respondent has failed to pay its debt. The
reply to notice was given by the respondent seeking the statement of
borrower’s accounts as maintained by the petitioner bank, however, no such
account has been provided by the petitioner bank to the respondent.
Learned counsel for the petitioner was unable to disclose whether the reply to
the communication dated 19th March, 2007 of the respondent was even sent.
In the circumstances, it is not possible to infer that the alleged liability of the
respondent of Rs.1,15,46,489.74 is acknowledged and admitted and the
respondent has failed to pay the same and it should be deemed that the
respondent company is unable to pay its debts and should be wound up in
the present facts and circumstances of the case. I do not find any merit in the
case of the petitioner so as to exercise this jurisdiction to wind up the
respondent company.

CP No.144/2007

Page 12 of 13

15.

The petition for the winding up of the respondent company is without

any merit and it is dismissed.

July 26th, 2007
‘sdp’

CP No.144/2007

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 13 of 13

