*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

%

Date of decision: February 26, 2007

+

W.P.(C).No.6254/2006

PRASHANT VATS

....
PETITIONER
Through: Mr. Arvind Nigam, Advocate and Mr.
Sanjeev Nigam, Advocate for the Petitioner.
Versus

UNIVERSITY OF DELHI & ANR
....
RESPONDENTS
Through: Mr. V.P.Singh Sr.Advocate with
Mohinder J.S.Rupal, Advocate for the
Respondent No.1.
Ms.Latika Chaudhary, Advocate for the
respondent No.2.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

YES

2. To be referred to the reporter or not?

YES

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES

Anil Kumar, J.
1.

This order shall dispose of this writ petition against the order of the

Delhi University canceling petitioner’s examination of CEE, 2005 and
further debarring him for five years from appearance in the examinations
of Delhi University w.e.f June, 2005. The petitioner had appeared in the
WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 1 of 62

CEE, 2005 on 29th May, 2005 and the result was declared on 13th June,
2005 and he was given question series no.14. After following the
procedure as contemplated under rules and regulations, petitioner’s
examination for CEE, 2005 has been cancelled and he has been debarred
for a period of five years for using unfair means in the examination.

2.

Some relevant details of the petitioner regarding the year he

qualified the Senior Secondary Examination, percentage of marks
obtained by him in the senior secondary examination, percentage of
marks in Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics, his roll number in CEE,
2005 examination, rank obtained by him in CEE, 2005; the question series
which was given to him in CEE, 2005 examination and ranking of the
petitioner in other competitive examinations to comprehend the disputes
are as under:
Prashant Vats
Question Series
:
Roll No.
Rank CEE, 2005
:
Rank AIEEE, 2005 :
Rank GGSIP, 2005 :
Year of passing
School
:
Marks in School
:
52+28)
Percentage of marks

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

14
:
70044
24
1,01,125
15,009
2005
PCM

204

:

68%

(Math59,

Physics36+29,

Chem

Page 2 of 62

Marks before EDC out of
120 marks in 30 questions:

3.

33

The petitioner scored following marks and his ranking in CEE, 2005

was as under:Name of the Candidate

Prashant Vats

4.

Marks Ranking
Obtained
528

in
CEE,2005
24

The comparison of the answer book of the petitioner with the

answer book of students, Rajat Parihar and Sandarbh Kapoor, who
appeared in CEE, 2005 from different centres revealed unusual similarity.
Rajat parihar and Sandarbh Kapoor were given series 14 and series 16
respectively and they had secured rank 20 and 25 respectively in CEE,
2005. On comparison and tabulation of their answers it was revealed that
the questions which were answered incorrectly were almost the same and
their incorrect options, as every question had four options, were also the
same. It was pointed out that the questions in different series were the
same and the only difference was in the arrangement of the questions i.e.
same questions were shown at different serial numbers in different series.

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 3 of 62

The answers of questions which were found to be wrong of the petitioner
and the students, Rajat Parihar and Sandarbh Kapoor were as under:-

Question numbers whose
Answers were incorrect
3
10
14
23
30
31
50
54
61
66
62
68
77
90
95
99
99
101
105
106
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
130
133
136
139

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Same Option
(Answer)
attempted
3
2
3
1
3
4
3
3
1
2
2
2
4
2
3
3
3
1
4
1
3
3
2
2
2
4
1
4
3
2
1

Page 4 of 62

148
150
153
162

5.

2
4
3
4

Another striking similarity in the answer books of the petitioner and

the above named students was that they did not attempt the same
questions i.e. did not give answer to the same question which was
question no. 163 in series 14 which was at serial no. 153 in QPB series
16. Besides this question, petitioner and Sandarbh Kapoor also did not
answer a question which was at serial no.62 in series 14 and the same
question was at serial no. 112 in QPB series 16. Petitioner also did not
answer question number 170.

6.

The dissimilarities in answers which has led to slight difference in

the marks of the petitioner with the other two students and their different
ranking are as follows.
i.

The petitioner did not answer question 170 whereas Rajat
Parihar and Sandarbh Kapoor had answered said question
which was at serial no. 160 in series 16 with option 4.

ii.

The petitioner and Rajat parihar wrongly attempted question
no. 65 with option 1. Petitioner did not answer question no.
62 whereas Rajat Parihar had answered the same question
with option 4.

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 5 of 62

iii.

The petitioner marked options 4 and 1 for the question nos.
6 and 65 whereas Sandarbh Kapoor answered the same
questions which were at serial no. 56 and 115 in QPB series
16 with options 1 and 4.

These miniscule differences in their answers had led to the different
scores and different ranks in CEE, 2005 examination. The petitioner
secured a rank of 24 whereas Rajat Parihar and Sandarbh Kapoor
secured a rank of 20 and 25 respectively.

7.

A petition seeking cancellation of result of CEE on the ground that

the question paper had leaked and rigging of paper of CEE, 2005 was
filed and an order canceling the admission of 33 students, on the ground
that they had adopted unfair and illegal means, was passed on 25th July,
2005. A complaint was made to CBI. In the complaint it was disclosed
that number of candidates scoring ranks 13, 25, 36 & 56 were 5, 3, 2 &
11 in numbers who had scored exactly the same marks in physics,
chemistry and mathematics. Aggrieved by the said order some students
had filed an appeal before the division bench which was disposed of by
order dated 23rd August, 2005 and CBI was directed to complete the
investigation within six weeks. The name of the petitioner did not figure in

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 6 of 62

the list of fourteen candidates furnished by the CBI. The house of
petitioner was however raided by CBI.

8.

The University of Delhi had given show cause notice to the

petitioner dated 6th October, 2005 which was replied by him. The
University of Delhi, however, cancelled his examination by Memorandum
dated 21st October, 2005 against which the petitioner filed a writ petition
being WP (C) 20512 of 2005. The University of Delhi withdrew the show
cause notice which was given and the memorandum canceling the
examination and as such the writ petition being WP (C) 20512 of 2005
was disposed of by order dated 8.2.2006 and the liberty was given to the
University of Delhi to issue fresh show cause notices.

9.

Pursuant thereto another show cause notice dated 23rd February,

2006 was issued to the petitioner calling upon him to explain in writing why
disciplinary action as contemplated under Ordinance X-A of the Delhi
University be not taken and the petitioner was directed to appear before
the Examination Disciplinary Committee (EDC). The petitioner appeared
before the EDC where the petitioner was asked to solve a question paper
containing 30 questions. Considering the show cause notice, reply given

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 7 of 62

and other factors including the answers to the 30 questions given during
the hearing, a notice was given on 7th April, 2006 asking the petitioner to
show cause as to why the result of the petitioner for CEE, 2005 be not
cancelled and he be further debarred for five years. After considering the
reply given by the petitioner, the University of Delhi has debarred the
petitioner for a period of five years and has also cancelled his examination
for CEE, 2005 by order dated 19th April, 2006 on the ground that the
petitioner has used unfair means in the examinations. The order was
based on the facts that the ranking of the petitioner in AIEEE, 2005
conducted by Central Board of secondary Education was 101125 and in
GGSIP, 2005 conducted by Guru Gobind Singh Inderprastha University
was 15009 whereas in CEE it was 24; petitioner scored only 33 marks out
of 120 marks in 30 questions which were put to the petitioner; on the QPB
same questions were ticked twice using pen and pencil both; 36 wrongly
attempted questions of the petitioner were same as that of Rajat Parihar;
there was bunching of result in series 14 around ranks 20-25; encoding in
the OMR of the petitioner matches with Sandarbh Kapoor (series 16) and
a major bunching was around rank 25-30 in series 16; different series
were created by relative shift of the questions in a subject and key which
belongs to series 14 were derived from key for series 16; encoding done

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 8 of 62

on the OMR sheet of Sandarbh Kapoor after shifting of questions in
various subject matches to a large extent with the encoding on the OMR
sheets of the petitioner; key for questions 1-180 found written in the QPB
of Sandarbh Kapoor and the petitioner had erased written material on
pages 8 and 9 of his QPB with the intention of hiding information though
there was no necessity for erasing any information written on QPB.

10.

The show cause notice dated 23rd February, 2006 was issued to the

petitioner stipulated the earlier orders passed by the High Court and
superseding the earlier show cause notice and memorandum dated 21 st
October, 2005. It also mentioned about the scrutiny done on the basis of a
complaint which revealed the bunching of results/ranks and about the
questions which were left unattempted or the questions which were
wrongly answered tallied almost completely which made the University to
believe that certain malpractices were adopted in the course of the
examination CEE, 2005. It also stipulated the names of the candidates in
respect of whom bunching was noticed. In the show cause notice to the
petitioner, it was categorically stated that the copies of OMR sheets of all
these candidates were supplied to him. The copies of expert reports were
also given to the petitioner. It was also mentioned that the phone bearing

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 9 of 62

numbers 9872899095 and 9899214819 were recovered by the invigilators
from Mr.Anshul Aggarwal( Roll No.16628) and Mr. Saumya Agarwal (Roll
No.68059). Mr. Anshul Aggarwal had confessed that the last SMS
received on his mobile phone was `03244312241310" which was the
answer from second numeral to last but one, of questions number 168 to
179. The OMR answer sheet is printed in blocks of five rows, each row
corresponding to one question and each row has four ovals marked 1 to 4.
The numbers in the ovals refer to the options for each question as set out
in QPB. Any key to answers to these questions would consist of five digit
numbers having numerals from 1 to 4. It was stated that the said incident
of recovery of mobile phones and communication of messages in digital
form had created doubts that unfair means were used in CEE, 2005. In
Para 6 of the notice given to the petitioner the result of scrutiny of QPB
and OMR answer sheets of the petitioner was given. The petitioner had
given reply to the notice issued to him. Para 6 of the show cause notices
given to the petitioner and his reply dated 28.2.2006 are as under:
PRASHANT VATS - W.P.(C).NO.6254/2006

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 10 of 62

6. In course of this detailed scrutiny,
your QPB and OMR answer sheet was
also taken up. You had secured a
common rank of 24.
The scrutiny
revealed as under:

6. That it is not understood why my
results were scrutinized in detail since it
is the stand of the University that it was
the results of the candidates detailed in
paragraph 3 alone whose results were
scrutinized in detail. The contents of
the paragraph under reply are
accordingly
contradictory
to
the
assertion of the University in paragraph
5 of the said Show Cause Notice. It is,
however, a matter of record that I
secured rank 24 at the said
examination.
It is further stated that the assertions of
the University in the paragraph under
reply are contrary to the earlier Show
Cause Notice dated 6.10.2005, the
Memorandum dated 21.10.2005 as also
the Counter Affidavit filed to Writ
Petition (Civil) No.20512 of 2005 are at
variance with each other and also
contrary to the allegations sought to be
leveled in the Show Cause Notice
under reply. I crave leave to refer to
and rely upon the said documents in
this behalf at an appropriate stage if
found necessary.

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 11 of 62

(i) The QPB in respect of Q.Nos.36, 37,
39, 40, 43, 44, 45, 46, 48, 49, 50, 51,
56, 57, 59, 60, 61, 63, 64, 67, 68, 69,
70, 77, 80, 81, 82, 89, 92, 94, 99, 120,
124, 128, 138, 144, 147, 148, 149, 150,
152, 153, 156, 157 and 168, you have
ticked two options. However, only one
out of two options ticked has been
encoded in the OMR sheet.

(i) That the allegation that in respect of
a few questions I have ticked two
options on the QPB, however, only one
of the said answers has been encoded
in the OMR answer sheet. This may be
a fact that is borne out from the record
however it is not understood how the
said fact is material to allege use of
unfair means by me and more
particularly by way of receiving SMS
messages on a mobile phone.
It is further not understood how the
manner and mode of answering his
questions devised by me for the said
examination has been interpreted by
the University to mean that I have used
unfair means at the said examination.
Moreover it is very common for a
candidate to initially mark certain option
as a probable answer and subsequently
arrive at a different conclusion and give
a different answer in the answer sheet.
I am in the habit of marking preliminary
answers with regard to questions of
which I was not sure and had initially
left
those
questions
and
after
attempting/answering the questions of
which I was relatively sure, I devoted
time and come to the correct answers
or the answers which appeared to me
to be correct. In any event I have
encoded only one option on the OMR
answer sheet which is what a candidate
is required to do. The purport of the
allegation sought to be leveled is not
understood in this behalf.

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 12 of 62

(ii) As per subject experts, the nature of
the questions asked was such that in
majority of cases some rough work was
required, particularly in Physics and
Mathematics (Encl.1). However, you
have done little rough work, the
scribbling against Q.Nos.61, 62, 63,
122, 128, 130, 131, 135, 138, 139, 140,
144, 147, 148, 152, 153, 155, 156, 157
and 168 and some calculations done
against Q.Nos.34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39,
42, 43, 47 are inconclusive.

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

(ii) That the contents of the paragraph
under reply are baseless apart from
being inconsistent with the earlier stand
of the University in this behalf. It is
submitted that fact that there was
absence of rough work in solving the
alleged
difficult
questions
even
otherwise does not indicate anything
suspicious. It is stated that I had done
rough work for my reference as per my
requirement. It would be relevant to
point out that in objective type paper
where 180 questions are to be
answered in 180 minutes, speed and
time management is the key to
success.
Accordingly, like various
other candidates in view of the four
optional answers I too used the
“process of elimination” whereby the
obvious
incorrect
answers
were
eliminated and rough work was done
for that purpose and by the same
process the answer was sought to be
given to the said question. In this
process, it was not found necessary
that with respect to all questions a
detailed rough work be carried out.
Even
otherwise,
neither
the
examination rules nor the authorities
require a candidate to show detailed
step-wise calculation to show the
manner of arriving at the answer.
Furthermore it has not been disclosed
who the so called experts are who have
given their opinion to the University.
The same has in any event not been
made available to me. The same is
accordingly violative of the principles of
natural justice. It seems improbable that
even an expert would be able to answer
all 180 questions within the time
stipulated after detailing all the steps
and calculations required to arrive at
the correct answer. It is a matter of
Page 13 of 62

(iii) The serial numbers of thirty six (36)
wrongly attempted questions as well as
the options encoded therein match
exactly with that of the candidate
having Roll No.61962 who appeared for
the CEE-2005 at a different centre and
was given booklets belonging to the
same series as yours. As opined by
the expert, this kind of similarity is not
possible without employing some unfair
means.

(iii) That the contents of the paragraph
under reply further indicate that the
University
has
proceeded
on
conjunctures and surmises.
It is
evidenced from a reading of the
contents of paragraph 6 (iii) that there is
no direct evidence available with the
University against me and that the
University has proceeded to issue the
captioned Show Cause Notice to me on
the basis of probability and which is not
based on any cogent reasoning or
material.
The alleged similarity
between my result and that of 1 other
candidate who allegedly took the said
examination at various other centers
with regard to unattempted and wrongly
attempted questions is not at all a
striking feature that ought to be held
against me to level a serious allegation
of having used unfair means at the said
examination.
Admittedly more than
55,000 students took the said
examination and my result allegedly
bearing some similarity with 1 other
candidate is a probability that not highly
improbable. Moreover the said similarity
allegedly pertaining to 36 unattempted
questions out of a question paper
carrying 180 questions too is not a
striking feature which could be held
against me to indite me for having used
unfair means at the said examination.
Moreover the report of any alleged
expert obtained by the University and
held against me to allege that I have
used unfair means at the said
examination has not been made
available to me. This is clearly violative
of the principles of natural justice and
the said opinion of the alleged experts
ought not to be held against me in the
absence of the same having been
furnished to me.
The University

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 14 of 62

(iv) Some hand written material on
pages 8 and 9 of the QPB has been
erased with the intention of hiding some
information although lot of other written
material on these pages has been left
untouched.

(v) You had marked in the QPB answers
to some questions in pencil.
After
clandestinely receiving assistance in
course of the CEE-2005, you had
marked the right options in pen which
tally with the options encoded in the
OMR sheet.

11.

(iv) That the contents of the paragraph
under reply are contradictory to the
assertions of the University in the
preceding paragraphs. The University
on the one hand seeks to allege that no
rough work has been done by me
whereas on the other hand markings
made by me are sought to be
deciphered to my detriment by the
University to be something surreptitious
is not only unfair but also unacceptable.
The
allegation
is
entirely
unsubstantiated and does not in any
manner connect me with the use of any
unfair means at the said examination.
(v) That the contents of paragraph 6(v)
are entirely baseless and based on
conjunctures and surmises. There is
some pattern allegedly deciphered by
the University that is sought to connect
me to the said candidate which is
unknown to me and not explained by
the University. The allegation sought to
be made against me is entirely
speculative. The University does not
even allege that I was carrying a mobile
phone to the examination but alleges
that I clandestinely received assistance
during the course of the said
examination is vague and discloses
complete non application of mind. It is
not understood how this could be
possible. The University too does not
attempt to decipher this. The contents
of the paragraph under reply are
baseless and conclusive of my
innocence.

The respondents considered the show cause notice, reply to show

cause notice, hearing given to the petitioner, performance of the petitioner
WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 15 of 62

in 30 questions given to the petitioner during hearing, performance of the
petitioner in other competitive examinations, percentage of the petitioner
in qualifying examination and his percentage in PCM in qualifying
examination and the opinions of the experts, his QPB and OMR sheets.
The respondent nos. 2 & 3 passed the order dated 19th April, 2006 and
stipulated that they considered the matter in detail on the basis of the
findings of Examination Disciplinary Committee, available records,
candidate's submission in writing and in oral and the reply to the show
cause notice and the reply to the notice proposing punishment against
him. The petitioner was found guilty of use of unfair means in CEE, 2005
held on 29th May, 2005 and issued the memorandum dated 19th April 2006
under the provision contained in Clause 13 read with Clause 9 of
Ordinance X-A of the University.

12.

The petitioner has impugned this order in the writ petition. The

learned counsel for petitioner has argued at length pointing out the
differences in the show cause notice given to the petitioner at different
times.

In the first show cause notice dated 6 th October 2005 it was

contended that the petitioner carried the mobile phones with the dishonest
intention of misusing it and received SMS messages during the CEE,

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 16 of 62

2005

and

the

petitioner

contact

with

Pankaj

Dahiya/Himanshu

Sharma/Lalit Hooda for the use of unfair means had been established
which was also confirmed by the disclosure statements of these persons.
The emphasis was also laid in variations in show cause notices and the
complaint filed with Central Bureau of Investigation and the grounds on
which the earlier memorandum dated 21st October 2005 was challenged.

13.

The earlier show cause notice had been withdrawn and also the

memorandum by which punishment was inflicted. While withdrawing the
earlier show cause notice, the liberty was granted to the respondents to
issue fresh show cause notice and consequently fresh show cause notice
dated 23rd February, 2006 was issued to the petitioner. When the liberty
was granted to the respondents to issue fresh show cause notice, there
was no restriction from issuing the fresh show cause notice on the same
grounds as were taken by the respondents in the earlier show cause
notice. The petitioner had also not challenged the order granting liberty to
the respondents to issue fresh show cause notice. Consequently some
variation in the earlier show cause notice and the show cause notice dated
23rd February, 2006 will not be very material to impugn the order passed
pursuant to subsequent show cause notice given by the respondents.

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 17 of 62

14.

While challenging the notice dated 23rd February, 2006, the learned

counsel for the petitioner has emphasized on the fact that the mobile
phone was not recovered from the petitioner and the name of the
petitioner did not appear in the list of 21 candidates which was prepared
on the basis of bunching of marks. The petitioner has also challenged the
order imposing punishment on the ground that the statistical theory about
the statistical impossibility of commonality of result is not applicable to the
petitioner and the Probability Theory was never put to him in the show
cause notice. It was pointed out that ticking of two options on the QPB
and encoding only one of the answers on the OMR sheets cannot be
considered as a material fact to allege use of unfair means. It was also
pointed out that allegation of inadequate rough work was based on
surmises and conjecture. Regarding the personal hearing given to the
petitioner it was contended that it was merely an eye wash.

During

personal hearing the direction by the respondents to attempt question
paper containing 30 questions was alleged to be impermissible.

15.

The petitioner also challenged the order on the ground that it was

passed on the new grounds which were not alleged in the show cause

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 18 of 62

notice dated 23.2.2006 by the respondents and that the petitioner's OMR
sheet was not compared with any other student of the same series i.e
series 14 and the show cause notice issued to the petitioner by the
respondents had nowhere sought any explanation from the petitioner
regarding the alleged similarity in unattempted and the wrongly attempted
questions in the OMR sheets of the petitioner and that of Mr. Sandarbh
Kapoor who was given series 16 and that such a comparison was based
on mere conjecture and surmises.

16.

Petitioner, as regards to ticking two options on the QPB in respect

of Q.Nos.36, 37, 39, 40, 43, 44, 45, 46, 48, 49, 50, 51, 56, 57, 59, 60, 61, 63, 64,
67, 68, 69, 70, 77, 80, 81, 82, 89, 92, 94, 99, 120, 124, 128, 138, 144, 147, 148,
149, 150, 152, 153, 156, 157 and 168, contended that initially the probable

answers were marked by the petitioner with regard to questions, the
answers of which he was not sure and later on
arriving at a different conclusion he marked a different answer. As regards to

the alleged similarity between the un-attempted and wrongly attempted
questions of the petitioner and that of the other candidate, Rajat Parihar,
and an effort to erase hand written material at page 8 and 9 of the QPB by
the petitioner it was contended that it was not a striking feature to level a

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 19 of 62

serious allegation of having used unfair means at the said examination.
Further no keys were found on the QPB of the petitioner and that the
allegations leveled against him are entirely speculative and that there was
some pattern allegedly deciphered by the respondents to connect the
petitioner to candidates unknown to the petitioner so as to implicate him in
the case of use of unfair means at the examination.

17.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the

respondents have failed to prove beyond reasonable doubt the use of
unfair means by the petitioner. However what is to be seen is whether on
the basis of preponderance of probability it could be inferred that the
petitioner have used unfair means during the examination. Strict rules of
evidence act and the standard of proof envisaged therein do not apply to
such proceedings taken by the University against the candidates
regarding the use of unfair means in the examination. What is to be seen
is that the material germane and relevant to the facts in issue had been
placed and considered.

What is also to be considered is that the

inference have been drawn from the evidence and not based on the
speculation and conjectures. The standard of proof is not proof beyond
reasonable doubt but the preponderance of probabilities tending to draw

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 20 of 62

inferences that the facts are more probable. In Maharastra State Board of
Secondary and Higher Education Vs K.S.Gandhi & ors (1991) 2 SCC 716,
the Supreme Court had held that in administrative bodies and domestic
tribunals the standard of proof required is preponderance of probabilities
and not proof beyond reasonable doubt and the probative value is to be
judged on the basis of particular facts and circumstances. The Supreme
Court had held on page 748 as under:
"37. It is thus well settled law that strict rules of the Evidence
Act, and the standard of proof envisaged therein do not
apply to departmental proceedings or domestic tribunal. It is
open to the authorities to receive and place on record all the
necessary, relevant, cogent and acceptable material facts
though not proved strictly in conformity with the Evidence
Act. The material must be germane and relevant to the facts
in issue. In grave cases like forgery, fraud, conspiracy,
misappropriation, etc. seldom direct evidence would be
available. Only the circumstantial evidence would furnish the
proof. In our considered view inference from the evidence
and circumstances must be carefully distinguished from
conjectures or speculation. The mind is prone to take
pleasure to adapt circumstances to one another and even in
straining them a little to force them to form parts of one
connected whole. There must be evidence direct or
circumstantial to deduce necessary inferences in proof of the
facts in issue. There can be no inferences unless there are
objective facts, direct or circumstantial from which to infer the
other fact which it is sought to establish. In some cases the
other facts can be inferred, as much as is practical, as if they
had been actually observed. In other cases the inferences
do not go beyond reasonable probability. If there are no
positive proved facts, oral, documentary or circumstantial
from which the inferences can be made the method of
inference fails and what is left is mere speculation or
conjecture. Therefore, when an inference of proof that a fact
in dispute has been held established there must be some
material facts or circumstances on record from which such
an inference could be drawn. The standard of proof is not
WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 21 of 62

proof beyond reasonable doubt “but” the preponderance of
probabilities tending to draw an inference that the fact must
be more probable. Standard of proof cannot be put in a
strait-jacket formula. No mathematical formula could be laid
on degree of proof. The probative value could be gauged
from facts and circumstances in a given case. The standard
of proof is the same both in civil cases and domestic
enquiries."

18.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has relied on Mohinder Singh

Gill Vs Chief Election Commissioner, AIR 1978 SC 851; Sawai Singh Vs
Stat of Rajasthan, AIR 1986 SC 995; R Nitya Priya Puri Vs Rvr. Div.
Officer Thirukoyilur, (1998) 8 SCC 508; AIR 1981 SC 818; Union of India
Vs H.C.Goel, AIR 1964 SC 364; Bank of India Vs Degala Suryanarayana,
(1995) 5 SCC 762; Hanumant Govind Nargulkar Vs State of M.P, AIR
1952 SC 343; Maharastra State Board of Secondary and Higher
Education Vs K.S.Gandhi & ors (1991) 2 SCC 716; Om Kumar Vs Union
of India, (2001) 2 SCC 386; B.C.Chaturvedi Vs Union of India (1995) 6
SCC 749; Union of India Vs G.Ganayutham, (1997) 7 SCC 463 and Ranjit
Thakur Vs Union of India, (1987) 4 SCC 611.

19.

In Mohinder Singh Gill (supra) the returning officer had postponed

the declaration of result of election on account of disruption due to mob

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 22 of 62

violence and an order for repoll was passed under Article 324 of the
Constitution of India and under section 153 of Representation of People
Act. In the Special Leave Petition before the Supreme Court it was held
that the writ petition challenging the cancellation coupled with the repoll
amounts to calling in question, a step in `election' and the same is barred
under Article 329 (b) and therefore the writ was not maintainable and the
only remedy was by way of an election petition. It was also held by the
Apex Court that when a statutory functionary makes an order based on
certain grounds, its validity must be judged by reason so mentioned and
cannot be supplemented by fresh reasons in the shape of affidavit or
otherwise because otherwise an order as in the beginning, by the time it
comes to court on account of challenge get validated by additional
grounds later brought out. In Sawai Singh(supra) the services of the
appellant who was the returning officer for panchayat elections, were
terminated on the ground that he showed undue favor to one of the
contesting candidates.

The Supreme Court had held that the charges

were not clear and charges involving consequences of termination of
service must be specific, though a departmental inquiry is not like a
criminal trial. In R Nitya Priya (supra) after the completion of the
departmental inquiry and during the pendency of writ petition at the High

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 23 of 62

Court, some additional evidence came to light and relying upon the same
and observing that the document is crucial and fatal to the case of the
petitioner, the High Court had upheld the order impugned. In these
circumstances it was held by the Apex Court that the High Court should
have remanded the matter back to the department rather than sitting and
adjudicating upon it. In Swadeshi Cotton Mills (supra) the Apex Court had
observed that where a statue does not, in terms, exclude a prior hearing
but contemplates a post decisional hearing amounting to a full review of
the order on merits, then such a statue would be construed as excluding
the Audi Alteram Parten rule at the pre decisional stage. And if the statute
conferring the power is silent with regard to the giving of a pre-decisional
hearing to the person affected and the administrative decision taken by
the authority involves civil consequences of a grave nature, and no full
review or appeal on merits against that decision is provided, courts will be
extremely reluctant to construe such a statute as excluding the duty of
affording even a minimal hearing shorn of all its formal trappings and
dilatory features at the pre-decisional stage, unless, viewed pragmatically,
as it would paralyze the administrative progress or frustrate the need for
utmost promptitude. Therefore, it was held that the rule of fair play “must
not be jettisoned save in very exceptional circumstances where

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 24 of 62

compulsive necessity so demands” and the Court must make every effort
to salvage this cardinal rule to the maximum extent possible, with
situational modifications. And thus the person affected must have
reasonable opportunity of being heard and the hearing must be a genuine
hearing and not an empty public relations exercise.

20.

In Union of India Vs H.C.Goel (supra) the Supreme Court had held

that in respect of an order of dismissal of public servant, High Court can
enquire whether the order is based on no evidence and mala fide exercise
of power need not be shown to prove that the order is based on no
evidence. It was held that the writ petition will be maintainable provided
the dismissed employee is able to satisfy that the findings of enquiry were
based on no evidence. In Bank of India (supra) the petitioner was found fit
for promotion, however the finding of promotion committee was not given
effect to on account of pendency of criminal cases. The criminal cases,
however ended in favor of the respondent and the order of promotion was
not issued and the writ petition was filed where an interim order was
passed which was upheld by a division bench. Before the Apex Court the
issue was whether the single judge was justified in interfering with the
findings recorded by the enquiry officer. It was held that the disciplinary

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 25 of 62

authority after taking into consideration the evidence, finding and reasons
recorded by the enquiry officer, is entitled to give a different finding of its
own supported by reasons and based on the evidence on record and such
a finding of disciplinary authority will not be subject to judicial review. In
Hanumant Govind Nargundkar & anr (supra) the appellant was found
guilty of offences under section 120-B and under section 465 of Indian
Penal Code which conviction was partly upheld by Sessions Judge. The
matter before the Supreme Court was whether the Supreme Court can
interfere with the two concurrent findings of the court of first instance and
court of appeal. It was held that if the finding of fact is based on the
testimony of an accomplice it should not be accepted unless it is
corroborated by some other evidence on record and in case of substantial
and grave injustice; the Apex Court can interfere despite concurrent
finding of facts. Regarding appreciation of circumstantial evidence it was
held that in cases where the evidence is of a circumstantial nature, the
circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should in
the first instance be fully established, and all the facts so established
should be consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused.
Again, the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and tendency
and they should be such as to exclude every other hypothesis but the one

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 26 of 62

proposed to be proved. In other words, there must be a chain of evidence
so far complete as not to leave any reasonable ground for a conclusion
consistent with the innocence of the accused and it must be such as to
show that within all human probability the act must have been done by the
accused.

21.
the

Relying on Maharastra State Board of S & H.S Education (supra)
petitioner

contended

that

in

administrative

decisions,

the

order/decision may not contain reasons but the record should disclose
reason which must be clear and explicit so as to indicate that the authority
has given due consideration to the points in controversy. The Supreme
Court had held in this judgment that the reasons are harbinger between
the minds of the maker of the order to the controversy in question and the
decision or conclusion arrived at. Such reasons exclude the chances to
reach arbitrary, whimsical or capricious decision or conclusion and they
assure an inbuilt support to the conclusion/decision reached. It was further
observed that the order when it affects the right of a citizen or a person,
irrespective of the fact, whether it is quasi-judicial or administrative, fair
play requires recording of germane and relevant precise reasons. The
recording of reasons is also an assurance that the authority concerned

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 27 of 62

consciously applied its mind to the facts on record. It also aids the
appellate or revisional authority or the supervisory jurisdiction of the High
Court under Article 226 or the appellate jurisdiction of this Court under
Article 136 to see whether the authority concerned acted fairly and justly
to mete out justice to the aggrieved person. In B.C.Chaturvedi (supra) it
was held that where the finding of disciplinary authority are based on
some evidence, then the court/Tribunal should not interfere with the same
and will not re-appreciate the evidence and substitute its own findings. In
this matter the Central bureau of investigation had concluded that the
petitioner

working

as

an

income

tax

officer

possessed

assets

disproportionate to that of his own income, however as the evidence was
not sufficient the case could not be registered under the Prevention of
Corruption Act. However, in the departmental proceedings initiated against
him, he was dismissed from service. Central administrative tribunal upheld
the charges, however, altered the punishment imposed. Relying on
Bidyabhusahn Mohapatra, AIR 1963 SC 779, Bhagat Ram Vs State of
H.P, (1983) 2 SCC 442 and Rangaswami Vs State of T.N, 1989 Suppl (1)
SCC 686, it was observed by the Apex Court that it has not been laid
down that in no case, the High Court/Tribunal has the power to alter the
penalty imposed by the disciplinary or appellate authority.

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

However,

Page 28 of 62

disciplinary authorities being fact-finding authorities have exclusive power
to consider the evidence with a view to maintain discipline.

They are

invested with the discretion to impose an appropriate punishment keeping
in view the magnitude and gravity of the misconduct.

The High

Court/Tribunal, while exercising the power of judicial review, cannot
normally substitute its own conclusion on penalty and impose some other
penalty. If the punishment imposed by the disciplinary authority or by the
appellate authority shocks the conscience of the High Court/Tribunal, it
would

appropriately

mould

the

relief,

either

directing

the

disciplinary/applicant authority to reconsider the penalty imposed, or to
shorten the litigation, it may itself, in exceptional and rare cases, impose
appropriate punishment with cogent reasons in support thereof. In G.
Ganayutham (supra) it was held that according to Wednesbury

case,

while examining `reasonableness' of an administrative decision the court
has to find out if the administrator has left out relevant factors or taken into
account irrelevant factors. The decision of the administrator must have
been within the four corners of the law, and not one which no sensible
person could have reasonably arrived at, having regard to the above
principles, and must have been a bonafide one. The decision could be
one of many choices open to the authority but it was for that authority to

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 29 of 62

decide upon the choice and not for the court to substitute its view. In this
case 50% of respondent's pension and 50% of gratuity were withheld on
proof of his misconduct. The tribunal had interfered with the quantum of
punishment and had also substituted its view of the punishment.

The

Apex court had set aside the punishment imposed by the tribunal and had
restored the punishment awarded by the Departmental authorities. The
apex court had also summarized the position of proportionality in England
and in India as follows:
(1)

.
(2)

To judge the validity of any administrative order or statutory discretion, normally
the Wednesbury test is to be applied to find out if the decision was illegal or
suffered from procedural improprieties or was one which no sensible decision-maker
could, on the material before him and within the framework of the law, have
arrived at. The court would consider whether relevant matters had not been taken
into account or whether irrelevant matters had been taken into account or whether
the action was not bona fide. The court would also consider whether the decision
was absurd or perverse. The court would not however go into the correctness of the
choice made by the administrator amongst the various alternatives open to him. Nor
could the court substitute its decision to that of the administrator. This is the
Wednesbury8 test
The court would not interfere with the administrator’s decision unless it was illegal
or suffered from procedural impropriety or was irrational — in the sense that it
was in outrageous defiance of logic or moral standards. The possibility of other
tests, including proportionality being brought into English administrative law in
future is not ruled out. These are the CCSU9 principles.

(3)(a)

As per Bugdaycay20, Brind12 and Smith19 as long as the Convention is not
incorporated into English law, the English courts merely exercise a secondary
judgment to find out if the decision-maker could have, on the material before him,
arrived at the primary judgment in the manner he has done.

(3)(b)

If the Convention is incorporated in England making available the principle of
proportionality, then the English courts will render primary judgment on the
validity of the administrative action and find out if the restriction is
disproportionate or excessive or is not based upon a fair balancing of the
fundamental freedom and the need for the restriction thereupon.

(4)(a)

The position in our country, in administrative law, where no fundamental freedoms
as aforesaid are involved, is that the courts/tribunals will only play a secondary

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 30 of 62

role while the primary judgment as to reasonableness will remain with the executive
or administrative authority. The secondary judgment of the court is to be based on
Wednesbury and CCSU principles as stated by Lord Greene and Lord Diplock
respectively to find if the executive or administrative authority has reasonably
arrived at his decision as the primary authority.
(4)(b)

22.

Whether in the case of administrative or executive action affecting fundamental
freedoms, the courts in our country will apply the principle of “proportionality” and
assume a primary role, is left open, to be decided in an appropriate case where such
action is alleged to offend fundamental freedoms. It will be then necessary to decide
whether the courts will have a primary role only if the freedoms under Articles 19,
21 etc. are involved and not for Article 14.

The quantum of punishment in disciplinary matters is primarily for

the disciplinary authority to decide and the jurisdiction of the High Court's
under Article 226 of the Constitution or of the administrative tribunals is
limited and is confined to the applicability of one or other of the well-known
principles known as the Wednesbury principles. This was held by the
Supreme Court in Om Kumar (Supra). It was held that the courts are
confined to a secondary role and only has to see whether the
administrator has acted illegally or has omitted relevant factors into
consideration or whether his view is one which no reasonable person
could have taken and if his action does not satisfy any of these conditions
it is to be treated as arbitrary.

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 31 of 62

23.

This petition and a number of petitions were heard together and the

arguments of other counsel were also adopted by the counsel for the
petitioner. The learned counsel for some other candidates Shri Anil Grover
has also relied on Ram Phal Kundu Vs Kamal Sharma, 2004 II AD (S.C)
261; Marathadawada University Vs Seshrao Balwant Rao Chavan, AIR
1989 SC 1582; State of U.P Vs Maharaja Dharmander Prasad Singh;
(1989) 2 SCC 50; Bhupendre Singh Vs University of Delhi & ors, 2001 II
AD (Delhi) 293 and R K.Sharma Vs University of Delhi & ors, 2004 IV AD
(Delhi) 445 to contend that there was no emergent situations nor can be
made out from the files and the Vice Chancellor was not authorized to act
as the power is with the Executive Council. This plea was not taken by the
Counsel in the writ petition filed by him on behalf of some other candidates
who have also been awarded the punishment for use of unfair means in
CEE, 2005 examination in similar circumstances as that of the petitioner.
The counsel for petitioner in the present writ petitions had also adopted
the arguments of counsel for other candidates and therefore, these pleas
are also dealt with.

24.

Where the power is given to do a certain thing in a certain way, the

thing

must be done in that way or not at all and other methods of

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 32 of 62

performance are necessarily forbidden, was held in Taylor Vs Taylor, 1876
(1) Ch. D 426 and this view has been followed by Indian Courts in a series
of cases. In Ram Phal (supra) the dispute was as to which one of two
persons was nominated by the Congress party. Relying on paras 13 and
13A of the symbols order, it was held that they lay down exhaustive and
complete procedure for determining whether a candidate has been set up
by a party or not. In Marathawada University (supra) it was held that it is a
settled principle that when the act prescribes a particular body to exercise
the power, it must be exercised only by that body and it cannot be
exercised by the others, unless it is delegated and the law must also
provide for such delegation. In this matter a Deputy registrar was required
to discharge the duty of controller of examination.

Bills raised for the

printing work done during the annual examination were not cleared
immediately and so an inquiry was set up. Executive council which also
had Vice Chancellor, made certain observations against the Deputy
Registrar, however, another committee gave a complete clean chit to him.
Later on the Vice-Chancellor, instead of executive council, directed a
departmental inquiry which action was subsequently ratified by the
executive council. It was held that the act of the Vice-Chancellor was
without any authority and the defect could not be cured by subsequent

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 33 of 62

ratification. In Indian Railway Construction Company (supra) it was held by
the Supreme Court that the Court will be slow to interfere in matters
relating to administrative functions unless decision is tainted by any
vulnerability like illegality, irrationality and procedural impropriety. In State
of U.P Vs Maharaja Dharmander Prasad Singh (supra) it was held that
judicial review under Article 226 cannot be converted into an appeal.
Judicial review is directed, against the decision, but is confined to the
examination of the decision-making process. It was held that when an
authority hands over its discretion to another body it acts ultra vires. Such
an interference by a person or body extraneous to the power would plainly
be contrary to the nature of the power conferred upon the authority.

25.

In Bhupender Singh (supra) the Vice-Chancellor had invoked the

emergency power under the ordinance in appointing the governing body of
a college which power is vested in executive council. It was held that the
opinion of the authority originating from its own subjective satisfaction
regarding the existence and satisfactions of the conditions precedent for
exercise of power under statute is subject to judicial review.

A single

judge of this court in R.K.Sharma (supra) had held that the scheme of the
Act, statute and Ordinances of the University of Delhi show that the Vice

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 34 of 62

Chancellor of the University is an office of the University. The executive
council is a statutory body of the University. The Vice-Chancellor has
been conferred with executive powers to act in emergent situations and so
in nominal course the Vice-Chancellor cannot exercise executive powers
except in emergent situations.

26.

The petitioner’s plea is that only the Controller of examination could

have exercised the power but no post of controller of examination is
provided under XA-12. According to learned counsel for the petitioner, no
emergent situations have been shown for the Vice Chancellor to exercise
the power of Executive Council. It was contended that nothing has been
established by the respondents that executive Council could not be
convened. By non consideration of the cases of the petitioner, the
valuable rights of the petitioner have been denied. According to counsel
for petitioner, VC has exercised powers under the statute 11(G)(4) of the
University Calendar which falls within the exclusive domain of the
Executive Council.

27.

Statute 11(G)(4) of University Calendar empowers the Vice

Chancellor to exercise powers in emergent situations

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

which calls for

Page 35 of 62

immediate action and can later on report the same for confirmation at the
meeting to the EC which, in ordinary course, would have dealt with the
matter. It is not disputed that the Executive Council is the competent
authority in the present facts and circumstance. This is also not disputed
that Clause 9 of the ordinance X-A empowers the Executive Council to
impose any punishment on candidate(s) who are found guilty of use of
dishonest or unfair means or disorderly conduct in the examination on the
recommendation of the EDC. Further statute 11-K (3) (f) of the University
Calendar empowers the registrar to call for an emergent meeting of EC
only in cases where neither the Vice Chancellor nor the Pro-ViceChancellor nor the Director, South Delhi Campus or the Dean of colleges
is able to act. Thus in an emergency if Vice Chancellor is present meeting
of Executive Council is not to be called. What is an emergent situation in
which power conferred under the statute 11(G)(4) of the University
Calendar can be exercised by the Vice Chancellor.
“Emergency” is defined in Black’s Law Dictionary (Sixth
Edition) as:- A sudden unexpected happening; an
unforeseen occurrence or condition; perplexing contingency
or complication of circumstances; a sudden unexpected
occasion for action; exigency; pressing necessity.
Emergency is an unforeseen combination of circumstances
that calls for immediate action without time for full
deliberation.

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 36 of 62

In the circumstances whether the Vice Chancellor was justified in
exercising powers conferred on him under Statute 11 G (4) of the
University Calendar or has he transgressed upon the powers which fall
within the exclusive domain of the Executive Council. The circumstances
as were there were sufficient to exercise emergent powers by the Vice
Chancellor.

From the perusal of the Statutes 11-G and 11(K) of the

University Calendar it is apparent that emergent meeting of EC can not be
called when the Vice Chancellor or the Pro-Vice-Chancellor or the
Director, South Delhi Campus or the Dean of colleges is able to act. Under
statute 11-G (4) of the University Calendar in an emergency situation
which calls for an immediate action, the Vice Chancellor who is also the
ex-officio Chairman of the Executive Council, has been empowered to
deal with the matter and take action himself and then report the same to
the Executive Council. Thus even if a matter which falls within the
exclusive domain of the Executive Council, in emergent situations, the
Vice Chancellor can deal with and decide the same himself and such a
decision cannot be challenged on the ground that it has been made
incompetently.

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 37 of 62

28.

In the present case by orders dated 23.11.2005 and 5.12.2005,

this court had directed the respondents to issue fresh show cause notices
to the candidates and had further directed them to

complete enquiry

within 6 weeks which period was further extended up to 24 th April 2006
vide order dated 29.3.2006 since the enquiry was not complete. Thus
within a time frame the University was required to decide the matter. The
executive council meeting was schedule to take place in May. But since
the decision was to be taken till 24th April, 2006, the emergent meeting of
EC could not be called since Vice Chancellor was available. Since the
Vice Chancellor was available there was no necessity for calling of the
emergency meeting of the Executive Council by the Registrar. The
argument put forward by the petitioner that instead of exercising the power
which falls within the exclusive domain of the Executive Council, the
respondents should have sought extension of time from the Court as there
was no emergent situation, is not sustainable in the present facts and
circumstances. In view of the charge of use of unfair means, the
admission of all the candidates whose names were included in the list of
candidates suspected of using unfair means in the CEE, 2005, was kept
on hold till the decision of the University and since the academic year of
so many students was involved, it called for expeditious enquiry and

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 38 of 62

decision which was to be arrived at within a time frame and as such the
matter could not have been delayed as the new academic year was to
start soon in July. Further the sanctity of the entrance examination was
also at stake and the offence was of serious nature which called for
immediate action and therefore exercise of emergent power by the Vice
Chancellor cannot be faulted in the facts and circumstances. The plea of
the petitioner, which has not been taken in the petition that there was no
emergent situation, is not sustainable in the present facts and
circumstances. The cases for use of unfair means were to be decided
expeditiously as delay could have caused a lot of hardship and
inconvenience. Therefore it cannot be said that there was no emergent
situation and the Vice Chancellor was not justified to act. The cases relied
on by the petitioner are distinguishable as it had been held that there was
no emergent situation in those cases. But in the case of the petitioner it is
apparent that there was emergent situation and in the circumstances the
Vice Chancellor has not transgressed upon the power which falls under
the exclusive domain of the Executive Council. The Vice Chancellor had
passed the order imposing punishment in exercise of power conferred on
it under Statute 11(G) (4) of the University Calendar. The other plea of the
petitioner that the procedure as laid down under Ordinance X-A rule 9 and

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 39 of 62

13 has not been complied with by the respondents as the second show
cause notice was issued by the Registrar which is not an executive body
is also not acceptable on the similar reasoning in the facts and
circumstances. The decisions of respondents, therefore, can not be set
aside on these grounds raised by the petitioner.

29.

The counsel for the petitioner has relied on various observations in

different cases cited during the arguments. The observations made in
most of the cases is not the ratio of the cases relied on by the counsel. A
case is only an authority for what it decides as observed by the Supreme
Court in State of Orissa v. Sudhansu Sekhar Misra MANU/SC/0047/1967:-

"A decision is only an authority for what it actually decides.
What is of the essence in a decision is its ratio and not every
observation found therein nor what logically follows from the
various observations made in it. On this topic this is what
Earl of Halsbury,LC said in Quinn v. Leathem, 1901 AC 495:
"Now before discussing the case of Allen v. Flood (1898) AC
1 and what was decided therein, there are two observations
of a general character which I wish to make, and one is to
repeat what I have very often said before, that every
judgment must be read as applicable to the particular facts
proved, or assumed to be proved, since the generality of the
expressions which may be found there are not intended to
be expositions of the whole law, but governed and qualified

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 40 of 62

by the particular facts of the case in which such expressions
are to be found. The other is that a case is only an authority
for what it actually decides. I entirely deny that it can be
quoted for a proposition that may seem to follow logically
Page 2009 from it. Such a mode of reasoning assumes that
the law is necessarily a logical Code, whereas every lawyer
must acknowledge that the law is not always logical at all."

30.

In Ambica Quarry Works v. State of Gujarat and Ors.

MANU/SC/0049/1986 the Supreme Court had held:-

"The ratio of any decision must be understood in the
background of the facts of that case. It has been said
long time ago that a case is only an authority for what
it actually decides, and not what logically follows from
it."

31.

In Bhavnagar University v. Palitana Sugar Mills Pvt Ltd (2003) 2

SC 111 (vide para 59), the Supreme Court had held:-

" It is well settled that a little difference in facts or
additional facts may make a lot of difference in the
precedential value of a decision."

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 41 of 62

As held in Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd and Anr. v.
N.R.Vairamani and Anr. (AIR 2004 SC 778), a decision cannot be relied
on without disclosing the factual situation. In the same judgment the
Supreme Court also observed:-

" Court should not place reliance on decisions without
discussing as to how the factual situation fits in with
the fact situation of the decision on which reliance is
placed. Observations of Courts are neither to be read
as Euclid's theorems nor as provisions of the statute
and that too taken out of their context. These
observations must be read in the context in which
they appear to have been stated. Judgments of
Courts are not to be construed as statutes. To
interpret words, phrases and provisions of a statute, it
may become necessary for judges to embark into
lengthy discussions but the discussion is meant to
explain and not to define. Judges interpret statutes,
they do not interpret judgments. They interpret words
of statutes; their words are not to be interpreted as
statutes.

In London Graving dock Co. Ltd. v. Horton (1951 AC 737 at p.761),
Lord Mac Dermot observed:

"The matter cannot, of course, be settled merely by
treating the ipsissima vertra of Wiles,J as though they

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 42 of 62

were part of an Act of Parliament and applying the
rules of interpretation appropriate thereto. This is not
to distract from the great weight to be given to the
language actually used by that most distinguished
judge."

In Home Office v. Dorset Yacht Co (1970 (2) All ER 294) Lord Reid
said, "Lord Atkin's speech is not to be treated as if it was a statute
definition it will require qualification in new circumstances." Megarry,J in
(1971) 1 WLR 1062 observed: "One must not, of course, construe even a
reserved judgment of Russell L.J as if it were an Act of Parliament." And,
in Herrington v. British Railways Board (1972 (2) WLR 537) Lord Morris
said:

"There is always peril in treating the words of a
speech or judgment as though they are words in a
legislative enactment, and it is to be remembered that
judicial utterances made in setting of the facts of a
particular case."

32.

Circumstantial flexibility, one additional or different fact may make

a world of difference between conclusions in two cases. Disposal of cases
by blindly placing reliance on a decision is not proper. The following words

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 43 of 62

of Lord Denning in the matter of applying precedents have become locus
classicus:

"Each case depends on its own facts and a close similarity
between one case and Anr. is not enough because even a
single significant detail may alter the entire aspect, in
deciding such cases, one should avoid the temptation to
decide cases (as said by Cordozo) by matching the colour of
one case against the colour of Anr.. To decide therefore, on
which side of the line a case falls, the broad resemblance to
Anr. case is not at all decisive."

"Precedent should be followed only so far as it marks the
path of justice, but you must cut the dead wood and trim off
the side branches else you will find yourself lost in thickets
and branches. My plea is to keep the path of justice clear of
obstructions which could impede it."

33.

The precedents relied on by the petitioner’s counsel and other

counsel, therefore, have to be considered with this settled law, as the
observations made in the judgments cited were referred to and relied on,
without adverting to the ratio of the cases cited.

34.

The respondents have relied on 1959 SCR 1424, Ghaiomall &

Sons vs. State of Delhi and Others, AIR 1966 SC 875, Board of High
Scholl and Intermediate Education, U.P. and another Vs. Bagleshwar

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 44 of 62

Prashad and another; 1967 (3) DLT 438, N.K. Mohd. Mustaff vs. Union of
India & others, (1970) 1 SCC 648; Bihar School Examination Board Vs.
Subhash Chander Sinha and others; AIR1973 Allahabad 1, Triambakpati
Tripathi Vs. The Board of High School and Intermediate Education,
U.P.,Allahabad; (1975) 3 SCC 602, State of Bihar and others Vs. Dr.
Ashish Kumar Mukherjee and others; (1994) 5 SCC 208, Guru Nanak Dev
University and another vs. Harjinder Singh and another; (2003) 9 SCC
237, Union Public Service Commission vs. Jagannath Mishra and ors and
(2005) 7 SCC 338, V. Ramanna vs. A.P. SRTC and others in support of
their pleas and contentions.

35.

The respondents have produced the original Question Paper

Booklets of the petitioner and his OMR answer sheets. The petitioner has
prayed for a writ of certiorari for quashing the impugned memorandums
dated 19th April, 2006 canceling the result of the petitioner in CEE, 2005
and also debarring the petitioner from appearing in any future examination
of University of Delhi during a span of next five years from 2005-2006.
For issuing a writ of certiorari, this court can peruse the entire record of
the proceedings, QPB and OMR sheets and may also ascertain reasons if

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 45 of 62

they are available from the record which may not have been recorded
categorically in the order sought to be quashed.

36.

The respondents have also produced the writings executed by the

petitioner stipulating that he had received the photocopy of QPB and
received the documents filed by Central Bureau of Investigation and also
the copies of the letters forwarding the documents to the petitioner. The
resolution No.18(1) of Executive Council of Delhi University dated 5th May,
2006; note of the Registrar duly approved by the Vice Chancellor; order of
the Vice Chancellor invoking his power under the Statute 11(G)(4) in
pursuance of the report of the EDC;

constitution of Examination

Disciplinary Committee; initiation of the action against the candidates
containing noting by the OSD (Exams), i.e., Controller of Examination;
office order No.632 dated 12th July, 1997 and taking over charges as OSD
(Examination) by Shri B.S.Garg dated July 14, 1997

have also been

produced.

37.

The respondents produced the original QPB as well as the OMR

sheets of the petitioner as well as the other candidates between whom the
alleged bunching was noticed. On the QPB of the petitioner it was noticed

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 46 of 62

that an attempt was made to erase certain written material on page nos. 8
and 9 whereas other written material was left untouched and the same
were encircled during investigation. The digit keys were noticed on the
QPB of the candidate Sandarbh Kapoor on space provided for rough
work. There was no necessity to erase any thing written on the QPB by
the petitioner. The petitioner failed to give any satisfactory explanation
about erasing the material written on pages 8 & 9 of his QPB.

38.

The petitioner, though in his writ petition has denied that he

received keys for answers to the questions in the QPB from some external
source, however, he was unable to explain the striking similarities in wrong
answers and wrong options marked by him when compared with other
candidates. The questions which were not attempted by the said petitioner
are also almost the same as that of other candidates namely, Rajat
parihar and Sandarbh kapoor. The version given by the petitioner that
though he has ticked two options on the QPB in respect of question nos.
Q.Nos.36, 37, 39, 40, 43, 44, 45, 46, 48, 49, 50, 51, 56, 57, 59, 60, 61, 63,
64, 67, 68, 69, 70, 77, 80, 81, 82, 89, 92, 94, 99, 120, 124, 128, 138, 144,
147, 148, 149, 150, 152, 153, 156, 157 and 168 however only one of the
two answers was encoded in the OMR answer sheet and that the

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 47 of 62

questions the answer of which he was not sure he had marked the
preliminary and the probable answers and later on arriving at the different
conclusion he marked the other answer, was not found satisfactory. The
petitioner however failed to explain satisfactorily as to why certain
questions on the QPB were marked with pencil and others were marked
with pen. The said petitioner also contended that his QPB does not
contain keys of the answers to 180 questions as was found in the case of
Sandarbh Kapoor. The petitioner also failed to explain his attempt to erase
only selective hand written material on pages 8 and 9 of the QPB while
leaving the rest untouched. The said petitioner was unable to explain the
striking similarity and vast difference in his performance in three
competitive examinations, as in CEE, 2005 his ranking is 24 whereas in
AIEEE, 2005 and GGSIP, 2005 his ranking was 1,01,125 and 15,009
respectively and his percentage of marks in qualifying examination was
measly 68% and he scored only 33 marks out 120 marks in 30 questions
attempted by him before the EDC.

39.

The charges stipulated against the petitioner have already been

detailed hereinbefore in earlier paras as well as the replies to the show
cause notices which were given to him. The petitioner was also given the

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 48 of 62

copies of the subject experts after the show cause notice dated 23rd
February, 2006.

40.

In the show cause notices dated 23rd February, 2006, it was

specifically brought to the notice of the petitioner that mobile phones were
recovered from Mr.Anshul Aggarwal and Mr. Somiya Aggarwal and the
examination of these candidates was cancelled and they were asked to
leave the examination hall immediately. Mr. Anshul Aggarwal had also
disclosed to the Centre Superintendent about answer keys consisting of a
set of numerals for questions Nos.168 to 179. It was categorically
stipulated in the show cause notice that this circumstance has created a
serious doubt about the use of unfair means by other candidates. It was
subsequently on account of bunching of marks another pattern was
revealed and still later on comparison of other OMRs and the answers, the
similarities in the answers especially in the wrong answers and the
questions not attempted and same wrong option for the wrong answer and
substantial number of same correct answers, it transpired that it would
have been possible on account of use of unfair means in the
examinations. The case of the respondents is not that Anshul Aggarwal
and Somiya Aggarwal from whom the mobile phones were recovered had

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 49 of 62

communicated the same to the petitioner directly.

In the case of

petitioner, it has not been possible to get the direct evidence of
communication of answer digits on the mobile phone and in the absence
of direct evidence the other evidence which is his attempt to erase the
written material from his QPB, the comparison of the QPBs of different
candidates, his performance in solving 30 questions given to him and the
evidence regarding his performance in other competitive examinations i.e
his ranking in AIEEE, 2005 conducted by Central Board of secondary
Education was 101125 and in GGSIP, 2005 conducted by Guru Gobind
Singh Inderprastha University was 15009 whereas in CEE it was 24, have
been considered. Whether this evidence in the absence of direct evidence
was material and relevant? What is also to be seen is whether the enquiry
which has been conducted by the respondents is fair and had afforded
adequate opportunity to the petitioner to defend themselves and the
inferences drawn by the EDC and respondents are not based on surmises
and

conjectures

and

decision

does

not

suffer

from

procedural

improprieties.

41.

A lot of emphasis had been laid during the arguments about non-

recovery of mobile phones and non-linking between the petitioner with the

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 50 of 62

candidates from whom the mobile phones were recovered and the
absence of invigilators report. It is apparent that the case of the petitioner
is not of direct evidence. As a principle, it cannot be held that whenever
there is no report from the Invigilator indicating adoption of unfair means in
any examination or till a link is established between the petitioner and
those persons from whom the mobile phones were recovered and who
admitted receiving the answers to the questions in SMS, the respondents
could not come to a conclusion about the adoption of unfair means by the
petitioner. There is no bar for the Expert committee of the respondents to
come to a definite conclusion about the adoption of use of unfair means in
the examination in absence of recovery of mobile phones and a link
between Somiya Aggarwal and Anshul Aggarwal and the petitioner. In
Union Public Service Commission (supra), the Supreme Court had held
that where an expert body comes to a conclusion of a fact, the same
should not be ordinarily interfered with by a court of law. In this case, the
candidates had appeared in the written examination for Indian Engineering
Services and the examiner while examining the answer paper in Civil
Engineering paper II reported that the candidate having the next roll
number was suspected to have copied the answer paper of the
respondent. The papers of two students were, therefore, examined by an

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 51 of 62

expert committee which confirmed that the candidates had copied from
each other and there after a show cause notice was issued to both the
candidates and after giving a due hearing they were debarred from
appearing in any competitive examination for a period of 10 years. It was
held by the Apex Court that mere absence of report would not be sufficient
to exonerate the delinquency as in a matter like this it will be difficult to get
direct evidence and in such circumstances, if an enquiry is held to be fair
and which affords the candidates adequate opportunity to defend
themselves, the matter should not ordinarily be examined by courts with
same strictness as applicable to criminal charges. The Supreme Court,
however, had reduced debarment from ten years to five years.

42.

In another matter, Guru Nanak Dev University and another

(supra), the Apex Court had held that though the incriminating material
was not recovered from the candidate, however, it was immaterial
because the answers tallied with the answers found on the incriminating
material which was also confirmed by subject expert on comparison. The
definition of unfair means was held to be inclusive and not exhaustive and
it was held that so long as the University had communicated the charges
to the candidate in clear terms and given him an opportunity to defend

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 52 of 62

himself, it can not be held that he is not guilty simply because he is not
covered specifically by any of the clauses of the Ordinance. A Full Bench
of Allahabad High Court in Triambakpati Tripathi (supra) relying on AIR
1966 Supreme Court 875, Board of High School and Intermediate
Education Vs. Bagleshwar Prashad had observed that in the matter of
adoption of unfair means, direct evidence may some time be not available
and in such cases the question will have to be considered in the light of
probabilities and circumstantial evidence, however, such an order which is
passed by the expert bodies, the High court does not sit in appeal over the
decisions and the jurisdiction is limited to see if the order in question is not
supported by any evidence at all. In this case, petitioner had given the
square root of 45.5625 as 7.675 without doing rough work or calculation
and given an explanation that he worked out the square root orally. The
Examination Committee was of the opinion that it was not possible to
accept the explanation given by the candidate which was rejected and
consequently the inference drawn by the Committee that the candidate
had found the square root by some improper method was accepted. In
the present case the subject experts had opined that questions in CEE,
2005 could not be answered or solved without rough work. The petitioner
had almost not carried out any rough work and whatever rough work had

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 53 of 62

been carried out was found to be insufficient to answer all the questions in
different subjects. The explanation to the contrary given by the petitioner
has not been accepted and in the present facts and circumstances the
opinion of subject experts that rough work was required to solve the
questions cannot be faulted and differed with by this court.

43.

Whether the EDC (Examination Disciplinary Committee) had

sufficient evidence to deduce necessary inference to prove the facts in
issue? Whether the petitioner have used unfair means in the examination
or not? The question paper book containing five digit keys were before
the EDC as well as OMR sheets. Comparison of OMR sheets of the
petitioner with the students, Rajat Parihar and Sandarbh Kapoor revealed
striking similarity in the pattern of answers given by the petitioner.
Although the answers were not descriptive but objective where one of the
options out of the four options given to the petitioner was to be chosen.
The petitioner has contended that probability theory on the basis of which
the petitioner have been found to be guilty was not put to them.

The

experts report was given to the petitioner with regard to statistical
impossibility on account of commonality of result.

The statistical

impossibility is computed on the basis of the probability theory.

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

The

Page 54 of 62

petitioner has attempted wrong answers for the same questions except
some questions which were not attempted by the petitioner. Coupled with
this fact, the other incriminating circumstance is that the questions which
have not been attempted by the petitioner are also same.

This is further

compounded by the fact that almost all the correct answers of the
petitioner and other two candidates were also the same except few
mistakes here and there which has resulted in slight difference in the
marks obtained by them and their different rankings. Regarding the
comparison of the QPB of the petitioner with that of Sandarbh Kapoor, to
whom a series 16 QPB was given, which was referred to in second show
cause notice dated 7.4.2006 regarding the proposed punishment and no
reference was made about the same in the first show cause notice dated
23.2.2006 it has been explained that the same was done only to explain
the bunching of rank 20-25. All questions in different series were the same
and the only difference was in the arrangement of the questions which too
was in a methodical pattern and that the person encoding series 14 would
not have any problem in encoding series 16. Question nos. 1-10 and 1160 of series 14 were similar to question nos. 51-60 and 1-50 respectively
of series 16. Question nos. 61-70 and 71-120 of series 14 were similar to
question nos. 111-120 and 61-110 respectively of series 16.Question nos.

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 55 of 62

121-130 and 131-180 of series 14 were similar to question nos. 171-180
and 121-170 respectively of series 16. The petitioner and the candidate
Sandarbh Kapoor secured a rank of 24 and 25 respectively and
comparison of the OMR sheets of the petitioner with that of Sandarbh
Kapoor made evident the striking similarity though it was an objective type
paper. The reply and explanations of the petitioner have not found to be
satisfactory. This will constitute sufficient evidence of outside help taken
by the petitioner which fact is further substantiated by the facts that the
performance of the petitioner in the qualifying examinations and his
performance in solving 30 questions given to him during the hearing after
show cause notices, does not commensurate with his performance in the
CEE, 2005 examination. The ranking of the petitioner in other competitive
examination also augment inference drawn by the EDC that the petitioner
had taken outside help in attempting the question paper. No plausibly
acceptable reason has been given by the petitioner for attempting to erase
certain material written on the QPB while other written work was left
untouched and EDC has not believed his version. The explanations given
by the petitioner has not been believed and in the facts and circumstances
it will not be appropriate to draw other inference different from the

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 56 of 62

inference drawn by the EDC and to hold that external source was not used
by him and not to impose punishment on the petitioner.

44.

From the evidence which was before the EDC and the

respondents, it is therefore difficult to contend that the inference drawn by
the EDC and the respondents are based on mere speculation or
conjectures. There were material facts or circumstances on record from
which the inference have been drawn and especially since the standard of
proof is not of ‘beyond reasonable doubt’, but of ‘preponderance of
probabilities’. Therefore the inferences drawn by the respondents that the
petitioner has used unfair means in the examination cannot be faulted in
the facts and circumstances.

45.

Though the petitioner very laboriously pointed out certain variations

in different show cause notices given to the petitioner and variations
between the show cause notice and the report to the Central Bureau of
Investigation but taking the totality of facts and circumstances and the
show cause notices dated 23rd February, 2006 and the reply given by the
petitioner and the personal hearing given to him during which also the
effort was made to ascertain the capability of the petitioner by giving him

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 57 of 62

30 questions to be solved, reflects nothing but that the charges were
communicated to the petitioner cogently and reasonable opportunity of
being heard was given. In the present facts and circumstances, it can not
be doubted that the opportunity which was given to the petitioner was
genuine and not an empty public relations exercise. Pursuant to the
recommendation of the EDC, the notices were again given stipulating the
punishment proposed and the reply given by the petitioner had also been
considered and in the circumstances it will not be correct to draw an
inference that the petitioner had not been given opportunity of being heard
or the opportunity given to the petitioner was an empty public relations
exercise.

46.

A lot of emphasis was also placed by the learned counsel for the

petitioner on slight differences in some of the answers given to 180
questions by the petitioner.

Even if those questions which had been

attempted differently are considered, the answers to other questions
especially the wrong questions and their wrong options and almost same
questions which remained un-attempted and other factors, lead to
inevitable probable conclusion that outside help was received by the
petitioner.

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 58 of 62

47.

The evidence against the petitioner is substantial and the

conclusion of guilt can be drawn from the said evidence in the first
instance itself and all the facts unequivocally points towards guilt of the
petitioner. The circumstances on the basis of which the EDC and
respondents have drawn the inference can not be termed illusory or based
on surmises. The reasons which are available on record and in the orders
passed by the respondents, it is apparent that the respondents have
consciously applied their mind to the facts of the case and they have acted
fairly to do justice in the facts and circumstances.

48.

Under the relevant Ordinance the respondents are entitled to

impose a maximum penalty of debarment from examinations for a period
of five years. The respondents are invested with the discretion to impose
proper punishment keeping in view the magnitude and amplitude of the
misconduct. Though the learned counsel for the petitioner has contended
that Anshul Aggarwal and Somiya Aggarwal from whom the mobile
phones were recovered, only their examination has been cancelled as the
examination papers was taken from them and they went out of the
examination hall and thereafter nothing has been done against them

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 59 of 62

whereas against the petitioner not only examinations for CEE, 2005 has
been cancelled but he has been further debarred for a period of five years
from 2005.

This is not disputed that the quantum of punishment in

disciplinary matters is to be imposed by the concerned authorities and this
Court under Article 226 of Constitution of India will not interfere with the
same as the role of the Court is only secondary and what is to be seen is
whether the authorities have acted illegally or have taken relevant factors
into consideration and whether the view taken by the authorities is such
which no reasonable person could have taken. In view of the substantial
evidence before the respondents, it cannot be held that they have acted
illegally or has omitted relevant factors into consideration. The petitioner
did not admit his guilt and use of unfair means could be inferred by
detailed investigation and effort. The case of the petitioner is therefore, not
the same as that of two persons from whom the mobile phones were
recovered and whose examination was cancelled. Though some
variations in the show cause notice have been pointed out and also some
variations in the performance of the petitioner, however, that does not
reflect any procedural impropriety or such an illegality which must be
interfered with under Article 226 of the Constitution of India in consonance
with a few precedents which have been discussed herein above. The

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 60 of 62

petitioner is unable to point out which other relevant matters have not
been taken into account and what irrelevant matters have been taken into
account to draw the inference as has been drawn by the EDC and the
respondents.

In my opinion, the decision of EDC cannot be termed

absurd or perverse nor it will be appropriate to substitute different
inferences with the inference drawn by EDC even though theoretically
some other inferences may be drawn, which have not been drawn by this
court in the present facts and circumstances.

49.

As discussed earlier, the petitioner has been imposed with the

maximum penalty of debarment for a period of five years, however, reason
for inflicting the maximum penalty has not been cogently stipulated by the
respondents. Consequently, despite the role of the Court being secondary,
it will be appropriate in the totality of facts and circumstances to modify the
punishment inflicted on the petitioner to be of cancellations of their result
for CEE, 2005 and further debarment for a period of two years from 2005
instead of debarment for a period of five years. Consequently, the
petitioner shall be entitled to appear in the examination of respondents
only from the academic years 2007 and afterwards.

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

Page 61 of 62

50.

Therefore, the writ petition seeking quashing of order holding that

the petitioner had used unfair means during the CEE, 2005 examination is
dismissed. However, regarding the punishment imposed the writ petition is
disposed of with the direction that the punishment awarded to the
petitioner for cancellation of his examination for CEE, 2005 and
debarment for a period of five years from 2005 shall now be cancellation
of his CEE, 2005 examination and his debarment for a period of two years
only from 2005. With these observations, the writ petition is disposed of
and parties are left to bear their own costs.

February 26, 2007
`k'

WP (C) 6254 of 2006

ANIL KUMAR J.

Page 62 of 62

