*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CCP No.727/2007 in W.P(C) No.8703/2007

%

Date of Decision : 26.05.2008

Capt.Rajinder Singh Rosha
Through:

….… Petitioner
Mr. Manjit Singh ahluwalia,
Advocate along with petitioner in
person.

Versus

Mr.Jehangir Wadia (Jeh Wadia)
Through :

......... Respondent
Mr.Ravi Kant Chadha, Sr.Advocate
with Mr.Dheeraj Malhotra and
Mr.Mritunjaya Kumar Singh,
Advocates for the respondent.

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.
*
1.

The petitioner has prayed for initiation of contempt proceedings

against the respondent, Jehangir Wadia (Jeh Wadia) for willfully
disobeying the order dated 5th December, 2007 passed by the Court in
CM No.16404/2007 in W.P(C) No.8703/2007.

CCP No.727/2007

Page 1 of 7

2.

The petitioner filed the writ petition No.8703/2007 seeking inter-

alia direction to the respondents in the writ petition to issue „No
Objection Certificate‟ to the petitioner and to release the salary and
other legitimate dues of the petitioner which were allegedly pending for
last 11½ months amounting to about Rs.32,56,500/-.
3.

The petitioner also filed an application for interim directions being

CM No.16404/2007 seeking direction to the Director General, Civil
Aviation; Union of India through Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation
and Goair Airlines to issue `No objection certificate‟ to the petitioner so
that he could join elsewhere in the meantime during the pendency of
the writ petition.
4.

On 5th December, 2007 this Court directed respondent no.3 to

release the suspension allowance to the petitioner, if not already
released, as per the rules applicable within a period of two weeks from
that day on the plea of the respondent that the petitioner had been
placed under suspension by the respondent No.3 since 13th July, 2007.
5.

The

petitioner

contended

that

he

several

times

met

the

respondent for compliance of order dated 5th December, 2007 but the
respondent did not pay any heed to the request of the petitioner and
thus he has committed the contempt of this Court and has deliberately
and intentionally disobeyed the order.

CCP No.727/2007

Page 2 of 7

6.

The application is contested by the respondent. The respondent

categorically contended that the petitioner never met him in relation to
the compliance of order dated 5th December, 2007 and petitioner also
did not made any request either in person or by any written
communication. It was also contended that the respondent does not
operate from any office at Jor Bagh where petitioner is alleged to have
met the respondent.
7.

It was further pleaded on behalf of respondent that the petitioner

in violation of civil aviation requirements had willfully and deliberately
stopped reporting for duties and remained absent from work, as a result
of which the Goair Airlines suspended him and the notice period of six
months had elapsed on 2nd August, 2007. The payment of the alleged
suspension allowance was denied on the ground that an amount of
Rs.53,162/- is recoverable as salary and the suspension allowance
payable to the petitioner for 21 days from 13th July, 2007 comes to
Rs.1,45,645/- only. The respondent also contended that a training cost
of Rs.8,80,807/- is also recoverable from the petitioner and the total
amount recoverable from the petitioner after adjusting the amount of
suspension allowance is Rs.7,31,505/- and therefore, no amount on
account of suspension allowance is payable to the petitioner.
8.

An additional affidavit has been filed on behalf of respondent

contending that the respondent has been unnecessarily dragged in the
CCP No.727/2007

Page 3 of 7

present petition with the aim to harass and pressurize him for illegal
gains and no contempt has been committed by the respondent. It was
asserted that the petitioner joined the respondent company on 19th
July, 2006 in terms of Pilot Employment Agreement and no salary was
payable for the month of July,2006 as the licence of the petitioner was
not recurrent and because it was mandatory in view of Clause 8.2 of the
Pilot Employment Agreement. Though the gross salary of the petitioner
was Rs.4,30,000/-, however, the suspension allowance was payable on
the basic salary of the petitioner. The respondent has also contended
that the petitioner is also liable for the expenses incurred in
revalidation of his licence for which he underwent 10 simulator
sessions.
9.

From the facts stated hereinabove it is apparent that the

respondent is no denying the entitlement of the petitioner for
suspension

allowance

during

the

pendency

of

the

disciplinary

proceedings against him. What is contended by the respondent is that
the amount payable on account of suspension allowance is liable to be
adjusted from the amounts which are payable by the petitioner to the
respondent under various accounts. The respondent was not directed to
pay the suspension allowance without adjusting any of the amounts
claimed by the respondent from the petitioner.

If the respondent

believed that the amount claimed from the petitioner are adjustable
from the amounts claimed by the petitioner, it will be difficult to infer
CCP No.727/2007

Page 4 of 7

that the respondent deliberately and intentionally did not pay the
suspension allowance so as to violate the order of this court.
10.

The Supreme Court in Mrityunjoy Das v. Sayed Hasibur Rahaman

(2001) 3 SCC 739 had held that mere disobedience of an order may not
be sufficient to amount to a `Civil Contempt‟ within the meaning of
section 2(b) of the Act of 1971.

The essential requirement is the

intentional and deliberate violation of the order of the court. It was also
held that if two interpretation are possible and the action of the alleged
contemnor pertains to one such interpretation, it will be doubtful to
hold that the order has been violated willfully and intentionally.

In

paragraph 15 of Mrityunjoy Das (supra) the apex court had held as
under:
“15. It may also be noticed at this juncture that mere
disobedience of an order may not be sufficient to amount to
a “civil contempt” within the meaning of Section 2(b) of the
Act of 1971 — the element of willingness is an
indispensable requirement to bring home the charge within
the meaning of the Act and lastly, in the event two
interpretations are possible and the action of the alleged
contemnor pertains to one such interpretation — the act or
acts cannot be ascribed to be otherwise contumacious in
nature. A doubt in the matter as regards the wilful nature
of the conduct if raised, question of success in a contempt
petition would not arise.”
11.

This is no more disputable that exercise of power within the

meaning of the Act of 1971 is comparatively a rarity and should be used
sparingly and in the larger interest of society and for proper
administration of justice.

CCP No.727/2007

Page 5 of 7

12.

The petitioner has alleged that he met the respondent in number

of times at the office at Jor Bagh. The allegation is denied by the
respondent. It is asserted that the respondent does not operate from
the office at Jor Bagh and in the circumstances it can be inferred that
the plea of the petitioner that he met the respondent is not correct. The
plea of the petitioner is also vague because the petitioner did not
disclose the dates on which he met the respondent. In any case in the
entirety of the facts and circumstances it is difficult to infer that there
has been deliberated and intentional violation of the order dated 5th
December, 2007 so as to entail the consequences of committing
contempt of this court.
13.

The Supreme Court of India in the case Perspective Publications

(Pvt.) Ltd. v. State of Maharashtra (AIR 1971 SC 221) has observed at
page 230, inter alia thus:
“The summary jurisdiction by way of contempt must be
exercised with great care and caution and only when its
exercise is necessary for the proper administration of law
and justice.” (Per Grover, J.) Contempt of Court is
essentially a matter which concerns the administration of
justice and the dignity and authority of judicial Tribunals.
It is not a right of a party to be invoked for the redress of
his grievances. It is not also a mode by which the rights of a
party, adjudicated upon by a Tribunal can be enforced
against another party. Moreover, if the matter, as in the
present case, requires a detailed inquiry, it must be left to
the Court which passed the order and which presumably is
fully acquainted with the subject-matter of its own order.
When the matter relates to mere infringement of an order,
as between parties, it is clearly inexpedient to invoke and
CCP No.727/2007

Page 6 of 7

exercise contempt jurisdiction as a mode of executing the
order, merely because other remedies may take time or are
more circumlocutory in character. Contempt jurisdiction
should be reserved for what essentially brings the
administration of justice into contempt or unduly weakens
it (vide (1964) 68 Cal WN 148, AIR 1951 Pat 231, AIR 1966
Mad 21 and AIR 1971 ALL 231).
14.

Having carefully considered the allegations made in the contempt

petition. I am of the opinion that the action of the respondent does not
fall within the ambit of Contempt of Courts Act. No undertaking was
given to or accepted by the Court. The suspension allowance was not
given under the belief that the amount recoverable from the petitioner is
more than the amount payable. Whether the suspension allowance was
payable on the basic salary or on the total emoluments also negated the
element of willingness in not complying with the order. In any case
suspension allowance as computed by the respondent has been paid to
the petitioner without prejudice to the pleas and contentions of the
parties. In the circumstances it cannot be held that the respondent has
committed contempt of this court.
15.

In the circumstances there are no grounds to take action against

the respondent for a committing Contempt of this court. The petition is
therefore, dismissed.

May 26th, 2008.
‘K’

ANIL KUMAR J.

CCP No.727/2007

Page 7 of 7

