*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP(C) No.6604/2006

%

Date of decision : 26.03.2008

Om Prakash
Through:

….… Petitioner
Mr.Krishan Kumar and Mr.Ajay Kumar,
Advocates.

Versus
The Ministry of Indian Railway
Through its General Manager & Anr
.........
Respondents
Through : Mr.B.S.Jain, Advocate.
CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
YES
YES

ANIL KUMAR, J.

1.

The petitioner has claimed the family pension from 25th

December, 2000 after the death of his father who was a Railways
employee during the lifetime of the petitioner on the ground that he is
disabled and unable to earn his livelihood.

2.

The brief relevant facts for adjudication of the present petition are

that the father of the petitioner was working as a fitter (MCM) in the
WP(C) No.6604/2006

Page 1 of 16

Central Railways. The petitioner’s father retired on 30th June, 1987 and
his pay at the time of retiring from service was Rs.1800/-. The father of
the petitioner had served from 2nd May, 1949 uptil 30th June, 1987.

3.

The petitioner contended that his father was getting pension from

Central Railways after his retirement on 30th June, 1987 till 25th
December, 2000 when the father of the petitioner expired. The
petitioner has produced a copy of the pension book and a copy of the
death certificate of his father.

4.

It is asserted by the petitioner that he is 55% physically

handicapped and he is fully dependant on his elder brother after the
demise of his father. It is contended that during the lifetime of his father
also he was dependent upon him and he is unable to earn his living.
The petitioner has produced the disability certificate issued by All India
Institute of Medical Sciences certifying that he has 55% disability of
both lower limbs. Petitioner pleaded that though he is 10th Class pass
but he could not continue due to illness as he had T.B of hip joints and
he became physically handicapped of both lower limbs. He is stated to
be unable to do any kind of physical job and was always dependant on
his father who was an employee of respondent Railways. The petitioner
has also produced the old record pertaining to his illness, T.B of hip
joints making him disabled.

WP(C) No.6604/2006

Page 2 of 16

5.

The petitioner contended that in the family pension book all the

documents relating to the pension of the father of the petitioner were
prepared by the clerks of respondent No.2 who had left the column
pertaining to the dependants of the petitioner’s father blank, however,
form 6 was filled by his father and he was shown as his dependent. The
mother of the petitioner had pre deceased his father.

6.

The petitioner has claimed that under the Family Pension Scheme

for Railway Servants, 1964 the family pension is payable not only to the
widow or the widower after the demise of the retired person but to the
son or daughter also if such a son or a daughter is suffering from any
disorder or disability of mind or is physically crippled or any disability
which renders son or daughter unable to earn a living even after
attaining the age of 25 years. The relevant part of Rule 75 of Family
Pension Scheme for Railway Servants, 1964 is as under:“75: Family Pension Scheme for Railway Servants, 1964.
(1). The provision of this rule shall apply:(a) To a railway servant entering service in a pensionable
establishment on or after the 1st January, 1964; and
(b) To a railway servant who was in service on the 31st
December, 1963 and came to be governed by the
provisions of the Family Pension the Scheme for railway
employees, 1964, contained in Railway Board’s letter
No.F(P)63 PN-1/40 dated the 2nd January, 1964 as in
force immediately before the commencement of these
rules.
Note: The provisions of this rule has also been extended
from 22nd September, 1977 to railway servants on
pensionable establishment who retired or died before
the 31st December, 1963 and also to those who were
alive on that date but had opted out of the 1964
Scheme.
WP(C) No.6604/2006

Page 3 of 16

(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-rule
(3), where a railway servant dies:(a).After completion of one year of continuous service, or
(b). Before completion of one year of continuous service
provided the deceased railway servant concerned
immediately prior to his appointment to the service or
post was examined by the appropriate medical authority
and declared fit by that authority for railway service;
(c). After retirement from service and was on the date of
death in receipt of pension, or compassionate allowance,
referred to in Chapter V other than the pension referred
to in rule 53.
The family of the deceased shall be entitled to a family
pension 1964 (hereinafter in this rule referred to as family
pension) the amount of which shall be determined in
accordance with the Table
Explanation: The expression “Continuous one year of
service” where-ever it occurs in this rule shall be construed
to include “less than one year of continuous service” as
defined in clause (b).
(3). The amount of family pension shall be fixed at monthly
rates and expressed in whole rupees and where the family
pension contains a fraction of a rupee, it shall be rounded off
to the next higher rupee.
Provided that in no case a family pension in excess of the
maximum specified under this rule shall be allowed.
(4).(i) (a)where a railway servant, who is not governed by the
Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1923), dies
while in service after having rendered not less than
seven years’ continuous service the rate of family
pension payable to the family shall be equal to fifty per
cent of the pay last drawn or twice the family pension
admissible under sub rule (2), whichever is less, and the
amount so admissible shall be payable from the date
following date of death of the railway servant for a period
of seven years, or for a period upto the date on which
the deceased railway servant would have attained the
age of sixty five (now sixty-seven) years had he survived,
whichever is less.
(b) In the event of death of a railway servant after
retirement, the Family Pension as determined under
sub-clause (a) shall be payable for a period of seven
years, or for a period upto the date on which the retired
deceased railway servant would have attained the age of
sixty five (now sixty-seven) years had he survived,
whichever is less.
WP(C) No.6604/2006

Page 4 of 16

That is no case the amount of family pension determined
under sub-clause (b) of this clause shall exceed the pension
sanctioned on retirement from railway service:
Provided further that where the amount of pension
sanctioned on retirement is less than the amount or family
pension admissible under sub-rule (2) the amount of family
pension determined under this clause shall be limited to
the amount of family pension admissible under sub-rule
(2).
Explanation: For the purpose of this sub-clause “pension
sanctioned on retirement” includes the part of the pension
which the retired railway servant may have commuted
before death.
(ii) (a) where a railway servant, who is governed by the
Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1923), dies
while in service after having rendered not less than
seven years continuous service, the rate of family
pension payable to the family shall be equal to fifty per
cent of the pay last drawn or one and a half times the
family pension admissible under sub-rule (2), whichever
is less.
(b) The family pension so determined under sub-clause (a)
shall be payable for the period mentioned in clause (i):
Provided that where a compensation is not payable under
the aforesaid Act, the pension sanctioning authority shall
send a certificate to the Accounts Officer to the effect that
the family of the deceased railway servant shall be paid
family pension on the scale, and for the period, mentioned
in clause (i)
(iii) After the expiry of the period referred to in clause (i), the
family, in receipt of family pension under that clause or
clause (ii) shall be entitled to family pension at the rate
admissible under sub-rule (2).
(5).Where an award under the Railway Services (Extraordinary
Pension) Rules, 1993 is admissible, no payment of family
pension under this rule shall be authorized.
(6). The period for which family pension is payable shall be as
follows:(i) In the case of widow or widower, up to the date of
death or remarriage, whichever is earlier;
(ii) In the case of a son, until he attains the age of
twenty-five years; and
(iii). In the case of an unmarried daughter, until she
attains the age of twenty-five years or until she gets
married, whichever is earlier:
Provided that if the son or daughter, of a railway
servant is suffering from any disorder or disability of
WP(C) No.6604/2006

Page 5 of 16

mind (including mentally retarded) or is physically
crippled or disabled so as to render him or her unable
to earn a living even after attaining the age of twentyfive years the family pension shall be payable to such
son or daughter for life subject to the following
conditions, namely:(a). The family pension shall be paid to such son/daughter
through the guardian as if he or she were a minor on
the basis of guardianship certificate or the guardian
appointed by a court except in the case of physically
crippled son/daughter who has attained the age of
majority.
The
spouse
of
the
deceased
pensioner/employee also allowed to furnish the details
of the eligible children to the Pension Sanctioning
Authority if such details were not furnished earlier.
(b). Before allowing the family pension for life to any such
son or daughter, the sanctioning authority shall satisfy
that the handicap is of such, prevent him or her from
earning his or her livelihood and the same shall be
evidenced by a certificate obtained from a medical
officer not below the rank of a Divisional Medical
Officer setting out, as far as possible, the exact mental
or physical condition of the child.
(c). The person receiving the family pension as a guardian
of such son or daughter shall produce every three
years a certificate from a medical officer not below the
rank of Divisional Medical Officer to the effect that the
son or daughter continues to suffer from disorder or
disability of mind (including mentally retarded) or
continues to be physically crippled or disabled.
Explanation:(1). Only the disability which manifests itself before the
retirement or death of the railway servant while in
service shall be taken into account for the purpose of
grant of family pension under this sub rule.
(Explanation no.1 deleted vide notification no.
F(E).III/94/PN-1/31 (Amendment) dated 3.2.1995)
Explanation: 2( )
(2) A daughter shall become eligible for family pension
under this sub rule from the date she gets married.
(3) the family pension payable to such a son or daughter
shall be stopped if he or she starts earning his or her
livelihood.
(4) in such cases it shall be the duty of the guardian to
furnish a certificate to the Treasury or Bank, or Post office
(Authorised disbursement units for Railways) as the case
may be, every month that (i) he or she has not started
WP(C) No.6604/2006

Page 6 of 16

earning his or her livelihood; (ii) in case of daughter that
she has not yet married;
(d) in the case of a mentally retarded son or daughter, the
family pension shall be payable to a person nominated by
the Railway Servant or the pensioner, as the case may be,
and in case no such nomination has been furnished to the
Head of Office of such Railway servant or pensioner during
his life time, to the person nominated by the spouse of such
Railway servant or family pensioner, as the case may be ,
later on.
(e) if the son and unmarried daughters including sons and
unmarried daughters suffering from disorder or disability of
mind (including mentally retarded) are alive, the family
pension shall be payable in the order of their birth
irrespective of the sex of the child and the younger of him
shall not be eligible for family pension unless the elder
above him or her becomes ineligible for the grant of family
pension. In cases, where the family pension is payable to
twin children, the same shall be payable to such twin
children in equal shares and in the event of any of such …..
7.

The Petitioner contended that under the relevant rule the family

pension of the father of the petitioner is to continue in the name of the
petitioner as he is a disabled son of the retired employee with
permanent disability and is unable to earn his livelihood and, therefore,
he sent representations to the respondents dated 3rd April, 2001, 14th
September, 2002 and 1st November, 2002 for grant of family pension to
the petitioner after the death of his father on 25th December, 2000. On
the representations made by the petitioner it was communicated to the
petitioner by communication dated 4th October, 2002 that at the time of
retirement, petitioner’s father did not give in writing intimation about
disability of petitioner though the disability certificate is dated 28th
April, 1997. It was also communicated to the petitioner to submit all the
relevant papers in compliance of letter dated 15th May, 2002.
WP(C) No.6604/2006

Page 7 of 16

8.

After petitioner complied with the requirements under the rules,

by another communication dated 18th November, 2002 the petitioner
was intimated that in terms of Explanation 1 of para 6 of explanation
of Rule 75 Clause 6 only that nominee will be taken into consideration,
which has been mentioned by the Railway employee at

the time of

retirement or before death during the course of the employment and in
the case of the petitioner in the forms of the retirement it had not been
so mentioned, therefore, the petitioner is not entitled for family pension.

9.

The petitioner contended that he had sent all the documents

demanded by the respondents and even sent a legal notice dated 25th
December, 2000, however, the family pension has not been granted to
him and he is on the verge of starvation and is dependent on his elder
brother and in the circumstances he is claiming family pension on the
ground that he is the disabled son of Sh.Lampoo, who was a Railway
employee and he is unable to earn his livelihood.

10.

The respondent has contested the petition on the ground that the

physically handicap certificate dated 28th April, 1997 certifying that the
petitioner is 55% handicap does not state that the petitioner is unable
to earn his livelihood. It is also alleged that the father of the petitioner
in the statement showing the details of the members of the family for
the purpose of Family Pension Scheme, 1964 had not stipulated the
WP(C) No.6604/2006

Page 8 of 16

disability of the petitioner. A copy of the form No.6 has been produced
by the respondent which is the statement showing the details of the
members of the family for purpose of Family Pension Scheme, 1964
which is dated 9th May, 1987. According to the respondent the physical
disability of the petitioner is after the retirement of his father on 30th
June, 1987. Relying on the explanation 1 of Rule 75(6) it is contended
that the petitioner is not eligible for family pension and the petitioner
was intimated by letter dated 18th November, 2002 that he is not
entitled for the family pension.

11.

The

petitioner

has

refuted

the

allegations

made

by

the

respondents and contended that the explanation 1 to Rule 75(6)
contemplating that only that disability which manifests itself before the
retirement or death of the Railway servant while in service shall be
taken into account for the purpose of grant of family pension under this
sub Rule, was deleted vide notification No.F(E) III/94/PN-1/31 dated 3rd
February, 1995 and therefore, the respondent cannot contend that he is
not entitled for family pension. The petitioner reiterated that he is
entitled for family pension.

12.

I have perused the petition, reply and the documents filed by the

parties and have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length.
This is not disputed that the father of the petitioner was a Railway
employee who retired after a long service from 2nd May, 1949 to 30th
WP(C) No.6604/2006

Page 9 of 16

June, 1987. This also cannot be disputed that the name of the
petitioner was mentioned in Form 6 which is the statement showing the
details of the members of the family for the purpose of Family Pension
Scheme, 1964 which is dated 9th May, 1987. The respondents in their
letter dated 4th October, 2002 denied the family pension on the ground
that the petitioner has not sent the relevant documents and since the
father of the petitioner had not given any information in writing about
the physical disability of the petitioner and as the certificate is dated
28th April, 1997 the petitioner is not entitled for the family pension. By
said communication dated 4th October, 2002 the petitioner was,
however, asked to comply with the requirement demanded by letter
dated 15th May, 2002. The copy of the letter dated 15th May, 2002 has
not been produced either by the petitioner or by the respondents. The
case of the petitioner is that he had submitted all the documents
demanded by the respondents from time to time which fact has not
been denied by the respondents. The family pension to the petitioner
has been declined by letter dated 18th November, 2002 on the ground
that the physical disability of the petitioner was acquired by him after
the retirement of his father on 30th June, 1987. However in the reply
filed to the writ petition it is also alleged that no certificate from a
medical officer not below the rank of a Divisional Medical Officer of the
Railways about the exact mental and physical condition had been
submitted. It is pertinent to notice that by communication dated 18th
November, 2002 the claim of the petitioner was rejected solely on the
WP(C) No.6604/2006

Page 10 of 16

ground that under the Railway Services (Pension) Act, 1993 Chapter VI
Rule 75 Explanation 1, the nominees for family pension could only be
those nominees who are mentioned by the Railways employees at the
time of retirement or before death during the course of the employment
whereas in Form 6 submitted by the father of the petitioner at the time
of retirement it had not been mentioned that the petitioner was disable.
The respondents thus have rejected the case of the petitioner only on
the ground that in terms of explanation to sub Rule 6 of Rule 75, since
the petitioner did not acquire the disability before the retirement or the
death of the Railway servant while in service, therefore, the petitioner is
not entitled for the family pension.

13.

While rejecting the case of the petitioner the ground taken was

not that the petitioner had not submitted a proper medical certificate
stipulating that petitioner is not able to earn his livelihood on account
of his disability but on the ground that the nomination of the petitioner
was not mentioned by the Railway employee at the time of retirement or
before death during the course of the employment. However, in the
counter affidavit filed by the respondents, the grounds taken are that
the petitioner has not submitted a certificate stipulating that he is
unable to earn his livelihood and his disability is after retirement of
his father on 30.6.1987 and he is not entitled for family pension under
Rule 75 (vi) (b) explanation 1. It is no more res-Integra that when a
statutory functionary makes an order based on certain grounds, its
WP(C) No.6604/2006

Page 11 of 16

validity must be judged by the reasons so mentioned and cannot be
supplemented by fresh reasons.

14.

The orders dated 18th November, 2002 is rather crypt and the

only reason given is that the father of the petitioner at the time of
retirement had not given any information about the disability of the
petitioner. No other ground was taken by the respondents at that time.
The Apex Court in AIR 1978 SC 851 = (1978) 1 SCC 405, Mohinder
Singh Gill Vs The Chief Election Commissioner had held that an orders
cannot be supplemented by fresh reasons as otherwise an order bad in
the beginning may, by the time it comes to Court on account of a
challenge, gets validated by additional grounds later brought out.
Consequently the respondents cannot validate their order on the
grounds now raised in the counter affidavit filed on their behalf. The
Supreme Court in Mohinder Singh Gill (supra) in para 8 page 417 had
held:8.
………..that when a statutory functionary makes an
order based on certain grounds, its validity must be judged
by the reasons so mentioned and cannot be supplemented
by fresh reasons in the shape of affidavit or otherwise.
Otherwise, an order bad in the beginning may, by the time
it comes to court on account of a challenge, get validated by
additional grounds later brought out. We may here draw
attention to the observations of Bose, J. in Gordhandas
Bhanji( AIR 1952 SC 16):
“Public orders, publicly made, in exercise of a
statutory authority cannot be construed in the light
of explanations subsequently given by the officer
making the order of what he meant, or of what was in
his mind, or what he intended to do. Public orders
made by public authorities are meant to have public
WP(C) No.6604/2006

Page 12 of 16

effect and are intended to affect the actings and
conduct of those to whom they are addressed and
must be construed objectively with reference to the
language used in the order itself.”
Orders are not like old wine becoming better as they
grow older.

15.

The learned counsel for the respondents has very vociferously

argued that since there is no certificate showing that the petitioner is
unable to earn his livelihood on account of his disability, the petitioner
is not entitled for family pension. This is not disputed that petitioner
has 55% disability of both his limbs which he has acquired on account
of TB of hip joints long back. The plea of the petitioner is that after
becoming disable he was totally dependent on his father, a retired
Railway employee and after his death on 25th December, 2000 he is
dependent upon his elder brother. The respondents have also admitted
that a certificate dated 28.04.1997 of AIIMS was given which was not
rejected on the ground that it is not from an officer below the rank of
Divisional Medical Officer nor was the family pension declined on the
ground that the certificate did not stipulate categorically that the
petitioner is unable to earn his livelihood. Therefore, the respondents
cannot be permitted to decline family pension to the petitioner on this
ground. The medical certificate is from the premier institution of this
country and it cannot be doubted and therefore, this fact that the
petitioner is a disabled person cannot be denied by the respondents.
The respondents have also not alleged that the petitioner is able to earn
WP(C) No.6604/2006

Page 13 of 16

his livelihood. In the facts and circumstances it can be inferred that the
petitioner is unable to earn his livelihood.

16.

The Apex Court in Smt. Bhagwanti Vs Union of India, (1989) 4

SCC 397 while considering the question whether the post retirement
spouse and children are entitled to family pension and whether the
provision contained in the Pension Rules denying such family pension
is constitutionally valid, had held that such provision denying the
family pension is ultra vires Article 14 of the Constitution of India and
cannot be sustained. The Apex Court had further held that the purpose
for which the family pension is provided, is frustrated if children born
after retirement are excluded from the benefit of the family pension and
in the event of death of the Government servant such minor children
would go without support. In another judgment 1995 supp (1) SCC 145,
Bhagwanti Mamtani Vs Union of India, the Apex Court had held that
the benefit of the provision of the rule to a mentally disabled person
cannot be denied on the ground of making such claim belatedly. The
Apex Court had also held that any nomination made contrary to the
statute denying the claim of the rightful person to get the family
pension will not disentitle such person from family pension under the
Pension Rules in (1999) 5 SCC 237, G.L.Bhatia Vs Union of India.
Following the principles laid down by the Apex Court; it is therefore,
evident that the pension being payable on consideration of the past
services

rendered

WP(C) No.6604/2006

by

the

Government servant and the avowed
Page 14 of 16

purpose of the pension rules being to provide sustenance in old age and
some solace that in the event of his/her death, children will get some
support in the form of family pension, such pension cannot be deprived
to a disabled child surely on the ground that no declaration was made
by the Government servant, while in service or at the time of retirement,
as in that event the very purpose granting family pension would be
defeated.

17.

The Rules 75(6) of the Railways family Pension Scheme for

Railway Service, 1964 categorically contemplates the period for which
the family pension shall be payable, under which the family pension is
payable to a son until he attains the age of 25 years and even to such a
son who has attained the age of 25 years provided he is suffering from a
disability which has rendered him unable to earn a living even after
attaining the age of 25 years. Consequently, according to the rules of
the respondents, even though the petitioner has attained the age of 25
years but on account of his 55% disability of limbs has rendered him
unable to earn his living, he shall be entitled for the family pension
during his life time. The plea of the respondent that the disability was
not acquired by the petitioner before the retirement of the Railway
servant in terms of explanation to Rule 75 (6) is based on the
misconception of the respondents that the explanation No.1 to Rule 6
still persists though by notification no. F(E) III/94/PN-1/31 dated 3rd
February, 1995 the explanation 1 stipulating that the disability must
WP(C) No.6604/2006

Page 15 of 16

have been manifested before retirement or death of the railway servant
while in service, was deleted.

18.

If after the demise of the retired Railway servant who was entitled

to pension, the pension continues to the widow upto the date of death
or remarriage and if in case of a son after the death of a retired
employee the pension continues to his son till he attains the age of 25
years, then by virtue of the proviso to Rule 75 (b) in case of a disable
son who is unable to earn his livelihood, after the demise of the retired
Railway servant, the pension shall continue during the lifetime of
disabled son who is unable to earn his livelihood.

19.

Consequently, the rule is made absolute and the writ petition is

allowed holding that the petitioner is entitled for the family pension.
Therefore, the petitioner is entitled for family pension during his
lifetime. The respondents, in the facts and circumstances should pay
the amount of family pension to the petitioner after the demise of his
father on 25th December, 2000 and continue to pay family pension to
the

petitioner

during

his

lifetime.

Considering

the

facts

and

circumstances of the case, the parties are however, left to bear their
own costs.

March 26, 2008.
‘k’
WP(C) No.6604/2006

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 16 of 16

