IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Date of Decision: September 27, 2007
C.M.(M).No.845/2005

# Smt.Raj Rani
Through:

..... PETITIONER
Mr.Sarat Chandra with Mr.Sachin
Chandra, Advocates.
Versus

$ Shri Ved Prakash (Deceased) & Others
..... RESPONDENTS
Through:
Mr.A.P.S. Ahluwalia with Mr.Hemant
Malhotra, Advocates for respondent
No.1.
Mr.Ajit Singh, Advocate for respondent
Nos.2 & 3.
CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
YES
YES

ANIL KUMAR, J.
1.

The Petitioner has impugned the order dated 17th March, 2005 passed by Rent

Control Tribunal dismissing the appeal of the petitioner against the order dated 17th
February, 2005 passed by the Additional Rent Controller dismissing the objections of
the petitioner against the order of eviction dated 15th October, 1996 passed against
petitioner under Section 14(1)(e) of Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958.

2.

To comprehend the controversy, the following facts are relevant.

Shri Ved

Prakash, predecessor of the respondents, filed an eviction petition being E-32/85 titled
C.M.(M).No.845/2005

Page 1 of 16

Ved Prakash vs. Smt. Raj Rani under Section 14(1)(e) of Delhi Rent Control Act
1958 contending that he is the owner/landlord of the premises No.WZ-40/A, Krishna
Puri, New Delhi, which was let out to Shri Ajit Ram at a monthly rent of Rs.15/- and
a rent deed dated 26th August, 1984 was executed. Shri Ved Prakash s/o Shri Kunj
Lal, landlord was in financial difficulties and therefore he had taken a loan of
Rs.1700/- from Shri Ajit Ram and executed an agreement to execute the mortgage
deed on 22nd September, 1972. Under the agreement it was categorically stipulated
that the possession is not being given to mortgagee. Shri Ajit Ram had agreed to give
a loan of Rs.2000/- and since only Rs.1700/- was given, he had to pay another amount
of Rs.300/-. The original sale deed of the house and original mortgage deed was
alleged to be handed over to Shri Ajit Ram who, however, continued to be a tenant in
the house. According to late Shri Ved Prakash, though an amount of Rs.1700/- was
returned to Shri Ajit Ram, who was suffering from Cancer, even after paying the
mortgage money he could not get the documents back. Shri Ajit Ram, the tenant who
had given a loan of Rs.1700 to his landlord, ultimately died in 1977. After his death,
the premises was let out or continued to be under the tenancy of his widow at the rate
of Rs.25/- per month. The widow of Late Shri Ajit Ram also left for U.K. in 1979 and
thereafter, the tenancy was transferred in the name of the petitioner who is the
daughter of late Shri Ajit Ram. The tenancy was transferred in her name and rent was
increased to Rs.40/- per month.

3.

Since late Shri Ved Prakash, owner/landlord of the premises, predecessor of

respondent Nos.1 to 3 had retired from a Government office and he did not have
C.M.(M).No.845/2005

Page 2 of 16

suitable residential accommodation available to him for his residence and his family
members, therefore, he filed an eviction petition on the ground of bonafide
requirement. The petition filed by Shri Ved Prakash, deceased, was contested by the
petitioner contending that her brother is also a legal heir of late Shri Ajit Ram and a
necessary party and there is no relationship of landlord and tenant between them. The
petitioner contended in the earlier eviction petition that Shri Ved Prakash had
mortgaged the premises with possession in favour of her father, Shri Ajit Ram for
Rs.2000/- out of which Rs.1700/- was paid to late Shri Ved Prakash on 27th
September, 1972 and Rs.300/- remained to be paid which was to be given to late Shri
Ved Prakash at the time of registration of the mortgage deed. However, Shri Ved
Prakash did not get the mortgage deed executed and registered in favour of her father.
It was also contended that a sum of Rs.300/- was sent to Shri Ved Prakash by money
order which was received, however, the mortgage deed was not got registered.

4.

In the earlier eviction petition, the petitioner alleged that she and her brother,

Mr.Ashok Kumar Aggarwal, are in occupation of the demised premises. The
Additional Rent Controller after considering the contentions of the parties and that
there has been a relationship of landlord and tenant between the petitioner and late
Shri Ved Prakash, son of Shri Kunj Lal, had held that the premises was required bona
fide by Late Shri Ved Prakash. It was further held by the Additional Rent Controller
in his order dated 10th January, 1989 in eviction petition No.E-32/85 that after the
demise of Shri Ajit Ram, his widow and his two daughters and one son became cotenants and, therefore, the eviction petition was bad for non-joinder of parties as the
C.M.(M).No.845/2005

Page 3 of 16

son and other daughter of deceased Shri Ajit Ram were also necessary parties. It was
also held that by virtue of alleged mortgage deed neither late Shri Ajit Ram nor the
petitioner, her daughter, became owner of the disputed premises. After the dismissal
of the earlier eviction petition Shri Ved Prakash, son of Shri Kunj Lal and predecessor
of the present respondents, did not impugn the order dated 10th January, 1989 nor the
petitioner challenged the order dated 10th January, 1989 holding that the petitioner and
her father had not become the owner of the property.

5.

Late Shri Ved Prakash son of Shri Kunj Lal filed another eviction petition

being E-170 of 1989 against the petitioner, Ashok Kumar Punj, her brother and Mrs.
Kole, her sister, on the ground of his bonafide requirement after his earlier eviction
petition was dismissed on the ground of non joinder of necessary parties. The eviction
petition was contested by the petitioner. After hearing the parties, learned Additional
Rent Controller passed an order of eviction dated 15th October, 1996 in favour of late
Shri Ved Prakash, son of Shri Kunj Lal, and against the petitioner and her brother and
sister.

6.

The Additional Rent Controller dispelled the contention of the petitioner and

her brother and sister that Shri Ajit Ram became owner of the suit property by virtue
of mortgage of the house for Rs.2,000/- and had held that there was relationship of
landlord and tenant between the petitioner, her brother and sister and Late Shri Ved
Prakash.

C.M.(M).No.845/2005

Page 4 of 16

7.

Thereafter aggrieved by the order of the Rent Controller passing an order of

eviction dated 15th October, 1996 in favour of Late Shri Ved Prakash and against the
petitioner and her brother and sister, the petitioner filed a Civil Revision Petition
being CR No.394 of 1994. During the pendency of the revision petition, Shri Ved
Prakash died on 28th November, 1998 and his legal representatives, the respondents
were substituted. The revision filed by the petitioner was dismissed by order dated
11th September, 2000 in default. An application for restoration was also filed on
behalf of petitioner which was also rejected on 13th September, 2001. Against the
dismissal of revision petition by this Court against the eviction order dated 15th
October, 1996, a Special Leave Petition was also filed by the petitioner which was
also dismissed by order dated 25th January, 2002.

8.

As the order of eviction passed against the petitioner and her brother and sister

had become final, therefore, an execution petition for recovery of possession from the
petitioner was filed by the respondents almost after 16 or 17 years of initiating the
litigation against them. In the execution petition, the petitioner filed objections under
Section 25 of Delhi Rent Control Act raising the same pleas which were raised before
the Additional Rent Controller in the eviction petition filed against the petitioner and
her brother and sister under Section 14(1)(e) read with Section 25 B of Delhi Rent
Control Act, 1958.

9.

Learned Additional Rent Controller considered the objections of the petitioner

and dismissed the same by an order dated 17th February, 2005. The Additional Rent
C.M.(M).No.845/2005

Page 5 of 16

Controller in execution petition No.18 of 2004 while deciding the objections of the
petitioner under Section 25 of Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 held that the objections
could be filed only by the person other than the tenant who claimed to have
independent rights in the demised premises. Since the petitioner was one of the
respondents in the eviction petition and an order of eviction was passed against her
and the revision petition filed against the order of eviction was dismissed and special
leave petition was also dismissed, in the circumstances, the petitioner could not
contend that the order of eviction was a nullity or non-est.

10.

The petitioner had also filed a suit for possession and she sought stay of

execution proceedings. The interim application by the petitioner had been disposed of
on the statement made on behalf of Late Shri Ved Prakash that he will not transfer the
premises in dispute till the petitioner acquires legal ownership right from any court of
law or through any instrument in any other manner. Thereafter, petitioner filed an
application under Order 39 Rule 2A on the ground that Late Shri Ved Prakash had
violated the order passed in the suit which application was dismissed. An appeal filed
by the petitioner was also dismissed.

11.

The Additional Rent Controller in his order dated 17th February, 2005 while

dismissing the objections of the petitioner had held that since the finding that there is
a relationship of landlord and tenant between the respondents and the petitioner has
become final, the executing court cannot go behind eviction decree passed in favour
of respondents.

While dismissing the objections of the petitioner various other

C.M.(M).No.845/2005

Page 6 of 16

contentions of the parties were also considered.

12.

Aggrieved by the dismissal of her objections, the petitioner filed an appeal

being RCA No.137 of 2005 titled Smt.Raj Rani Vs. Shri Ved Prakash (since
deceased) through his LRs. The Tribunal considered the provision of Section 111 (d)
of Transfer of Property Act and in absence of any decree of foreclosure had held that
the decree of eviction passed under Section 14(1)(e) of Delhi Rent Control Act which
was affirmed by dismissal of the revision petition and thereafter dismissal of special
leave petition of the petitioner, the same has become executable. The Tribunal
considered various judgements cited by the petitioner.

13.

The learned counsel for the Petitioner has contended that the eviction order

passed against the petitioner which was confirmed by the High Court and the
Supreme Court is a nullity and can be challenged under section 25B of Delhi Rent
Control Act, 1958. According to him only the Civil Court can decide about the
mortgage which was created in favour of the father of the petitioner by Late Shri Ved
Prakash, landlord of the premises. The plea of the petitioner is that the tenancy rights
of her father got merged in his rights as mortgagee and therefore, the tenancy did not
survive and consequently there was no relationship of tenant and landlord between
Shri Ajit Ram, her father and Late Shri Ved Prakash.

14.

The petitioner had relied on AIR 1954 Supreme Court 340, Kiran Singh and

Others Vs. Chaman Paswan and Others in which case it was held that a decree passed
C.M.(M).No.845/2005

Page 7 of 16

without jurisdiction is a nullity. It was held by the Apex Court that it is a fundamental
principle that a decree passed by a court without jurisdiction is a nullity and that this
plea that it is invalid, should be set up whenever and wherever it is sought to be
enforced or relied upon even at the stage of execution and even in collateral
proceedings. It was further held that a defect of jurisdiction, whether it is pecuniary
or territorial, or whether it is in respect of subject matter of the action, strikes at the
very authority of the court to pass any decree and such a defect cannot be cured even
by the consent of the parties. In case of the petitioner, the question about the
jurisdiction of the Rent Controller was considered and it was held that on account of
the mortgage without possession and the mortgage deed being unregistered, Shri Ajit
Ram and after his demise the petitioner and his brother and sister continued to be
tenant in the property and tenancy did not merge with their rights as mortgagee. It
was established that there was a relationship of tenant and landlord which was
affirmed in the revision petition filed by the petitioner and the special leave petition
filed before the Apex Court was also dismissed. After adjudication of the plea about
the jurisdiction where it has been held that there is a relationship of landlord and
tenant, the petitioner cannot contend that a decree is a nullity though a competent
court has held that the decree of eviction is valid.

15.

The petitioner has relied on AIR 1976 Supreme Court 1565, Shah Mathuradas

Maganlal and Co. Vs. Nagappa Shankarappa Malaga and others to contend that the
tenancy in favour of Shri Ajit Ram extinguished on creation of mortgage by the
predecessor of respondents in favour of Shri Ajit Ram. In this case relied on by the
C.M.(M).No.845/2005

Page 8 of 16

petitioner, the landlord had executed a mortgage deed in favour of the tenant and no
interest was to be paid to the landlord, instead possession of the property was agreed
to remain with the tenant. The period for redeeming the mortgage was fixed for 10
years and after notice for redemption of mortgage was served, the tenant claimed that
after redemption he was entitled to retain possession because his previous tenancy
right subsisted. It was held by the Apex Court that in case, delivery of possession was
inconsistent with the continuance or subsistence of the lease, therefore, on redemption
of the mortgage, the landlord will have a right to recover possession both on the basis
of the terms of mortgage deed and under Section 62 of Transfer of Property Act.
The mortgage deed in this case had indicated that there was surrender of tenancy and
the tenant was only a mortgagee. The court in Mathuradas (supra) had also found that
a surrender of tenancy may be expressed through delivery of possession and in the
circumstances of the case it was held that the plea of the continuance of tenancy rights
was inconsistent and there was merger of interest of mortgagee and the tenant.
Apparently, the cases relied on by the petitioner are distinguishable. In the case of the
petitioner, the agreement for mortgage was not registered, rather it was contemplated
that the mortgage deed will be got registered before the sub registrar which was not
done. The agreement for mortgage rather categorically stipulated that property was
pledged without possession and an amount of Rs.1700/- had been received by the
mortgagor/landlord towards mortgage amount of Rs.2,000/-. The relevant portion of
the agreement which is construed as a mortgage between Shri Ajit Ram and late Shri
Ved Prakash predecessor of respondents is as under:“I, we Shri Parkash s/o Shri Kunj Lal r/o, Quarter No.11, Block No.5,
Railway station Daya Basti, Delhi 2) Ajeet Ram s/o, Shri Puran Chand
C.M.(M).No.845/2005

Page 9 of 16

R/o, WZ/40-A, Krishna Puri, New Delhi-18. That the executant No.1
is owner and occupier of House No.WZ/40A, in which two rooms,
kitchen, open court yard has been built at plot no.130, measuring
133_1/3 sq.yds khasra no.1, situated Rakba at Moza Nangli Jalib,
Delhi province and abadi known as krishna puri and the said plot has
been purchaser from Shri Sukh Lal by virtue of Bainama registered
document No.1387 dated 17.3.60 registered with deptt. of Jt. Sub
Registrar, Delhi and the executant has built the house from his own
costs, the executant has built the house from his own costs, the
executant is in need of money so the executant want to pledge the said
property against the amount of Rs.2000/- sold to executant no.2
pledged without possession and Rs.1700/- has teen received in cash
by the executant no.1 from executant no.2 and remaining amount of
Rs.300/- is produced before the Sub Registrar for registry by executant
no.1 in favour of executant no.2 and shall get the pledge deed
registered and the period of pledge is settled for five years and if the
executant no.1 failed to get executed the pledge deed under the
stipulated period in favour of executant no.2 then the executant no.2
entitled to get executed the document through court of law and the
total expenses of the court shall be borne by the executant no.2.”

16.

The petitioner herself in the earlier eviction petition had pleaded that though

the mortgage deed required registration and it was also agreed between late Shri Ajit
Ram and late Shri Ved Prakash that on payment of the balance Rs.300/-, the deed
shall be got registered, however, late Shri Ved Prakash avoided to get the mortgage
deed registered. On avoidance of late Shri Ved Prakash to get the mortgage deed
registered, Shri Ajit Ram, predecessor-in-interest of the petitioner, did not take any
steps and the mortgage deed remained unregistered. Consequently, neither the
possession was given to late Shri Ajit Ram, father of the petitioner, as a mortgagee
nor the mortgage deed was got registered and consequently it is inevitable to infer
that the possession of late Shri Ajit Ram continued as a tenant and his tenancy rights
did not merge with his rights as mortgagee as the mortgage was without possession.
C.M.(M).No.845/2005

Page 10 of 16

So the tenancy of Late Shri Ajit Ram and after his demise his legal
representative/heirs continued in respect of demised premises.

17.

Reliance has also been placed by the petitioner on AIR 1984 Supreme Court

1728, Gambangi Appalaswamy Naidu and others vs. Behara Venkataramanayya
Patro, where it was held that in the facts and circumstances of that case there was no
merger of lease and mortgage in respect of same property. It was held that it is well
settled that for a merger to arise, it is necessary that lesser estate and a higher estate
should merge in one person at one and the same time and no interest in the property
should remain outstanding. The Apex Court had held that in case of a lease, the estate
outstanding in the lessor is of the reversion and in the case of a mortgage the estate
that is outstanding is the equity of redemption of the mortgagor. In the circumstances
it was held that the lease and mortgage in respect of same property cannot be merged
as neither of them is a higher or lesser estate than the other. It was further held that
even if the right of the lessee and rights of the mortgagee in respect of the same
property are to be united in one person, the reversion in regard to the lease and the
equity of redemption in regard to the mortgage, would be outstanding in the owner of
the property and accordingly there would not be a complete fusion of all the rights.
Regarding the question as to whether or not upon redemption of a usufructuary
mortgage, a tenant mortgagee could be directed to deliver actual or physical
possession of the mortgaged property, it was held that it depends upon whether there
was an implied surrender of the lessee's rights when the usufructuary mortgage was
executed in favour of the lessee by the lessor/mortgagor.
C.M.(M).No.845/2005

Page 11 of 16

18.

The learned counsel for the respondents have relied on AIR 1930 Privy

Council 76, Hukamchand Kasliwal and another Vs.Rada Kishen Moti Lal Chamaria
and others holding that agreement to mortgage cannot constitute mortgage or charge.
In this matter, relied on by the learned counsel for the respondent, Mr.Ahluwalia, an
agreement executed between A and B provided that the executant A would give a
regular mortgage of his immovable property for money advanced by B and in these
circumstances it was held that the agreement did not constitute a mortgage or charge
upon such property within the meaning of Section 58 and 100 as the agreement
merely created a right in B to obtain another document that is a regular deed of
mortgage of the said immovable property.

19.

In AIR 1938 Bombay 367, Waman Mahadeo Apte Vs. Janardan Balwant

Risbud and others relied on by the respondent it was held that a mere agreement to
mortgage cannot create any interest in the mortgaged property in favour of the party to
whom the property is agreed to be mortgaged nor does it create any charge because an
agreement to mortgage gives rise only to a personal obligation which does not
constitute either a mortgage or a charge. The Apex Court in 1995(2) of All India Rent
Control Journal, 401, Parmar Kanaksinh Bhagwansinh (dead) by LRs Vs. Makwana
Shanabhai Bhikhabhai had held that leasehold of a tenant in a property does not
merge in mortgage security of that property even if it is given to him by the landlord
on a mortgage by a conditional sale as would debar the tenant from desisting the suit
of the landlord/mortgagor for recovery of possession of such property by obtaining
C.M.(M).No.845/2005

Page 12 of 16

decree for redemption of the mortgage. It was held that if a lessee of a property takes
a mortgage of the same property from the landlord it would be unreasonable to
attribute to a tenant the intention to surrender the tenancy and to invoke the
sophisticated doctrine of implied surrender.

20.

Perusal of the agreement dated 22nd September, 1972 between Sh.Ved Prakash

and Sh.Ajit Ram, predecessor of the petitioner it is apparent that Rs.1700/- was given
by Sh.Ajit Ram to Sh.Ved Prakash and it was agreed that Rs.300/- shall be given
before the sub Registrar for registration of the document by executant No.1 that is
Ved Prakash in favour of executant No.2 Ajit Ram, predecessor in interest. There was
no usufructuary mortgage/pledge as the agreement categorically stipulated that the
mortgage was without possession. If the agreement was for mortgage without
possession, then there will not be merger of rights of a mortgagee with the rights of
the lessee nor the tenancy of the mortgagee who was not given possession as a
mortgagee, will merge with the tenancy rights so as to result in extinguishment of
tenancy.

21.

The respondents have also contended that agreement by Sh.Ved Prakash with

Sh.Ajit Ram executed on 22nd September, 1972 was an agreement to execute the
mortgage deed and it does not create a mortgage. The learned counsel for the
respondent has also contended that in any case there is no merger of the rights of late
Sh.Ajit Ram as a lessee with his rights as a mortgagee. In any case these pleas and
propositions were raised by the petitioner in the eviction petition filed against her
C.M.(M).No.845/2005

Page 13 of 16

under Section 14(1)(e) read with Section 25B of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958
and have been negated and the order of the Rent Controller negating the pleas and
contentions of the petitioner, has been upheld in the revision petition filed in the High
Court and the Special Leave Petition filed by the petitioner which was dismissed.

22.

The learned counsel for the respondents have also contended that after the

determination and rejection of the plea regarding the mortgage and the alleged rights
of the lessee as a mortgagee to continue in possession on account of alleged merger
and extinguishment of tenancy rights by the Additional Rent Controller in the eviction
petition under Section 14(1)(e) of Delhi Rent Control Act, the petitioner does not
have a right to file the objection under Section 25 of Delhi Rent Control Act.

23.

Perusal of Section 25 of Delhi Rent Control Act reveals that the said

provision contemplates that an eviction order which is passed against a tenant in
respect of any premises is binding on all persons who may be in occupation of the
premises and vacant possession thereof is to be given to the landlord by evicting all
such persons therefrom. However, a proviso has been carved out which contemplates
that the eviction order passed against a tenant shall not be applicable to a person who
has some independent title to such premises. Consequently, the impact of the eviction
order is clear even on persons who claim through the tenant either as sub tenants,
licensees or otherwise who have been illegally inducted into the premises by such
tenant because such persons would not have protection of the proviso against them as
they have claimed through the tenant and, therefore, would be bound by the eviction
C.M.(M).No.845/2005

Page 14 of 16

order passed against the tenant. The word 'occupation' in Section 25 indicates physical
occupation of the premises. Consequently, it does not indicate or imply any interest in
or title to the premises or the lack of it in the occupant. The proviso is carved out only
in respect of those persons who have interest or right to property independent of the
title of the landlord himself and against whom the eviction order is not passed.

24.

In the case of the petitioner the eviction order is passed against her and her

plea that she had the rights as mortgagee and entitled to continue in possession was
negated and the eviction order was passed and the revision petition filed by the tenant
has been dismissed and even the Special Leave Petition filed against the dismissal of
her revision petition was also dismissed. Consequently, it cannot be held that the right
of the petitioner is of such a person who has an independent title to said premises. A
fortiori the petitioner could not sustain petition under Section 25 of Delhi Rent
Control Act in the present facts and circumstances as has been rightly held by the
Rent Controller. The appeal of the petitioner against the dismissal of her objection
was also dismissed by the Rent Control Tribunal.

25.

Whether on account of alleged mortgage, the petitioner is entitled to retain

possession or not has already been determined by the competent Court against the
petitioner and, therefore, the same point cannot be reagitated by the petitioner.
26.

Considering the facts and circumstances the inevitable inference is that the

decisions of the Additional Rent Controller and Rent Control Tribunal holding that
the objections of the petitioner under Section 25 against whom an order of eviction
C.M.(M).No.845/2005

Page 15 of 16

had already been passed after hearing and deciding her plea to continue in possession
on account of being a mortgagee, were not maintainable does not suffer from an error
of law apparent on the face of the record nor the orders of the Rent Controller and the
Rent Control Tribunal can be termed to be arbitrary, capricious or perverse or based
on no material and suffer from patent or flagrant error resulting into any manifest
injustice.

27.

The petition is, therefore, without merit and it is dismissed.

September 27, 2007
‘sdp’

C.M.(M).No.845/2005

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 16 of 16

