*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P(C) No.3948/2007

%

Date of Decision : 27.05.2008

Dr.Manoj Singhania
Through:

….… Petitioner
Mr. Pawan Upadhyay, Ms.Shubhra
Goyal and Ms. Anisha Upadhyay,
Advocates

Versus

Union of India & Ors
Through :

......... Respondents
Ms. Preetika Dwivedi, Advocate for the
respondents no. 2 & 3.
Mr. Rakesh Gosain, Advocate for the
respondent no.4.

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
YES
YES

ANIL KUMAR, J.
*
1.

The petitioner has challenged the order dated 3rd May, 2007 of

Medical

Director,

Northern

Railway

terminating

petitioner‟s

attachment as DNB 3rd year candidate in the department of Medicine,

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 1 of 46

Northern Railway, Central Hospital, New Delhi with effect from 3rd
May, 2007.
2.

Brief facts to comprehend the controversies between the parties

are that the petitioner is a Doctor and he was selected as a Diplomat
of National Board Training Course by the Medical Director, Northern
Railways, Central Hospital, New Delhi. He was offered the DNB course
in internal medicine under the said hospital and the factum of his
selection was communicated by the respondent Nos.1 to 3 to the
National Board of Examination, respondent No.4.
3.

The petitioner asserted that DNB training consists of three years

period and on completion of this period, examination is held by
National Board of Examination which is functioning under the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The successful candidates are
awarded post graduate degree in the discipline in which they undergo
and complete training. According to the petitioner the DNB training
leading to post graduate degree in the discipline in which a candidate
undergoes training is controlled by the rules known as Residency
Scheme review of consolidated revised instructions dated 5th June,
1992.

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 2 of 46

4.

The petitioner pleaded that on being selected as DNB (medicine)

he resigned from the post of junior resident in Department of Medicine
and joined the Northern Railway, Central Hospital for his training for
DNB (Medicine). According to him during the course of three years
training, the candidates are given all those privileges and facilities
which are admissible to junior residents. The DNB trainees are not
only imparted training but they are required to perform all duties of a
resident doctor attending patient wards, ICUs, OPD, etc. and they are
paid stipend with full allowances for the same. The petitioner‟s
grievance is that under para 13 of Residency Scheme a resident doctor
is not to perform normally exceeding 12 hours per day and resident
doctors are allowed one week holiday by rotation and junior residents
ordinarily work for 40 hours per week, however, number of call duties
of 24 hrs have also been increased to 7 instead of 5 per month.
Another allegation of the petitioner is that the Northern Railway,
Central Hospital has breached the rules of the Residency Scheme
more often than complying with the same.

The petitioner has also

contended that even the emoluments of the DNB training was reduced
from Rs.21,000/- per month to Rs.8,000/- per month leading to filing
of a writ petition which was allowed by order dated 25th August, 2005.

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 3 of 46

5.

The petitioner plea is that since he and some other doctors took

leading part in the litigation initiated against respondent No.3 against
reduction of their stipend from Rs.21,000/- to Rs.8,000/-, the
respondent No.3 became inexplicably prejudiced against him. In order
to substantiate the case against respondent No.3, it was contended
that petitioner is not paid an amount of Rs.2000/- per year against
book allowance and he is also not paid the amount of Rs.3000/- per
month which is deducted from his emoluments without giving any
reason and without any written order.
6.

The petitioner had sent a legal notice through his counsel on 1st

September, 2005 seeking attention of the authorities including
respondent No.3 to various irregularities being committed by Railway
Administration particularly in respect of violation of rules of working
hours by extending them and of the period of leave and for payment of
all his emoluments. He had sought all the facilities, privileges which
the junior residents are entitled for. The relevant rules under
Residency Scheme are as under:
“13.

Hours of Work.

Continuous active-duty for resident doctors will not
normally exceed 12 hours per day. Subject to exigencies
of the work the resident doctors will be allowed one
weekly holiday by rotation. The resident doctors will also
required to be on call duty not exceeding 12 hours at a
time. The junior residents should ordinarily work for 48

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 4 of 46

hours per week and not more than 12 hours at a stretch
subject to the condition that the working hours will be
flexible and maybe decided by the Medical Superintendent
concerned keeping in view the workload and availability of
doctors for clinical work.”
The rules also contemplated that the junior residents are not to
be treated as the Government servants but are to be governed by the
terms of their agreement under the Residency Scheme.

The notice

given on behalf of petitioner was not replied. The petitioner made
another representation dated 7th November, 2006 regarding excessive
stress imposed in the form of physical, mental, emotional and about
his financial exploitation. He categorically contended that number of
duty of 24 hours duties have been increased to 7 per month instead of
5 per month and at times these duties are stretched to 29 hours
without any break. He also complained about meaningless enquiries
which are conducted to force the trainee doctors to work under
inhuman conditions. He also complained that one of the faculty
members had represented to him not to give good marks in
confidential reports of training. The petitioner had to contend that his
suspension/rustication will be less stressful than working under
those circumstances. The petitioner‟s notice and representation were
not replied. Instead his monthly pay and allowances for January and
February, 2007 were withheld and were paid later on 2nd April, 2007.
Petitioner contended that he was not allowed to perform his duties as

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 5 of 46

resident doctor after 1st March, 2007 nor his salary has been released
from the month of March, 2007 onwards. The petitioner sent a letter
dated 2nd March, 2007 to the Medical Director intimating him that Dr.
Sudhir Sharma Sr. Administrator had not allowed him to join the
duties

and

he

had

promised

to

send

petitioner

suspension/termination letter within 3 to 4 days. He also intimated
that Mr. Pujara, Mrs. Dinesh and Mr. Vishnu had refused to accept
his application and therefore he had addressed the letter dated 2nd
March, 2007 to the Medical Director. It appears that none of the
letters/representations were replied. The petitioner sent various
representations which he mentioned in his letter dated 16th March,
2007 and he stated that he is deemed to be on duty since his
suspension/termination letter had not been issued. By another
communication dated 29th March, 2003 he again requested the
Medical Director to allow him to join the duties which had been denied
to him without any justification since 2nd March, 2007.
7.

On 15th March, 2007 a preliminary enquiry was ordered into

working and conduct of the petitioner as well as allegations which
were leveled by the petitioner against various authorities. The
petitioner has contended that the respondent no.3 did not take any
action despite personal interview of the petitioner.

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

On 28th March,

Page 6 of 46

2007 he had received a letter from Chief Orthopedic Surgeon, Central
Hospital to attend his room for an enquiry at 11 o‟clock on the same
date. The petitioner appeared for enquiry on 28th March, 2007 and he
was asked certain questions and after that he was allowed to leave. A
copy of the statement of petitioner shows that the recording of the
statement started on 28th March, 2007 but it was signed on 9th April,
2007.
8.

The petitioner thereafter filed a writ petition being 2921/2007

as nothing was communicated to him. During the pendency of the
writ petition, the order dated 3rd May, 2007 terminating his training
was passed. Consequent whereto the petitioner withdrew the earlier
writ petition and has filed the present petition. The petitioner has
challenged the order of termination of his attachment as DNB 3rd year
candidate on the grounds that the order is not a termination
simplicitor but a punitive order passed by malafide intention to throw
the petitioner out and to damage his career. It is contended that the
order of termination is in violation of principles of natural justice and
is also an act of vindictiveness on account of active participation of
petitioner against the action of the respondent No.3 of reduction of
stipend from Rs.21,000/- per month to Rs.8,000/- per month. The
order is also challenged on the ground that the petitioner was

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 7 of 46

admitted to three year Diplomat of National Board and so the same
could not be terminated during the training after two years. It is also
asserted that the petitioner has a right to complete his three years
training as a Diplomat of National Board and the order of termination
is punitive and bad in law and is liable to be set aside.
9.

The petitioner has relied on (1980) 2 SCC 593, Gujarat Steel

Tubes Ltd and Ors Vs. Gujarat Steel Tubes Mazdoor Sabha and Ors;
(1993) 1 SCC 13, State Bank of India and Ors Vs.D.C.Aggarwal and
Anr; (1999) 3 SCC 60, Dipti Prakash Banerjee Vs.Satyendra Nath Bose
National Centre for Basic Sciences, Calcutta and Ors; (2005) 13 SCC
652, State of U.P and Ors Vs. Ashok Kumar and (2006) 2 SCC 584,
South Bengal State Transport Corpn. Vs. Sapan Kumar Mitra and Ors
to contend that termination of petitioner‟s attachment as DNB 3rd year
candidate in the Department of Medicine is stigmatic and has been
passed without due opportunity and is in violation of principles of
natural justice and, therefore, it is vitiated and is liable to be set aside.
10.

The petition is contested by the respondents. On behalf of

respondent No.3 a counter affidavit of Dr.Sudhir Kumar Sharma,
Senior Divisional Medical Officer (Administration) Northern Railway
has been filed who has contended that the Diplomat of National Board
Trainee is not the employee of Indian Railways. Any medical graduate

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 8 of 46

with MBBS qualification who has completed internship and registered
with MCI/State Medical Council and who accepts the terms and
conditions of the Indian Railway, is eligible to become a DNB Trainee
in the Railway hospital and, therefore, Railway Servants (Discipline
and Appeal) Rules, 1968 will not be applicable to the petitioner.
According to the respondent No.3 the terms and conditions for DNB
Trainees working in every Railway Hospital of Indian Railways, are in
accordance with the Government of India, Ministry of Railways
(Railway

Boards)

communication

No.2006/H/2-1/5

dated

26th

February, 2007. The said terms and conditions stipulate the stipend,
accommodation, leave rules for DNB Trainees and other types of leave
and medical treatment policy and training charges only. The
respondent No.3 further asserted that DNB trainees are posted in
different wards and are required to work from 9 AM to 5 PM subject to
the requirement of their services and in case of emergencies they can
be asked to work after 5 PM. It was contended that those candidates
who pursue their DNB training in Railways, it is the policy and the
rules circulated by the Indian Railways which are applicable.
Therefore, reliance has also been placed on the circular dated 26th
February, 2007 and circular dated 15th January, 2008 of Northern
Railways regarding payments etc. to be made to the DNB trainees. The
allegations of prejudice against the petitioner were denied and

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 9 of 46

deduction of Rs.3000/- per month was justified on account of training
charges in accordance with Rule 5 of Rules dated 26th February, 2007.
Regarding stipend payable to the petitioner, it is contended that the
petitioner has not worked after 8th February, 2007 and, therefore, the
salary commencing 8th February, 2007 has not been paid. The
Railways have justified the termination order dated 3rd May, 2007 on
the ground that there had been grave misconduct on the part of the
petitioner which compelled the respondent No.3 to initiate an enquiry
into working and conduct of the petitioner which was conducted on
16th April, 2007. During the enquiry the statements of various senior
medical officers were recorded and the enquiry officer had concluded
that the petitioner‟s performance was highly unsatisfactory and he is
short tempered, rude to behave with seniors, colleagues and patients
and used to leave his duty without making any arrangements for the
care of critical patients and on the basis of the report of enquiry, the
training of petitioner was terminated by letter dated 3rd May, 2007. In
paragraph 14 of the counter affidavit it has been categorically
admitted that the training of the petitioner has been terminated on the
basis of report after enquiry. Paragraph 14 of the counter affidavit is
as under:
“14. It is stated that owing to the great misconduct of
the petitioner, the respondent was compelled to initiate an
enquiry into the working and conduct of the petitioner.

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 10 of 46

The same was conducted on 16th April, 2007, and is
attached herewith and marked as Annexure R-3.
Statements of various Senior district medical officers were
recorded and the enquiry report concluded that:
„… the work and conduct of Dr. Manoj Singhania is
highly unsatisfactory. He is short tempered, rude
to seniors, colleagues and patients, and used to
leave his duty without making any arrangements
for critical patients.‟
It was on the basis of this report that the petitioner was
terminated, vide letter dated 03.05.2007.”
11.

In the counter affidavit it was not denied that owing to alleged

misconduct of the petitioner he was not allowed to continue after 2nd
March, 2007. The respondents 1 to 3 contended that the petitioner is
not an employee as a Diplomat of National Board of Trainees attached
to railway hospitals.

It was asserted that the complaints of

indiscipline were received against the petitioner and a fact finding
inquiry was conducted on 16.4.2007 to ascertain the facts to
determine whether the work and conduct of the petitioner was
satisfactory. The findings were against the petitioner and, therefore,
his training has been terminated. It is also pleaded that against his
termination, the petitioner should have approached the Appellate
Authority without disclosing which is the Appellate Authority. It has
been further asserted by the respondents that in the fact finding
inquiry constituted by the respondents, a fair opportunity was given to

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 11 of 46

him and charges were intimated to him by letter dated 15th March,
2007 by which enquiry committee was appointed, a copy of which was
sent to the petitioner. It is also pleaded that since the inquiry was a
summary fact finding inquiry, no charge sheet was issued and since
the petitioner participated in the inquiry, the plea of the respondents
is that petitioner is misleading in contending that the inquiry was
conducted behind his back.
12.

The respondents 1 to 3 have contended that since the petitioner

was a trainee his status is different from that of an employee and
judicial review is limited in case of disciplinary action taken against a
student/trainee

by

Institution

imparting

training.

For

this

submission, the respondents have relied on Director, Indian Institute
of Technology, Kanpur v. Hiyat Khan, (2000) 3 A.W.C. 2265.

It is

asserted by the respondents that judicial review of orders in the
matter of enforcement of discipline in the educational institutions is
limited and authorities in charge of imparting education are best
suited to deal with students for their lapses and malpractices.

13.

Regarding the violation of principle of natural justice, it is

contended that principle of natural justice is not a straight-jacket
formula. It is pleaded that in any case principals of natural justice

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 12 of 46

were complied with, as the petitioner was intimated by letter dated
28th March, 2007 about the inquiry and he has, in fact, participated in
the inquiry. Relying on the statement given by the petitioner to the
fact finding inquiry, it is contended that all allegation against him
were made known to him, however, the names of the doctors who had
leveled the allegations against the petitioners were not disclosed to
him which was in the best interest of the patients and to avoid any
possibility of hostile environment in the hospital. It was also pleaded
that since doctors are in close proximity with each other and doctors
of various Departments are dependent on each other for the treatment
of their patients, it was thought fit not to reveal the names of the
doctors who had leveled the allegations against the petitioner and
thus there is no violation of the principle of natural justice and the
petitioner has been given a fair opportunity. Relying on Miss Shefali
Pathak v. Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi, AIR 2006 Delhi 66, it
was asserted that Principle of Natural justice are not a straight jacket
formula and must be molded to suit specific circumstances. Reliance
has also been placed by the respondents on AIR 2006 SC 3096, Om
Prakash Mann v. Director of Education.

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 13 of 46

14.

The

respondent

No.4,

National

Board

of

Examination,

contended that the petitioner was enrolled in DNB Internal Medicine
for three years training with the respondent No.3 on 28th February,
2005 and his name was sent for registration on 21st April, 2005. The
respondent

No.4

also

contended

that

the

petitioner

has

deserted/abandoned his mandatory three years training after 8th
February, 2007. It was asserted that the petitioner did not inform or
sought any advice from the respondent no.4 before leaving the
training in mid-session and the petitioner who is seeking to reactivate
his training with effect from 8th February, 2007 cannot be allowed to
do so. It is also contended that the respondent No.4 does not have
any right for granting any latitude to any candidate for giving any
relaxation in the period of three years. It is pleaded that allowing the
petitioner to continue would adversely effect upon the standards in
higher medical education. The training of the petitioner is short by one
year and 20 days. It is further contended that the petitioner would
have to complete his three years mandatory training and submit his
thesis with the answering respondent No.4 before appearing in DNB
Theory Examination.

15.

The respondent No.4 has also asserted that in the peculiar facts

the respondent No.4 could consider granting migration of petitioner to

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 14 of 46

some accredited institutions for the remaining period of his mandatory
three years training, however, the respondent No.4 in any way is not
taking any responsibility for providing the approval of appointment of
the petitioner to any other institute.

16.

I have heard the learned counsel for the parties in detail and

have also perused the writ petition and the replies filed to the writ
petition and the documents relied on by the parties. In South Bengal
State Transport Corporation (Supra), relied on by the Learned Counsel
for the petitioner, a bus driver was removed from service after holding
departmental enquiry against him.

The order of the disciplinary

authority removing the driver from the service was challenged by filing
a writ petition on the ground that the documents relied on by the
enquiry officer did not feature in the list of documents annexed to the
charge sheet nor the copies thereof were supplied to the delinquent
driver.

The removal was also challenged on the ground that the

delinquent driver was acquitted in the criminal case. The learned
Single Judge of Calcutta High Court had set aside the order of removal
and had directed the disciplinary authority to supply the copies of the
documents and after considering the comments of the delinquent
driver to reach a fresh conclusion about the punishment of removal
awarded to the driver. In appeal the Division Bench came to the

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 15 of 46

conclusion that finding of the disciplinary authority as well as enquiry
officers were wholly perverse and the judgment of the learned Single
Judge was set aside and the order of removal of the delinquent driver
was set aside and he was reinstated with full back wages. In the
appeal to the Supreme Court, the judgment of the Division Bench was
set aside and the order of the Single Judge was restored subject to
certain modifications. Since the copies of the documents sought by
the delinquent driver were supplied, he was allowed to file comments
or representations against the finding made in the enquiry report and
on the basis of the representations of the delinquent driver, the
disciplinary authority was directed to reach a final conclusion. The
Apex Court relying on Union of India Vs. Mohd.Ramzan Khan, (1991)
1 SCC 588 and Managing Director, ECIL Vs. B.Karunakar, (1993) 4
SCC 727 had held that wherever there has been an enquiry officer and
he has furnished a report to the disciplinary authority at the
conclusion of the enquiry holding the delinquent guilty of all or any of
the charges with proposal for any particular punishment or not, the
delinquent is entitled to a copy of such report and will also be entitled
to make a representation against it, if he so desires, and nonfurnishing of the report would amount to violation of rules of natural
justice and make the final order liable to be challenged. The
Constitution bench of the Apex Court in Managing Director, ECIL Vs.

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 16 of 46

B. Karunakar, (1993) 4 SCC 727 on the issue of non supply of enquiry
report had held in para 26 at page 754 as under:“26. The reason why the right to receive the report of the
enquiry officer is considered an essential part of the
reasonable opportunity at the first stage and also a
principle of natural justice is that the findings recorded by
the enquiry officer form an important material before the
disciplinary authority which along with the evidence is
taken into consideration by it to come to its conclusions.
It is difficult to say in advance, to what extent the said
findings including the punishment, if any, recommended
in the report would influence the disciplinary authority
while drawing its conclusions. The findings further might
have been recorded without considering the relevant
evidence on record, or by misconstruing it or unsupported
by it. If such a finding is to be one of the documents to be
considered by the disciplinary authority, the principles of
natural justice require that the employee should have a
fair opportunity to meet, explain and controvert it before
he is condemned. It is negation of the tenets of justice and
a denial of fair opportunity to the employee to consider
the findings recorded by a third party like the enquiry
officer without giving the employee an opportunity to reply
to it. Although it is true that the disciplinary authority is
supposed to arrive at its own findings on the basis of the
evidence recorded in the inquiry, it is also equally true
that the disciplinary authority takes into consideration
the findings recorded by the enquiry officer along with the
evidence on record. In the circumstances, the findings of
the enquiry officer do constitute an important material
before the disciplinary authority which is likely to
influence its conclusions. If the enquiry officer were only
to record the evidence and forward the same to the
disciplinary authority, that would not constitute any
additional material before the disciplinary authority of

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 17 of 46

which the delinquent employee has no knowledge.
However, when the enquiry officer goes further and
records his findings, as stated above, which may or may
not be based on the evidence on record or are contrary to
the same or in ignorance of it, such findings are an
additional material unknown to the employee but are
taken into consideration by the disciplinary authority
while arriving at its conclusions. Both the dictates of the
reasonable opportunity as well as the principles of natural
justice, therefore, require that before the disciplinary
authority comes to its own conclusions, the delinquent
employee should have an opportunity to reply to the
enquiry officer‟s findings. The disciplinary authority is
then required to consider the evidence, the report of the
enquiry officer and the representation of the employee
against it.”

17.

The Apex Court, however, held that after hearing the parties, if

the Court/Tribunal comes to the conclusion that non supply of report
would have made no difference to the ultimate findings and the
punishment given, the Court/Tribunal should not interfere with the
order of punishment and the order of punishment should not be
mechanically set aside on the ground that the enquiry report was not
furnished. The Apex Court had also held that the disciplinary
authority or the enquiry officer are not Courts and, therefore, the
strict procedure that are to be followed in Courts may not be strictly
adhered to. Relying on B.C.Chaturvedi Vs. Union of India, (1995) 6
SCC 749 it was further held that the strict proof of legal evidence and

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 18 of 46

findings

on

that

evidence

are

not

relevant

in

departmental

proceedings.

18.

The copy of the report dated 16th April, 2007 was not given to

the petitioner. The statement of the petitioner was recorded on various
dates from 28th March, 2007 to 9th April, 2007.

The statements of

other Doctors were recorded in absence of the petitioner and their
names were not disclosed and when he did not hear anything from the
respondents, a writ petition was filed by him. During the pendency of
the earlier writ petition it was disclosed that the training of the
petitioner has been terminated and communicated to him by letter
dated 3rd May, 2007. The stand of the respondents has been that the
termination of the training of the petitioner was after conducting a
proper enquiry and after giving a reasonable opportunity. The copy of
the enquiry report was not given to the petitioner nor the names of the
doctors whose statements had been relied on, were disclosed to the
petitioner. The petitioner had not been disclosed the incidents of
misconduct and lapses in his working for which the enquiry
committee was appointed.

In the circumstances, it cannot be held

that non supply of the enquiry report would have made no difference
to the punishment of termination of the training imposed on the
petitioner.

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 19 of 46

19.

Though in the counter affidavit, it was not pleaded that the

termination of the training of the petitioner was simplicitor and not
punitive, however, during the arguments it was contended that since
no reasons were disclosed in the order of termination, the termination
of the training of the petitioner was simplicitor without being punitive.
To counter this contention of the respondents, the learned counsel for
the petitioner has relied on para 14 of the counter affidavit which is
categorical in asserting that the training of the petitioner has been
terminated on account of his misconduct and lapses in his working.

20.

Whether the termination of attachment/training of petitioner

with the Department of Medicine, Northern Railway Central Hospital
was simplicitor or punitive is to be ascertained by considering whether
the misconduct and lapses in working against the petitioner was the
motive of termination or if these were the foundation of the
termination then it will be punitive. The Supreme Court in State of
U.P and Ors Vs. Ashok Kumar (Supra) had held that when there the
termination is without any enquiry, then complaint about the
misconduct and lapses in working is the motive. However, when the
misconduct and lapses in working lead to enquiry resulting in

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 20 of 46

termination, then misconducts and lapses in working are the
foundation of the termination and it is punitive. In the case relied on
by the petitioner, a constable after recruitment was undergoing
training and he was entitled for regular appointment on successful
completion of training.

During his training his services were

terminated. The termination was challenged by the constable in an
appeal. The Tribunal held that the termination of constable‟s services
was violative of Article 311(2) of Constitution as no reasonable
opportunity of hearing had been afforded to him as contemplated
under Article 311(2) of the Constitution. The Tribunal and High Court
had held that the constable was found using unfair means while
undergoing training with other trainees which was the foundation of
the termination and, therefore, violative of Article 311(2) of the
Constitution. In an appeal the Apex Court had held that whether the
order of termination is simplicitor or punitive is ultimately to be
decided having due regard to the facts and circumstances of each. The
Apex Court had relied on Dipti Prakash Banerjee Vs. Satyendra Nath
Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences, (1999) 3 SCC 60 where it was
held at pages 71, 72 in para 21 as under:“21. If findings were arrived at in an enquiry as to
misconduct, behind the back of the officer or without a
regular departmental enquiry, the simple order of

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 21 of 46

termination is to be treated as “founded” on the
allegations and will be bad. But if the enquiry was not
held, no findings were arrived at and the employer was
not inclined to conduct an enquiry but, at the same time,
he did not want to continue the employee against whom
there were complaints, it would only be a case of motive
and the order would not be bad. Similar is the position if
the employer did not want to enquire into the truth of the
allegations because of delay in regular departmental
proceedings or he was doubtful about securing adequate
evidence. In such a circumstance, the allegations would
be a motive and not the foundation and the simple order
of termination would be valid.”

21.

The Supreme Court in Gujarat Steel Tubes Ltd and Ors (Supra)

had also laid down the test to distinguish whether a termination order
is punitive or not. It was held that the form of the order is not decisive
and the Court can lift the veil to see the true nature of the order. It
was held that the substance, not semblance governs the decision. In
paragraphs 53 and 54, it was held as under:“53. Masters and servants cannot be permitted to play
hide and seek with the law of dismissals and the plain
and proper criteria are not to be misdirected by
terminological cover-ups or by appeal to psychic
processes but must be grounded on the substantive
reason for the order, whether disclosed or undisclosed.
The Court will find out from other proceedings or
documents connected with the formal order of termination
what the true ground for the termination is. If, thus
scrutinised, the order has a punitive flavour in cause or
consequence, it is dismissal. If it falls short of this test, it
cannot be called a punishment. To put it slightly

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 22 of 46

differently, a termination effected because the master is
satisfied of the misconduct and of the consequent
desirability of terminating the service of the delinquent
servant, is a dismissal, even if he had the right in law to
terminate with an innocent order under the standing
order or otherwise. Whether, in such a case the grounds
are recorded in a different proceeding from the formal
order does not detract from its nature. Nor the fact that,
after being satisfied of the guilt, the master abandons the
enquiry and proceeds to terminate. Given an alleged
misconduct and a live nexus between it and the
termination of service the conclusion is dismissal, even if
full benefits as on simple termination, are given and noninjurious terminology is used.
54. On the contrary, even if there is suspicion of
misconduct the master may say that he does not wish to
bother about it and may not go into his guilt but may feel
like not keeping a man he is not happy with. He may not
like to investigate nor take the risk of continuing a
dubious servant. Then it is not dismissal but termination
simplicitor, if no injurious record of reasons or punitive
pecuniary cut-back on his full terminal benefits is found.
For, in fact, misconduct is not then the moving factor in
the discharge. We need not chase other hypothetical
situations here.

22.

In the case of petitioner what is to be seen is whether the order

of termination of the training of the petitioner is founded on the
allegations based on the enquiry. The order of termination of the
training of the petitioner though does not refer to the enquiry
conducted by the respondents, however, it is apparent and clear that
the termination of the training of the petitioner is based and founded
on the alleged fact-finding enquiry conducted by the respondents. The

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 23 of 46

respondents in para 14 of the counter affidavit have admitted it. In
the circumstances the termination of the training of the petitioner is
stigmatic and no other inference is possible in the facts and
circumstances.

23.

The learned counsel for the petitioner, Mr.Upadhyay has next

contended that the enquiry against the petitioner was contrary to the
Principle of Natural Justice. He contended that the fact finding
enquiry was based on the statement of other doctors and other
material which were not only not supplied but not disclosed to him
and, therefore, cannot be countenanced. The reliance was placed by
the learned counsel for the petitioner on State Bank of India and Ors
(Supra) where the Apex Court had held that non supply of CVC
recommendation which was prepared behind the back of the
delinquent employee without his participation but was examined and
relied on by the disciplinary authority, was certainly violative of
procedural safeguards and the plea regarding non supply of CVC
recommendation on the ground that they were confidential and could
not be supplied, was rejected.
24.

Per contra, the respondents 1 to 3 plea is that fair opportunity

had been given to the petitioner as he was intimated about the inquiry

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 24 of 46

by letter dated 15th March, 2007 and since the inquiry was a
summary fact finding inquiry, no charge sheet was issued.

The

petitioner participated in the inquiry, his statement was recorded and
ample opportunity was given to him and therefore, petitioner is
misleading in contending that the inquiry was conducted behind his
back.

25.

A copy of the inquiry proceedings has been produced in which

the statement of Dr.Manoj Singhania, petitioner was recorded from
28th March, 2007 upto 9th April, 2007. The statement of Dr.S.C.
Khorwal, Sr. D.M.O./CH. was recorded on 2nd April, 2007; Dr. (Ms.)
Asha Rani on 2nd April, 2007, Sr. D.M.O./Casualty/CH.; Dr.(Ms.)
C.Dungdung, D.M.O./CH. on 2nd April, 2007; Dr. Anand Barla, Sr.
D.M.O./CH. on 2nd April, 2007; Dr. Atul Gupta, Sr. D.M.O./CH. on 3rd
April, 2007; Dr.(Ms.) Madhu Kaushal, Sr.D.M.O./CH. on 3rd April,
2007; Dr.S.K. Chaudhary, D.M.O./CH. on 3rd April, 2007; Ms.Santosh
Sharma, Matron I/c, ICU/CH. on 4th April, 2007, Dr.Sanjay Joshi,
D.M.O./CH. on 4th April, 2007; Dr.Roopesh Kumar, A.D.M.O./CH. on
3rd April, 2007; Dr. Sushum Sharma, Sr. D.M.O./CH on 5th April,
2007. and Dr.Sudhir Kumar Sharma, Sr. D.M.O./CH. on 5th April,
2007. It is apparent that the statements of other doctors were not

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 25 of 46

recorded in presence of Dr.Manoj Singhania, petitioner, as his
presence is not marked on the days when the statements of other
doctors were recorded. The statement of the petitioner started on 28th
March, 2007 however, the statement is signed on 9th April, 2007. A
copy of the statement of the petitioner recorded before the inquiry
committee, a copy of which is produced in the Courts, reveals that it
had started on 28 March 2007 but it is signed on 9th April, 2007. First
paragraph of the statement is as under:
“In reference to Letter no. E/Med/Ch/18 dated 26th
March, 2007, a fact finding enquiry has been conducted
into the working and conduct of Dr. Manoj Singhania,
DNB 3rd Year candidate in the Depttt. Of medicine on 28th
March, 2007
Qu.1:

What is your grievance?

Ans. I am getting financially, physically, mentally,
socially and emotionally exploited.
The details have
already been sent to medical director/NRCH, Head of
Medicine and all other higher Railway authorities has
been sent on 7th November, 2006. Letters submitted to
I.O.

26.

The petitioner deposed that he is getting financially, physically,

mentally, socially and emotionally exploited. In answering a question,
whether he left the duties leaving the patients unattended in ICU on
the night of 7th August, 2006, the petitioner admitted that it was one
incidence when he was not present as he could not present himself to

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 26 of 46

mosquitoes and insects to be bitten and to get admitted next day in
ICU for his own treatment.

In an answer to another question, he

deposed that he complained multiple times to ICU Matron, Dr.Sanjay
Joshi, HOD/Medicine but neither he nor anybody had given

any

attention to improve the inhuman conditions of residents‟ duty room.
In answer to a question, whether anyone stopped him from calling the
Head Jamadar and getting the things done himself, he deposed that
he being a temporary student, no hospital staff listened. Rather he
was insulted on asking from such staff to do anything.

27.

All the doctors who had been examined in absence of the

petitioner were asked stereotype question to comment on the work
and conduct of the petitioner and whether they ever counseled him in
the past. None of these doctors had given adverse reports to the
petitioner in the past. None of the doctors gave anything in writing
against the petitioner complaining about lapses in his working. From
the statements of various doctors recorded it is apparent that none of
the patients ever gave in writing any complaint against the petitioner
about his alleged rudeness and working. Rather Dr. Ms.Celistina
Dungdung, D.M.O/NRCH, New Delhi had given a very positive report
dated 2nd March, 2007 about the petitioner. This positive report was

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 27 of 46

given on the same date 2nd March, 2007, when the petitioner was also
not allowed on training. This is quite inexplicable.

The Senior

Administrator did not allow him to join the training on 2nd March,
2003 and his complaint regarding this was not entertained by various
officers, forcing him to send a communication dated 2nd March, 2003
to the Medical Director and on the same day another doctor had given
a very positive report about his behavior. Despite all this evidence,
which was not disclosed to the petitioner and where petitioner was not
allowed to participate, the inquiry committee comprising of Dr.C.P.
Singh,

Chief

Orthopedic

Surgeon

and

Dr.

Sunil

Kumar,

Sr.

C.M.O.(SG) held that the conduct of Dr.Manoj Singhania/petitioner
was highly unsatisfactory and he is short tempered, rude to behave
with his seniors, colleagues and he used to leave his duties without
making any arrangement for the care of critical patients.

The

conclusion of the fact finding inquiry given in report dated 16th April,
2007 are as under:“Conclusion:
On inquiring it has been found that
the work and conduct of Dr.Manoj Singhania is highly
unsatisfactory. He is short tempered, rude to behave with
seniors, colleagues and patients and used to leave his
duty without making any arrangements for the care of
critical patients”.

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 28 of 46

28.

On the basis of the alleged fact finding inquiry dated 16th April,

2007, the Medical Director, Dr.R.N. Tripathi, also passed an order
stipulating that he has gone through all the facts and circumstances
of the case and he is in total agreement with the findings of the
Inquiry Report and remarks of DNB Coordinator. It was further stated
by him that retention of petitioner in the hospital is neither in the
interest of patients nor in the interest of administration and, therefore,
it was recommended that the attachment of Dr.Manoj Singhania with
Northern Railways, Central Hospital, New Delhi, as a DNB Candidate
in Medicine be terminated with immediate effect pursuant to which
the attachment of the petitioner with Northern Railways, Central
Hospital, New Delhi, as 3rd Years DNB (Medicine) Candidate was
terminated by letter dated 3rd May, 2007.

29.

Though it is asserted by the respondents that complaints were

received against the petitioner, however no such complaints, have
been produced before this court. From the proceedings of the enquiry
conducted, it is apparent that the statements of other doctors
complaining

about

the

petitioner

were

recorded

after

the

commencement of the statement of the petitioner on 28 March, 2007.
There are no complaints against the petitioner prior to appointment of
an enquiry committee.

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

No record has been shown or produced

Page 29 of 46

regarding any complaint received by the respondents or sent to the
respondents prior to 15th of March 2007 when the enquiry committee
was constituted and a copy of the said letter was also sent to the
petitioner.

30.

On the very first day of the enquiry, the petitioner had produced

the copy of his letter/representation dated 7th November, 2006
regarding his financial, social, emotional and mental exploitation.
However, the enquiry report does not deal with most of his grievances
as detailed by him in his letter dated 7th November, 2006. No attempt
had even been made to even find out the basis of those grievances.
From the perusal of the representation dated 7th November, 2006, it is
apparent that he had also complained about not granting paternity
leave to him. The terms and conditions for DNB trainees produced by
the respondents have a provision for paternity leave. This point and
many other points raised by the petitioner have not at all been
addressed. The enquiry report has only the considered the statement
of the petitioner and the statements of other doctors, recorded in his
absence and whose copies or the gist of the complaints made against
the petitioner, were not given to him.

The hostility against the

petitioner on account of various complaints made by him are writ

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 30 of 46

large which included taking work from doctors under training
continuously up to 21 hours and at times instead of five times, seven
times a month.

The prejudice against the petitioner at every step

cannot be denied in the facts and circumstances. The respondents
can not be permitted to take shelter under the plea that the names of
those persons who had complained against the petitioner cannot be
disclosed to him in the best interest of the patients and to avoid any
possibility of hostile environment in the hospital and since the doctors
work in close proximity with each other and doctors of various
Departments are dependent on each other for the treatment of their
patients.

31.

Even

the

fact-finding

inquiry

committee

comprising

of

Dr.D.P.Pande and Dr.S.K.Sabharwal was not intimated as to what
were the allegations of misconduct and what was against the working
of the petitioner which was required to be inquired.

It appears that

two members enquiry committee had the objective of finding some
misconduct and lapses in the working of the petitioner so that his
training could be terminated.

In the fact and circumstances, the

inevitable inference is that there was complete lack and violation of
Principles of natural justice and the alleged enquiry is nothing but a
mere eyewash to throw out a trainee doctor who took cudgels against

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 31 of 46

the might of the Railway Administration. None of the representations
of the petitioner and his legal notice were replied. Except the bare
denial nothing has been shown that the complaints of the petitioner
were baseless. The respondents should have produced something to
show the baselessness of the complaints of the petitioner, not for their
adjudication by this court but to prime facie show and demonstrate
that their action in terminating the training of the petitioner was not
vindictive.

32.

The judgment relied on and cited by the respondents are

apparently distinguishable and on the basis of the same, the
inferences as suggested by the respondents cannot be drawn. It is no
more res integra that a decision is only an authority for what it
actually decides. What is of the essence in a decision is its ratio and
not every observation found therein nor what logically follows from the
various observations made in it. The ratio of any decision must be
understood in the background of the facts of that case. It has been
said long time ago that a case is only an authority for what it actually
decides, and not what logically follows from it. It is well settled that a
little difference in facts or additional facts may make a lot of difference
in the precedential value of a decision. Considering the present facts

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 32 of 46

and circumstances, it may not be necessary to deal with all judgments
in detail relied on by the respondents in the facts and circumstances
of the present case as the present case is apparently distinguishable
from the fact situation of the decisions relied on by the respondents.
In any case, the counsel for respondent No.3 has referred to the
judgments only. The Supreme Court in Bharat Petroleum Corporation
Ltd and Anr. v. N.R.Vairamani and Anr., AIR 2004 SC 778 had
observed:" Court should not place reliance on decisions without
discussing as to how the factual situation fits in with the
fact situation of the decision on which reliance is placed.
Observations of Courts are neither to be read as Euclid's
theorems nor as provisions of the statute and that too
taken out of their context. These observations must be read
in the context in which they appear to have been stated.
Judgments of Courts are not to be construed as statutes. To
interpret words, phrases and provisions of a statute, it may
become necessary for judges to embark into lengthy
discussions but the discussion is meant to explain and not
to define. Judges interpret statutes, they do not interpret
judgments. They interpret words of statutes; their words
are not to be interpreted as statutes.
In Bhavnagar University v. Palitana Sugar Mills Pvt Ltd (2003) 2
SC 111 (vide para 59), the Supreme had observed:" It is well settled that a little difference in facts or
additional facts may make a lot of difference in the
precedential value of a decision."

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 33 of 46

Similarly In Ambica Quarry Works v. State of Gujarat and Ors.
MANU/SC/0049/1986 the Supreme Court had also observed:"The ratio of any decision must be understood in the
background of the facts of that case. It has been said long
time ago that a case is only an authority for what it
actually decides, and not what logically follows from it."
Circumstantial flexibility, one additional or different fact may
make a world of difference between conclusions in two cases and
disposing of a case by blindly placing reliance on a decision is not
proper.

33. In Shefali Pathak (supra), a single Judge of this Court had dealt
with the question whether petitioner had completed her practical
training which was an essential concommitment of the curriculum for
the Bachelor of Technology in Chemical Engineering (B.Tech) from the
globally acclaimed and prestigious Indian Institute of Technology.
Learned single judge had held that when duly qualified and competent
academic authorities examine and assess the work of a student over a
period and declare his work to be unsatisfactory, the question of right
to be heard whether the work of the candidate was satisfactory or not
does not arise.

In these circumstances, it was held that judicial

review in academic matter has a very limited ambit and interference

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 34 of 46

with the decisions taken by an academic authority after due
consideration of all the questions raised will not arise.

34.

In Om Prakash Mann (supra) relied on by the respondents, the

Headmaster who was on probation was charged of dereliction of
duties, misappropriation, etc.

The services of the Headmaster was

terminated under the rules preceded by an inquiry. The charges were
framed against him and he was asked to submit his reply. An inquiry
was initiated and the Headmaster participated in the inquiry
proceedings and he was also afforded an opportunity to defend himself
and thereafter his services were terminated.

The Headmaster had

raised the contention that the chargesheet was vague and the copy of
the inquiry report was not furnished to him.

The Apex Court had

held, in those circumstances, that to sustain complaint of violation of
the principle of natural justice, one must establish that he has been
prejudiced by non-observance of principle of natural justice. It was
also held that if the probationer is dismissed/terminated during the
period of probation, no opportunity is required to be given and,
therefore, the question of violation of principle of natural justice did
not arise in that case.

Apparently, the case relied on by the

respondents is quite distinguishable as the case of the petitioner is of

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 35 of 46

a trainee.

No chargesheet was issued to him nor the allegations

against him were disclosed not the names of the persons who had
made allegations against him were disclosed.

The statement of the

petitioner was recorded and on the basis of the statements of the
petitioner and other persons whose statements were recorded, it was
inferred that his retention in the hospital is neither in the interest of
patients nor in the interest of administration and his training has
been terminated. All the questions raised by him were not determined.
Apparently, the ratio of the present case does not support the action
of the respondent.

35.

In Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur (supra), one Hiyat

Khan was enrolled as Trainee (Mechanist) for a period of two years on
7th October, 1996, however, his training was terminated by order
dated 19th September, 1997 before the expiry of the period of two
years. The termination of training was challenged by him and in a
writ petition filed by him, the order of termination of the training was
quashed and the institute was given the opportunity to take
appropriate action after affording opportunity of hearing to the
trainee. Pursuant to the order passed in the writ petition, the trainee
was afforded a reasonable opportunity and personal hearing and
thereafter, the order was passed terminating his training which was

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 36 of 46

again challenged by him in a subsequent writ petition. The Division
Bench of Allahabad High Court, in the circumstances, held that order
of terminating the training by the respondent on the ground of bad
academic performance could not be faulted on the principle of natural
justice. It was also held that the position of a training is akin to that
of a student and not that of an employee and in the matter of
discipline of academic institutions, the court should be slow in
interfering with the decisions of the authority as they are the best
judge of the situation and know how to maintain the discipline so that
the atmosphere in the institute does not get polluted putting in
jeopardy the career of a large number of bright students. The Division
Bench of Allahabad High Court relied on Glynn v. Keele Universith &
Another, (1971) 2 All England Report 89 and Queens Bench Divisional
Court, R. v. University of Oxford Ex parte Bolchover (1970) in para 19,
20 & 21 of the judgment, which are as under:“19. Glynn v. Keele University and another, (1971) 2 All ER 89,
is a case where a severe punishment was imposed upon a
student for an act of indiscipline without affording him an
opportunity of hearing and even after arriving at a finding that
there was violation of principles of natural justice, the Court
refused to exercise the discretion in his favour. After getting a
report of indiscipline, the Vice-Chancellor imposed a fine and
excluded
Glynn
from
residence
in
any
residential
accommodation on the University campus for the whole of the
academic session. Glynn subsequently wrote to the Registrar of
the University denying his involvement in the incident and
further pleaded that the punishment had been imposed without

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 37 of 46

any representation by him or on his behalf and hence he had not
even had opportunity to defend himself. After referring to leading
cases relating to compliance of natural justice in quasi-judicial
proceedings like Ridge v. Baldwin, (1963) 2 All ER 66 and
Duryappah Vs. Fernando, (1967) 2 All ER 152, the following
observation was made:“The context of educational societies involves a
special factor which is not present in other contexts
namely, the relation of tutor and pupil; i.e, the
society is charged with the supervision and
upbringing of the pupil under tuition, be the society
a university or college or a school. Where this
relationship exists, it is quite plain that on the one
hand in certain circumstances the body or
individual acting on behalf of the society must be
regarded as acting in a quasi-judicial capacity
expulsion from the society is the obvious example.
On the other hand, there exists a wide range of
circumstances in which the body or individual is
concerned to impose penalties by way of domestic
discipline. In these circumstances, it seems to me
that the body or individual is not acting in a quasijudicial capacity at all but in a magisterial capacity,
i.e., in the performance of the rights and duties
vested in the society as to the upbringing and
supervision of the members of the society. No
doubt there is a moral obligation to act fairly, but
this moral obligation does not, I think, lie within the
purview of the Court in its control over quasijudicial acts.
Indeed, in case of a schoolboy
punishment, the contrary could hardly be argued.”
In the same report reference is made to decision of
Queen‟s Bench Divisional Court, R V. University of Oxford
exparte Bolchover, (1970). The Times, 7th October, in
which the University had expelled a post graduate
member and he applied for an order of certiorari to quash
the decision. In a short judgment, Lord Parker, C.J., said:
“The Court has carefully considered the papers in
this case, and of course, all that you so ably urged,
but at the end of the day we remain unconvinced
that the conduct of the hearing before the proctors

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 38 of 46

offended against such rules of natural justice as
were applicable in the circumstances. To put it
more simply, they are not satisfied that the hearing
was unfair. But it is only right to any that even if
the Court felt there might be something to be
enquired into nevertheless as a matter of discretion
they would, having regard to the appeal, refused
you leave. In the result leave is refused.”
These cases lay down that in matters involving
disciplinary action by academic bodies, discretion to
quash their decisions should not be lightly exercised.
20. Coming to the criticism leveled by the learned single
Judge that no reasons have been recorded, it may be
stated at the very outset that the matter is not governed
by any statutory provision which may make the recording
of reasons mandatory. We are not concerned here with
decision of any Court or Tribunal. The order terminating
training of the respondent clearly shows that the Director
of the Institute had considered the show cause notice, the
reply given by the respondent and also the statement
made by him during the course of oral hearing wherein he
did not deny any charge and, therefore, he had arrived at
a finding that the training of the respondent should be
terminated. The Director was not trying the respondent
like a Judge of a criminal court where evidence in support
of each charge had to be considered and weighed and,
thereafter, a finding had to be recorded. The order cannot
be said to a non-speaking order. It is not a cryptic order
of one sentence but is a fairly long order.
Nonconsideration of the facts mentioned in the show cause
notice in great detail cannot per se make the order bad.
In Sachchidanand Pandey v. State of West Bengal, AIR
1987 SC 1109, it was held that where reasons are not
stated, the Court may seek to gather the same from the
impugned adjudicative order by considering the entire
course of events. In K.L. Tripathi v. State Bank of India
and others, AIR 1984 SC 273, the court sustained an
order of dismissal from service which did not give reasons
with the following observations:

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 39 of 46

“…. Through reasons had not been expressly stated
in the final order, these reasons were implicit,
namely, the nature of the charges, the explanation
offered and the reply of the officer to the show cause
notice. It was manifest that absence of any denial
by the officer, indeed admissions of the factual
basis and nature of the explanation offered by the
officer were considered by the authority to merit the
imposition of the penalty of dismissal. Such a
conclusion
could
not,
in
the facts
and
circumstances of the case, be considered to be
unreasonable or one which no reasonable man
could make……….”
21. Again, in M.J.Stwani Vs. State of Karnataka, 1995
(6) SCC 289, it was observed in paragraph 32 that it is a
settled law that the order need not contain detailed
reasons like a Court order. Administrative order itself may
contain reasons or the file may disclose the reasons to
arrive at a decision showing application of mind to the
facts in issue which would be discernible from the
reasons stated in the order or the contemporaneous
record.”

36.

Perusal of the facts of the case relied on by the respondents, it

is apparent that the trainee in that case was given ample warning in
writing to improve himself and devote himself to the training. There
were also allegations of mis-behaviour and indiscipline against the
respondent. In the circumstances, his performance was not found to
be upto mark and there were allegations of mis-behaviour and
indiscipline.

He was given a show cause notice and he was also

afforded an opportunity of hearing whereas in the case of Dr.Manoj

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 40 of 46

Singhania/petitioner, no show cause notice was given to him nor the
alleged misconducts and lapses in his working were disclosed to him.
However, he was given a notice regarding fact finding inquiry to be
conducted where first his statement was recorded and thereafter the
statements of a number of doctors were recorded in his absence and
without disclosing the same to him and the interference has been
drawn that his retention is not in the interest of patients nor in the
interest of administration.

Apparently, the principle enunciated in

Hiyat Khan (supra) shall not be applicable in the case of the petitioner
in the present facts and circumstances.

37.

Though the learned counsel for respondent No.3 has also relied

on the admissions made by the petitioner that once on the night of the
7th August, 2006 he had left the duty for various reasons as has been
alleged by him, however, no effort was made by the Inquiry Committee
or the respondent No.3 to ascertain as to what were the conditions on
7th August, 2006. The staff who was on duty on 7th August, 2006, has
not been examined.

The other doctors who are alleged to have

complained against him have not been asked anything about the
incident of 7th August, 2006 when the petitioner had gone.

The

inspection by the Committee on 28th March, 2007 of the residents‟
duty room of Medical ICU and the conditions prevailing on that date

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 41 of 46

does not lead to any presumption that the same conditions existed
even on 7th August, 2006.

38.

Normally, the Court while exercising the jurisdiction under

Article 226 of the Constitution of India does not review the findings of
facts arrived at by a fact finding committee unless they are perverse or
have manifest error. Had there been any evidence in respect of the
prevailing conditions in the residents‟ duty room of Medical ICU on 7th
August, 2006, the findings of the Inquiry Committee that there was
nothing wrong with the residents‟ duty room of Medical ICU as no
mosquitoes were found on that day, could not be interfered with.
However, perusal of the statements of all the doctors recorded in
absence of the petitioner reveals that it had not even been put to them
as to what were the prevailing conditions in the residents‟ duty room
of Medical ICU so as to infer that there was no justification for the
petitioner to leave the medical room in the night on 7th August, 2006.
This court is not justifying the act of the petitioner in leaving the duty
room on 7th August, 2006. However, on the basis of the said incidence
for which there is no evidence before the Inquiry Committee, the
allegations as made against the petitioner cannot be inferred so as to

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 42 of 46

justify the termination of his training in the present facts and
circumstances.

39.

The plea of the respondent No.4 that the petitioner had

abandoned or deserted the training is not made out from the
allegations made by respondent No.3. The petitioner‟s case is that he
was not allowed to join by the Senior Administrator, Dr.Sudheer
Sharma,

on

2nd

March,

2007.

The

petitioner

has

written

letters/representations dated 1st March, 2007; 2nd March, 2007; 3rd
March, 2007; 5th March, 2007; 6th March, 2007; 7th March, 2007; 8th
March, 2007; 9th March, 2007; 10th March, 2007; 12th March, 2007;
14th March, 2007 and 15th March, 2007 against his prevention from
joining his training, however, none of the letters or representations
have been answered. The respondent Nos.1 and 3 also in the counter
affidavit though stated that the petitioner was not allowed to continue
the training after 8th February, 2007, however, has not controverted
the allegations of the petitioner that he was not allowed to join since
1st March, 2007 though he had been going there daily.

Nothing has

also been produced by the respondent to show that the petitioner did
not join the duties from 8th February, 2007 till 1st March, 2007. In
any case, respondent No.3 in paragraph 15 has categorically admitted

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 43 of 46

that the petitioner was not allowed to join the training after 8th
February, 2007 on account of his grave mis-conduct.

Para 15 of the

counter affidavit of respondent No.3 is as under:“15.

40.

The contents of para 15 are not denied to the extent that
the petitioner, owing to his grave mis-conduct was not
allowed to continue the training after 8th February, 2007”.

The petitioner was not issued any suspension letter.

The

petitioner has rather complained in his letter dated 2nd March, 2007
addressed

to

Medical

Director

after

his

complaints

and

his

applications were refused to be accepted by Mr.Pujara, Mrs.Dinesh
and Mr.Vishnu that Dr.Sudhir Sharma had promised to send
suspension/termination letter within 3/4 days, however, the same
was not done. This is not the case of the respondent No.3 that the
petitioner was suspended before his training was terminated by letter
dated 3rd May, 2007.

Since there was no suspension and/or

termination of the training of the petitioner prior to 3rd May, 2007, the
respondent No.3 could not disallow the petitioner to join the training
nor the respondents can be permitted to take the plea that the
petitioner had abandoned/deserted the training.

The allegation is

palpably incorrect and reflects utter non-application of mind by the
respondents. Since the petitioner had not been allowed to join the

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 44 of 46

training and termination of his training is illegal, then respondent
No.4 cannot be allowed to take shelter under the plea that he has
abandoned his training and that the petitioner should not be allowed
to complete his training on the ground that it would adversely affect
upon the standards in higher medical education. The termination of
the training of the petitioner is invalid and contrary to the canons of
the Principle of Natural Justice and cannot be sustained and
consequently the petitioner shall also be entitled to complete his
training in accordance with rules and regulations and thereafter
appear in the theory examination. The plea of the respondent No.4
that the petitioner could have opted to join some other accredited
institution for the remaining period of his training and the respondent
could have facilitated the same, also does not disentitle the petitioner
to continue his training on the termination of his training being set
aside by this Court.

The petitioner cannot be condemned for the

lapses in the manner as has been canvassed by the respondents, in
the facts and circumstances.

41.

For the foregoing reasons the order dated 3rd May, 2007

terminating the training of the petitioner in DNB 3rd year in the
Department of Medicine, Northern Railway, Central Hospital, New

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 45 of 46

Delhi is set aside and the petitioner is reinstated with a direction to
the respondents to allow the petitioner to complete his course and
training in accordance with rules. The petitioner shall also be entitled
for all the consequential benefits. Petitioner is also awarded cost of
Rs.10,000/- payable by the respondent nos.2 & 3 to the petitioner in
the facts and circumstances of the case.

May 27, 2008

ANIL KUMAR J.

‘Dev’

WP(C) 3948 of 2007

Page 46 of 46

