IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
C.M.(Main) No.580/2007
Date of Decision: 27th April, 2007
In the matter of:Om Prakash Nagpal

....
Petitioner
Through: Mr.F.K.Jha, Advocate.
Versus

Sh.Prem Pal @ Prem Kumar & Anr
....
Through: Nemo.

Respondents

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

YES

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

NO

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported NO
in the Digest ?

ANIL KUMAR, J. (ORAL)
1.

The petitioner has impugned the order of Rent Control Tribunal

dated 17th Jan, 2006 dismissing his appeal against the dismissal of his
objection under Section 25B of Delhi Rent Control Act by the Rent
Controller by his order dated 7th July, 2006 in Execution Petition
No.33/2000 titled Sh.Prem Pal Vs. Sh.Vishwanath Duggal.

CM (Main) 580 of 2007

Page 1 of 9

2.

Sh.Vishwanath Duggal, respondent No.2 is the landlord of the

premises Shop No.CB-70/10, Indra Market, Ring Road, Naraina, Delhi
Cantt, Delhi. The said shop was under the tenancy of respondent No.1,
Sh.Prem Pal. Respondent No.2 landlord obtained an ex-parte order of
eviction against respondent No.1, Sh.Prem Pal and recovered the
possession of the said shop.

3.

After, pursuant to an ex-parte eviction order, possession of the

shop was recovered by respondent No.2 from respondent No.1, he filed
an application on 13th November, 1989 for setting aside the ex-parte
eviction order passed against him. An application for restoration of the
tenanted premises, the possession of which was recovered from him by
the respondent no.2 was also filed on 13th November, 1989.

4.

After the application for setting aside the ex-parte eviction order

passed against respondent No.1 and his application for restoration of
possession of the tenanted premises was filed by respondent No.1, with a
view to defeat the rights of respondent No.1, the respondent No.2 let out
the said shop to petitioner on a monthly rent of Rs.1000/-.

CM (Main) 580 of 2007

Page 2 of 9

5.

The petitioner also alleged that he had paid a premium/pagri

(refundable to the petitioner at the time of eviction of the tenanted shop) of
Rs.2 lakhs to respondent No.2, however, no receipt was executed.

6.

After protracted trial the application of petitioner No.1 for setting

aside the ex-parte eviction order and for restoration of the possession of
the tenanted premises was allowed by order dated 7th July, 2006 and the
possession of the tenanted shop was recovered petitioner and restored to
the respondent no.1. The petitioner, therefore, filed an application under
Order 21 Rule 99, 100 and 101 read with Section 151 of the Code of Civil
Procedure. The petitioner before the Rent Controller had contended that
the rent of the shop which was let out by respondent No.2 to the
petitioner, after filing the application of respondent No.1 for setting aside
the ex-parte eviction proceedings and for restoration of possession of the
tenanted premises, was let out at Rs.1000/- per month excluding
electricity and other charges which rate of rent was increased to Rs.1900/per month and he was dispossessed on 4th December, 2004. The
contention of the petitioner was that no decree was passed against him
nor he is a judgment debtor within the meaning of Section 2(10) and Order
21 Rule 100 and, therefore, he is entitled for re-delivery of the property on

CM (Main) 580 of 2007

Page 3 of 9

the ground that he is the lawful tenant and the shop was got evicted from
respondent No.1 by respondent No.2 pursuant to an eviction order dated
8th May, 1989 passed by Sh.B.L.Garg and for restoration of possession by
the respondent no.2 to respondent no.1, the premises can not be
recovered from him and given to the respondent no.1.

7.

The application of the petitioner was contested contending inter-alia

that the petitioner could not acquire better rights than the rights of the
respondent No.2. Respondent No.2 had let out the premises to the
petitioner with a view to deprive the rights of respondent No.1 who had
already filed an application for setting aside the ex-parte decree dated 8th
May, 1989 passed against him and for restoration of possession because
admittedly the same premises was let out to the petitioner after the
applications were filed by the respondent no.1. After the order of eviction
against the respondent No.1 was set aside and he was held to be entitled
for recovery of possession, the respondent No.2 was liable to restore the
possession and consequently even petitioner to whom the premises was
let out only to circumvent the order passed in favor of respondent No.1
was liable to restore the possession. The eviction order which was passed
against the respondent no.1 was ultimately set aside on 22nd April, 2000.

CM (Main) 580 of 2007

Page 4 of 9

8.

The Rent Controller considered the judgments relied on by the

petitioner including 54(1994) Delhi Law Times 258 (SC) regarding the
rights of a bonafide purchaser. It was held that if a party to a suit is bound
to restore possession under any provision of law, his representatives or
legal assigns are equally liable. Consequently, it was held that if
respondent No.2 on setting aside the eviction order passed in his favor
dated 8th May, 1989 was liable to restore the possession of tenanted
premises to respondent No.1, the petitioner being his legal assign or
representative was equally liable to restore the possession to the
respondent No.1 and consequently respondent No.1 was justified in
recovering possession from the petitioner. It was noticed that the petitioner
failed to establish that he was inducted bonafide by the respondent No.2.

9.

In the appeal filed by the petitioner against dismissal of his

application by order dated 7th July, 2006 the Rent Control Tribunal has
also considered AIR 1963 Punjab 229, Smt.Kanso Devi Vs.Kishan Chand;
AIR 1966 SC 948; AIR 1993 Karnataka 338 and AIR 1977 Delhi 12 and
passed an order holding that petitioner was liable to restore the
possession of the premises to respondent No.1 and dismissed his appeal

CM (Main) 580 of 2007

Page 5 of 9

against the order dated 7th July, 2006 of the Rent Controller.

10.

The Tribunal relied on Section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act.

Considering the evidence and especially regarding the fact that the
petitioner was not inducted bonafide and the fact that the tenancy in favor
of petitioner was created, after the application for setting aside the exparte eviction order dated 8th May, 1989 and for restoration of possession
was filed by the respondent no.1. It has been held that the petitioner was
not entitled for the protection sought by him and he had been rightly
dispossessed pursuant to an order passed against respondent No.2 to
restore the possession of the tenanted premises to respondent No.1.

11.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that he was

not made a party and he has not been given a hearing. After the
possession of the premises was restored to respondent No.1 pursuant to
order of restoration of possession was passed against respondent No.2,
the application filed by the petitioner by objecting the recovery of
possession from him, has been considered in detail by the Rent Controller
along with his documents filed by him and after detailed investigation
came to the conclusion that petitioner was liable to restore the possession

CM (Main) 580 of 2007

Page 6 of 9

of the tenanted shop to the respondent No.1. The Appellate Court has
also considered his pleas and contentions in detail and, therefore, the
petitioner cannot say that he was not given a reasonable opportunity so as
to deny the principles of natural justice.

12.

Perusal of the record also reveals that the petitioner has failed to

establish that the tenancy of respondent No.2 was created in his favour
bonafide. If the petitioner cannot claim that the tenancy in his favour was
bonafide, he cannot resist the order passed against respondent No.2 for
restoration of possession to his tenant, respondent No.1 after the
possession was taken by respondent No.2 pursuant to an eviction order
passed against respondent No.1 ex-parte.

13.

There is concurrent finding of facts by the courts. It is also to be

noticed that the Tribunal has considered the pleas and evidence in detail
and also the judgment of rent controller. The petitioner is not entitled for
reconsideration of all the pleas and contentions. An important aspect
which cannot be lost sight of is that that the tenancy in favor of respondent
no.1 after evicting him, was not created bonafide and was created after
the respondent no.1 had already filed his application for setting aside the

CM (Main) 580 of 2007

Page 7 of 9

ex-parte order against him and for restoration of possession of tenancy
premises to him. In view thereof the scrutiny by this Court under Article
227 of the Constitution of India is not to review or reweigh the evidence
upon which the determination of the inferior Court or Tribunal purports to
be based. The Apex Court in Mohd. Yunus v. Mohd. Mustaqim and Ors.,
AIR 1984 SC 38 had in fact observed that a mere wrong decision without
anything more is not enough to attract the jurisdiction of the High Court
under Article 227 of the Constitution of India as the supervisory jurisdiction
conferred on the High Courts is limited to seeing that an inferior Court or
Tribunal functions within the limits of its authority and not to correct an
error apparent on the face of the record much less an error of law. This
legal position had again been expounded in Surya Dev Rai v. Ram
Chander Rai & Ors., JT 2003 (6) SC 465.

14.

In the circumstances, the learned counsel is unable to point out

such an error of law distinguishable from a mere mistake of law or error of
law relating to jurisdiction or violation of principle of natural justice or that
there has been arbitrary or capricious exercise of authority or discretion by
the Rent Controller and Tribunal so as to entail interference by this Court.
The decision of the Courts below cannot be termed perverse or based on

CM (Main) 580 of 2007

Page 8 of 9

no material nor there is flagrant error in the procedure adopted by the
Tribunal and the Rent Controller which will entail interference by this court
under Article 227 of the Constitution of India.

15.

In the totality of facts and circumstances there are no grounds to

interfere with the orders of Rent Controller and Rent Control Tribunal in
exercise of jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution of India and,
therefore, the petition is dismissed.

April 27, 2007
'k'

CM (Main) 580 of 2007

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 9 of 9

