*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP(C) No.283/1992

%

Date of decision : 27.02.2008

Devesh Kumar & Ors.
Through:

….… Petitioners
Mr.Sunil Malhotra, Advocate

Versus
N.D.M.C.
Through :

......... Respondent
Ms.Jyoti Singh, Advocate

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.
+ CM No.3075/2008 in W.P.(C) No.283/1992
*
Issue notice to the respondent/non-applicant. Ms.Jyoti Singh
accepts notice and states that she does not want to file any reply. She,
however, contends that relief claimed by the petitioners is based on
different cause of action and the petitioners should file a separate writ
petition.

This is an application by the petitioners under Order VI Rule 17
of the Code of Civil Procedure seeking amendment to the writ petition.
W.P(C) No.283/1992
Page 1 of 7

The petitioners/applicant contended that in their petition seeking
they have sought quashing of orders of cancellation of panel formed in
September, 1988 of the Junior Engineer (Electrical). They have also
sought a direction to the respondent to form a fresh panel of Junior
Engineers (Electrical) and appoint no other person against the post of
Junior Engineer and for a writ of mandamus directing the respondent
to appoint the petitioners as Junior Engineer (Electrical) before
appointing any other candidate to the said post.

The petitioners contended that court passed an order dated 22nd
October, 1992 directing the respondent that no fresh appointment be
made to the post of Junior Engineer (Electrical), however, the
respondent was given liberty to appoint the petitioners. This interim
order was confirmed by order dated 22nd January, 1993.

The

application of the respondent to modify the interim order dated 21st
April, 1993 was partly allowed and the respondent were directed to keep
four vacancies for the petitioners.

The petitioners asserted that out of four of them, three were
departmental candidates and one was from outside. The respondent,
therefore, appointed petitioners on the basis of select panel as Junior
Engineer (Electrical) on ad hoc basis for a period of six months and
W.P(C) No.283/1992

Page 2 of 7

thereafter, the respondent has continued the services of the petitioners
by extending the ad hoc appointments for six months from time to time
for the last 14 years. The petitioners stated that they have completed
14 years and are still continuing on ad hoc basis without any break in
service after being duly selected in accordance with rules. The
petitioners’ grievance is that they are 40 to 50 years of age, however,
they have not been regularized and they are entitled for regularization
from the date of their ad hoc appointment to the post of JE (Electrical).

In view of the pendency of the writ petition for a considerable
period and the petitioners continuing to work as Junior Engineer
(Electrical), the petitioners want to amend the writ petition and want to
incorporate paras 5 to 8 and grounds A and B and consequently prayer
3A to the writ petition also and therefore, the present application for
amendment has been filed.

No reply to the application has been filed by the respondent.
Learned counsel for the respondent states that amendment sought shall
change the nature of the reliefs sought by the petitioners.

The power to allow the amendment is wide and can be exercised
at any stage of the proceedings in the interests of justice on the basis of
guidelines laid down in various precedents. Though the amendment
W.P(C) No.283/1992

Page 3 of 7

cannot be claimed as a matter of right and under all circumstances but
the Courts while deciding such prayer do not adopt a hyper technical
approach. The purpose and object of Order 6 Rule 17 is to allow either
party to alter or amend his pleading in such manner and on such terms
as may be just. Amendments are allowed in the pleadings to avoid
uncalled for multiplicity of litigation.

This is not disputed that the court can take note of subsequent
events. The petitioners are seeking relief on the basis of subsequent
events which have occurred during the pendency of the writ petition as
on account of interim order passed by this court, the petitioners were
appointed as ad hoc Junior Engineers and have continued as Junior
Engineers for the last many years. Normal rule is that in any litigation
the right and obligation of the parties are adjudicated upon as they
obtained at the commencement of the lis.
exception.

But this too is subject to an

Where subsequent events of facts or law which have a

material bearing on the entitlement of the parties to relief or on aspects
which depend on the molding of the relief occurs, the Court is not
precluded from taking note of the subsequent events of facts and to
mold the relief accordingly.

W.P(C) No.283/1992

Page 4 of 7

In Pasupuleti Venkateshwarlu vs. Motor and General Traders,
(1975) 1 SCC 770 at page 773 para 4 the Apex Court had held as
under:4. We feel the submissions devoid of substance. First about
the jurisdiction and propriety vis-a-vis circumstances
which come into being subsequent to the commencement of
the proceedings. It is basic to our processual jurisprudence
that the right to relief must be judged to exist as on the
date a suitor institutes the legal proceeding. Equally clear is
the principle that procedure is the handmaid and not the
mistress of the judicial process. If a fact, arising after the lis
has come to court and has a fundamental impact on the
right to relief or the manner of moulding it, is brought
diligently to the notice of the tribunal, it cannot blink at it
or be blind to events which stultify or render inept the
decreetal remedy. Equity justifies bending the rules of
procedure, where no specific provision or fairplay is
violated, with a view to promote substantial justice —
subject, of course, to the absence of other disentitling
factors or just circumstances. Nor can we contemplate any
limitation on this power to take note of updated facts to
confine it to the trial court. If the litigation pends, the power
exists, absent other special circumstances repelling resort
to that course in law or justice. Rulings on this point are
legion, even as situations for applications of this equitable
rule are myriad. We affirm the proposition that for making
the right or remedy claimed by the party just and
meaningful as also legally and factually in accord with the
current realities, the Court can, and in many cases must,
take cautious cognizance of events and developments
subsequent to the institution of the proceeding provided the
rules of fairness to both sides are scrupulously obeyed. On
both occasions the High Court, in revision, correctly took
this view. The later recovery of another accommodation by
the landlord, during the pendency of the case, has as the
High Court twice pointed out, a material bearing on the
right to evict, in view of the inhibition written into Section
10(3)(iii) itself. We are not disposed to disturb this approach
in law or finding of fact.

W.P(C) No.283/1992

Page 5 of 7

Taking these facts into consideration, it is apparent that the
amendment sought by the petitioners is relevant for determination of
real controversies between the parties and is based on the fact that the
petitioners are continuing on ad-hoc basis for the last 14 years and
their term is being extended on six monthly basis. It is also true that at
the time of adjudication of the application for amendment by a party
who takes a particular plea, normally the validity and correctness of the
plea is not to be determined so as to allow or disallow the amendment
sought by a party. In the said facts and circumstances, I do not find
any embargo in allowing the application for amendment of the petition
by the petitioners.

The application is, therefore, liable to be allowed and the
petitioners are entitled to amend the petition incorporating the paras,
ground and reliefs as detailed therein.

For the foregoing reasons the application for amendment of the
writ petition is allowed. The petitioners are allowed to amend the writ
petition in order to incorporate amendments as detailed in the
application subject to a cost of Rs.5000/- payable by petitioners to the
respondent. Amended writ petition be filed.

W.P(C) No.283/1992

Page 6 of 7

W.P.(C) No.283/1992
Amended writ petition dated 22nd February, 2008 already filed is
taken on record. The learned counsel for the respondent seeks time to
file additional counter affidavit. Additional counter affidavit be filed
within eight weeks. Rejoinder, if any, within four weeks thereafter.
List on 9th July, 2008.

February 27th , 2008

ANIL KUMAR, J.

'K/Dev'

W.P(C) No.283/1992

Page 7 of 7

