*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP(C) No.1579/2008

%

Date of decision : February 27th, 2008

Arvind Kumar
Through:

….… Petitioner
Mr. Sanjay Ghose , Advocate.

Versus
Campari Export Pvt. Ltd.
Through : Nemo

.........

Respondent

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
1.

The petitioner has challenged the award dated 20th November,

2007 declining the claim of the petitioner for reinstatement and back
wages.

2.

The Secretary (Labour), Government of NCT had made the

following reference on 22nd May, 1998 :“Whether the services of Sh.Arvind Kumar have been
terminated
illegally
and/or
unjustifiably
by
the
management, and if so, to what relief is he entitled and
what directions are necessary in this respect”.

WP(C) 1579 of 2008

Page 1 of 5

3.

The petitioner has contended that he was engaged as a Sample

Man/Flat Operator since 1995 and he was getting the salary of
Rs.3,050/- p.m. It was asserted that he was not given any appointment
letter and was not provided ESI and PF facilities. Petitioner had become a
member of the union of workers leading to management becoming
inimical towards the petitioner. His grievance was that he was
terminated from service on 20th August, 1997 without notice and without
any reason and he has not been paid his earned wages for the month of
August, 1997 and has also not been paid overtime wages for the month
of July, 1997 and his retrenchment is in violation of Section 25-F of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.

4.

The claim of the petitioner was contested on the ground that there

is no establishment by the name of the management i.e. Campari
Exports and there is no relationship of employee and employer between
the parties. It was contended that respondent is the sole proprietorship
concern engaged in the business of exports.

5.

Before the Labour Court, pleadings were filed and evidence was led

and on the basis of the same an award has been given which is
challenged by the petitioner. The Labor Court considered the fact that
workman did not produce any cogent evidence to establish that there is a
relationship of employer and employee between the respondent and the
petitioner.

The workman had produced the gate passes, however, the

WP(C) 1579 of 2008

Page 2 of 5

same were not duly approved. The Labour Court considered the same
and inferred that on the basis of the gate passes, it could not be
established that there was relationship of employer and employee.
Reliance was placed by the Labor Court on Surendranagar District
Panchayat Vs.Dahyabhai Amarsingh, 2005 LLR 1222 and Range Forest
Officer Vs.S.T. Hadimani, 2002 FJR 397 to infer that onus to prove the
relationship was squarely on the petitioner, however, he has not been
able to show or produce any document to establish the relationship of
employer and employee. The management has produced the PF file and
ESI register from 1993 to 2000 and the name of the Petitioner/workman
does not appear there.

Though the management did not produce the

attendance register, however, neither any plea was taken by the
petitioner that the name of the petitioner appears in the attendance
register but not in the ESI register between 1993 to 2000 nor any such
suggestion was given to the witness of the management.

On the

preponderance of probability the inference drawn on the basis of the fact
that the petitioner failed to produce any cogent evidence to establish the
relationship

of

employer

and

employee,

however,

the

respondent/management produced the ESI register from 1993 to 2000
which does not have the name of the petitioner, a probable inference has
been drawn that there is no relationship of employer and employee
between the parties.

WP(C) 1579 of 2008

Page 3 of 5

6.

On the basis of the pleadings and evidence of the parties, no such

ground has been shown which will show that the inference drawn by the
Labor Court is perverse or there is a manifest error. Learned counsel for
the petitioner has contended that the respondent/management had first
stated that the record of the attendance shall be produced, however, later
on it was stated that the record has been destroyed as it was not
mandatory to preserve the record. Learned counsel for the petitioner is
unable to show any provision under which the management was liable to
preserve the record of the attendance. In any case, this Court in exercise
of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is not
required to draw another inference and substitute the probable inference
of the Labour Court drawn on the basis of evidence with its inference.

7.

It is a settled position of law that in exercise of jurisdiction under

Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the Court should not interfere
with factual findings of the lower courts and should restrain itself from
re-appreciating evidence while exercising powers of judicial review.
Reliance for this proposition can be placed on the judgment of the
Supreme Court, Government of A.P. and Ors. v. Mohd. Nasrullah Khan
reported as (2006) 2 SCC 373. Writ court should refrain from interfering
with the orders of an inferior tribunal or subordinate court unless it
suffers from an error of jurisdiction or from a breach of the principles of
natural justice or is vitiated by a manifest or apparent error of law. The
WP(C) 1579 of 2008

Page 4 of 5

objective of judicial review is that a person receives a fair treatment and
objective is not to re-appreciate the entire pleas and evidence and draw
inferences again. Judicial review is not an appeal from a decision but a
review of the manner in which the decision is made. Power of judicial
review is meant to ensure that the individual receives fair treatment and
not to ensure that the conclusion which the authority reaches is
necessarily correct in the eye of the court.
8.

The petitioner has failed to show and perversity or manifest error

in the award of the Labor Court impugned by the petitioner nor the
award was given in denial of principle of natural justice. In the facts and
circumstances, there are no grounds to interfere with the award dated
20th November, 2007.

9.

The Writ Petition is, therefore, without any merit and is,

accordingly, dismissed.

February 27th, 2008.
'Ravindra'

WP(C) 1579 of 2008

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 5 of 5

