*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P(C) No.12418/2006

%

Date of decision: 28.02.2008

Executive Engineer

….… Petitioner
Through: Mr.Sewa Ram, Advocate.
Versus

Khumb Raj and Ors

....... Respondents
Through : Mr.Varun Prasad, Advocate.

CORAM :*

HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.
*
1.

The petitioner, Municipal Corporation of Delhi has impugned the

award dated 15th July, 2004 holding that the action of the management
in terminating the services of the respondent is not just, proper and
legal and reinstating the respondent with 50% back wages in the scale
of Rs.750-940/-.

WP(C) No.12418/2006

Page 1 of 21

2.

The respondent was engaged as a beldar on muster roll with

effect from 7th June, 1985. He continued working on daily wages uptil
18th August, 1992. The petitioner leveled the charges of misbehavior
against the respondent and issued a show cause notice on 17th August,
1992. The reply was filed by the respondent on 18th August, 1992 at 2
PM, however, the petitioner terminated his services with effect from 18th
August, 1992 by order dated 18th August, 1992 without considering the
explanation rendered by the respondent and without conducting any
enquiry against the alleged mis-behavior of the respondent.

3.

The

workman

challenged

his

termination

order

and

the

appropriate Government referred the following dispute to the Industrial
Tribunal Cum Labor Court:“Whether the action of the management of Executive
Engineer, Construction Division VII, CPWD, New Delhi in
terminating the services of Sh.Khumb Raj Beldar w.e.f.
18.8.92 is proper, legal and justified? If not, to what relief,
the workman is entitled?”

4.

The respondent had challenged his termination order as illegal,

unjust and having passed in violation of principles of natural justice
and without complying with provisions contained in Industrial Disputes
Act. The respondent also asserted that persons junior to him have been
retained by the management and their services have been regularized in
the time scale of Rs.750-940 and in the circumstances the respondent
WP(C) No.12418/2006

Page 2 of 21

sought reinstatement with full back wages, continuity in service and all
consequential benefits.

5.

The petitioner contested the claim and filed a reply to the claim

petition

of

the

respondent.

management/petitioner

that

It
the

was
place

asserted
of

on

behalf

workman

of

was

at

Chanakyapuri, however, he was found at Bihar Bhawan on 8th August,
1992 in drunken condition and came to the office of the AE at about
11.30 AM and demanded Rs.500/- and on refusal he manhandled and
misbehaved with Sh.V.K.Bansal, Junior Engineer who was on duty and
thereafter, ran away from the office.

6.

The respondent workman was issued a show cause notice on 14th

August, 1992, the service of which was allegedly avoided by the
respondent workman. However, the show cause notice was ultimately
received by him on 17th August, 1992 and a reply was filed on 18th
August, 1992. In the reply filed by the petitioner in para 8, the
petitioner rather contended that no reply was received on 18th August,
1992 and reply was received only on 19th August, 1992 after the formal
order of termination was communicated to the respondent and a copy of
the communication was annexed at Annexure IV. The petitioner also
contended that the reply relied on by the respondent is forged and the
alleged reply was also filed after he was discharged on 18th August,
WP(C) No.12418/2006

Page 3 of 21

1992. The petitioner categorically contended that the petitioner was
discharged from service on account of misbehavior by the competent
authority and for coming to the office of the Junior Engineer in drunken
condition.

7.

After considering the pleadings and evidence of the parties the

Industrial Cum Labour Court held that the discharge order of the
respondent is not an order of discharge simplicitor but it is penal in
nature and, therefore, a regular enquiry as per law should have been
initiated against him for giving him adequate and proper opportunity.
The Court held that the reply of the respondent ought to have been
considered and in the circumstances, there has not been any fair and
reasonable opportunity to the respondent and consequently the action
of the petitioner is not just, legal and deserves to be set aside. The
Industrial Cum Labour Court also relied on the claim of the respondent
that he has not been gainfully employed and the petitioner did not show
or establish that the respondent was gainfully employed since 18th
August,

1992

when

his

services

were

terminated

and

in

the

circumstances also awarded 50% of the back wages to the respondent
from 18th August, 1992.

WP(C) No.12418/2006

Page 4 of 21

8.

I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have perused

the award and the evidence. In reply to the claim of the respondent, it
was contended on behalf of petitioner that the respondent was generally
found in a drunken condition and used to misbehave and he continued
drinking during working hours and thus he had been committing
misconduct. Regarding the incident on 8th August, 1992, it was pleaded
that the respondent was found drunk and he deliberately misbehaved
and manhandled Shri Bansal, Junior Engineer, and after that he ran
away from the spot. Regarding show cause notice dated 11th August,
1992, it was stated that it was served on 17th August, 1992 as earlier
respondent had refused to take delivery of show cause notice for which
a reminder was sent to him on 14th August, 1992. Regarding the reply
to the show cause notice, the petitioner pleaded that the reply was
received on 19th August, 1992 after the formal order of termination was
passed and communicated to him.

According to the petitioner,

sufficient and appropriate time from 11th August, 1992 to 18th August,
1992 was given to him and, therefore, the services of the respondent
has been rightly terminated. Regarding the applicability of Section 25 F
of the I.D Act, the respondent asserted that the respondent was
discharged on account of disciplinary action taken against him and his
case is not of retrenchment and as per Section 2(oo) of the Act,
retrenchment means termination by the employer for any reason
whatsoever otherwise than as a punishment inflicted by way of
WP(C) No.12418/2006

Page 5 of 21

disciplinary action and therefore no notice pay or any compensation
was accruable to him.

9.

In the deposition filed on behalf of the petitioner of Shri B.N.

Mandal, Assistant Engineer, rather deposed that reply of the workman
was received on 19th August, 1992 whereas termination order was
issued on 18th August, 1992. Respondent, however, deposed that the
notice to show cause was served by Shri Babu Lal, Assistant Engineer
V, on 17th August, 1992. Perusal of the copy of the reply filed, however,
shows that the reply was received by the petitioner on 18th August,
1992 at 2.00 PM.

10.

The respondent has also filed a counter affidavit dated 7th May,

2007 contending that the reply was sent on 19th August, 1992. A copy
of

the

reply

dated

18th

August,

1992

to

the

letter

No.12(5)AE/V/EE/CDVII/80 dated 11th August, 1992 is produced by
the respondent as Annexure R2 which has an endorsement of receipt of
the reply on 18th August, 1992 at 2.00 PM. It was thus contended that
even the explanation given by the respondent was not taken into
consideration and in the circumstances no reasonable opportunity was
given to the respondent.

WP(C) No.12418/2006

Page 6 of 21

11.

Learned

counsel

for

the

petitioner

has

very

emphatically

contended that the respondent has been simply discharged and
consequently no inquiry was to be conducted. Learned counsel for the
petitioner has relied on (1997) 4 SCC 391, Himanshu Kumar Vidyarthi
and Others v. State of Bihar and Others; (2006) 11 SCC 684, Jaipur
Development Authority v. Ramsahai and Others; 133 (2006) DLT 24,
Ajay Kumar Sharma v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court No.VI; (2006) 4
SCC 1, Secretary, State of Karnataka and Others v. Umadevi (3) and
Others; 122 (2005) DLT 576, Ramesh Chand Sharma and Others v.
Commissioner of Police and Others; (2006) 7 SCC 558, Om Prakash
Mann v. Director of Education (Basic) and Others; AIR 2007 Supreme
Court 705, Government of India and Another v. George Philip; AIR 2005
Supreme Court 1924, Madhya Pradesh Electricity Board v. Jagdish
Chandra Sharma; (2004) 8 SCC 129, State of Punjab v. Jagir Singh;
(2007) 2 SCC 433, J.K. Synthetics Ltd. V. K.P. Aggrawal and Another;
(2005) 9 SCC 278, University of Bihar and Others v. Kamal Deo Thakur
and Others; (2002) 10 SCC 433, Pyare Jan and Another v. Karnataka
Electricity Board and Another and 1995 Supp (4) SCC 715, Ex.Capt.
Ashwani Kumar Katoch v. Union of India and Others in support of his
contention that the dismissal of the respondent was on account of
alleged mis-behavior with the Junior Engineer on 8th August, 1992 and
since the respondent was a daily wager, it was a discharge simplicitor

WP(C) No.12418/2006

Page 7 of 21

and the respondent being employed as a daily wager is not entitled for
reinstatement.

12.

Learned counsel for the workman has relied on 2007 Lab.I.C.

3528, M.C.D. v. Naresh Kumar & Another; 1999 Lab.I.C. 619, M.C.D. V.
Praveen Kumar Jain and Others; 2000 Lab.I.C. 1377, Nar Singh Pal v.
Union of India and Others; (1984) 2 SCC 433, Brahma Chandra Gupta
v. Union of India; (1982) 1 SCC 645, L. Robert D‟Souza v. Executive
Engineer, Southern Railway and Another; 82(1999) DLT 958, Anil
Kumar v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court No.II & Another; (1983) 4 SCC
611, Jai Bhagwan v. Management of the Ambala Central Co-Operative
Bank Ltd. And Another; 2006 II AD (Delhi) 43, Amar Pal (Shri ) &
Another v. MCD; (2003) 4 SCC 27, S.M. Nilajkar and Others v. Telecom
District Manager, Karnataka and 2006 I AD (S.C.) 166, Sonepat
Cooperative Sugar Mills Ltd. V. Rakesh Kumar to contend that the
respondent was not employed in a project or for a temporary duration
nor the respondent was on the contract but was a daily wager and
consequently the provisions of Section 25(F) of the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947 shall be attracted. It was also contended that for the alleged
mis-conduct, the termination of the services of the respondent cannot
be termed discharge simplicitor and in the facts and circumstances the
respondent could be terminated only after holding a proper inquiry and
finding him guilty.
WP(C) No.12418/2006

Page 8 of 21

13.

Both the counsel have relied on certain observations made in a

number of judgment which are detailed hereinabove. It is no more res
integra that a decision is only an authority for what it actually decides.
What is of the essence in a decision is its ratio and not every
observation found therein nor what logically follows from the various
observations made in it. The ratio of any decision must be understood
in the background of the facts of that case. It has been said long time
ago that a case is only an authority for what it actually decides, and not
what logically follows from it. It is well settled that a little difference in
facts or additional facts may make a lot of difference in the precedential
value of a decision. Considering the present facts and circumstances, it
may not be necessary to deal with judgments in detail relied on by the
parties in the facts and circumstances of the present case as the
present case is apparently distinguishable from the fact situation of the
decisions relied on by the parties. The Supreme Court in Bharat
Petroleum Corporation Ltd and Anr. v. N.R.Vairamani and Anr., AIR
2004 SC 778 had observed:" Court should not place reliance on decisions without
discussing as to how the factual situation fits in with the fact
situation of the decision on which reliance is placed.
Observations of Courts are neither to be read as Euclid's
theorems nor as provisions of the statute and that too taken
out of their context. These observations must be read in the
context in which they appear to have been stated.
WP(C) No.12418/2006

Page 9 of 21

Judgments of Courts are not to be construed as statutes. To
interpret words, phrases and provisions of a statute, it may
become necessary for judges to embark into lengthy
discussions but the discussion is meant to explain and not to
define. Judges interpret statutes, they do not interpret
judgments. They interpret words of statutes; their words are
not to be interpreted as statutes.

In Bhavnagar University v. Palitana Sugar Mills Pvt Ltd (2003) 2
SC 111 (vide para 59), the Supreme had observed:" It is well settled that a little difference in facts or
additional facts may make a lot of difference in the
precedential value of a decision."
Similarly In Ambica Quarry Works v. State of Gujarat and Ors.
MANU/SC/0049/1986 the Supreme Court had also observed:"The ratio of any decision must be understood in the
background of the facts of that case. It has been said
long time ago that a case is only an authority for what
it actually decides, and not what logically follows from
it."

Circumstantial flexibility, one additional or different fact
may make a world of difference between conclusions in two cases
and disposing of a case by blindly placing reliance on a decision
is not proper. The counsel for the parties have mainly relied on
few observations made in these cases.

WP(C) No.12418/2006

Page 10 of 21

14.

Perusal of the precedents relied on by the learned counsel for the

petitioner, Mr.Sewa Ram,

reflect that most of the judgments are not

relevant for the disputes between the parties.

In case of Himanshu

Kumar Vidyarthi and Others (supra), it was held that every department
of a Government cannot be treated as an industry and, therefore,
dispensing with the services of person engaged on daily wages in a
Government department cannot be a retrenchment.

The judgment

relied on by the petitioner is apparently distinguishable as Municipal
Corporation of Delhi is not a Department of Government of India.

In

any case, the services of the respondent has been terminated on
account of allegations made against him that he was drunk on duty and
he had misbehaved with a Junior Engineer. The ratio of the judgment
relied on by the petitioner in Jaipur Development Authority (supra) is
also not applicable as in that case it was held that Section 25 (F) on the
one hand and Section 25 (G) and 25(H) were enacted to meet the
situations of different kind. It was further held that the statute does
not envisage application of the provisions of the Act and the rules where
both recruitment and termination are uncertain or when the workmen
are recruited in a category wise service, e.g., skilled, semi skilled or
unskilled, etc.

In this case, it was held that departmental proceedings

for a daily wager who kept on coming and going on different dates and
in such circumstances, it was held that the departmental proceedings
for

his

absence

WP(C) No.12418/2006

on

various

dates

was

not

necessary.

In

Page 11 of 21

contradistinction, in the case of the respondent, he has been dismissed
on account of a specific misbehavior/misconduct alleged against him
that he was drunk and misbehaved with the superior Junior Engineer
without considering his explanation and without conducting an enquiry
against him.

The ratio of this case does not lay down that if a daily

wager is to be dismissed on account of specific allegation of
misbehavior, no departmental inquiry would be required. Similarly, the
judgment of the Ajay Kumar Sharma (supra) relied on by the petitioner
is distinguishable as a single Judge of this Court was concerned about
the regularization of a daily wager or a temporary employee or a casual
worker who had continued for time beyond the terms of his
appointment and it was held that such a person was not entitled for
regularization and is not to be absorbed permanently relying on the
case of Secretary, State of Karnataka and Others (supra). In Secretary,
State of Karnataka and Others (supra) also, the Supreme Court did not
lay down that if the services of a daily wager is to be terminated on
account of mis-conduct on his part, no departmental proceedings shall
be required. The respondent has not granted the claim of regularization
by the Tribunal rather he has been granted reinstatement on account of
non compliance of Section 25 F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
The respondent has challenged his termination as a daily wager without
considering his reply to the show cause notice given to him and without
conducting a proper inquiry.
WP(C) No.12418/2006

Page 12 of 21

15.

In the case of Ramesh Chand Sharma and Others (supra), a

single Judge had noticed that Shri Ramesh Chand Sharma had also
ventilated his grievance before the Central Administrative Tribunal
which had returned a finding that a proper opportunity had been given
to the applicant to defend his case and, therefore, learned single Judge
had not departed from that view. The case of the present respondent in
comparison is entirely different as no inquiry was conducted nor any
opportunity had been given to him as even a reply which was submitted
by him on 18th August, 1992, which is apparent from the endorsement
made thereon, had not been considerate and pursuant to show cause
notice which was admittedly served on the respondent on 17th August,
1992, the termination order was passed on 18th August, 1992. The plea
of the petitioner is not supported even by the ratio of Om Prakash Mann
(supra) relied on by the petitioner as in this case though the delinquent
had participated in the disciplinary proceedings without demur and had
not raised any plea regarding charges being vague and, therefore, it was
held that the delinquent employee was stopped from raising the said
issues before the Supreme Court. It was rather held that there was no
violation of principle of Natural Judge in contradistinction to the finding
of the Labor Court in the present case that there has been violation of
the principle of natural justice and no reasonable opportunity was given
to the respondent. In the case of Government of India and Other v.
WP(C) No.12418/2006

Page 13 of 21

Geroge Philip (supra), it was rather held that the High Court exercising
jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India does not hear
an appeal against the decision of the disciplinary authority imposing
punishment upon the delinquent employee and the jurisdiction is
limited, and the punishment imposed cannot be set aside altogether
unless there has been substantial non-compliance of rule of procedure
or a gross violation of rules of natural justice which has caused
prejudice to the employee and has resulted in miscarriage of justice or if
the punishment is shockingly disproportionate to the gravity of charge.
In Madhya Pradesh Electricity Board (supra), a delinquent employee
was awarded punishment after due inquiry and the question before the
Apex court was whether the interference with the punishment by the
Labor Court was justified or whether the punishment imposed was so
harsh or disproportionate to the charges proved.

In case of the

respondent though the allegation has been made that the respondent
had been a habitual drunker and under the influence of liquor he
misbehaved on 8th August, 1992 with a Junior Engineer, however,
without framing the charges against him and giving him a reasonable
opportunity, he has been dismissed from the services. Even his reply to
the notice given by him has not been considered. Consequently, on the
basis of the ratio of Madhya Pradesh Electricity Board (supra), it cannot
be held that the respondent could be dismissed without a due
opportunity as contemplated under law.
WP(C) No.12418/2006

No doubt, the court should
Page 14 of 21

not condone the act of physical violence and thus interfere with the
sustenance of discipline in the organization, however, in case proper
inquiry has not been conducted nor the explanation of the respondent
workman has been considered, the court shall be justified in interfering
with the dismissal of the workman, even if he is a daily wager, from the
services.

16.

The Labor Court after consideration of law and the plea and the

deposition has held so and thus this Court does not find any fault with
the findings of the Labor Court so as to substitute the finding of the
Labor Court with its own, in the facts and circumstances. The ratio of
other judgments relied on by the petitioner, i.e., J.K. Synthetic Ltd.
(supra), University of Bihar and Others (supra), Pyare Jan (supra) also
do not lay down that a daily wager against whom specific allegation of
mis-behavior had been made by the petitioner, could be dismissed
without conducting proper inquiry. In the circumstances, the finding of
the Labor Court that dismissal of the services of the respondent is not a
discharge simplicitor cannot be faulted.

17.

A single judge of this Court in MCD v. Naresh Kumar and Others

(supra) had rather held that termination of services of a daily wager
chowkidar on the ground of mis-conduct without serving any charge
sheet or conducting any domestic inquiry nor termination order
WP(C) No.12418/2006

Page 15 of 21

accompanied by a salary in lieu of notice as payable to the workman
shall be in compliance with the provisions of Section 25 (F) of Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947 and termination shall be violative of principle of
natural justice and in the circumstances had directed reinstatement of
the daily wager chowkidar holding that such a workman before being
visited by such a grave civil consequence as termination of service was
entitled to be afforded an opportunity of hearing followed by a
departmental inquiry.

The single Judge had also held that even if it is

assumed that the termination of the services of the respondent was not
stigmatic but a termination simplicitor, such a termination of a daily
wager was not in consonance with the provisions of Section 25(F) of
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, and consequently the daily wager
chowkidar in that case was reinstated. Similarly, the Supreme Court in
MCD v. Praveen Kumar Jain (supra) had held that the termination of
casual muster roll employee on the ground of a misconduct without
conducting any inquiry, is not in consonance with the provisions of
Section 25 (F) of the Act, will not be sustainable and such an employee
shall be entitled for the consequences of wrongful termination in noncompliance of Section 25 (F) of the Act.

18.

The Supreme Court in the case of Nar Singh Pal (supra) had also

held that the termination of service of a workman who had acquired
temporary status without conducting an inquiry and merely by paying
WP(C) No.12418/2006

Page 16 of 21

retrenchment compensation and the order passed on the basis of a
preliminary inquiry and not on the basis of a regular departmental
inquiry without issuing a charge sheet or giving opportunity of hearing
shall be liable to be set aside despite the fact that the cheque of
termination compensation paid by the management had been encashed
by the workman. It was held that if the termination of a workman is
punitive in nature and is in violation of principle of natural justice,
such termination order shall be contrary to his constitutional rights and
such a workman shall be entitled for relief.

19.

The Apex Court in a number of case have held that even a casual

or seasonal workman who has rendered continuous service for one year
or more cannot be retrenched without complying with the requisites of
Section 25 (F). Reliance can be placed on L. Robert D‟Souza (supra),
Ratan Singh v. Union of India, (1997) 11 SCC 396; 1982 LLR 2160
Samistha Dubey v. City Board, Itawah; (1998) 8 SCC 460, Municipal
Corporation of Delhi v. Praveen Kumar. It is settled law that the
expression “termination of service for any reason whatsoever” in the
definition of the expression “retrenchment” in Section 2(oo) of the Act
covers every kind of termination of service except those not expressly
included in Section 25-F or not expressly provided for by other
provisions of the Act such as Sections 25-FF and 25-FFF. Therefore,
even striking off the name of a workman from the rolls without anything
WP(C) No.12418/2006

Page 17 of 21

more constitutes retrenchment within the meaning of the expression
“retrenchment” in Section 2(oo). Thus if termination of service of a
workman is brought about for any reason whatsoever, it would be
retrenchment except if the case falls within any of the excepted
categories, i.e. (i) termination by way of punishment inflicted pursuant
to disciplinary action; (ii) voluntary retirement of the workman; (iii)
retirement of the workman on reaching the age of superannuation, if
the contract of employment between the employer and the workman
concerned contains a stipulation in that behalf; (iv) or termination of
the service on the ground of continued ill health. Once the case does
not fall in any of the excepted categories the termination of service even
if it be according to automatic discharge from service under agreement
would nonetheless be retrenchment within the meaning of expression in
Section 2(oo). The Apex Court in the case of S.M. Nilajkar v. Telecom
District Manager,(2003) 4 SCC 27 had spelt out the cases where
termination of services of a workman will not be retrenchment and
engagement of a workman as a daily wager does not by itself amount to
putting the workman on notice that he has been engaged for a fixed
period and after that he would not be entitled to continue. It was held at
page 37 of S.M.Nilajkar(supra) as under:
“13. The termination of service of a workman engaged in a
scheme or project may not amount to retrenchment within
the meaning of sub-clause (bb) subject to the following
conditions being satisfied:
WP(C) No.12418/2006

Page 18 of 21

(i)

that the workman was employed in a project or
scheme of temporary duration;

(ii)

the employment was on a contract, and not as a
daily-wager simplicitor, which provided inter alia that
the employment shall come to an end on the expiry of
the scheme or project;

(iii)

the employment came to an end simultaneously with
the termination of the scheme or project and
consistently with the terms of the contract; and

(iv)

the workman ought to have been apprised or made
aware of the above said terms by the employer at the
commencement of employment.

14. The engagement of a workman as a daily-wager does
not by itself amount to putting the workman on notice that
he was being engaged in a scheme or project which was to
last only for a particular length of time or up to the
occurrence of some event, and therefore, the workman
ought to know that his employment was short-lived. The
contract of employment consciously entered into by the
workman with the employer would result in a notice to the
workman on the date of the commencement of the
employment itself that his employment was short-lived and
as per the terms of the contract the same was liable to
termination on the expiry of the contract and the scheme or
project coming to an end. The workman may not therefore
complain that by the act of the employer his employment
was coming to an abrupt termination. To exclude the
termination of a scheme or project employee from the
definition of retrenchment it is for the employer to prove the
abovesaid ingredients so as to attract the applicability of
sub-clause (bb) abovesaid. In the case at hand, the
respondent employer has failed in alleging and proving the
ingredients of sub-clause (bb), as stated hereinabove. All
that has been proved is that the appellants were engaged as
casual workers or daily-wagers in a project. For want of
proof attracting applicability of sub- clause (bb), it has to be
held that the termination of the services of the appellants
amounted to retrenchment.

20.

From the award passed in favor of the respondent, it is not to be

mis-construed that the respondent has been regularized and such as
regularization is contrary to the ratio of (2006) 4 SCC 1, Secretary, State
WP(C) No.12418/2006

Page 19 of 21

of Karnataka and Others versus Uma Devi & others. From the award it
is apparent that the petitioner has been reinstated on account of noncompliance of the provisions of Section 25 F of the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947. The petitioners may be entitled to retrench him in
accordance with first-come-last-to-go principle on reinstatement he is
not being regularized.

This is not disputed that the respondent has

worked for more than 240 days in a year for a number of years before
his termination which has been established and nothing has been
produced to the contrary.

The findings of the Labor Court in this

regard, therefore, cannot be interfered with.

Since the provision of

section 25 F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 were applicable in the
case of respondent and were not complied with, the Labor Court was
justified in reinstating the respondent.

The reliance of the learned

counsel for the petitioner on decisions of the Supreme Court that the
daily wagers cannot be regularized merely on account of having worked
for more than 240 days in a year for a number of years is thus, not
relevant in the facts and circumstances as the respondent has been
reinstated on account violation of section 25F of the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947.

21.

Consequently, the inevitable inference is that the termination of

the respondent is punitive in nature which have been awarded without
issuing a charge sheet against the respondent for his alleged misWP(C) No.12418/2006

Page 20 of 21

behavior with his senior and dismissal on the ground that the
respondent misbehaved with his senior in a state drunkenness cannot
be termed discharge simplicitor. The finding of the Labor Court that
dismissal of the respondent could not be termed as discharge
simplicitor cannot be faulted. Even if the respondent was a daily wager,
the services could be dispensed after complying with the provisions of
Section 25(F) of the Act.

Admittedly, neither any compensation was

given nor any notice as contemplated under Section 25(F) of the Act was
given. The findings of the Labor Court, in the facts and circumstances,
do not suffer from any manifest error nor the learned counsel for the
petitioner has been able to point out any perversity so as to entail
interference of this Court in exercise of his jurisdiction under Article
226 of the Constitution of India.

22.

Considering the facts and circumstances, there is no infirmity in

the order of the Tribunal holding that the action of the petitioner in
terminating the services of the workman was not proper, legal and
justified and if that be so, he is entitled for reinstatement and 50% back
wages in the pay scale of 750-940. The writ petition, in the facts and
circumstances, is without any merit and it is dismissed.

February 28th, 2008.
„k/Dev‟
WP(C) No.12418/2006

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 21 of 21

