*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP(C) No.1628/2008

%

Date of decision : February 29th, 2008

Ramagya & Ors.
Through:

….… Petitioners
Mr.Umesh Singh, Advocate.

Versus

M/s.Bata India Ltd. & Ors.
Through :

.........
Nemo.

Respondent

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
1.

The petitioners have challenged the award dated 8th October,

1997 of the Industrial Tribunal-I declining the reference regarding
regularization of the services of the petitioners.

2.

The Secretary (Labor), Government of NCT had made the following

reference :-

W.P(C) No.1628/2008

Page 1 of 5

“Whether the workmen S/Sh. Ramagya S/o.Sh. Rajman
Singh & Others as shown in Annexure-A are entitled to be
regularized in the services from the initial date of their
joining & if so, what directions are necessary in this
respect”.
3.

The petitioners in their claim petition had contended that the

managements are not maintaining proper records and are not providing
legal benefits and their services have not been regularized in spite of the
petitioners working for the last many years whereas their other
colleagues have been granted regularization and permanent position by
the respondent.

4.

The respondent Nos.2 and 3 opposed the claim of the petitioners

on the ground that the petitioners were engaged on casual and
temporary basis and they had never been employed as regular
employment. It was asserted that regularization is done on the basis of
the test conducted by the management and all those workmen who
qualify the test and fulfill other requisite conditions are appointed as
permanent employee. In case of petitioners, it was contended that they
have

failed

to

qualify

the

test

for

regularization

and

in

the

circumstances they are not entitled for appointment to the permanent
post.

5.

The Industrial Tribunal has considered the statement of the

workmen in which they admitted that the management regularly
W.P(C) No.1628/2008

Page 2 of 5

conducts an examination/test for regularization of the temporary
employees and those who pass the recruitment test are posted at
different places. The petitioners also admitted in their statements and
in the cross-examinations that the respondents have never restricted
the petitioners to appear in the said test/examination. The petitioners
also admitted that those who have qualified the test have been
appointed as permanent employees.

6.

Learned counsel for the petitioners has contended that under the

rules of the respondents 2 and 3, there are two classes of the
employees, probationer and permanent and in the circumstances, the
petitioners cannot be termed as employees other than permanent
employees.

7.

The contention of the petitioners is without any basis because the

petitioners themselves have admitted that before appointment as
permanent employee, the tests are conducted in which the petitioners
have also appeared, however, they have not qualified.

In the

circumstances the petitioners cannot contend that they are entitled to
be appointed as permanent employee without qualifying the test
conducted by respondents 2 and 3 to which tests the petitioners have
never been restricted to appear.

W.P(C) No.1628/2008

Page 3 of 5

8.

It is a settled position of law that in exercise of jurisdiction under

Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the Court is not to interfere with
factual findings of the lower courts and should restrain itself from reappreciating evidence while exercising powers of judicial review.
Reliance for this proposition can be placed on the judgment of the
Supreme Court, Government of A.P. and Ors. v. Mohd. Nasrullah Khan
reported as (2006) 2 SCC 373. Writ court should refrain from interfering
with the orders of an inferior tribunal or subordinate court unless it
suffers from an error of jurisdiction or from a breach of the principles of
natural justice or is vitiated by a manifest or apparent error of law. The
objective of judicial review is that a person receives a fair treatment and
objective is not to re-appreciate the entire pleas and evidence and draw
inferences again. Judicial review is not an appeal from a decision but a
review of the manner in which the decision is made. Power of judicial
review is meant to ensure that the individual receives fair treatment and
not to ensure that the conclusion which the authority reaches is
necessarily correct in the eye of the court.

9.

In the facts and circumstances, there is no manifest error in the

award dated 8th October, 2007 of the Industrial Tribunal-I so as to

W.P(C) No.1628/2008

Page 4 of 5

interfere with the same under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The Writ Petition is, therefore, without any merit and is dismissed.

February 29th, 2008.
'Ravindra'

W.P(C) No.1628/2008

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 5 of 5

