IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
AA No.255/2006
#
!

Sh.Mukesh Kumar

......... Petitioner
Through: Mr.J.K.Dhingra, Advocate.
Vs.

$
^

The Commissioner,
Municipal Corporation of Delhi & Anr.
........ Respondents.
Through : Ms.P.L.Gautam, Advocate.
CORAM :-

*

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
*
This is a petition under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration &
Conciliation Act, 1996 for appointment of an arbitrator.

The petitioner has contended that he is a MCD contractor and
pursuant to a short notice inviting tender dated 4.12.2002 for work of
improvement of Titar Pur Drain between N & P Block, Raghubir
Nagar, under West Zone, Delhi he had applied and filed a tender
which was accepted and he has carried out the work specified in the
tender including an extra work of sixty five meters on an oral request
of the respondents.

AA No.255/2006

Page 1 of 7

According to the petitioner there is an arbitration agreement
between the parties and pursuant to the work executed by the
petitioner disputes have arisen. The petitioner has given a notice
dated 27th January, 2006 seeking payment of a total amount of
Rs.7,33,124/- due to the petitioner along with interest from the
respondents and in the alternative appointment of an arbitrator in
terms of the arbitration agreement, however, no arbitrator was
appointed by the respondent.

The petition is contested by the respondents contending that
some of the claims are outside the purview of clause 25 of the
agreement and that proper procedure as stipulated under clause 25 of
the agreement has not been adopted. The petitioner denying
assignment of any verbal work orders to the petitioner stated that the
payment for the actual work done by the petitioner has already been
made. Clause 25, Arbitration Agreement between the parties is as
under:
'Clause 25
Settlement of Disputes and Arbitration
Except where otherwise provided in the contract all
questions and disputes relating to the meaning of the
specifications designs, drawings and instructions
hereinbefore mentioned and as to the quality of
workmanship or materials as used on the work or as to
any other question, claim, right, matter or thing whatsoever
AA No.255/2006

Page 2 of 7

in any way arising out of or relating to the contract
designs, drawings, specifications, estimates instructions
orders or these conditions or otherwise concerning the
works or the execution or failure to execute the same
whether arising during the progress of the work or after
the cancellation, termination completion or abandonment
thereof shall be dealt with as mentioned hereinafter:
1. If the contract considers any work demanded of him to
be outside the requirement of the contract, or disputes
any drawings, record or decision given in writing by
the Engineer in charge on any matter in connection
with or arising out of the contract of carrying out of the
work, to be unacceptable, he shall promptly within 15
days request the Superintending Engineer in writing for
written instructions or decision. Thereupon, the Superintending engineer shall give his written instructions or
decision within a period of one month from the receipt
of contractor’s letter.
If the Superintending engineer fails to give his
instructions or decision in writing within the
aforesaid period or if the contract are is dissatisfied
with
the
instructions
or decision
of
the
Superintending engineer, the contract may, within
15 days of the receipt of Superintending Engineer’s
decision, appeal to the chief engineer who shall
afford an opportunity to the contractor to be heard, if
the latter so desires, and to offer evidence in support
of his appeal. The chief engineer shall give his
decision within 30 days of the receipt of contractor’s
appeal. If the contractor is dissatisfied with this
decision, the contractor shall within a period of 30
days from receipt of the decision, give notice to the
Commissioner MCD for appointment of arbitrator
failing which the said decision shall be final binding
and conclusive and not referable to adjudication by
the arbitrator.
2).

AA No.255/2006

Except where the decision has become final, binding
and conclusive in terms of sub Para (i) above
Page 3 of 7

disputes or differences shall be referred for
adjudication through arbitration a sole arbitrator
appointed by the Commissioner MCD. If the
arbitrator so appointed is unable or unwilling to act
or resigns his appointment or vacates his office due
to any reason whatsoever another sole arbitrator
shall be appointed in the manner aforesaid. Such
personal shall be entitled to proceed with the
reference from the stage at which it was left by his
predecessor.
It is a term of this contract that the party
invoking arbitration shall give a list of disputes with
amounts claimed in respect of each such dispute
along with the notice for appointment of arbitrator
and giving reference to the rejection by the chief
engineer of the appeal.
It is also a term of this contract that no person
other than a person appointed by such
Commissioner MCD as aforesaid should act as
arbitrator and if for any reason that is not possible,
the matter shall not be referred to arbitration at all.
It is also a term of this contract that if the
contractor does not make any demand for
appointment of arbitrator in respect of any claims in
writing as aforesaid within 120 days of receiving the
intimation from the Engineer in charge that the final
bill is ready for payment, the claim of the contractor
shall be deemed to have been waived and
absolutely barred and MCD be shall be discharged
and released of all liabilities under the contract in
respect of these claims.
The arbitration shall be conducted in
accordance with the provisions of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act,1996 (26 of 1996) or any statutory
modification or re-enactment thereof and the rules
made thereunder and for the time being in force
shall apply to the arbitration proceedings under this
clause
It is also a term of this contract that the
arbitrator shall adjudicate on only such disputes as
AA No.255/2006

Page 4 of 7

are referred to him by the appointing authority and
give separate award against each dispute and claim
referred to him and in all cases where the total
amount of the claims by any party exceeds Rs.
1,00,000 the arbitrator shall give reasons for the
award.
It is also a term of the contract that if any fees
are payable to the arbitrator these shall be paid
equally by both the parties.
It is also a term of the contract that the
arbitrator shall be deemed to have entered on the
reference on the day he issues notice to both the
parties calling them to submit their statement of
claims and counter statement of claims. The venue
of the arbitration shall be such place as may be
fixed by the arbitrator in his sole discretion. The
fees, if any, of the arbitration shall, if required to be
paid before the award is made and published, be
paid half and half by each of the parties. The cost of
the reference and of the award (including the fees, if
any, of the Arbitrator) shall be in the discretion of the
arbitrator who made direct to any by whom and in
what manner, such cost or any part thereof shall be
paid and fix or settle the amount of cost to be so
paid.

The respondents have alleged that the dispute raised by the
petitioner is outside the ambit of Clause 25 of the agreement which is
the arbitration agreement. The respondents, therefore, admits that
the agreement between the parties have an arbitration agreement in
terms of clause 25 which is reproduced hereinabove. Despite the
letter dated 27.1.2006 of the petitioner demanding payment due no
amount has been paid by the respondents nor has an arbitrator been
appointed.
AA No.255/2006

Page 5 of 7

From the aforesaid, it is evident that the disputes have arisen
between the parties and that there is a binding arbitration agreement.
The petitioner invoked the Arbitration Agreement on 27.1.2006. The
respondent failed to appoint an arbitrator within four weeks of notice
being given by the petitioner for appointment of an arbitrator. Even
after filing of the petition the arbitrator has not been appointed. The
learned counsel for the respondent is unable to give any reason for
not appointing an arbitrator on demand being raised by the petitioner.
The failure of the respondent to appoint an arbitrator despite
petitioner’s specific demand by letter dated 27.1.2006 has resulted in
respondent losing its right to appoint an arbitrator. The learned
counsel for the respondents is unable to explain as to how the
disputes raised by the petitioner are beyond the scope of the
Arbitration Agreement between the parties.

A learned Single Judge in Haryana Telecom Ltd. v. Union of
India & Anr., 112 (2004) DLT 339=2004 (3) RAJ 147, had held that if
the respondent fails to appoint an Arbitrator within the stipulated
time of 30 days of the notice, and even after filing of the petition
under Section 11 of the Act, it is for the Court to appoint an
Arbitrator. Learned Counsel for the petitioner relied on this judgment
and states that position is similar in the present case, since in the
present case also notice was issued to the respondent and even after

AA No.255/2006

Page 6 of 7

receipt of notice, no Arbitrator has been appointed by the respondent.
It is contented that even after filing of the present petition till date,
Arbitrator to resolve the disputes between the parties has not been
appointed by the respondent. The learned counsel for the respondents
is also unable to show as to how the disputes between the parties are
beyond the scope of the Arbitration Agreement and can not be decided
by the Arbitrator.

Consequently, I appoint Mr.S.M.Chopra Advocate,( Retired
Additional District Judge), 181, Deshbandhu Apartment, Kalkaji, New
Delhi-110019 (Mob: 9213230349, Res.:26484158) as an arbitrator.
The learned counsel for the petitioner states that the total claim of the
petitioner is of about Rs.7,33,124/- with interest. Considering these
facts the fees of the arbitrator shall be Rs.60,000/- payable by the
petitioner.

The

parties

shall

appear

before

the

arbitrator

on

26.11.2007 at 4.30 PM. A copy of this order be sent to the learned
arbitrator forthwith. The parties are also directed to give a copy of this
order to the arbitrator. Copies of this order be given to the counsel for
the parties dasti.

October 29, 2007
'k

AA No.255/2006

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 7 of 7

