IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
AA No.325/2005
%
#
!

Date of decision : October 29, 2007
Sh.Mukesh Kumar
......... Petitioner
Through: Mr.J.K.Dhingra, Advocate.
Vs.

$
^

Municipal Corporation of Delhi & Ors
........ Respondents.
Through : Ms.Smita Shankar, Advocate.
CORAM :-

*

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
+
*

IA No.11473/2006 in AA No.325/2005
This

is

an

application

by

the

respondent

seeking

condonation of delay in filing the reply.
For the reasons stated in the application it is allowed and
the delay in filing the reply is condoned and the reply is taken on
record.
IA No.7999/2006
This is an application by the petitioner under Order 8 rule

AA No.325/2005

Page 1 of 8

1 and 10 read with section 151 of Code of Civil Procedure seeking
closing

of

the

right

of

the

respondent

to

file

the

written

statement/reply as the respondents failed to file the written statement
within a maximum permissible statutory time of 90 days.
The delay in filing the reply has already been condoned
and the reply filed by the respondent has been taken on record.
Consequently, the application has become infructuous.
Dismissed as infructuous.
AA No.325/2005
This is a petition under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration &
Conciliation Act, 1996 for appointment of an arbitrator.
The petitioner has contended that he is a MCD contractor
and pursuant to a short notice inviting tender dated 8.5.2000 for
desilting of covered/open drain from Z-1, Murga Market, Rajouri
Garden to Raja Garden W-No.23 RD-00 to 500 m @ 52% below, he
had applied and filed a tender which was accepted and he has carried
out the work. According to the petitioner there is an arbitration
agreement between the parties and pursuant to the work executed by
the petitioner disputes have arisen. The petitioner has given a notice
dated 26.5.2004 seeking appointment of the arbitrator in terms of the
arbitration agreement between the parties, however, no arbitrator was
appointed.
The petition is contested by the respondents contending
AA No.325/2005

Page 2 of 8

that the claim of the petitioner is barred by time and the proper
procedure has not been adopted.
Considering the facts and circumstances the pleas of the
respondents are untenable. Prima facie the claim of the petitioner
does not seem to be barred by time. The bill was passed by the
respondent and the net amount was Rs.55,069/- after deduction of
Rs.4383/-. The petitioner has been returned the earnest money of
Rs.3200/- after six months after the bill was passed on 27th May,
2001. While passing the bill an endorsement was made to pay the
amount of Rs. 55,069/-. The amount was not paid nor it was
categorically refused. Therefore, a notice of demand dated 26th May,
2004 was sent. Since the respondent refused to pay the amount after
notice of demand and nothing has been produced prior to date of the
notice that the respondent refused to pay the amount, therefore, the
claim of the petitioner is prima facie within time. In any case whether
the claim of the petitioner is barred by time or not is to be adjudicated
finally by the arbitrator. On the pleas and contentions of the parties,
it can not be inferred that the claim of the petitioner is barred by time.
The other dispute raised by the petitioner is that the
appointment of arbitrator is sought without going through the
arbitration procedure stipulated in the arbitration agreement. The
arbitration agreement is in terms of clause 25 contained in agreement
no. GW-161, which is as under:
AA No.325/2005

Page 3 of 8

'Clause 25
Settlement of Disputes and Arbitration
Except where otherwise provided in the contract all
questions and disputes relating to the meaning of the
specifications designs, drawings and instructions
hereinbefore mentioned and as to the quality of
workmanship or materials as used on the work or as to
any other question, claim, right, matter or thing whatsoever
in any way arising out of or relating to the contract
designs, drawings, specifications, estimates instructions
orders or these conditions or otherwise concerning the
works or the execution or failure to execute the same
whether arising during the progress of the work or after
the cancellation, termination completion or abandonment
thereof shall be dealt with as mentioned hereinafter:
1. If the contract considers any work demanded of him to
be outside the requirement of the contract, or disputes
any drawings, record or decision given in writing by
the Engineer in charge on any matter in connection
with or arising out of the contract of carrying out of the
work, to be unacceptable, he shall promptly within 15
days request the Superintending Engineer in writing for
written instructions or decision. Thereupon, the Superintending engineer shall give his written instructions or
decision within a period of one month from the receipt
of contractor’s letter.
If the Superintending engineer fails to give his
instructions or decision in writing within the
aforesaid period or if the contract are is dissatisfied
with
the
instructions
or decision
of
the
Superintending engineer, the contract may, within
15 days of the receipt of Superintending Engineer’s
decision, appeal to the chief engineer who shall
afford an opportunity to the contractor to be heard, if
the latter so desires, and to offer evidence in support
of his appeal. The chief engineer shall give his
decision within 30 days of the receipt of contractor’s
appeal. If the contractor is dissatisfied with this
AA No.325/2005

Page 4 of 8

decision, the contractor shall within a period of 30
days from receipt of the decision, give notice to the
Commissioner MCD for appointment of arbitrator
failing which the said decision shall be final binding
and conclusive and not referable to adjudication by
the arbitrator.
2).

AA No.325/2005

Except where the decision has become final, binding
and conclusive in terms of sub Para (i) above
disputes or differences shall be referred for
adjudication through arbitration a sole arbitrator
appointed by the Commissioner MCD. If the
arbitrator so appointed is unable or unwilling to act
or resigns his appointment or vacates his office due
to any reason whatsoever another sole arbitrator
shall be appointed in the manner aforesaid. Such
personal shall be entitled to proceed with the
reference from the stage at which it was left by his
predecessor.
It is a term of this contract that the party
invoking arbitration shall give a list of disputes with
amounts claimed in respect of each such dispute
along with the notice for appointment of arbitrator
and giving reference to the rejection by the chief
engineer of the appeal.
It is also a term of this contract that no person
other than a person appointed by such
Commissioner MCD as aforesaid should act as
arbitrator and if for any reason that is not possible,
the matter shall not be referred to arbitration at all.
It is also a term of this contract that if the
contractor does not make any demand for
appointment of arbitrator in respect of any claims in
writing as aforesaid within 120 days of receiving the
intimation from the Engineer in charge that the final
bill is ready for payment, the claim of the contractor
shall be deemed to have been waived and
absolutely barred and MCD be shall be discharged
and released of all liabilities under the contract in
respect of these claims.
Page 5 of 8

The arbitration shall be conducted in
accordance with the provisions of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act,1996 (26 of 1996) or any statutory
modification or re-enactment thereof and the rules
made thereunder and for the time being in force
shall apply to the arbitration proceedings under this
clause
It is also a term of this contract that the
arbitrator shall adjudicate on only such disputes as
are referred to him by the appointing authority and
give separate award against each dispute and claim
referred to him and in all cases where the total
amount of the claims by any party exceeds Rs.
1,00,000 the arbitrator shall give reasons for the
award.
It is also a term of the contract that if any fees
are payable to the arbitrator these shall be paid
equally by both the parties.
It is also a term of the contract that the
arbitrator shall be deemed to have entered on the
reference on the day he issues notice to both the
parties calling them to submit their statement of
claims and counter statement of claims. The venue
of the arbitration shall be such place as may be
fixed by the arbitrator in his sole discretion. The
fees, if any, of the arbitration shall, if required to be
paid before the award is made and published, be
paid half and half by each of the parties. The cost of
the reference and of the award (including the fees, if
any, of the Arbitrator) shall be in the discretion of the
arbitrator who made direct to any by whom and in
what manner, such cost or any part thereof shall be
paid and fix or settle the amount of cost to be so
paid.

The petitioner has contended that agreement GW-161 was
executed by the petitioner with the respondent which contains an

AA No.325/2005

Page 6 of 8

arbitration agreement in terms of clause 25. This fact has not been
disputed rather what is alleged is that the petitioner should be
directed to produce the original agreement. The learned counsel for
the petitioner has contended that the original agreement is with the
respondent which has not been produced. The respondent also
alleged that the dispute raised by the petitioner is outside the ambit of
Clause 25 of the agreement which is the arbitration agreement. In
totality of circumstances, it is inevitable to infer that there is
arbitration agreement between the parties which is reproduced
hereinabove.
The respondent also failed to appoint an arbitrator within four
weeks of notice being given by the petitioner for appointment of an
arbitrator. Even after filing of the petition the arbitrator has not been
appointed.
A learned Single Judge in Haryana Telecom Ltd. v. Union of
India & Anr., 112 (2004) DLT 339=2004 (3) RAJ 147, had held that if
the respondent fails to appoint an Arbitrator within the stipulated
time of 30 days of the notice, and even after filing of the petition
under Section 11 of the Act, it is for the Court to appoint an
Arbitrator. Learned Counsel for the petitioner relied on this judgment
and states that position is similar in the present case, since in the
present case also notice was issued to the respondent and even after
receipt of notice, no Arbitrator has been appointed by the respondent.
AA No.325/2005

Page 7 of 8

It is contented that even after filing of the present petition till date,
Arbitrator to resolve the disputes between the parties has not been
appointed by the respondent.
Consequently, I appoint Mr.S.M.Chopra Advocate, (Retired
Additional District Judge), 181, Deshbandhu Apartment, Kalkaji, New
Delhi-110019 (Mob: 9213230349, Res.:26484158) as an arbitrator.
The learned counsel for the petitioner states that the total claim of the
petitioner is of about Rs.55,069/- with interest and costs. Considering
these facts the fees of the arbitrator shall be Rs.10,000/- payable by
the petitioner. The parties shall appear before the arbitrator on
26.11.2007 at 4.30 PM. A copy of this order be sent to the learned
arbitrator forthwith. The parties are also directed to give a copy of this
order to the arbitrator. Copies of this order be given to the counsel for
the parties dasti.

October 29, 2007
'k

AA No.325/2005

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 8 of 8

