IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Date of decision : November 29, 2007
AA No.189/2006

#
!

Sh.Anil Katyal
Through:

......... Petitioner
Mr.B.M. Sehgal, Advocate.
Vs.

$
^

Municipal Corporation of Delhi
........ Respondent
Through: Mr.Sanjeev Sabharwal, Advocate.

CORAM :* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1.
2.
3.

Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
To be referred to the reporter or not ?
Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
*
1.

This is a petition under Section 11 of the Arbitration Act, 1996

for appointment of arbitrator in terms of arbitration agreement
between the parties as the disputes have arisen.

2.

The notice of the petition was issued to the respondent,

however, despite various opportunities given to the respondent, reply
has not been filed and consequently the pleas and averments raised
by the petitioner has not been denied by the respondent.

AA No.189/2006

Page 1 of 8

3.

The contention of the petitioner is that a notice inviting tender

bearing No.14/1 was issued by the Executive Engineer (Pr.), South
Zone, Sewa Nagar, New Delhi for the work of “Widening &
Improvement of Mehrauli-Badarpur Road from Qutab to Khirki,
Masjid Road, X-ing Part I, Phase III – Sub Head: Widening of carriage
way opposite CISF camp”.

4.

The petitioner has contended that he is a registered municipal

contractor.

Pursuant to the notice inviting tender, the petitioner

furnished the relevant documents and after perusal of the documents,
a tender form was issued by the respondent, Executive Engineer.
The petitioner quoted rates and his rates were the lowest amongst all
the contractors and as such work order bearing No.EE(Pr.)/TC/992000/69 dated 25th February, 2000 was issued to the petitioner.
The work was to be started under the work order from 6th March,
2000 and it was to be completed within six months. The stipulated
date of completion was 5th September, 2000, however, the work was
completed by the petitioner within a period of 8½ months, i.e., on 20 th
November, 2000.

5.

The petitioner contended that the delay in execution of the work

was attributable to the respondent as it was decided by the
respondent officials to provide a slip road in order to facilitate the

AA No.189/2006

Page 2 of 8

merging of traffic coming from West End Marg, Saidullajab Village
with a new carriage way of M.B. Road. According to the petitioner,
the delay was on account of additional work which was executed by
the petitioner and for this additional work the time ought to have been
extended for completion of work by the respondent.

6.

On completion of work, the petitioner has raised the final bill

which amount has not been paid and consequently the disputes have
arisen between the parties. Since there is an Arbitration agreement
between the parties for adjudication of the disputes by an Arbitrator
in terms of clause 25 of the agreement, the petitioner invoked the
same.

Clause 25 of the agreement containing the arbitration

agreement is as under:“Clause 25:
Except where otherwise provided in the contract all
questions and disputes relating to the meaning of the
specifications, designs, drawings and instructions herein
before mentioned and as to the quality of workmanship or
materials used on the work or as to any other question
claim, right matter or thing whatever in any way arising
out of or relating to the contract designs, drawings,
specifications, estimates instructions order or these
conditions or otherwise concerning the work of execution
or failure to execute the same whether arising during the
progress of the work or after the completion or
abandonment shall be referred to the Sole Arbitrator of
the person appointed by the Commissioner, MCD at the
time of dispute or the administrative Head of MCD at the
time of such appointment. It will be no objection to any
such appointment that the Arbitrator so appointed is a
Govt. Servant, had expressed views on all or any of the
matter in dispute or difference. The Arbitrator to whom
AA No.189/2006

Page 3 of 8

the matter is originally referred being transferred or
vacating his office or being unable to act for any reason,
the reason, the Commissioner or administrative head as
aforesaid at the time of such transfer vacating of office or
inability to act, shall appoint another person to act as
Arbitrator in accordance with the terms of the contract,
such person shall be entitled to proceed with the
reference from the stage at which it was left by his
predecessor, it is also a term of this contract that no
person other than a person appointed by Commissioner
or administrative Head of MCD as aforesaid should act as
Arbitrator and if for any reason that is not possible, the
matter is not to be referred to arbitration at all. In all
cases where the amount of claim in dispute n Rs.25,000/(Rupees twenty five thousand) only and above the
Arbitrator shall give the reason for the award.
Subject as aforesaid the provisions of the
Arbitration Act 1940, on any statutory modification of reenactment, thereof and the rules made there under and
for the time being in force shall apply to the arbitration
proceedings under this clause.
It is a terms of the contract that the party invoking
arbitration shall specify the dispute or disputes to be
referred to the arbitration under this clause together with
the amount of amounts claimed in respect of each such
dispute.
It is also a term of the contract that if the
contractor(s) do/does not make any demand for
arbitration in respect of any claim(s) in writing within 90
days of receiving the intimation from the Corporation or
any officer authorized in this behalf that the bill is ready
for payment the claim of the contractor will be deemed to
have been waived and absolutely barred and the
Corporation shall be discharged and released of all
liabilities under the contract in respect of these claims.
The Arbitrator(s) may from time to time with
consent of the parties enlarged the time for making and
publishing the award.
The decision of the Superintending Engineering
regarding the quantum of reduction as well as
justification thereof in respect of rates for sub-standard
AA No.189/2006

Page 4 of 8

work which may be decided to be accepted will be final
and would not be open to arbitration.”

7.

The petitioner gave a notice dated 12th January, 2006

demanding

appointment

of

arbitrator

in

terms

of

arbitration

agreement which communication was sent by registered post and
under postal certificate. No reply to the notice was given. Thereafter,
the petitioner has filed the present petition and despite opportunities
given, the respondent has failed to file any reply and in any case has
failed to appoint an arbitrator within 30 days from the receipt of the
notice invoking the arbitration agreement and even before filing the
present petition. Further contention of the petitioner is that the
original agreement was not given to him and the petitioner also
sought production of original agreement which has not been produced
by the respondent. In the circumstances, the plea of the petitioner is
that there is an arbitration agreement in terms of clause 25 cannot be
refuted.

8.

The learned counsel for the respondent has contended without

filing any reply that the labor reports have not been filed by the
petitioner which has entailed the delay in making the payments of the
bills raised by the petitioner. The learned counsel for the respondent
is, however, unable to explain as to how appointment of an arbitrator

AA No.189/2006

Page 5 of 8

could be withheld on this ground by the respondent.

9.

A learned Single Judge in Haryana Telecom Ltd. v. Union of

India & Anr., 112 (2004) DLT 339=2004 (3) RAJ 147, had held that if
the respondent fails to appoint an Arbitrator within the stipulated
time of 30 days of the notice, and even after filing of the petition
under Section 11 of the Act, it is for the Court to appoint an
Arbitrator. A Division Bench of this Court in Delkon (India) Pvt. Ltd.
v. G.M., Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd., 120 (2005) DLT 542 (DB),
relying on Datar Switchgears Ltd Vs Tata Finance Ltd has held in
para 4 is as under:
“4. We have given our careful consideration to the
arguments advanced by learned Counsel for both the
parties. In view of the law laid down in the case of Datar
Switchgears Ltd. v. Tata Finance Ltd. & Anr., IV (2000)
CLT 191 (SC)=VII (2000) SLT 543=JT 2000 (Suppl. 2) SC
226 it is no more res integra that the vacancy can be
supplied by a party pursuant to the arbitration agreement
even after thirty days of the receipt of the notice. However,
once a party approaches the Court and files a petition for
appointment by the designated authority of the Chief
Justice of that Court under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, the right to supply vacancy by the
opposite party is extinguished. If that right stood
extinguished on filing of the petition under Section 11(6)
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, in September
1998 the appointment of an Arbitrator on 3rd May, 1999
could not be made, therefore in our view, the order
passed by the learned Single Judge on 7th May, 1999
suffers from patent illegality. Therefore, the submission of
the respondent that the petitioner had appeared before
the Arbitrator and the application of the petitioner raising
preliminary objections is pending adjudication which
inter alia challenges the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator to
decide the dispute is of no consequence as from the order
AA No.189/2006

Page 6 of 8

reproduced above it was pursuant to the directions
passed by the learned Single Judge that the parties were
directed to appear before the Arbitrator. The petitioner
had no other option but to appear before the Arbitrator
and after appearing before the Arbitrator the petitioner
has not submitted to the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator,
rather has at first opportunity taken the objection that
the Arbitrator had no jurisdiction to proceed with the
matter.

10.

In Union of India v. M/s. R.R. Industries, 120 (2005) DLT 572

(DB) also it was held that once a party does not supply the vacancy or
fails to supply the vacancy before filing of a petition under Section
11(6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, such a party forfeits the
right to supply the vacancy in terms of the arbitration clause and
what remains is only the arbitration clause, i.e. the dispute has to be
resolved under the mechanism of alternative dispute redressal
scheme but no right survives to the respondent to supply the named
Arbitrator in the arbitration clause. Thus the arbitrator was to be
appointed before the filing of the petition and since no arbitrator has
been appointed by the respondent consequently, the respondent has
lost its right to appoint the arbitrator in terms of clause 25 of the
arbitration agreement.

11.

Considering the facts and circumstances, I appoint Shri S.M.

Chopra, Advocate, (Additional District Judge, Retd.),181, Deshbandhu

AA No.189/2006

Page 7 of 8

Apartment,

Kalkaji,

New

Delhi-110019

(Mob:9213230349,

Res.:26484158) as an Arbitrator. The fee of the arbitrator shall be
Rs.70,000/- which shall be borne by the petitioner in the first
instance. Parties shall appear before the Arbitrator on 17th December,
2007 at 4.30 PM. Registry to send a copy of this order to the
Arbitrator forthwith. Parties are also directed to intimate the
Arbitrator about the order. Copies of this order be also given to the
parties dasti.

November 29, 2007
'Dev'

AA No.189/2006

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 8 of 8

