IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of decision : October 29, 2007
IA Nos.1783/2006 & 6811/2007 in CS (OS) No.1295/2005
# Sh.Manmohan Singh Chawla & Anr
..... PLAINTIFFS
Through: Mr.Amarjit Singh Chandhiok, Sr.
Advocate with Mr.Amit Sibal,
Mr.Rajneesh Chopra and
Ms.Geetika Panwar, Advocates for
plaintiffs.
Versus
$ Rajesh Berry & Anr
Through:

..... DEFENDANTS
Mr.Vijay K. Gupta, Advocate
for the defendant Nos.1 & 2.

CORAM :*

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)

1.

This order shall dispose of the applications of the plaintiffs

under Order 6 Rule 17 read with Section 151 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 for amendment of the plaint.

2.

The plaintiffs are the trustees of Dashmesh Educational

Charitable Trust. The suit for recovery has been filed by the trustees

CS (OS) No.1295/2005

Page 1 of 17

of the said trust after their appointment as trustee and coming to
know that defendants by abusing their powers and position have
defrauded the trust and have from the funds so misappropriated
purchased various immovable properties.

3.

The plaintiffs in the plaint in para 26 have detailed the

properties which have been purchased by the defendants from the
amounts misappropriated from the trust. The defendants have
already been restrained by an order passed in an application under
Order 39 Rules 1 & 2 from selling, alienating, disposing or creating
any third party rights in the respect of properties mentioned in para
26 of the plaint.

4.

In IA No.1783 of 2006 the plaintiff has sought amendment of

the plaint seeking to incorporate the properties bearing No.Khevat
Khata No.316/356, Mu.No.87, Kila No.23/2 (3-16) & Mu.No.112, Kila
No.2 (4-13), 3(7-19), 4(8-0), 5/1 (2-15), 7(8-0), 8/1 (2-13) Kila 7,
Kulrakba 37 kanal 16 Marle Ka ½ Portion Bakdar 18 kanal 18 marle
& Khevat Khata No.317/357 mu.No.112, Kila No.26(0-13) rakba 13
marla ka ¼ portion bakdar 3 marle mein se 2 marle hissa naal chah
yani dono khevato ka kul rakba=bamutabik hissa 19 kanal 0 marle
waka sivana mauja budheda tehsil & Distt.Gurgaon. According to the
plaintiffs this property has also been acquired, purchased out of the

CS (OS) No.1295/2005

Page 2 of 17

funds of the trust. The plaintiffs have contended that omission to
include the details of this property was not deliberate but on account
of non availability

of knowledge about the existence of the

aforementioned property. The plea of the plaintiff is that inclusion of
the above said property in the list of properties which have been
acquired by the defendants by misappropriating the funds of the trust
is bonafide and necessary for determination of real controversies
between the parties.

5.

The plaintiffs have also filed another application being IA

No.6811/2007 under Order 6 Rule 17 of the Code of Civil Procedure
seeking further amendment to the plaint seeking a decree of
declaration that the properties as detailed in para 26 of the plaint are
trust properties and belong to the trust and seeking a decree of
cancellation of the sale deeds in respect of 26 properties in favor of
defendants and a direction to defendants to deliver the possession of
aforesaid properties to the plaintiffs.

6.

The plaintiffs have contended that a complaint was instituted by

them against the defendants on the basis of which an FIR
No.337/2004 dated 8th September, 2004, P.S.Nabi Karim, Delhi was
registered against defendant No.1 under Sections 406, 467, 409, 468,
471, 420, 120B of the Indian Penal Code. The plea of the plaintiffs is

CS (OS) No.1295/2005

Page 3 of 17

that the records regarding the investigation is voluminous and second
supplementary charge sheet was filed, which along with the
documents which were filed with the supplementary charge sheet,
runs

in about

700 pages.

It is stated

that

in the

second

supplementary charge sheet filed on 30th May, 2005 the investigating
officer has adverted to the discovery of a land ledger account created
by the defendant no.1 during his regime as a trustee despite the fact
that no land was purchased in the name of either the trust or the
college.

7.

The averment of the plaintiffs seeking amendment to the plaint

is that some of the facts which are on the basis of second
supplementary charge sheet were inadvertently left out and the
omission to incorporate all the relevant facts of the second
supplementary charge sheet is neither intentional nor deliberate. In
the circumstances plaintiffs seek amendment to the cause title and
para 2 of the plaint. Amendment is also sought in para 26 of the
plaint. In para 26 of the plaint the plaintiffs also want to incorporate
the facts that defendant No.1 had created a land ledger account for
the period 1st April, 2001 to 6th August, 2004 and as per the account
books so seized, it is reflected that an amount of Rs.16,20,000/- was
spent during the year 2002-2007 and Rs.14 lakh were spent in the
year 2003-2004 towards purchase of land whereas no such land was

CS (OS) No.1295/2005

Page 4 of 17

purchased in the name of the trust or dental college. The plaintiffs
have also sought similar amendment to para 27 of the plaint. The
consequential amendment in para 40 of the plaint are also sought
and the amendment to the para of the plaint giving the value for the
purpose of Court fees and jurisdiction of the Court is also sought on
account of seeking relief of declaration and cancellation.

8.

The application is contested by the defendants alleging inter-

alia that the application is not maintainable as the trust, Dhashmesh
Educational Charitable Trust has not been impleaded as a party and
the plaintiffs have no locus standi to seek the proposed amendment
in the name of the trust and the plaintiffs are not authorized to file
the present application. It is also contended that plaintiff Nos.3 & 5
have been illegally introduced as trustee by the plaintiff Nos.1, 2 & 4
which is ex-facie contrary to the provisions of Section 92 of the Code
of Civil Procedure. According to the non-applicant/defendants they
still continue to be the trustees as neither any meeting had been
called for passing any resolution for introducing any new trustee nor
any agenda had been circulated to the defendants.

9.

The learned counsel for defendants, Mr.Vijay K.Gupta has

contended that the plaintiffs by amendment wants to include the
personal properties of the defendant which will tantamount to plaintiff

CS (OS) No.1295/2005

Page 5 of 17

changing the nature of the suit. According to him if the property to be
included by amendment is the personal property of the plaintiff, then
the suit for recovery would not lie against such a property and the
plaintiff is not entitled to have both the claims which will not be
sustainable in law.

10.

The proposed amendment to the plaint is also opposed on the

ground that the same is inconsistent with the original case when it
was filed on 14.9.2005. The

defendants/non-applicants

have

also

opposed the amendment on the ground that the proposed amendment
is malafide, as pursuant to interim restraint order passed against the
defendants from selling, alienating, disposing or creating any third
party rights in respect of properties mentioned in para 26 of the plaint
by order dated 15.9.2005 in IA No.7284/2005, the defendants had
offered on 18th May, 2007 a security of Rs.5 crores for vacation of
interim order against the sale of immovable properties and according
to the defendants, the application for amendment has been filed to
cover other personal properties and to seek a relief of declaration to
counter and negate the offer made by the defendants. The amendment
is also opposed on the ground that by the proposed amendment the
plaintiff is attempting to block properties worth Rs.50 crores.

11.

The learned counsel for the defendants has also imputed delay

CS (OS) No.1295/2005

Page 6 of 17

in amendment on the ground that the second supplementary charge
sheet is dated 30th May, 2005 whereas the present suit was filed on
14.9.2005. Relying on the doctrine of election of remedies it is
contended that once the plaintiff had chosen to file the suit for
recovery

only,

the

proposed

amendment

for

declaration

and

cancellation of sale deeds cannot be allowed.

12.

The defendants/non applicants have also relied on the fact that

an application for attachment being IA No.7285/2005 is pending
where the defendants were directed to show cause as to why the
security should not be furnished by them for the suit amount and
now with the proposed amendment the nature of entire suit will
change.

13.

Though in the replies to the applications for the amendment the

defendants took a plea of Order 2 Rule 2 that the proposed
amendment seeking other reliefs is barred by Order 2 Rule 2 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, however, the same was not argued before the
Court at the time of argument.

14.

By the application being IA No.1783/2006 the plaintiffs seek

inclusion of another property at Serial No.7 in para 26 of the plaint.
The cause of action of the plaintiffs against the defendants is the

CS (OS) No.1295/2005

Page 7 of 17

misappropriation of funds by the defendants and recovery of the
amount so misappropriated. If after filing of the suit, it transpires that
more amounts were misappropriated and another property was also
acquired from the funds misappropriated by the defendants, the
plaintiffs should not be denied the right to include the details of
another property which is alleged to have been purchased from the
funds of the trust whose Chairman was defendant No.1.

15.

The purpose and object of Order 6 Rule 17 is to allow either

party to alter or amend his pleading in such manner and on such
terms as may be just. The power to allow the amendment is wide and
can be exercised at any stage of the proceedings in the interest of
justice on the basis of guidelines laid down in various precedents.
Though the amendment cannot be claimed as a matter of right and
under all circumstances but the Courts while deciding such prayer do
not adopt a hyper technical approach. Liberal approach is the general
rule particularly in cases where the other side can be compensated
with costs. Technicalities of law cannot be permitted to hamper the
Courts

in

the

administration

of

justice

between

the

parties.

Amendments are allowed in the pleadings to avoid uncalled for
multiplicity of litigation. It is also no more res integra that pretrial
amendments are allowed more liberally than those which are sought
to be made after the commencement of trial or after conclusion

CS (OS) No.1295/2005

Page 8 of 17

thereof. Mere delay usually cannot be a ground for refusing a prayer
for

amendment

because

merits

of

amendment

sought

to

be

incorporated by way of amendments are not to be judged at the stage
of allowing prayer for amendment.

16.

A single Judge of the High Court in 93 (2001) Delhi Law Times

579, Kanwal Kishore Manchanda Vs. Ms.Raksha Arora & Ors had
held that the object of allowing the amendment in the averments of
the parties is to iron out and solve the tangle and not to complicate
them or to leave certain points for decision in future litigation and the
endeavor of the court should always be to settle the matter by taking
into consideration all the facts. Reliance can be placed on AIR 2000
SC 614, B.K. Pillai Vs. P. Pillai; where it was held that the application
for amendment should not be rejected, especially when the party
opposing amendment can be compensated by cost and the application
does not suffer from any delay.

17.

The plea of the defendants in opposing the applications for

amendment is not that the reliefs claimed by amendments are barred
by time.

What is alleged is that there is delay in seeking the

amendment. In AIR 1957 SC 357, L.J. Leach and Co. Ltd. And
Another Vs. M/s. Jardine Skinner and Co., it was held by the Apex
Court that an amendment which incorporates a claim which is barred

CS (OS) No.1295/2005

Page 9 of 17

by time on the date of the application, then it can be disallowed,
however, it does not affect the power of the Court to order it, if that is
required in the interest of justice. It was held by the Court:
“it is no doubt true that Courts would, as a rule, decline
to allow amendment, if a fresh suit on the amended claim
would be barred by limitation on the date of the
application. But that is a factor to be taken into account
in exercise of the direction as to whether amendment
should be ordered, and does not affect the power of the
Court to order it, if that is required in the interests of
justice.”

In AIR 2000 SC 614, B.K. Pillai Vs. P. Pillai it was held that the
application for amendment should not be rejected, especially when
the party opposing amendment can be compensated by cost and the
application does not suffer from any delay. It is settled law that the
amendment of pleadings under Order 6 Rule 17 is to be allowed, if
such an amendment is required for proper and effective adjudication
of controversy between the parties and to avoid multiplicity of judicial
proceedings, subject to certain conditions such as allowing the
amendment should not result in injustice to the other side. Normally
a clear admission made conferring certain right on a defendant is not
allowed to be withdrawn by way of amendment by the plaintiff
resulting in prejudice to such a right of the defendant, depending on
the facts and circumstances of a given case. In certain situations, a
time-barred claim cannot be allowed to be raised by proposing an

CS (OS) No.1295/2005

Page 10 of 17

amendment to take away the valuable accrued right of a party.
However, mere delay in making an amendment application itself is not
enough to refuse amendment, as the delay can be compensated in
terms of money. Amendment is to be allowed when it does not cause
serious prejudice to the opposite side.

18.

Whether this property which is sought to be included at Serial

No.7 in para 26 of the plaint is the personal property of the
defendants or not is to be decided. This is no more res integra that
correctness and the falsity of this plea cannot be decided at this stage
in the present facts and circumstances nor it is to be decided at the
time of consideration whether the amendment should be allowed or
not. The defendants have not shown any facts which will show that
the property sought to be included is the personal property of the
defendants and have not been acquired from the funds allegedly
misappropriated except the bald allegation that it is the personal
property. Nothing has been produced by the defendants to show as to
from where they got the consideration to acquire this property. The
amendment sought by the plaintiffs in the facts and circumstances
shall be necessary for determination of real controversies between the
parties and on the grounds as alleged by the defendants the same
cannot be denied. Though the supplementary charge sheet included
this property on the basis of ledger of the property which was

CS (OS) No.1295/2005

Page 11 of 17

maintained by the defendant no.1 as the Chairman of the trust
though no properties were purchased in the name of the trust and the
suit was filed after the second supplementary charge sheet was filed,
however, the fact that the supplementary charge sheet runs into
about 700 papers cannot be ignored. On the basis of such
voluminous record, not incorporating one of the property which also
had been acquired from the funds misappropriated by the defendants,
cannot be termed malafide so as to deny the plaintiffs amendment of
the plaint in order to incorporate the particulars of this property also
in the list of the properties which have been acquired from the
misappropriated funds of the trust. The Supreme Court in Pankaja
Vs Yellappa, (2004) 6 SCC 415 at page 419 had held:
“ 12. So far as the court’s jurisdiction to allow an
amendment of pleadings is concerned, there can be no
two opinions that the same is wide enough to permit
amendments even in cases where there has been
substantial delay in filing such amendment applications.
This Court in numerous cases has held that the
dominant purpose of allowing the amendment is to
minimize the litigation, therefore, if the facts of the case
so permit, it is always open to the court to allow
applications in spite of the delay and laches in moving
such amendment application.”
Similarly in G. Nagamma v. Siromanamma, (1996) 2 SCC 25, at
page 26 the Apex Court had held :
“
It is settled law that the plaintiff is entitled to plead
even inconsistent pleas. In this case, they are seeking
alternative reliefs. The application was for amendment of
the plaint whereby neither cause of action could change
CS (OS) No.1295/2005

Page 12 of 17

nor the relief could be materially affected. We allow the
same.”

19.

By IA No.6811/2007 the plaintiffs want to increase the amount

claimed by plaintiffs against the defendants from Rs.5 crores to Rs.12
crores. This is not disputed that the plaintiffs are seeking these
amendments also on the basis of the second supplementary charge
sheet which was filed on 30.5.2005 and which was available to the
plaintiffs before the suit was filed on 14.9.2005. What is relevant is
that the charge sheet along with the documents runs into about 700
pages which is not denied by the defendants. The learned counsel for
the defendants rather tried to contend that the charge sheet runs into
4 or 5 pages only. The documents and other relevant papers which
are filed with the charge sheet are also part of the charge sheet and
in the circumstances the contention of the counsel for the defendants
that the charge sheet runs only into 4 or 5 pages cannot be sustained.
The learned counsel for the defendants has contended so, probably to
assert that if the charge sheet was only of 4 or 5 pages it could have
been easily perused by the plaintiffs before filing the suit on
14.9.2005 for recovery of Rs.5 crores and later on the amount claimed
cannot be sought to be enhanced. From the facts of this case it is
apparent that subsequently, after going through the voluminous
charge sheet and the documents filed with the charge sheet, if it has
transpired that the amount misappropriated by the defendant Nos.1
CS (OS) No.1295/2005

Page 13 of 17

& 2 is not Rs.5 crores but Rs.12 crores and if the claim is within time
which cannot be denied in the present facts and circumstances on
prima facie consideration of the facts, then the plea of the defendants
that the proposed amendment is mala fide and should not be allowed
on account of delay cannot be sustained.

20.

This cannot be disputed that the amendments sought by the

plaintiffs are relevant for determination of controversies between the
parties.

The cause of action as pleaded by the plaintiffs is that

defendant no.1 as the chairman of the trust along with defendant no.
2 misappropriated the funds from which various properties have been
purchased. By the amendments, besides the recovery, the plaintiffs
also want to seek the relief of declaration and cancellation in respect
of the properties which had been purchased from the misappropriated
funds. In the circumstances it cannot be pleaded or contented by the
defendants that the plaintiffs are trying to incorporate an entirely
different cause of action. On the basis of the same cause of action if
the plaintiffs are entitled for different reliefs and plaintiffs in the first
instance only claim one relief which is available to them, they should
not be prevented from seeking other reliefs also which are available to
plaintiffs provided they are not barred by time. Apparently the claims
of the plaintiffs in the present facts and circumstances are not barred
by time.

CS (OS) No.1295/2005

Page 14 of 17

21.

Amendments sought by the plaintiffs also cannot be declined on

the ground that for the modification of interim order, the defendants
had offered rupees five crores and in case the amendment shall be
allowed, the defendants may perhaps have to offer more amount to
get the order modified and allow the defendants to exercise their
rights in respect of various properties. In case it has transpired that
from the misappropriated funds more properties were acquired, on
this ground the plaintiffs cannot be denied to amend the plaint to
incorporate all such reliefs which are available to them. The learned
counsel for the defendants is also unable to show any precedent that
on account of pendency of an application for attachment before
judgment, the relief for the amendment of the plaint seeking
incorporation of other reliefs on the same cause of action can be
denied to the plaintiffs. The plea of the counsel for the defendants
relying on the doctrine of election of remedies that once the plaintiffs
have chosen to file the suit for recovery only, later on in the same
suit, the plaintiffs cannot seek further reliefs on the same cause of
action though the reliefs claimed are not barred by time cannot be
accepted into present facts and circumstances.

Amendments are

allowed in the pleadings to avoid uncalled multiplicity of litigation.
The power to allow the amendment is wide and can be exercised in
the interest of justice.

CS (OS) No.1295/2005

Liberal approach is the general rule

Page 15 of 17

particularly in cases where the opposite party can be compensated
with costs. In Kanwal Kishore Manchanda (supra) it was held that the
object of allowing the amendment in the averments of the parties is to
iron out and solve the tangle and not to complicate them or to leave
certain points for decision in future litigation. The endeavor of the
court is always to settle all the matters by taking into consideration
all the facts.

This is not disputed by the defendants that the

particulars of the properties which are now sought to be incorporated
find place in the second supplementary charge sheet. It also cannot
be disputed that the basis for seeking declaration and cancellation of
sale deeds is the allegation of the plaintiffs that the defendants have
misappropriated the funds of the trust and have acquired various
properties.

In the circumstances there does not seem to be any

impediment in allowing the applications seeking amendments to the
plaint.

22.

For the reasons stated hereinabove, the applications for

amendments are allowed, subject to cost of Rs.15,000/- each payable
to the defendants/non-applicants within two weeks.

The amended

plaint be filed.
CS (OS) No.1295/2005
Amended plaint be filed within two weeks. Learned counsel for
the defendant seeks time to file the written statement to the amended

CS (OS) No.1295/2005

Page 16 of 17

plaint. Written statement to the amended plaint be filed within two
weeks. Replication, if any, be filed within two weeks thereafter.
List on December 7, 2007 along with all pending applications.

October 29, 2007
'Dev'

CS (OS) No.1295/2005

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 17 of 17

