IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Decision: October 30, 2007
AA No.451/2006
#
!

A.L. Sudershan Construction Company Limited ... Petitioner
Through: Ms.Pooja Dhar, Advocate.
Vs.

$
^

GE Capital Transportation Financial Services
Limited
Through : Nemo.

... Respondent

CORAM :* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

YES

2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?

NO

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
+
*
1.

The notice of the petition was sent to the respondent.

The

notice was served at the Delhi address of the respondent, however, no
one is present on behalf of respondent. The matter was passed over,
however, no one has appeared even after the pass over and
consequently the respondent is proceeded ex parte. No reply has been
filed by the petitioner refuting the allegations made by the petitioner
and in the circumstances the averments and pleas raised by the
petitioner remain unrebutted.
AA No.451/2006

Page 1 of 8

2.

This is a petition under Section 11(6) of Arbitration &

Conciliation Act, 1996 for appointment of an Arbitrator in terms of
arbitration agreement between the parties.

3.

The petitioner contended that it is a construction company

engaged in the business of road construction. Mr.A.L.Sudershan is
stated to be the Director of the company authorized to institute the
proceedings on behalf of petitioner company.

4.

According to the petitioner, a Road contract was awarded by

National Highway Authority of India to the joint venture of the
petitioner and a company named Dolomite Berhad. The petitioner
entered into a Master Security and Loan Agreement dated 6th
February, 2003 with the respondents for a sum of Rs.88,00,000/payable in 22 equal installments with interest @6.49% against Vogele
Paver Finisher (a machinery imported for an amount of 198790
Euros), in respect of which post dated cheques from 10.3.2003 to
10.1.2005 were given to the respondent by the petitioner. However,
due to capital crunch by reason of certain disputes which arose
between the petitioner and the NHAI and hike in steel prices, the
petitioner, who had earlier paid the first sixteen installments in time,
defaulted in payment of later installments and a request for

AA No.451/2006

Page 2 of 8

rescheduling the installments was made to the respondent. The
respondent by an e-mail dated 3rd November 2004 asked for payment
of additional finance charges @ 18% and re-scheduling charges of
Rs.15,000/-.

5.

The petitioner gave another proposal to the respondent who

without responding to the same repossessed the machinery on 10th
December, 2004 from Chitradurga work site of the applicant and
shifted it to Hyderabad. Thereafter letter dated 30th December, 2004
enclosing the termination sheet was issued by the respondent
informing the petitioner that the machinery has been repossessed by
the respondent and that the same will be sold, if the petitioner did not
pay the amount mentioned in the termination sheet (Rs.34,30,134/-)
within 7 days of the receipt of the letter.

6.

According to the petitioner despite repeated request from the

petitioner not to sell the machinery, which was purchased by the
petitioner under duty exemption scheme of the Central Government
(under which the machinery could not be disposed off within five
years from the date of purchase), without giving notice to the
petitioner, the respondent in breach of the agreement dated 6th
February, 2003 sold the machinery without informing the petitioner.
Thus

disputes

AA No.451/2006

relating

to

hire-purchase

agreement

dated

Page 3 of 8

6th

February, 2003 have arisen between the parties. Clause 13(g) of the
agreement

dated

6th

February,

2003

provides

an

arbitration

agreement which is as under:13(g) Any dispute, controversy or claim arising out of or
relating to this Agreement or any related agreement or
other document or the validity, interpretation, breach or
termination thereof (“Dispute”), including claims seeking
redress or asserting rights under applicable law, shall, be
resolved and finally settled in accordance with the
provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 as
may be amended from time to time or its re-enactment
(the “Arbitration Act”). The parties consent to a single,
consolidated arbitration for all disputes that may at the
time exist. The arbitral tribunal shall be composed of
one arbitrator to be appointed by the Secured Party.
The arbitration proceedings shall be conducted in the
English language and any document, not in English
submitted by any party shall be accompanied by an
English translation. The arbitration shall be conducted in
New Delhi. The arbitral tribunal shall determine the
Dispute in accordance with the law of India, without
giving effect to any conflict of law rules or other rules that
might render such law inapplicable or unavailable, and
shall apply this Agreement according to its terms. The
arbitral tribunal shall not appoint any experts under
Section 26 of the Arbitration Act. The parties agree to be
bound by any reward or order resulting from any
arbitration conducted hereunder. The arbitral tribunal
shall endeavor to make the award within 90 days from the
date of reference to him. The arbitral tribunal shall award
the prevailing party, as determined by such arbitral
tribunal, all its, costs and fees. For the purpose of this
Agreement, the expression costs and fees shall mean and
include all reasonable pre-award expenses of the
arbitration including the arbitrator's fees, administrative
fees, travel expenses, out of pocket expenses such as
copying and telephone, court costs and lawyers' fees. The
parties hereto agree to be bound by any award or order
passed by the arbitral tribunal in the manner laid out
hereinabove and further agree that:i)
in the context of an attempt by either to enforce an
arbitral award or order, any defenses relating to the
AA No.451/2006

Page 4 of 8

parties capacity or the validity of this Agreement are
hereby waived; and
ii)
Judgment/decree on any award or order resulting
from an arbitration conducted hereunder may be entered
and enforced in any court, having jurisdiction thereof or
having jurisdiction over any of the parties or any of their
assets.
iii)
In the event of any dispute or controversy arising
out of this arbitration clause, the Courts at Delhi shall
have sole and exclusive jurisdiction to entertain such
dispute.

7.

Consequent to the arbitration agreement between the parties

and the fact that disputes had arisen between the parties, the
petitioner sought appointment of an Arbitrator by a notice dated 14th
October, 2005. Under the arbitration agreement the respondent was
to appoint an arbitrator for a single Consolidated arbitration.

The

respondent in its reply dated 14th November 2005 denied the
appointment of an arbitrator on the ground that no terms of reference
are left.

The petitioner thereafter, gave a final notice dated 18th

December 2005 seeking appointment of an arbitrator in terms of
arbitration agreement which notice has not been replied.

The

disputes which have been raised by the petitioner survive or not are to
be decided by the arbitrator and on this ground the respondent could
not refuse to appoint an arbitrator. Since despite a demand raised by
the petitioner to appoint an arbitrator in terms of the arbitration
agreement between the parties which is not denied by the respondent,

AA No.451/2006

Page 5 of 8

an arbitrator has not been appointed, therefore the respondent has
lost its right to appoint an arbitrator in terms of arbitration agreement
and it will be for this court to appoint an arbitrator.

8.

A learned Single Judge in Haryana Telecom Ltd. v. Union of

India & Anr., 112 (2004) DLT 339=2004 (3) RAJ 147, had held that if
the respondent fails to appoint an Arbitrator within the stipulated
time of 30 days of the notice, and even after filing of the petition
under Section 11 of the Act, it is for the Court to appoint an
Arbitrator. A Division Bench of this Court in Delkon (India) Pvt. Ltd.
v. G.M., Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd., 120 (2005) DLT 542 (DB),
relying on Datar Switchgears Ltd Vs Tata Finance Ltd has held paras
4 is as under:
“4. We have given our careful consideration to the
arguments advanced by learned Counsel for both the
parties. In view of the law laid down in the case of Datar
Switchgears Ltd. v. Tata Finance Ltd. & Anr., IV (2000)
CLT 191 (SC)=VII (2000) SLT 543=JT 2000 (Suppl. 2) SC
226 it is no more res integra that the vacancy can be
supplied by a party pursuant to the arbitration agreement
even after thirty days of the receipt of the notice.
However, once a party approaches the Court and files a
petition for appointment by the designated authority of
the Chief Justice of that Court under Section 11(6) of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, the right to supply
vacancy by the opposite party is extinguished. If that
right stood extinguished on filing of the petition under
Section 11(6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, in
September 1998 the appointment of an Arbitrator on 3rd
May, 1999 could not be made, therefore in our view, the
order passed by the learned Single Judge on 7th May,
1999 suffers from patent illegality. Therefore, the
submission of the respondent that the petitioner had
AA No.451/2006

Page 6 of 8

appeared before the Arbitrator and the application of the
petitioner raising preliminary objections is pending
adjudication which inter alia challenges the jurisdiction of
the Arbitrator to decide the dispute is of no consequence
as from the order reproduced above it was pursuant to
the directions passed by the learned Single Judge that
the parties were directed to appear before the Arbitrator.
The petitioner had no other option but to appear before
the Arbitrator and after appearing before the Arbitrator
the petitioner has not submitted to the jurisdiction of the
Arbitrator, rather has at first opportunity taken the
objection that the Arbitrator had no jurisdiction to
proceed with the matter.
9.

In Union of India v. M/s. R.R. Industries, 120 (2005) DLT 572

(DB) also it was held that once a party does not supply the vacancy or
fails to supply the vacancy before filing of a petition under Section
11(6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, such a party forfeits the
right to supply the vacancy in terms of the arbitration clause and
what remains is only the arbitration clause, i.e. the dispute has to be
resolved under the mechanism of alternative dispute redressal
scheme but no right survives to the respondent to supply the named
Arbitrator in the arbitration clause.

10.

Despite the service of notice of the petition, no one has

appeared on behalf of respondent today nor has any reply been filed.
In totality of circumstances, it is inevitable to infer that there is
arbitration agreement between the parties which is reproduced
hereinabove. The respondent failed to appoint an arbitrator within
four weeks time pursuant to notice given by the petitioner for
AA No.451/2006

Page 7 of 8

appointment of an arbitrator. Even before filing of the petition the
arbitrator has not been appointed. Therefore, it will be just and
appropriate to appoint an arbitrator to adjudicate the disputes
between the parties.

11.
1/36,

Consequently, I appoint Ms.Justice Usha Mehra (Retired), CSafdarjung

Development

Area,

New

Delhi,

(Mobile

No.9818421144, residence No.26531100, 26561316) as an arbitrator
to adjudicate all the disputes between the parties. The learned
Arbitrator shall decide her fees and the procedure for adjudication of
disputes between the parties.

The parties shall appear before the

arbitrator on 26.11.2007 at 4.30 PM. A copy of this order be sent to
the learned arbitrator forthwith. The parties are also directed to give a
copy of this order to the arbitrator. Copy of this order be given dasti to
the counsel for the petitioner.

October 30, 2007
'Dev”

AA No.451/2006

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 8 of 8

