IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of decision : January 30th, 2008
WP(C) No.1786/1989
#
!

Srimohan Tayal
Through:

….…
PETITIONER
Mr.Amitabh Narayan, Advocate.

Versus
$
^

The Regional Provident Fund .........
Commissioner & Another
Through : Nemo.

RESPONDENTS

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
YES
YES

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
1.

The petitioner has impugned the demand raised by respondent

No.1 against the petitioner relating to contribution towards the
provident fund on the ground that the petitioner is not an employer as
contemplated under Section 2 of the Employees Provident Fund Act,
1952 and merely being a director of the private limited company, the
petitioner has not become liable for the demands raised by the
respondent no.1.

2.

The brief facts relevant for the adjudication of this petition are

WP(C) No.1786/1989

Page 1 of 14

that a notice dated 4th May, 1989 bearing No.549/PF/38/7435 was
issued in the name of the petitioner directing the petitioner to appear
before the respondent No.2 and to pay a sum of Rs.18,012.75/- on
account of dues of the firm M/s. National Offset Works.

3.

The contention of the petitioner is that M/s. National Offset

Works is only a trade name in which the business was carried on by
M/s Allahabad Law Journal Company Ltd which is a company
incorporated under the Companies Act. According to the petitioner the
trading name is owned by the company which is being wholly looked
after and the business is exclusively run by Mr.Krishan Mohan Tayal.

4.

Petitioner averred that he had at all times only 20 preference

shares of face value of Rs.50/- each and that will not make him liable
for the liability of the private limited company.

5.

According to the petitioner the authorized capital of the

company was Rs.10,00,000/- divided into 4000 preference shares of
Rs.50/- each and 80,000 equity shares of face value of Rs.10/each.
The issue and subscribed capital is 4000 preference shares of Rs.50/each amounting to Rs.2,00,000/- and 34,000 equity shares of the
face value of Rs.10/- each amounting to Rs.3,40,000/- and thus the

WP(C) No.1786/1989

Page 2 of 14

subscribed capital of the company is Rs.5,40,000/- out of which the
petitioner has only 20 preference shares of the value of Rs.1,000/only. The petitioner categorically averred that there have been three
directors of the said company during the years 1973 up to the middle
of June, 1977 namely Mr.Krishan Mohan Tayal, Mr.Vinod Tayal and
Sh. Sri Mohan Tayal (petitioner). It is contended that consequently the
dues of the companies were to be paid by the company and not by the
petitioner and no action can be taken against the petitioner for
nonpayment of contribution of employees provident fund by the
company and its managing director or the persons who were in
control of the company at the relevant times. According to the
petitioner he is not an employer nor can he be constituted to be an
employer under section 2(e) of the Act which is as under:
(e) "employer" in relation to a factory means the owner or
occupier of the factory, including the agent of such owner
or occupier, the legal representative of a deceased owner
or occupier and, where a person has been named as a
manager of the factory under clause (f) of sub-section (1)
of section 7 of the Factories Act, 1948 (LXIII of 1948), the
person so named;
6.

The petitioner has also averred that he was dissatisfied with the

management of the company and, therefore, he had tendered his
resignation as a Director of the company during the year 1977 and in
the circumstances there is no personal liability of the petitioner as an
employer as contemplated under the provisions of the said Act.

WP(C) No.1786/1989

Page 3 of 14

7.

The petitioner in the circumstances has sought quashing of the

notice dated 4th May, 1989 issued to the petitioner for payment of
Rs.18,012.75/- and to appear before respondent No.2 on 15th May,
1989.

8.

The petition is contested by the respondents and a counter

affidavit dated 25th August, 1989 was filed contending that this Court
is not to sit in appeal over the decision and the matter involves
questions of fact which cannot be raised in the writ petition. It has
also been averred that the petitioner had been one of the Directors of
the petitioner company for the relevant period during which the
company had been in default in provident fund contribution. The
emphasis was laid by the respondents that in case there was any
change in the employers/Directors/partners such change had to be
intimated to the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner by a
registered post within 15 days of the change and no such change as
has been alleged by the petitioner that he resigned from the company
in 1977 was ever intimated to the respondents. According to the
respondents the petitioner continued to be a Director of the company
in terms of Form 5-A and consequently the petitioner is liable and the
claim that he has been absolved of his liability is not sustainable as
even in terms of return of ownership available with the respondent

WP(C) No.1786/1989

Page 4 of 14

No.1, the petitioner continues to be a director.

9.

I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner. No one has

appeared on behalf of respondent No.1. Perusal of Section 2 of the
Employees Provident Fund & Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952
reflects that every Director is not an employer as contemplated in the
said provision. To be liable on behalf of the company, one has to be an
employer and it has to be established that the control over the affairs
of the establishment was with the Director or a manager or a
Managing Director or the Managing Agent.

10.

This cannot be disputed that the partners of a partnership firm

and directors of a Limited company cannot be held to be liable on
account of being employer merely on account of being partners or
director of a company. In (1981) Lab I.C. 538, Annatharamaiah
Woolen Factory, Bangalore-26 and Ors. Versus State, a complaint
under section 14(1-B) and section 14(A) of the Provident Fund Act was
filed against the firm and its four partners. The partners sought
discharge on the ground that they were not the “employer” of the
factory in terms of section 2(e)(i) of the Act and therefore not liable for
prosecution. The Court in terms of section 2(e) of the Act held the
prosecution against the partners was not proper as only those

WP(C) No.1786/1989

Page 5 of 14

partners who had ultimate control of the affairs and business of the
establishment were liable to be prosecuted. The Court held as under:“8. ………..Thus it is clear that ordinarily not all the
partners are liable to be punished, but only the person
who has ultimate control over the affairs of the
establishment or the manager, managing director or
managing agent who has ultimate control over the affairs
of the establishment, is liable to be prosecuted both
under sections 14(1-A) and 14(1-B). so also, in cases
where the Act, the scheme, the Family pension scheme or
the Insurance Scheme, is a company as provided under
sub-section(1) of section 14-A, it is not all the person but
the person who at the time of committing of the offence
was in charge and was responsible to the company for the
conduct of the business of the company, as well as the
company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offences and
shell be liable to be prosecuted against and punished
accordingly.
Xxxx
10. ………….But, it is not in all cases irrespective of the
fact whether all the persons or partners of the firm or
establishment are necessarily to be indicted for such
offence committed by the company establishment. Only
such manager, secretary or other officer of the company
or establishment who is in charge of such management or
the affairs of the establishment or contributes to the
commission of the offence by consent or connivance or
neglect is liable to be prosecuted.”

11.

Similarly in 1991 Lab I.C. 2017, Transport Corporation of India

Limited and Others Versus R.M.Gandhi and Ors., it was held relying
on Annatharamaiah Woolen Factory’s case (supra) that not all or any
Director, can be prosecuted under the provisions of the Provident
funds act, unless he is the in charge of the establishment. Quoting

WP(C) No.1786/1989

Page 6 of 14

section 2 of the Provident Fund Act, it was held as under:“22. …………The intention of the legislature in making
elaborate provisions, reproduced hereinabove, is to
ensure that at all given times there is readily available a
person/persons who is/are directly responsible for
implementation of the provisions of the act, in the
establishment and, conversely, answerable for breach of
the provisions thereof. In the face of these provisions, it
would be futile to vaguely aver in the complaint that all
the directors named in the complaint are in charge of the
establishment and responsible for the conduct of its
business.”
Thus what flows from the aforesaid judgments is that only those
directors who are in charge of the management or the affairs of the
establishment or contributes to the commission of the offence by
consent or connivance or neglect are liable to be prosecuted.

12.

The petitioner has categorically averred that he had only 20

preference shares of Rs.50/- each amounting to Rs.1,000/- only out
of the subscribed capital of Rs.5,40,000/-. The categorical averment
of the petitioner that Sh. Krishan Mohan Tayal, s/o.Late Sh.Dev Raj
Tayal was looking after and managing the affairs of the company has
not been specifically denied by the respondent No.1. The other facts
disclosed by the petitioner regarding the authorized capital and
subscribed capital of the company have also not been categorically
refuted by the respondent except the bald denial. A director of the
company does not become an employer under the act unless it is

WP(C) No.1786/1989

Page 7 of 14

established that the director is in control of the affairs of the private
limited company.

13.

In the circumstances the inevitable inference is that the

petitioner could not be termed as an employer in respect of M/s
Allahabad Law Journal Ltd which was carrying on business under the
trading name M/s. National Offset Works so as to be liable under the
provisions of the Employees Provident Fund and Miscellaneous
Provisions Act, 1952 on default of the company to pay the
contribution of the provident fund.

14.

Though the petitioner has alleged that he had resigned from the

company as director in 1977 but nothing has been produced by the
petitioner that he had resigned from the company. In any case
whether the petitioner had resigned from the company or not, will be
material only in case it is established that prior to his resignation, he
was in control of the affairs of the company. If the petitioner was not
in control of the affairs of the company whether he resigned or not,
will not be very material.

15.

The petitioner Sh.Srimohan Tayal has also died during the

pendency of the writ petition on 21st November, 1997 and after his

WP(C) No.1786/1989

Page 8 of 14

demise the legal representatives of Late Sh.Srimohan Tayal were
substituted in his place. If the petitioner Late Sh.Srimohan Tayal was
not an employer as contemplated under the Act as he was neither in
control of the company nor it has been established that he was
exercising such powers so as to manage the affairs of the company, it
cannot be inferred that there was liability of the petitioner. Therefore,
if there was no liability of the petitioner for the contribution under
the Employees Provident Fund

Act on behalf of the company, the

liability shall not be inherited by the legal representatives, the present
petitioners who have been substituted after the demise of Late
Sh.Srimohan Tayal.

16.

In a matter Regional Provident Fund Commissioner and Anr. v.

Dharamsi Morarji Chemical Co. Ltd., 1998 (2) SCC 446, it was held
that unless there is clear evidence to show that there was any
supervisory, financial or managerial control, it cannot be said that
one is the branch of the other. In this case two entities were
separately registered under the Factories Act. They were separately
registered under the Central Sales Tax Act and the Employees State
Insurance

Act

and

it

was

also

found

that

there

was

total

independence of the two units and in the circumstances it was held
that the learned Single Judge and the Division Bench were right in

WP(C) No.1786/1989

Page 9 of 14

their conclusion that the respondent was not a branch of M/s.
Continental Exporters. Though this was a case under section 2A of
the act, however, the similar yardstick has to be applied to ascertain
whether a person is an employer or not as contemplated under
Section 2 (e) of the Act. Therefore, unless it is clearly shown that there
was any supervisory financial or managerial control, it could not be
inferred that the petitioner was an employer and was liable on behalf
of the company for non contribution of the funds. Merely because in
the form 5A relied on by the respondent, a copy of which is filed
showing the name of the petitioner as one of the Directors, it could
not be inferred that the petitioner was in supervisory financial or
managerial control. The petitioner has categorically given the
authorized capital and paid up capital of the company and his
shareholding of the preferential shares of the company. To refute
these facts the respondents have relied on a copy of the return of
ownership which was sent to the Regional Commissioner, Delhi, a
copy of which is annexed with the counter affidavit. In the said
return, petitioner is not shown as occupier. In para 9, the name of the
occupier is given as Shri.K.M.Tayal. Para 10 regarding name of the
Managing agent is blank. Under para 11, the names of directors and
their postal address, the name of the petitioner is mentioned along
with other directors, Shri. Vinod Tayal; Shri K.M.Tayal; Shri Shiv Raj

WP(C) No.1786/1989

Page 10 of 14

Gupta and Shri Babu Lal Jaipuria. The name of the manager as given
in para 13 is Shri H.K.Jain and the name of person in-charge and
responsible for the conduct of business of establishment in para 14 is
given as Shri H.K.Jain. Therefore, even according to the document
relied on by the respondents, the petitioner is neither occupier nor
managing agent nor manager nor in-charge and responsible for the
conduct of business. Merely because the petitioner is one of the
directors of the company along with other directors whose names are
given, the liability cannot be fasten on the petitioner.

17.

The plea of the respondent that the writ petition involves

substantial disputed question of facts and the writ petition will not be
maintainable

cannot

be

accepted

in

the

present

facts

and

circumstances of the case. The Court can go into disputed question of
facts also in exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India. In ABL International Ltd. v. Export Credit
Guarantee Corpn. of India Ltd. ((2004) 3 SCC 553 it was observed by
the Supreme Court that in certain cases even a disputed question of
fact can be gone into by the court entertaining a petition under Article
226 of the Constitution, holding: (SCC p.572, para 28)
“28. However, while entertaining an objection as to the
maintainability of a writ petition under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India, the court should bear in mind the

WP(C) No.1786/1989

Page 11 of 14

fact that the power to issue prerogative writs under
Article 226 of the Constitution is plenary in nature and is
not limited by any other provisions of the Constitution.
The High Court having regard to the facts of the case, has
a discretion to entertain or not to entertain a writ petition.
The Court has imposed upon itself certain restrictions in
the exercise of this power. (See Whirlpool Corpn. v.
Registrar of Trade Marks13.) And this plenary right of the
High Court to issue a prerogative writ will not normally be
exercised by the Court to the exclusion of other available
remedies unless such action of the State or its
instrumentality is arbitrary and unreasonable so as to
violate the constitutional mandate of Article 14 or for
other valid and legitimate reasons, for which the Court
thinks it necessary to exercise the said jurisdiction.”

18.

In Harbanslal Sahnia Vs Indian Oil Corporation (2003) 2 SCC

107, relying upon upon Whirlpool Corpn. v. Registrar of Trade
Marks(1998) 8 SCC 1 it was held that in appropriate cases, in spite of
availability of the alternative remedy, the High Court may still exercise
its writ jurisdiction in at least three contingencies: (i) where the writ
petition seeks enforcement of any of the fundamental rights; (ii) where
there is failure of principles of natural justice; or (iii) where the orders
or proceedings are wholly without jurisdiction or the vires of an Act is
challenged. However, there cannot be any doubt whatsoever that the
question as to when such a discretionary jurisdiction is to be
exercised or refused to be exercised by the High Court has to be
determined having regard to the facts and circumstances of each case
and no hard-and-fast rule can be laid down.

WP(C) No.1786/1989

Page 12 of 14

19.

A three-Judge Bench of this Court in Gujarat Ambuja Cement

Ltd. (2005) 6 SCC 499 referring to Harbanslal Sahnia (supra) held:
(SCC pp. 517-18, paras 22-23)
“22[24]. … There are two well-recognised exceptions to
the doctrine of exhaustion of statutory remedies. First is
when the proceedings are taken before the forum under a
provision of law which is ultra vires, it is open to a party
aggrieved thereby to move the High Court for quashing
the proceedings on the ground that they are incompetent
without a party being obliged to wait until those
proceedings run their full course. Secondly, the doctrine
has no application when the impugned order has been
made in violation of the principles of natural justice. We
may add that where the proceedings itself are an abuse of
process of law the High Court in an appropriate case can
entertain a writ petition.
23[25]. Where under a statute there is an allegation of
infringement of fundamental rights or when on the
undisputed facts the taxing authorities are shown to have
assumed jurisdiction which they do not possess can be
the grounds on which the writ petitions can be
entertained. But normally, the High Court should not
entertain writ petitions unless it is shown that there is
something more in a case, something going to the root of
the jurisdiction of the officer, something which would
show that it would be a case of palpable injustice to the
writ petitioner to force him to adopt the remedies
provided by the statute.”
20.

In the facts and circumstances, it will not be appropriate not to

exercise jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and
relegating the petitioner (legal representative), who has also since
deceased, to another forum. In the absence of any plea that the
petitioner was in financial and managerial control of the company, it

WP(C) No.1786/1989

Page 13 of 14

cannot be inferred that the petitioner as a director who had only 20
preferential shares of Rs.50 each had been exercising financial and
managerial control over the company which defaulted in payment of
the contributions of the provident fund so as to become liable for the
same.

21.

Consequently, the inevitable inference is that the respondents

could not recover an amount of Rs.18,012.75/- from the petitioner
and,

therefore,

the

notice

dated

4th

May,

1989

bearing

No.549/PF/3/7435 demanding an amount of Rs.18,012.75/- from
the petitioner is set aside and the writ petition is allowed. The parties
are, however, left to bear their own cost in the facts and
circumstances.

January 30th, 2008.
'k'

WP(C) No.1786/1989

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 14 of 14

