IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Date of decision : November 30, 2007
CS (OS) No.1158/2005

#
!

Smt.Bimla Rai & Anr
Through:

......... Plaintiffs
Mr.Sandeep Mittal, Advocate.

Vs.
$
^

Smt.Sadhana Rai & Ors
Through :

........ Defendants
Mr.Harish Malhotra, Sr.Advocate
with Mr.Vibhu Bakhru, Advocate
for the defendant Nos.1 & 2.
Mr.Arvind Nigam, Advocate for
the defendant Nos.3 & 4.

CORAM :* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?

YES

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

NO

NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
IA No.13727/2007
1.

This is an application by the defendant Nos.1 & 2 for rejection

of the plaint under Order 7 Rule 11 read with Section 151 of the Code
of Civil Procedure.

2.

The applicant has contended that the plaintiff has filed this

suit for partition and permanent injunction. According to the

CS (OS) No.1158/2005

Page 1 of 16

applicant the plaintiff has admitted that the property bearing No.12,
Aurangzeb Lane, New Delhi, land and the superstructure has been
given on perpetual lease dated 22nd December, 1931 by the Central
Government in favor of R.B.Sardar Baisakha Singh. According to the
applicant the perpetual lease has a prohibition that the rights in the
property shall not be assigned, transferred without the approval in
writing of the Chief Commissioner of Delhi.

3.

The applicant has contended that the property was purchased

by three private limited companies namely M/s.Allied Finance (P) Ltd,
M/s.Kulwant Rai & Sons (P) Ltd (now name changed and known as
RKKR International (P) Ltd) and third M/s.Ram Kishan Kulwant Rai
Industries (P) Ltd and the property has been mutated in their favour
in the record of Land & Development office vide letter No.L19/11(5)/63.

4.

According to the defendant Nos.1 & 2, one third undivided

share is of M/s.Kulwant Rai & Sons (P) Ltd (now known as RKKR
International (P) Ltd) which was purchased pursuant to a Court
decree dated 16.10.1992 by M/s. New Peak Real Estate (P) Ltd.

5.

Consequently, according to the applicants the property in

dispute is owned by M/s.Allied Finance (P) Ltd, M/s. New Peak Real

CS (OS) No.1158/2005

Page 2 of 16

Estate (P) Ltd and M/s.Ram Kishan Kulwant Rai Industries (P) Ltd.

6.

The applicant in the circumstances has contended that the suit

is misconceived, uncalled for and is an abuse of the process of Court
as plaintiffs and defendants are not the co-owners of the property in
question, as the ownership vests with three private companies who
are separate legal entities under the provisions of Indian Companies
Act and, therefore, there is no cause of action and plaintiffs have no
right to maintain the suit.

7.

It has also been contended that plaintiffs have admitted that a

registered perpetual lease deed dated 27.2.1974 was executed by the
then landlords in favor of defendant No.3 at Rs.825/- per month in
respect of an undivided share in the aforesaid property and another
perpetual lease deed dated 1.3.1974 was executed in favor of Sh.
Jaswant Rai (brother of defendant No.3) at Rs.825/- per month in
respect of an undivided share in the said property. According to the
applicant plaintiffs have also admitted that a registered perpetual
lease deed dated 1.3.1974 was executed by the landlords in favor of
defendant No.2 at Rs.600/- per month.

8.

The applicant has relied on the averments made by the

plaintiffs that by letter dated 12.3.1992 by Shri Jaswant Rai,

CS (OS) No.1158/2005

Page 3 of 16

defendant No.4 was substituted as lessee with the consent of the
lessors.

9.

According to the applicants the transfer of leasehold rights by

Sh. Jaswant Rai by letter dated 12.3.1992 in favour of Sh.Anil Rai is
void for want of proper stamp, lack of registration and absence of
attestation by two witnesses with the effect that the leasehold rights
have not been transferred from Sh.Jaswant Rai to Sh.Anil Rai.

10.

The rejection of the plaint has also been sought on the ground

that the plaintiffs have alleged that defendant Nos.2, 3 & 4 have gifted
their perpetual leasehold/tenancy rights to plaintiff No.1, defendant
No.1 and plaintiff No.2 respectively vide gift deeds dated 1.4.2000.
According to applicants the gift deeds are void and of no consequence
as they are neither registered nor attested by two attesting witnesses
as mandatorily required and thus are barred by Section 123 of the
Transfer of Property Act, Section 17 of the Registration Act and are
also not duly stamped as required under the Stamp Act and some gift
deeds are inadmissible as evidence and of no effect and since the
leasehold rights were never transferred to Sh.Anil Rai, therefore,
question of further gift from Sh.Anil Rai to plaintiff No.2 does not
arise.

CS (OS) No.1158/2005

Page 4 of 16

11.

The applicants have asserted that plaintiff Nos.1 & 2 have not

acquired any leasehold/tenancy rights in the suit premises and,
therefore, they do not have any locus standi. Rejection of plaint is also
sought on the ground that the property 12, Aurangzeb Lane, New
Delhi is governed by Delhi Rent Control Act as all the tenancies are
below Rs.3500/- per month and the provisions of Delhi Rent Control
Act are applicable and even the combined rent of the three tenancies
is less than Rs.3500/- per month and under the Delhi Rent Control
Act there is a bar to subletting and, therefore, the suit is not
maintainable and the plaint is liable to be rejected. The applicant has
also sought rejection of the plaint on the ground that Court fees has
not been properly paid as the value of the suit is not less than Rs.60
crores and the plaintiffs are liable to pay advalorem Court fees for
Rs.60 crores.

12.

The rejection of the plaint is also sought on the ground that the

plaint has not been signed, verified and filed in accordance with the
provisions of Delhi High Court Rules and of the Code of Civil
Procedure and that the verification of the plaint is defective and that
the suit is bad and non maintainable for non joinder of necessary
parties as the lessors of the demised premises comprising in 12,
Aurangzeb Lane, New Delhi are necessary parties. In any case it has
been sought that tenants are not entitled for partition of tenanted

CS (OS) No.1158/2005

Page 5 of 16

premises without express written consent of the lessors.

13.

The plaintiff has filed the present suit for partition and

permanent

injunction

contending

inter-alia

that

plaintiffs

and

defendants are members of Rai family with defendant No.3 being its
patriarch being the husband of plaintiff No.1 and father of defendant
No.2 and defendant No.4 and father-in-law of plaintiff No.2 and
defendant No.1. According to the plaintiffs defendant No.3, defendant
No.2 and defendant No.4 acquired leasehold rights in respect of onethird share each under the perpetual lease deeds dated 27.2.1974,
1.3.1974 and another perpetual lease deed dated 1.3.1974, the details
of which are given in para 3 of the plaint. It is also asserted that
plaintiff No.1, plaintiff No.2 and defendant No.1 are the wives of
defendant No.3, defendant No.4 & defendant No.2 respectively and in
order to secure their wives defendant No.3 gifted his leasehold rights
in favor of defendant No.1, however, retaining his rights to live in the
said property during his lifetime and defendant No.4 gifted his
leasehold rights in the said property in favor of plaintiff No.2 and
defendant No.2 gifted his leasehold rights in the said property in favor
of plaintiff No.1 and this was incorporated in declaration of gift deed
dated 1.4.2000.

14.

The plaintiffs have also contended that now there are three

CS (OS) No.1158/2005

Page 6 of 16

units of Rai family one comprising of plaintiff No.1 and defendant
No.3, second comprising of plaintiff No.2 and defendant No.4 along
with family members and third comprising of defendant No.1 and
defendant No.2 along with their family members. All the three units
are in possession of different areas which are shown in the plan with
the inks pink, blue and red whereas the green areas are common
areas.

15.

According to the plaintiffs an agreement was executed between

the parties which was titled as “The Rai Family Agreement” dated 19th
March, 2000 which has been partly implemented where it was agreed
that all the three units will have one third of the property.

16.

The plaintiff has sought partition detailing the facts on account

of another communication between the defendant Nos.1 & 2 on the
one hand and other family members on the other leading to the
tension between them and, therefore, the demarcation of the property
in three units have been claimed which is according to the plaintiff
necessary as three units are the joint lessees for the purposes of
peaceful and proper enjoyment of the said property as per their
respective shares.

17.

Rejection of a plaint is a serious matter as it non suits the

CS (OS) No.1158/2005

Page 7 of 16

plaintiff and kills the cause of action. It cannot be ordered cursorily
without satisfying the requirement of the said provision. To decide
under Order VII Rule 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure, averments in
the plaint have to be read without looking at the defense and
thereupon it has to be seen whether on the averments made in the
plaint, Order VII Rule 11 get attracted or not and from the averments
made in the plaint it has to be seen whether the jurisdiction of the
Court is made out or not and whether the suit is barred by any law or
plaint does not disclose any cause of action. Reliance for this
proposition can be placed on 2005 (4) AD (Delhi) 541, Kanwal Kishore
Manchanda Vs S.D.Technical

Services

Pvt.

Ltd.;

2005 (2) AD

(Delhi) 430, Arvinda Kumar Singh Vs Hardayal Kaur; 2005 (116) DLT
191, Asha Bhatia Vs. V.L.Bhatia; 2003 (5) AD (Delhi) 370, Punam
Laroia Vs Sanjeev Laroia 2004 (111) DLT 121, Condour Power
Products Pvt. Ltd. Vs Sandeep Rohtagi.

18.

To ascertain whether the plaint discloses cause of action or not

the averments made in the plaint only have to be seen. A cause of
action is a bundle of facts which are required to be pleaded and
proved for the purpose of obtaining relief claimed in the suit. For the
aforementioned purpose, the material facts are required to be stated
but not the evidence except in certain cases where the pleading relies
on any misrepresentation, fraud, breach of trust, willful default, or
CS (OS) No.1158/2005

Page 8 of 16

undue influence. Whether a plaint discloses a cause of action or not is
essentially a question of fact. But whether it does or does not must be
found out from reading the plaint itself. For the said purpose the
averments made in the plaint in their entirety must be held to be
correct. The test is, if the averments made in the plaint are taken to
be correct in their entirety, a decree would be passed or not. In
ascertaining whether the plaint shows a cause of action, the court is
not required to make an elaborate enquiry into doubtful or
complicated questions of law or fact. By the statute the jurisdiction of
the court is restricted to ascertaining whether on the allegations a
cause of action is shown. In Vijai Pratap Singh v. Dukh Haran Nath
Singh (AIR 1962 SC 941) the Supreme Court held: (AIR pp.943-44,
para 9)
“
By the express terms of Rule 5 clause (d), the court
is concerned to ascertain whether the allegations made in
the petition show a cause of action. The court has not to
see whether the claim made by the petitioner is likely
to succeed: it has merely to satisfy itself that the
allegations made in the petition, if accepted as true,
would entitle the petitioner to the relief he claims. If
accepting those allegations as true no case is made
out for granting relief no cause of action would be
shown and the petition must be rejected. But in
ascertaining whether the petition shows a cause of
action the court does not enter upon a trial of the
issues affecting the merits of the claim made by the
petitioner. It cannot take into consideration the
defences which the defendant may raise upon the
merits; nor is the court competent to make an
elaborate enquiry into doubtful or complicated
questions of law or fact. If the allegations in the petition,
prima facie, show a cause of action, the court cannot
embark upon an enquiry whether the allegations are true
in fact, or whether the petitioner will succeed in the
claims made by him.”

CS (OS) No.1158/2005

Page 9 of 16

19.

Therefore, if the plaint discloses some cause of action or raises

some questions which require to be adjudicated or decided by the
judge, the mere fact that the case is weak and not likely to succeed is
no ground for striking it out. The purported failure of the pleadings to
disclose a cause of action is distinct from the absence of full
particulars. In ascertaining whether the plaint shows a cause of action
the court does not enter upon a trial of the issues affecting the merits of
the claim made by the plaintiff. It cannot take into consideration the
defenses which the defendant may raise upon the merits; nor is the
court competent to make an elaborate enquiry into doubtful or
complicated questions of law or fact.
20.

For consideration whether the plaint discloses cause of action or

not the pleas and documents of the defendants are not to be
considered. In D. Ramachandran Vs. R.V. Janakiraman and Others,
(1999) 3 SCC 267 the Apex Court had held that effect of dismissal of a
suit is altogether different and distinct from the effect of rejection of
the plaint. The Apex Court had held as under:“Learned Single Judge fell in error in placing reliance
upon the material supplied by the defendant, which
alone is sufficient to set aside the impugned order.
Learned Single Judge instead of proceeding to reject the
plaint dismissed the suit, which approach is also
erroneous. The effect of dismissal of suit is altogether
different and distinct from the effect of rejection of the
plaint. In case plaint is rejected under Order 7 Rule 11,
CPC, filing of a fresh plaint in respect of the same cause
CS (OS) No.1158/2005

Page 10 of 16

of action is specifically, permitted under Rule 13 of Order
7, CPC. Altogether different consequence follows in the
event of dismissal of suit, which has the effect of
precluding the plaintiff to file a fresh suit on the same
cause of action. Rejection of plaint takes away the very
basis of the suit rendering as if there was no suit at all or
that no suit was instituted. Order of dismissal of suit
while recognizing the existence of a suit indicates its
termination. While deciding the application under
Order 7 Rule 11, CPC, learned Single Judge ought not
and could not have dismissed the suit. Even in the
decision of the Supreme Court in T.Arvindandam's case
(Supra), relied upon by learned Counsel for the appellant,
it was held that if on a meaningful-not formal-reading of
the plaint it is manifestly vexatious and merit-less, in the
sense of not disclosing a clear right to sue, the Trial
Court should exercise his power under Order 7 Rule 11,
CPC taking care to see that the ground mentioned therein
is fulfilled. In order to fulfill that ground bare allegation
made in the plaint and documents filed therewith
were required to be looked into, which in the instant
case clearly disclosed at least a cause of action
against the defendant that defendant was liable for
damages for its acts of omission and commission. It
would be an altogether different situation that the
plaintiff might not ultimately succeed in obtaining a
decree against the defendant or that Court might come to
the conclusion that suit would not be maintainable
against the defendant and that plaintiff had a cause of
action only against defendant's principal and its parent
until in Hong Kong, but such aspect could not have been
gone into at this stage. Three paragraphs of the plaint
quoted above in our view do clearly disclose cause of
action for the plaintiff to claim damages.”
21.

Perusal of the entire plaint reflect that three units of this family

one comprising of plaintiff No.1 and defendant No.3, second
comprising of plaintiff No.2 and defendant No.4 along with family
members and third comprising of defendant No.1 and defendant No.2
along with their family members are seeking of segregation of their

CS (OS) No.1158/2005

Page 11 of 16

portions in the property. All the three units are in possession of
different areas which are shown in the plan with the inks pink, blue
and red whereas the green areas are common areas.

This is not

denied that the lease deeds were executed in favor of defendant nos. 2
& 3 and Shri Jaswant Rai.

22.

If the defendant no.2 & 3 and Shri Jaswant Rai were the

lessees, whether they could create further lease in favor of others
without the written consent of the landlord of the premises, is the
main dispute raised by the applicant. Whether a tenant can gift the
tenancy rights and on such gift the tenancy in favor of the tenant will
be extinguished and a new tenancy will be created in favor of the
donee or the donee will be sub lessee or will have independent rights
is to be ascertained on the basis of the plea of the applicant. If one
reads the entire plaint, it emerges that three units of family seek
different portions of the tenanted property and out of these three
units the lease deeds in favor of defendant no.2 and defendant no.3
are admitted. Regarding the third unit the lease deed is in favor of
Shri Jaswant Rai who has attorned the tenancy in favor of his brother
Defendant no.4. Whether he can do it or not requires consideration,
in the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case. What also has to
be determined whether defendant no.2,3 & 4 could transfer assign the
rights in favor of plaintiff nos. 1 & 2 and defendant no.1. The rejection

CS (OS) No.1158/2005

Page 12 of 16

of the plaint is also sought on the ground that the lessor of the
premises is a necessary party in the facts and circumstances of the
case. Whether the landlord(s) are necessary parties to the suit for
division of tenancy rights is a plea in defense which may not be
considered for rejection of the plaint in the facts and circumstances of
the case. The Apex Court has held that the purported failure of the
pleadings to disclose a cause of action is distinct from the absence of
full particulars. In ascertaining whether the plaint shows a cause of
action the court does not enter upon a trial of the issues affecting the
merits of the claim made by the plaintiff nor can take into
consideration the defenses raises by the defendants nor it is
appropriate for the Court to make an elaborate enquiry into
complicated question of law or fact.

23.

There are three units of family which are seeking partition,

segregation of their portion so that these units may live in harmony.
Even if the alleged gift deeds in favor of some of them are ultimately
held to be not valid on the basis of objections raised by the applicant,
regarding gift deeds not in accordance with and barred under Section
123 of the Transfer of Property Act and section 17 and 49 of the
Registration Act,

the lease deeds in favor of other member of the

three units are valid and therefore, whether the lease hold rights can
be divided or not has to be adjudicated especially because the status

CS (OS) No.1158/2005

Page 13 of 16

of the parties in the suit of partition, co-lessee i.e plaintiffs and the
defendants shall be same.

The Supreme Court had held that the

Court does not to have to see whether the claim made by the plaintiff
is likely to succeed but it has merely to satisfy itself that the
allegations made in the plaint, if accepted as true, would entitle the
plaintiff

to the relief he claims. In ascertaining whether the plaint

shows a cause of action the court does not enter upon a trial of the
issues affecting the merits of the claim made by the plaintiff. The
Court should not and cannot take into consideration the defenses
which the defendant may raise upon the merits; nor is the court
competent to make an elaborate enquiry into doubtful or complicated
questions of law or fact for rejection of the plaint.

24.

A fortiori, this Court will not go into question whether the

parting of portion of tenancies are barred under the provision of the
Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 for the purposes of determining whether
the plaint is liable to be rejected or not. In any case whether the
alleged gifts by some of the lessees will amount to sub letting or not
and will be barred under the Delhi Rent Control Act will give a cause
of action to the Lessor of the premises and not to some of the colessee. Under the Rent Control Act, 1958 the bar against parting of
the possession or assignment or subletting depends on the consent of
the landlord. If the landlord has consented or does not take action,

CS (OS) No.1158/2005

Page 14 of 16

some of the sub lessees cannot take this plea and seek rejection of the
plaint on this ground.

25.

Similarly on the ground that the plaint has not been signed,

verified and filed in accordance with the provisions of Delhi High
Court Rules and of the Code of Civil Procedure and that the
verification of the plaint is defective and that the suit is bad and not
maintainable for non joinder of necessary parties as the lessors of the
demised premises comprising in 12, Aurangzeb Lane, New Delhi are
necessary

parties

are

the

defenses

raised

by

the

defendants/applicants on these grounds the plaint cannot be
rejected.

26.

The issues in this matter has not yet been framed. In case after

issues are framed and some of the issues can be treated as
preliminary issues which can be decided without evidence and which
will be issues purely on law, the suit can be dismissed but on these
allegations as has been raised by the defendants/applicant the plaint
cannot be rejected. The Apex Court in D.Ramachandran (supra) had
held that the rejection of the plaint is different from dismissal of the
suit as the effect of dismissal of suit is altogether different and
distinct from the effect of rejection of the plaint. In case plaint is
rejected under Order 7 Rule 11, CPC, filing of a fresh plaint in respect

CS (OS) No.1158/2005

Page 15 of 16

of the same cause of action is specifically, permitted under Rule 13 of
Order 7, CPC. Altogether different consequence follows in the event of
dismissal of suit, which has the effect of precluding the plaintiff to file
a fresh suit on the same cause of action. Rejection of plaint takes
away the very basis of the suit rendering as if there was no suit at all
or that no suit was instituted. Order of dismissal of suit while
recognizing

the existence of a suit indicates its termination.

Consequently on the grounds as raised by the applicant, the plaint
cannot be rejected in the present facts and circumstances.

27.

For the aforesaid reasons, the application for rejection of the

plaint by the applicant under Order VII rule 11 of the Code of Civil
Procedure is without any merit and it is dismissed.

November 30, 2007
'k'

CS (OS) No.1158/2005

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 16 of 16

