IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Date of decision : October 30, 2007
CS(OS) No.199/2006

#
!

MKJ Developers Limited
Through:

..........
Plaintiff
Mr.Anil Kher, Sr.Advocate with
Mr.Rishi Manchanda, Advocate.

Versus
$
^

Growth Techno Projects Ltd & Anr .........
Defendants
Through: Mr.P.Jauhar with Ms.Anupama
Kaul, Advocates.

CORAM :* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

YES

2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?

NO

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.(Oral)
IA No. 9215/2006
1.

This order shall dispose of defendants' application under

Section 8 of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 for appointment
of an Arbitrator in terms of the Arbitration agreement between the
parties.

CS(OS) No.199/2006

Page 1 of 12

2.

The plaintiff has filed the suit for recovery of a sum of

Rs.1,22,76,094/- along with interest under Order XXXVII of the Code
of the Civil Procedure alleging inter alia that in the year 1999, plaintiff
and its associate companies were looking for investment option in
Delhi and defendant No.2 represented himself to be a Director of
defendant No.1.

It was represented that they were developing a

residential complex in Shahdara and since defendants were looking
for parties to invest in their project, the plaintiff and its associate
companies were persuaded to invest by entering into agreement to
sell.

The plaintiff was represented that by an agreement of

development dated 2nd April, 1987, the defendant No.2 had acquired
the rights of development of land measuring 323 Bigha 11 biswa and
17 biswassi in village Karkardooma, Shahdara, Delhi.
Builders

&

Developers

and

defendant

No.2

entered

Devidayal
into

a

Development Collaboration Agreement dated 15th July, 1987 for the
development, however, the development agreement was dissolved by a
memorandum of understanding dated 26th May, 1989 whereby
defendant No.2 became absolute beneficiary of the development
collaboration agreement dated 15th July, 1987 and all the rights of
defendant No.2 were assigned in favor of defendant No.1 who became
entitled for 38,00,000 sq.ft.. It was represented that the defendant
no.1 is entitled to sell or otherwise dispose of that area.

CS(OS) No.199/2006

Page 2 of 12

3.

Consequently, the plaintiff and defendant No.1 entered into 24

separate agreements for sell dated 18th April, 1999 for purchase of 24
flats in the residential complex. Under the said agreements to sell,
the plaintiff paid to the defendant No.1 an amount of Rs.21,14,100/towards part consideration for the 24 flats. It was categorically agreed
between the plaintiff and the defendants that in the event of
defendants' failure to obtain approved sanction plan from the
appropriate authorities, it shall pay interest to the plaintiff on all
amounts

which

the

plaintiff

has paid

to

the

defendants

as

consideration for the purchase or any amount which shall be paid to
the defendants on behalf of plaintiff along with interest at the rate of
24% per annum on quarterly rest. The plaintiff was also given liberty
to terminate the agreement at any time by sending a communication
to that effect and on termination, it was agreed that defendants shall
refund all such amounts which will be paid by the plaintiff to the
defendant no.1 with interest at 24% per annum with quarterly rest.

4.

The defendant No.2 also executed a personal guarantee for due

performance of agreement entered into between defendant No.1 and
the plaintiff for the sale of flats and for refund of amount with interest
in case of termination of the agreement.

5.

It is contended that since the agreement was terminated and

CS(OS) No.199/2006

Page 3 of 12

the defendants failed to perform their part of agreement, they became
liable to pay amount with interest and on their failure to pay the
amount, the present suit was filed for recovery of Rs.1,22,76,094/which included the amount of Rs.21,14,100/- along with interest and
penal interest payable by the defendants in terms of agreement dated
18th April, 1999.

6.

The application under section 8 of the Arbitration and

Conciliation Act, 1996 has been filed by the defendants contending
inter alia that the plaintiff have neither relied upon nor produced a
copy of another agreement dated 18th April, 1999 where other terms
and conditions were agreed between the parties including for
adjudication of disputes by arbitration in respect of the flat which was
agreed to be sold by the defendant no.1 to the plaintiff.

The other

agreement to sell dated 18th April, 1999 (same date) clearly stipulated
that in case the plaintiff does not wish to purchase, the residential
units, option shall be given to the defendants to buy back the said
residential units and by the said agreement it was also agreed that
the plaintiff shall exercise his option to sell the residential unit to the
defendants at the rate of Rs.2,350/- per sq.ft.

7.

According to the defendants, the agreement to buy back the

residential units was a supplementary agreement to be read with

CS(OS) No.199/2006

Page 4 of 12

agreement to sell dated 18th April, 1999 executed between the plaintiff
and defendants for which the suit for recovery of the amount has been
filed by the plaintiff.

8.

According to the defendants, the supplementary agreement

dated 18th April, 1999 contains an arbitration agreement between the
parties which is as under:“5.
That in the event of any difference or disputes
between the parties arising out of or under this
agreement, the same shall be referred to arbitration of
three arbitrators to be appointed by each of the parties
and the third arbitrator to be appointed by both the
arbitrators mutually. All such arbitration proceedings
shall be held in New Delhi and the provision of
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 shall apply in this
regard”.

9.

The contention of the defendants is that since there is an

arbitration agreement all the disputes raised by the plaintiff for
recovery of amount including the interest and penal interest be
decided by the arbitration and an arbitrator in terms of arbitration
agreement be appointed.

10.

The application is contested by the plaintiff contending that the

defendants have not come to this Hon'ble Court with clean hands and
have concealed the material facts.

It is contended that the

supplementary agreement, “buy back”, is not the basis of the present
CS(OS) No.199/2006

Page 5 of 12

suit and as such the arbitration agreement incorporated in the buy
back agreement cannot be invoked by the defendants for appointment
of an arbitrator. According to the plaintiff, the cause of action has
arisen between the parties on the basis of first agreement to sell
between the plaintiff and the defendants dated 18th April, 1999 under
which the plaintiff could terminate the agreement and recover the
amount already paid along with interest and penal interest. The plea
of the plaintiff is that since the residential units as had been agreed
could not be constructed by the defendants, therefore, the second
agreement, buy back agreement, could not be invoked which was for
repurchase of the constructed residential units by the defendants
from the plaintiff for which earlier agreement dated 18th April, 1999 (of
the same date) was executed.

11.

I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length. The

main contention of the learned counsel for the defendants is that buy
back agreement dated 18th April, 1999 also refers to the agreement to
sell dated 18th April, 1999 whereby a part of the consideration of the
flat was paid by plaintiff to the defendants and the agreement for
purchase of the flat could be terminated by the plaintiff at its option
in which case the defendants were liable to return the consideration
paid

to

them

supplementary

along

with

agreement

CS(OS) No.199/2006

interest

(buy

back

and

penal

interest.

agreement)

was

The

only

Page 6 of 12

a

contingent

agreement

which

could

have

come

into

force

on

construction of residential units as had been agreed between the
parties. Mere reference of the agreement to sell dated 18th April, 1999
in the buyback agreement dated 18th April, 1999, does not make it an
agreement whereby the arbitration agreement in the buy back
agreement can be interpolated to the agreement for the purchase of
flat under which on termination of the agreement the defendants were
liable to refund the entire amount with interest and penal interest.

12.

The agreement to sell of flat dated 18th April, 1999 was executed

by the defendant no.1 in favor of plaintiff and a personal guarantee
agreement for performance of the terms of the agreement to sell of the
flat by the defendant no.1 to the plaintiff was also executed by the
defendant No.2 in favor of plaintiff under which the plaintiff was
entitled to purchase the flat which was to be developed by the
defendants and the said agreement which was mainly for the purpose
of investment, could be terminated by the plaintiff by giving a notice
and on termination of the agreement, the defendants were liable to
pay back the amounts invested, the part of the consideration paid to
the defendants, along with interest and penal interest.

13.

The `buyback’ agreement is a distinct agreement and it was

contingent upon the construction of the flat because only after the

CS(OS) No.199/2006

Page 7 of 12

construction of the flat and payment of entire consideration and the
title of the said flat being transferred in favor of plaintiff, the
`buyback’ agreement could come into force under which the plaintiff
was entitled to sell the agreement to the defendants for the price
agreed by the defendants. On perusal of the two agreements and in
the facts and circumstances, it is apparent that the agreement to sell
dated 18th April, 1999 executed by the defendant no.1 in favor of the
plaintiff and the guarantee agreement executed by defendant No.2 in
favour of plaintiff are distinct agreement with the `buyback’ agreement
executed between the plaintiff and defendants.

An arbitration

agreement in respect of buy back agreement after the construction of
flat cannot be related back to the agreement to sell and the guarantee
agreement executed by defendant No.2 in favor of plaintiff.

14.

Learned counsel for the plaintiff has relied on 95 (2002) Delhi

Law Times 290, Maruti Udyog Limited Vs. Mahalaxmi Motors Ltd. &
another holding that an arbitration clause cannot be invoked where
there is an admitted liability. In this matter, there was a dealership
agreement between the parties and the liability was admitted and,
consequently, the arbitration clause invoked by the defendants for
appointment of arbitrator was not resorted to holding that there
should be difference or disputes with regard to a particular liability
arising out of terms of the agreement. Reliance has also been placed

CS(OS) No.199/2006

Page 8 of 12

on AIR 2003 Supreme Court 2252, Sukanya Holdings Pvt. Ltd. Vs.
Jayesh H. Pandya and another about the ambit of arbitration
agreement.

It was held that the matter which lies outside the

arbitration agreement and is also between some of the parties who are
not parties to the arbitration agreement, the arbitrator cannot be
appointed. In the present case, the liability of defendant No.2 is on
the basis of personal guarantee agreement executed by defendant
No.2 in favor of plaintiff pursuant to agreement to sell dated 18th
April, 1999.

There is no liability of defendant No.2 under the

‘buyback’ agreement dated 18th April, 1999 and which agreement was
contingent on completion of the flat and the transfer of the flat in
favor of the plaintiff which was agreed to be repurchased from the
plaintiff

by

the

defendant

No.1

for

an

agreed

consideration.

Admittedly in the present case, the flat was not constructed and
rights in the constructed flat had not been conveyed in favor of
plaintiff and consequently if the flat was not constructed, the same
could not be sold or transferred back to the defendants and
consequently no disputes have arisen between the parties on the
basis of `buyback’ agreement.

15.

Admittedly there is no arbitration agreement in respect to the

agreement to sell dated 18th April, 1999 and the personal guarantee
agreement executed by defendant No.2 in favor of plaintiff. In AIR

CS(OS) No.199/2006

Page 9 of 12

2002 Bombay 8, Garden Finance Ltd. Vs. Prakash Industries Limited,
a single Judge of Bombay High Court had held that Section 5 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act will not come in the way of the High
Court entertaining the suit on the basis of lease agreement and the
guarantee agreement executed by defendant No.2. In this case, the
subject matter of the suit was on the basis of two agreements,
namely, the agreement of lease of equipment between the plaintiff and
defendant No.2 as also the agreement of guarantee between the
plaintiff and the defendant No.2. Though the agreement of lease had
an arbitration clause but there was no arbitration agreement in
respect of the agreement of guarantee and since the suit was filed
against defendant No.1 and defendant No.2 and in case of defendant
No.1, there was an arbitration agreement whereas in case of
defendant No.2 there was no arbitration agreement, it was held that
the suit would be maintainable. Similar is the position in the present
case inasmuch as there is no arbitration agreement under the
personal guarantee executed by defendant No.2 in favor of defendant
No.1 pursuant to agreement to sell dated 18th April, 1999. Even
agreement to sell dated 18th April, 1999 does not have any arbitration
agreement.

Consequently, section 5 will not come in the way of

maintainability of the present suit and the defendants are not entitled
to invoke section 8 of the Arbitration Act for appointment of an
arbitrator.

CS(OS) No.199/2006

Page 10 of 12

16.

In the facts and circumstances, the inevitable inference is that

there is no arbitration agreement between the parties in respect of the
matters in controversies in the present suit for recovery of part of the
consideration paid and the interest and the penal interest thereon.
Consequently, in the facts and circumstances, the inevitable inference
is that under the agreement to sell dated 18th April, 1999 under which
a part of consideration was paid to the defendants which agreement
could be terminated by the plaintiff and the defendants including
defendant No.2 who had executed a personal guarantee agreement
were liable to refund the entire amount along with interest and penal
interest, do not contain any arbitration agreement.

Since the

agreement to sell and the guarantee agreement executed by defendant
No.2 in favor of plaintiff do not contain any arbitration agreement,
therefore, the disputes between the parties which are only pertaining
to first agreement as the plaintiff has only sought recovery of part of
the consideration paid by plaintiff to defendants along with interest
and penal interest under the agreement to sell dated 18th April, 1999,
the disputes raised in the present suit cannot be adjudicated by
appointment of an arbitrator.

17.

Considering all the facts and circumstances and law cited by

the parties, the inevitable inference is that there is no arbitration

CS(OS) No.199/2006

Page 11 of 12

agreement in respect of disputes which are the basis of the suit and
consequently the application is dismissed.
IA Nos.6607/2006 and 10996/2006 in CS(OS) No.199/2006
Learned counsel for defendants seeks time to file leave to defend
application and reply to IA No.10996/2006 without prejudice to the
rights and contentions of the plaintiff that the application for leave to
defend has already been barred by time. The application for leave to
defend be filed within 10 days from today. Reply, if any, be filed within
four weeks thereafter.
List on April 11, 2008.

October 30, 2007
'Dev'

CS(OS) No.199/2006

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 12 of 12

