IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Date of decision : October 31, 2007
CS(OS) No.1755/2007

#
!

Munnu Lal Mishra
Through:

......... Plaintiff
Mr. Chetan Sharma Sr. Advocate
With Mr. Santosh Chauriha, Advocate
Vs.

$
^

National Federation of the Blind & Others .......... Defendants
Through : Mr.S.K.Rungta, defendant no.3 in
person and Advocate for Defendant
No.1.
Mr.A.P.Dhamija Advocate for
defendant no.2
Ms. Sadhna Chaudhary,
Advocate for Defendant no.4

CORAM :* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

YES

2. To be referred to the reporter or not ?

NO

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

NO

ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)

IA. NO. 11008 OF 2007

1.

This order shall dispose of plaintiff’s application under Order 39

Rules 1 & 2 of the code of civil procedure seeking a restraint against

CS(OS) No.1755/2007

Page 1 of 23

the defendants to hold election on the basis of present voters list and
registration form with the help of paid staff of the Federation.

2.

The plaintiff has filed this suit for declaration and Permanent

injunction seeking a decree of declaration that the voter list,
resolution dated 8th September, 2007 with regard to cancellation of
affiliate body and the registration form prepared by defendants, as
illegal. The plaintiff has also sought a decree for mandatory injunction
seeking direction against the defendants to hold the election of the
Executive Council under the supervision of an independent agency or
under the supervision of an observer appointed by the Court.

3.

The plaintiff contended that he is a member of defendant No.1

and

he was the Vice President of Central Zone of the National

Federation of the Blind. It is contended by the plaintiff that earlier
defendant

No.1

was

known

as

National

Federation

of

Blind

Graduates, however, in the year 1978, the name of the defendant no.1
was changed to National Federation of the Blind. This is stated that
the defendant No.3 is involved with the affairs of the defendant no.1
Federation since 1978 and is its General Secretary since 1987 and he
is managing its affairs.

It is asserted that although there are 14

members of the Executive Council of defendant No.1, however,
defendant No.3 is wholly and solely responsible for managing the
CS(OS) No.1755/2007

Page 2 of 23

affairs of defendant No.1. Allegation of the plaintiff is that in
managing the affairs of the defendant no.1 the defendant no.3 acts
with high handedness and arbitrarily and if anyone speaks against
the high handedness

and arbitrariness of defendant No.3, his

membership is immediately terminated by Executive Council of
defendant No.1.

4.

The plea of the plaintiff is that the election of the Executive

Council of defendant No.1 takes place on all-India basis and the
members who join the Federation in the year prior to the election are
eligible to participate in the election. Eligible members of the
Federation have to get their names registered to cast their votes for
the Executive Council and their names are included in the voter list
which is prepared by the Federation. The federation, defendant No.1
provides admit cards to the members who get their names registered
after depositing the prescribed fee.

5.

According to the plaintiff, though the Federation had decided

that the list of actual members should have been published by 31st
December, 2005, however, list was published only in May 2007. It is
further asserted that the list of registered members who have voting
rights should have been published by 31st August, 2007, however, the
list had been made available on compact disc (CD) only on 11th
CS(OS) No.1755/2007

Page 3 of 23

September, 2007. According to the plaintiff, he had to resign from the
post of Vice President of Central Zone on 12th September, 2007 on
account of autocratic, undemocratic and unconstitutional functioning
of defendant No.3. The plaintiff has also alleged difference in the voter
list which was prepared at the time of election of Madhya Pradesh
Branch of the Federation which was issued by the Head Office of the
Federation and the present voter list. The discrepancy in the names
of actual members published in May 2007 has also been alleged and
it

is

contended

that

the

discrepancies

are

on

account

of

manipulations done by defendant No.3 in the ensuing election.

6.

The grievance of the plaintiff is that defendant No.3 is holding

the post of General Secretary for more than 25 years and he conducts
election in such a manner in connivance with his trusted paid
employees that no other person, who contests the election, succeeds
in the election as the persons who are employed to manage the
election process are the paid employees of the National Executive
Council of defendant No.1 where the dictate of defendant No.3
prevails.

The apprehension of the plaintiff is that the elections which

are scheduled to be held on 4th November, 2007 at Udaipur
(Rajasthan) shall not be free, fair and impartial. It is further pleaded
that the rules and regulations of defendant No.1 prohibits any paid
employee to be a member. However, there are various paid employees
CS(OS) No.1755/2007

Page 4 of 23

of the Federation whose names appear as members of the defendant
No.1. Even the names of the members who have died appears in the
list of members provided by the defendant No.3.

7.

Other allegation of the plaintiff is that there have been several

instances where paid employees were made to escort the members for
casting their votes and the conduct of these escorts was detrimental
to hold free and fair election as they tampered with the votes of
opponents. According to the plaintiff, column 9 of the registration
form provides for help of guide/escort for registered members who do
not know braille script and in such cases central representatives are
appointed as guide/escort who are directly accountable to General
Secretary and they play a very crucial role at the time of voting and at
the time of counting, as they manipulate and tamper with the votes in
favor of the candidate they are interested. It is alleged that although
the election is conducted by secret ballot, however, the presence of
paid employees as escorts defeats the very purpose of secret ballot.

8.

On these grounds, the plaintiff has sought an interim order that

the defendants more particularly defendant no.3 be restrained from
holding the election on the basis of present voter list and registration
form with the help of the paid staff of the Federation.

CS(OS) No.1755/2007

Page 5 of 23

9.

The suit of the plaintiff and the application for interim

injunction is contested by the defendants contending inter alia that
the plaintiff has concealed the material fact as he is seeking election
to the posts of President and General Secretary in the ensuing
election in respect of which the voter list has been challenged. It is
contended that the plaintiff is not entitled for interim relief on the
ground that various candidates to various posts for the ensuing
election are the necessary parties who have not been impleaded and,
therefore, the plaint suffers from non-joinder of necessary parties and
interim relief as sought by the plaintiff should be declined. The
defendant Nos.1 and 3 have also opposed the grant of interim relief on
the ground that the plaint does not disclose cause of action and the
plaintiff has been a party to all the decision taken by National
Executive Council of defendant no.1 with regard to process of election
including mode of registration, format for registration, finalization of
list of eligible members entitled to be registered on payment of
registration fee and on completing the registration form along with
finalization of registrants/voter list etc and he did not object to the
decisions taken earlier and this fact has also not been disclosed by
the plaintiff. Concealment of the fact that the plaintiff had filed
objection to the voter list circulated in May 2007 and which objections
were considered and voter list was rectified, has also been alleged

CS(OS) No.1755/2007

Page 6 of 23

against the plaintiff. Grant of interim relief is also opposed on the
ground that in the plaint plaintiff has not sought any consequential
reliefs after the cancellation of impugned voter list and even a decree
of mandatory injunction has been sought without challenging the
appointment of nomination-cum-election committee formed by the
National Executive Council of defendant No.1 to which decision the
plaintiff was a party and no bias or malafide has been alleged against
the said election committee. It is also contended that the suit has not
been properly valued for the purpose of relief of declaration and
deficient court fee has been paid as the assets of the defendant No.1
are more than Rs.70.00 crores and the plaintiff has valued the suit for
Rs.20.00 lakh only.

10.

The defendants further contended that the suit has been filed

by the plaintiff with malafide intention as plaintiff was not allowed to
continuously burden the defendant No.1 with heavy bills of mobile
phones sometimes ranging between Rs.12,000/- to Rs.18,000/- per
month without any justification, to which strong exception was taken
by the defendant Nos.2 and 3 more so because the cheques issued by
the plaintiff were dishonoured towards the payment of installment of
housing loans to defendant No.1.

The defendant No.3 has

categorically denied that defendant No.3 is solely responsible for
managing the affairs of defendant No.1. According to him the bye laws
CS(OS) No.1755/2007

Page 7 of 23

of defendant No.1 provides for rights and duties of each of the office
bearers separately and everyone operates in accordance with those
rights and duties.

It is also contended that the plaintiff has been a

party to the approval of registration form by the National Executive
Council and the plaintiff never differed from the decisions taken by
the National Executive Council and, therefore, the allegations now
made in the suit are after thoughts an election gimmick before the
elections.

The allegations of any high handedness or any decision

taken arbitrarily by the defendant No.3 contrary to the rules is not
admitted and it is contended that no instance of such high
handedness or arbitrary decision taken by the defendant no.3 have
been given. It is contended that till the plaintiff was the vice president
of Central zone no such objections were ever raised by the plaintiff
and some of the anomalies pointed out by the plaintiff in the voter list
were corrected and other anomalies alleged that the names of dead
members were not deleted in the list of members, were found to be
untrue as those members were found to be alive.

After May 2007

when the plaintiff had raised certain specific objections to the list, no
specific objections were raised by the plaintiff. Even in the plaint the
allegation made are generic and no instances have been given of the
paid employees being the members of the Federation, dead members
whose names have not been deleted, details of paid employees who
tampered with the votes or such instances and the instances of high

CS(OS) No.1755/2007

Page 8 of 23

handedness and arbitrary decisions taken by the defendant no.3.

11.

I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and

have perused the pleadings and documents filed and relied on by the
parties. This has not been disputed that the plaintiff was a party to
the various decision taken by the National Executive Council
including conduct of election, preparation of voter list, finalization of
registration form and appointment of an independent election
committee and did not differ from the decision taken by the National
Executive Council nor objected to the procedure adopted and form
finalized.

If the plaintiff was involved in the process of decision

making for conducting the elections and for the modalities of election
which has already been set into motion, normally he cannot be
allowed to seek stay of ensuing elections to be held on 4th November,
2007 on the basis of the voter list, against which objections were filed
by the plaintiff and which were considered and decided and the list
was finalized thereafter and the registration form was also approved
in the meeting which was also attended by the plaintiff.

12.

The

learned

counsel

for

the

plaintiff,

on

instructions,

consequently does not press the interim relief seeking the stay of
election on 4th November, 2007. Perusal of the application for interim
relief under Order XXXIX Rules 1 and 2 read with Section 151 of the
CS(OS) No.1755/2007

Page 9 of 23

Code of Civil Procedure, shows that the plaintiff has only sought the
relief that the defendants be restrained more particularly defendant
No.3 to hold the election on the basis of present voter list and
registration form with the help of the paid staff of the Federation. The
learned counsel for plaintiff contended that though the relief for
appointment

of

independent

observers

has

not

been

prayed

specifically as an interim relief but considering the facts and
circumstances, independent observers should be appointed to have
free and fair election.

13.

To press for the relief for appointment of independent observers,

the plaintiff

has contended that there has been large scale

manipulations in the list and the list which was to be published by
31st December, 2005 was published in May, 2007. It is also contended
that the list of registered members who have voting rights should have
been published by 31st December, 2005 whereas the list has been
given on 11.9.2007 only on CD. To substantiate these allegations the
plaintiff has tried to show the discrepancies between earlier lists of
Central zone and other zones and subsequent lists prepared.
According to him numbers of members of Madhya Pradesh branch in
the earlier list are at variance with the present voter list which shows
only 405 members. It has also been contended that in the voter list
published in May, 2007 there were 961 actual members in the
CS(OS) No.1755/2007

Page 10 of 23

Maharashtra branch whereas the list circulated shows 1440 as
registered members on the compact disc.

14.

The defendant No.3 has categorically denied that defendant

No.3 is solely responsible for managing the affairs of defendant No.1
and for the preparation of voter list or that the voter list has been
manipulated at his instance or that the objection raised against the
voter list were not considered and mistakes rectified, as the bye laws
of defendant No.1 provides for rights and duties of each of the office
bearers separately and everyone operates in accordance with those
rights and duties. It is also contended that the plaintiff has been a
party to the approval of forms and modalities of election and
consideration of cases to enroll members which may have come up
during

the

present

term

of

National

Executive

Council

for

consideration. The plaintiff never differed with the decisions taken by
the National Executive Council nor objected and, therefore, there is no
question of any high handedness or any decision taken arbitrarily by
the defendant No.3 contrary to the rules. It is also asserted that the
perusal of the plaint and the replication by the plaintiff will reflect
that besides the generic allegations, no specific instances have been
given by the plaintiff of the violation of the rules and enrollment of the
members contrary to the rules of defendant No.1. The plaintiff had
been a Vice President of Central zone at the relevant time and
CS(OS) No.1755/2007

Page 11 of 23

consequently it also cannot be inferred that had there been such
violations as alleged by the plaintiff, he would not have had the
knowledge about the specific instances.

15.

From perusal of documents filed by the parties, it transpires

that in fact the plaintiff had filed objections to the list of members for
voting pursuant to communication dated 27th April, 2007 inviting
objections to the voter list. The plaintiff had objected to about 26
cases in the members list including the objection that the names of
some of the dead members had not been deleted which objection was
found to be incorrect. Plaintiff had raised objections that two
members from Varanasi, namely, Patia Sen and Gopal Chand
Upadhyay were dead and he had sought deletion of their names. On
verification by the concerned Varanasi Unit, it was found that they
were alive and strong exception was taken to the unethical and
reckless allegation of the plaintiff. The defendants have contended
that the objections against the list were invited by letter dated 27th
April, 2007 and very few objections had been received, one of which
were from the plaintiff. This fact has not been controverted by the
plaintiff.

16.

The decision was taken on 17th March, 2007 to hold the election

in November for which a list was prepared which was circulated which
CS(OS) No.1755/2007

Page 12 of 23

was admittedly received by the plaintiff in May, 2007. After
considering the list the objections were filed by the plaintiff. In the
objections filed by the plaintiff on 15th May, 2007, the plaintiff had
taken about twenty eight

specific objections. The plaintiff raised

objections in respect of the list which was prepared considering the
eligibility till 31st December, 2005 as according to the bye-laws of the
federation, candidate eligible for election should have been enrolled in
a year preceding the year in which the General Body is held. Since the
General Body was to be held in 2007, therefore, the eligibility was to
be considered up till 31st December, 2005.

17.

In the letter dated 15th May, 2007 the plaintiff had raised about

28 specific objections besides the general objections that the
description of receipt number and whether the member is blind and
sighted had not been given in most of the cases of the members. The
defendant Nos.1 & 3 in their written statement has categorically
contended that any member who enrolls himself as a member of the
defendant no.1 at any time in the year preceding the year of the
general body meeting, is entitled to take part in the general body
meeting and cast his vote by registering for the concerned general
body and paying the registration fees and completing all other
formalities as decided by NEC. Similarly, the bye laws also provides
that for being eligible to seek any office of the defendant no.1, the
CS(OS) No.1755/2007

Page 13 of 23

concerned member should have uninterrupted membership of at least
four years apart from other conditions. No objection has been raised
about those members who are contesting the elections. The objection
is to the members who are the voters. All those members who has
been enrolled as the members of the federation, defendant No.1 on or
before 31st December, 2005 were eligible to register themselves after
making payment of the registration fees of Rs.20/- which was decided
by NEC. In its meeting held on 17th March, 2007 it was decided at
Nagpur to hold the General Body Meeting and election on 4th
November, 2007 at Udaipur, Rajasthan and consequently the list of
eligible members was circulated and objections were invited where
plaintiff filed objections dated 15th May, 2007 raising 28 specific
objections regarding the members including the objection that some
members are dead. In the circumstances it is apparent that the plea
of the plaintiff that the membership list should have been published
by 31st December, 2005 is not correct. The plaintiff in the plaint did
not disclose that he had filed the objections by letter dated 15th May,
2007 which were considered and certain anomalies pointed out by the
plaintiff were rectified. The plaintiff also cannot feign ignorance of the
registering of the members till 31st August, 2007 who have voting
rights, as it was decided in the meeting of NEC held on 17th March,
2007 at Nagpur which was attended by the plaintiff and no objection
was taken to the decisions taken by the NEC on 17th March, 2007.

CS(OS) No.1755/2007

Page 14 of 23

The defendants have categorically denied the averment that there are
5285 registered members as has been alleged by the plaintiff. It has
been categorically contended that the compact disc containing the
names of the registered members was circulated on 11.9.2007 which
has been admitted even by the plaintiff. However, no objection to the
same has been filed by the plaintiff. If the plaintiff could file the
objections to the list which was circulated in May, 2007 raising 28
objections, which were considered, had there been any objections to
the list of members circulated by compact disc and which was also
placed on the Internet, the plaintiff would have again filed the
objections which had not been done.

18.

In the plaint also no specific instances have been given about

those members who are not eligible to participate in the election. It is
also relevant to note that to the list circulated in May, 2007 the
plaintiff had raised specific objections regarding the names of the
members and as to why they were not eligible, in his communication
dated 15th May, 2007. However, in the plaint there are no such
specific objections to the names of any of the alleged ineligible
members whose names have been put on the compact disc and on the
Internet for the ensuing election on 4th November, 2007. In the
circumstances, the probable inference is that voter list is proper for
the purpose of election and the allegations made by the plaintiff
CS(OS) No.1755/2007

Page 15 of 23

alleging discrepancies in numbers is without any rational basis and
attempt to mislead and get the interim relief. Had there been genuine
specific objections, the plaintiff would have raised the same. This
probable inference gets further support from the communication
dated 15th May, 2007 wherein plaintiff raised specific objections
against the names of various members. These objections were
considered and some rectification was carried out and other
objections raised, such as that the names of some of the dead
members which were not deleted, were found to be incorrect.
Thereafter when plaintiff wrote another letter dated 30th July, 2007,
none of those objections which were raised in the letter dated 15 th
May, 2007 regarding specific members were taken or reiterated. The
plaintiff had again raised objection to the list of members on 6th
August, however, no specific objections were taken except that there
are discrepancies between the various branches list which were
prepared earlier. The plaintiff has kept his allegations deliberately
vague regarding the list of various branches. The details of various
branch lists as to their dates and other particulars have not been
given by the plaintiff. The lists prepared earlier will be different from
the lists prepared later on, unless the allegation of the plaintiff is that
there has not been any change in number of members. No specific
objections have been disclosed by the plaintiff to the list of member
which had been put on the internet and which was also provided to

CS(OS) No.1755/2007

Page 16 of 23

the members on the compact disc. Consequently, in these facts and
circumstances it is difficult to draw an inference that there are
manipulations in the list of eligible members of voters which seems to
be one of the main plank of the plaintiff seeking an interim order
against the defendants regarding conduct of ensuing elections.

19.

The plaintiff has also relied on alleged discrepancies in the list

of members provided by the defendants, on the basis of a typed
comparison giving the name of places, number of members in the old
list and number of members in the new list. The said typed
comparison is neither signed by anyone nor it gives the dates of the
old list or the dates of the new list. Who has seen those lists and who
has prepared this comparison statement has not been disclosed nor
copies of such lists have been filed on the basis of which alleged
comparison was prepared. The plaintiff had filed the objections to the
list of members on 15th May, 2007 and such objections as are
canvassed now on the basis of this typed comparison, were not
adverted to in his objections. Consequently on the basis of alleged
discrepancies also which are without any relevant particulars, it
cannot be inferred prima facie that the list of eligible members for
voting, suffers from such discrepancies which will entitle the plaintiff
for appointment of independent observers in order to hold a fair
election fixed on 4th November, 2007.
CS(OS) No.1755/2007

Page 17 of 23

20.

The learned counsel for the plaintiff, Mr.Sharma has sought

appointment of an independent observers, though no such prayer has
been made on behalf of plaintiff in the application for interim orders
under Order 39 Rules 1 & 2 of Code of Civil Procedure, on the ground
that defendant No.3 had reserved the pre-emptry powers to appoint
the members of the Election Committee and therefore, the election
committee which has been appointed pursuant to the decision of the
NEC on 8th September, 2007 which was also attended by the plaintiff,
cannot be termed as an independent impartial committee.

21.

In the meeting of the National Executive Council (NEC) on 8th

September,

2007

it

was

decided

to

constitute

an

Election

Commission, Nomination Committee comprising of Sh.Rajpal Singh,
Retd SDO from Haryana Govt; Mr.Kishan Verma, GM Stationary
Stores, Delhi University

and the Chairperson to the Election cum

Commission Committee was to be nominated by defendant No.3 in
consultation with Sh.Virender Arya, convener of the organizing
committee.

22.

Perusal of the pleas raised by the plaintiff, reflects that no

allegations have been made about Sh.Rajpal Singh and Mr.Kishan
Verma that they are not impartial or biased. Even against the
CS(OS) No.1755/2007

Page 18 of 23

Chairperson who is a principal of the Government school of Udaipur
who has been nominated by defendant No.3 in consultation with Sh.
Virender Arya, convener of organizing committee, no allegation that he
is not impartial of bias has been made. There are no allegations that
Sh. Virender Arya has colluded with defendant no.3 in appointing the
Chairman of election committee, has been made.In the replication
filed by the plaintiff, the allegation which has been made is that the
name of ADM, Udaipur was discussed being the Chairman of the
Committee, however, he was not appointed. What is relevant in these
circumstances is that plaintiff participated in the NEC held on
8.9.2007

where

Sh.Rajpal

Singh,

Retd

SDO

from

Haryana

Government and Mr.Kishan Verma, GM Stationary Stores, Delhi
University were appointed as the members of Election Committee and
it was also agreed that defendant No.3 will nominate the Chairman in
consultation with Sh.Virender Arya. The plaintiff has not raised any
objection the nomination of Chairman of defendant No.3 in the plaint.
The plea of the learned counsel for the plaintiff that the power of
defendant No.3 was unrestricted, also cannot be accepted as the
Chairman was to be appointed in consultation with Sh.Virender Arya
and no allegations have been made against Sh.Virender Arya that he
is a man of defendant No.3 or is biased or is against the plaintiff. The
plaintiff also did not raise any objection against the nomination of a
Principal of the school as the Chairman of the Election Committee.

CS(OS) No.1755/2007

Page 19 of 23

Plaintiff had attended the meeting of NEC on 8th September, 2007 and
no objection to the appointment of election committee was raised by
the plaintiff. The only allegation which has been made is that Sh.Inder
Singh who is a nominated member of the NEC and who is also
contesting the election is closely related to one of the members of the
Election Committee. The allegation is utterly vague and had not been
raised in the plaint so that an answer could be elucidated from the
defendants. The learned counsel for the plaintiff is also unable to
point out as to how Inder Singh is related to which member of the
Election Committee. In any case this allegation will not substantiate
the case of the plaintiff against the defendant no.3 as this may only
result in some favor being shown by the alleged member in favor of
Shri Inder Singh. The plaintiff has not alleged or shown that Shri
Inder Singh is contesting the election for the same posts for which the
plaintiff is contesting the election. On the basis of these averments
and the allegations, no inference can be drawn that the Election
Committee comprising of three persons shall be biased and will not be
able to function independently so as to have fair and impartial
election and independent observers should be appointed in the facts
and circumstances of the case.

23.

The learned counsel for the plaintiffs have also relied on the

allegations made in the plaint that election of defendant No.3 was
CS(OS) No.1755/2007

Page 20 of 23

cancelled in 1986. No copy of the order cancelling the election and the
reason for cancellation of the election of defendant No.3 has been
produced and in the circumstances plaintiff is unable to point out the
reason for cancellation of election of defendant No.3 in 1986. Merely
because the election of defendant No.3 was cancelled in 1986 does not
lead to any logical conclusion that there will be manipulation by the
defendant No.3 in the present election also when an independent
Election Committee has been set up for conducting the elections and
regarding the eligible member list no cogent objection has been filed
by the plaintiff. It is also not apparent that in 1986 when the election
of defendant no.3 was cancelled, the elections were conducted by an
independent election committee or not. The defendant no.3 has
pointed out that the election was cancelled in 1986 on account of a
bundle of votes found in the box in favor of another candidate during
an electric failure. On this ground also the plaintiff is not entitled for
appointment of independent observers as nothing can be imputed to
the defendant no.3 in the present facts and circumstances.

24.

The learned counsel for the plaintiff on instructions has already

given up the claim for stay of the election as the election process has
already been set pursuant to the decision taken by National Executive
Council in various meetings in which plaintiff participated without
any objection till 12th October, 2007 when he resigned and, therefore,
CS(OS) No.1755/2007

Page 21 of 23

the election cannot be stayed. The relief claimed by the learned
counsel for the plaintiff for appointment of independent observers in
the facts and circumstances also cannot be granted for the reasons
stated hereinabove.

25.

Therefore the plaintiff does not have a prima facie case for

appointment of independent observers and the application for interim
injunction is liable to be dismissed. Considering the fact that an
independent election committee has already been set up without any
objection by the plaintiff, it will not be appropriate to appoint other
independent observers. The application for interim order is therefore,
without any merit and it is dismissed in the present facts and
circumstances.

It is, however, clarified that the outcome of the

election will be subject to the present suit. It is also clarified that
anything stated hereinabove shall not be final expression of the
controversies between the parties.
CS (OS) No.1755/2007

Original documents or certified copies thereof be filed within
four weeks.
List before the Joint Registrar for admission/denial and
marking of documents on 14.1.2008.

CS(OS) No.1755/2007

Page 22 of 23

List before the Court for framing of issues on 11.4.2008.

October 31, 2007

ANIL KUMAR, J.

CS(OS) No.1755/2007

Page 23 of 23

'Dev/k'

