*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP(C) No.2622/2008

%

Date of decision : 31.03.2008
Yogesh Kumar Sehgal
Proprietor: Sumit Agencies
Through:

….…
Petitioner
Mr.Ajay Paul, Advocate.

Versus
Lalit Kumar & Another
Through:

.......

Respondents

Nemo.

CORAM :HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES
NO
NO

ANIL KUMAR, J.
1.

The petitioner, Proprietor of Sumit Agencies, management has

impugned the award dated 6th July, 2007 directing the reinstatement
with full back wages to the respondent workman.

2

On the dispute being raised by the respondent, following

reference was made by the appropriate government:
“Whether the services of Sh.Lalit Kumar s/o Shri Yad Ram
has been terminated illegally and/or unjustifiably by the
management, and if so, to what relief is he entitled and
what directions are necessary in this respect?”
WP (C) 2622 of 2008

Page 1 of 5

3.

The respondent in his claim petition pleaded that he was working

as Bill Courier and his services were terminated with effect from 29th
January, 2003 without observing the requirements of law as contained
under Section 25 F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.

4.

The petitioner contested the claim contending that there is no

relationship of master and servant and the respondent has suppressed
the truth that he has received Rs.30,100/- in full and final settlement
and nothing is due to the respondent from the petitioner.

5.

The Labor Court relied on the statement of the witnesses of the

management admitting that the respondent was working as a Courier
Boy. It was also admitted that he had filed the proceedings for nonpayment of wages before the competent authority under Delhi Shops
and Establishments Act and an order dated 26th February, 2005 was
passed against the petitioner directing the payment of the amounts due
to the respondent.

6.

Though the petitioner raised a plea that amount of Rs.30,100/-

was paid in full and final settlement, however, the learned counsel for
the petitioner admits that the amount of Rs.30,100/- was paid
pursuant to order dated 26th May, 2005 which was passed as no one
had contested the claim before the competent authority under Delhi

WP (C) 2622 of 2008

Page 2 of 5

Shops and Establishments Act. Learned counsel for the petitioner also
admits that the order dated 26th May, 2005 was not challenged. In the
circumstances,

the

plea of the

petitioner that the

amount of

Rs.30,100/- was paid in full and final settlement is not sustainable and
in any case it is contrary to the plea raised by the petitioner that there
is no relationship of employer and employee.

7.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the Labor

Court has not considered the documents filed and proved by the
management which are the three vouchers, copies of which are also
produced before this Court.

Perusal of vouchers dated 23rd October,

2002, 26th December, 2002 and 24th January, 2003 reveals that the
amount as detailed in the vouchers were allegedly paid to the
respondent. In the statement on behalf of the management, it has not
been deposed and proved as to who had signed those vouchers nor
these vouchers were put to the respondent whether the same were
signed by him or not. This cannot be disputed that mere exhibition of a
document is not the proof of the document. From the testimonies of the
petitioner and the respondent, copies of which were produced by the
learned counsel for the petitioner during the hearing, it cannot be
inferred that the Labor Court has committed any manifest error in not
considering the same as they have not been proved and cannot be relied
on in the facts and circumstances.

In any case, the said vouchers did

not dispel the contention of the respondent that there is relationship of
WP (C) 2622 of 2008

Page 3 of 5

employer and employee between the petitioner and the respondent nor
these documents prove that there is no relationship of employer and
employee between the petitioner and the respondent.

In the

circumstances, the finding of the Labor Court that there is relationship
of employer and employee between the parties does not suffer from any
perversity or manifest error so as to correct them in

exercise of

jurisdiction of under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.

8.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has admitted that the

provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 were not
complied with as no notice was given nor any amount was given in lieu
of the notice and the services of the respondent were terminated with
effect from 29th January, 2003. The petitioner is unable to establish
that Rs.30,100/- was paid in full and final settlement and thereafter
the respondent left the services of the employer. Rather the plea taken
was that there is no relationship of employer and the employee which
has been dis-believed.

9.

In the circumstances, the finding of the Labor Court holding that

the services of the respondent were terminated illegally cannot be
faulted. While exercising its powers of judicial review under Article 226
of the Constitution of India this Court is not to re-appreciate the
evidence. It is a settled position of law that in exercise of jurisdiction
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the Court does not
WP (C) 2622 of 2008

Page 4 of 5

interfere with factual findings of the lower courts and restrain itself
from re-appreciating evidence while exercising powers of judicial review.
The objective of judicial review is to ascertain that a person received a
fair treatment and objective is not to re-appreciate the entire pleas and
evidence and draw inferences again. The findings and inferences of the
Labor Court are based on evidence and documents on record and there
does not appear to be any manifest errors in them. Judicial review is
not an appeal from a decision but a review of the manner in which the
decision is made. Power of judicial review is meant to ensure that the
individual receives fair treatment and not to ensure that the conclusion
which the authority reaches is necessarily correct in the eye of the
court.

10.

No other ground has been raised by the learned counsel for the

petitioner.

The award dated 6th July, 2007, in the circumstances, does

not suffer from any manifest error and has not been passed in denial of
principle of natural justice so as to entail exercise of jurisdiction by this
Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.

11.

The writ petition is, therefore, without any merit and it is

dismissed.

March 31st , 2008.
‘Dev’
WP (C) 2622 of 2008

ANIL KUMAR, J.

Page 5 of 5

