*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+
%

CRL. APPEAL No. 864/2004
Decided on: 15th December, 2009
Sanjeevan Ram

State

..... Appellant
Through: Ms. Rakhi Dubey, Adv.

Versus

..... Respondent
Through: Mr. O.P. Saxena, APP.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K. PATHAK
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

A.K. PATHAK, J.(ORAL)
1.

Appellant along with co-accused Nagina was convicted

under Sections 20/61/85 of Narcotic Drugs & Psychotropic
Substances Act, 1985 (for short hereinafter referred to as the
„Act‟) by Special Judge (NDPS), Delhi on 10th September, 2004.
Vide

order

dated

18th

September,

2004

appellant

was

sentenced to face rigorous imprisonment for a period of ten
years along with fine of Rs. 1 lakh and in default of payment of
fine, to further undergo rigours imprisonment for six months
since he was found in possession of commercial quantity of
ganja weighing 33 kg.
CRL. APPEAL NO. 864/2004

So far appellant‟s co-accused is
Page 1 of 8

concerned, he was sentenced to face rigorous imprisonment
for a period of five years since quantity of ganja recovered
from him was 17 kg which was not a commercial quantity.
2.

Co-accused Nagina filed an appeal being Crl. A. No.

863/2001 against his conviction and sentence which was
dismissed on 12th December, 2006.

This Court found

conviction of the co-accused on the same set of evidence as
proper.
3.

Briefly stated, facts are that on 7th May, 2003 ASI Vijay

Singh received a secret information that the appellant,
resident of house No. 164, Kakrola Housing Society, Uttam
Nagar, Delhi had brought ganja from Bihar along with his
associate Nagina and that both of them were present in the
house.

This information was passed on to Inspector Hoshiyar

Singh and was recorded as D.D. No. 10.

Raiding party was

organized comprising of Inspector Hoshiyar Singh, ASI Vijay
Singh, HC Subhash, HC Omvir, Constables Kabod Singh,
Shamsher and Ranvir.

Thereafter, raiding party reached at

Kakrola more at about 1:45 pm when appellant along with coaccused was seen coming.

They were intercepted, on the

pointing of secret informer. Appellant was carrying a suit case
in his right hand and a traveller bag on his shoulder while coaccused was carrying a suit case in his hand.
CRL. APPEAL NO. 864/2004

Page 2 of 8

4.

Notice under Section 50 of the Act was served on them

whereby they were asked if they wished to be searched in the
presence of the gazetted officer or a Magistrate. Appellant and
his co-accused desired their search to be concluded before a
gazetted officer. Accordingly, ACP Satinder Nath was informed
on phone who reached at the spot at about 2:15 pm. Search of
appellant and co-accused was taken but no contraband was
recovered on their personal search.

However, on search of

their baggages, ganja was recovered.

Samples were taken

and sealed in six separate pulandas with the seal of V.S.
Remaining quantity of ganja was also sealed separately with
the seal of V.S.

Thereafter, sealed pullandas were sent to

police station along with rukka. Pullandas were handed over to
SHO Surinder, who deposited the same in Malkhana on the
same day. Later on samples were sent to C.F.S.L. on 21 st June,
2003 and its report was obtained which confirmed that the
recovered material was in fact ganja. Statement of witnesses
were recorded.
5.

After completion of investigation charge sheet was filed

in the court of learned Special Judge. Charges

against

the

accused persons were framed separately under Section 20 of
the Act on 3rd September, 2003.
6.

Prosecution examined thirteen witnesses.

CRL. APPEAL NO. 864/2004

Thereafter
Page 3 of 8

statements under Section 313 Cr.P.C. of the appellant and his
co-accused were recorded on 24th August, 2004 in which they
claimed themselves to be innocent.

It was stated that they

had been falsely implicated.
7.

Learned counsel for the appellant has vehemently

contended that samples were tampered with.

No evidence

was led to show that CFSL Form was filled up when samples
were drawn and sealed; CFSL Form was not deposited in the
Malkhana. No evidence was either led to show that CFSL Form
and the seal was sent to CFSL along with samples. CFSL report
remained unproved as the chemical examiner who had
conducted the analysis, was not produced in the witness box.
According to the learned counsel, since CFSL Form was neither
filled nor deposited in the Malkhana nor was sent to CFSL,
benefit has to go to the accused. This lacuna further creates
serious doubt about the genuinity of the samples.

There is

every possibility of samples being tampered with more so,
when case property was sent to CFSL after about one and a
half monthS. Learned counsel has placed reliance on Radha
Kishan vs. State reported in 87 (2000) Delhi Law Times
106, Phool Kumar vs. The State (Delhi Administration)
reported in 1997 JCC 490, Lalman vs. State reported in 75
(1998) Delhi Law Times 224 and unreported judgment
CRL. APPEAL NO. 864/2004

Page 4 of 8

dated 6th May, 2008 passed by this Court in Crl. A. No.
921/2005 titled Balban Singh vs. The State (Govt. of NCT
of Delhi).
8.

I find that the arguments regarding tampering of the

sealed parcels were advanced in the appeal preferred by coaccused Nagina but were not found convincing and thus
negated. This Court held as under:“I find no force in these arguments. I have
perused the CFSL report Mark-A. It clearly
reads at serial number 9, that the condition
of sealed parcels were found intact and
tallied with the specimen seals. It is not the
case property but the sample which is more
significant. The seal of the case property
may get disturbed while these are brought to
the Court or kept in the malkhana. Seals
also get disturbed due to wear and tear of
the time. The CFSL report shows that the
exhibits 1-6 produced before it were
identified as ganja after analysis by
chemical, Thin Layer Chromatographic and
Gas Chromatographic methods. In case the
appellant has got some doubt about the case
property which was exhibited before the trial
court, he should have made request to the
Court that the case property should be reexamined
before
the
CFSL
analyst.
Consequently, this ground, too, does not
enure in favour of the appellant.”
9.

I find no reason to take a different view than what had

been taken by the Bench of coordinate jurisdiction of this Court
in the same facts, evidence and circumstances. As a matter of
propriety also no different view can be taken on the same set
of evidence.

The role of appellant is akin to the co-accused

CRL. APPEAL NO. 864/2004

Page 5 of 8

Nagina. Both the appellant and co-accused were found coming
together when the raiding party intercepted them. Ganja was
seized at the same time. Samples were drawn and sealed at
the spot. Case property was also sealed at the spot. In view of
this, once the testimony of witnesses had been found to be
trustworthy and reliable by the bench of coordinate jurisdiction
of this Court, there is no reason to take a different view in this
appeal, arising out of the same incident and on the same set of
evidence.
10.

Besides this, I find that HC Virender Singh posted as

Malkhana Mohrar was examined as PW13.

Constable Kripal,

who had taken the samples to CFSL, was examined as PW7.
PW2 ASI Vijay Singh had sealed the samples. Samples along
with case property were then given to PW12 Inspector Surinder
Singh.

No suggestion was given to these witnesses in their

cross examination that samples were tampered with or that
CFSL Form was not filled, deposited in Malkhana and sent to
CFSL. In the CFSL report it has been categorically mentioned
that seal was tallied before samples were opened. There is no
reason to ignore this evidence and to cast a suspicion that the
said samples were tempered with.
11.

So far as argument of learned counsel for the appellant

that the prosecution case must fail since chemical examiner
CRL. APPEAL NO. 864/2004

Page 6 of 8

was not examined, I find no force therein. As per Section 293
Cr.P.C. report of Govt. Scientific Expert, who had conducted
the analysis and made a report, can be used in evidence in a
trial. In terms of Section 293 (4) Director, Deputy Director or
Assistant Director of Central Forensic Science Laboratory or a
State Forensic Science Laboratory is a “Government Scientific
Expert” within the meaning of sub Section 1.
12.

In Rajesh Kumar and Anr. Vs. State Govt. of NCT of

Delhi reported in JT 2008(3)SC 330 Supreme Court held as
under :“A bare reading of Sub-sections (1) and (2)
of Section 293 shows that it is not
obligatory that an expert who furnished his
opinion on the scientific issue of the
chemical examination of substance, should
be
necessity
made
to
depose
in
proceedings before Court. This aspect has
been highlighted by this Court in Ukha
Kolhe v. The State of Maharashtra
MANU/SC/0059/1963: 1963CriLJ418
and
Bhupinder Singh v. State of Punjab
MANU/SC/0049/1988: 1988 Cri LJ1097.
Therefore, there is no substance in the
revision petition so far as the conviction is
concerned.”
13.

In N.Muralidharan Nair vs. State of Delhi reported in

Manu/DE/0692/2009, this court held that the report of
scientific experts mentioned in sub-section 4 of Section 293
Cr.P.C. is admissible without examining the expert as witness.
Therefore, examination of expert as a witness was not required
CRL. APPEAL NO. 864/2004

Page 7 of 8

for making the report admissible in evidence.
14.

Perusal of CFSL report shows that it had been given by

the Director, CFSL. Accordingly, this report can be used as
evidence in the trial even in absence of maker of the document
entering in the witness box.
15.

In the light of the above discussion, I do not find any

reason to interfere with the order of conviction and sentence
passed by the learned Special Judge.
16.

Dismissed.

A.K. PATHAK, J.
December 15, 2009
ga

CRL. APPEAL NO. 864/2004

Page 8 of 8

