IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+WP(C) No.2016/2004
Date of Decision:07.04.2008
#Const. Durg Singh

....

Petitioner

!

Through: Mr. D.S.Kauntae, Advocate

Versus
$Union of India & Ors.

.....

Respondents

^

Through Ms.Maninder Acharya,Adv.

CORAM :*THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE J.M. MALIK
1.Whether Reporters of Local papers may be allowed to
see the Judgment?
2.To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3.Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
A.K. SIKRI, J (Oral).

The petitioner who as per the averments made in the petition itself, is
Class 8th passed from Junior High School, Shera Sabla, District Mathura, applied
for and was selected to the post of cook in the Central Reserve Force. He was
issued appointment letter in May 1994. At the time of joining the service, the

WP(C)No.2016/2004

Page 1

petitioner had also filled Verification Roll Form in which he had to furnish various
informations as asked for in the said Form. Against column no. 12 pertaining to
his involvement, if any, in a case, it was specifically asked therein as to whether
he had been arrested, prosecuted, kept under dentention or bound down/fined,
convicted, by a Court of law for any offence etc. This column also directed that
the applicant should give information, if any case is pending against him in any
Court of law. In the form filled by the applicant, the said Column No.12 was left
blank.
After the petitioner joined the service the respondent had asked for his
character and antecedents verification report from the District Magistrate,
Mathura as the petitioner was the resident of Mathura. On 24.6.95 a report was
sent by District Magistrate duly verified by two Additional DIGs, CRPF. As per this
report, the petitioner was involved in a criminal case no.106/93 under Section
452 and 324 IPC. On receipt of this report the Commandant/Respondent no. 5
decided to hold an enquiry against the petitioner. A charge-sheet was served
upon him and one Mr. P.V. PILLAI, Deputy Commandant was appointed as the
Enquiry Officer. As per the charge-sheet, following charges were framed against
the petitioner:

WP(C)No.2016/2004

Page 2

“That the said No.951380048 Cook Durg Singh while
functioning as Cook of 91 Bn committed an act of misconduct
in the discharge of his duty in his capacity as a member of the
Force u/s 11(1) of CRPF Act 1949 in that he deliberately
concealed the fact regarding his involvement in Criminal Case
No.106/93 u/s 452 and 324 IPC as per verification report
received from the District Magistrte, Mathura, vide letter
No.392/verification/95 for getting enlistment in CRPF.”

The Enquiry Officer gave the report holding that the aforesaid charge
stood proved. On the basis of the said enquiry report, the petitioner was given
the penalty of removal from service vide orders dated 19.4.1996. It was followed
by a formal order passed by the Commandant on 1.5.1996 stating that the
petitioner’s services were terminated from 25.4.1996. The petitioner preferred
appeal thereagainst which was rejected by the Appellate Authority vide orders
dated 19.9.1996. He filed Revision Petition which was also dismissed. Thereafter,
present petition is preferred by the petitioner challenging the impugned order of
removal as well as subsequent orders passed by the Appellate Authorities and
Revisionary Authority.
Mr. Kauntae, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner made the
following submissions in support of petitioner’s case:
(a) The charge sheet was served upon the petitioner under section 11(1) of the
C.R.P.F. Act,1949 and impugned order of removal from service was also
WP(C)No.2016/2004

Page 3

passed by the respondent under the same provision, namely, Section 11(1)
of the Act and Rule 27 of the C.R.P.F. Rules. His submission was that under
Section 11, only minor penalty can be imposed and thus the Disciplinary
Authority had no power to impose major penalty vide the impugned
orders once the proceedings were initiated against the minor penalty
proceedings.
(b) That the entire charge framed against the petitioner was misconceived
inasmuch as the petitioner had not suppressed any information or given
false information as the column 12 in the Verification Roll Form was left
blank. From this it was sought to argue that the petitioner did not even
answer this question and therefore there was no question of giving false
information as is clear from the fact that the column 12 in the Verification
Roll is left blank.
(c)

The last submission of learned counsel for the petitioner was that the
petitioner was not much educated as he was only 8th Class passed. It was
also submitted that the petitioner was involved in the said criminal case
falsely and he was even acquitted by the court of law. This information
was supplied by him to the Enquiry Officer when the enquiry was pending

WP(C)No.2016/2004

Page 4

but was not taken into consideration. Moreover having regard to these
facts the penalty of removal is clearly disproportionate to the charge.
Ms.Maninder Acharya, learned counsel appearing for the respondent
opposed the aforesaid submissions of the counsel for the petitioner, a note
whereof shall be taken while dealing with these submissions.
We now proceed to discuss the aforesaid arguments advanced by the
learned counsel for the petitioner seriatim.
A.

Since first submission is based on Section 11 of the Act, it would be
prudent to quote this provision:
“11. Minor punishments.(1) The Commandant or any other authority or officer as
may be prescribed, may subject to any rules made under
this Act, award in lieu of, or in addition to, suspension or
dismissal any one or more of the following punishments
to any member of the Force whom he considers to be
guilty of disobedience, neglect of duty, or remissness in
the discharge of any duty or of other misconduct in his
capacity as a member of the Force, that is to say,(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

WP(C)No.2016/2004

Reduction in rank;
Fine of any amount not exceeding one month’s pay and
allowances;
Confinement to quarters, lines or camp for a term not
exceeding one month;
Confinement in the quarter-guard for not more than
twenty-eight days, with or without punishment drill or
extra guard, fatigue or other duty; and

Page 5

(e)

Removal from any office of distinction or special
emolument in the Force.”

No doubt, heading of Section 11 is `minor punishment’.

Further

punishments which are stipulated in Clauses (a) to (c) are also minor
punishments. However, in the body of sub-section(1) it is clearly stated
that the minor punishments prescribed therein can be given in addition
to suspension or dismissal.

Ms.Maninder Acharya argued that under

Section 11, punishment of dismissal can be given. She referred to the
Division Bench judgments of this Court, taking this view, which are as
follows:
1. Order dated 6.1.2003 passed in CWP No.4329 of 2000, entitled
Abbas Ali Vs. Union of India & Ors.
2. Order dated 6.12.2001 passed in CWP.No.3920 of 1999 entitled Ram
Bihari Shukla Vs. Union of India & Others.
3. Order dated 6.12.2001 passed in CWP.No.4958 of 2000, entitled
Khushi Ram Vs. Union of India & Ors.

Mr.Kauntae on the other hand relied upon the judgment of Jammu &
Kashmir High Court in the case of Angrez Singh Vs. Union of India and others

WP(C)No.2016/2004

Page 6

2002(6)SLR 565 and that of Gauhati High Court judgment passed in the case of
Deep Chand Vs. Union of India & Ors. 2002(3)SLR 665.

In view of the judgments of this Court which have taken a
specific view that under Section 11 of the CRPF Act,1949, major
penalty of removal or dismissal can be given, it is not necessary even
to look into the judgments of the other High Courts.
It is simply because of the reason that we are bound by the
judgments of our own court rendered by the Co-ordinate Benches.
Learned counsel for the petitioner had, however, argued that the
judgment of this Court need reconsideration and from that point of
view he had cited the aforesaid judgments. In this case, we are even
spared with the aforesaid exercise inasmuch as the matter stands
conclusively determined and the controversy is set at rest by the Apex
Court’s judgment in the case of Union of India Vs. Gulam Mohd. Bhat
AIR 2005 SC 4289. The interpretation given by the Supreme Court is
same as given by this High Court in the aforesaid judgments which is
clear from the reading of para-5 of the judgment. It reads:
“5. A bare perusal of Section 11 shows that it
deals with minor punishment as compared to the
major punishments prescribed in the preceding
section. It lays down that the Commandant or any
other authority or officer, as may be prescribed, may,
WP(C)No.2016/2004

Page 7

subject to any rules made under the Act, award any
one or more of the punishments to any member of
the force who is found guilty of disobedience, neglect
of duty, or remissness in the discharge of his duty or
of other misconduct in his capacity as a member of
the force. According to the High Court the only
punishments which can be awarded under this
Section are reduction in rank, fine, confinement to
quarters and removal from any office of distinction or
special emolument in the force. In our opinion, the
interpretation is not correct, because the section says
that these punishments may be awarded in lieu of, or
in addition to, suspension or dismissal.“

It is thus clear that major punishment could also be given to the
petitioner under Section 11 of the Act.
B.

Coming to the second submission, merely because Column 12 in

the Verification Roll Form is left blank, we cannot accept the
arguments of learned counsel for the petitioner that there is no
suppression. When an applicant /candidate who is aspiring to get an
employment is asked to fill Verification Roll Form, he is required to fill
each and every coloumn therein.

It does not appeal to us that the

official who was getting the said Verification Roll Form filled would
even say the petitioner not to answer the query raised in Column 12.
Leaving this column blank would further show that the petitioner knew
the implication of the information which he was supposed to supply
and, therefore, he intentionally forgot to give the information. We say

WP(C)No.2016/2004

Page 8

so because of the warning which was given in the beginning of the said
Verification Roll Form in the following words:
“The furnishing of false information or suppression
of any factual information in the Verification Roll
would be a disqualification and is likely to render
candidate unfit for
employment under the
Government”.

Furthermore, immediately after Col.12, following note is
appended:
“Please also see the `Warning’ at the top of the
Verification Roll”.

Thus not only warning was given in the beginning, it was
repeated in Column 12 clearly highlighting the importance of filling this
column.

Inspite thereof when the Coloumn is left blank, one would

clearly infer that the petitioner suppressed the information regarding
his involvement in a case. We may also note that learned counsel for
the respondent produced original records which contains letter dated
7.3.1996 written by the petitioner in Hindi wherein the petitioner has
stated that he did not supply the information at Column 12 as he was
not aware of the pendency of the case. If that was the explanation
given in his aforesaid letter he cannot now contend that he was not
asked to supply the information against Column 12 as the justification
WP(C)No.2016/2004

Page 9

which is given in the aforesaid letter is that he could not give the
information as he was not aware of the case. In the regular enquiry,
charge against the petitioner has been proved. It is not for this Court
to sit as an Appellate Authority over the findings recorded by the
Enquiry Officer, more so when no case is even sought to be made out
that such findings are perverse or based on no evidence. We may also
note that the petitioner does not even deny that there was no case
under Section 324 and 452 of the IPC pending against him. Therefore,
we are not inclined to accept this submission of learned counsel for the
petitioner.
C.

Insofar as last submission of learned counsel for the petitioner is

concerned, we may point out at the outset that the allegation against
the petitioner is not about his involvment in the aforesaid criminal case
and terminating his services on that ground.

Allegation is that he

concealed the factum of his involvement and did not disclose the same
while answering column 12 of the Verification Roll.
On the issue regarding gravity of the said charge, the learned
counsel for the petitioner has relied upon judgment of Supreme Court
in the case of U.P.State Road Transport Corpn. And others Vs. Mahesh
Kumar Mishra and others (2000)3 SCC 450. However, this judgment
would have no application in the facts of the present case as against
WP(C)No.2016/2004

Page 10

that there is a recent judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of
R.Radhakrishnan Vs. The Director General of Police and others
2007 (12) Scale 539. That was also a case where information about
involvement in a criminal case was suppressed by the appellant who
was involved in a criminal case registered against him under Section
294(b) of IPC. The Supreme Court was of the opinion that involvement
in a criminal case and that too of an offence which was cognizable was
required to be disclosed and serious view was to be taken in those
cases which related to disciplinary force as is clear from the following
observation made therein:
“Indisputably, appellant intended to obtain
appointment in a uniformed service. The standard
expected of a person intended to serve in such a
service is different from the one of a person who
intended to serve other services. Application for
appointment and the verification roll were both in
Hindi as also in English. He, therefore, knew and
understood the implication of his statement or
omission to disclose a vital information. The fact
that in the event such a disclosure had been made,
the authority could have verified his character as
also suitability of the appointment is not in dispute.
It is also not in dispute that the persons who had
not made such disclosures and were thus similarly
situated had not been appointed”.

In arriving at the above conclusion, the Supreme Court also
referred to and relied upon the earlier judgment in the case of Delhi

WP(C)No.2016/2004

Page 11

Administration Through Its Chief Secretary and others Vs.
Sushil Kumar (1996) 11 SCC 605. Moreover in series of judgments
rendered by this Court it is held that if such an information in the
Verification Roll is concealed the concerned employee can be
terminated from service.
We, therefore, do not find any merit in this petition and the
same is dismissed.
A.K. SIKRI, J.

April 07, 2008
skk

WP(C)No.2016/2004

J.M. MALIK, J.

Page 12

