Reportable
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+ WP (C) No. 776 of 1995
Reserved on : January 29, 2008
Pronounced on : February 01, 2008
# L.N.K. Gurdev Singh
!

through :

.....Petitioner
Ms. Rekha Palli, Advocate

VERSUS
$ Union of India & Ors.
^

through :

.....Respondents
Mr. Rajeeve Mehra with
Ms. Rachitta Mehra, Advocates

CORAM :* THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE J.M. MALIK
1.
2.
3.

Whether Reporters of Local papers may be allowed to
see the Judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?

A.K. SIKRI, J.
1.

The petitioner herein, who was working in the Army, has been
dismissed from service and is also sentenced to one year
rigorous imprisonment after holding summary court martial on
the charges under Sections 39(f)/40(c)/41(1)/48 of the Army Act.
The sum and substance of the imputation levelled against him is
that on 15.12.1992 when the petitioner was returning to the
company post from Chandel Indoor Stadium after the deaddiction camp, he visited a local house and purchased country
liquor and was found intoxicated at 1700 hours. On 14.1.1993,
when he was given the charge sheet for his summary court
martial by Subedar Nirmal Singh, he uttered filthy abuses.

WP (C) No. 776/1995

nsk

Page 1 of 13

Likewise, on the same day when he was ordered by Subedar
Shivpal Singh to proceed to the battalion quarter guard from the
living barrack, he uttered filthy abuses to him as well.
petitioner was taken into custody on 15.12.1992.

The

Summary

court martial was convened, which commenced its proceedings
at 11.00 a.m. on 15.1.1993.

As per the summary court

proceedings, the petitioner allegedly pleaded guilty to the
charges. Proceedings concluded at 11.45 a.m. and resulted in
awarding sentence of one year rigorous imprisonment in civil jail
and dismissal from service by the said court martial.

He was

handed over to the civil police to undergo the sentence.

The

petitioner filed a statutory appeal under Section 164 of the Army
Act on 25.4.1993. As nothing was heard by him for almost six
months, he filed a supplement appeal on 12.10.1993.

The

appeal

and

was

rejected

vide

order

dated

10.9.1994

immediately thereafter, the petitioner approached this Court
through the present petition challenging the procedure followed
in the conduct of summary court martial and the consequent
orders of punishment.

2.

The case of the petitioner, to put in nutshell, is that he never
pleaded guilty to the charge and the court martial proceedings,
as recorded, are bogus and make believe. It is an eyewash and
in fact no such proceedings took place inasmuch as the
petitioner was handed over to the civil police at 9.55 a.m. along
with committal warrants and there was no question of holding
summary court martial at 11.00 a.m. when the petitioner was
not even present as he was in the police custody at that time

WP (C) No. 776/1995

nsk

Page 2 of 13

and also take away by them. It is the case of the petitioner that
he was not even provided with the alleged summary court
martial proceedings and after number of requests, copy of the
proceedings were supplied to him only on 21.1.1993 when he
came to know of the punishment given to him on the basis of
purported court martial proceedings. He has also stated that in
the statutory appeal preferred by him on 25.4.1993, he had
mentioned the factum of his handing over to the civil police on
15.1.1993 at 9.55 a.m. supported by the certificate issued by
the police authorities themselves to this effect, which was
enclosed along with the appeal.

It is the allegation of the

petitioner that the respondent No.4, namely, Lt. Col. S.K. Sood,
who was the company commander, was inimical to him and
roped him in a false case.

With pre-determined mind, the

petitioner was handed over to the police and thereafter
summary court martial proceedings were cooked up. It is also
alleged that the petitioner was severely beaten and tortured a
day before he was handed over to the police. The petitioner was
medically examined by the jail authorities after he was handed
over to the police and the medical certificates issued by the
authorities recording his examination after arrest by the police
bore testimony to this aspect.

The jail authorities had

confirmed this by issuing a certificate on 19.4.1993, which was
also enclosed with the statutory appeal preferred on 25.4.1993.

3.

We may point out at this stage that the respondents have filed
photocopy of the extract of summary court martial proceedings
which relate to the recording of plea of guilty by the petitioner

WP (C) No. 776/1995

nsk

Page 3 of 13

and also the photocopy of the verdict of the court. Though the
court held the petitioner guilty of all the charges, the higher
authority, namely, V.G. Patankar, Brigadier and Commander of
the 59, Mountain Brigade has passed the following order
thereon on 19.3.1993 :“I set aside the findings of 'Guilty' by the court on the
third and the fourth charges.
I remit the unexpired portion of the sentence of One Year
Rigorous Imprisonment awarded by the Court.”

4.

It is clear from the above that the petitioner was not only held
not guilty of 3rd and 4th charges, which relate to abusive
language used against officers and for which the petitioner was
arraigned under Section 40(c) and 41(1) of the Army Act, the
unexpired portion of this sentence was also remitted. Normally,
with this remission on 19.3.1993, the petitioner should have
been released forthwith, but he was released only on 20.4.1993,
which would indicate that the order of the higher authority
remitting

the

unexpired

portion

of

sentence

was

not

communicated to the jail authorities forthwith because of which
the petitioner had to suffer imprisonment for more than one
month even after these orders.

5.

In

the

counter

affidavit

filed

by

the

respondents,

the

respondents have denied the allegations raised in this petition.
It is specifically denied that the respondent No.4, who was
officiating commanding officer of the petitioner, with a view to
take revenge, weaved a false case against the petitioner and
fabricated the summary court martial proceedings.

It is also

denied that the petitioner was handed over to the civil police at
WP (C) No. 776/1995

nsk

Page 4 of 13

10.00 a.m. According to the respondents, he was handed over
to the civil police on 15.1.1993 at 11.55 a.m. after the
conclusion of the summary court martial proceedings and to
support this plea reference is made to the said proceedings
wherein it is recorded that the petitioner was handed over to the
civil police at 11.55 a.m.

It is further pleaded that the

proceedings in fact took place in accordance with law where the
petitioner voluntarily and willingly pleaded guilty after he was
apprised of the nature of charge and the consequence of
pleading guilty after following the procedure laid down in Rule
115 of the Army Rules, as would be clear from the court martial
proceedings.

6.

We have gone through the record and with reference thereto
considered the respective submissions of counsel for the
parties.

7.

The first issue is about the genuineness of the summary court
martial proceedings which hinges on the question as to when
the petitioner was handed over to the police. The petitioner has
placed on record copy of the certificate issued by the police
authorities. Since heavy reliance is placed upon this document
by the petitioner and it has significant bearing on the issue
involved, we deem it proper to reproduce the said certificate in
entirety :“Certificate issued by the Kakching P.S. regarding Shri
Gurdev Singh.
1.
It is a fact that the on 15.1.1993 the Army of 7 para
Regiment at old airport (Pallel) through Telephone
message by the Lt.Col. S.K. Sud at about 8.30 AM

WP (C) No. 776/1995

nsk

Page 5 of 13

regarding Shri Gurdev Singh (Naik) for Sumari Court
Martial.
2.
That, since the telephone message there was no
signed of any authorities.
3.
That, the Police party of Kakching P.S. rushed there
and reached at about 9.30 at 7 para of Kakching.
4.
That, Shri Lukram Deven Singh S.I. (2nd Officer) on
duty collected the above Shri Gurdev Singh at about 10.00
AM who was handed over by Shri Lt. Col. S.K. Sud by that
the accused was completely found severely illover the
body.
5.
That, the Police party returned back at about 10.45
AM and lateron the said Gurdev Singh sent to Central Jail
at about 2 P.M.
6.
That, there was food and other necessary were
issued by the Army authorities when he was in the Central
Jail.
When he was in the Central Jail and other necessary
expenses were borned by the state of Manipur. This is
the facts regarding the Gurdev Singh who was one time
handed over to our Police Station.
Sd/8.5.93
Officer Incharge,
Kakching Police Station,
Therbai Distt. Manipur.”

8.

As per this certificate, a telephone message was received from
the respondent No.4 by the police at 8.30 a.m. regarding the
petitioner. The police party of Kakching Police Station reached
the unit at 9.30 a.m.

It was handed over the custody of the

petitioner at 10.00 a.m. by the respondent No.4. At that time,
the petitioner was found “severely illover the body” and the
police party returned back at about 10.45 a.m.

Later on the

petitioner was sent to the Central Jail at 2.00 p.m.

If this

certificate is to be believed, it will prove the case of the
petitioner to the hilt and expose the fabrication of the summary
court martial proceedings inasmuch as if the petitioner was
taken away at 10.00 a.m. and was in the police station at 10.45
WP (C) No. 776/1995

nsk

Page 6 of 13

a.m., there could not have been any court martial proceedings
which allegedly commenced at 11.00 a.m. as the petitioner was
not there at all.

Having regard to the seriousness of the

consequences which flow from this certificate of the police
authorities, on 17.8.2007 when this matter came up for hearing,
the Court reminded the respondents about the order which was
passed one year ago directing the respondents to determine the
authenticity of this document. Along with it, the same exercise
was to be undertaken in respect of the medical certificate issued
by the Medical Officer, Jail Hospital, Manipur Central Jail, Imphal,
as per which when the petitioner was brought to the jail he was
found to be suffering from pain all over his body due to torture
before.

This

certificate

also

discloses

that

after

close

examination, he was found to be suffering from Lunber
Spoundylitis which causes sciactica and due to this his right foot
was paralysed. The doctor had also opined that long treatment
and good management only could fully cure the petitioner. As
the respondents had not undertaken any exercise to determine
the authenticity of these documents, on 17.8.2007 one final
adjournment of four weeks was given for the said purpose. On
the next date, i.e. on 26.9.2007, the respondents produced
photocopy of a fax message dated 8.9.2007 which was to the
effect that genuineness of this certificate cannot be ascertained
since the signatory has died and it was an old record. Following
order was passed on that date :“On the last date of hearing, we had granted a final
adjournment to the Respondents to determine the
genuineness of Annexure P-13 which is a Certificate
issued by the P.S. Kakching.
A typed copy of this
Certificate is Annexure P-13 to the Petition filed in 1995.
Originals have been seen by us and returned.
WP (C) No. 776/1995

nsk

Page 7 of 13

A photocopy of a fax message dated 8.9.2007 has
been produced which is to the effect that the genuineness
of the Certificate cannot be ascertained since the
signatory has died and the record/document is 14 years
old and is not traceable. Since Annexure P-13 had been
filed along with the Petition in 1995, we will proceed on
the basis that it is genuine.
List for hearing on 29.1.2008.”

9.

The Court, thus, recorded the opinion that it would proceed on
the basis that the certificate issued by the jail authorities
disclosing the details of the custody of the petitioner by the
police shall be treated as genuine. This opinion was recorded
because of the fact that the said certificate was filed along with
the petition in the year 1995.

We may add that even in the

statutory appeal preferred under Section 164 of the Army Act
this fact was specifically mentioned. However, at that time the
appellate authority chose not even to look into this serious
allegation of the petitioner supported by documentary evidence
produced before the jail authorities. The appeal was rejected by
a non-speaking one line order dated 10.9.1994 and the entire
order of two paragraphs running into six lines is as under :“1.
The petitions submitted by Number 13613274 ex
Naik Gurdev Singh of 7 parachute Regiment were placed
before the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, Eastern
Command, who has perused the same alongwith
connected documents.
2.
The General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, directs
that the petitions be rejected.”

10.

No doubt, the respondent, on the basis of the proceedings
recorded in the summary court martial, contends that the
petitioner was handed over to the police only at 11.55 a.m.
However,

it

amounts

to

begging

the

question

as

the

respondents are trying to prove their case from the same
WP (C) No. 776/1995

nsk

Page 8 of 13

documents, authenticity whereof is under question. There can
hardly be any reason to disbelieve the certificate given by the
police authorities, more particularly when no explanation is
forthwith coming from the respondents as to why such
certificate be not believed.

It is not alleged that the police

authorities mixed up with the petitioner and gave a false
certificate. No motive of any other kind is also imputed. Our
discussion that follows hereafter would further confirm the view
which we have taken, namely, to believe this certificate as
against the purported summary court martial proceedings,
which is as follows.

11.

Even as per the respondents, the petitioner was handed over to
the police at 1155 hours on 15.1.1993. As per the respondents,
the court martial proceedings finished at 1145 hours. Can it be
believed that after the conclusion of court martial proceedings
at 1145 hours, within 10 minutes the police was informed, the
police reached the unit and the custody of the petitioner was
handed over to the police?

If the police was informed in

advance, was it known to the respondents, even before the
summary court martial proceedings commenced, that the
petitioner would plead guilty and, therefore, entire proceedings
would get finished in 45 minutes? This itself speaks volumes
about such court martial proceedings.

Coupled with this, we

now make few comments about the recording of the court
martial proceedings.

12.

Though the petitioner has allegedly admitted the charge by

WP (C) No. 776/1995

nsk

Page 9 of 13

pleading guilty, his signatures nowhere appear on the purported
plea of guilt. When an accused person pleads guilty, it would be
necessary to obtain his signatures to lend authenticity to such
proceedings. This basic requirement was not even adhered to,
the absence whereof lends credence to the allegation of the
petitioner that he was not even present at the time of recording
of the summary court martial proceedings and he never pleaded
guilty.

13.

In our recent judgment pronounced on 17.1.2008 in LPA No.
254/2001 entitled The Chief of Army Staff & Ors. v. Ex.
14257873 K. Sigmm Trilochan Behera, we have concluded that
such court martial proceedings would be of no consequence and
would not stand the judicial scrutiny. In forming this opinion,
we had referred to the judgment of the Jammu & Kashimir High
Court in the case of Prithpal Singh v. Union of India & Ors.,
1984 (3) SLR 675 (J&K).

We had also take note of the

instructions issued by the respondents themselves in the year
1984, based on the aforesaid judgment of the Jammu & Kashmir
High Court, mandating that signatures of the accused pleading
guilty of charge be obtained and if there is an infraction of this
procedural

requirement,

it

would

violate

the

mandatory

procedural safeguard provided in Rule 115 (2) of the Army Rules
and would also be violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of
India.
Faced with this, an innovative justification was sought to
be given by the respondents, namely, the said guidelines were
issued by Northen Command whereas the petitioner was tried by
WP (C) No. 776/1995

nsk

Page 10 of 13

the unit in Eastern Command. We feel that the law of the land
has uniform application across the country and there cannot be
one law for a particular command and different law for another
command under the Army. We may note that even this Court
has taken similar view in Lachhman (Ex. Rect.) vs. Union of
India & Ors., 2003 II AD (Delhi) 103 wherein it was held as
under :“13. The record of the proceedings shows that the plea
of guilty has not been entered into by the accused nor
has it been recorded as per Rule 115 inasmuch neither it
has been recorded as finding of court nor was the
accused informed about the general effect of plea of guilt
nor about the difference in procedure which is involved in
plea of guilt nor did he advise the petitioner to withdraw
the plea if it appeared from the summary of evidence that
the accused ought to plead not guilty nor is the factum of
compliance of sub-rule (2) has been recorded by the
Commanding Officer in the manner prescribed in sub rule
2(A).
Thus the stand of the respondents that the
petitioner had entered into the plea of guilt stands on
highly feeble foundation.”

Same view was taken by the Allahabad High Court in Uma
Shanker Pathak v. Union of India & Ors., 1989 (3) SLR 405.
The Jammu & Kashmir High Court has reiterated its opinion in a
recent judgment in Sukanta Mitra v. Union of India & Ors.,
2007 (2) 197 (J&K), wherein the Court held as follows :“9.
This apart the fact remains that the appellant has
been convicted and sentenced on the basis of his plea of
guilt. The plea of guilt recorded by the Court does not
bear the signatures of the appellant. The question arising
for consideration, therefore, is whether obtaining of
signatures was necessary. In a case Union of India and
Ors. v. Ex-Havildar Clerk Prithpal Singh and Ors. KLJ 1991
page 513, a Division Bench of this Court has observed :
The other point which has been made basis for
quashing the sentence awarded to respondentaccused relates to clause (2) of rule 115. Under
this mandatory provision the court is required to
ascertain, before it records plea of guilt of the
accused, as to whether the accused undertakes
the nature of the charge to which he has pleaded
guilty and shall inform him of the general effect of
that plea and in particular of the meaning of
charge to which he has pleaded guilty. The Court
WP (C) No. 776/1995

nsk

Page 11 of 13

is further required under this provision of law to
advise the accused to withdraw that plea if it
appears from summary of evidence or otherwise
that the accused ought to plead not guilty. How
to follow this procedure is the main crux of the
question involved in this case. Rule 125 provides
that the court shall date and sign the sentence
and such signatures shall authenticate of the
same. We may take it that the signature of the
accused are not required even after recording plea
of guilt but as a matter of caution same should
have been taken.”

14.

The matter does not end here.

As per the court martial

proceedings, the petitioner pleaded guilty to all the four
charges, on the basis of which the court held him guilty of these
charges.

However,

interestingly

the

superior

exonerated the petitioner on charges 3 & 4.

authority

It shows that

notwithstanding the alleged plea of guilty, the superior authority
did not find the said charges as proved on the basis of evidence
produced. Further, as mentioned above, the appellate authority
did not even consider it proper to give any significance to the
certificate issued by the police authorities and, therefore, took
no steps to get the same verified.

The appellate authority

should have treated the matter as serious when there was
another certificate supporting the plea of the petitioner, namely,
doctor's certificate, about the medical condition of the petitioner
when he was handed over to the police. This certificate clearly
mentions that the petitioner was found to be suffering from pain
all over his body due to torture before and was suffering from
serious illness which had rendered his right foot paralysed and
requires long treatment and good management to enable the
petitioner to be fully cured.

It was the bounden duty of the

respondent authorities to attach seriousness to this official
WP (C) No. 776/1995

nsk

Page 12 of 13

documents which they deserved rather on turning a blind eye on
the same.

15.

We have, thus, no hesitation in quashing such proceedings
which are cooked up, malicious and violative of the principles of
natural justice and there is a total lack of fair play. We would
have directed the official respondents even to take action
against the respondent No.4. However, we are unable to do so
as the services of the respondent No.4 had been terminated in
the meantime and he could not be served in these proceedings.
Thus, on 17.8.2007, his name was struck off from the array of
parties as the petitioner did not want the decision in the writ
petition to be further delayed.

16.

Accordingly, the rule is made absolute.

The summary court

martial proceedings dated 15.1.1993 whereby the petitioner was
dismissed from service and also awarded rigorous imprisonment
for one year is set aside. The consequence of this would be the
reinstatement of the petitioner in service by the respondents
with all consequential benefits.

The petitioner shall also be

entitled to costs which are quantified at Rs. 25,000/-.

(A.K. SIKRI)
JUDGE

(J.M. MALIK)
JUDGE

February 01, 2008
nsk

WP (C) No. 776/1995

nsk

Page 13 of 13

