Reportable
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Bail Application No. 4211 of 2006
Reserved on : November 28, 2006
Pronounced on : December 01, 2006
# Kamal @ Kailash Joshi
!
through:

.....Petitioner
Mr. Sunil Kumar Bharti, Advocate

VERSUS
$ State
^

through:

.....Respondent
Mr. M.N. Dudeja,
Addl. Public Prosecutor

CORAM :*THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
1.
2.
3.

Whether Reporters of Local papers may be allowed to
see the Judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?

A.K. SIKRI, J.
1.
Preeti Joshi (since deceased and hereinafter referred to as such)
married the petitioner on 8.6.2006 according to Hindu customary
rites.

This marriage could not last even for two months as, on

2.8.2006 her dead body was found from a drain/ pond at Najafgarh.
Though further facts would be stated at later stage, it may be
worthwhile to mention at this stage that on 30.7.2006 the deceased
had come to her maternal home. On 2.8.2006, a missing report vide
FIR/DD No. 34 was lodged by the parents of the deceased with P.S.
Uttam Nagar stating therein that the deceased had left her
Bail Appln. No. 4211/2006

Page 1 of 13

matrimonial home on 1.8.2006 informing that she was going to her
friend's place but did not return thereafter. After the dead body of
the deceased was found, the parents of the deceased informed the
petitioner (husband) about the same. The petitioner is the resident
of Village Dhilkuli, Ram Nagar, Uttaranchal.

After receiving the

information of his wife's death, he came to Delhi and after cremation
on 3.8.2006 by the petitioner in the presence of his family members,
the ashes were collected whereafter the petitioner, along with his
other family members, left for his village on 4.8.2006. However, in
the evening hours of 4.8.2006, FIR was got registered on the
statement of Smt. Rama Devi (mother of the deceased) under
Sections 304-B/498-A of the Indian Penal Code (for short, 'IPC'). On
the basis of this FIR, the petitioner was arrested on 18.8.2006.
2.

Two brothers of the petitioner and their wives moved applications for
anticipatory bail before the Additional Sessions Judge, which were
dismissed on 19.8.2006 and 22.8.2006 respectively. Thereafter, on
18.9.2006, one brother of the petitioner, named Laxmi Dutt was
arrested from his residence. On 19.9.2006, another brother Jagdish
Joshi and wives of Laxmi Dutt and Jagdish Joshi surrendered before
the Police Officials so as to take regular bail.

The regular bail

applications preferred by the wives of the two brothers namely, Smt.

Bail Appln. No. 4211/2006

Page 2 of 13

Reeta Joshi and Smt. Rekha Joshi, were dismissed by the learned
ASJ on 23.9.2006. Feeling aggrieved by this order, they have filed
Bail Appln. Nos. 3606/2006 & 3605/2006 respectively. In these bail
applications, the following order was passed on 13.10.2006 granting
them interim bail :“It is the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner
that the petitioner is sister-in-law (Jethani) of the deceased
and was living separately and away from the deceased and
her husband.
It is pointed out by Mr. Dudeja, learned counsel for the
State, that just before her death the deceased and her
husband had stayed with the petitioner and there is an
apprehension that some poisonous substance was given to
the deceased which ultimately caused her death. He has
further stated that viscera report in the case is awaited.
The petitioner is in judicial custody since 19.9.2006.
Depending on the viscera report which may ultimately be
received, it can be inferred as to whether the petitioner is at
all responsible or not and, therefore, the I.O. is directed to
obtain the viscera report as early as possible. CFSL, Rohini,
Delhi, shall also expedite the matter and give the viscera
report at the earliest.
The petitioner, in the meantime, is released on interim
bail for a period of six weeks, subject to her furnishing
personal bond in the sum of Rs.25,000/- with one surety of
the like amount to the satisfaction of the concerned Trial
Court.
List on 28.11.2006.
Copy of this order be sent to CFSL, Rohini, Delhi.”

Thereafter, Laxmi Dutt and Jagdish Joshi, brothers of the
petitioners, also moved applications for bail being Bail Appln. Nos.
3782/2006 & 3780/2006 respectively in which interim bail was given
to them by this Court on 19.10.2006. The petitioner has filed this
application for grant of bail on 24.9.2006.

Since the other four

Bail Appln. No. 4211/2006

Page 3 of 13

applications filed by his two brothers and their wives were coming up
for hearing on 28.11.2006, notice in this bail application was also
issued for the said date. It is, in these circumstances, all the five
applications were heard on 28.11.2006.
3.

In the statement of Smt. Rama Devi, mother of the deceased, on the
basis of which FIR in question has been registered, she has alleged
as under :“Q.
Ans.

What do you want to tell about the incident of Preeti?
After the marriage her husband told me that your
daughter is mental take her away. Her husband had
never given her the status of wife and he wants divorce.
When her in-laws ill-treated her we brought to our
home. At home she had told that her husband always
ill treats her and demanded dowry. On 01/8/2006 Preeti
had telephoned at her in-laws home and nobody picked
up the phone. Thereafter in the evening Preeti, after
taking my permission, went to the house of her friend
and afterwards we came to know that she had died at
Najafgarh.

Q.
Ans.

Is there any demand of dowry?
Yes, always demand was made. The husband of Preeti
always ill-treated her and taunted her.
Whether Preeti was murdered or she committed
suicide?
Due to maltreatment of the in-laws and due to their
demand, my daughter had committed suicide.

Q.
Ans.
Q.
Ans.

4.

Do you want to say anything else?
No.

”

As is clear from the orders dated 13.10.2006, interim bail was
granted to the wives of the two brothers of the petitioner, pending
viscera report. At the time of arguments, learned APP for the State
was candid in his submission that there was nothing against the
Bail Appln. No. 4211/2006

Page 4 of 13

petitioners in the said viscera report.

In fact, even as per the

statement of the complainant, the allegation is that due to
maltreatment of the in-laws and due to their demand for dowry, the
deceased has committed suicide, though it is yet to be determined
whether it is a case of suicide. However, for the purpose of present
application, learned APP for the State submitted that the matter be
examined on this presumption and the learned counsel for the
petitioners also made his submissions on that premise.
5.

Submission of learned APP was that it was a case where the
deceased was forced to commit suicide within two months of her
marriage. There was a clear statement of the complainant that she
was compelled to take this step because of the maltreatment on the
part of her in-laws and demand of dowry by them. He submitted that
presumption in this case would thus arise in favour of the
prosecution and in view of the provisions of Section 113-B of the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872, onus was upon the accused to show
otherwise. His further submission was that no girl would take such
an extreme step within such a short span of her marriage unless she
was tortured by her husband and in-laws, which compelled her to put
an end to her life. He also submitted that it was clear from the
statement of the complainant that the deceased was never given the

Bail Appln. No. 4211/2006

Page 5 of 13

status of wife by her husband, who wanted to divorce her alleging
that she was 'mental', which allegations were totally uncalled for as
the deceased was a graduate, therefore, she could not be suffering
from mental disorder.
6.

Learned counsel for the petitioner, however, submitted that bail in
this case should be granted to all the accused persons inasmuch as
the allegations made in the statement of the complainant were
afterthought and there was no substance therein. His submission
was that the relationship between the deceased and her husband
(petitioner herein) was normal, which would be clear from the
various love letters written by the deceased to the petitioner and
would also negate the allegation that her husband had never given
her the status of wife. In support of this plea, learned counsel for the
petitioner referred to the following circumstances :a)

during the short tenure of their marriage, the deceased
had been visiting her parents' house at Delhi
frequently.

She stayed in her maternal home from

17.7.2006 to 23.7.2006, but during this period no such
complaint of any cruelty or demand of dowry was
made;

b)

the deceased had gone back to her maternal home
again on 30.7.2006. During this visit also neither the
deceased nor her parents had complained of any
Bail Appln. No. 4211/2006

Page 6 of 13

cruelty or dowry demand;
c)

in the missing report, which was lodged by the parents
of the deceased, they specifically stated that the
complainants had no suspicion on anybody;

d)

even when body of the deceased was found on
2.8.2006, the petitioner and his family members were
informed about the same by the parents of the
deceased and they came to Delhi and the deceased
was cremated by her husband according to their
custom in the presence of the parents/relatives of the
deceased.

At this juncture also there was no

allegation of any cruelty or demand of dowry. Not only
this, after collecting the ashes of the deceased, the
petitioner left for his native place on 4.8.2006 and till
that time no such allegations were made. FIR was got
registered only at about 1710 hrs. on 4.8.2006;
e)

it is stated that according to the missing report dated
2.8.2006, the deceased had left the house at about
5.00 O'clock in the evening of 1.8.2006, whereas in the
statement of the deceased's brother, which was
recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C., he states that his
mother had told him on phone that the deceased had
left in the morning after informing that she was going to
her friend's house; and

f)

in order to demonstrate that the allegations made in
the FIR were afterthought, learned counsel for the

Bail Appln. No. 4211/2006

Page 7 of 13

petitioner referred to various letters written by the
deceased in her own hand and addressed to her
husband and it was his submission that reading of
these letters would show not only that the deceased
and her husband enjoyed normal marital relationship,
they were rather madly in love with each other.
7.

It is unfortunate that Preeti Joshi died within two months of her
marriage.

As per the allegations contained in the FIR, she

committed suicide.

Section 304-B IPC was introduced by the

Legislature by Amendment Act No. 43 of 1986 making dowry death
as an offence. This section reads as under :“304B. Dowry death. – (1) Where the death of a woman is
caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise than
under normal circumstances within seven years of her
marriage and it is shown that soon before her death she was
subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any
relative of her husband for, or in connection with, any demand
for dowry, such death shall be called “dowry death”, and such
husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused her
death.
Explanation. – For the purpose of this sub-section, “dowry”
shall have the same meaning as in section 2 of the Dowry
Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961).
(2)
Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven
years which may extend to imprisonment for life.”

It has been held by the Supreme Court in Satvir Singh & Ors.
v. State of Punjab & Ors, AIR 2001 SC 2828 that the prosecution,
for an offence under Section 304-B IPC, cannot escape from the
burden of proof that the harassment or cruelty was related to the
Bail Appln. No. 4211/2006

Page 8 of 13

demand for dowry and this harassment was caused 'soon before her
death'. The presumption could be raised on proving the following
essentials :(i)

The question before the court must be whether the
accused has committed the dowry death of a woman.

(ii)

The woman was subjected to cruelty or harassment by
her husband or his relatives.

(iii)

Such cruelty or harassment was for, or in connection
with, any demand for dowry.

(iv)

Such cruelty or harassment was soon before her
death.

{See– Kaliyaperumal v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 2003 SC 3828}

8.

Section 113-B of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, raising presumption
as to dowry death, makes the following reading :“113B – Presumption as to dowry death. – When the
question is whether a person has committed the dowry death of
a woman and it is shown that soon before her death such
woman had been subjected by such person to cruelty or
harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry,
the Court shall presume that such person had caused the
dowry death.
Explanation.- For the purposes of this section, "dowry death"
shall have the same meaning as in section 304B of the Indian
Penal Code(45 of 1860).”

9.

Thus, no doubt, if it is shown that Preeti Joshi died otherwise than
under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage and
it is also shown that soon before her death she was subjected to
cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her
Bail Appln. No. 4211/2006

Page 9 of 13

husband, in connection with demand for dowry, such death shall be
called “dowry death” and the petitioner shall be deemed to have
caused the death. Therefore, what has to be examined is as to
whether it is shown, prima facie, that soon before her death, she was
subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or other relatives,
i.e., the petitioners in the other bail applications. It may be stated
that while examining this aspect, the entire matter has to be
examined in the context of grant/non-grant of bail to the petitioners.
10.

I may also state here that learned APP for the State had not
seriously opposed the bail applications of the husband's two
brothers and their wives, having regard to the facts of this case and
further that they had already spent more than two months in judicial
custody and were not required for further interrogation.

He,

however, opposed the bail application of the husband with all
vehemence.
11.

Learned counsel for the petitioners is right in his submission that in
the missing report it was categorically mentioned that the
complainants were not suspecting anybody.

However, since the

deceased left the house on 1.8.2006 while in Delhi and did not
return back and at that time the complainants could not think that
she would commit suicide. It was only a missing report and they

Bail Appln. No. 4211/2006

Page 10 of 13

may be nurturing the belief that something wrong may have
happened to the deceased in Delhi. Therefore, at that stage, the
complainants would not relate the missing incident of their daughter
with the petitioners. Only when it was found that the deceased had
committed suicide the names of the petitioners were disclosed, who
were allegedly treating the deceased with cruelty. Therefore, this
argument, by itself, of the learned counsel for the petitioners would
not cut much ice. However, the love letters written by the deceased
to her husband immediately before her death cannot be brushed
aside at this stage and need to be given their due weightage. True
translations of two such letters are as under :“1. Dearer than my life, my husband, I am remembering you a
lot. Today is Wednesday, that means only three days are
left before we meet. After reading this letter, kiss me the
manner in which you gave a wonderful kiss to me before
you left. Had you left even without kissing, that would have
been alright. However, before leaving the way you treated
me, my heart was overwhelmed and it is because of that
love that I am able to cover this distance. That love has
proved that you wanted to stay with me but work is also
necessary.
2.

Dear. Greetings to my husband Kamalji and I love you. I
am writing this letter on Monday at 10.00 AM with a big
kiss. I am missing you a lot. You are very nice. Please
come once. Now, I am not able to live without you. You
have a lot of patience and you are very good. I apologize
for all my mistakes. You had not told my family members
about the incident of Kosi and for that I am thankful to you.
You telephoned me and said that you are missing me. I
have taken some time in understanding you. Though not
completely, I have started understanding you. Even when
you are away I feel you are with me. Your memories are in
Bail Appln. No. 4211/2006

Page 11 of 13

my breaths. When you say 'please' I like it. Please kiss me
immediately after reading this.

Likewise, in another letter which is very long and runs into
four pages, the deceased expressed her love towards her
husband in no uncertain terms and even stated that her
husband was taking due care to her. This letter is also
written at a time when she was away from her husband and
she has expressed her gratitude for the love which her
husband had exhibited. This letter further shows that even
when she was away, she was missing her husband and
remembering those moments when they were together and
enjoyed marital life. She specifically mentioned about the
love they made on 22nd, which was precious gift by her
husband to her on her birthday. She has even described
the act of love making and stated that she was eagerly
waiting to meet him.
12.

Reading of the aforesaid letters written by the deceased within two
months of her marriage does not given an impression that the
petitioner had not accepted her or had told her parents to take her
away, which is the allegation in the FIR and has surfaced after her
death. These letters also do not give an impression that there was
any ill-treatment meted out to the deceased. I am conscious of the
provisions of Section 304-B IPC and the presumption which the said
section along with Section 113-B of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872
create in such cases. However, at the same time, when we are
considering the bail application of the husband, these letters may
Bail Appln. No. 4211/2006

Page 12 of 13

have some bearing. As against these letters written by the
deceased, as of today, there are only statements of the parents and
brother of the deceased, that too after her death. Therefore, in a
case like this, when the petitioner is in judicial custody since
19.8.2006 and is not required for further interrogation, during the
pendency of the trial, he should be released on bail.

It is,

accordingly, directed that the petitioner be released on bail on his
furnishing a personal bond in the sum of Rs.25,000/- with one surety
of the like amount to the satisfaction of the trial court.
13.

It is made clear that the aforesaid observations would not have any
bearing on the ultimate outcome of the criminal proceedings which
would depend on the evidence that surfaces and the context in
which these letters were written also comes on record.

14.

Application stands disposed of.

(A.K. SIKRI)
JUDGE
December 01, 2006
nsk

Bail Appln. No. 4211/2006

Page 13 of 13

