Unreportable
THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+ WP (C) No. 4486 of 2002
Reserved on : October 10, 2007
Pronounced on : February 01, 2008
# Raj Kumar
!

.....Petitioner
through :

Ms. S. Janani with Mr. Deepak
Goel, Advocates

VERSUS
$ Government of NCT of Delhi & Ors.
^

through :

.....Respondents

Ms. Avnish Ahlawat with
Ms. Latika Chaudury, Advocates

CORAM :* THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1.
2.
3.

Whether Reporters of Local papers may be allowed to
see the Judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?

A.K. SIKRI, J.
1.
The petitioner applied for the post of Post Graduate Teacher
(History) in the Directorate of Education, Govt. of NCT of Delhi in
pursuance of Advertisement No. 002/99 of Delhi Subordinate
Services Selection Board (for short, 'DSSSB') published in the year
1999.

The candidates who fulfil the requisite educational

qualifications from the recognized institution as per the
advertisement/brochures by the DSSSB were eligible for the post
of PGT (History). The petitioner participated in a test conducted
by DSSSB and was declared successful. He was issued offer of
appointment dated 27.12.1999 by the Deputy Director of
Education (DDE) directing him to join his office within 10 days
WP (C) No. 4486/2002

nsk

Page 1 of 10

along with original certificates and attested copies thereof for
verification.

He reported to the Office of the DDE on

28.12.1999.

He was asked to report for posting orders after

four days. When he visited the office of the DDE after four days,
he was told that his certificate of 12th standard issued by the
Board of Adult Education & Training (BAET) is not valid as the
institute was not a recognized one.

He was, therefore, not

allowed to join the duties. In these circumstances, he filed OA
No. 471/2000 before the Central Administrative Tribunal,
Principal Bench, New Delhi.

Within few days thereafter, the

petitioner received communication dated 23.2.2000 sent on
24.3.2000 and received by him on 28.3.2000 mentioning that
Board of Adult Education and Training (Institute of Adult
Education) was not listed among the accredited institutes in the
country and, therefore, his candidature was cancelled.

The

Tribunal, thereafter, considered the OA of the petitioner and
passed orders dated 19.12.2000 inter alia stating that the
petitioner should have been given opportunity of being heard.
2.

After this judgment, the respondents issued Order No. 56 dated
16.1.2001

nominating

the

petitioner

to

District

West-B.

Thereafter, vide memorandum dated 23.1.2001 the petitioner
was offered the post of PGT. The petitioner was posted to the
Govt. Boys Senior Secondary School, Hastal, New Delhi. Within
four

months

thereafter,

vide

show-cause

notice

dated

31.5.2001, the petitioner was called upon to show-cause as to
why his services be not terminated as the basic qualification of
10+2, on the basis of which he was provisionally selected, was
not recognized by the concerned authority.
WP (C) No. 4486/2002

nsk

This show-cause
Page 2 of 10

notice was challenged by the petitioner by filing another OA
before the Tribunal, which was however dismissed by the
Tribunal vide orders dated 12.7.2002.
3.

The petitioner has passed his matriculation exam from Haryana
Vidyalaya Shiksha Board in March 1984.

He passed Senior

Secondary School (Uttar Madhyama) examination from BAET,
New Delhi in the year 1988. On the basis of this qualification,
he got admission in B.A. and did his graduation in April 1994
from Maharshi Dayanand Vishwa Vidyalaya.

From the same

university he did his B.Ed. in July 1997 and thereafter ehe even
passed MA (History) in May 1998.

On the basis of these

qualifications, he had applied for the post of PGT. However, the
bone of contention today is that the Senior Secondary School
qualification obtained by the petitioner from BAET, New Delhi is
not recognized as the said institute is not listed among the
accredited Boards and Institutions in the country. The learned
Tribunal, while dismissing the application of the petitioner
herein, noted the argument of the respondents that Directorate
of Education by a public notice issued on 29.1.1999 in Times of
India and Indian Express had informed that four institutions,
including BAET, are not listed among the accredited board/
institutions in the country and the certificates awarded by these
institutions are not recognized by the competent authority.
Though the petitioner was appointed provisionally on the basis
of the Tribunal's orders dated 19.12.2000 passed in the first OA
filed by the petitioner, thereafter Ministry of Human Resource
Development vide its letter dated 24.1.2000 had informed the
Directorate of Education that BAET is not recognized by CBSE
WP (C) No. 4486/2002

nsk

Page 3 of 10

nor the institution is working under the instructions of the
Ministry and it was clarified that OM dated 12.12.1988
purported to have been issued by Shri L. Parmar, former AEO,
Ministry of Human Resource Development was never issued and
that was a bogus letter.

Going by these considerations, the

Tribunal held as under :“8.
It is well settled legal position that only the
competent authority can grant recognition to educational
institutions to conduct classes, examination and award
certificate/degree to the students. Recognition cannot be
conferred by the order of any court of law. In fact MHRD
has categorically stated that the letter dated 12.12.88
purported to have been issued by Shri L. Parmar, former
Assistant Education Officer in that department had never
been issued recognising an examination conducted by
BAET. Thus, there is no question of grant of recognition
to BAET at any point of time. Therefore, applicant cannot
claim the benefit of having passed the exam at the time
when the institute was not recognised and any certificate
issued by the institute cannot be treated as a valid
certificate for the purpose of getting employment under
the Government. Hence applicant's case has been rightly
rejected by the respondents. Therefore the action of the
respondents in this regard issuing the impugned show
cause notice dated 31.5.2001 cannot be found fault.”

4.

Ms. Avnish Ahlawant, learned counsel appearing for the
respondents, laid much stress on the aforesaid aspects,
including the fact that benefit was earlier given to the petitioner
in view of the OM dated 12.12.88 and as it came to the notice
that it was a bogus and forged document and, thus, BAET was
never recognised, the judgment of the Tribunal was perfectly
valid. She also referred to the Supreme Court judgment in the
case of Dr. Ravinder Nath v. State of H.P. & Ors., 1993 Supp.
(2)

SCC

639,

wherein

the

Apex

Court

held

that

the

diploma/degree of Vaidya Visharad or Ayurved Ratna obtained
from Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Allahabad in 1974 is not
recognizant qualification because the institute was recognised
for the period starting from 1931 to 1967 only and mere
WP (C) No. 4486/2002

nsk

Page 4 of 10

mention of the institution in the Directory of Institution for
Higher Education issued by the Government of India would not
confer on the authority to give degree/diplomas overriding the
provision of the Central Act of 1970, the State of 1968 and the
State Service Rules of 1974 and the notification of the State
Government issued in the year 1978 which laid down on the
professional medical qualification.
5.

She further submitted that in the case of Union of India & Ors.
v. Shah Goverdhan L. Kabra Teacher College, JT (2002) 8 SC
269, it was held that the education is the back bone of every
democracy and deterioration of the standards of teaching in the
B.Ed. course would ultimately produce sub-standard productive
teachers.

Section 17(4) of National Council for Teacher

Education Act, 1993 states that where an institution providing
teacher education is not recognized or the recognition granted
is withdrawn under the Act, the qualification obtained by any
person after undergoing course or training in such institution
shall not be a valid qualification for the purpose of the
employment as teacher.
6.

She referred to another judgment of the Apex Court in State of
Rajasthan & Ors. v. Lata Arun, (2002) 6 SCC 252 wherein it
was held by the Supreme Court that it is not for the courts to
determine

whether

a

particular

educational

qualification

possessed by a candidate should or should not be recognized as
equivalent to the prescribed qualification.
such matters are not justifiable.
court

can

examine

whether

That is to say that

In an appropriate case, the

the

policy

decision

or

the

administrative order dealing with the matter is based on a fair,
WP (C) No. 4486/2002

nsk

Page 5 of 10

rational and reasonable ground; whether the decision has been
taken on consideration of relevant aspects of the matter;
whether exercise of the power obtained with mala fide intention;
whether the decision serves the purpose of giving proper
training to the candidates admitted or it is based on irrelevant
and irrational consideration or intended to benefit an individual
or a group of candidates.
7.

Ms. Ahlawat further argued that where a candidate lacks
requisite qualification, such appointment cannot be continued
and such a person does not hold any right over the post, as held
by the Supreme Court in Mohd. Sartaj & Ors. v. State of U.P. &
Ors., (2006) 2 SCC 315.

8.

Her last leg of submission was based on another judgment of
the Supreme Court in State of U.P. v. Neeraj Awasthi & Ors.,
(2006) 1 SCC 667.

In Neeraj Awasthi (supra), the Supreme

Court held that an attempt to induct an employee without
following the procedure would be a back door appointment and
such appointments have been deprecated by it times without
numbers. Similarly in L. Muthukumar & Anr. v. State of Tamil
Nadu & Ors., (2000) 7 SCC 618, it was held that in most of
civilized and advanced countries, the job of teachers in a
primary school is considered an important and crucial one
because moulding of yound minds begins in primary schools.
Allowing ill-trained treachers coming from de-recognized or
unrecognized institutes or licensing them to teach children of an
impressionable age, contrary to the norms prescribed, will be
detrimental to the interest of the nation itself in the sense that
in the process of building a great nation, teachers and
WP (C) No. 4486/2002

nsk

Page 6 of 10

educational institutions also play a vital role. In cases like these,
interest of individual cannot be placed above or preferred to the
larger public interest.

Thus, considering all the relevant

aspects, the prayer of the petitioner therein was rejected.
9.

Learned counsel for the petitioner, on the other hand, relied
upon the judgment of this Court in Dayal Singh Rawat v. UCO
Bank & Ors. (CWP No. 528/1995) decided on 10.1.1997 to
contend that this Court had already taken the view that the
aforesaid qualification from BAET was recognized. It was also
submitted that when the first OA of the petitioner was allowed
vide orders dated 19.12.2000, pursuant to which the petitioner
was given the appointment, such a show-cause notice dated
31.5.2001 was not proper and the respondents were estopped
from terminating his services on the same ground on which they
had earlier refused to issue appointment orders to the
petitioners, but ultimately yielded after the Tribunal's judgment
dated 19.12.2000.

It was also submitted that the basic

qualification for appointment to the post is Post Graduation in
his trade with the B.Ed. degree.

Admittedly, both these

qualifications are from recognized institutes. The certificate of
class 12th was deemed acceptable by the University of MDU for
grant of B.A. & B.Ed. degree and also Kurukshetra University at
Kurukshetra accepted 12th class certificate for grant of M.A.
degree to the petitioner. The respondents, therefore, cannot at
this stage dispute the validity of the class 12th certificate.
Learned counsel also pointed that several universities and
States had recognized this certificate granted by BAET and there
were number of people in the employment of the Government,
WP (C) No. 4486/2002

nsk

Page 7 of 10

including in the Department of Education, who had obtained
their 10th and 12th class certificates from that very Board. The
counsel, therefore, made fervent plea to allow the petitioner to
continue in service, more so when no such vide publicity was
given to the effect that BAET was not recognized by them and,
therefore, the petitioner should not be made to suffer because
of the laches on the part of the department.
10.

We have considered the submissions of both the parties.
In the first OA filed by the petitioner, the Tribunal had
placed reliance upon the judgment of this Court in Dayal Singh
Rawat (supra).

That was also a case where Shri Rawat had

passed out from the same Board of Adult Education and Training
in the year 1984, at which point of time the institute was
recognised by a competent authority and its certificate was,
therefore, valid and he could not be denied the promotion or
benefits flowing therefrom. This Court had also observed that
in that judgment that at least until 12.12.1988 the institute was
a recognized institution and even if it was derecognized
thereafter, Shri Rawat could not be denied the benefit.

It is

manifest from the reading of the said judgment that the opinion
of the court that BAET was recognized till 12.12.1988 was based
on the certificate dated 12.12.1988 as per which the Board was
derecognized.

The Court, thus, inferred that since it was

derecognized only vide letter dated 12.12.1988 it was at least
recognized till that date and, thus, benefit was given to the
petitioner in the said petition who had passed out the exam
from the said Board in the year 1984.

WP (C) No. 4486/2002

nsk

Page 8 of 10

11.

It is not in dispute that pursuant to this judgment the petitioner
was given appointment albeit on provisional basis. No doubt,
show-cause notice dated 31.5.2001 was issued to the petitioner
in

view

of

Ministry

of

Human

Resource

Development's

clarification that letter dated 12.12.1988 was never issued by it
whereby the said Board was allegedly derecognized and
according to the MHRD this Board was never recognized in the
first instance.
12.

Since it is now clarified by the MHRD itself that it never issued
any such letter dated 12.12.1988, the very premise on the basis
of which this Court had passed the judgment in Dayal Singh
Rawat (supra) vanishes.

Apart from this, there is no other

document to support that the Board was ever recognized by the
MHRD.

In the absence of any such recognition to this Board,

obtaining such a qualification from this Board would be no avail
to the petitioner insofar as the question of his appointment in
the Directorate of Education, Govt. of NCT of Delhi is concerned
as the Central Government has not recognized this Board. May
be, as pointed out by learned counsel for the petitioner, many
other universities or State Governments have recognized the
certificate granted by BAET. However, for that purpose, while
seeking

employment

with

those

authorities

who

have

recognized, it may not be a handicap for the petitioner, but this
would not be of any aid to the petitioner insofar as his
appointment is concerned.
13.

In this factual backdrop, we are of the opinion that the
conclusion drawn by the Tribunal in the impugned judgment is

WP (C) No. 4486/2002

nsk

Page 9 of 10

valid and does not call for any interference. Learned counsel for
the respondent is right in her submission that qualification
obtained by any person from a institute which is not recognized
would not be treated as valid qualification for the purpose of
employment. This submission is based on the judgments of the
Apex Court, note whereof is already taken above.
14.

We, therefore, find no merit in this writ petition and dismiss the
same. There shall, however, be no order as to costs.

(A.K. SIKRI)
JUDGE

(VIPIN SANGHI)
JUDGE

February 01, 2008
nsk

WP (C) No. 4486/2002

nsk

Page 10 of 10

