Unreportable
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
W.P.(C) No.3032 of 2005
DATE OF HEARING: 29.10.2007
DATE OF DECISION : 18.01.2008
IN THE MATTER OF :
Constable Om Prakash

.......

Petitioner.

Thru. Ms.Avnish Ahlawat with Ms.Latika
Chaudhry, Advocates.
- Versus

-

Govt. of NCT of Delhi & Ors.

.......

Respondents.

Thru. Mr.Amiet Andley with
Mr.Arun Sharma,Advocates.
CORAM :THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether Reporters of Local papers may be allowed to see the
Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
A.K. SIKRI, J.
The petitioner herein who was working as Constable in Delhi
Police was charge-sheeted levelling allegation of habitual absentism
amounting to gross misconduct. He was dismissed from service vide
WP(C)No.3032/05

1 of 8

order dated 10.10.2002.

Petitioner's statutory appeal against the said

dismissal order was also rejected by the Appellate Authority on 4.3.2003.
These orders were challenged by the petitioner before the Tribunal in
OA.No.3032/2003.

The Tribunal has, however, dismissed the said

application of the petitioner as well vide impugned order dated 11.8.2004
against which present petition is filed. On 6.5.2005 while issuing notice,
it was limited to the issue of sentence as is clear from the said order:

"Notice waived by Mr.Amiet Andley on the issue of
petitioner's sentence to be reduced from dismissal to
compulsory retirement in view of his having rendered
20 year service. Reply within four weeks. Rejoinder
within two weeks. List on 30.08.2005"
In view of the aforesaid order, reconsideration is limited to
the question of quantum of punishment, namely, whether the
circumstances of this case warrant the punishment of dismissal to be
reduced to compulsory retirement. We may take note of certain facts
having aforesaid issue in focus.

The petitioner was appointed as

Constable on 1.12.1980. On 4.10.2001 he proceeded for casual leave for
two days which was extended by another two days. After the expiry of
leave he was supposed to return back on 9.10.2001. However, on that
date he lodged DD No.27 dated 9.10.2001 informing that he was sick and,
therefore, he would not be able to join his duty. Ultimately he joined duty
on 2.1.2002 after availing 85 days medical leave. On 11.4.2002 he was
charge-sheeted alleging that though he had proceeded on 2+2 days casual
leave, he did not join the duty on 9.10.2001 and got a report lodged vide
WP(C)No.3032/05

2 of 8

DD No.27 dated 9.10.2001 about his illness and stated that he is admitted
in Government Hospital Jhunjhunu (Rajasthan). He resumed duty on
2.1.2002 after availing medical rest of about 85 days and produced
certificates of three different hospitals/dispensaries situated at three
different places in Rajasthan i.e. Singhana, Jaipur and Saga and he also
failed to submit medical treatment slips about his illness to suggest that he
was actually ill and admitted in the Government Hospital despite the fact
that he was personally directed by the RI/P&L in the charge-sheet. It is
mentioned that his earlier record showed that he had absented himself on
63 different occasions between 10.12.81 to 18.12.2001 suggesting that he
was a habitual absentee.

After the enquiry, Enquiry Officer held the

petitioner guilty of the aforesaid charge. It was, inter alia, mentioned in
the report that the petitioner did not produce the medical treatment card.
The contention of the petitioner was that he had in fact produced
photocopies of these documents at the time of joining his duty.
Accordingly, he made detailed representation pointing out the aforesaid
aspect and also submitted copies of the medical treatment slips as well on
the basis of which he claimed that he was admitted in Primary Health
Centre, Singhana, Rajasthan on 9.10.2001 and discharged from there on
10.10.2001. He also submitted that three hospitals from where he had
taken treatment in the same vicinity, his explanation was that when the
Ayurvedic treatment and Primary Health Centre treatment did not cure he
was shifted to Sawai Man Singh Hospital, Jaipur, Rajasthan.

The

Disciplinary Authority, however, dismissed him from service and the
appeal was also dismissed as aforesaid.
WP(C)No.3032/05

3 of 8

The learned Tribunal while dismissing his OA noted that
absence period of 85 days was not contested. The controversy centered
around the medical condition of the petitioner during this period. As per
the respondent, neither the medical certificates nor his behaviour for
obtaining treatment supported his case, inasmuch as, he took treatment at
long distant villages (three different hospitals). The Tribunal was of the
opinion that the petitioner was not able to show any infirmity in the
enquiry proceedings and the conclusion recorded by the Disciplinary
Authority and observed that it was not for the Court to substitute its
judgment over the judgment of the Disciplinary Authority. The operative
part of the impugned judgment of the Tribunal is as under:

"In the case of Appeal Export Promotion Council Vs.
A.K. Chopra (JT1999(1) SC 61) it is held that strict
rules of evidence are not applicable to departmental
enquiry proceedings. The only requirement of law is
that the allegation against the delinquent officer must
be established by such evidence acting upon which a
reasonable person acting reasonably and with
objectivity may arrive at a finding upholding the
gravamen of the charge against the delinquent
officer.
In the present case disciplinary authority has come to
the conclusion according to the rules for imposition
of such penalty and the applicant has not been able to
show infirmity in this regard and as such it would be
incorrect on our part to substitute our judgment over
the judgment of the disciplinary authority. The only
requirement of the law is that evidence on which
action has been taken supports the principle of
WP(C)No.3032/05

4 of 8

preponderance of probability and that any reasonable
person acting reasonably and with objectivity may
arrive at a finding upholding the charge against the
delinquent officer.
We note that the applicant has produced medical
certificate from different hospitals of Rajasthan
which are situated at distant places from his village
and as such the certificates do not support his
averments that he was so medically in capacitated
that he could not report back for duty".
We may state at this stage that learned counsel for the
petitioner had submitted that though the notice was issued on limited
aspect, it was permissible for the petitioner to argue the case on all counts
and even on merits and in support again reiterated the explanation
furnished by the petitioner on the basis of which it became necessary to
take treatment from three different hospitals. However, after hearing the
counsel for the petitioner, we are of the opinion that the order of the
Tribunal did not suffer from any infirmity and the approach of the
Tribunal which is evident from the afore-quoted portion of the judgment
is in tune with the legal principles. Therefore, no case for interference
with the said judgment on merits is made out.
With this we proceed to discuss the issue on which notice

WP(C)No.3032/05

5 of 8

was issued by this Court, namely, quantum of punishment. According to
the petitioner, the extenuating circumstances in the present case were "the
petitioner had put in more than 20 years of service which was
unblemished and by imposing the punishment of dismissal the petitioner
was even deprived of his right to get pension and other retirement
benefits. It was further submitted that the medical certificates produced
by the petitioner were of the Government Hospital. It was not a case of
falsehood on the part of the petitioner. He was in fact suffering from
Jaundice and was absented for 85 days. Even as per PW-3 who appeared
as prosecution witness to support the charge, doubt was created in his
mind only because of the reason that the petitioner did not produce the
treatment card. However, the said witness admitted that no enquiry was
made to find out as to whether medical certificates submitted

were

genuine or not. Learned counsel for the petitioner also pointed out that as
per the enquiry report itself, in the final defence statement the petitioner
had submitted that he was never given any verbal or written direction by
PW-3 to produce medical slip; he had submitted medical certificates in
original to suggest that he was actually ill; he had also attached medical
treatment card issued by Medical Officer, Incharge, Singhana, Jaipur and
WP(C)No.3032/05

6 of 8

Sawai Man Singh Hospital, Jaipur. Learned counsel further pointed out
that in the Enquiry Report the Enquiry Officer had himself even observed
as under:

"In toto medical certificates may be genuine but
the sequence of so called treatment in the
dispensaries give ample scope of discredit to the
conduct of the defaulter and that too when he is a
previous habitual absentee case on 63 occasions
though the previous absentee cases have been
decided but are sufficient evidence to draw an
inference of a case of frequent absenteeism without
any cogent reason".

She thus submitted that it was only on account of inferences
that the petitioner was held guilty and punished. Insofar as previous 63
occasions were concerned, Ms. Avnish Ahlawat pointed out that PW-2
had made categorical statement that "all the absence have been filed in the
decision column of the absentee record" and thus those previous
occasions could not be taken into consideration which was even indicated
by the Enquiry Officer as well but he was still drawing an inference of a
case of frequent absenteeism and stated that this was his 64th occasion
when the petitioner was absent and that would be sufficient to discredit

WP(C)No.3032/05

7 of 8

his conduct.
We are of the opinion that these are the aspects, on the
quantum of punishment which merit consideration.

We feel that the

Disciplinary Authority, Appellate Authority have not bestowed their
consideration on these aspects in deciding the quantum. Since it is not for
the Court to interfere with the punishment unless it is shocking
disproportionate, we deem it more appropriate to remit the case back to
the Appellate Authority with direction to reconsider the question of
punishment, namely, whether the circumstances warrant taking lenient
view of the matter and imposing the punishment of compulsory retirement
or maintaining the punishment already awarded. The Appellate Authority
shall pass speaking order on this aspect within 8 weeks from today.
The writ petition is disposed of in the aforesaid terms leaving
the parties to bear their own costs.

( A.K. SIKRI )
JUDGE

January 18,2008.
skk
WP(C)No.3032/05

(VIPIN SANGHI)
JUDGE
8 of 8

