Unreportable
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CS (OS) No. 227-A of 1984
Pronounced on : January 11, 2008
# Kunj Behari

.....Petitioner

!

through :

Mr. Atul Batra, Advocate

VERSUS
$ K.D. Churiwala & Ors.
!

.....Respondents

through :

Mr. Rajiv Saxena, Advocate

CORAM :* THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
1.
2.
3.

Whether Reporters of Local papers may be allowed to
see the Judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?

A.K. SIKRI, J.
1.

The respondent No.1, namely, M/s. K.D. Churiwala & Sons, is a
Hindu Undivided Family (HUF) and respondent Nos. 2 to 6 are its
co-parceners. Respondent No.6 is the Karta of this HUF. This
HUF owned one plot No. W-122, measuring 1299 sq.yds. in
Greater Kailash Part-II, New Delhi.
Karta,

approached

the

The said HUF, through its

petitioner

for

development

and

construction of the said plot, for which purpose a partnership
under the name and style of M/s. Builder Associates (hereinafter
referred to as the ‘partnership firm’) was formed on 3.12.1979.
This partnership firm consisted of the petitioner, respondent
No.6 and Shri Rishi Kumar, Karta of Radhey Lal Rishi Kumar
(HUF) as partners.

CS (OS) No. 227-A/1984

nsk

In this petition, Shri Rishi Kumar was

Page 1 of 15

originally petitioner No.2, but later on vide order dated
30.11.1987, he is transposed as respondent No.7 instead of
petitioner No.2.

According to the petitioner, disputes had

arisen and since the partnership deed provided for settlement of
disputes through arbitration, the petitioner filed the instant
petition under Section 20 of the Arbitration Act, 1940 (for short,
‘the Act’) for appointment of an arbitrator and reference of
disputes for adjudication by the said arbitrator.

For some

reason or the other, this petition is pending for all these years.

2.

As per the averments made in the petition, an oral agreement
was entered into for development of the said plot of land and
terms thereof were reduced into writing in the agreement dated
3.2.1979.

This

agreement

was

executed

between

the

respondent No.1 HUF and respondent No.6, Karta of respondent
No.1 HUF on the one hand and the partnership firm on the other
side. On behalf of the partnership firm, all the three partners
signed the agreement, including the respondent No.6.

Thus,

respondent No.6 signed the agreement on both sides, namely,
as Karta of HUF and as partner of the partnership firm.

In

furtherance of the collaboration agreement dated 3.2.1979,
another agreement dated 6.2.1979 was also executed between
the partnership firm and the HUF defining the role of various
parties in the collaboration. Clause 7 of the latter agreement
contained an arbitration clause.

3.

Thus, on 3.2.1979 a partnership was entered into; on the same
date partnership firm entered into the collaboration agreement
with the

CS (OS) No. 227-A/1984

HUF and within three
nsk

days thereafter

another
Page 2 of 15

agreement was entered into between the partnership firm and
the HUF. In the agreement dated 6.2.1979, besides some other
terms, a term about the payment of commission to the
partnership firm was also inserted. According to the petitioner,
this was done as the respondent No.6 stated that the purpose of
this agreement was to bifurcate the profits to be earned by the
HUF. It was subsequently understood between the parties that
agreement dated 6.2.1979 had no effect on the main agreement
between the parties and the same was entered into for the
benefit of HUF only for the purpose of income-tax, etc.

4.

Pursuant to the collaboration agreement, the partnership firm
took up the project of developing the aforesaid land. Plans were
got sanctioned, bookings of the flats were made, earnest money
and other installments were realised from the purchasers of
various flats.

Entire money realised from the buyers was

deposited with the HUF through its Karta. Accounts were also
maintained by the said HUF and its Karta. The petitioner alleges
that the money which was realised from the prospective buyers
was being utilised and invested by the HUF in its sister concern
instead

of utilising the same for incurring expenses of

construction on the said plot of land.

The petitioner had to

utilise his own resources in making the bookings, apart from
spending his almost entire time looking after the aforesaid work
of construction. In the petition it is alleged that the petitioners
(reference is to both the petitioner and the respondent No.7
who was joint petitioner at the time of filing of this petition)
invested more than Rs. 2 lacs and during this period 22½ flats

CS (OS) No. 227-A/1984

nsk

Page 3 of 15

were constructed. Booking in respect of 15 flats was done with
the prospective buyers. However, the HUF got two flats from the
prospective buyers surrendered to them.
5.

The three partners also decided to take two flats each for
themselves while the construction was going on and was in full
swing. It was agreed between them that one flat would be free
of cost and one against payment. In these circumstances, three
agreements, all dated 12.8.1981, were entered into between the
parties which provide for distribution of one flat each free of
cost to all the parties to the collaboration agreement and one
flat each at a specified (concessional) rate to all the parties.
Free flat and the flat at concessional rate was to be given to the
parties as consideration towards services rendered by the
parties (share of profits) in making the collaboration a success.

6.

The respondent Nos. 2 to 5, as co-parceners of the respondent
No.1 HUF, filed a suit in February 1983 being Suit No. 65/1983,
against the partnership firm and its three partners, namely, the
petitioner, respondent No.6 and respondent No.7. In this suit
declaration was sought to the effect that HUF was the absolute
owner in possession of flat in question together with the
constructions thereon and injunction was prayed for restraining
the defendants in the said suit from interfering with their
possession. Application under Order XXXIX Rule 1 & 2 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 was also filed in which order of
maintenance of status quo was passed.

According to the

petitioner, the co-parceners were not in possession of the
property on the date of filing of the suit, but after obtaining the
CS (OS) No. 227-A/1984

nsk

Page 4 of 15

injunction order, they took illegal possession of the flats and
excluded the petitioners from the same.

The contractor to

whom the work had been entrusted and was in possession of
the building was turned out by the co-parceners and a letter of
surrender dated 7.8.1983 was also obtained from him.

The

architect engaged for the project was also discharged by them.

7.

The respondent Nos. 2 to 5, as co-parceners of HUF, filed
another suit for injunction against the petitioner, respondent
No.6 and respondent No.7 seeking injunction against them from
entering upon the building or disturbing their possession and
also from negotiating any agreement or conducting sale or
receiving/collecting any money.

8.

Yet another and third suit was filed by the respondent No.6
against the partnership firm, the petitioner herein and the
respondent No.7 for declaring that the agreement dated
3.2.1979 was illegal, void etc. and praying for an injunction
restraining the defendants to the said suit from interfering with
the possession/enjoyment of the property by the HUF. Injunction
was also sought to restrain the petitioner and the respondent
No.7 from acting as partners of the partnership firm.

In this

suit, the petitioner filed application under Section 34 of the Act
alleging, inter alia, that there was an arbitration agreement
between the parties and, therefore, the suit was liable to be
stayed.

This application

was allowed vide order dated

26.3.1983 by the Sub-Judge, Delhi ordering stay of the said suit.
The respondent No.6 filed appeal there against.

CS (OS) No. 227-A/1984

nsk

Page 5 of 15

9.

While all these proceedings were pending, the present petition
was initially filed jointly by the petitioner and the respondent
No.7, as mentioned above, under Section 20 of the Act alleging
that disputes had arisen between the parties which needed to be
referred for arbitration. In the petition, the petitioner mentions
that the partnership deed dated 3.2.1979 contains arbitration
clause No.15.

Likewise, agreement dated 6.2.1979 also

contains clause 7 which is an arbitration clause.

Following

disputes are stated to have arisen between the parties, as
mentioned in para 27 of the petition :“(i)

That the so called partnership entered into by
agreement dated 3.2.1979 between the petitioners
and respondent No.6 is to be dissolved;

(ii)

That the accounts of the project have to be rendered
by the respondents and the petitioners' share of
profits is to be paid to them. It may be stated that
each of the petitioners have 1/3rd share in the
profits and the respondents through respondent
No.6 have 1/3rd share. The respondents are denying
the share of the profits of the petitioners.

(iii)

That the investments made by the petitioners as well
as which were got made by them from their own
relatives and friends have to be accounted for and
paid by the respondents together with interest due
thereon. The respondents are not doing the same.

(iv)

That the respondents are denying the rights of the
petitioners in the project in pursuance to which 22½
flats were constructed, although according to the
agreement between the parties the petitioners are
entitled to their shares therein.

(v)

That each of the petitioners had been alloted
flats each to the possession of which they
entitled but the respondents are depriving
petitioners of the possession thereof.
petitioners are entitled to the possession of the
flats.

(vi)

That the whole construction was to cost at the rate
of Rs.72/- psf. as per the agreement with the
Contractor but the respondents had dispensed with
the services of the contractor without the consent of
the petitioners to which they are not entitled and
they are liable to reimburse the petitioners for the
consequences ensuing therefrom, which too they are
denying.”

CS (OS) No. 227-A/1984

nsk

two
are
the
The
said

Page 6 of 15

10.

In the aforesaid backdrop, this petition contains the following
prayers :“(i)

(ii)

costs of the proceedings be awarded to
petitioner and against the respondents;

(iii)

11.

that the aforesaid agreements dated 3.2.1979 and
6.2.1979 may kindly be directed to be filed in this
Hon'ble Court and further proceedings in the matter
of appointment of Arbitrator/Arbitrators may be
taken;

Any other order or orders which this Hon'ble Court
may deem fit and proper in the circumstances of the
case may also be passed in favour of the
petitioners.”

the

Respondent Nos. 1 to 6 have filed reply to the aforesaid petition
stoutly contesting the same. It is pointed out that the suit is
based on three agreements, namely, deed of partnership dated
3.2.1979,

construction

agreement

dated

3.2.1979

and

commission agreement dated 6.2.1979. Though the deed of
partnership and commission agreement contain arbitration
clause, there is no such arbitration clause provided in the
construction

agreement

dated

3.2.1979.

Therefore,

the

disputes relating to the construction agreement cannot be made
subject matter of arbitration.

It is also contended that three

suits, as referred to in the petition, were pending before the
competent courts of Sub-Judges, Delhi and the petition was not
maintainable at the relevant time.

The maintainability of the

petition is also challenged on the ground that it is based on
multiplicity of cause of action and contradictory claims.

It is

sought to be explained that originally the respondent No.1/HUF,
which was the
admeasuring
CS (OS) No. 227-A/1984

nsk

owner of W-122, Greater

about

1299

sq.yards

acting

Kailash Part-II,
through

its

Page 7 of 15

Karta/respondent No.6, entered into a contract for development
of plot, land and building of residential flats for a value assessed
at Rs.7.0 lacs, for which purpose a construction agreement
dated

3.2.1979

was

entered

upon

between

the

parties.

Admittedly, a partnership has been executed, by and between
the petitioner and respondent No.6 individually with the
partnership firm to avoid capital gains, taxes and expenses for
stamp duty etc., as more specifically stated by the petitioner in
para

6

of

his

plaint,

which

contention

patently

evince

constitution of a business entity with illegal and unlawful
purpose and in this regard neither the said entity can be said to
be entitled for any equitable relief nor for that matter the
document executed for constitution of such business for
unlawful purposes can be acted upon for the same being void
ab initio.
Thus, it is argued on this basis that when the agreements
have been admitted to be camouflage by the petitioner himself,
such an agreement is not enforceable as it is not a valid contract
and the maxim “ex turpi causa non oritur actis”, i.e. 'Out of a
turpitude no cause of action arises', applies.

It is further

submitted that the Court cannot lend its aid to such a
petitioner, who on its own stating alleges that the cause of
action arises from ex turpi causa.

12.

It is also submitted that as per clause 5 of the agreement dated
3.2.1979, it is clear that arrangement made therein was for
construction of residential units/flats wherein the partnership
firm was only authorised to conduct sale of the said flats and

CS (OS) No. 227-A/1984

nsk

Page 8 of 15

there was no agreement for sharing of the construction portion
or ownership or transfer of any portion in favour of the
petitioner in any manner. As per clause 7 thereof, it is evident
that payment of Rs. 7 lacs was to be made by the partnership
firm to the respondents “in lieu of tendering the said plot for
carrying out the project”.

Thus, it is only a construction

agreement and there was no intention, at any point of time, of
the owners to part with either the possession of the property or
to share the same, except for construction, and sale of the flats
for which commission was payable to the petitioner.
Likewise, the second agreement, which is a partnership
deed, is entered into between the partners for development of
the land only for a remuneration @ 15% p.a. on investments.
Moreover, this deed has not been witnessed by any person nor
was it a registered partnership. Likewise, even the agreement
dated 6.2.1979 was only for preparation and arranging of
sanctioning of plans, construction material, appointment of
architect, construction of flats and its sale and for ensuring
collection as collection agent of the HUF. Even this agreement
does not give any right for any transfer of property in any
manner whatsoever and the petitioner was only allowed to get
5% of the total installments from the purchasers upto 31.3.1980
and 2½ per cent thereafter besides financing @ 18% p.a. Thus,
even by this agreement no right, title or interest in the property
is vested in the petitioner.

13.

It is stated that besides the aforesaid agreements, three further
agreements too have been relied upon by the petitioner, namely

CS (OS) No. 227-A/1984

nsk

Page 9 of 15

agreement dated 12.8.1981 regarding (i) Flat No. 4 & 6 (Ground
Floor) for 1000 sq. ft. with 250 sq.ft. free for services rendered
and (ii) 1000 sq.ft. at the rate of Rs.160/- per sq.ft. with a precondition that finances for construction are to be arranged for
and contributed by the petitioner only and on these lines two
further agreements regarding Shri Rishi Kumar for Flat No. SGF1, SGF-2 and the respondent No.6 for one flat, i.e. 1000 sq.ft.
free UGF-4 sold @ 300 sq.ft.

However, all the said three

agreements were non-existent, inconsequential, invalid and were
accordingly denied.

14.

It is also claimed that all payments collected were spent on
construction and related activities and the accounts were
regularly verified by the

petitioner, which contained

his

signatures as well. All commissions were paid to the petitioner
commensurating with the collections.

It is alleged that no

money is due to the petitioner and on the contrary, it is the
petitioner who is to pay a sum of Rs.1,65,562.50p. Besides, an
amount of Rs.9,448.79p. is due from the partnership firm. It is
also alleged that a bare perusal of the Local Commissioner
report dated 3.5.1983 confirms that the construction was totally
incomplete and as against the petitioner's alleged construction
and booking of 22½ flats by 1982, only 15 flats were booked for
which due and proper commissions, interest and investments
etc. have all been paid. It is denied that any arrangement for
allotment of flats have been made on account of the HUF or any
of its co-parceners, as alleged by the petitioner.

On the

contrary, the fact remains that the alleged agreement dated
CS (OS) No. 227-A/1984

nsk

Page 10 of 15

12.8.1981 was false and has never been executed with the
consent and knowledge of the co-parceners or for and on behalf
of the HUF.
It is also the contention of the respondents that assuming,
though not admitting in any manner whatsoever, that the
respondent No.6 entered into some deed of partnership or
certain agreement with his partners by virtue of the alleged
agreement dated 12.8.1981 or constitution of the partnership
firm have got no bearing on the interest or rights of the coparceners of the respondent No.1/HUF insofar as in case of
debts contacted by the Karta/Manager in pursuance of his
implied authority in the ordinary course of family business there
is a distinction between the liability of the Karta/Manager and
the liability of his co-parceners. The Manager is liable not only
to the extent of his share in the joint property but being a party
to the contract he is liable personally, i.e. to say, his separate
property is also liable.

However, as regards the other

coparceners, they are liable only to the extent of their interest in
the family property, except in the case of adult co-parcener, that
too in certain circumstances. However, when contracting for a
new business, the Karta/Manager is not entitled to encumber
the joint family estate for starting a new business {See –
Gurmukh Singh v. Shiv Ram, (1936) 17 Lahore 53; and AIR
1938 AP 40}.

15.

During the pendency of this petition, the respondent Nos. 2 & 6
died. This fact was disclosed by learned counsel for the
respondents by making statement in the Court on 7.9.1995.

CS (OS) No. 227-A/1984

nsk

Page 11 of 15

The petitioner, in these circumstances filed an application for
bringing the LRs of these two deceased respondents on record
along with an application for condonation of delay in the year
1996.

The same were hotly contested by the respondents.

However, vide orders dated 19.10.2001, delay was condoned
and LRs were brought on record.

The respondents even filed

appeal before a Division Bench against that order, which was
also dismissed on 2.12.2004. Thereafter, the respondent No.3
also died and another application was filed for bringing the LRs
of the respondent No.3 on record, which was allowed on
20.9.2005.

16.

In support of the petition, learned counsel for the petitioner
argued that raising of the dispute by the respondents by filing
suits itself suggests that there are disputes between the parties.
Since these disputes have arisen, the matter should be referred
to arbitration and merits of the disputes can be gone into by the
arbitrator only. Referring to the judgment of the Calcutta High
Court in Nandram Hanutram v. Raghunath & Sons Ltd., AIR
1954 Cal 245, it is contended a dispute implies an assertion of a
right another. The repudiation by the other party may be either
express or implied and may be by words or by conduct. Failure
to perform the contract and to pay the amount claimed may
justly lead to the inference of repudiation and denial of the right
of the other part. Coupled with other circumstances failure to
pay a claim may constitute of difference between the parties.
Failure to pay under claim of right is certainly a dispute.

17.

It is also contended that the agreement/partnership was not

CS (OS) No. 227-A/1984

nsk

Page 12 of 15

constituted with any illegal or unlawful purpose and, therefore,
the agreements are not void, inasmuch as, it was perfectly legal
to have formed a partnership for development of the said plot in
Delhi and for that purpose to also enter into a collaboration
agreement.

Since

the

property

was

to

be

sold

after

development, there was no need for transferring the same to the
partnership firm. The capital accounts, in any case, would have
to be paid by the respondents once the property/flats were sold
and stamp duty would have been levied and paid at that stage.
Referring to the judgment of the Patna High Court in the case of
Saudagar Chaudhary & Ors. v. Smt. Bipati & Ors., AIR 1986
Patna

211,

learned

counsel

relied

upon

the

following

observations:“....Courts of Law will not come in aid of person enforcing
the performance of an illegal contract..... However,
an issue for
which the plaintiff ... is not required to rely on illegality
to make out his claim ... can be granted by the court”.

He also relied upon the Supreme Court judgment in the
case of Sita Ram v. Radha Bai & Ors., AIR 1968 SC 534.
18.

Learned counsel for the respondents contended on the same
lines on which the reply is filed contesting the petition, note
whereof has already taken above.

He also submitted that

insofar as agreement dated 6.2.1979 is concerned, between the
HUF and the partnership firm, the petition raising the disputes
arising out of the said agreement is not maintainable. It was
further submitted that insofar as the partnership firm is
concerned, not only the agreement is illegal, but in any case the
rights/disputes do not arise out of the said partnership firm but
CS (OS) No. 227-A/1984

nsk

Page 13 of 15

arise out of the construction agreement dated 3.2.1979 which
does not contain any arbitration clause and, therefore, the
petition is not maintainable.
19.

Various disputes, which according to the petitioner, have arisen
and need to be referred to arbitration are already mentioned
above.

It is clear from the nature of disputes mentioned at

S.Nos. 2 to 6 that the same have arisen out of the construction
agreement dated 3.2.1979. This construction agreement does
not contain any arbitration clause.

Therefore, these disputes

cannot be referred for arbitration and the proper course for the
petitioner was to file suit for adjudication of those disputes.
However, dispute No.1, which relates to the dissolution of the
partnership firm would arise out of the partnership agreement
and, therefore, is referable to arbitration.

20.

I do not agree with the contention of learned counsel for the
respondents that arbitration agreement is illegal. The objective
for which the partnership firm was entered into has to be seen.
The said purpose was perfectly legal, namely, to develop the plot
in question.

This petition, therefore, succeeds partly.

The

respondents are directed to file original partnership agreement
dated 3.2.1979 in the Court. Ms.Kanwal Inder, District Judge
(Retd.), is appointed as the Arbitrator, who shall adjudicate the
disputes relating to the partnership firm.

Her fee is fixed at

Rs.1,00,000/-, to be shared by the parties equally.
21.

This petition is disposed of in the aforesaid terms.

CS (OS) No. 227-A/1984

nsk

Page 14 of 15

January 11, 2008
nsk

CS (OS) No. 227-A/1984

nsk

(A.K. SIKRI)
JUDGE

Page 15 of 15

