Reportable
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

W.P.(C) No.6416 of 2007
DATE OF HEARING: 06.12.2007
DATE OF DECISION : 18.01.2008
IN THE MATTER OF :
SMS Infrastructure Limited

.......

Petitioner.

Thru. Mr. Neeraj Kishan Kaul, Sr. Advocate
with Mr. Sachin Datta and
Mr.Manik Dogra, Advocates.
- Versus
New Delhi Municipal Council

.......

Respondent.

Thru. Mr.A.S.Chandhiok and Mr.V.P.Singh,
Sr. Advocates with Ms.Anjana Gosain and
Ms.Kanika Agnihotri, Advocates.
CORAM :THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether Reporters of Local papers may be allowed to see the Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
A.K. SIKRI, J.
The respondent-NDMC has floated tenders for developing
“Multi Level Parking-cum-Commercial Complex” at Baba Kharak Singh
CWP No.6416/07.

1

Of 36

Marg, New Delhi. Bids from eligible persons are invited thereby. These
bids are in the form of “Request for Proposal” (RFP). Liberty is given to
the bidders to opt for “Fully Automatic Parking System” or “Semi
Automatic Parking System” or “Manual System”. The main purpose of the
project is to achieve maximum "Net Equivalent Car Space” (ECS). RFP
envisages proposal evaluation in three stages. In stage one the proposal is
to be first checked for responsiveness with the requirement of the RFP with
reference to “other submissions of the proposal” submitted by the bidders.
In the second stage technical evaluation of the bids is to be undertaken.
This evaluation is to be done only in respect of those bidders whose “other
submissions” qua stage one are found to meet the requirements of the RFP
i.e. stage one is found to be responsive in terms of the requirement under
Clause 1.2.1 of the bid documents. In case technical submissions are found
to meet the requirements of RFP, the bidders’ proposal would be evaluated
at stage three, namely, `Techno Commercial’ . Based on the basis of this
process of evaluation, the bidder who emerges triumphant is to be awarded
the contract. The petitioner herein is one of the aspirants for this contract
and, therefore, it submitted its bid. However, the petitioner is knocked out
at stage two as according to NDMC it is found that petitioner’s bid is not
CWP No.6416/07.

2

Of 36

responsiveness with the requirement of RFP.

The submission of the

petitioner is that its bid was in accordance with the tender conditions and
satisfy the technical parameters and evaluation criteria set out in the RFP
documents issued by the respondent and, therefore, the action of the
respondent in not allowing the petitioner to stage two by not even opening
its techno commercial bid is arbitrary. We may point out at this stage itself
that as per the evaluation standard and norms fixed for stage two, evaluation
benchmark score of 75 marks was fixed for moving on to stage three
evaluation. According to the respondent the petitioner has not been able to
achieve this benchmark.
In order to appreciate the controversy, basic facts and the
relevant provisions of the RFP need mention with some elaboration. We,
therefore, propose to do this exercise in the first instance:
(i)

In December, 2006 request for Proposal (RFP) document was

issued by the respondent for Project to Develop Multilevel Parking cum
Commercial Complex at Baba Kharag Singh Marg on a Build Operate and
Transfer (BOT) basis.
The very purpose of the Project was to achieve maximum "Net
Equivalent Car Space" (ECS), subject to satisfaction of the minimum
CWP No.6416/07.

3

Of 36

technical criteria. The bidders have been left free to opt for

a

"Fully

Automatic Parking System" or a "Semi Automatic Parking System" or a
Manual Parking System. The Tender Conditions

did

not

accord

any

preference/extra weightage to either system.
The said Request for Proposal document envisaged 'proposal
evaluation' in three stages as set out in Sections 1.25, 1.26 and 1.27 thereof,
which are reproduced hereunder:

1.25 Proposal Evaluation: Stage I- Other submissions

1.25.1 In Stage I evaluation, the Part I(A) - Other Submissions of the
Proposal would first be checked for responsiveness with the
requirements of the RFP.

1.25.2 The Stage II evaluation, the Part I(B) - Technical Submissions
of a Bidder shall be taken up only after the contents of the
Other Submissions are found to meet the requirements of this
RFP. i.e., the Part I (A) submission is found to be responsive in
terms of the requirements under Clause 1.21

1.25.3 NDMC reserves the right to reject the Proposal of a Bidder
without opening the Part I(B) and Part II Submissions if, in its
opinion, the contents of Part I(A) - Other submissions are not
substantially responsive with the requirements of this RFP.

1.26 Proposal Evaluation: Stage II - Technical Submissions
CWP No.6416/07.

4

Of 36

1.26.1 In Stage II of the evaluation process, Part I(B) Submissions of
all the Bidders who pass the Part I(A) evaluation would be
evaluated.
1.26.2 In Stage II, the Part I(B) - Technical Submissions of the
proposal would first be checked for responsiveness with the
requirements of the RFP.

1.26.3 In case the Proposal is found to be responsive in terms of the
requirements under Clause 1.21, the Technical Submission of
the Bidder would be evaluated in accordance with the
conditions set out in Section 2 (Evaluation Methodology) of
this RFP document.

1.26.4 NDMC would have the right to review the Part I(B) Technical
Proposals and seek clarifications where necessary.

1.26.5 NDMC may request the Bidder to make a visual presentation
on the Project Proposal. No marks or extra weightage shall be
assigned to the presentation. NDMC reserves the right to call
for presentations from any/all of the Bidders.

1.26.6 The evaluation of the Techno-Commercial Bid (i.e., the Part II
of submission vide Clause 1.16) would be taken up only after
the contents of the Part 1(B) - Technical Submissions are found
to meet the requirements of this RFP. NDMC reserves the right
to reject the Proposal of a Bidder without opening the Part II
Submissions if, in its opinion, the contents of the Technical
Submissions are not substantially responsive with the
requirements of this RFP.

CWP No.6416/07.

5

Of 36

1.27 Proposal Evaluation: Stage III - Techno-commercial Bid.

1.27.1 The Part II submissions, viz., Techno-Commercial Bid of all
the Bidders who pass the Part I(B) evaluation, for particular
project, will be opened in the presence of the Bidders'
representatives who choose to attend.
The Bidders'
representatives who are present shall be re3quired to sign and
record their attendance. The time and date of opening of Part II
Submissions shall be informed to the Bidders in advance.

1.27.2 The Techno-Commercial Bid would be evaluated and ranked
on the basis of the evaluation criteria set out in Section 2. The
Bidder obtaining the highest rank after evaluation of the
Techno-Commercial Bid, shall, subject to terms and conditions
set out under Section 2 be declared as the Preferred Bidder.
Clause 2 of the RFP sets out the evaluation methodology for
the purpose of stage II Evaluation.

In terms thereof, marks are to be

assigned to the various bidders and a benchmark/score of 75 marks was
fixed for moving on to the Stage III Evaluation. The relevant sub-clauses of
Clause 2 of the RFP are reproduced hereunder:
“2.
2.1

Evaluation Methodology

Guidelines for submission on Project proposal
The Bidder would be required to furnish the following as part
of their Project Proposal (Part I(B) - Technical Submission)
XXX
XXX

CWP No.6416/07.

XXX
XXX

XXX
XXX

XXX
XXX
6

Of 36

2.3

Evaluation of Technical Submission
The Bidder's Technical Submission would be evaluated to
check the adequacy and appropriateness of the proposed
technology for the Project purposes and its conformance to the
Construction Requirements and O & M Requirements (as set
out in the Draft Concession Agreement - between Schedules 2,
2 and 4 and development control norms and fixed design
parameters as set out in Schedule 1 of the Draft Concession
Agreement).

2.4

For this purpose, the Technical Submission would be scored on
the basis of rating of various parameters such as the following:
S.
No.

Evaluation Criteria

Score

1

Project Appreciation, Layout and Design

20

Evaluation Parameters include, inter alia
(a) Design Configuration - Conceptual
planning & Architectural layouts of the
facilities
(b) Traffic Management Plans - Safety and
Circulation Plans
(c) Contingency Plans - Disaster management
plans
(d) Design Attractiveness - Environment
friendliness, Aesthetics
2.

CWP No.6416/07.

Technology Section
30
Evaluation Parameters include, inter alia
(a) Adequacy and Appropriateness of chosen
technology
(b) Testimonials on - safety & Time provenness in operations
(c) Technology management & know-how
transfer arrangements
(d) Overall Conformance to stipulated
(technical) requirements
7

Of 36

3.

Plan of Implementation
15
Evaluation Parameters include, inter alia
Sequencing and time phasing of activities Plan for
interim parking arrangements

4.

Resource Allocation

15

Evaluation Parameters include, inter alia
(a) Adequacy and Effectiveness of resource
allocations - plant & machinery and
manpower
(b) Financial stake (equity percentage) and
Financial arrangements (percentage of the
extent of tie-up)
5.

Method statement

15

The detailed method statement justifying the
methodology of execution proposed by the bidder.
This shall include, inter alia
(a) method & technique for manufacture
(sourcing) and transportation of the various
project components
(b) method & technique for erection, testing
and commissioning of the various project
components - civil, structural, electrical,
fire safety and the like
(c) construction methodologies - safety and
environment friendliness - with special
emphasis on the methodology adopted for
an underground construction
(d) operations & management procedures,
arrangements and tie-ups in that regard
6.

Compliance Requirements
Evaluation Parameters include, inter alia
(a) Extent of compliance
(b) Constructive
justification
deviations, if any

5

behind

Total

CWP No.6416/07.

100

8

Of 36

2.5

Composite score under the Technical Proposal would be the
arithmetic sum of the marks assigned to the Bidders under each
of the parameters listed above in Clause 2.4. The Benchmark
Score to be achieved for Stage II evaluation is 75. The marks
so assigned by NDMC or it Consultant(s) or Advisor(s) would
be final and binding on the Bidder.

2.6

Only Proposals that have achieved the Benchmark Score on the
Stage II evaluation will be taken forward to Stage III
evaluation.

2.7

Evaluation of Part III submissions - Techno-commercial Bid:
Net Equivalent Car Spaces

This Part II submission, viz., Techno-Commercial Bid of
Bidders who have passed the stage II evaluation, for the
particular Project, would be opened and evaluated on the basis
of the highest Net Equivalent Car Space (ECS) provision that
the Bidder is committing to offer to NDMC< as per teh format
prescribed in Appendix 5-B.

2.8

XXX
XXX

XXX
XXX

XXX
XXX

XXX
XXX."

The Bid was required to be submitted in the prescribed format
in terms of the Appendices to the RFP.
(ii)

On 9.4.2007, the petitioner submitted its proposal as per the

CWP No.6416/07.

9

Of 36

prescribed methodology and fully in accordance therewith. While
meeting the prescribed technical criteria, the Petitioner opted for a
Semi Automatic System to maximize the ECS.

(iii)

On 17.4.2007 Part I of the petitioner's bid was opened by the
respondent. Part I(A) of the petitioner's bid was found to be in order,
and, accordingly, the Petitioner's proposal successfully cleared the
Stage I evaluation as contemplated under Clause 1.25.1, and moved
on to Stage II of the evaluation process.

There were three more parties whose bids are also found
responsive and thus four parties were allowed to move the stage two.

On 14.7.2007 the petitioner made technical presentation before
the Evaluation Committee of the respondent highlighting various aspects of
its bid.

Thereafter, vide letter dated 27.7.2007, the petitioner clarified

certain issues which, according to the petitioner, had emerged during the
presentation.

According to the petitioner he did not receive any

communication thereafter though date for third stage evaluation was
CWP No.6416/07.

10

Of 36

14.8.2007. Thus a day before i.e. on 13.8.2007 the petitioner handed over a
letter dated 11.8.2007 to the respondent protesting at the manner and the
apprehended reason for the ousting of the petitioner. In this communication
the petitioner expressed its feeling that it was not being considered for
stage three evaluation on account of the fact that the petitioner had opted for
“Semi Automatic Parking System” instead of “Fully Automatic Parking
System”. This was in gross violation of the terms and conditions of the
tender, inasmuch as, choice was given to the bidders to opt for any of the
three parking systems and, therefore, this could not be the consideration for
attempting to oust the petitioner as the main consideration which should
have weighed with the respondent in evaluating the proposals was to
achieve maximum net “Equivalent Car Space”. The NDMC went ahead
with the evaluation of Techno Commercial Bid in respect of remaining
three bidders on 14.8.2007 and did not consider the bid of the petitioner for
stage three.

The petitioner thus wrote another letter dated 16.8.2007

protesting at the aforesaid move on the part of the NDMC and the manner in
which NDMC seeking to oust the petitioner. As no response was received,
the petitioner filed present writ petition on 29.8.2007.

CWP No.6416/07.

11

Of 36

Since advance notice of this petition was served upon the
standing counsel for NDMC, when this petition came up for hearing on
31.8.2007, arguments were heard-in-part and thereafter matter was taken up
on 6.9.2007. Though the NDMC had produced the records, we deemed it
proper to have the version of the respondent on the record of this case in the
form of an affidavit and, therefore, granted time to the respondent-NDMC to
file counter-affidavit, issuing show cause notice in the writ petition. As we
were informed that the tenders had already been finalized, in the stay
application filed by the petitioner, order was passed that Letter of Intent
(LOI), if issued shall be subject to further orders that may be passed and the
outcome of the writ petition.

Pleadings were thereafter completed.

Counter-affidavit was filed. Learned counsel for the petitioner, however,
wanted to peruse the original records which permission was granted. After
perusal thereof the petitioner filed the rejoinder and thereafter both the
parties were heard at length.

We may state at the outset that the entire thrust in the writ
petition is that the NDMC sought to exclude the petitioner from the
reckoning primarily because of the reason that the petitioner had opted for
CWP No.6416/07.

12

Of 36

“Semi Automatic Parking System”

and the NDMC wanted “Fully

Automatic Parking System” in the said multi level parking. According to
the petitioner this was not at all proper and was in fact contrary to RFP and
the provisions contained therein including in respect of norms of evaluation
provided in the RFP.

Submission was that, as noted above, the main

purpose of the project was to achieve maximum net equivalent car space
and for this purpose the bidders were given an option to either opt for “Fully
Automatic Parking System” or “Semi Automatic Parking System” or
“Manual System” of parking. Therefore, the criteria adopted by the NDMC
was totally irrelevant and irrational and arbitrary in excluding the petitioner
from the tender process merely because the proposal was for “Semi
Automatic Parking System” and not for “Fully Automatic Parking System”.
On the contrary going by the purpose and objective of the project, the
petitioner’s proposal was better than others as it was aimed at maximum
ECS.

In order to test the aforesaid arguments, original records were
summoned and perused.

Going through the minutes of the various

meetings, we found that the aforesaid contention of the petitioner was ill-

CWP No.6416/07.

13

Of 36

founded and factually incorrect.

There is nothing to suggest that the

petitioner’s proposal was rejected on the ground that it was for “Semi
Automatic Parking System” and not “Fully Automatic Parking System”.
Record reveals that a Technical Evaluation Committee
consisting of experts in the field was constituted by the NDMC to evaluate
the bids. This committee consists the following members:

Name
Sh. K.K. Mutreja
Sh. Sanjib Sengupta
Sh. J.B. Bhatia
Sh. K.C. Iyer
Sh. S. Mukherjee

Designation
Engineer-in-Chief
Chief Architect
EE (SIP)
Professor
Professor

Organisation
New Delhi Municipal Corporation
New Delhi Municipal Corporation
Municipal Corporation of Delhi
IIT, Delhi
IIT, Delhi

The composition of the Committee discloses that there are two
high ranking officials of the NDMC and one of the MCD with expertise in
the field as they are Engineer-in-Chief, Chief Architect, EE(SIP)
respectively. This was supported by the consultant for this project, namely,
M/s. IDFC and also the Director Projects of NDMC. In addition five more
experts from other organizations were included in the Committee. Two of
them are the Professors from an esteemed institution, namely, Indian

CWP No.6416/07.

14

Of 36

Institute of Technology, Delhi. They hold the post of Professor. As per the
description given in the counter-affidavit, one of them is a Civil Engineer
with a PhD from IIT, Madras. He has 15 years working experience in
Industry which include working in Military Engineer Services; Defence
Research and Development Organization (DRDO).

The areas of

specialization of other Professor are mechanisms, Rebotics, Mechanical
Systems Design and Impact Biomechanics.

It is also mentioned that IDFC has substantial expertise in
designing, running and managing large complex bid processess for
infrastructure, assets, particularly in the transport sector and various
prestigious projects have been undertaken by the IDFC. The expertise and
the insights gained in such assignments have enabled IDFC to provide high
quality advice to the Government Agencies in managing bid processess.
Keeping in view this credential of the IDFC, this company was appointed as
Consultant and two persons with requisite expertise were placed by the
IDFC who were associated in the meetings of the Technical Committee.

Five experts who constituted the bid Evaluation Committee
CWP No.6416/07.

15

Of 36

undertook the task of technical evaluation of the bidders. Record shows
that the bids were evaluated on six parameters, namely, project appreciation,
layout design, technology selection, plan of implementation, resource
allocation and compliance allocation. Maximum marks allocated under the
aforesaid six heads were 20,30,25,15,15 and 5 respectively. In this manner
marks were to be awarded out of 100 and minimum requirement/benchmark
was to get 75 marks for a bidder to qualify for stage three.

While

evaluating the bids under the aforesaid six heads, there were further subheads and the total sub-heads count to 17 under the six heads. Thus there
were six main parameters and 17 sub-parameters under which evaluation
exercise was undertaken. All the five experts evaluated each of the four
bidders who had qualified for stage two, under aforesaid heads. Thereafter,
marks were added and on that basis it was found that the petitioner secured
49.1 marks whereas other three bidders could achieve the benchmark of 75
and above.

This is demonstrated from the following tabulated sheet

prepared by the Evaluation Committee which is signed by all the five
experts.

CWP No.6416/07.

16

Of 36

papers `A` Page-12 to be photocopied & attached

CWP No.6416/07.

17

Of 36

The aforesaid process when read along with the minutes of the
meetings of the Evaluation Committee, as recorded, brings out the following
significant aspects:
A. There was an objective criteria laid down by the Evaluation
Committee on the basis of which the technical bids of the bidders
were evaluated.
B. Every proposal was examined on the basis of the pre-determined
objective norms which have clear relevance with the nature of
project.

All the proposals were discussed and evaluated on a

common platform.
C. Adequate opportunity was provided to all the bidders to clarify their
proposal.

The bidders were even given a chance to make their

presentation on the proposal submitted by them. The five members
of the Committee had evaluated each proposal on the fixed
parameters after going through the bids, presentations made and
clarifications

offered

by

the

bidders

while

making

their

presentations.
D. The five experts made their individual assessments assigning marks
CWP No.6416/07.

18

Of 36

to the bidders under various heads which would signify an objective
assessment made by these experts.
E. Most importantly, the bid of the petitioner is not rejected on the
ground that it contained the proposal for `Semi Automatic Parking
System’.

Thus the apprehension of the petitioner on this count

which is the foundation of the writ petition is wholly misconceived.
Normally after finding the aforesaid material on record, no
further discussion was needed as this is sufficient to dismiss the petition
being without any merits. However, after the records were produced and
inspection provided to the petitioner as well, the petitioner has sought to
build altogether different case after inspecting these records. The attempt
thereafter was to find out loopholes and irregularity in the process and
methodology adopted by the Evaluation Committee. The argument has thus
shifted to a different platform. The petitioner now alleges, which was the
focus at the time of arguments as well:
1.

There has been no objective in the allocation of marks to
various bidders inasmuch as there is wide variation in the
marks allocated to the petitioner vis-a-viz allocated to other
bidders and no reasons have been recorded therefore,

CWP No.6416/07.

19

Of 36

2.

It is contended that the Supreme Court in the case of
Reliance Airport Developers (P) Ltd. Vs. Airports Authority
of India (2006) 10 SCC 1 has categorically held and
stressed the need for objective scoring system. Specific
reference was made to pars 30,31,56,57,74 and 110 of the
said judgment.

3.

It is submitted that the representation of the petitioner was
considered by the Technical Committee in its 8th meeting
held on 14.8.2006 giving four reasons to disqualify the
petitioner but these four reasons had no nexus with the
evaluation criteria set out in Clause 2.4 of RFP. The four
reasons which are assigned in the minutes of meeting dated
14.8.2007 are as under:

4.

No references/testimonials with regard to workings of this
parking system/solution anywhere in the world was
provided.

5.

Retrieval times excluded the time required to park-in the
cars from the elevator to the parking floor & part-out the car
upto the elevator from the parking floor and clearly

CWP No.6416/07.

20

Of 36

exceeded the retrieval period of 3 minutes as required in the
tender documents.
6.

Circulation plan as proposed was observed to be
unsatisfactory on account of usage of lifts for entry/exit
during the peak traffic period.

7.

Non-compliance was observed with regard to provision of
three basements for manual/semi automatic systems and 4
basements were provided, however within 12 mts.

8.

According to the petitioner, as per Clause 2.4 of the RFP,
the

parameters

are

technical

selection,

plan

of

implementation, resource allocation method statement.
However, in the four alleged reasons cited by the
Committee, only circulation plan finds the mention which is
relevant and only 5 marks have been allocated under this
head and no marks have been allocated to any other criteria
set out in Clause 2.4.
9.

It is argued that entire evaluation criteria and evaluation
process is stooped in favour of `Fully Automatic Parking
System’

CWP No.6416/07.

involving

use

of

sophisticated
21

technology

Of 36

regardless of the ECS being achieved.
10.

None of the members of the Evaluation Committee were
experienced in transportation engineering which is the area
of experts relevant for appraisal of the bids.
Independent studies/ reports obtained by the Petitioner from

Transportation Engineering Section, Deptt. of Civil Engineering, Indian
Institute of Technology, Delhi and also from Centre for Transportation
Systems, Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee, clearly establish that the
reasons cited by the Respondent for disqualifying the Petitioner are nonexistent and have no factual basis whatsoever.

The said reports have

already been placed on record.
The various technical parameters that a Bidder is supposed to
achieve, have been duly set out in detail in various Clauses of Schedule - II.
These include parameters relating to construction requirement, design
parameter, operating and maintenance requirement etc.

Objective

requirements have been specifically prescribed in respect of various aspects,
for instance, depth of construction, Base/Soil Dimensions/Car Space, Airconditioning, Gradient of Ramp, Width of Ramp, Straight Turing Radius,
number of Care Lifts, Power Backup, Sound Emission, Lighting, Signage,
CWP No.6416/07.

22

Of 36

Generator Back-up, Drainage, Safety Barriers etc. Each and every of the
criteria set out in Schedule II of the RFP is satisfied by the Petitioner. It is,
therefore, inconceivable as to how the Petitioner could fail, and fail so
miserably, to even achieve the qualifying score for it to proceed to Stage-III
of the Evaluation Process. The credentials of the Petitioner are evident from
the fact that it has emerged as the successful bidder in respect of a similar
tender floated by the MCD for construction of an automatic multi-level
parking system in Kamla Nagar.
We are not impressed by any of the aforesaid submissions.
Clause-2 of the RFP deals with evaluation methodology. As per para 2.3
which is concerned with evaluation of technical submission, it is provided
that the technical submission would be evaluated to check the adequacy and
appropriateness of the proposed technology for the project purposes and its
conformance to the construction requirements and O & M requirements.
For this purpose the technical submission is to be scored on the basis of
rating of various parameters mentioned in para 2.4 which is already
extracted above. It provides a complete package and every bidder was put
to notice of these parameters. No doubt he had choice to bid for `Fully
Automatic Or Semi Automatic Or Manual Parking System but then he could
CWP No.6416/07.

23

Of 36

very well anticipate that keeping in view the yardsticks on the basis of
which evaluation was to be done. He may have this advantage in getting his
bid evaluated under certain heads if his bid is `Semi Automatic’ Or
`Manual'. Schedule-2 of RFP under the head “Construction Requirements’
though gives choice to the bidders to choose any of the aforesaid
technology, namely, Manual, Semi or Fully Automatic Parking System, it
also specifically stipulates as to what is to be ensured in the chosen
technology by providing as under:
Request for proposal document
PPP Project to Develop Multilevel Parking cum Commercial Complex at Baba Kharag Singh Marg,
New Delhi

Schedule 2
Construction Requirements
1.
1.1

Construction Requirements for Parking Facility
General
i.
ii.

The facilities to be provided in the Parking Facility which is to be
implemented by the concessionaire as part of the Project shall be as set out
in Schedule 1.
The choice of technology for the Parking Facility is left to the
Concessionaire, and shall be finalized as part of the bid submitted. the
Concessionaire is free to choose:
a.

Manual

A manual parking system is a conventional ramp based parking system
where, the vehicle is expected to be driven and parked in/retrieved and
driven out from an available/alloted parking space by the owner and/or a
designated operator. No mechanisation what so ever is expected for the
process of conveying to the parking/retrieving of the vehicle.
CWP No.6416/07.

24

Of 36

b.

Semi-automatic

A semi automatic system is a parking system where one or more processes
of conveying to/from and parking/retrieving of the vehicle within the
parking structure is mechanised. It is presumed that there is a human
involvement with the vehicle (either by the owner or a designated operator)
during the physical process conveying or of parking or retrieving the
vehicle.
c.

Fully automatic

A fully automatic system is a parking system where all the processes of
conveying to/from and parking/retrieving of the vehicle within the parking
structure beyond a designated entr4y area is fully mechanised. it is
presumed that there is no human involvement with the vehicle (either by
the owner or a designated operator) during the physical process conveying
or of parking or retrieving the vehicle from the storage area.
Provided that the Concessionaire shall ensure that the technology chosen is
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)

Appropriate to the site and ground situation
Accommodates the number of ECS proposed
Has a precedent for use in a project of similar nature and size
is supported by the technology/service provider for design, supply,
implementation and on going maintenance
Addresses all issues of safety, including fire safety, operational
safety, and environmental safety
Does not add to circulation problems for pedestrians and traffic in
the contiguous area

NDMC desires that, at the time of Handback of Project Facilities, it takes
over an asset that would have the most appropriate technology under the
circumstances, would be operationally, the most safe and convenient
design and environmentally, the most friendly and aesthetic structure.
Towards satisfying this objective, the Table 2.1 below lists the technical
parameters that the Concessionaire shall comply with while selecting the
appropriate technology and while designing the facilities thereunder.
This table is definitely not intended to be exhaustive and it shall be the
obligation of the Concessionaire to adhere to an applicable norms and to
good industry practices in the design of the Project Facilities. As such, the
Concessionaire would be expected to adhere to all the relevant set of
CWP No.6416/07.

25

Of 36

covenant(s) that would relate to the technology option(s) that is offered
for the Project.
The Parameters listed in the table would co-exist with the approved
development control norms as listed in Table 1.3 of Schedule I. They shall
be read with and applied in conjunction with the development control
norms as appropriate. Any deviations, from these parameters, however,
being within the compliance of the approved development control norms
shall be accepted by NDMC only at its sole discretion.
Table 2.1- Covenants
Sl. No.

Type of Parking Facility

Item Description

1.

Manual Parking

Depth of construction, Should not exceed
below ground
three
basement
levels.

2.

Manual Parking

Height
of
Parking, Should not exceed
without elevators
three floors

3.

Manual Parking

Height of each basement Should not exceed
floor
3.00 M

4.

Semi-automatic
Depth of construction, Should not exceed
(requiring
human below ground
three
basement
intervention in vehicle
levels or 12 metres
handling below ground)

5.

Manual Parking

Space for calculating
one Equivalent Car
Space (ECS) within
parking structure.

6.

Manual Parking

Space for calculating Note less than 23
one Equivalent Car Sq.m
Space (ECS) within
parking structure

7.

Manual
automatic

CWP No.6416/07.

Covenant

Not less than 28 M2
per ECS for ground
floor
covered
parking and 32 M2
per
ECS
for
underground
and
above the ground
parking facilities.

Parking/semi Bay/slot dimensions per Not less than 5.2 m
car space
long and 3.25 m
wide
26

Of 36

8.

Automatic/Semi - automatic Space per ECS
(if mechanical parking bays
are proposed)

Note less than 15 sq.
m

9.

Manual Parking/
automatic

Preferable, but not
mandatory.
However mechanical
ventialation must be
provided to permit a
minimum of 15 airchanges per hour for
normal ventilation
and 30 air-changes
per hour in case of
fire or distress call

10.

Fully Automatic

11.

Semi automatic (operator Retrieval Time
assisted)

Not more than 3
minutes

12.

Manual/automatic (if ramp Gradient of Ramp
is provided )

Not more than 1:7:5
with a minimum
transition space of 5
M at the start and
Termination of the
ramp with gradient
of 50% of the main
ramp.

13.

Manual/semi automatic (if width of Ramp
ramp is provided)

Minimum of 5.5 M
width and only one
way

14.

Manual/semi automatic (if Straight Turning Radius Minimum 7.5 M
ramp is provided)
Helical Length turning Minimum 10 M
radius
Lot turning radius
Minimum 5.5 M

15.

Automatic/Semi automatic Number of car lifts
(if car lifts are used)

CWP No.6416/07.

Semi- Airconditioned

Retrieval time

Not more than 3
minutes minutes.

A minimum number
of 3 car lifts each for
entry and exit with
atleast one lift each
for entry and exit as
stand by

27

Of 36

16.

Manual/
automatic/automatic

17.

Automatic/Semi automatic

power back up

Not less than 100%
with
automatic
switch
over
mechanism

18.

Automatic/Semi automatic

sound emissions

Not more than 40
dba

ii.

Semi Carriageway
of
pavement for circulation
space within parking
facilities

Note less than 4
meters, if one way,
and not less than 6
meters if it is two
ways flow

The Concessionaire may adopt appropriate designs conforming to

Approved Development Control norms for the Project Facilities and
approved in accordance with this Schedule 1.
A cumulative reading of the aforesaid provisions would show
that marks were to be allotted for safety and circulation plans, adequacy and
appropriateness of chosen technology, technology management and
knowhow transfer arrangements, construction methodologies -safety and
environment friendliness with special emphasis on the methodology
adopted for an underground construction etc.
If under the aforesaid and other heads bidder would adopt for
`Fully Automatic Parking System’ steal a march , the other bidders (like the
petitioner) with proposal for `Semi Automatic Parking System’ cannot

CWP No.6416/07.

28

Of 36

make grievance thereby.
In Madan Lal & Others Vs. State of J&K and others (1995) 3
SCC 486, the Supreme Court made following observations which may be
relevant in the context though that was a case of appointment through
selection:
“Therefore, the result of the interview test on merits cannot
be successfully challenged by a candidate who takes a chance
to get selected at the said interview and who ultimately finds
himself to be unsuccessful. It is also to be kept in view that in
this petition we cannot sit as a Court of appeal and try to reassess the relative merit of the concerned candidates who had
been assessed at the oral interview nor can the petitioners
successfully urge before us that they were given less marks
though their performance was better. It is for the Interview
Committee which amongst others consisted of a sitting High
Court Judge to judge the relative merits of the candidates who
were orally interviewed in the light of the guidelines laid
down by the relevant rules governing such interviews.
Therefore, the assessment on merits as made by such an
expert committee cannot be brought in challenge only on the
ground that the assessment was not proper or justified as that
would be the function of an appellate body and we are
certainly not acting as a court of appeal over the assessment
made by such an expert committee”.
To the same effect is the judgment of this Court in the case of
Continental Construction Ltd. Vs. Tehri Hydro Development Corporation
Ltd. & Another 2002 V AD (Delhi) 789.

CWP No.6416/07.

29

Of 36

Paras 2.3, 2.4 of RFP along with Schedule -2 extracted above
provide sufficient guidelines for the Expert Committee prosecuting the
manner in which the bids were to be evaluated. It was obviously done to
achieve objectivity when such specific guidelines were provided to the
Expert Committee. It cannot be said that the exercise undertaken by the
experts is arbitrary merely because so called reasons giving different marks
are not recorded. Further only because of the reason that different experts
have given different marks is no ground to contend that there is no
objectivity. As mentioned above, all the five members are experts in their
field. Three out of five members belong to other organizations. No member
had any personal interest in the matter. There are no allegations of bias or
mala fides.
From the perusal of the records it is clear that the evaluation
was done by the Technical Committee after receiving the presentation of the
bidders on July 13 and 14,2007. The following minutes of the meeting
record in respect of the petitioner, are as under:
●

●

CWP No.6416/07.

Presentation broadly covered all aspects
required by the Technical Committee.
The semi-automatic system described was
found deficient vis-a-vis the output parameters
provided in the tender documents
30

Of 36

•

•

•

•

●

no references/testimonials with regard to
workings of this parking system/solution
anywhere in the world was provided
retrieval times excluded the time required to
park-in the cars from the elevator to the
parking floor & park-out the car upto the
elevator from the parking floor and clearly
exceeded the retrieval period of 3 minutes as
required in the tender documents;
Circulation plan as proposed was observed to
be unsatisfactory on account of usage of lifts
for entry/exit during the peak traffic period
Non-compliance was observed with regard to
provision of three basements for manual/semi
automatic systems and 4 basements were
provided, however within 12 mts.
The bidder could not satisfactorily respond to
queries pertaining to turning radius, direction
on movement of vehicle (turntable),
dedication
of
the
lift-car/car
cum
passenger/service lift, etc".

In the next meeting held on 7.8.2007 clarifications received
from the three bidders along with suo moto clarification furnished by the
petitioner were considered. The comparative analysis of all the bidders was
reviewed by the Technical Committee. Evaluation methodology for scoring
was followed. The minutes further record that evaluation methodology was
followed in accordance with the RFP documents and final score-sheet was
prepared accordingly which has already been extracted above. On this basis

CWP No.6416/07.

31

Of 36

the Committee recommended that three bidders had qualified and their
Techno Commercial bids be opened. Since the bid of the petitioner was not
found responsive, it did not reach stage-3. However, in the meeting held on
14.8.2007 representation dated 11.8.2007 of the petitioner received on
13.8.2007 was considered and reasons for its clarification were given which
have also been reproduced above. On the basis of which the Committee
remarked that contentions of the petitioner were based on supposition. It
would be necessary to note that even if the members of the Committee have
given different marks to the petitioner, which is the case in respect of other
three bidders as well, minutes dated 14.8.2007 are signed by all the five
experts /members without giving any dissent or making discordant note.
In the case of Tata Cellular Vs. Union of India (1994) 6 SCC 651 the
Court after detailed examination of the law on the subject taking note of
scores of judgments laid down opined that the principles of judicial review
would apply to the exercise of contractual powers by Government bodies in
order to prevent arbitrariness or favouritism. However, at the same time the
Court delineated the inherent limitations in exercise of the said power of
judicial review. The Apex Court was of the view that Judicial review is
concerned with reviewing not the merits of the decision in support of which
CWP No.6416/07.

32

Of 36

the application for judicial review is made, but the decision-making process
itself. It is thus different from an appeal. When hearing an appeal the Court
is concerned with the merits of the decision under appeal. Since the power
of judicial review is not an appeal from the decision, the Court cannot
substitute its own decision. Apart from the fact that the Court is hardly
equipped to do so, it would not be desirable either. Where the selection or
rejection is arbitrary, certainly the Court would interfere. It is not the
function of a judge to act as a superboard, or with the zeal of a pedantic
schoolmaster substituting its judgment for that of the administrator. The
Court thus laid down the following parameters on which the legality of the
action of the respondent could be adjudged:

“The duty of the court is to confine itself to the
question of legality. Its concern should be:
1. Whether a decision-making authority exceeded its
powers?
2. committed an error of law
3. committed a breach of the rules of natural justice
4. reached a decision which no reasonable tribunal would
have reached or
5. abused its powers.
Therefore, it is not for the court to determine whether a
particular policy or particular decision taken in the
fulfillment of that policy is fair. It is only concerned with
CWP No.6416/07.

33

Of 36

the manner in which those decisions have been taken.
The extent of the duty to act fairly will vary from case to
case, shortly put, the grounds upon which an
administrative action is subject to control by judicial
review can be classified as under :
(i) Illegality: This means the decision-maker must
understand correctly the law that regulates his decisionmaking power and must give effect to it.
(ii) Irrationality, namely, Wednesbury unreasonableness,
It applies to a decision which is so outrageous in its
defiance of logic or of accepted moral standards that no
sensible person who had applied his mind to the question
to be decided could have arrived at. The decision is such
that no authority properly directing itself on the relevant
law and acting reasonably could have reached it
(iii) Procedural impropriety”.
The legal position in respect of the judicial review of the
contractual matters was summarized by the Supreme Court in para-94 of the
said judgment laying down the following principles:
“The principles deducible from the above are:
(1) The modern trend points to judicial restraint in
administrative action.
(2) The Court does no sit as a court of appeal but merely
reviews the manner in which the decision was made.
(3) The Court does not have the expertise to correct the
administrative decision. If a review of the administrative
decision is permitted it will be substituting its own
decision, without the necessary expertise which itself
CWP No.6416/07.

34

Of 36

may be fallible.
(4) The terms of the invitation to tender cannot be open
to judicial scrutiny because the invitation to tender is in
the realm of contract. Normally speaking, the decision to
accept the tender or award the contract is reached by
process of negotiations through several tiers. More often
than not, such decisions are made qualitatively by
experts.
(5) The Government must have freedom of contract. In
other words, a fairplay in the joints is a necessary
concomitant for an administrative body functioning in an
administrative sphere or quasi-administrative sphere.
However, the decision must not only be tested by the
application of Wednesbury principle of reasonableness
(including its other facts pointed out above) hut must be
free arbitrariness not affected by bias or actuated by mala
fides.
(6) Quashing decisions may impose heavy administrative
burden on the administration and lead to increased and
unbudgeted expenditure”.

The upshot of the aforesaid discussion would be to conclude that the
Expert Committee evaluated the bids in accordance with the criteria laid
down in the RFP which was an objective criteria spelled out in the tender
document itself and made known to the bidders as well to ensure
transparency in the system. This was adhered to by the Committee. Even
technical evaluation was done by the experts.

This Court is neither

competent nor equipped to comment upon the technical evaluation done by
CWP No.6416/07.

35

Of 36

the said committee.
We, therefore, do not find any merit in this petition which is
dismissed.

( A.K. SIKRI )
JUDGE

January 18,2008.
skk

CWP No.6416/07.

(VIPIN SANGHI)
JUDGE

36

Of 36

