Unreportable
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
W.P.(C) No.1847 of 1984
DATE OF HEARING: 30.01.2008
DATE OF DECISION :
14.03.2008
IN THE MATTER OF :
Ex. Hav. Rudra Singh

.......

Petitioner.

Thru. Major K. Ramesh, Advocate.
- Versus –
UNION OF INDIA & Ors.

.......
Respondents.
Thru. Mr.Mohan Kumar, Advocate with
Major S.S.Pandey

CORAM :THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE J.M.MALIK
1. Whether Reporters of Local papers may be allowed to see the Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?

A.K. SIKRI, J.

On the basis of charge-sheet dated 5.8.1982 and Summary Court
Martial proceedings conducted thereupon in which he pleaded guilty, the petitioner
was sentenced to six months rigorous imprisonment and also awarded penalty of
dismissal from service. The petitioner has not challenged the Summary Court
WP(C)No.1847/84

Page 1

Martial and also accepts that his plea of guilt to the charge was voluntary.
However, the entire thrust of the submissions of the learned counsel for the
petitioner was that the punishment imposed upon him does not commensurate with
the nature of the offence. Learned counsel, therefore, confined his submissions
exclusively to this aspect. He commenced his arguments by referring to order
dated 17.11.2005 passed in this writ petition, which is as under:
“Without prejudice to the plea of either parties as to the
culpability of the petitioner, we are of the view that taking
into account the following factors it is an appropriate case
where the respondents should consider as to the nature of the
punishment imposed because prima facie we are of the view
that the punishment in the facts of the present case does not
commensurate with the nature of the offence in view of the
following factors :(a) The totally clean record of the petitioner from
1965- 1981.
(b)

That fact that the carbine was recovered from Sepoy
Vikram Singh who was a soldier of the unit and

(c) Fact that there is some element of doubt as to how the
plea of guilt was entered into.
List on 8th December, 2005.
A copy of this order be given dasti to the counsel for the
parties.”

2.

Since we have to confine our consideration to the aforesaid fact alone,

namely, whether the punishment given in the circumstances is shockingly
WP(C)No.1847/84

Page 2

disproportionate to the charge or not, we shall take note of those material facts
which have bearing on this issue.
3.

The petitioner was enrolled in the Indian Army in 1965 when Indo-

Pak war broke out. During his service, he conducted himself appropriately in
discharge of his duties till the episode in question occurred. From 15.7.1981
onwards, the petitioner was Kote NCO. He was thus entrusted with weapons
which used to be issued to various soldiers for the AIA inspection and for carrying
out other duties and after the performance of duties, these weapons used to be
deposited back. Certain weapons were issued on 7.9.1981 for cleaning. However,
after the weapons were deposited back, there was shortage found therein. In the
evening on the same date, the petitioner reported about the loss of carbine when the
weapons were returned in the Kote.
4.

It transpired later that said lost carbine was used in looting a Bank.

One Bikram Singh who was working as Sepoy in the same Kote was caught red
handed with lost weapon. After it was established that the weapon was stolen and
used in the said Bank decoity, the petitioner was also charged vide Charge-sheet
dated 5.8.1982. Apart from 2-3 other minor charges as far as episode in question is
concerned, the charge against him was that on 7.9.1981 while performing the
duties at Kote NCO `D’ Coy, he neglected to obey Unit standing order para 533
WP(C)No.1847/84

Page 3

which required him to check all the weapons on opening the Kote but did not do
so when opening the Kote on 7.9.1981 at 0445 hours. He, therefore, omitted to
exercise proper check while issuing weapons which resulted in loss of carbine
machine as per the particulars of the said machine given in the charge sheet. It was
treated as charge under Section 63 of the Army Act. It was also alleged that he had
made a false statement to his superior officers in that at field on 6.9.1981 while
performing the duties of Kote NCD of D Cay, he did not get the broken window
pane of D Cay Kote repaired and made false statement giving incorrect report to
Sub-Major Man Singh knowing it to be so.
5.

After recording the Summary of Evidence, the Summary Court

Martial was conducted. As mentioned above, the petitioner pleaded guilty to the
charges. On this confession and on the basis of evidence led, the Court held him
guilty of the charges. As a consequence, the sentence imposed upon him was to
suffer rigorous imprisonment for six months by confinement in civil prison and he
was also dismissed from service vide orders dated 13.8.1982.

The petitioner

preferred pre-confirmation as well as post confirmation petition under Section 164
of the Army Act which were also dismissed. Thereafter, present petition was filed
by the petitioner.

WP(C)No.1847/84

Page 4

6.

As mentioned in the beginning, since the petitioner has not challenged

the plea of guilty and accepted the charge, the question which is to be decided is as
to whether punishment imposed upon the petitioner is disproportionate. Order
dated 17.11.2005 reveals that the petitioner had taken the plea that he had a clean
record from 1965 to 1981; carbine was recovered from Sepoy Bikram Singh who
was a soldier in the said Unit and no action was taken against him though the said
order also records that there was some element of doubt in recording the plea of
guilt was entered into.
7.

Learned counsel for the petitioner strenuously argued that the Sepoy

Bikram Singh was working in the same Unit and weapon was also recovered from
him when he was caught red handed. It is thus he who used the said weapon while
looting the Bank. His submission was that the weapons were issued in mass for
arms cleaning and, therefore, individual signatures were rightly not obtained in the
Kote register. In any case it was Lance Havaldar Keshav Dutt who was NCO
Incharge and who had collected the weapons for 16 Jawans. It was also pointed
out that these weapons were issued in wee hours i.e. 0445 hours in the morning and
humanly it was not possible to search missing weapons. When the weapon was
found short, the petitioner himself had reported for the loss of weapon. Moreover
it was not in dispute that actual Kote NCO Lance Naik ran away and absconded
WP(C)No.1847/84

Page 5

from duty which proved that he was guilty person.

Thus before the Army

Authorities caught actual culprit Sepoy Bikram Singh who stole the weapon and
also ran away, entire blame fell on the petitioner who was only assisting to Kote
NCO without any official charge of the Kote where arms were kept. Submission
of learned counsel, in this backdrop was that plea of guilt should also be taken to
be not voluntarily and under suspicious circumstances.
8.

The respondents have countered the aforesaid submissions by

contending that the petitioner could not be assistant to Naik Lalit Prasad, Kote
NCO as the petitioner was holding higher rank of Havaldar. We find force in the
submission and, therefore, are not inclined to believe that the petitioner was not
responsible for issuance of carbine and was only assisting Naik Lalit Prasad.
Insofar as loss of weapon is concerned, it is apparent that there is no charge that it
was the petitioner who stole the weapon. The petitioner may be right to the extent
that the stolen weapon was found in the custody of Sepoy Bikram Singh who had,
after the episode on 7.9.1981, eloped from the scene and was declared deserter
later on. However, insofar as the petitioner is concerned charge against him of
negligence in performing the duties. The thrust of the charge is clear, namely, the
petitioner had not performed his duties with due diligence. Inference, therefore, is
that had he performed his duties carefully, carbine might not have been stolen.
WP(C)No.1847/84

Page 6

Therefore, merely because somebody else committed the theft of the weapon,
would not discharge the petitioner of his lapses i.e. charge of careless and
negligence in performance of his duties which led to theft..
9.

Pursuant to order dated 17.11.2005 the Competent Authority had

considered the matter again and passed the detailed order dated 6.1.2006 rejecting
the contention of the petitioner. The Competent Authority concluded that the
punishment awarded to the petitioner was just and commensurate with the gravity
of the offence and there exists no extenuating circumstances to warrant the
commutation of the punishment of dismissal to that of discharge. Each of the
aspect noted in the order dated 16.12.2005 are taken into consideration and
following observations made as per the copy of the said order supplied by the
respondent:
“ (a) It is true that the petitioner had a clean disciplinary record prior to this
conviction. Therefore, the Summary Court Martial had given due
consideration to this fact, prior to awarding the sentence, on the petitioner.
However, it is pertinent to point out that despite his clean past record, he was
an average NCO. (Flag „D‟). As such his contention that this aspect was not
considered when awarding the sentence is incorrect. Negligence and gross
inefficiency of such a nature can not be condoned on grounds of past good
conduct.
(b) It is true that the Sten Machine Carbine, the loss of which was
occasioned, by the neglect and omission on the part of the petitioner, has
been recovered from another person named Sepoy Bikram Singh of the same
unit, involved in a dacoity case. However it is pertinent to point out that Ex
Hav Rudra Singh was charged and convicted for an act of omission on his
WP(C)No.1847/84

Page 7

part, to exercise proper check while issuing weapons from Delta Company
Kote of which he was the NCO-in-charge and which omission resulted in the
loss of the said Sten Machine Carbine. He had not been charged for stealing
the Sten Machine Carbine but for occasioning the loss of the Sten Machine
Carbine by his neglect of omission. As such the subsequent recovery of the
Sten Machine Carbine from Bikram Singh does not mitigate/dilute the
petitioner‟s offence.
(c ) The Kote NCO is responsible for the maint, accounting and security
of Kote per se and all the muutions of war housed in them. He as part of his
bounden duties is responsible for the daily opening the Kote, the issue of
wpns, taking signatures of indls/Senior NCO-in-Charge of a Gp of soldiers
drawing wpns from the Kote and keeping an account of same. Similarly on
the return of the arms/amn/war like stores he has to ensure that they are
physically present and accounted for before the Kote is sealed for the day.
He also has to maint the Kote Register as a record for drawal and deposit of
the arms/amn/war like stores held in his custody. The Kote is the „Sanctum
sanctorum‟ the most important/sensitive and heavily guarded place in an unit
which houses all the arms, amn and war like stores. The responsibility of
the Kote NCO who has been entrusted with the security of munitions of war
is very great. The lost wpn in unauth hands could have been a potential
source of danger and could have taken a toll of innocent human lives. The
gravity of the offence can be gauged in the correct perspective only when
viewed from the angle that it more wpns had been lost, they would have the
potential of endangering innumerable human lives and wreaking havoc on
public property.
(d) Hav Rudra Singh had deliberately violated the Unit Standing Orders
and the Standing Operating Procedures for opening/closing the Kotes, by
opening the Kote at 4.45 AM on 07 September 1981, in the absence of the
Duty JCO and the Kote JCO. Further Hav Rudra Singh in total
contravention to the Standing Orders failed to maintain a proper account of
the total number of Sten Machine Carbines issued to Hav Keshav Datt and
his party of 16 Sepoys, as he failed to obtain their signatures against the
number of Sten Machine Carbines drawn by them on 07 September 1981 at
4.45 AM in the Delta Company Kotes Arms In/Out Register. The Kote is
the „Sanctum sanctorum‟ the most important/sensitive and heavily guarded
place in an unit which houses all the arms, amn who has been entrusted with
the security of munitions of war is very great. In the Army loss of arms is an
WP(C)No.1847/84

Page 8

extremely grave military offence. The petitioner had displayed a sense of
grave irresponsibility totally disproportionate to the degree of trust and faith
reposed on his shoulders by the org. An act unbecoming of a trained
professional soldier, which is unpardonable.
(e) The Summary Court Martial proceedings were conducted strictly as
per various provisions of the law. The charge sheet was prepared in
accordance with the provisions of Army Rules 28 to 32. The Court martial
constitution of Lt Col RM Pherwani, as the Court, Capt VKS Karki and Sub
Ummed Singh, the persons in attendance and Maj SJS Grewal the friend of
the accused. The Court and the interpreter were duly affirmed and the
arraignment of the accused was carried out, in the presence of the possession
in attendance and the friend of the accused. Thereafter on the petitioners
plea of guilty, provisions of Army Rule 115 were complied with. The
petitioner was also given an opportunity to make any statement in reference
to the charge or in mitigation of the punishment but declined to make any
statement. Further the petitioner was given an opportunity to summon any
witness of character, which he refused to avail. While considering and
awarding of sentence, due cognizance was taken of his previous record and
character and the sentence awarded in the presence of all above referred
persons present in the court and the friend of the accused. Subsequently the
petitioner was apprised about his right of petition vide 6 Kumaon Letter
No.113/SC/2a DATED 06 August 1982. Therefore it may be seen that
during the conduct of the Summary Court Martial Proceedings no rule/laid
down procedure was violated.
(f)
The petitioner had pleaded quilty in front of the Summary Court
Martial and this fact was accordingly endorsed in the Summary Court
martial proceedings and the proceedings signed by the Officer holding the
Court martial.”

10.

In this backdrop we have to consider as to whether punishment

imposed upon the petitioner does not commensurate with the nature of offence.
We are of the opinion that the charges leveled against the petitioner in the context
WP(C)No.1847/84

Page 9

in which they are to be understood are by no means trivial charges. Negligence on
the part of the petitioner led to the theft in carbine. Such weapons in the Kote are
to be dealt with, with extreme care as pilferage of Army weapons may have
disastrous consequences. In this case itself the weapon in question was used for
Bank robbery.
11.

Under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the High Court has

limited power to interfere with the punishment.

Unless it is shown that the

punishment is so disproportionate that it shocks the conscience of the Court, the
Court cannot interfere with such penalties awarded in disciplinary proceedings.
Present is not a case of this nature.
12.

We, therefore, do not find any merit in this petition and dismissed the

same.

( A.K. SIKRI )
JUDGE

March 14, 2008.
skk

WP(C)No.1847/84

(J.M.MALIK)
JUDGE

Page 10

