Unreportable
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
W.P.(C) No.17859 of 2006
DATE OF HEARING: 29.10.2007
DATE OF DECISION : 18.01.2008
IN THE MATTER OF :
Smt. H.K.Bhatia (Retd)

.......

Petitioner.

Thru. Mr.O.P.Saxena, Advocate.
- Versus
UNION OF INDIA

.......

Respondent.

Thru. Mr.Dalip Mehra, Advocate.
CORAM :THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether Reporters of Local papers may be allowed to see the
Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
A.K. SIKRI, J.
Order dated 1.12.2006 passed in this writ petition would depict
the controversy involved. This order reads as under:
“CM.14823/2006.
Exemption allowed subject to all just exceptions.
WP(C)No.17859/06

1 of 8

WP(C)17859/2006
The main contention of the petitioner is that one
Ms.Lavlin Jain who was junior to the petitioner
had received the benefit of preponement of
increment since her juniors had received the same
earlier to her. Accordingly, he claims that
petitioner is entitled to similar treatment when her
junior has been given the benefit of preponement
of increment.
Issue notice to the respondents to show cause as
to why rule nisi be not issued, returnable on 25th
April,2007.
Mr.Anil Nag appears and waives service of
notice. Let counter-affidavit be filed within four
weeks. Rejoinder, if any, within four weeks
thereafter.
CM.14822/2006
Dismissed as not pressed.”

The petitioner who was working as Junior Programme
Assistant with the Deputy Director General, Computer Centre in the
Ministry of Statistics and P.I. has since retired from service.

She,

however, is pressing her claim for stepping up of her pay. The claim is
founded on the averments that she was promoted to the rank of Jr.
Programme Assistant on 18.6.1987 and another person Smt. Lovlin Jain
WP(C)No.17859/06

2 of 8

was promoted as Jr. Programme Assistant w.e.f. 26.2.1988. Thus she was
promoted prior to Smt. Lovlin Jain and Smt. Lovlin Jain was also junior
to her in the lower rank, namely, Data Processing Assistant/Tape
Librarian (DPA/TL). Post of Jr. Programme Assistant was re-designated
as Data Processing Assistant-A (DPA-Grade A) on 11.9.1989 and this
decision was given effect from 1.1.1986. Pay scale was also revised to
Rs.1600-2660.

The increment of Smt. Lavlin Jain in the grade of

Rs.1600-2660 was preponed from September to April vide orders dated
30.7.2004. As a result thereof, her pay was stepped up to the same stage
as her junior, namely, junior of Smt. Lavlin Jain to avert an anomaly. In
these circumstances, as on 1.4.1986 pay of Smt. Lavlin Jain was fixed at
Rs.1650/- whereas basic pay of the petitioner as on that date was
Rs.1600/-. Since the stepping up of the pay of Smt. Lavlin Jain by
preponing the date of increment was to remove the anomaly which has
arisen because of her junior getting higher pay, same treatment had to be
meted out to the petitioner as well who was senior to Smt. Lavlin Jain.
On this basis she requested for pre-poning of her increment in a similar
manner from September to April. This representation was rejected. Her
OA filed to claim this relief before the Central Administrative Tribunal,
WP(C)No.17859/06

3 of 8

Principal Bench, Delhi has also been dismissed vide judgment dated
13.4.2006. She even preferred Review Application which met the same
fate. Feeling aggrieved, present petition is filed.

A perusal of the judgment dated 13.4.2006 passed by the
learned Tribunal would reveal that the Tribunal was of the view that even
if Smt. Lavlin Jain and three other persons were junior to the petitioner as
DPA, her case was not similarly placed to the aforesaid officials. The
petitioner had earned increment on first day of September every year.
She was promoted to the post of DPA in the year 1984 on ad hoc basis
and regularized on 16.6.1987 and Smt. Lavlin Jain etc. were appointed in
subsequent years. Further, the petitioner's pay was fixed in the said grade
in terms of option furnished by her. Moreover, when the petitioner's pay
was fixed in the revised pay scale of Rs.1600-2660, on that date there was
no anomaly as far as pay fixation is concerned. This anomaly had arisen
because of the accrual of next increment to different persons in different
months, which certainly varies. Therefore, such a fixation could not be
termed as anomaly and the Tribunal was also of the view that the
petitioner was claiming equal pay for equal work which claim was
WP(C)No.17859/06

4 of 8

unjustified and untenable in law as there could be variety of reasons
which may contribute to different pay irrespective of seniority and the
claim could not be made on this ground, inasmuch as, doctrine of “equal
pay for equal work” cannot be read in Article 14 of the Constitution.
The date of increment which varies from individual to individual

is

reasonable classification. The Tribunal referred to the judgment of the
Supreme Court in the case of State of Andhra Pradesh & Others Vs. G.
Sreenivasa Rao & Ors (1989) 2 SCC 290 and quoted the following
observations:
"without considering the scope of these rules and
without adverting to the reason s for fixing the
junior at a higher pay, the High Court and the
Tribunal were not justified in coming to the
conclusion in an omnibus manner that whenever
and for whatever reason a junior is given higher
pay, the doctrine of "equal pay for equal work" is
violated and the seniors are entitled to the same
pay."
The Hon'ble Supreme Court further held therein
that"Equal pay for equal work" does not mean that
all the members of a cadre must receive the same
pay packet irrespective of their seniority, source
of recruitment, educational qualifications and
various other incidents of service. When a
single running pay scale is provided in a cadre
WP(C)No.17859/06

5 of 8

the constitutional mandate of equal pay for equal
work is satisfied. Ordinarily grant of higher pay
to a junior would ex facie be arbitrary but if
there are justifiable grounds in doing so the
seniors cannot invoke the equality doctrine. To
illustrate, when pay fixation is done under valid
statutory rules/executive instructions, when
person recruited from different sources are given
pay protection when promotee from lower cadre
or a transferee from another cadre is given pay
protection, when a senior is stopped at efficiency
bar, when advance increments are given for
experience/passing a test/acquiring higher
qualifications or as incentive for efficiency; are
some of the eventualities when a junior may be
drawing higher pay than his seniors without
violating the mandate of equal pay for equal
work. The differentia on these grounds would
be based on intelligible criteria which has
rational nexus with the object sought to be
achieved." (emphasis supplied)

Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the senior
was entitled to stepping up of pay with reference to junior's pay if the
senior as well as junior discharges the same duty with similar
responsibility. In support of this proposition, he relied upon the judgment
of Supreme Court in the case of Calcutta Municipal Corporation and
another Vs. Sujit Baran Mukherjee and others (1997) 11 SCC 463.
However, he could not dispute the factual position in this case, namely,

WP(C)No.17859/06

6 of 8

the petitioner was placed in the pay scale of Rs.1600-2660 from 1.1.1986
and the petitioner's pay was fixed in the said grade in terms of option
furnished by her and when the petitioner's pay was fixed in the revised
pay scale of Rs.1600-2660, on that date there was no anomaly as far as
pay fixation is concerned. Her pay was, therefore, properly fixed on
giving the option and such an option once exercised was to be treated as
final. Smt. Lavlin Jain and other officials whose date of increment had
been fixed as 1.4.1986 was by virtue of order of Tribunal had sought
redesignation and higher scale on entirely different basis.
We are, therefore, of the opinion that the Tribunal was right in
relying upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of State of
Andhra Pradesh & Others Vs. G. Sreenivasa Rao & Ors (supra) and in
this case judgment of

Calcutta Municipal Corporation and another Vs.

Sujit Baran Mukherjee and others (supra) will have no application. That
was a case where the court held that the senior would be entitled to
stepping up of pay with reference to junior's pay if both discharge the
same duties under the same responsibility and not in different
circumstances. Therefore, this case would not help the petitioner in view
of the distinction we have drawn above.
WP(C)No.17859/06

7 of 8

We, therefore, do not find any merit in this petition which is
accordingly dismissed.

( A.K. SIKRI )
JUDGE

January 18,2008.
skk

WP(C)No.17859/06

(VIPIN SANGHI)
JUDGE

8 of 8

