Unreportable
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+WP(C) No.9522/2004
Date of Hearing: 20.02.2008
Date of Decision: 20.02.2008
# Brig. B.C. Rana

....Petitioner

!

Through: Ms. Jyoti Singh, Adv.
Versus

$ Union of India & Ors.
^

.....Respondents
Through Ms. Manisha Dhir with
Ms. Preeti Dalal and Maj. S.S. Pandey

CORAM :*THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE J.M. MALIK
1.Whether Reporters of Local papers may be allowed to see
the Judgment?
2.To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3.Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
A.K. SIKRI, J.
:
1.

The petitioner wanted to get the benefit of a welfare

scheme which was promulgated by the Army Headquarters vide
its circular letter dated 18.11.1996 for serving army officers. As
per this scheme, the respondents had decided that those serving
officers who had become disabled or who became paraplegic
patients during various operations, including counter insurgency
operations

be

WP (C) No. 9522/2004

provided

the

facility

of

purchase

of

such
Page 1

cars/vehicles which are disabled friendly.

The reading of the

scheme would indicate that it was available to those serving
officers who fulfilled the following conditions:“(a)

Should be a battle or operational casualty.

(b)
Should be invalid/paraplegic and be incapable
of independent movement.
(c)

2.

Should preferably be gallantry award winner.”

This circular also mentions that this type of car is being

manufactured by M/s.Maruti Udyog Limited and the cost of the
car is Rs.3-4 lakhs excluding customs, excise duty and sales tax.
It was decided that the concerned officer would be paying 20%
of the cost and 80% shall be met by various authorities. The
concerned Regiment/Command had to contribute 20%, 40% was
to be given by AGI Fund and 20% contribution was to come from
AG‟s Branch Welfare Fund. The willing officers who fulfilled the
aforesaid conditions were asked to apply for the aforesaid grant
for the purpose of purchase of such cars.
one of the applicants.

The petitioner was

He has, however, not been given the

benefit of the said scheme as his application was rejected,
though considered twice. In these circumstances, the petitioner
has approached this Court by means of the present writ petition
with the following prayers:“1.
Issue a writ of certiorari quashing the letter
dated 8.6.99 and 28.1.02 whereby the allotment of
WP (C) No. 9522/2004

Page 2

the petitioner to auto transmission Maruti Zen car
under the scheme for disabled serving army officer
has been rejected.
2.
Issue a writ of mandamus directing the
respondents to immediately allot the said car to the
petitioner as he is completely entitled the same
under
the
scheme
evolved
by
the
Army
Headquarters.
3.
Issue a writ of mandamus directing the
respondents to produce all the medical records of the
petitioner which would substantiate the stand of the
petitioner as regards the percentage and nature of
his disability.
4.
Issue any other writ as this Hon‟ble Court may
deem fit in the fact of this case.

3.

The basis for making the application under the aforesaid

scheme for the purchase of car at subsidized rates is contained in
the petition and it would be necessary to first take stock of the
said factual matrix narrated by the petitioner.

4.

According to the petitioner, he was commissioned in the

Indian Army in December 1969 and he participated in the IndoPak war in the year 1971. In the said war he incurred a disability
of amputated symes LT., i.e., amputation below knee left side.
Though there is a dispute about the extent of injury, it is
conceded by the respondents that at that time the disability of
the petitioner was assessed by the Medical Board at 60%. The
petitioner

has

WP (C) No. 9522/2004

produced

sufficient

material

on

record

to

Page 3

demonstrate the extent of disability, which is clear from the
following documents:
(a)

Certificate

dated

2.8.1972

issued

by

the

Commandant, Artificial Limb Centre which indicates that the
injury suffered by the petitioner was a battle casualty of Indo-Pak
conflict 1971 and is a case of Amputation Symes LT.

It further

mentions that “His disability as is usually assessed under the
rules is not less than 60% (Sixty Percent) as on (date) 2-8-72 …”
(b)

Certificate

dated

2.7.1999

issued

by

the

Command Hospital (WC), Chandi Mandir, again confirming that he
was a battle casualty in 1971 war and “His disability as per guide
to medical Office G of I 1980 Appendix 1 to Chapter VII is 60%
(Sixty percent)”.
(c)

As per the disability assessment undertaken by

the Command Hospital EC, Calcutta, on 2.2.2000 the disability of
the petitioner was again assessed at 60%. This document further
mentions that the disability was also of permanent nature and
incapable of further improvement.

It also mentions that the

petitioner was incapable of driving conventional vehicle and
needed specialized vehicle with auto transmission.
(d)

Learned counsel for the petitioner also produced,

today in the Court, Pension Payment Order (PPO) of the petitioner
issued by the CDA(P), Allahabad, which is dated 3.10.2002. This
WP (C) No. 9522/2004

Page 4

pension order clarifies that it is a war injury pension and
mentions the disability of the petitioner at 60% for life.
5.

In the aforesaid circumstances, the petitioner made out a

case that he was eligible to be considered for purchase of car
with auto transmission under the aforesaid scheme. Along with
his application, he submitted certificate from authorized Medical
Board disclosing his disability at 60% (refer Annexure C at page
18 of the petition). It is also an admitted fact, as already noted
above, that the petitioner had suffered the said injury in a mine
blast in a war.
6.

The respondents had also issued circular letter dated

26.4.1999 in furtherance of its aforesaid policy dated 18.11.1996
giving revised eligibility criteria for the purchase of the aforesaid
automated Maruti Zen car to the disabled officers.

As per this

criteria, it was, inter alia, provided that the applicant should be
paraplegic/quadriplegic or be disabled by any of the following
categories of disability:“(i)

Loss of Lower Limb at Hip Joint-unilaterial and
bilateral.

(ii)

Bilateral Above Knee (AK) through Knee amputation.

(iii)

Bilateral Below Knee (BK) amputation.

(iv)

Unilateral AK or BK amputation.

(v)

Loss of both feet.

WP (C) No. 9522/2004

Page 5

(vi)

Loss of Upper Limb at shoulder-unilateral or bilateral.

(vii)

Amputation above elbow unilateral or bilateral.

(viii) Amputation below elbow unilateral or bilateral.
(ix)

Loss of both hands or one hand.

(x)

Loss of thumb and three fingers in any one hand.

(xi)

Gun shot wound damaging main nerve trunks and
producing paralysis of one or both sides upper or
lower 4 limbs.”

7.

As per the petitioner, his case is covered by category (iv)

above as his case was a case of unilateral below knee
amputation.

Therefore, according to the petitioner, he fulfilled

the eligibility criteria and his case could not have been rejected
by the Selection Board.
8.

In the counter affidavit filed by the respondents, the

respondents have contested the claim of the petitioner by taking
various pleas. It is, inter alia, pointed out that the Headquarters
had taken up the case with the Ministry of Defence for excise
exemption for the said cars for disabled serving officers and the
Ministry of Defence had obtained permission for exemption from
the excise duty for 18 cars as one-time measure from the
Ministry

of

Finance.

accommodated.

Thus,

18

officers

could

be

However, in the first instance the number of

applications received were 24.

WP (C) No. 9522/2004

only

In order to screen these

Page 6

applications, a Screening Board was constituted.

The first

Screening Board was held on 18.4.1999, which was chaired by
officials of very high rank. Twenty four officers were considered
by the said Screening Board out of which, 13 officers were
recommended for allotment of cars.

It is mentioned that the

Board did not recommend the name of the petitioner for the
provision of auto transmission car owing to his lower severity of
disability, i.e., 40%. The proceedings of the said Screening Board
indicating names of the persons who were recommended and
who were found not eligible are annexed along with the counter
affidavit.
9.

It is further stated that the second Screening Board was

held on 21.1.2000.

Since, in the meantime, the petitioner had

made a representation against his non-selection by the first
Screening Board, which was considered by the Headquarters, it
was decided to include his name for screening by the second
Screening Board as well. This was primarily the reason that the
petitioner had mentioned that his disability was 60%.

This

disability is maintained at 60% throughout, except on one
occasion to which we shall revert soon after. What is emphasized
is that even as per the respondents, the disability is permanent in
nature as it is a case of amputation of limb.

The extent of

disability is also assessed having regard to the extant rules.
WP (C) No. 9522/2004

Page 7

However, it appears that re-categorisation Medical Board, which
met on 27.9.1996, after examining the petitioner had stated the
percentage of disability at 40%. It is this document which was
placed before the first Screening Medical Board and on the
assumption that the petitioner suffered from 50% disability, his
case was rejected. This is the ground of rejection given by the
respondents themselves in the counter affidavit. Though Medical
Board proceedings dated 27.9.1996 were not filed along with the
petition, a copy thereof was handed over to us during arguments.
In column No.10(e), which relates to „Percentage of Disability‟, we
find that initially words „N.A.‟ were written which are scored off
and in its place 40% is mentioned.

Learned counsel for the

petitioner pointed out, and rightly so, that the mentioning of such
a percentage was totally uncalled for and the manner in which it
is mentioned creates doubts as well as it mentions after scoring
out the initial mentioning, namely, „N.A.‟. She produced the copy
of the proceedings of the re-categorisation Medical Board dated
19.3.1999 where again the same column, i.e. 10(e) the words
„Not Applicable‟ are written. It is because of this reason that recategorisation Medical Board is not to assess the extent of
disability. In the case of the petitioner the disability suffered by
him is of permanent nature.

As per the instructions dated

7.2.2001 issued by the Ministry of Defence, Government of India,
WP (C) No. 9522/2004

Page 8

in case of officials suffering from permanent disability, there is no
need to have periodical reviews by the Re-survey Medical Board
for re-assessment of the disability. These instructions are valid
and enforceable with effect from 1.1.1996 and would be
applicable when the re-categorisation Medical Board proceedings
were held on 27.9.1996 to examine the petitioner.

Even

otherwise, as already pointed out above, the petitioner suffers
from permanent disability as per the respondents‟ own showing
and in 1999 as well his disability is shown as 60%.

The

proceedings dated 27.9.1996 are signed by one Col. P.K. Manna,
President of the Medical Board.
issued

disability

certificate

Interestingly, he has himself

dated

2.2.2000

indicating

the

disability of the petitioner at 60% and also indicating that this
disability

is

of

permanent

nature

and

incapable

of

any

improvement.
10.

No doubt, there were more applicants than the cars

available for allotment and, therefore, there was no choice for the
respondent but to screen the applicant and allot these cars to
more deserving persons. In the first Screening Board when 24
applicants were considered and 18 cars were still available, the
name of the petitioner was rejected only because of the reason
that he suffered from 50% disability.

It is clear from this that

case of the petitioner was not properly considered as correct
WP (C) No. 9522/2004

Page 9

facts in respect of the extent of disability suffered by the
petitioner were not placed before the said Screening Board.
Learned counsel for the respondents had ventured to point out
that there were many persons with 60% disability whose cases
were also rejected and merely because a person suffered from
60% disability would not mean that his case could still have been
recommended for allotment of the said auto transmission car.
However, it is not for this Court to fathom a dwell into the mind of
the Screening Committee and try to find out as to what could be
the result had correct facts qua the petitioner been placed before
the Screening Committee. We are one with the learned counsel
for the respondent that it is the Screening Committee, which is
the best judge which had considered the applications. In juridical
review we are concerned with the process of decision-making.
The Court can interfere when it is found that a particular decision
suffers from irrationality, procedural impropriety or is mala fide
and contrary to law. In the present case, we find that there was
procedural impropriety as the correction position, qua the
petitioner, was not placed before the first Screening Committee.
On this ground alone we are inclined to allow this petition. The
consequence would be to direct the first Screening Committee to
consider the case on the basis that the petitioner suffered from
60% disability.
WP (C) No. 9522/2004

While considering the case, the Screening
Page 10

Committee would relegate itself to the original position in which it
was when 24 applicants were considered by the said Committee,
namely, it will keep in mind that 24 applicants and 18 cars are at
its disposal. Keeping these considerations in mind, the case of
the petitioner shall be considered and the Screening Committee
would then decide as to whether on comparative merit the
petitioner is worthy of recommendation for purchase of auto
transmission car under the aforesaid scheme. If the petitioner is
found eligible and is recommended, even if the scheme is
discontinued, in so far as the petitioner is concerned, he would
not be deprived of the benefit on this ground alone inasmuch as,
already pointed out above, his case is to be considered restoring
the status quo ante and as if the Screening Committee is meeting
on 18.4.1999.

The case of the petitioner shall be considered

within eight weeks from today and decision be communicated to
him.
A.K. SIKRI
(JUDGE)

J.M. MALIK
(JUDGE)
February 20, 2008
hp

WP (C) No. 9522/2004

Page 11

