Unreportable
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+RFA No.335/2006 and CM 7305/2006
Date of Hearing: 30.07.2007
Date of Decision: 20.09.2007
#Sh. Purshotam Lal Kalra
!

.....Appellant
Through: Nemo

Versus
$Smt. Kamlesh Chopra & Others ..........Respondents
^
Through Ms. Anjali Chopra
CORAM :*THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
THE HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
1.Whether Reporters of Local papers may be allowed to see
the Judgment?
2.To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3.Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?

A.K. SIKRI, J.
:
1. This appeal is preferred against preliminary decree for
partition passed by the learned Additional District Judge,
Delhi on 31.10.2005 in a suit filed by the respondent No.1
herein for partition of property bearing No. 17/11, Shakti
Nagar, Delhi-110 007 (hereinafter referred to as the 'suit
property')

against

the

petitioner

herein

and

respondent Nos.2 to 5.
RFA No.335/2006

Page 1 of 11

the

2. We may state at the outset that keeping in view the
relationship between the parties, on 6.12.2006 when this
matter came up for hearing, counsel for the parties
agreed for exploring the possibility of an amicable
settlement

through

mediation.

The

matter

was

accordingly referred to the Mediation Centre and case
was adjourned to 2.5.2007. On 2.5.2007, it was reported
that compromise efforts had failed. The mediation report
dated 9.2.2007 had been received to this effect. Counsel
for the respondent, therefore, wanted that the matter be
heard on merits.

However, counsel for the appellant

requested for an adjournment.

While granting the

adjournment and fixing the case for 16.7.2007, it was
made clear that no further adjournment shall be granted
and the case would be heard on the next date of hearing.
The trial court record was also summoned for that date.
On 16.7.2007 when the matter came up for hearing,
there was again a request on behalf of the counsel for the
appellant on the ground that counsel was indisposed.
Matter was, therefore, adjourned to 30.7.2007. When we
took up the matter on 30.7.2007 on its turn, counsel for
the appellant was not present. We heard the counsel for
RFA No.335/2006

Page 2 of 11

the respondent and waited for counsel for the appellant
for more than one hour. Taking note of what transpired
on previous hearing, we did not feel it proper to grant any
further indulgence. Therefore, we reserved the matter for
judgment. However, at the same time we granted liberty
to the appellant to file written submissions, if any, within
one week.

Though we waited for over a month, the

appellant had failed to file any written submissions either.
Therefore, we are proceeding with the judgment on the
basis of record and the submissions made by the
appellant in the memo of appeal.
3. The appellant is the brother of the respondents. All these
six siblings are the children of late Sh. Manohar Lal. Late
Sh.Manohar Lal had inherited the suit property measuring
264 sq. yards from his father late Sh.Punnu Ram Kalra
vide registered will dated 15.9.1978. He was, thus, the
sole owner of the suit property and as he had inherited
the said property through will, the property acquired the
character of self-acquired property in the hands of
Sh.Manohar Lal. He died on 15.9.2002 leaving behind his
registered will dated 12.8.1996. As per this will, the suit
property was to devolve upon his wife Smt. Amrit Devi
RFA No.335/2006

Page 3 of 11

Kalra (mother of the parties to the litigation) and after her
death, it was to devolve upon her son and five daughters
in equal share. Smt. Amrit Devi Kalra died on 25.1.2000,
i.e. even before the death of late Sh. Manohar Lal.
4. On the aforesaid basis, the respondent No.1 claimed that
she, her other sisters (respondent Nos.2 to 5) and the
appellant (defendants in the suit) had become the lawful
co-owners of the suit property in equal share and,
therefore, she demanded partition thereof and her 1/6th
share therein. She also averred in the plaint that she was
in occupation of the first floor of the suit property, which
was given to her by her father during his life-time and the
plaintiff and the defendant No.5 kept their dowry articles
and other domestic goods on the said first floor. She also
stated that the appellant herein was in possession of the
ground floor. In the plaint she also mentioned that she
had some matrimonial discord with her husband.
5. The suit was contested by the appellant alone.

He

alleged that suit property was a joint family property and
was purchased from joint family funds in the year 1950
by late Sh. Punnu Ram Kalra, who was the Karta of the
HUF. The house was built in the year 1954. The property
RFA No.335/2006

Page 4 of 11

being an HUF property, late Sh. Punnu Ram Kalra had no
right to execute the will and, therefore, the said will was
of no consequence.

Accordingly, even Sh. Manohar Lal

could not and did not inherit the property by virtue of the
will of late Sh. Punnu Ram Kalra and, therefore, he also
could not write any will. Since the suit property was an
HUF property, which was built from joint family funds, the
respondents had no right or interest in the suit property.
He also alleged that he was in possession of the entire
property. He stated that the plaintiff was living with her
family members in house No. D-267, Gandhi Vihar, Delhi
and was not using or occupying any portion of the suit
property.

It was also alleged that the suit was not

properly valued for the purpose of court fee and
jurisdiction.

Defendant Nos.2 to 5 also filed their joint

written statement but they supported the case of the
plaintiff.

Following

issues

were

framed

from

the

pleadings of the parties:i. Whether the suit property is HUF?

OPD

ii. Whether the Punnu Ram Kalra had right or
authority to execute a will as the property was
HUF?
RFA No.335/2006

If so to what effect?

If not to what
Page 5 of 11

effect?

OPP

iii. Whether Sh. Manohar Lal had authority to
execute the Will as the property was HUF? If
so to what effect? If not to what effect?

OPP

iv. Whether the suit has been properly valued for
the purposes of court fees and jurisdiction?
OPP
v. Whether the plaintiff is entitled for the relief
claimed for?

OPP

vi. Relief.
6. As is clear from the issue Nos. (ii) and (iii) as well as the
defence taken in the written statement, the execution of
the will by late Sh. Punnu Ram Kalra as well as late Sh.
Manohar Lal was not disputed.

However, their right to

execute such a will in respect of the suit property was
disputed by the appellant/defendant No.1 on the ground
that it was an HUF property. Therefore, the central issue
was as to whether the suit property is an HUF property on
which issue No.1 was framed and onus of proving this
issue was on the defendant No.1. Both the parties had
led their evidence in support of their respective cases.
The learned ADJ has held that the suit property was not
RFA No.335/2006

Page 6 of 11

the joint family property as there was no credible
evidence to support the plea of the defendant No.1 that
the suit property was purchased by late Sh. Punnu Ram
Kalra from any joint family funds or it was built using joint
family funds.
7. The evidence, which has come on record, would show
that late Sh. Punnu Ram Kalra had purchased the suit
property from Sh. Nand Lal Raj Pal through conveyance
deed dated 28.8.1950 (Ex. PW 1/3).

In furtherance

thereof, sale deed was also executed by the DDA in
favour of Sh. Punnu Ram Kalra on 10.6.1976 (Ex. PW 1/4).
The plaintiff had also produced PW-2 and PW-3, officials
from the office of the Sub-Registrar, Kashmere Gate,
Delhi, who had proved the sale deed. PW-4 was a UDC
from the DDA, who had also proved the sale deed. The
plaintiff had also produced PW-5, an official from Delhi
Archives, who proved the conveyance deed executed by
Sh. Nand Lal in favour of Sh. Punnu Ram Kalra relating to
the suit property, i.e. Ex. PW-1/3.

As against the

aforesaid evidence, the defendant No.1 could not produce
any evidence to show that late Sh. Punnu Ram Kalra had
purchased the property from joint family funds. He had
RFA No.335/2006

Page 7 of 11

appeared as DW-2 and in his cross-examination he
accepted that he had no documentary evidence in his
possession to show that his father and grandfather were
living together with his grandfather as Karta of HUF. He
also deposed that he had no personal knowledge about
the details of the suit property and how it was purchased
and who paid the consideration. He even admitted that
the suit property was purchased by his grandfather, who
at the time of purchase, was in the employment of Indian
Railways. He also accepted that in the sale deed of the
suit property there is no mention of HUF.

He also

conceded that neither his father nor he himself had made
any

claim

or

representation

with

any

authority

whatsoever that the suit property belonged to HUF or that
they were coparceners of the same. He even admitted
that his grandfather had treated the suit property as his
own property during his life-time.

Interestingly, to a

question put to him in his cross-examination in respect of
will of his grandfather (Ex.PW 1/6), he did not give any
specific reply and simply stated that he was not aware of
the said will and did not want to say anything with
respect to the said will. He also stated that he could not
RFA No.335/2006

Page 8 of 11

give details of individual contribution made by his family
members.
8. In view of the aforesaid evidence and the material on
record, we are of the opinion that the learned trial court
rightly held that the defendant No.1 did not produce any
evidence worth the name to prove that the suit property
was an HUF property.

He had rather admitted to the

contrary in his deposition.

Admittedly, though the

conveyance deed and the sale deed are in the name of
late Sh. Punnu Ram Kalra and not the HUF, these
documents were not challenged at any time by the
defendant No.1.
9. In R. Dalip Kumar Vs. S. Ramu, XI-1992 (3) Current Civil
Cases 613, Karnataka High Court has held that: “no
presumption that any particular property held by a
member of a joint family is the property of the undivided
Hindu Joint Family. Property standing in the name of the
respondent since the time of its purchase in 1979.

No

material produced to prove that the property was
purchased for the benefit of the co-parceners in the
family.”
10.The property in question was, therefore, not the HUF
RFA No.335/2006

Page 9 of 11

property but self-acquired property of late Sh. Punnu Ram
Kalra, which was bequeathed by him to his son late Sh.
Manohar Lal vide will dated 13.9.1978 (Ex. PW 1/6). The
learned ADJ has rightly held that this will is proved. Will
dated 12.8.1996 executed by late Sh. Manohar Lal is also
proved. In fact, as mentioned above, the defendant No.1
did not even deny the execution of these wills but
questioned the capacity of those persons to bequeath the
suit property by way of those wills. In any case, there is a
detailed discussion on issue Nos.(ii) and (iii) about the
proof of these wills, which could not be questioned.
Therefore, we are of the view that the findings of the
learned trial court on issue Nos.(i) and (iii) are in
accordance with the material on record and the law and
there is no scope for interference with the same or taking
contrary view. The findings on issue No.(iv) also cannot
be faulted with inasmuch as, it has come on record that
part possession of the suit property, namely, the first
floor is with the plaintiff. The defendant No.1 had even
admitted that after the death of husband of the plaintiff
on 10.12.1992, she had lived for some time in the suit
property. Further, the plaintiff had categorically deposed
RFA No.335/2006

Page 10 of 11

that she was receiving rent from the mezzanine floor and
no suggestion was given to the plaintiff on this aspect in
the cross-examination.

It is, thus, clear that all the

children of late Sh. Manohar Lal, namely, the plaintiff and
the defendant Nos.1 to 5 have equal share in the suit
property. The defendant No.1 (appellant herein) cannot
claim himself to be owner of the said property to the
exclusion of his five sisters.
11.This appeal is accordingly dismissed with costs.

(A.K. SIKRI)
JUDGE

September 20, 2007
HP.

RFA No.335/2006

(ARUNA SURESH)
JUDGE

Page 11 of 11

