Unreportable
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+ WP (C) No. 1595 of 2007
Reserved on : January 09, 2008
Pronounced on : January 28, 2008
# Shashi Bala

.....Petitioner

!

through :

Mr. R. Nanavaty, Advocate

VERSUS
$ Union of India & Anr.
^

through :

.....Respondents
Mr. Hemant Gupta, Advocate

CORAM :* THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE J.M. MALIK
1.
2.
3.

Whether Reporters of Local papers may be allowed to
see the Judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?

A.K. SIKRI, J.
1.
The petitioner herein is the widow of Corporal R.N. Singh
(hereinafter referred to as the 'deceased').

According to the

averments made in the petition, the deceased served the Indian
Air Force from 15.3.1962 to 23.5.1971. Thereafter he was in
the Reserve Service from 25.5.1971 to 31.3.1977.

The

petitioner is claiming reservist pension for the deceased and
family pension for herself after the demise of her husband, who
expired on 16.4.1991.
2.

Before the entitlement of the deceased for reservist pension and
that of the petitioner for family pension is considered, she has
to cross a formidable hurdle which is coming her way, namely,

WP (C) No. 1595/2007

nsk

Page 1 of 8

abnormal laches and delays in filing the present petition.
3.

As mentioned above, even as per the averments made in the
petition, the deceased was in Reserve Service till 31.3.1977. He
died on 16.4.1991. During his lifetime, he was not given any
reservist pension. Even when the petitioner's husband died on
16.4.1991, there was no attempt on the part of the petitioner to
rake up the issue and as per the averments made in the petition
she started corresponding with the respondents authorities with
claim for family pension from March 2001 and filed the present
petition in November 2006, which was listed for the first time
for preliminary hearing on 16.3.2007 as between November
2006 and March 2007, the petition came under objections
number of times, which were finally removed only in March
2007. There is, thus, a delay on the part of the petitioner in
filing the present petition at three levels which are as under :(i)

From 1977 to 1991
As per the petitioner, on the discharge from service on

31.3.1977 the deceased became entitled to receive reservist
pension. However, in the entire petition nothing is stated as to
whether the deceased even made an attempt to claim the said
pension by writing even a single letter.
petition,

which

is

in

five

Practically, two page

paragraphs,

excluding

formal

paragraphs, does not even mention that the deceased had made
any request for reservist pension. Para 3 contains the necessary
averments as per which the petitioner is claiming reservist
pension for the deceased and family pension for herself, which
reads as under :"3.
WP (C) No. 1595/2007

nsk

That said CPL R.N. Singh of Service No. 24003 was
Page 2 of 8

discharged from Indian Air Force on 31 Mar 1977 and as
such became entitled to receive reservist pension for life
and after his demise his wife/widow became entitled to
Family Pension as per rules."

In para 4 it is only stated that the deceased was not paid
reservist pension in his lifetime and, therefore, the petitioner is
entitled to arrears of reservist pension from 1.4.1977 to
16.4.1991 and for family pension from 17.4.1991 till her
lifetime.

When the deceased, namely, the husband of the

petitioner, who was allegedly entitled to reservist pension did
not even make any demand for the same during his lifetime and
did not take any legal steps to enforce the claim, the prayer for
payment of arrears of reservist pension from 1.4.1977 to
16.4.1991 would be highly belated for which the petitioner has
not even preferred any explanation, what to talk of satisfactory
explanation.
(ii)

Even after the death of the petitioner's husband on

16.4.1991, the petitioner did not take any steps for more than
10 years.

Her first representation claiming family pension is

dated 23.3.2001, i.e. after 10 years after the demise of her
husband. This delay is also not at all explained.
(iii)

After

the

first

representation

dated

23.3.2001,

the

petitioner gave another reminder dated 21.1.2002. No doubt,
some

correspondence

from the

Air

Force

Record

Office

addressed to the petitioner is filed as per which she was asked
to supply certain certificates/documents to consider as to
whether she was entitled to the family pension, but deficiencies
in the documents supplied by her are pointed out by subsequent
communications from the authorities.

However, after going

through the said documents, the respondents found that as the
WP (C) No. 1595/2007

nsk

Page 3 of 8

late husband of the petitioner was not a service pensioner, she
was not entitled to family pension and the case was treated as
closed vide letter dated 24.8.2004. Vide communication dated
15.10.2004, the authorities also pointed out that since the
deceased was not paid the reservist pension, it could be
presumed that he must have opted for one time gratuity and
was not a pensioner.

Even after these communications, the

petition is filed only in November 2006.
4.

The question that falls for consideration is as to what should be
the approach of the Court in cases where pension is claimed
even when such a claim is preferred belatedly. No doubt, claim
of pension is a continuing cause of action and if an individual is
found entitled to the said claim, it should not be denied merely
because he approached the Court belatedly. If the claim is found
to be legitimately proved, the relief can be moulded by depriving
the petitioner from getting arrears of past period and limit it
from the date three years prior to the filing of the petition.

5.

A Division Bench of this Court in the case of Ajaib Kaur & Ors.
v. Union of India & Ors., 2002 (64) DRJ 132, while holding that
normally plea of laches in such pension matters is not to be
entertained, but in the fact situation of a particular case such
plea can be accepted and on that ground prayer for claiming
pension would be rejected.

6.

A recent judgment of the Supreme Court, in fact, enlightens us
on this issue as it lays down the principle of law on the question
of delay and laches in a claim for disability pension in lucid
terms. The judgment in question is Shiv Dass v. Union of India

WP (C) No. 1595/2007

nsk

Page 4 of 8

& Ors., 2007 (2) SCT 72. The Apex Court in that case restated
the approach which the High Court is to adopt in case of belated
petitions. Para 5 of the said judgment may be quoted in this
behalf :“5.
Normally, in case of belated approach writ petition
has to be dismissed. Delay or laches is one of the factors
to be borne in mind by the High Court when they exercise
their discretionary powers under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India, 1950 (in short the 'Constitution').
In an appropriate case the High Court may refuse to
invoke its extraordinary powers if there is such negligence
or omission on the part of the applicant to assert his
right as taken in conjunction with the lapse of time and
other circumstances, causes prejudice to the opposite
party. Even where fundamental right is involved the
matter is still within the discretion of the Court as
pointed out in Durga Prasad v. Chief Controller of
Imports and Exports and Ors. (AIR 1970 SC 769). Of
course, the discretion has to be exercised judicially and
reasonably.”

In para 6 & 7, reference is made to various other
judgments in support of the aforesaid proposition.

It is also

observed that such belated petitions are not to be entertained
as it is likely to cause confusion and public inconvenience and
bring in its train new injustices and if writ jurisdiction is
exercised after unreasonable delay, it may have the effect of
inflicting not only hardship and inconvenience but also injustice
on third parties. The Court also pointed out that mere making
of representations would not be adequate explanation to take
care of delay. After stating the law in these general terms, in
respect of pension cases the Supreme Court laid down the
following approach :-

“9.
In the case of pension the cause of action actually
continues from month to month. That, however, cannot
be a ground to overlook delay in filing the petition. It
would depend upon the fact of each case. If petition is
filed beyond a reasonable period say three years normally
the Court would reject the same or restrict the relief
which could be granted to a reasonable period of about
WP (C) No. 1595/2007

nsk

Page 5 of 8

three years. The High Court did not examine whether on
merit appellant had a case. If on merits it would have
found that there was no scope for interference, it would
have dismissed the writ petition on that score alone.”

It is clear from the above that each case has to be dealt
with on its own merits. No doubt, if the claim is well founded it
is not to be rejected merely on the ground of delay. However, if
delay prejudices the other side, it becomes relevant factor to
dismiss the petition.

7.

Applying the aforesaid principles to the present case, we find
that there are various difficulties in the way of the petitioner to
claim family pension and the entitlement is very doubtful, to say
the least. We may point out that the petitioner has placed on
record letter dated 1.4.1977 written by the respondents and
addressed to the late husband of the petitioner wherein it was
accepted by the respondents that the husband of the petitioner
was eligible for reservist pension for life if he was not already in
receipt of service pension.

This letter also mentions that

necessary action in this regard would be initiated by Vayu Sena
Abhilekh Karyalaya and, therefore, he should make further
correspondence on this subject with the said office directly.
Apart from this letter, nothing is produced on record to show as
to what happened thereafter.

It is not in dispute that an Ex-

Serviceman, who is entitled to reservist pension, can opt for one
time gratuity. Since the matter was raked up in the year 2004,
by that time the respondents had weeded out the service record
of the deceased. Under these circumstances, the respondents
addressed letter dated 13.9.2004 to the PCDA(P), PS Authority,
Allahabad to verify the records of the deceased and confirm
WP (C) No. 1595/2007

nsk

Page 6 of 8

whether he had been granted with reservist pension or one time
gratuity.

The said pension office replied the respondents by

informing that the PPO authorising service pension could not be
traced.

In these circumstances, vide communication dated

15.10.2004, the petitioner was informed as under :"2.
Now this office has received reply form O/O PCDA (P)
Allahabad stating that PPO authorising service pension
could not be traced. It can, therefore, be clearly presumed
that the above named individual must have been opted for
one time gratuity and was not a pensioner. Since your
husband was not a pensioner, you automatically become
ineligible for family pension from Air Force side."

8.

Thus, it is because of not taking up the matter for substantial
number of years that the respondents are now unable to find as
to whether the deceased had opted for one time gratuity. The
petitioner has herself produced copy of letter dated 1.4.1977 as
per which the deceased was held eligible for reservist pension
for life. If there is no PPO, i.e. necessary order sanctioning the
pension, and the deceased also did not lay any claim for this
pension during his lifetime, in the absence of records now, it is
the

legitimate presumption of the respondents

that

the

deceased may have opted for one time gratuity. It can be so
said as even when the deceased was informed that he was
entitled to pension, it is highly unlikely that he would not claim
pension.

There is, thus, a great possibility that the deceased

would have opted for one time gratuity. It is for this reason we
opine that the claim for reservist pension has not been made
out in clear terms.
9.

It cannot be disputed that if the deceased was not in receipt of
service pension, the petitioner cannot claim family pension. We,
therefore, feel constrained in rejecting this petition as we do not

WP (C) No. 1595/2007

nsk

Page 7 of 8

find any merit therein.
10.

This petition is accordingly dismissed with no order as to costs.

(A.K. SIKRI)
JUDGE

January 28, 2008
nsk

WP (C) No. 1595/2007

nsk

(J.M. MALIK)
JUDGE

Page 8 of 8

