Reportable
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+RFA No. 575/2005
Date of Decision: 20.09.2007
#Smt. Narinder Pal Kaur Chawla
.....Appellant
!
Through : In person
Versus
$Shri Manjeet Singh Chawla
^
CORAM :-

.....Respondents
Through Mr. Rajit Singh

*THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
THE HON'BLE MS.JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
1.Whether Reporters of Local papers may be allowed to see
the Judgment?
2.To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3.Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?

A.K. SIKRI, J.
1. The appellant herein is duped by the respondent.

The

respondent, who was already married to one Amarjeet Kaur
suppressing this marriage and pretending that he was still
a bachelor, married the appellant on 11.12.1977, according
to Sikh rites and ceremonies at Jalandhar.

Both of them

lived as husband and wife for number of years at the
matrimonial house, i.e. A-447, Defence Colony, New Delhi.
Two daughters were born out of this wedlock, on 18.2.1981
and 31.5.83 respectively. According to the appellant, she
decided to complete her B.A. Degree, which she had left
RFA No.575/2005

1 of 29

incomplete earlier before marriage. Therefore, she picked
up her studies again. In April 1991, she went to Paghwara,
Punjab, to take the exams.

On 13.6.1991 when she

returned, her mother-in-law did not allow her to go inside
the house. She was, thus, deserted by the respondent. At
that time she came to know that the respondent was
already married to Smt. Amarjeet Kaur.
2. The appellant did not swallow this insult to her. She filed a
criminal case against the respondent for committing
bigamy (in this case the respondent has been convicted).
She also filed a petition under Sections 18 and 20 of the
Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act (in short the 'Act')
claiming recovery of maintenance and right of residence
from the respondent. She claimed decree of maintenance
at the rate of Rs.12,000/- per month plus rent of residence
and also prayed for necessary charge on the matrimonial
house A-447, Defence Colony for securing the right of
maintenance. The petition was filed as an indigent person
under Order XXXIII Rule 1 CPC, which was allowed.

3. This petition was originally filed in this Court.
RFA No.575/2005

2 of 29

On

28.8.1997, order was passed directing the respondent to
pay interim maintenance of Rs.5,000/- to the petitioner.
Vide order dated 2.3.2000, the Court ordered for payment
of a further sum of Rs.10,000/- to the appellant by way of
interim

maintenance.

Thereafter,

vide

order

dated

28.4.2000 further maintenance of Rs.5,000/- was allowed.
Application for interim maintenance was ultimately decided
by the Court vide order dated 11.1.2002 granting interim
maintenance of Rs.400/- per month.

The quantum was

challenged by the appellant by filing appeal before the
Division Bench, which enhanced the maintenance to
Rs.700/- from 1.8.2003 vide orders dated 25.7.2002.
further

appeal

to

the

Supreme

Court,

this

On

interim

maintenance was enhanced to Rs.1,500/- per month with
effect from May 2004 till the disposal of the suit, vide order
dated 21.4.2004.
4. On enhancement of the pecuniary jurisdiction of the District
Courts, the petition was transferred to the District Court on
27.11.2003. The respondent did not file the written
statement and ultimately vide order dated 11.10.2004 the
right of the respondent to file the written statement was
RFA No.575/2005

3 of 29

struck off. The appellant appeared in the witness-box and
submitted her affidavit by way of evidence (Ex. PW 1/1).
She also proved various other documents showing financial
status of the respondent as well as the appellant's motherin-law. The respondent did not lead any evidence.
5. The learned trial court, however, has dismissed the petition
of the petitioner vide impugned order dated 13.7.2005.
This petition is not dismissed on merits but on the ground
that such a petition filed by the appellant under Section 18
of the Act claiming maintenance from the respondent is not
maintainable as the appellant is not a legally wedded
“wife” of the respondent. This finding is arrived at by the
learned trial court on the premise that since the respondent
was already married to one Amarjeet Kaur, his second
marriage with the appellant was clearly void and of no
legal effect.

It is held that under Section 18 of the Act,

petition can be filed by a legally wedded wife and not by a
person who is not lawfully married and for this conclusion
the learned trial court has drawn the support from the
judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Savitaben
Somabhai Bhatiya Vs. State of Gujarat, AIR 2005 SC 2141
RFA No.575/2005

4 of 29

and of this Court in the case of Ms. Suresh Khullar Vs. Vijay
Khullar, II (2002) DMC 131.

Challenging this judgment,

present appeal is filed.
6. The appellant argued the appeal herself whereas Mr. Ranjit
Singh, Advocate, appeared for the respondent.

Learned

counsel for the respondent relied upon the reasoning given
by the trial court in dismissing the petition of the appellant
herein.

His submission was that since the appellant was

not legally wedded wife, she could not file petition under
Section 18 of the Act, as held by the Supreme Court in
Savitaben Somabhai Bhatiya (supra).
7. The appellant, on the other hand, submitted that it is the
respondent who suppressed the factum of first marriage
and on his representation that he was a bachelor, the
appellant and the appellant married the respondent on
11.12.1977.

They lived as man and wife for 14 years

before the appellant was denied entry into the house and
was deserted by the respondent on 14.4.1991. In such
circumstances, it was not open to the respondent to take
advantage of his own wrong and deny maintenance to the
appellant, who was not a “concubine” of the respondent,
RFA No.575/2005

5 of 29

who lived with him by marrying him.
8. We have given deep thoughts to the respective contentions
of the parties and have also gone through the record. The
admitted position, which has emerged on the record of this
case, may be taken note of as that will have important
bearing on the outcome of the case:a)

the

respondent

did

not

file

any

written

statement to the petition for maintenance filed by the
appellant and the right of the respondent to file the
written statement was struck off.
examined

herself

documents.

The

as

PW-1

and

respondent

The appellant
proved

has

not

various
led

any

evidence. Therefore, the material, which has come on
record

as

proved

by

the

appellant,

remains

unchallenged, there being no evidence in rebuttal by
the respondent.
b)

the

parties

had

married

on

according to Sikh rites and ceremonies.

11.12.1977
They lived

together till 14.4.1991, i.e. for almost 14 years.
During this period, two daughters were born out of
the said wedlock.
RFA No.575/2005

6 of 29

c)

As per the testimony of the appellant, at the

time of marriage the respondent had pretended that
he was a bachelor. The appellant, therefore, had no
knowledge that the respondent was already married.
Not only that, for a long period of 14 years when the
parties lived as husband and wife in the matrimonial
house at Defence Colony, the first wife had not
surfaced nor was there any interference in the
matrimonial life of the parties.
d)

In the petition filed by the appellant under

Section 18 and 20 of the Act, interim orders were
initially passed directing the respondent to pay
particular

amount

as

maintenance.

Thereafter,

interim maintenance was fixed at Rs.400/- per month
by the Single Judge of this Court vide order dated
11.1.2002.

The

Division

Bench

enhanced

that

maintenance to Rs.700/- from 1.8.2003 by orders
dated 25.7.2002. This was further enhanced to
Rs.1500/- per month with effect from May, 2004 by
the Hon'ble Supreme Court. Order dated 21.4.2004
passed by the Supreme Court fixing maintenance is
RFA No.575/2005

7 of 29

reported as Narinder Pal Kaur Chawla Vs. Manjeet
Singh Chawla, (2004) 9 SCC 617 and reads as
under:“1. Leave granted.
2. Heard the petitioner in person and learned
counsel appearing for the respondent. We have
also perused the counter affidavits and
rejoinders along with the written submissions
filed by the parties.
3. The present appeal arises out of an interim
order dated 11.1.2002 passed by the learned
Single Judge of the High Court of Delhi in the
course of proceedings Instituted by the present
appellant claiming to be the second wife of the
respondent for grant of maintenance to her
under Section 18 read with Section 20 of the
Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act [for short
the Act]. The learned Single Judge on the
original side of the High Court in the pending
proceeding under the Act has by order dated
11.1.2002 granted an interim maintenance of
Rs. 400/- per month to the wife.
4. The wife appealed to the Division Bench of
the High Court. By order dated 25.7.2003
which is the subject matter of this appeal, the
interim maintenance has been increased to Rs.
700/- per month. Not satisfied with the increase
In the amount of interim maintenance granted
by the Division Bench, the wife has approached
this Court seeking farther enhancement of rate
of interim maintenance.
5. By this appeal, Interim maintenance @ Rs.
12,000/- per month has been claimed on the
RFA No.575/2005

8 of 29

ground that the respondent/husband has taken
voluntary retirement from the Bank's services
and has received substantial amount of retiral
benefits. It is stated that he is possessed of
valuable properties and assets which are
sufficient to pay higher amount of maintenance
to the wife to enable her to maintain a
reasonable standard of living to which the
parties are accustomed.
6. The husband is contesting the maintenance
proceeding both on the ground of competence
of the present wife to claim maintenance and
the quantum.
7. Normally, this Court would not have
entertained this appeal as it is directed against
an order fixing only interim maintenance
pending adjudication of claim of maintenance
by the wife under the Act: On the prima facie
evidence with regard to the social and financial
status of the parties, this Court finds that
interim maintenance of Rs. 700/- per month
fixed by the Division Bench of the High Court is
extremely low. Therefore, after notice issuing
on the Special Leave Petition, this appeal is
entertained.
8. Before the High Court, It appears that at one
stage, reconciliation efforts were made in
which the husband had agreed to provide
second floor of the accommodation owned by
him for separate residence of the wife with Rs.
1,500/- per month as permanent alimony to her
during her life. Efforts of reconciliation,
however, failed as at a later stage, the wife
backed out. The copies of orders passed by the
Division Bench of High Court on 13.2.2003 and
17.2.2003, in the course of reconciliation
proceedings, have been produced by the
parties in this appeal.
RFA No.575/2005

9 of 29

9. As the legal right of the second wife to claim
maintenance under the Act and its quantum
are hotly contested issues in the main case, we
refrain from expressing any opinion on merit of
the claims and contentions of the parties. For
the purpose of fixing appropriate amount of
interim maintenance, we may assume that the
financial position of husband is such that he
can easily pay a sum of Rs. 1,500/- per month
as interim maintenance without disturbing the
right of separate residence provided to the wife
at the second floor of the husband's premises.
10. The appeal, therefore, is partly allowed by
increasing the amount of interim maintenance
to Rs. 1,500/- per month which shall be payable
at the above rate from the month of May, 2004
until decision of the main case pending under
the Act on the original side of the High Court. It
is made clear that the High Court shall decide
the main case on merits uninfluenced by orders
passed for fixing interim maintenance.
11. In the circumstances, there shall be no
order as to costs in this appeal.”

9. The question that arises for consideration, in these
circumstances, is as to whether the respondent can take
advantage of his own wrong by not disclosing to the
appellant the factum of his first marriage; marrying the
appellant and then maintaining the relationship of husband
and wife for a long period of 14 years. The position, which
has emerged on record and noted above, further discloses
RFA No.575/2005

10 of 29

that during all this period when the appellant and the
respondent were cohabiting as husband and wife, first wife
of the respondent was nowhere on the scene.

The

respondent was away from her during this period and,
therefore, the appellant remained totally oblivious about
the said relationship.

Both the parties, thus, lived as

validly married couple for all these years and to the world
at large the appellant was known as the lawfully wedded
wife of the respondent.

She took the responsibility of

running the family as a housewife, taking care of the
respondent as her husband and also bore two female
children from him whom she nourished and brought up.
She took the responsibility of marrying them as well,
though this happened after the respondent withdrew from
the appellant's company.
10.In these circumstances, we are of the opinion that the
legislature never intended that a woman like the appellant,
in which position she is placed, be not treated as the 'wife'
of the respondent at least for the purposes of Section 18 of
the Act and be deprived of her right to seek maintenance.
We are conscious of the judgment of the Supreme Court in
RFA No.575/2005

11 of 29

the case of Savitaben Somabhai Bhatiya (supra). However,
that was a case where the second wife was claiming
maintenance under Section 125 Cr.P.C.. While holding that
the expression 'wife' contained therein refers only to legally
wedded wife, the Court observed in para-8 of the judgment
as under:“8. There may be substance in the plea of
learned counsel for the appellant that law
operates harshly against the woman who
unwittingly gets into relationship with a
married man and Section 125 of the Code
does not give protection to such woman.
This may be an inadequacy in law, which
only the legislature can undo. But as the
position in law stands presently there is no
escape from the conclusion that the
expression 'wife' as per Section 125 of the
Code refers to only legally married wife.”
11.It is, thus, clear that the expression 'wife' was construed
only in the context of Section 125 Cr.P.C.. The Court did
not discuss the interpretation of Section 18 of the Act.
Rather, following observations contained in this very
judgment encourage us to embark on the interpretation of
Section 18 of the Act on the basis of the language used in
the said provision:“10. There is no inconsistency between
RFA No.575/2005

12 of 29

Section 125 of the Code and the provisions
in the Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act,
1956 (in short the 'Adoption Act') “
12.Other judgments where such a view is taken also relate to
the interpretation of Section 125 Cr.P.C. It would be apt to
take note of the language of Section 125 Cr.P.C. at this
stage itself, so that were are able to contrast the same with
Section 18 of the Act. Section 125 Cr.P.C. reads as under:“125.Order for maintenance of wives,
children and parents.(1) If any person having sufficient means
neglects or refuses to maintain(a) his wife, unable to maintain herself, or
(b) his legitimate or illegitimate minor child,
whether married or not, unable to maintain
itself, or
(c) his legitimate or illegitimate child (not
being a married daughter) who has attained
majority, where such child is by reason of
any physical or mental abnormality or injury
unable to maintain itself, or
(d) his father or mother, unable to maintain
himself or herself,
a Magistrate of the first class may, upon
proof of such neglect or refusal, order such
person to make a monthly allowance for the
maintenance of his wife or such child, father
or mother, at such monthly rate not
RFA No.575/2005

13 of 29

exceeding five hundred rupees in the whole,
as such Magistrate thinks fit, and to pay the
same to such person as the Magistrate may
from time to time direct:
Provided that the Magistrate may order the
father of a minor female child referred to in
clause (b) to make such allowance, until she
attains her majority, if the Magistrate is
satisfied that the husband of such minor
female child, if married, is not possessed of
sufficient means.
Explanation:
Chapter-

For the purposes of this

(a) 'minor' means a person who, under the
provisions of the Indian Majority Act, 1875 is
deemed to have attained his majority;
(b) 'wife' includes a woman who has been
divorced by, or has obtained a divorce from,
her husband and has not remarried.”
13.Relevant portion of Section 18 of the Act, which entitles a
Hindu wife to claim maintenance and also residence is
couched in the following language:-

“18. Maintenance of wife
(1)
Subject to the provisions of this
section, a Hindu wife, whether married
before or after the commencement of this
Act, shall be entitled to be maintained by
her husband during her lifetime.
RFA No.575/2005

14 of 29

(2)
A Hindu wife shall be entitled to live
separately from her husband without
forfeiting her claim to maintenance (a)

.....

(b)

.....

(c)

.....

(d)

If he has any other wife living;

(e)
If he keeps a concubine in the same
house in which his wife is living or habitually
resides with a concubine elsewhere;”
14.Sub-Section (2) of Section 18 of the Act entitles a Hindu
wife to claim maintenance against her husband even if he
has other wife living. This gives an impression that even a
second wife may have right to claim maintenance.

It is

more so when, 'Hindu wife' has not been defined under the
Act. In the absence of any such definition given in the Act,
we have to interpret the expression in the spirit in which it
appears in the statute. This is more so when as per the
provision of Section 4 of the Act, no external aid (from
other statutes) is to be brought to define Hindu wife.
Section 4 clearly gives overriding effect to this Act.
This Act was brought into force in the year 1956. As
on that date Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 was already in force,
which contains provision like Section 5 regarding void
RFA No.575/2005

15 of 29

marriages. If “second wife”, though her marriage is void
under

the

Hindu

Marriage

Act,

was

to

be

denied

maintenance, then the legislature would not have included
provision like clause (d) in sub-section (2) of Section 18 of
the Act or would have clarified that this clause was added
only to take care of those second marriages performed
before the Hindu Marriage Act, 1995 was enacted when
polygamy was permissible for male Hindus.
15.Clause (e) of sub-section (2) of Section 18 of the Act, which
uses the expression 'concubine' would also lend colour to
the expression 'Hindu wife' inasmuch as, the legislature
has carved out a distinction between 'second wife' and
'concubine'.

“Concubine” has been defined in various

dictionaries as under:Oxford Dictionary of Difficult Words-2002
defines
Concubine: A woman who lives with a man but
has lower status than his wife or wives.
Black's Law Dictionary, 7th Edn. Defines
Concubine: A woman who cohabits with a man
to whom she is not married.”
16.Thus, Section 18 of the Act uses the expression 'Hindu

RFA No.575/2005

16 of 29

wife', 'wife' and 'concubine' and 'Hindu wife' and 'wife' are
definitely be on a high pedestal then 'concubine'.

Very

recently, this Bench has decided RFA No.350/2007 entitled
Suresh Kullar vs. Sh. Vijay Kumar Khullar. In our judgment
rendered on 27.8.2007 in the said case where also we were
interpreting the same provision of the Act, we dilated this
principle in the following manner:“18. It is trite that while interpreting the
statute, courts not only may take into
consideration the purpose for which the same
has been enacted, but also the mischief it
seeks to suppress (See Sneh Enterprises Vs.
Commissioner of Customs, 2006 (8) JT 587). We
may also, with advantage apply the maxim
construction ut res magis valeat quam
pereat,
namely,
where
alternative
constructions are possible the court must give
effect to that which will be responsible for the
smooth working of the system for which the
statute has been enacted rather than the one
which would put hindrances in its way. If the
choice is between two interpretations, the
narrower of which would fail to achieve the
manifest purpose of the legislation we should
avoid a construction which would reduce the
legislation to futility and should rather accept
the bolder construction based on the view that
Parliament would legislate only for the purpose
of bringing about an effective result (See Nokes
v. Doncaster Amalgamation Collieries Ltd.,
1940 AC 1014 [Maxwell pg. 45]).
Where
alternative constructions are equally open, that
alternative is to be chosen which will be
consistent with the smooth working of the
system which the statute purports to be
RFA No.575/2005

17 of 29

regulating; and that alternative is to be
rejected which will introduce uncertainty,
fiction or confusion into the working of the
system (Shannon Realities Ltd. v. Ville de St.
Michel, (1924) A.C. 185 [Maxwell pg. 45]). We
hasten to add that this interpretation we are
giving only in deciding the question of
entitlement of the appellant to claim
maintenance from the respondent under
Section 18 of the Act.”

17.We had also taken support from the provisions of
Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act.

In a

case like this, if the interpretation we are suggesting is not
given,

it

would

amount

to

giving

premium

respondent for defrauding the appellant.

to

the

Therefore, we

feel that in a case like this, the appellant, at least for
claiming maintenance under Section 18 of the Act, be
treated

as

legally

wedded

wife.

Even

when

two

interpretations are possible, one which would advance the
purpose for which the Act was enacted should be preferred
than the other, which may frustrate the purpose.
18.At this stage, it would be of interest to refer to a judgment
of the Supreme Court in the case of Reema Aggarwal Vs.
Anupam and others, AIR 2004 SC 1418. That was a case
of dowry death where the respondent was prosecuted
under Section 498-A and Section 304-B of the Indian Penal
RFA No.575/2005

18 of 29

Code. The plea taken by the respondent in that case was
that it was his second marriage with the deceased and
being an invalid marriage, demand of dowry in respect of
that marriage was not legally recognisable and, therefore,
he could not be prosecuted under Section 498-A and
Section 304-B, as he was not the 'husband' of the deceased
whereas the said provisions make 'husband' liable for the
offence. The Court, though held that demand of dowry in
respect of an invalid marriage would not be legally
recognisable, it was of the opinion that the purpose for
which Sections 498-A and 304-B IPC and Section 113-B of
the Evidence Act were introduced could not be ignored. It
also noted that 'husband' was not specifically defined to
include a person, who contacts marriage ostensibly and
cohabit with such woman in purported exercise of his role
and status as husband, would be treated as husband and
could be prosecuted under the said provisions. The Apex
Court pressed into service “mischief” rule and purposive
interpretation to hold that for the purpose of Sections 498A and 304-B IPC, a person, who enters into second
marriage, which may not be a legal marriage, would be
RFA No.575/2005

19 of 29

treated as 'husband' and could be prosecuted.

This

eloquent message that nobody gets undue benefit of his
such dubious actions is expressed by the highest Court of
the land (speaking through Hon'ble Mr. Justice Arijit
Pasayat) in the following forceful words:“18. The concept of "dowry" is intermittently
linked with a marriage and the provisions of the
Dowry Act apply in relation to marriages. If the
legality of the marriage itself is an issue further
legislation problems do arise. If the validity of the
marriage itself is under legal scrutiny, the
demand of dowry in respect of an invalid marriage
would be legally not recognizable. Even then the
purpose for which Sections 498A and 304B IPC
and Section 113B of the Indian Evidence Act,
1872 (for short the 'Evidence Act') were
introduced cannot be lost sight of. Legislations
enacted with some policy to curb and alleviate
some public evil rampant in society and
effectuate a definite public purpose or benefit
positively requires to be interpreted with certain
element of realism too and not merely
pedantically or hyper technically. The obvious
objective was to prevent harassment to a woman
who enters into a marital relationship with a
person and later on, becomes a victim of the
greed for money. Can a person who enters
into a marital arrangement be allowed to
take a shelter behind a smokescreen to
contend that since there was no valid
marriage the question of dowry does not
arise? Such legalistic niceties would destroy
the purpose of the provisions. Such
hairsplitting
legalistic
approach
would
encourage harassment to a woman over demand
of money. The nomenclature 'dowry' does not
have any magic charm written over it. It is just a
RFA No.575/2005

20 of 29

label given to demand of money in relation to
marital relationship. The legislative intent is clear
from the fact that it is not only the husband but
also his relations who are covered by Section
498A. Legislature has taken care of children born
from invalid marriages. Section 16 of the Marriage
Act deals with legitimacy of children of void and
voidable marriages. Can it be said that
legislature which was conscious of the social
stigma attached to children of void and
voidable marriages closed eyes to plight of
a woman who unknowingly or unconscious
of the legal consequences entered into the
marital relationship. If such restricted
meaning is given, it would not further the
legislative intent. On the contrary, it would
be against the concern shown by the
legislature for avoiding harassment to a
woman over demand of money in relation to
marriages. The first exception to Section 494
has also some relevance. According to it, the
offence of bigamy will not apply to "any person
whose marriage with such husband or wife has
been declared void by a Court of competent
jurisdiction". It would be appropriate to construe
the expression 'husband' to cover a person who
enters into marital relationship and under the
colour of such proclaimed or feigned status of
husband subjects the woman concerned to cruelty
or coerce her in any manner or for any of the
purposes enumerated in the relevant provisions Sections 304B/498A, whatever be the legitimacy
of the marriage itself for the limited purpose of
Sections 498A and 304B IPC. Such an
interpretation,
known
and
recognized
as
purposive construction has to come into play in a
case of this nature. The absence of a definition of
'husband' to specifically include such persons who
contract marriages ostensibly and cohabitate with
such woman, in the purported exercise of his role
and status as 'husband' is no ground to exclude
them from the purview of Section 304B or 498A
IPC, viewed in the context of the very object and
aim of the legislations introducing those
RFA No.575/2005

21 of 29

provisions.”

19.When, to advance the purpose for which Sections 498-A
and 304-B IPC were introduced by the legislature in the
Indian Penal Code, the Court can read a male entering into
second matrimonial alliance, as 'husband', why for the
purpose of granting maintenance to a woman under
Section 18 of the Act, second wife be not treated as 'Hindu
wife' in the absence of definition 'Hindu wife' specifically
excluding second wife, more so when interpretation of
Section 18 of the Act, which we have suggested above, is a
possible interpretation.
20.There is yet another reason to allow this appeal. Even if it
is presumed that the appellant could not be treated as
'Hindu wife' since she is not legally wedded wife of the
respondent (though we have not accepted this contention
in view of our discussion above), such a wife is entitled to
lump sum amount in the form of damages or otherwise. In
this context, we may take shelter under the following
observations

of

Rameshchandra

the

Supreme

Rampratapji

Court

Daga

Vs.

in

the

Rameshwari

Rameshchandra Daga, (2005) 2 SCC 33:RFA No.575/2005

case

22 of 29

“20. It is well known and recognized legal
position that customary Hindu Law like
Mohammedan
Law
permitted
bigamous
marriages which were prevalent in all Hindu
families and more so in royal Hindu families. It
is only after the Hindu Law was codified by
enactments including the present Act that bar
against bigamous marriages was created by
Section 5(i) of the Act. Keeping into
consideration the present state of the
statutory
Hindu
Law,
a
bigamous
marriage may be declared illegal being in
contravention of the provisions of the Act
but it cannot be said to be immoral so as
to deny even the right of alimony or
maintenance to a spouse financially weak
and economically dependent. It is with the
purpose of not rendering a financially
dependent spouse destitute that Section 25
enables the court to award maintenance at the
time of passing any type of decree resulting in
breach in marriage relationship.”

21.Giving

jurisprudential

exposition

to

the

'right

of

maintenance' to a wife from her husband, the Bombay High
Court in the case of Rajeshbai and Ors. Vs. Shantabai, AIR
1982 Bom. 231, went to the extent of holding that right to
claim maintenance was not limited by the statutory
provisions like Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act but
could arise under the general principles of law regarding
the maintenance and the Court would be in a position to
grant the same.
RFA No.575/2005

For this purpose, the Court drew
23 of 29

distinction between English Law and Hindu Law on the
premise that in English Law, marriage was a matter of
contract, whereas under the Hindu system it is sacrosanct.
From this detailed judgment, we extract some of the paras,
which may be useful for our purposes:-

“34. However, that in my view. Can not be the
end result of such cases where the finding is
recorded by the competent Court that the
marriage is void de jure Firstly, the provisions
of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act.
1956 are not the provisions which can be
treated to be exhaustive of matters for
awarding maintenance. To the extent the
provisions are made there, the same would
apply or be operative, but there would arise
cases where the matter may arise under the
general principles of law regarding the
maintenance and the Court would be in a
position to grant the same.
35. The measures for maintenance by
themselves are secular and social in character.
Those aim at avoiding immorality and
destitution. Maintenance for juridical purposes
has its own pragmatics having relation to the
need and necessity to make provisions for
securing reasonable bioeconomic as well as
biocultural requirements for persons, such as
shelter, food, garment and health. In the tenets
of Hindu Shastric law, two principles subserve
this need to provide reliefs of maintenance and
those emanated firstly from social ethics and
secondly because of personal economics. The
persons related to each other and dependent
as such, could look for such relief by reason of
law both on the moral and secular grounds,
RFA No.575/2005

24 of 29

Subject to conditions, it was a personal
obligation and where there was estate. The
rights in maintenance could be worked against
the estate, nay, was a charge upon. It the
moral of pious obligations mostly arose as
personal liabilities, while those against property
could be classed as economic of secular ones.
36. The principles of Hindu personal Law have
developed in an evolutionary way out of
concern for all those subject to it so as to make
fair provision against the destitution. There is
clear evidence to indicate that the law of
maintenance stems out of the secular desire
and so as to achieve the social objectives for
making bare minimum provision to sustain the
members of relatively smaller social groups.
Organically and originally the law itself is
irreligious. Its fountain spring is humanistic. In
its operational field all through it lays down the
permissible categories under its benefaction,
which are so entitled either because of the
tenets supported by clear public policy by
because of the need to subserve the social and
individual morality measured for maintenance.
37. Further, it must be kept in view that the
institution of property amongst the Hindus is a
fine admixture of rights and duties, obligations
and liabilities. In fact, it is an intermixture of
corpus that is the right or entitlement to it, A
Hindu may possess the property and yet is
would be limited by moral and civic obligation.
One of such recognised obligations. One of
such recognised obligations inscribed into the
property of a Hindu was that of maintenance of
dependents. There is no reason to hold that by
codification of the laws, this basic concept for
providing a sort of social security and having
general insurance in favour of dependents has
been completely taken away or abrogated by
passing
of
the
Hindu
Adoptions
and
Maintenance Act, 1956, Necessity to provide
RFA No.575/2005

25 of 29

even now may arise out of the premises of that
Act and will have to be so worked out.
38. On parity of the principle that prevailed
with this Court in Govindrao v, Anandibai, AIR
1976 Bom 433, it can be said that even after
the Court rendered a decree of nullity under S.
11 of the Hindu Marriage Act. The wife related
by such marriage was treated to be entitled
under Sec. 25 of that Act to possess a right by
have alimony and maintenance. Thus it is
obvious that had the matter arisen during th
life-time of Sadashiv between Sadashiv and
Rajeshbai and the matter would have been
under S. 11 , Rajeshbai would have been
entitled to rely on Sec. 25 of the Hindu
Marriage Act so as to claim the relief of
maintenance. I do not think that only by reason
of the fact that the proceedings are after the
death of Sadashiv, there should be any change
in the principle. If Sec. 25, as has been found
by the above decision conferred a right that
right could be worked out even in collateral
proceedings if it be correct that the declaration
of nullity for such a marriage could be rendered
in such proceedings. Therefore, it will have to
be found that Rajeshbai is entitled to rely on
the principles of Sec. 25 of the Hindu Marriage
Act and to invoke the powers of the Court for
making
provisions
for
just
and
fair
maintenance.
39. Even apart from sec. 25 of the Hindu
Marriage Act. 1 would think that in such matter
the Court possesses the inherent power to
make such order in matters or maintenance as
may be necessary so as to meet the ends of
justice. The principles underlying sec. 151, of
the Civil, P. C. Are no more in doubt. Where the
need and the the circumstances to do justice
require, the power to act ex debito justitiae
exists and can be invoked. That power as is
RFA No.575/2005

26 of 29

observed by the Supreme Court in Manoharlal
v. Seth Hiralal, AIR 1962 SC 527, is not
conferred on the Court but is inherent in the
Court "by virtue of its duty to do justice
between the parties before it". The power will
not be exercised when there is any express
prohibition enacted by any statute nor would it
be terms of the Code. It would always be
exercise undoubtedly and unfailingly to reach
out a just and fair dispensation of justice to the
parties before the Court.
40. When Laws' terms are inadequate and lead
to loose ends in unfair tracts, the Court can rely
on its inherent power to do justice, With
changing complexity of human relations and
times, everything cannot be provided by
enacted statutes and unfailing as well as just
results can be left to be worked out by the
Courts possessing such power. This power has
been exercised so as to grant maintenance
pendente lite in partition suits. (Sec Sushilabai
v. Ramcharan. 1976 Mah LJ 82). Along with this
is the holding of the principles enunciated by
this Court that under Sec.25 of the Hindu
Marriage Act, the wife whose marriage is void
would be entitled as of right to the relief of
permanent maintenance once the marriage is
annulled by a decree of nullity under Sec. 11.
There is no reason to deny similar relier on pari
materia principle, though strictly the decree is
not passed having reference to Sec. 11 of the
Hindu Marriage Act. The right recognised by
Sec. 25 of the Hindu Marriage Act can clearly
be worked out in any civil proceeding subject to
consideration of facts and circumstances so as
to meet ends of justice by resort to the
inherent powers conferred upon the Courts by
Sec. 151 of the Civil P.C.
The statutory
references do not indicate that there is any
prohibition or any specific provision in this
RFA No.575/2005

27 of 29

regard. On the other hand, the principle is
statutorily reconginsed that upon a decree
being passed for nullifying the marriage as void
de jure, the Court is possessed with ample
power to make orders as to alimony and
maintenance. What could, therefore, be
available in special proceedings cannot be said
to be not available when the same issue is
involved
collaterally
in
competent
civil
proceedings. Strictly, the statutory entitlement
of the Court may not apply but having the
recognised right and necessity to enforce it, the
Court can, in exercise of its inherent powers
reach out justice by giving remedial and such
salutary reliefs. Justice after all is another name
of fairness. It cannot be blind to the facts in a
given case and should reach out in its mercy
those results which would be necessary to
avoid ruinous consequences like economic or
moral destitution. Ultimately, having based the
relief on Sec. 151 of the C. P. C. with the aid of
inherent powers and drawing upon the
principles underlying Sec. 25 of the Hindu
Marriage Act, it is implicit that before
maintenance is granted, the need to grant such
must exist as well as the grantee must fulfill
the ordinary conditions like that of chastity, not
being married to any other person and further
of not being in a position to maintain herself.”

22.The appellant herein had claimed right to residence as
well, which aspect has also not been dealt with by the
learned trial court.
23.For all these reasons, we allow this appeal, set aside the
impugned judgment and remand the case back to the
RFA No.575/2005

28 of 29

learned trial court to decide the claim of the appellant on
merits. With the setting aside of the impugned judgment,
the interim order of maintenance, as enhanced by the
Supreme Court, shall stand revived. The appellant shall be
paid arrears of interim maintenance for the intervening
period. Such arrears shall be paid to the appellant within a
period of two months from today and interim maintenance
for future period shall be paid by 7th of each month.
24.The appellant shall also be entitled to costs in this appeal.

(A.K. SIKRI)
JUDGE

September 20, 2007
HP.

RFA No.575/2005

(ARUNA SURESH)
JUDGE

29 of 29

