Reportable
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Crl.M.(M)No.3324 of 2003.
DATE OF DECISION : 20.08.2007
IN THE MATTER OF :
Madhavsinh Solanki

.......

Petitioner.

Thru. Mr.Hamid Kureshi with
Ms.Seema Gulati,Advocates

-

Versus

State through CBI

-

.........

Respondent.

Thru. R.M.Tiwari with
Mr.U.S.Prasad,Advocates.
CORAM :THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
1. Whether Reporters of Local papers may be allowed to see the
Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?

A.K. SIKRI, J.
1. These proceedings are the side effects of long drawn infamous legal
battle in Bofors case.

Crl.M.C. 3324/2003

Proceedings have been initiated against the

1 of 24

petitioner, who at relevant time was the Minister of External Affairs,
Government of India, under Section 340 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure for the offence under Section 193 of the IPC in the said main
proceedings (Bofors Case entitled State Vs. Martin Ardbo, Former
President of M/s.A.B. Bofors, Sweden & Others registered as Case
No.RC.1(A)/90-ACB-1V/SPE-CBI/ New Delhi). It is not necessary to
state in detail the facts of the main case or the history of the legal battle.
Suffice it to note that CBI registered the case on 22.1.1990 against some
named and unnamed persons including politicians and government
officials

alleging that they are involved in receiving Bofors

bribe/kickbacks in the deal with M/s.AB Bofors Sweden (hereinafter
referred to as the `Bofors') on 7.2.1990. The learned Special Judge
issued a Letters Rogatory to the judicial authorities in the Confederation
of Switzerland in connection with the said case.

Through the said

Letters Rogatory authorities were requested to collect certain documents
from Swiss Ban k along with details of bank holders as well as certain
other information.
2. The petitioner who, as aforesaid, was the Minister of External Affairs,
Government of India at that time visited Davos, Switzerland in JanuaryCrl.M.C. 3324/2003

2 of 24

February,1992.

This visit was

for attending the Annual World

Economic Conference. It is alleged against the petitioner that during the
period of that Conference, on 1.2.1992 the petitioner sought an
appointment with the Swiss Foreign Minister Mr.Rene Felber or a few
minutes in the Hotel and is said to have requested that there should be
no witnesses. It is also alleged that in this meeting the petitioner gave an
envelope containing an unsigned typed memorandum relating to the
matter of execution of the aforesaid Letters Rogatory to Mr.Felber. It is
also alleged that in his meeting with Felber, the petitioner said that he
had new information about the Bofors case and that it was important for
Mr.Felber to communicate that to the Swiss Government. Mr.Felber is
said to have told the petitioner that he was not responsible for justice
matters but he could take the document and pass it on to the Federal
Office of Justice.
3. This act on the part of the petitioner is perceived as interference in the
course of Justice and an attempt on the part of the petitioner to influence
the investigation and also an attempt to fabricate the evidence and,
therefore, constituting the commission of offence under Section 192 of
the IPC.

According to the prosecution, the memorandum was a

Crl.M.C. 3324/2003

3 of 24

fabricated document and contained certain false statement of facts,
which intended the Swiss Judicial Authorities dealing with the execution
of Letters Rogatory to cause them to form an erroneous opinion touching
a point, material to the result of the proceedings in the Bofors case,
namely the legality and propriety of the Letters Rogatory and in this way
the petitioner had committed an offence under Section 193 of the IPC.
4. As per the prosecution, in the course of execution of Letters Rogatory,
statement of Mr.Rene Felber and others were recorded.

Swiss

authorities sent those statements as well as original memorandum in
execution of the Letters Rogatory. Thus this memorandum allegedly
handed over by the petitioner to Mr.Rene Felber had been collected by
the CBI during investigation.

On receipt thereof, the CBI filed the

application under Section 340 of the Code of Criminal Procedure against
the petitioner praying the learned Special Judge to record a finding that
the petitioner herein had committed an offence under Section 193 IPC
and to make a complaint to the competent Magistrate having jurisdiction.
5. The learned Special Judge deemed it proper to hear the petitioner before
passing any order on this application and, therefore, vide order dated
9.6.2003 notice is issued to the petitioner on the aforesaid application of
Crl.M.C. 3324/2003

4 of 24

the prosecution filed under Section 340 of the Cr.P.C.
6. Challenging this order, present petition is filed by the petitioner under
Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure as the petitioner wants
that the said order be set-aside and the application filed against him
under Section 340 of the Code of Criminal Procedure be dismissed.
7. As a demurrer, the respondent challenged the maintainability of the
petition itself at this stage contending that only a notice is issued on the
application moved by the CBI to take action against the petitioner under
Section 340 Cr.P.C. though even that was not required in law as
observed by the Special Judge himself.

Therefore, such a petition

against the order issuing notice was not maintainable. Submission of the
learned counsel for the petitioner on the other hand was that the petition
under Section 340 Cr.P.C. on the face of it was not maintainable as no
prima facie case for offence under Section 193 IPC was made out even
on the basis of averments made in the application and, therefore, it was
the right of the petitioner to approach this Court at this stage itself,
inasmuch as there was clear lack of application of mind on the part of the
Special Judge in issuing the notice.
8. To buttress the aforesaid submission, learned counsel for the petitioner
Crl.M.C. 3324/2003

5 of 24

argued that original note (memorandum) was not produced by the CBI,
in absence whereof the petition itself was not tenable. It was argued that
not even authenticated copy of the said document in accordance with the
provision of the Indian Evidence Act was produced. It was submitted
that in the absence of primary or secondary evidence of the ground and
only document-memorandum note on which the entire CBI case was
based, the CBI could not press the said application under Section 340
Cr.P.C. for proceeding criminally against the petitioner. The learned
counsel relied upon the judgment of a learned Single Judge of this Court
in the case of Srichand P. Hinduja Vs. State through CBI 2005 [2]
JCC 1153 wherein in the main Bofors Case arising out of same FIR
proceedings against Hinduja were quashed by this Court for want of
original documents. It was next contended that perusal of the application
filed by the CBI would show that none of the ingredients of Section 192
of the IPC were satisfied. In this behalf it was submitted that (1) the
petitioner admittedly was not the maker of the note (2) note does not
contain any false statement (3) note is not `evidence' under Section `3' of
the Indian Evidence Act. Therefore, no prima facie case was made out
for proceeding against the petitioner under Section 193 IPC and the
Crl.M.C. 3324/2003

6 of 24

Section 195 Cr.P.C. was not attracted.
9. It was also contended that the note produced and relied upon by the CBI
is not a document containing any false statement inasmuch as:
(i)

There is no false statement made in the said note.

(ii)

It is wrong to state that the note was a fabricated document and

contained certain false statements.
(a) The statement in the note “though an enquiry took place in
India, such allegations could not be proven” is a true statement. (Refer (i)
JPC conclusions, and (ii) Janta Dal Vs. H.S. Chowdhary and others (1992)
4 SCC 305, the judgment which the Hon. Supreme Court gave is a case in
which CBI was a party.)
(b) JPC enquiry (Enquiry by the Joint Parliamentary Committee
on Bofors Contract) did take place in India, and the allegations made could
not be proven, is a fact.
(c) The statement in the note “the enquiry opened in India led to
several proceedings in India, where the validity and the legality of the
request for mutual assistance had been challenged in the Indian Court” is
not a false statement. It is a true statement.
(d) It is a fact that Joint Committee to enquire Bofors contract
Crl.M.C. 3324/2003

7 of 24

was appointed by the Parliament. The said JPC report was presented to the
8th Loksabha on 26-4-1988 and was tabled in Rajyasabha on the same day.
(e) Thereafter several proceedings started in India, including a
Public Interest Litigation, Criminal Misc. case No.12 of 1990 filed in the
Delhi High Court by Advocate Shri Harinder Singh Chaudhari in which the
validity and the legality of the request for Rogatory was challenged.
(f) The statement in the note “the matter is still not resolved in
India, and some party Mr. Chadda filed a petition before the Delhi High
Court, which will have to decide whether the Indian request for mutual
assistance is valid or not under Indian law” is an absolutely true statement
and not a misstatement.

(Ref. Union of India and another Vs. W.N.

Chadha AIR 1993 SC 1082).
(g) The statement “until final decision is issued by Indian Courts
on that issue no further steps should be taken in Switzerland in this matter.”
is an expression of opinion on legal aspects.

It cannot be called a

misstatement.
(h) The statement “therefore the matter is still subjudice, and
any action or judgment in Switzerland will have a very adverse effect” is an
expression of opinion. It is not a misstatement.
Crl.M.C. 3324/2003

8 of 24

(i) The statement that “no allegation could be proven although
an enquiry had taken place in India” cannot be called patently false. It is a
true statement. JPC enquiry did take place in India wherein no allegations
could be proven.
10.It was also argued that said memorandum/note was given on 1.2.1992
and after a lapse of over 10 years i.e. 4.2.2003 the CBI filed the
application before the Special Judge under Section 340 Cr.P.C. and this
delay was itself fatal in initiating the proceedings. It was also argued
that statutory mandatory provisions of law had also not been fulfilled as
there was no lawful sanction obtained under Section 197 Cr.P.C. for
proceeding against the petitioner. The petitioner who was Minister at
the relevant time was a `public servant' and the sanction under Section
197 Cr.P.C. was, therefore, necessary. It was also submitted that there
was no sanction obtained by the CBI under proviso to Section 188
Cr.P.C. prior to the inquiry and, therefore, entire proceedings, were void
abnitio.
11. On this premise the learned counsel submitted that filing of such an
application is misuse and an abuse of the process of the law and not even
notice was required to be issued and this Court should exercise its power
Crl.M.C. 3324/2003

9 of 24

under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. to quash the notice and dismiss such an
application in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of
Madhavrao Jiwaji Rao Scindia and another Vs. Sambhajirao
Chandrojirao Angre and others etc. AIR 1988 SC 709, N. Natarajan Vs.
P.K.Subba Rao AIR 2003 SC 541 and in the case of M/s.Zandu
Pharmaceutical Works Ltd. Vs. Mohd. Sharaful Haque & others AIR
2005 SC 9.
12.Learned counsel for the CBI on the other hand submitted that in the
course of execution of Letters Rogatory, statements of Mr.Rene Felber
were recorded which were sent by the Justice Authorities along with
other documents as well as original memorandum in execution of the
Letters Rogatory. Further, as per the statement of Mr.Rene Felber the
said memorandum was handed over by the petitioner to him and since it
had been collected by the CBI during investigation, CBI could produce
the same. It was also submitted that the said memorandum was handed
over to Mr.Pirre Simonin who in his statement has said that he made a
note for one of his staff at the left top on the memorandum that this
document should be passed on to International Law Directorate.
Therefore, the document has been duly identified during investigation.
Crl.M.C. 3324/2003

10 of 24

On this basis the respondent claimed that ingredients of offence under
Section 193 were made out as the act of the petitioner amounted to
`causing any circumstance to exist'. In the judicial proceedings on the
basis of which erroneous opinion could be entertained in the concerned
judicial proceedings touching any point material to the result of such
proceedings and, therefore, it amounted to `fabricate false statement' as
per Section 192 of the Act. It was further submitted that for this purpose
it was not necessary that the memorandum was signed by the petitioner.
Handing over of such document would squarely fall within the purview
of Section 193 of the Act and in support of this plea reliance was placed
on Supreme Court judgment in the case of Ajay Agarwal Vs. Union of
India (1993) 3 SCC 609.
13.Learned counsel for the CBI further submitted that sanction had already
been obtained for prosecution under Section 197 Cr.P.C. as well as
under Section 188 Cr.P.C. It was argued that under Section 188 Cr.P.C.
sanction was necessary for trial which was duly obtained. Proviso to
Section 188 regarding prior sanction was not attracted in the instant
case. In this behalf it was argued that from the Scheme of Chapter XIII
Cr.P.C., it is clear that neither the place of business nor the place of
Crl.M.C. 3324/2003

11 of 24

residence of the accused and for that matter, even of the complainant, is
of any relevance. The relevant factor is the place of Commission of the
offence. By legal fiction, section 188 Cr.P.C. Which deals with offence
committed outside India, makes the place at which the offender may be
found, to be a place of commission of offence. The expression “at which
he may be found” as used in section 188 Cr.P.C., has to be interpreted
by holding that the “finding” of the accused under Section 188 has to be
made by the Court and not by the Police or the Complainant.

(OM

HEMRAJANI VS. STAE OF U.P. (2005) 1 SCC 617). It was argued
that obviously, the main case (Bofors case) was under trial before the
Ld. Special Judge (CBI) at Delhi and the Court had issued the Letters
Rogatory under section 166-A Cr.P.C. to the competent

Court /

authority in the Confederation of Switzerland for collection of
documents from Swiss Bank Corporation, Geneva, Switzerland,
Nordfinanz Bank Zurich, Switzerland and other with full details of
account holders as well as the persons who were authorised signatories
or beneficiaries for receipt of illegal remittance by M/s. AB Bofors. It
was during the pendency of the execution of the said Letters Rogatory
that the petitioner committed the offence punishable under section 193
Crl.M.C. 3324/2003

12 of 24

IPC. Therefore, the act was committed when the judicial proceedings
were in continuity and hence the proviso to section 188 Cr.P.C. is not
attracted.
14.Learned counsel reiterated the preliminary submission regarding
maintainability of the petition by contending that at this stage where only
notice was issued, even when it was not mandatory, petition challenging
order of issuing of notice could not be entertained. His submission was
that

Section 340 Cr.P.C., confers an inherent power in the Court

concerned to make a complaint in respect of an offence committed in or
in relation to a proceeding in that Court or, as the case may be, in respect
of a document produced or given in evidence in a proceeding in that
court, if that court is of opinion that it is expedient in the interest of
justice that an inquiry should be made into an offence referred to in
Clause (b) of section 195 (1) of the Cr.P.C. That section 340 Cr.P.C.
authorizes the Court concerned to hold a preliminary enquiry, and then
to make a complaint. The purpose of preliminary enquiry, even if the
Court is to conduct it, is only to decide whether it is expedient in the
interest of justice to inquire into the offence which appears to have been
committed. (Pritish Vs. State of Maharashtra (2002) 1 SCC 253).
Crl.M.C. 3324/2003

13 of 24

Holding Preliminary Enquiry is not mandatory.

Even though it is

desirable for the Court to hold Preliminary Enquiry before making
complaint, it is not mandatory. (Johnson Vs. State of Kerala 1996 Cr.L.J.
2338 (Ker).
15.He thus concluded his submission by arguing that in a case like this, this
court should not exercise its inherent powers at this pre-mature stage as
no case was made out. He submitted that the exercise of power under
section 482 Cr.P.C. In a case of this nature is an exception and not a
rule. The power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to quash proceedings should
not be arbitrarily exercised to cut short normal process of a criminal trial,
except in exceptional cases, as held in the following judgments:-

1.STATE OF M.P. VS. AWADH KISHORE GUPTA
(2004) 1 SCC 691
2.JANTA DAL VS. H.S. CHOWDHARY
AIR 1993 SC 892
3.STATE OF HARYANA VS. BHAJAN LAL
1992 SCC (Crl.), 426
4.STATE OF BIHAR VS. K.J.D. SINGH
1993 Crl.L.J. 3537 (SC)
5.CBI Vs. RAVI SHANKAR SRIVASTAVA
(2006) 7 SCC 188
Crl.M.C. 3324/2003

14 of 24

16.He further submitted that the power under section 482 Cr.P.C. is not to
be resorted to, if there is a specific provision in the Code for redressal of
grievance. It should be exercised sparingly to prevent abuse of process
of the Court or otherwise to secure the ends of Justice, and it should not
be exercised against express bar of law engrafted in any other provision
of the Code.
17. Though I have noted the submissions of counsel on either side in detail,
I am of the view that it is not necessary to deal with these contentions
and the petition is liable to be dismissed on the ground that it is premature and is not maintainable at this stage, and this submission of the
learned counsel for the respondent has adequate force in law.

The

respondent has filed the application under Section 340 of the Cr.P.C. and
wants the action to be initiated against the petitioner alleging that the
purported act of the petitioner constitutes commission of offence under
Section 192 of the IPC as it amounts to interference in the course of
justice and to influence the investigation as well as an attempt to
fabricate the evidence. No orders on this application have been passed
by the learned Trial Court so far. Only notice is issued to the petitioner

Crl.M.C. 3324/2003

15 of 24

vide order dated 9.6.2003, which reads as under:
“At the stage of Section 340 Cr.P.C. this Court is
not required to express opinion on the guilt or
innocence of the accused. An exercise of the Court
at the stage is not finding whether any offence was
committed or who committed the same. The Court
is only required into the offence which appears to
have been committed. The scope is confined to
seeing whether the court could decide on the
materials available that the matter requires inquiry
by a criminal Court and that it is expedient in the
interest of justice to have it inquired into.
Thus there is no compulsory requirement of issuing
notice to the accused before initiating action in the
matter under Section 340 Cr.P.C. Nonetheless, in
the peculiar fact and circumstances of this case as
mentioned in the application and supported by the
documents, it is desirable and expedient to give
notice of the petition to Mr.Madhavsinh Solanki.”

18.The Special Judge thus thought it proper to issue notice to the petitioner
before deciding as to whether any action is to be initiated in the matter
under Section 340 Cr.P.C. or not. The learned Judge wants to have the
version of the petitioner. Therefore, the more appropriate course of
action for the petitioner was to respond to the said notice and state his
objections which are raised here. At this stage, the learned Special

Crl.M.C. 3324/2003

16 of 24

Judge has not even considered and formed his opinion as to whether
action under Section 340 Cr.P.C. is warranted or not. It would be in the
fitness of things that such a consideration is bestowed by the learned
Special Judge in the first instance and he should apply his mind and pass
orders on the application after considering the various submissions of
both sides.

The petitioner cannot presume that the learned Special

Judge would ultimately decide to initiate the action. In the absence of
any orders passed so far by the learned Court below, it would not be
proper to entertain this petition in exercise of extra ordinary jurisdiction
of this Court under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C.
19. The order dated 9.6.2003 itself suggests mental process of the learned
Special Judge. Though the learned Trial Court is conscious of the fact
that there is no compulsory requirement of issuing notice, he still chose
to do so in the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case so that the
petitioner is heard before the decision is taken on the application under
Section 340 Cr.P.C. as to whether action at all is warranted or not. The
Trial Court has, therefore, depicted requisite sensitivity. Therefore, in a
matter like this, it would be proper that in the first instance Trial Court
considers the submissions of the petitioner on the basis of which
Crl.M.C. 3324/2003

17 of 24

petitioner argues that no case of proceeding against him under Section
193 IPC and Section 195 Cr.P.C. is made out.
20.In the case of STATE OF M.P. VS. AWADH KISHORE GUPTA
,(supra), the Supreme Court explained the scope and contours of powers
under Section 482 of the Code in the following eloquent words:
8. “Exercise of power under Section 482 of the Code
in a case of this nature is the exception and not the
rule. The section does not confer any new powers on
the High Court. It only saves the inherent power
which the Court possessed before the enactment of
the Code. It envisages three circumstances under
which the Inherent jurisdiction may be exercised,
namely, (i) to give effect to an order under the Code,
(ii) to prevent abuse of the process of court, and (iii)
to otherwise secure the ends of justice. It is neither
possible nor desirable to lay down any inflexible rule
which would govern the exercise of inherent
jurisdiction. No legislative enactment dealing with
procedure can provide, for all cases that may
possibly arise - Courts, therefore, have inherent
powers apart from express provisions of law which
are. necessary for proper discharge of functions and
duties imposed upon them by law. That is the
doctrine which finds expression in the Section which
merely recognizes and preserves inherent powers of
the High Courts. All courts, whether civil or criminal
possess, in the absence of any express provision, as
inherent in their constitution, all such powers as are
necessary to do the right and to undo a wrong In
course of administration of justice on the principle
quando lex aliquid alique concedit, concedere
videtur id sine quo res ipsa esse non potest (when
Crl.M.C. 3324/2003

18 of 24

the law gives a person anything it gives him that
without which it cannot exist). While exercising
powers under the Section, the Court does not
function as a court of appeal or revision. Inherent,
jurisdiction under the Section though wide has to be
exercised sparingly, carefully and with caution and
only when such exercise is justified by the tests
specifically laid down in the Section itself. It is to be
exercised ex debito justitiae to do real and
substantial justice for the administration of which
alone courts exist. Authority of the court exists for
advancement of justice and if any attempt is made to
abuse that authority so as to produce injustice, the
court has power to prevent such abuse. It would be
an abuse of process of the court to allow any action
which would result in injustice and prevent
promotion of justice. In exercises of the powers court
would be justified to quash any proceeding if it finds
that initiation/continuance of it amounts to abuse of
the process of court or quashing of these proceedings
would otherwise serve the ends of justice. When no
offence is disclosed by the complaint, the court may
examine the question of fact. When a complaint is
sought to be quashed, it is permissible to look into
the materials to assess what the complainant has
alleged and whether any offence is made out even if
the allegations are accepted in toto”.

21.In State of Haryana Vs. Bhajan Lal (supra), the Supreme Court enlisted

certain principles which are to be kept in mind while exercising power
under Section 482 of Cr.P.C.. At the same time guiding principles laid
down by the Supreme Court in the said judgment was that the Court
Crl.M.C. 3324/2003

19 of 24

should examine as to whether the exercise of power is necessary to
prevent abuse of process of any Court or otherwise to secure the ends of
justice. The Court also observed that the quashment of FIR or complaint
in exercise of inherent power of the High Court should be limited to very
extreme exceptions. All the judgments cited by both the parties on the
exercise of power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. reiterate the same
principle. In the present case the Trial Court has not even formed any
opinion as to whether any action under Section 340 Cr.P.C. is even
warranted or not. Tendency of rushing to the higher courts when the
matter is yet to be examined by the Trial Court is to be discouraged.
Without exhausting the remedy which is still available before the Special
Judge, as no orders adverse to the petitioner has so far been passed, it is
not a stage where inherent powers under Section 482 be exercised. In
Rakesh Kumar alias Lal and others Vs. State of UP and another 1994
Crl.L.J. 289, the Allahabad High Court refused to exercise its
jurisdiction under Section 482 Cr.P.C. on the same principle. That was a
case where on report of the police about alleged nuisance in a public
way by the applicants, conditional order was passed by the Magistrate
and the applicants were directed to show cause.
Crl.M.C. 3324/2003

Instead of filing
20 of 24

objections before the Magistrate the applicants filed a Revision before
the Sessions Judge who rejected the same on the ground that the
applicants had alternative remedy of a seeking cancellation of the notice
by filing objections. It was held that recourse to petition under Section
482 Cr.P.C. was not permissible to such a party. In the case of JANTA
DAL VS. H.S. CHOWDHARY (supra) the High Court had taken the
view that it could take judicial notice of any illegality with a view to
preventing injury being caused to known or unknown aggrieved party
even when investigation was at its threshold. On this basis suo moto
cognizance was taken issuing notice to CBI. The Supreme Court held
that in doing so the Judge had overstepped his jurisdiction and quashed
the show cause notice.
22. It would also be of use to reproduce the following extracts from the
judgment of

STATE OF M.P. VS. AWADH KISHORE GUPTA

,(supra):
9. “In R.P. Kapur v. State of Punjab AIR 1960 SC
866 this Court summarized some categories of cases
where inherent power can and should be exercised to
quash the proceedings.
(i) where it manifestly appears that there is a legal
bar against the institution or continuance e.g. want of
sanction;
Crl.M.C. 3324/2003

21 of 24

(ii) where the allegations in the first information
report or complaint taken at their face value and
accepted in their entirety do not constitute the
offence alleged;
(iii) where the allegations constitute an offence, but
there is no legal evidence adduced or the evidence
adduced clearly or manifestly fails to prove the
charge.
10.In dealing with the last case, it is important to bear

in mind the distinction between a case where there
is no legal evidence or where there is evidence
which is clearly inconsistent with the accusations
made, and a case where there is legal evidence
which, on appreciation, may or may not support
the accusations, When exercising jurisdiction
under Section 482 of the Code, the High Court
would not ordinarily embark upon an enquiry
whether the evidence in question is reliable or not
or whether on a reasonable appreciation of it
accusation would not be sustained. That is the
function of the trial Judge. Judicial process no
doubt should not be an instrument of oppression,
or, needless harassment. Court should be
circumspect and judicious in exercising discretion
and should take all relevant facts and
circumstances into consideration before issuing
process, lest it would be an instrument in the
hands of a private complainant to unleash vendetta
to harass any person needlessly. At the same time
the Section is not an instrument handed over to an
accused to short-circuit a prosecution and bring
about its sudden death....”.

23. Likewise in CBI Vs. RAVI SHANKAR SRIVASTAVA ,(supra) the
Crl.M.C. 3324/2003

22 of 24

Apex Court reiterated the legal position in the following words:
“While exercising powers under the section, the
Court does not function as a court of appeal or
revision. Inherent jurisdiction under the section
though wide has to be exercised sparingly,
carefully and with caution and only when such
exercise is justified by the tests specifically laid
down in the section itself. It is to be exercised ex
debito justitiae to do real and substantial justice
for the administration of which alone the courts
exist”.

24.In view of the above, I am of the opinion that the petitioner should raise
all his contentions before the learned Special Judge in response to notice
issued by him. While deciding as to whether any action under Section
340 Cr.P.C. is required to be initiated or not, the learned Special Judge
shall consider all these submissions. It is also made clear that it would
not be necessary for the petitioner to appear in person and will be at
liberty to be represented through counsel, at the time of hearing of the
application.
25. With the aforesaid observations, this petition is dismissed.
No costs.

Crl.M.C. 3324/2003

23 of 24

August 20,2007.
skk

Crl.M.C. 3324/2003

(A.K. SIKRI)
JUDGE

24 of 24

