+ Unreportable
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Bail Application Nos. 1613-1614/2006
Pronounced on : November 27, 2006
# Subhan Ali & Anr.
!
through:

.....Petitioners
Mr. L.K. Giri with Mr. M.K. Giri
Advocates
VERSUS

$ State (NCT of Delhi)
^
through:

.....Respondent
Mr. M.N. Dudeja,
Addl. Public Prosecutor

CORAM :*THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
1.
2.
3.

Whether Reporters of Local papers may be allowed to see
the Judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?

A.K. SIKRI, J.
1.
Shahin (for short, 'the deceased'), wife of the petitioners' son Zarif
Ahmed, i.e. daughter-in-law of the petitioners, allegedly committed
suicide by hanging on 31.3.2006 while she was in the house of her inlaws. She had married Zarif Ahmed on 8.5.2005 and at the time of
committing suicide, she was pregnant by four months. The father of
the deceased lodged FIR No. 182/2006 on 1.4.2006 blaming her inlaws for the suicide of his daughter. Allegations, in nutshell, in the said
FIR are that the in-laws were not happy with the insufficient dowry
Bail Appln. No. 1613-14/2006

Page 1 of 10

brought by the deceased at the time of marriage and were making
further demands; the deceased was harassed, humiliated and tortured
and because of that she committed suicide.

It is in view of these

allegations that FIR is registered under Sections 498-A/304-B/34 of the
Indian Penal Code (hereinafter referred to as 'IPC').

Both the

petitioners were arrested and they are in judicial custody since
2.4.2006.

They, along with their son, applied for bail before the

learned ASJ, but the same was dismissed vide order dated 3.5.2006.
In these circumstances, the two petitioners have approached this Court
seeking bail under Section 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (for
short, Cr.P.C.).
2.

Perusal of the FIR would show that after the marriage, when the
deceased went to her matrimonial home, her husband, father-in-law,
mother-in-law, nanad and brother-in-law complained that she had not
brought a washing machine in the marriage and they demanded
washing machine in dowry. She told this to her parents when she
came back to her house after one day. Thereafter, when in-laws came
to his house for taking her i.e. gauna, the complainant pleaded that he
was not in a position to give washing machine, upon which they said
that it was OK and they took the deceased with them. Subsequently,
there was a demand of Rs.1 lakh and when the deceased said that her

Bail Appln. No. 1613-14/2006

Page 2 of 10

parents won't be able to meet this demand, allegations of theft were
levelled against her. It is alleged that because of the behaviour of the
petitioners, tension developed in her mind but she was not given
proper treatment and was treated in some inferior hospital. She was
also assaulted. She had been coming to her parents' house and going
back in regular intervals.

About the incident of 31.3.2006, the

complainant has stated in the FIR as under :“Yesterday dated 31.3.06 when I inquired by ringing up at 2.00
Hrs. about the well being of the daughter, the Nanad
Zaibunishan of my daughter said that now the relationship has
been severed. Thereafter my son-in-law telephoned at 3.00
Hrs. and said to me that Shaheen is indisposed and she is
refusing to take medicine from mother and at 5 Hrs. when I
again asked about the well being of my daughter, her Nanad
said that she is sleeping. Then I said to get me talked with her
mother, when her mother refused to talk to me and then at 9.00
Hrs in the night my son-in-law telephoned that Shaheen is
seriously ill, you come immediately and after saying this the
telephone was kept off by him. Thereafter at 9.15 p.m. the Tau
of my son-in-law rang up to me and said that Shaheen has died
and when I my wife and other persons of the village came to
Delhi in the morning at 5.00 Hrs. My daughter was having
pregnancy of four months. In the death of my daughter we
have full doubt that my daughter has not died on her own but
has been killed by my son-in-law, her mother-in-law, his Nanad,
father-in-law and Devar.”

3.

Case set-up by the petitioners is that the deceased was a mentally
challenged patient and was getting regular treatment.

It is for this

reason that she lived most of the time at her parents' house at Bijnaur
and did not wish to live in Delhi. It was only for 10 days preceding this
alleged incident that she lived in her matrimonial home and herself took
the drastic step to end her life by committing suicide.
Bail Appln. No. 1613-14/2006

All the

Page 3 of 10

allegations of demand of dowry or maltreatment are denied. Along
with the petition, medical prescriptions and report of the mental
hospitals are filed to demonstrate that the deceased was suffering from
mania with psychic disease, which is recorded by the Investigating
Officer also in his report dated 15.4.2006, and the statement was also
recorded by the learned trial court on 22.4.2006 of Dr. Sourav from the
Institute of Human Behaviour and Allied Sciences (IHBAS) in this
behalf. It is pointed out that on 26.4.2006, the learned ASJ had issued
direction to the Investigating Officer to examine the panchayat people
as to whether the allegations as to demand of dowry were correct or
not and the Investigating Officer was directed to be present on
3.5.2006. However, on that date another ASJ, without considering the
earlier order passed by his predecessor, and without looking into the
report submitted by the Investigating Officer and statement of the
doctor recorded earlier, dismissed the application of the petitioners
treating the allegations contained in the FIR as gospel truth.
4.

Learned counsel for the petitioners, relying on the judgment of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in State of Rajasthan v. Teg Bahadur & Ors.,
(2004) 13 SCC 300, argued that the settled proposition of law in
respect of Section 304-B IPC and Section 113-B of the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872 is that the initial burden of proof lies with the

Bail Appln. No. 1613-14/2006

Page 4 of 10

prosecution to establish the ingredients of Section 304-B IPC. This
burden would not shift on accused merely on the basis of prosecution
alleging that death has occurred within 7 years of the marriage. Strong
reliance was also placed on Kunhiabdulla & Anr. v. State of Kerala,
(2004) 4 SCC 13, wherein the Apex Court held as under :“A conjoint reading of Section 113-B of the Evidence Act and
Section 304-B IPC shows that there must be material to show
that soon before her death the victim was subjected to cruelty
or harassment. Prosecution has to rule out the possibility of a
natural of accidental death so as to bring it within the purview of
“death occurring otherwise than in normal circumstances”. The
expression “soon before” is very relevant where Section 113-B
of the Evidence Act and Section 304-B IPC are pressed into
service. The prosecution is obliged to show that soon before
the occurrence there was cruelty or harassment and only in that
case the presumption operates. Evidence in that regard has to
be led by the prosecution. “Soon before” is a relative term and
it would depend upon circumstances of each case and no
straitjacket formula can be laid down as to what would
constitute a period of soon before the occurrence. It would be
hazardous to indicate any fixed period, and that brings in the
importance of a proximity test both for the proof of an offence of
dowry death as well as for raising a presumption under Section
113-B of the Evidence Act. The expression “soon before her
death” used in the substantive Section 304-B IPC and Section
113-B of the Evidence Act is present with the idea of proximity
test. No definite period has been indicated and the expression
“soon before” is not defined. A reference to the expression
“soon before” used in Section 114 Illustration (a) of the
Evidence Act is relevant. It lays down that a court may
presume that a man who is in the possession of goods “soon
after the theft”, is either the thief, or has received the goods
knowing them to be stolen, unless he can account for its
possession. The determination of the period which can come
within the term “soon before” is left to be determined by the
courts, depending upon facts and circumstances of each case.
Suffice, however, to indicate that the expression “soon before”
would normally imply that the interval should not be much
between the cruelty or harassment concerned and the death in
question. There must be existence of a proximate and live link
Bail Appln. No. 1613-14/2006

Page 5 of 10

between the effect of cruelty based on dowry demand and the
death concerned. If alleged incident of cruelty is remote in time
and has become stale enough not to disturb the mental
equilibrium of the woman concerned, it would be of no
consequence.”

5.

Placing reliance on Teg Bahadur (supra); Sham Lal v. State of
Haryana, 1997 (9) SCC 759; and Yashoda & Anr. v. State of M.P.,
2004(3) SCC 98, it was argued that whether an attempt had been
made to patch up between two sides, for which a panchayat was
convened in which the matter was settled, that would be a
distinguishable feature from the other cases.

6.

He argued that in the present case, the application of bail has been
moved by the father-in-law and mother-in-law of the deceased under
Section 439 Cr.P.C., who are in Jail since 2.4.2006 on the information
given by the mother-in-law to the police and to the petitioner No.1, who
lives in Himachal Pradesh. As per the prosecution case, the marriage
between the deceased and the son of the petitioners was solemnized
on 8.5.2005 and the alleged demand of washing machine was made
on the next day, i.e. on 9.5.2006, therefore, there was no direct and
proximate link between the alleged demand and death on 31.3.2006.
As per the prosecution case, there was panchayat on 21.3.2006 and
she was taken back to Nuptial home and till 31.3.2006 nothing has
come on record to show that she was either treated with cruelty or
harassed with the demand of dowry during the period between her

Bail Appln. No. 1613-14/2006

Page 6 of 10

having been taken to the home and her tragic end. Contrary to this,
the deceased was being medically treated and it was the husband who
telephoned at 9.00 hrs. regarding her illness and prior to that at 3.00
hrs and she was being treated for the dicease mania since 19.10.2005.
7.

Reliance was also placed on the medical prescriptions of the deceased
on the basis of which it was argued that the deceased was suffering
from mania and psychic disorder, which was of such a nature that
there was a possibility of committing suicide. It was submitted that
'mania', known as the bipolar disorder, developed due to genes the
microscopic building blocks of DNA inside all cells and influence how
mind and body work and grow pass down to the generations MedicineNet.com on bipolar disorder mania and causes of bipolar
disorder on Mania Information on Healthline, American Psychiatric
Association, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 4th
Ed. Washington, DC.

American Psyc Press Inc. 1994. As per the

Black's Law Dictionary (English Edition) 'mania' means insanity mania
and potu Delirium Tremes. According to Whartons's Law Lexicon (4th
Ed.) 'mania' means alienation.

Modi's Medical Jurisprudence and

Taxicology (21st Ed.) mentions three types of functional insanities or
psychotics, which are as under :“(1) Depression illness which is of five types and one of them
includes Maniac depressive psychosis;
Bail Appln. No. 1613-14/2006

Page 7 of 10

(2)
(3)

8.

Schizophrenia; and
phychosis associated with organic diseases. The first two
types belong to the group of functional psychosis.”

Learned APP for the State as well as the complainant, on the other
hand, vehemently argued that there were very serious charges against
the petitioners, which were taken note of by the learned trial court also,
and for this reason, the petitioners should not be released on bail. It
was also submitted that the manner in which the occurrence of
31.3.2006 was tried to be suppressed, as stated in the FIR, would
clearly show the incriminating behaviour of the petitioners. Though
learned counsel for the complainant did not dispute the treatment given
to the deceased, what was sought to be argued was that it was the
result of the maltreatment given to the deceased and in any case the
disease is not such which would lead the person to commit suicide.

9.

At this stage, we are concerned with the question as to whether the
petitioners, during the period of trial, are entitled to bail or not and it
would not be necessary to deal with the aforesaid contentions in detail
and also give definite opinion about the mental and psychological
condition of the deceased.

However, it is not in dispute that the

deceased was getting treatment from IHBAS.

The prescription of

19.10.2005, when deceased was taken to the Department of
Psychiatry in IHBAS, would show that as per the medical history there
was some doubt about her 'self injurious behaviour'. She was also
Bail Appln. No. 1613-14/2006

Page 8 of 10

getting less sleep, i.e. it was a case of 'low sleep'.

This very

prescription further mentions, at page 5, that 'Insight – Absent', which
would mean that the petitioner is not able to understand and
distinguish between good and bad and was exhibiting abnormal
behaviour. The medicines prescribed would also clearly show that she
was a patient of psychiatric disorders. The case of the petitioners is
that this was her condition even before marriage and she was under
continuous treatment. The possibility of committing suicide, in view of
the aforesaid medical condition of the deceased, therefore, cannot be
ruled out.
10.

Having regard to the aforesaid medical condition of the deceased at
the time when the incident took place, coupled with the fact that the
petitioners are in judicial custody since 2.4.2006 and that the
investigation is complete and they are not required for interrogation as
challan has also been filed on 11.6.2006, I am of the opinion that the
petitioners are entitled to be released on bail.

It is, accordingly,

directed that the petitioners be released on bail on each of them
furnishing a personal bond in the sum of Rs.20,000/- with one surety
each of the like amount to the satisfaction of the trial court.
11.

The aforementioned expressions are tentative in nature and the case is
looked into only from the angle of granting bail and the same will have

Bail Appln. No. 1613-14/2006

Page 9 of 10

no bearing on the trial.
12.

Application is disposed of.

(A.K. SIKRI)
JUDGE
November 27, 2006
nsk

Bail Appln. No. 1613-14/2006

Page 10 of 10

