Unreportable
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
WP (C) No. 8385 of 2002
Pronounced on : December 20, 2007
# Govt. of NCT of Delhi & Ors.
!

through :

.....Petitioners
Mr. V.K. Tandon, Advocate

VERSUS
$ Jitender Kumar
!

.....Respondent
through :

Mr. Sudarshan Rajan, Advocate

CORAM :* THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1.
2.
3.

Whether Reporters of Local papers may be allowed to see the
Judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?

A.K. SIKRI, J.
1.
The petitioner, Directorate General of Home Guards and Civil Defence,
Government of NCT of Delhi, had invited applications for the post of
Chowkidar. For this purpose, advertisement was issued and the candidates
desirous of being appointed were required to fill up the attestation/application
form for the said post. The respondent herein also gave the application in the
prescribed form. In column 12 of this application form, following information
was sought:“12(a)
Have you ever been arrested, prosecuted, kept under
detention or bound down/found convicted by a court of law or any
offence or debarred/disqualified by any public service commission
from appearing at the examination/selection or debarred from any
examination rusticated by the University of any other Educational
Authority/Institution at the time of filling up the attestation form.
(b) Is any case pending against you in any court of law, university
or any other education authority/ institution at the time of filling up
this attestation form.
(If the answer to (a) or (b) is 'YES', full particulars of the case,
arrest, detention, fine, conviction, sentence, etc. and the nature of
the case pending in the Court/University/ Educational Authority etc.
at the time of filling up this form should be given).
Note: Please also see the 'Warning' at the top of this attestation
WP (C) No. 8385/2002

nsk

Page 1 of 7

form.”

2.

Against this column, no information was given and it was left blank. The
candidature of the respondent was considered and he was offered temporary
post of Chowkidar vide letter dated 17.9.2001.

He joined the duties on

26.9.2001 pending verification of his character and antecedents. The police
verification was sought in the meantime and report dated 20.12.2001 was
received from the DCP, Special Branch, Delhi, stating that the respondent was
reported to be involved in FIR No.554 dated 15.7.1997 under Section 325/34
IPC, Police Station Hari Nagar, New Delhi. It was further stated that, in the
said FIR, he was acquitted by the Court of learned MM, Delhi on 2.7.2000 in
Lok Adalat.
3.

The petitioner, after receiving this information, took the view that the
respondent had deliberately not mentioned regarding his involvement in the
above case in column No.12 of the attestation form and, therefore, invoking
the provisions of Rule 5(1) of the CCS (Temporary Service) Rules, 1965, his
services were terminated vide orders dated 2.4.2002. After being unsuccessful
in the departmental appeal, the respondent herein challenged the said action of
the petitioner herein before the Central Administrative Tribunal by filing
application under Section 19 of the Administrative Tribunal Act (OA
No.1072/2002). This OA is allowed by the learned Tribunal vide impugned
judgment dated 16.8.2002.

4.

Feeling aggrieved, present petition is preferred by the Government of NCT of
Delhi under Article 226 of the Constitution.

5.

It is case of the petitioner that the question is not as to whether the respondent
was acquitted in the FIR lodged against him under Section 325/34 IPC. The
issue, however, relates to the concealment of respondent's involvement in the
aforesaid FIR, which amounts to suppression of the information. Learned
counsel drew the attention of this Court to the said attestation/application

WP (C) No. 8385/2002

nsk

Page 2 of 7

form, which, at the outset, contained the following warning:“Warning
The furnishing of false information or suppression of factual-I
information in the attestation form would be offence and is likely to
render the candidate unfit for employment into the Government.
2.
If detained, convicted, debarred etc. subsequent to the
completion and submission of this form, the details should be
communicated immediately to the U.P.S.C. or the authority to whom
the attestation form has been sent earlier, as the case may be, failing
which it will be deemed to be a suppression of factual information.
3.
If the fact that false information has been furnished or that
there had been suppression of any factual information in the
attestation form comes to notice at any time during the service of a
person his service would be liable to be terminated.”

6.

He submitted that it was categorically informed to the applicants that
furnishing of false information and suppression of factual information would
render the candidate unfit for employment. The candidates were also warned
that if such false information or suppression of any factual information is
detected at a later stage during the service of a person, his services would be
liable to be terminated. In column No.12, while seeking the information about
the involvement of a candidate in a criminal case, specific attention of the
candidate was drawn to the aforesaid 'Warning' in the note appended below
the said column. Therefore, argued the learned counsel, that the action of the
petitioner in terminating the services of the respondent was lawful and
justified and the Tribunal did not appreciate the contentions in the right
perspective while holding that there was no material concealment and services
should not have been terminated. He submitted that the petitioner had relied
upon the judgment of this Court in Pramod Kumar Rastogi Vs. Union of
India & Ors., 1999 (49) DRJ 506, which was not considered properly.

7.

It is not in dispute that the respondent herein had left blank Column No. 12 of
the application form and, thus, did not give the information about his
involvement in the case under Section 325/34 IPC and the acquittal therein.
The information sought in Column No.12 is not only of the case in which the
candidate is convicted but the candidate is also required to give the

WP (C) No. 8385/2002

nsk

Page 3 of 7

information about the case in which he is prosecuted. Column No. 12(a),
which requires a candidate to give information about arrest, prosecution,
detention etc., ends with the words 'at the time of filling up the attestation
form'. However, in the bracketed portion under Column No.12, where full
particulars of the case etc. are required to be given, these are to be in the event
of arrest, detention, fine, conviction, sentence, etc. The word 'acquittal' is
conspicuously absent. Reading Column No.12 in its entirety would clearly
indicate that :
(i)

the information is to be given in respect of those cases where a

candidate was either arrested, or detained, or convicted even with fine or
sentenced. Thus, in a case where the candidate was arrested or kept under
detention, even if such a case ultimately resulted in acquittal, information is to
be provided; and
(ii)

insofar as prosecution is concerned, information is to be provided if

such a prosecution is pending at the time of filling up the attestation form.
However, if there is no such prosecution pending and the person was acquitted
in the case in which he was either arrested or detained, he may not be required
to give such an information.
8.

In the present case, the respondent was prosecuted under Sections 325/34 IPC.
He had already been discharged much before the filling up of the attestation
form. Therefore, if, going by the language of Column No.12, he under a bona
fide impression thought that such an information is not to be provided and did
not provide this information, it may not be a serious lapse on his part. One has
to keep in mind the fact that the respondent is not a very literate person and the
post for which he had applied was that of Chowkidar.

9.

Even if it is to be presumed that he was required to give such an information,
in a case like this we are of the opinion that the Tribunal was correct in
observing that such a minor indiscretion of non-disclosure would have no

WP (C) No. 8385/2002

nsk

Page 4 of 7

bearing on his ultimate appointment. The Tribunal for this purpose relied
upon the judgment of a Single Judge of this Court in the case of Pramod
Kumar Rastogi (supra). Para 9 depicts the mind of the Tribunal and also
contains the quote from the aforesaid judgment of this Court and, therefore,
we reproduce this para:“9. I have carefully considered the matter. Facts are not disputed
that the applicant had failed to indicate in his attestation form that he
was involved in a criminal case much earlier, as he was acquitted in
the same. Respondents from their side, aver that the termination of
the applicant's service was not on account of his involvement in the
case but on account of his not mentioning the same, in the attestation
form. Doubtless, therefore the applicant has been guilty of the
minor indiscretion of non-disclosure but the fact remains that the
fact, even if disclosed would not have come in the way of his
ultimate appointment. The case of the applicant gains support from
the decision of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in Pramod Kumar
Rastogi's case (supra) wherein it is held as below :“The word concealment has got a definite connotation in
law. Everything (sic) withholding of a fact would not be
concealment. When civil consequences follow on the basis
of the any act of omission on the part of the employees, the
provision has to be strictly construed and the second
respondent should not only prove and establish that there
was a concealment in law and act complained of was such
that the employee concerned could not be entrusted with
any responsible job having regard to his propensity to
commit crime. From the information made available the
second respondent should have come to a positive
conclusion that the general tendency of the petitioner is to
resort to force and to take law into his hands and the
employee has no regard for the rule of law. The law does
not empower the second respondent to presume proprio
vigore that the concealment would amount to the petitioner
being rendered unfit for the tasks assigned to him and the
petitioner would compromise the interests of the
organisations.”

10.

On going through the judgment in the case of Pramod Kumar Rastogi (supra),
we find that the learned single Judge had relied upon the judgment of the
Supreme Court in Pawan Kumar vs. State of Haryana & Anr., AIR 1996 SC
3300. That was a case where the appellant before the Supreme Court, while in
service, was convicted after a summary trial for an offence under Section 294
IPC on his confession to his guilt and a sum of Rs.20/- was imposed as fine.
On this conviction his services were terminated. The Supreme Court held that
such a conviction for a petty offence which did not involve any moral

WP (C) No. 8385/2002

nsk

Page 5 of 7

turpitude could not be the basis of termination and set aside the same. What is
important is the following observations made by the Apex Court which may
serve as a guiding principle for us also in such cases :“Before concluding this judgment we hereby draw attention of the
Parliament to step in and perceive the large many cases which per
law and public policy are tried summarily, involving thousands and
thousands of people throughout the country appearing before
summary Courts and paying small amounts of fine, more often than
not, as a measure of plea-bargaining. Foremost among them being
traffic, municipal and other petty offences under the Indian Penal
Code, mostly committed by the young and/or the inexperienced.
The cruel result of a conviction of that kind and a fine of payment of
a paltry sum on plea-bargaining is the end of career, future or
present, as the case may be, of that young and/or inexperienced
person, putting a blast to his life and his dreams. Life is too precious
to be staked over a petty incident like this. Immediate remedial
measures are, therefore, necessary in raising the toleration limits
with regard to petting offences especially when tried summarily.
Provision need be made that punishment of fine up to a certain limit,
say up to Rs.2,000/- or so, on a summary/ordinary conviction shall
not be treated as conviction at all for any purpose and all the more
for entry into and retention in Government service. This can brook
no delay, whatsoever.”

11.

We may remark here that where the case is pending at the time of filling up of
the form, position would be different and in case a candidate conceals such an
information or provides wrong information, the candidature or even the
appointment can be cancelled {See – Sanjay Kumar Bajpai v. Union of India,
1997 II AD SC 704}. Similarly, where the prosecution, though resulted in
acquittal, was for an offence which otherwise involves moral turpitude, it may
be necessary to mention particulars of such a case as that may be a relevant
consideration to adjudge the conduct or character of a candidate to be
appointed to a service even when such a prosecution resulted in acquittal,
inasmuch as, it would provide information about the antecedents of the
candidate {See – Delhi Administration through its Chief Secretary & Ors. v.
Sushil Kumar, JT 1996 (10) SC 34}. However, where the offence with which
the candidate was charged was petty offence not involving moral turpitude and
it has resulted in acquittal as well and going by the petty nature of the offence
if such a factor is not material enough to deny appointment to a candidate,
non-disclosure thereof shall not be a ground to terminate his services.

WP (C) No. 8385/2002

nsk

Page 6 of 7

12.

In view of the foregoing discussion, we are of the opinion that the judgment of
the Tribunal, in the facts of the present case, does not call for any interference.
We, accordingly, dismiss this writ petition.
No costs.

(A.K. SIKRI)
JUDGE

(VIPIN SANGHI)
JUDGE
December 20, 2007
nsk

WP (C) No. 8385/2002

nsk

Page 7 of 7

