Unreportable
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
WP (C) No. 12587 of 2006
Reserved on : 08.01.2008
Pronounced on : 28.01.2008
# Praveen Tomar
!

.....Petitioner
through :

Mr. Alok Kishor, Advocate

VERSUS
$ Union of India & Ors.
!

through :

.....Respondents
Ms.Barkha Babbar with
Ms.Liny K.Nambiar, Advocate

CORAM :* THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE J.M.MALIK
1.
2.
3.

Whether Reporters of Local papers may be allowed to see
the Judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?

A.K. SIKRI, J.
1.

The petitioner herein applied for a post in the Army. After due selection

he was enrolled in Rajputana Rifles Centre, Delhi Cantt. on 20th December,
2003. After completion of one year Infantry Army Training he was posted as
Sepoy to 4 Rajputana Rifles and he reported for duty on 29th December,
2004. When he had spent about 1 year 10 months in the service, he was
served with charge sheet dated 12th August, 2005. As per the said charge
sheet, following charge was made against him:" ARMY ACT MAKING AT THE TIME OF ENROLMENT A
SECTION 44 WILFULLY FALSE ANSWER TO A QUESTION
SET FORTH IN THE PRESCRIBED FORM OF
ENROLMENT WHICH WAS PUT TO HIM BY
WP (C) No.12587/2006

Page 1 of 6

THE ENROLLING OFFICER BEFORE WHOM
HE APPEARED FOR THE PURPOSE OF
BEING ENROLLED

2.

In that he,
at RAJ RIF Regimental Centre, Delhi Cantt. on 22 Dec 2003,
when appeared before Commandant, an enrolling officer, for
the purpose of being enrolled for service in the 'RAJPUTANA
RIFLES REGIMENT' to the question put to him, "Have you
ever been Imprisoned by the Civil Power or are you under trial
for any offence or has any complaint or report been made
against you to the magistrate or Police for any offence" If so
give details"? answered 'No' well knowing it to be false since a
case was pending against him at Police Station Baraut
bearing no.CC No.28/2000 under IPC Section 302."
Thus the charge against the petitioner was that though he was facing

trial under Section 302 of the IPC at the time when he made application for
appointment/enrollment for service in Rajputana Rifles Regiment, he did not
disclose this fact in the application furnished by him inasmuch as against
specific column eliciting this application he had given the answer in the
negative. Therefore, according to the respondents it was a false information
since case under Section 302 IPC was pending against him at that time.
3.

A summary of evidence was conducted on 26th August, 2005. On that

date petitioner also made the statement. In this statement he did not dispute
that the case under Section 302 IPC was pending trial against him at the time
he made application for appointment and further that he had not disclosed the
same in the application. However, his explanation was that the incident of
murder in which he was implicated happened at the time when petitioner was
a student and only 15 years of age and a false case had been foisted upon
him. He further stated that he was acquitted by the court in the said case. He
also mentioned that he had revealed this fact to the Coy. Cdr. Capt. Vijay
when he was still undergoing training and had already completed training for
about 5 months. He was given leave of 28 days and Capt. Vijay told him to
produce the copy of the court order in case the petitioner is acquitted.
Thereafter he had produced the copy of the order, after his acquittal. Thus

WP (C) No.12587/2006

Page 2 of 6

his explanation was that he had informed the authorities who were aware of
the pending proceedings and, therefore, no action should be taken against
him.
4.

The summary court martial was convened thereafter. As per the

proceedings of the said summary court martial the petitioner pleaded guilty of
the charge levelled against him as a result thereof the respondents inflicted
the penalty of dismissal vide orders dated 17th October, 2005. Petitioner
submitted petition against the said order which was also rejected vide orders
dated 15th May, 2006. Challenging these orders present petition is filed.
5.

It is the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the

petitioner did not understand the charge and the Commanding Officer
arbitrarily and on his own recorded plea of guilty contrary to petitioner's
statement. Thus, he violated the Army rule 116(4) and (6) which are to the
following effect:"(4) If from the statement of the accused, or from the
summary of evidence, or otherwise, it appears to the
court that the accused did not understand the effect of
his plea of "Guilty", the court shall alter the record and
enter a plea of "Not guilty", and proceed with the trial
accordingly.

6.

(6) When the accused states anything in mitigation of
punishment which in the opinion of the Court requires to
be proved, and would, if proved, affect the amount of
punishment, the court may permit the accused to call
witnesses to prove the same."
It is further argued that at the time of summary court martial the

Commandant did not call any witness to prove the charge against the
petitioner nor did he allow to test the veracity of the petitioner's statement
made at the time of recording of summary of evidence.
7.

We have considered the aforesaid submission of the learned counsel

for the petitioner but did not find any merit therein. As per the petitioner's own
version the petitioner was facing trial in a murder case at the time when he
made application for enrollment in service. Charge had been framed and the
WP (C) No.12587/2006

Page 3 of 6

case was pending against him at the time of making that application. He has
also admitted even in this writ petition that inspite of this in the application he
did not furnish this information.

The copy of the application for enrollment

which the petitioner submitted has been placed on record.

In column 8

thereof following information is sought:“Have you ever been imprisoned by the civil power
or are you under trial for any offence or has any
complaint or report been made against you to the
Magistrate or Police for any offence? If so give details.”
Against this column answer given by the petitioner is 'No'.
8.

This is clearly a false information provided by him in the said

application. the charge levelled against him was giving false information in
the said application. Therefore, it is not disputed even now that the petitioner
had provided incorrect information. Therefore, we are not inclined to agree
with the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner, though the
Commanding Officer arbitrarily recorded plea of guilty contrary to petitioner's
statement. No doubt the petitioner had submitted in his statement that he
was falsely implicated in the said case and was also acquitted by the court.
Question is not as to whether he was falsely implicated in a case or he was
ultimately acquitted in the case. The nature of charge is to be understood
which was providing false information at the time of making application and
suppressing the pendency of the aforesaid case in which he was initially
imprisoned also.
9.

The effect of giving such false information has been considered by

Apex Court in number of cases. A Division Bench of this Court, of which one
of us was a Member (A.K.Sikri, J.) had occasion to take note of law on the
subject in detail in a recent judgment in the case WP No.8385/2002 entitled
Government of NCT of Delhi and others vs. Jitender Kumar, decided on 20th
December, 2007. The position in law is summarised in para 11 thereof which

WP (C) No.12587/2006

Page 4 of 6

reads as under:"11. We may remark here that where the case is
pending at the time of filling up of the form, position
would be different and in case a candidate conceals
such an information or provides wrong information, the
candidature or even the appointment can be cancelled
{see Sanjay Kumar Bajpai vs. Union of India, 1997 II
AD SC 704}. Similarly, where the prosecution, though
resulted in acquittal, was for an offence which
otherwise involves moral turpitude, it may be necessary
to mention particulars of such a case as that may be a
relevant consideration to adjudge the conduct or
character of a candidate to be appointed to a service
even when such a prosecution resulted in acquittal,
inasmuch as, it would provide information about the
antecedents of the candidate {See Delhi Administration
through its Chief Secretary and Ors. vs. Sushil Kumar,
JT 1996(1) SC 34}. However, where the offence with
which the candidate was charged was petty offence not
involving moral turpitude and it has resulted in acquittal
as well and going by the petty nature of the offence if
such a factor is not material enough to deny
appointment to a candidate, non-disclosure thereof
shall not be a ground to terminate his services."
10.

Once we take the aforesaid legal position into consideration, the

irresistible conclusion would be that petitioner was under obligation to give the
information regarding pendency of the aforesaid case by giving answer in
negative in respect of information sought in column 8.

It is clear that

petitioner gave false answer and concealed the aforesaid information. The
charge was under Section 302 IPC which is a serious offence. Even if the
petitioner was acquitted of this charge ultimately that would not be a relevant
consideration.
11.

We are, therefore, of the opinion that the impugned punishment against

the petitioner is in accordance with law. Thus finding no merit in this petition,
we dismiss the same. No costs.
(A.K. SIKRI)
JUDGE
(J.M.MALIK)
JUDGE
WP (C) No.12587/2006

Page 5 of 6

January 28, 2008
JK

WP (C) No.12587/2006

Page 6 of 6

