Unreportable
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+WP(C) No.2511/1998
Date of Decision: 28.03.2008
#Dr. Niloy Roy

…..Petitioner

!

Through: Mr.Sunil Kumar,
Sr. Advocate with Ms.Madhu Saran
Mr.Amit Pawan and Mr.Jai Bansal
Versus

$Union of India & Others

…..Respondents

^

Through Mr. Dalip Mehra with
Mr.Siddhartha Singh for the
respondent/UOI.
Mr.Kirti S. Javali for the intervenor.

CORAM :*THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1.Whether Reporters of Local papers may be allowed to see
the Judgment?
2.To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3.Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
A.K. SIKRI, J.
:
1. The petitioner herein craves for his seniority on the post of
Junior Medical Officer from the date of appointment with
effect from 13.1.1986, though he was appointed on that date
on monthly wage basis, which was converted into ad hoc basis

WP(C) No.2511/98

Page 1

with effect from 2.11.1986. His attempt before the Central
Administrative

Tribunal,

Principal

Bench,

New

Delhi

(hereinafter referred to as the ‘Tribunal’) has failed as the
Tribunal has dismissed his OA vide judgment dated 2.2.1998.
Assailing that judgment present petition is filed. The order of
the Tribunal refers to judgment dated 29.10.1997 passed by
Madras Bench of the Central Administrative Tribunal in OA
No.606/1995 entitled Mrs. Leela Bai v. UOI & Ors. wherein
same order as impugned by the petitioner herein was under
challenge and the said challenge was repelled.

Without

discussing that judgment in any detail, the Tribunal had
dismissed the OA of the petitioner herein simply following the
said judgment observing that it fully covers the facts of the
present case and the Tribunal was bound by the said judgment
of a coordinate Bench.
2. The case set up by the petitioner was that he was appointed as
a Junior Medical Officer on monthly wage basis with effect
from 13.1.1986 and on 2.11.1988 the Government of India
took a decision to appoint all such monthly wage doctors as ad
hoc employees in the regular pay scale from the date of their
joining. The petitioner was accordingly made ad hoc with
WP(C) No.2511/98

Page 2

effect from 30.12.1988 and started getting regular pay from
the date of initial recruitment. Thereafter, on the basis of
successful performance in the written test as well as the
interview conducted by the Union Public Service Commission,
the petitioner along with other doctors was made regular with
effect from 22.10.1991 vide orders dated 7.8.1992. However,
he was granted seniority only with effect from 22.10.1991 in
the regular cadre. The petitioner wanted seniority with effect
from 13.1.1986 on the premise that he was in continuous
employment from the date of ad hoc appointment till he was
regularized and further that even on ad hoc basis he was
appointed after following the procedure meant for regular
appointments and thus, was entitled to count his service, for
the purpose of fixing seniority, from the date of initial
appointment as per the principle laid down by the Constitution
Bench of the Supreme Court in the case of Direct Recruit Class
II Engineering Officer’s Association’s case v. State of
Maharashtra & Ors., AIR 1990 SC 1607. The judgment of the
Madras Bench in Dr. Leela Bai’s case (supra) has been annexed
by the respondents along with their counter affidavit. Since it
is this judgment which is followed by the Principal Bench of the

WP(C) No.2511/98

Page 3

CAT in its impugned order, it would be advisable to know the
reasons which prevailed with the said Bench in denying the
benefit to a similarly situated person. Perusal of the judgment
of the Madras Bench of the CAT would reveal that the
applicant in the said case was also appointed on monthly
wage/contract basis as a Medical Officer in Central Leprosy
Teaching and Research Institute, Chengalpattu. Some similarly
engaged monthly wage doctors had approached the Tribunal
on the question of their service conditions and the Tribunal
had directed that these persons may be taken on ad hoc basis
and continued in service till replaced by regularly appointed
Medical Officers.

Benefits like annual increments, casual

leave, maternity leave etc., which were not available earlier,
were also directed to be given to them. In pursuance of these
directions, appointment was converted into ad hoc basis from
monthly wage/contract basis. The Department of Personnel
and Training (DoPT) also sent a proposal to the UPSC for
regularizing

all

such

officers.

The

UPSC

gave

its

recommendation for regularization of 114 Medical Officers
working on ad hoc basis in different participating units of
Central Health Scheme. This recommendation was contained

WP(C) No.2511/98

Page 4

in UPSC’s letter dated 22.10.1991. Thereafter, the limited
departmental test was conducted followed by interview and all
those persons who qualified in that said written test and
interview were regularized giving them seniority from
22.10.1991. The applicant in the said case had referred to the
judgment of Dr. P.P.C. Rawani and others etc. v. Union of India,
JT 1991 (6) 534, which was a case decided by the Apex Court
on

29.10.1991

allowing

the

doctors

the

benefit

of

regularization from 1.1.1973 or from the date of initial
appointment in service, though on ad hoc basis, whichever is
later. The applicant wanted similar benefit. The respondents,
on the other hand, had argued that Dr.P.P.C. Rawani’s case
(supra) pertained to a different group of doctors who had been
recruited prior to 1978. The system of recruiting doctors on
monthly/contract basis was introduced in the year 1978 and
therefore, that judgment was not applicable in the case of
these doctors. They also contended that the Supreme Court in
Dr. P.P.C. Rawani’s case (supra) itself had clarified that
directions given therein would be confined to that case only in
the special facts thereof and would not be extended to other
cases. The respondents also relied upon another judgment of

WP(C) No.2511/98

Page 5

the Apex Court in the case of Dr. M.A. Haque & Ors. v. UOI &
Ors., JT 1993(2) SC 265, which was also a case of doctors
recruited on ad hoc basis by the Ministry of Railways who had
been regularized pursuant to the directions of the Supreme
Court. Those doctors also claimed seniority on the analogy of
Dr.P.P.C. Rawani’s case (supra) but the Supreme Court did not
accept this contention. In view of the judgment in Dr. M.A.
Haque’s case (supra), the Tribunal refused to extend the
benefit of Dr. P.P.C. Rawani’s case (supra) to the applicant and
thus, dismissed the OA.
3. After hearing the counsel for the parties we are of the opinion
that the approach of the Madras Bench of the Tribunal, which
is relied upon by the Principal Bench in its judgment is
perfectly justified. It is clear from the sequence of events
narrated above, the petitioner herein as well as others were
appointed initially on monthly wages/contract basis. There is
nothing on record to show that while making these
appointments, procedure for making regular appointment, as
provided in the recruitment rules, was followed.

On the

contrary, these doctors were appointed on monthly
wage/contract basis to tide over the difficult position in
WP(C) No.2511/98

Page 6

running the dispensaries due to shortage of medical officers as
a stop-gap arrangement vide Ministry’s letter dated 11.5.1978.
They were given consolidated wages on monthly rate. When
such persons approached the Tribunal, no doubt, the Tribunal
ordered that they be paid the salary in the pay scale and
should also be given other usual allowances as admissible.
This direction was given keeping in view the fact that even
when they were appointed on contract basis, these doctors
were discharging the same duties which was discharged by
those doctors who are appointed on regular basis.

Thus,

principle of ‘equal pay for equal work’ was adopted. At the
same time, the Tribunal had rejected their contention that
they be deemed to have been employed on regular basis.
Rather, the direction was that they should be allowed to
continue on ad hoc basis till regularly selected doctors joined
the service. Therefore, these doctors, including the petitioner
were to be treated as ad hoc. If because of the length of
service the Government ultimately decided to regularize them
after taking limited departmental examination and interview,
in relaxation of the recruitment rules, the petitioner cannot be
given the seniority with effect from the date he was appointed

WP(C) No.2511/98

Page 7

on ad hoc basis. The judgment of the Supreme Court in the
case of Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officer’s Association’s
case (supra) will have no application to the fact situation
prevailing here, as all these doctors, including the petitioner
were engaged de hors the rules and they were not posted
against any substantive vacancies. In these circumstances, the
Tribunal was right in holding that ratio laid down in the
Supreme Court in the case of Dr. M.A. Haque (supra) would
clearly be attracted. Moreover, the judgment in the case of Dr.
P.P.C. Rawani (supra) cannot come to the aid of the petitioner
in view of clarification given by the Supreme Court in that very
judgment confining the benefit to the petitioners therein with
clear stipulation that it would not be a precedent for future
cases. The following observations of the Supreme Court in Dr.
M.A. Haque (supra) would have direct bearing in the present
case:“8. Since
the
petitioner-applicants
are
admittedly not regularly appointed through the
UPSC according to the rules but have been
directed to be regularized by following the
procedure laid down by this Court, it is obvious
that they are not appointed to their posts
according to the rules. Under no circumstances,
therefore, they fall within the scope of guideline
[A] laid down in Direct Recruit Class II Engineering
WP(C) No.2511/98

Page 8

Officer’s Association’s case [supra]. In fact, they
do not fall under guideline [B] given therein
either, since their regularization is not in
accordance with the rules but as a consequence of
special procedure laid down by this Court. The
expression “in accordance with the rules” or
“according to rules” used in the said guidelines *A+
and [B] means the rules of recruitment and not
the special procedure laid down by this Court.
The petitioner-applicants thus fall in an altogether
different category not covered under any of the
guidelines given in Direct Recruit Class II
Engineering Officers’ Association’s case [supra].
We have, therefore, to evolve a procedure for
fixing their seniority. That procedure cannot be in
violation of the guidelines laid down in Direct
Recruit Class II Engineering Officers’ Association’s
case [supra]. Secondly, the seniority given to the
petitioner-applicants will have to be below the
seniority of the outsiders directly recruited
through the UPSC as well as below that of the
directly recruited erstwhile ad hoc Medical
Officers. This is not and cannot be disputed on
behalf of the petitioner-applicants.”

4. We, therefore, find this petition as devoid of any merit and
dismiss the same.

(A.K. SIKRI)
JUDGE

March28, 2008
HP.

WP(C) No.2511/98

(VIPIN SANGHI)
JUDGE

Page 9

