Unreportable
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Bail Application No. 4397 of 2006
Pronounced on : January 31, 2007
# Vikas Yadav
!

.....Petitioner
through:

Mr. D.C. Mathur and
Mr. Sandeep Sethi, Sr. Advocates
with Mr. Rajneesh Chopra,
Mr. Dhruv Kapur and
Mr. Mike Desai, Advocates

VERSUS
$ State of Uttar Pradesh
^

through:

.....Respondent
Ms. Mukta Gupta,
Standing Counsel, NCT of Delhi.
Mr. P.K. Dey with Mr. Kaushik Dey,
Advocates for the complainant.

CORAM :*THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
1.
2.
3.

Whether Reporters of Local papers may be allowed to
see the Judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?

Bail Appln. No. 4397/2006

Page 1 of 19

A.K. SIKRI, J.
1.
The petitioner is facing trial in case FIR No. 192/2002 in which he is
charged for the offences under Sections 302/201/364 read with
Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short, 'IPC'). He was
arrested on 23.2.2002 and is an under-trial prisoner since then.
During this period, the petitioner has made various attempts to seek
bail before the trial court as well as this Court. He even knocked the
doors of the Apex Court for this purpose twice. So far, he has not
been successful. His last bail application (B.A. No. 2978/2005) was
dismissed by this Court on 11.8.2006, followed by detailed reasons
dated 21.8.2006 (hereinafter referred to as the order dated
11/21.8.2006). Feeling aggrieved against that order, the petitioner
preferred Special Leave Petition (SLP) No. 5307/2006 before the
Supreme Court of India. On 1.12.2006, order was passed in the said
SLP permitting him to withdraw the same on the statement of his
counsel that the petitioner would like to move the High Court seeking
bail under the changed circumstances. This order reads as under :“

Heard learned counsel for the parties.

Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the
petitioner was denied bail by the Sessions Judge on the
ground that three witnesses were not examined. It is
submitted that the witnesses have already been examined
and the petitioner would like to move the High Court seeking
bail under the changed circumstances and seeks permission
to withdraw the petition. Permission granted. The special
leave petition is dismissed as withdrawn.

Bail Appln. No. 4397/2006

Page 2 of 19

However, we are not expressing our views on the
merits of the case and the High Court will consider the
application in accordance with law.”

This is the reason for the petitioner to file the present bail
application.
2.

As is clear from the aforesaid order of the Supreme Court, the
submission of learned counsel for the petitioner was that he was
earlier denied bail on the ground that three witnesses were yet to be
examined, who had since been examined, and according to him this
has brought about a change in the circumstances, entitling him to
renew his request.

This was the thrust of the entire argument of

learned counsel for the petitioner during the hearing of this
application. Referring to the observations of this Court in its earlier
order dated 11/21.8.2006 at various places, Mr. D.C. Mathur, learned
senior counsel appearing for the petitioner, submitted that the main
reason which influenced this Court to deny bail to the petitioner was
non-examination of Ms. Bharti Yadav, who was eluding the Court for
a couple of years. It was observed that she was a material witness
and being sister of the petitioner, the petitioner could not claim
innocence if she was not coming to the Court to depose. It was also
pointed out that there was strong possibility that Ms. Bharti Yadav is
under the influence of the petitioner and other family members, which
could be one of the reasons because of which she was not appearing
in the trial court for all these years and possibility of the witness being
Bail Appln. No. 4397/2006

Page 3 of 19

intimidated could not be ruled out and, therefore, the petitioner's plea
for bail could not be considered till Ms. Bharti Yadav is examined. On
the basis of these observations in the order dated 11/21.8.2006,
submission of learned counsel for the petitioner was that since
Ms.Bharti Yadav had appeared as a prosecution witness, the
aforesaid reasons denying bail were removed and, therefore, now
there was no reason, not to enlarge the petitioner on bail.
3.

Reading from the testimony of Ms. Bharti Yadav (who is examined as
PW-38), learned senior counsel argued that she had only admitted
the letters written by her to Nitish Katara (hereinafter referred to as
'the deceased') and the greeting cards sent by her to him from time to
time. However, these letters, in no way, could connect the petitioner
with the alleged crime inasmuch as reading of these letters did not
give any indication that the petitioner was aware of the alleged
relationship between Ms. Bharti Yadav and the deceased. It is stated
that she had given a specific answer that she used to like the
deceased. She was only friendly with the deceased and there was no
proposal of marriage. He also submitted that she had categorically
stated that Vishal Yadav and Vikas Yadav had attended Ms. Shivani's
marriage but left much earlier, whereas the deceased was present
there till late night and this version corroborated the statement of Ms.
Shivani, who had earlier deposed as PW-11. He further pointed out

Bail Appln. No. 4397/2006

Page 4 of 19

that Ms. Bharti Yadav had specifically denied having made any
statement earlier to the Police under Section 161 of the Criminal
Procedure Code, 1973 and when she was confronted with various
portions of the alleged statement purportedly recorded by the lady
police official, she had denied the same. She also specifically denied
having informed the lady police official that at about 1.30 a.m., she
came to know that her brothers Vishal Yadav and Vikas Yadav, along
with Sukhdev Pehlwan, had called the deceased and took him away
and she became upset.

Learned counsel also referred to the

question which was put to her giving her the suggestion that her
friendship with the deceased and the subsequent love with him was
not relished by her brothers Vishal Yadav and Vikas Yadav and by
her father and that her specific answer was that her brothers and her
father were not aware of any feelings of her towards the deceased
since it was something personal to her and, therefore, there was no
question of their disliking her such relationship with the deceased. He
also pointed out to that part of the testimony where she had stated
that mother of the deceased was aware that she and her deceased
son were close friends and the deceased had mentioned to Ms. Bharti
Yadav that his mother was not comfortable with their relationship as
she belonged to a particular family. She also specifically stated that
letters and greeting cards, which she sent to the deceased, were not

Bail Appln. No. 4397/2006

Page 5 of 19

within the knowledge of her family members.

Mr. Mathur further

submitted that Ms. Bharti Yadav had been examined at the instance
of the prosecution as its witness and, therefore, it was for the
prosecution to suffer the consequences of her deposition.

His

submission was that the testimony of Ms. Bharti Yadav had not
furthered the case of the prosecution.

If at all, it had proved the

absence of any motive for the petitioner to commit such a crime. He
submitted that even if she had been declared hostile, benefit had to
go to the accused, namely, the petitioner.
4.

In the aforesaid background, his submission was that the case of the
petitioner now had parity with that of Vishal Yadav, who had already
been granted bail by this Court, inasmuch as between the petitioner
and the bail the only reason ascribed earlier was the non-production
of Ms. Bharti Yadav. He read the order dated 6.10.2005 passed by
this Court in the case of Vishal Yadav admitting him to bail and
submitted that this Court had taken into consideration the nature of
evidence produced at that time and opined that ends of justice would
be met if Vishal Yadav is admitted on bail. Evidence being the same,
the petitioner was also entitled to bail on the ground of parity. For
this, he relied upon the following observations of the Apex Court in
the case of Kalyan Chandra Sarkar v. Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu
Yadav & Anr., (2005) 2 SCC 42 :-

Bail Appln. No. 4397/2006

Page 6 of 19

“The principles of res judicata and such analogous principles
although are not applicable in a criminal proceeding, still the
courts are bound by the doctrine of judicial discipline having
regard to the hierarchical system prevailing in our country.
The findings of a higher court or a coordinate Bench must
receive serious consideration at the hands of the court
entertaining a bail application at a later stage when the same
had been rejected earlier. In such an event, the courts must
give due weight to the grounds which weighed with the former
or higher court in rejecting the bail application. Ordinarily, the
issues which had been canvassed earlier would not be
permitted to be reagitated on the same grounds, as the same
would lead to a speculation and uncertainty in the
administration of justice and may lead to forum hunting.”

The same judgment was relied upon by the learned counsel to
show how the Supreme Court's earlier judgment in the case of
Kalyan Chandra Sarkar v. Rajesh Ranjan, (2004) 7 SCC 528, was
explained by the Apex Court. Referring to the following passage from
the judgment, he submitted that the Court had emphasised that no
principle of law was laid down in Pappu Yadav (supra) and each case
had to be considered on its own facts :“The learned counsel for the respondent further contended
that this Court in Jayendra Saraswathi5 case having not
agreed with the law laid down in Kalyan Chandra Sarkar2 out
to have overruled the said judgment in Kalyan Chandra
Sarkar2. We consider this as an argument of desperation. In
Kalyan Chandra Sarkar2 there has been no declaration of any
law made as such. This Court only applied the requirement of
Section 437(1)(i) CrPC to the facts of the case and came to
the conclusion that there was prima facie case against the
respondent, hence, cancelled his bail. Nor has this Court in
the case of Jayendra Saraswathi5 made any declaration of
law. In that case also based on the facts of that case, this
Court came to the conclusion that the prosecution had not
established a prima facie case as against the accused in that
case.”

5.

Ms. Mukta Gupta, learned Standing Counsel for the NCT of Delhi,

Bail Appln. No. 4397/2006

Page 7 of 19

who opposed the bail application with all vehemence, submitted that
there was no change in the circumstances and the matter was
considered on merits on earlier occasions, while denying bail to the
petitioner. Her submission was that though one of the reasons for
denying bail to the petitioner while dismissing Bail Appln. No.
2978/2005 vide order dated 11/21.8.2006 was non-production of Ms.
Bharti Yadav, reading the said order in its entirety would show that,
even

otherwise,

the

petitioner

was

denied

bail

on

other

considerations, viz. keeping in view the fact that the petitioner was
charged with the offence which was grave and serious and also the
nature of evidence which had been produced by the prosecution till
that stage. She further submitted that Ms. Bharti Yadav had, though
evasively, denied the 'love affair' between her and the deceased, she
had admitted writing of letters and sending greeting cards to the
deceased, abundant in number and exhibited as Ex.PW-30/C-1 to
PW-30/C-72. Her submission was that reading of these letters and
the language used by Ms. Bharti Yadav in these letters as well as the
greeting cards sent by her to the deceased would clearly indicate the
intimate relationship between the two. She also pointed out that Ms.
Bharti Yadav had, on these letters, even written the timings of writing
the letters and in many cases, timings were between 2.30 a.m. to
3.00 a.m.

She wondered as to how one could deny the intimate

Bail Appln. No. 4397/2006

Page 8 of 19

relationship when she was waking up in midnight hours to write those
letters, which could conveniently be described as 'love letters' and
such letters could be written only by a person stricken by cupid. To
buttress this submission, she referred to the following language used
in Ex.PW-30/C-1, which is a long letter running into four pages :“now m not askin u but m damn sure and infact tellin u that u
did not just made a mistake.... u made a blunder by choosin
me...... Agree!!! u cannot leave.... neithe can i..... coz' i love u
and i love more than nebody or nething in this world..... in fact
i consider u as my world.....”

She pointed out that in this letter she is explaining her nature
and temperament to the deceased and though at stages she has
written that she is a difficult person and may not be coming up to the
expectation of the deceased as she feels it difficult to describe
herself, whereas the deceased wants her to open up. At the same
time, she admitted that she liked the deceased very much, who was a
sweetheart in her life, and she did not know in which direction they
were headed and ends the letter in the following words :“I love u Chimpu i love a lot.... can't live without u..... can't
imagine my life without u but..... i still don't know where xactly
m headin too..... at this point of time m unable to figure out
nething.....
PLEASE HELP ME! ”

In Exhibit PW-30/C-2, she has written :“I love you
i love you tons, ....
U R my life ......
U R the meanin to this life.....
I LOVE YOU
CHIMPU
Ghugu”
Bail Appln. No. 4397/2006

Page 9 of 19

Likewise, on Ex.PW-30/C-3, which is a card signed by her with
printed words “.... it's in the staying there!”, she has written below :“Dearest Chimpu,
N v've stayed here 4 10 mnths
now...
n' wanna stay in love with u
not 4 rest of Ur life
but 4 rest of mine....
luv U!”

6.

Learned Prosecutor also pointed out that in one of her letters written
on 22.7.2001 at 2.30 a.m. (Ex.PW-30/C-4), Ms. Bharti Yadav had
written that she wanted the deceased in her life; to be with him
always. She had never prayed so much for nothing in her life as she
prayed for the deceased, to be with him, to be in his arms. She had
also expressed that she could not live without the deceased and if
she had a life it was with the deceased. Otherwise, she was not
going to live. She could feel a vaccum with her without him and could
not even bear the mere thought of living without the deceased. In this
very letter she has expressed that she felt the absence of the
deceased on her birthday, but she knew that “from next year onwards
u'll always b there....” This letter, which appears to have been written
from Shimla as it is on the letter heads of Clarke's Hotel, Shimla, she
has expressed that she was missing the deceased when she was
writing the last page of the said letter at almost 3.00 a.m. and she
thought he could be there to hold her in his arms and she could lie
there in his lap like a baby. She has expressed that though it was her

Bail Appln. No. 4397/2006

Page 10 of 19

dream, but hoped that it would definitely come true one day.
7.

Ms. Mukta Gupta also pointed out that same language was used in
various other letters and cards. Many of these cards were sent on
Valentine's Day. One such card, all over which was written “Love
U!!!”, was having photographs of the two, cut in heart shape, pasted
on the card. In another card it was scribed “...and I want you to know that I think you're Wonderful, Sexy,
Dependable, Gorgeous, in fact you're just plain.
GREAT !
and the best thing of all is.......
YOU'RE MINE!”

8.

Learned counsel also submitted that they had even opened a joint
bank account. On the basis of this material coming on record, which
was accepted by Ms. Bharti Yadav, Ms. Gupta argued that one could
clearly infer, from the language used in those letters, timings and
occasions of those letters and cards etc., that the two were in deep
love with each other and had clear plans to marry as she had
expressed in no uncertain terms that she wanted to live with the
deceased forever. Therefore, her submission was that in the face of
these admitted documents, Ms. Bharti Yadav's denial to the effect that
it was only a friendly relationship and she had only liking for the
deceased, without any proposal for marriage was a falsehood and
this part of her statement could not be accepted, more particularly,
when she had turned hostile. Ms. Gupta, therefore, submitted that
the testimony of Ms. Bharti Yadav had clearly provided the necessary

Bail Appln. No. 4397/2006

Page 11 of 19

motive as it could clearly be inferred that such a relationship was
known to the family members of Ms. Bharti Yadav and was not liked
by them, particularly the petitioner herein, which was also expressed
by the deceased to his mother, as per the testimony of Ms. Neelam
Katara (PW-30).
9.

She further submitted that the petitioner could not draw parity with the
case of Vishal Yadav and that aspect had already been dealt with by
this Court while rejecting the petitioner's earlier bail application vide
order dated 11/21.8.2006. She also submitted that the grant of bail to
Vishal Yadav was challenged in the Supreme Court and the matter
was still pending consideration. Referring to the judgment of Pappu
Yadav (supra), she submitted that it was categorically laid down in
the said case that if the offence alleged is serious, the long
incarceration could not be a ground to release an under-trial on bail.
Her submission was that the said judgment was cited in support of
this plea, which circumstance existed in the case of the petitioner as
well,

having regard to the attendant circumstances.

It was also

submitted that when the bail was given to Vishal Yadav, the main
consideration which weighed with the Court was that there was no
likelihood of trial coming to an end in near future.

However, at

present, in this case, only two witnesses were to be examined on
narrow aspect, which could be concluded in a day's time and in

Bail Appln. No. 4397/2006

Page 12 of 19

respect of one more witness, steps were being taken by the
prosecution and, therefore, there was all likelihood of trial being
concluded in near future.

She also submitted that on the earlier

occasion this Court was informed that the petitioner was involved in
other cases as well and since then he had been convicted by this
Court in one of the cases, namely, Criminal Appeal No. 193/2006,
entitled State v. Sidhartha Vashist & Ors., (famously known as
'Jessica Lal Murder Case') decided on 18.12.2006, under Section 201
IPC and sentenced to imprisonment for a period of four years.
Learned counsel for the complainant added that there were as many
as five circumstances, appearing on record, which would clearly prove
that the petitioner and other family members had the knowledge
about the affair between Ms. Bharti Yadav and the deceased.
10.
11.

I have considered the submissions of counsel for both the parties.
In the earlier order dated 11/21.8.2006, details of this case; the nature
of offence; the charges which are levelled against the petitioner and
others; and the manner in which the case has progressed, are stated
in detail and, therefore, it would not be necessary to burden this order
by repeating the same. However, some of the facts noted in the
earlier order shall be referred to, wherever deemed necessary.

12.

The only change is that Ms. Bharti Yadav is now examined as a
witness. Insofar as deposition of Ms. Bharti Yadav is concerned, it is

Bail Appln. No. 4397/2006

Page 13 of 19

manifest from the submissions of counsel from both sides that both
are drawing sustenance from it in support of their respective cases. It
would not be advisable for me to give any analysis, even prima facie,
and comment upon the same, particularly, when the prosecution
evidence is almost over and granting or refusing the bail on the basis
thereof may not be proper. The case is before the trial court and if I
venture into this exercise, it may influence the thinking process of the
trial judge and, thus, prejudice either party.

It would always be

prudent if, in the first instance, the learned ASJ undertakes this
exercise.
13.

Suffice it to say that in spite of bail granted to Vishal Yadav, this Court
did not deem it proper to release the petitioner on bail and dismissed
his plea vide order dated 11/21.8.2006. In para 9 of the said order, it
was noted as under :“9.
The murder was committed in a diabolical manner.
Death was caused due to ante-mortem injury inflicted on the
head and thereafter body of the deceased was burnt in a
grotesque manner. No doubt, these are only allegations
against the petitioner and the prosecution has to prove the
charges beyond reasonable doubt.
However, what is
emphasised is the grave nature of offence of which the
petitioner is charged with.”

After observing that this Court had rejected the bail plea of the
petitioner earlier on 14.10.2003, in para 13 it was observed :“13. The petitioner moved as many as three applications
before the learned ASJ/Trial Court as well, on different
occasions for grant of bail and all these applications were
dismissed. Last application was dismissed vide order dated
10th November 2005 which order was passed after order
Bail Appln. No. 4397/2006

Page 14 of 19

dated 6th October 2005 releasing Vishal Yadav on bail. In
fact, after Vishal Yadav was admitted to bail, the petitioner
had filed bail application in this Court which was, however,
dismissed as withdrawn on 28th October 2005. Thereafter, the
petitioner had approached the learned ASJ by moving third
application and this application was also dismissed vide
detailed order dated 10th November 2005. One has to
consider the aforesaid facts in the light of the principles laid
down by the Supreme Court in the case of Kalyan Chandra
Sarkar (supra). Offence with which the petitioner is charged
is grave and serious. Merely because he is in custody for last
four years would not by itself be a ground to release him on
bail. In fact, as noted above, the Supreme Court has gone to
the extent of observing that even if there is no likelihood of
trial being concluded in the near future, that would not justify
grant of bail. On earlier occasions applications for bail were
rejected. It may also be noted that when these applications
were rejected, the prosecution evidence on record was the
same.”

14.

After what is stated in para 13, this Court noted the argument of
learned counsel for the petitioner, referring to the testimony of the
doctor who conducted the post mortem (PW-3), Ms. Shivani Gaur
(PW-11), Mr. Virender Singh (PW-23), and two beat constables (PW28 & 32) as well as Mr. Gaurav Gupta (PW-26). The order, thereafter,
proceeds to record the submissions of counsel for the State on the
evidence which had come on record in the form of testimonies of
Ms.Neelam Katara (PW-30) and Mr. Ajay Katara (PW-33), who is the
witness of last seen.

Thereafter, the Court recorded as under in

paras 17 and 18 of the said order :“17. Furthermore, as pointed out above, this very evidence
was before the Court when earlier applications of the
petitioner were rejected. It has also to be kept in mind that
most crucial witness Bharti Yadav is yet to be examined.
18. The only ground which survives for consideration is the
remote possibility of trial being concluded and Bharti Yadav
Bail Appln. No. 4397/2006

Page 15 of 19

has not been examined so far. This is an aspect which
cannot be considered in isolation and holistic view of the
matter needs to be taken. I say so because of the reason
that accusation of the prosecution is that Bharti Yadav is
under the influence of the petitioner and his family members
and it is because of this reason that she has been avoiding to
come to the Court and depose in the matter.”

15.

Thus, the matter was examined from the angle as to whether the
petitioner could be given bail on the ground that there was remote
possibility of trial being concluded as Ms. Bharti Yadav had not been
examined by that time. The consideration of this ground arose as
referring to the order dated 6.10.2005, whereby bail was granted to
Vishal Yadav, learned counsel for the petitioner had argued that since
Ms. Bharti Yadav had not been appearing, Vishal Yadav could not
remain in incarceration. Dealing with this submission, the subsequent
discussion in the order would reveal that the Court was of the opinion
that the petitioner, who is the brother of Ms. Bharti Yadav, could not
take advantage if Ms. Bharti Yadav was avoiding to appear and
depose in this case and as there was strong possibility that she would
be doing so at the instance of the petitioner and his family members
and there was also a strong possibility of the petitioner influencing
and/or intimidating her. Therefore, what is to be borne in mind was
that in the order dated 11/21.8.2006, the aforesaid discussion was
with reference to the argument of learned counsel for the petitioner
that as there was remote possibility of trial being concluded, the
petitioner could not be kept in prison for indefinite period and should

Bail Appln. No. 4397/2006

Page 16 of 19

be given the same treatment as given to Vishal Yadav.
16.

No doubt, it was mentioned in the order that it would afford a good
ground to reject the bail application at that stage till Ms. Bharti Yadav
was examined. It would not follow therefrom that the petitioner is to
be necessarily granted bail once Ms. Bharti Yadav is examined.
I may also state here the reasons which weighed with this Court in
granting bail to Vishal Yadav.

These can be gathered from the

following portion of the order dated 6.10.2005 :“I have heard both the counsel who have with reference to the
evidence on record, made their respective submissions.
Without entering into the merits or the case and discussing
the evidence on record, suffice it to say that the present case
is based on circumstantial evidence where the prosecution
have already closed their evidence. But for this court
directing the prosecution to examine Ms. Bharati Yadav at the
instance of the complainant, since Ms. Bharati Yadav was
material and a necessary witness, given by the prosecution,
the trial would have concluded. Ms. Bharati Yadav has not
been appearing as prosecution witness for over two years and
as the things stand, is unlikely to be examined in the near
future.
The petitioner has been in incarceration since
23.02.2002 with no end to trial insight, the nature of the
evidence produced, particularly the doctor's statement, last
seen evidence and the recovery evidence, I am of the opinion
that ends of justice would be met if the petitioner Vishal Yadav
is admitted to bail...”

17.

The governing factors were non-appearance of Ms. Bharti Yadav as
prosecution witness for more than two years; non-likelihood of her
examination in near future; and in this backdrop, no end to trial
insight. In the face of this situation prevailing at that time, the Court
observed about the nature of evidence produced. However, in the
order dated 11/21.8.2006, this Court observed that the petitioner

Bail Appln. No. 4397/2006

Page 17 of 19

could not take advantage of non-examination of Ms. Bharti Yadav.
Be as it may, the main reason which persuaded the Court to release
Vishal Yadav on bail has disappeared.

Things would have been

different if the trial was to prolong indefinitely, even after the
deposition of Ms. Bharti Yadav. The case has virtually reached the
final stages. Only two witnesses remain to be examined, that too, on
very short points. They are Ms. Bhawana, the petitioner's other sister,
and official of HDFC Bank. Next dates before the trial court for this
purpose are 1.2.2007 and 8.2.2007. If these witnesses appear on
these dates, their testimony can be completed on the same day. That
apart, it was informed during arguments that one more witness is to
be examined for which the learned ASJ has refused permission and
the prosecution was taking appropriate steps in that behalf.
18.

What is emphasised is that trial can be concluded in near future.
Proceedings, thereafter, may not take much time and verdict can also
be legitimately expected at an early date. In view thereof, it may not
be proper to release the petitioner on bail at this juncture. Equities
can be balanced by directing the trial court to dispose of the matter
within a stipulated time frame.

19.

In view of what was stated in paras 9 & 13 of the earlier order dated
11/21.8.2006 and the aforesaid discussion, the bail plea of the
petitioner has to be rejected. I am conscious of the fact that the trial

Bail Appln. No. 4397/2006

Page 18 of 19

court is proceeding with the matter with requisite alacrity and
dispatch. Record bears testimony to this. However, it is directed that
the learned trial court shall endeavour to conclude the trial within four
months from today.
20.

This application is, accordingly, dismissed with the aforesaid
observations.

(A.K. SIKRI)
JUDGE
January 31, 2007
nsk

Bail Appln. No. 4397/2006

Page 19 of 19

