Unreportable
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
W.P.(C) No. 1639-41 of 2006
DATE OF HEARING: 23.10.2007
DATE OF DECISION : 31.10.2007
IN THE MATTER OF :
Shri A.K.Bhattacharya & others. .....

Petitioners.

Thru. Mr.Arun Bhardwaj, Advocate.
- Versus -

The Government of NCT of Delhi ......
and another.

Respondents.

Thru. Ms.Avnish Ahlawat, Advocate.
CORAM :THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether Reporters of Local papers may be allowed to see the Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
A.K. SIKRI, J.
1. Whether the Tribunal is right in dismissing the O.A. filed by the petitioner herein on the
ground of res judicata is the question which needs determination in this case.
2. The petitioners are promotee officers who were promoted to Grade-II of Delhi
Administration Subordinate Services on ad hoc basis w.e.f. 3.5.1984. They were governed by
W.P.(C) No. 1639-41 of 2006

1 of 9

Delhi Administration Subordinate Service Rules (DASS Rules). On 19.5.1989
amendment was made in Rule 26 of DASS Rules whereby it was decided to merge the
Executive and Ministerial cadres of the services on the basis of seniority. The post held by
an officer as on 4.12.1980 was stated to be the relevant criteria. As per the petitioners, because
of the said amendment they were losing benefit of their services in Grade II for a number of
years as their ad hoc service was not to be counted for promotion. Therefore, they challenged
the vires of Rule before the Central Administrative Tribunal (Tribunal for short) in OA
Nos.1407/92 and 1714/92. Vide orders dated 21.12.1992 these OAs were dismissed by the
Tribunal. The petitioners preferred SLP against it, which was also dismissed. The
Tribunal in its detailed judgment dated 21.12.1992 running into 35 pages considered all the
submissions of the petitioners herein but did not find any merit in the same. Prayers made in
the said OAs were as under:

(i)“The applicant has prayed for quashing of :(a) New Rule 26 of the Delhi Administration
Subordinate Service Rules as promulgated in 1989 vide
notification dated 19th May, 1989.
(b) Regularization orders dated 14th November, 19th
November, 19th November and 26th November 1990 granting
assumed dates of promotion in Grade II;
(C) Final seniority list of Grade II Officers as on 12th
July, 1985 as circulated by circular dated 28th February, 1992.
W.P.(C) No. 1639-41 of 2006

2 of 9

(ii) Declaring the services rendered by the applicant in Grade
II (Executive) from 1983/1984 onwards as regular and
determination of seniority of the applicant in the said Grade II
(Executive) separately from the employees of Grade II
(Ministerial) at least for the period up to July, 1985 and
preparing the integrated seniority list separately up to July,
1985.”
3. The aforesaid prayers were, therefore, specifically rejected. Not only were the vires of the
Rules upheld, the Tribunal also held that the petitioners were not entitled to count ad hoc
service in Grade-II. Relevant portion in this behalf as contained in the said judgment reads
as under:
“Therefore, an amendment rule had to cater for the principle of
determination of seniority for the period prior to 12th July, 1985.
This being inescapable, we do not see any good ground for
quashing the amendment rule of 1989. Further, it is neither
uncommon nor illegal that when a senior is left out wrongly on
correction or finalization of a seniority list and a junior to
promoted the date is to be adjusted according to the date of
appointment of the junior. So, while the principle of length of
service was treated as determining feature of seniority, the
Learned Counsel for the respondent said that the clause
regarding nomination was also incorporated if for any very valid
reasons a person having occurred higher merits in the select list
was nominated/appointed later and the date of
nomination/appointment of their immediate junior was to be
assumed as the date of nomination/appointment.
On
amalgamation of two cadres and as correction of seniority lists
consequential effects on promotion also had to be taken care of and
the cases of left/out seniors had to be protected. We, therefore,
see no good ground to quash rule 26 as in the Delhi
W.P.(C) No. 1639-41 of 2006

3 of 9

Administration Subordinate Service (First Amendment)
Rule, 1989. The preamble to these amendments were made to take
care of various judgments of the Apex Court/High Court and
the Tribunal.
The applicants who were promoted on ad hoc basis should continue
to remain in Grade-II undisturbed and earn increments also, as
agreed to by the respondents, and await regularization in turn
according to merged seniority lists. This much protection of the
interest of the officers would also be consistent with the
observation of the Apex Court in the case of Banarasi Das &
Ors. (supra). With this observation, the O.As are dismissed
with no order as to costs. The interim orders get vacated."
4. Also, with the dismissal of SLP by the Apex Court, the judgment of the Tribunal
attained finality. However, incidentally vires of the said amended Rule 26 of the DASS
Rules were challenged directly as well before the Supreme Court in a petition filed under
Article 32 of the Constitution of India, by certain other employees who were similarly
situated as the petitioners herein. The Supreme Court decided the said writ petition vide
judgment dated 3.2.1997 which culminated in the same result, namely, upholding the amended
Rule 26 and thereby dismissing the Writ Petition No.525/90. We may also note that the
applications filed by some other employees before the Tribunal were also dismissed and
SLPs were preferred thereagainst which were also dismissed along with the said writ petition
by another judgment dated 3.2.1997. However, in the said judgment the Supreme Court had
noted the stand of the Delhi Administration to the effect that seniority shall be determined
on the basis of total length of service in the cadre. Taking cue from this statement the

W.P.(C) No. 1639-41 of 2006

4 of 9

petitioners filed another OA No.1595/2001 which was dismissed by the Tribunal on 3.7.2001
as barred by res judicata. The petitioners preferred Writ Petition No.5110/2001 which was
disposed of with the direction to the Tribunal for fresh adjudication. After hearing the OA,
the Tribunal again dismissed the petition vide orders dated 21.3.2003. The petitioners again
approached this Court and filed Writ Petition No.5432/2003 assailing the said order. The
said writ petition was dismissed as withdrawn vide order dated 22.9.2003 giving liberty to the
petitioners to move appropriate OA before the Tribunal. The petitioners filed Review
Application which was again dismissed by the Tribunal vide order dated 15.7.2004. Thus,
maintaining that OA was rightly dismissed as barred by res judicata. Aggrieved by this
order, present petition has been filed.
5. It is clear from the factual matrix noted above that vires of amended Rule 26 was upheld by
the Tribunal on earlier occasion when challenge was made through petitioners. SLP
thereagainst was also dismissed by the Supreme Court. Even in the judgment on which the
petitioners had relied to file the fresh OA, the Supreme Court had dismissed the writ
petition and appeals, upholding the validity of Rule 26, as amended. Once the amendment to
the Rule has been upheld, seniority has to be determined in accordance therewith. That is
what has been precisely done by the respondents. Though having failed in their attempt to
challenge the validity of the Rule and fully conscious of the consequence of amended Rule
26, the petitioners want to take the benefit that would only amount to circumventing the

W.P.(C) No. 1639-41 of 2006

5 of 9

Rule. The judgment dated 21.12.1992 passed in OA No.1407/92 rejecting the same prayers
of the petitioners on earlier occasion which attained finality would clearly bar further remedy
agitating the same issue on the application of Principles of Res Judicata. A statement by
the Delhi Administration and observation thereupon by the Supreme Court would not give
fresh cause of action to the petitioners.
6. In the case of Union of India & Ors. v. Southern Railway Employees

Cooperative Stores Workmen Union & Ors., (1998) 5 SCC 530, the Supreme
Court in somewhat similar circumstances applied the principle of res judicata. That was a
case where CAT decided the issue in favour of 172 workers by holding that the employees of
Railway Employees Co-operative Stores were regular Railway servants. Appeal against
the order of Tribunal was dismissed by Supreme Court. Review Petition was also dismissed
by Supreme Court. It was held that the order of Tribunal as confirmed by Supreme Court
is final and binding between the parties. Benefit of judgment cannot be denied to all the
workmen on the ground that contrary view has been taken by another bench of CAT in a
similar case. The Apex Court observed as under:
“In our view, the order of the Tribunal as confirmed by this Court is final and
binding between the parties to the present litigation. It is true as submitted by
learned counsel for the Union of India that in similar matter arising out of the
order of the Central Administrative Tribunal, Hyderabad Bench, this Court
has taken the view that such workmen cannot be treated as direct employees of the
Railways. This decision cannot be of any avail in present proceedings. The
appellants cannot attempt to whittle down the effect of the order of the Tribunal
in the present proceedings which got confirmed by this Court. On the principle of
W.P.(C) No. 1639-41 of 2006

6 of 9

res judicata it will be binding between the parties especially when the review
proceedings have been dismissed by this Court.”
The objective behind the rule of res judicata is to accord finality to the lis between
the parties and preclude a party to reagitate the same issue all over again after it is finally
determined between the same parties in the earlier proceedings. As Lord Halsbury puts
this: “the doctrine of res judicata is not a technical doctrine applicable only to records; it is a
fundamental doctrine of all courts that there must be an end of litigation”. {Halsbury's
Laws of England, 3rd Ed., Vol. 15, para 357, p.185}
This principle is quoted with approval by the Supreme Court in the case of
State of Haryana v. State of Punjab & Anr., (2004) 12 SCC 673. Again in K.K.
Modi v. K.N. Modi & Ors., AIR 1998 SC 1297, the Supreme Court explained the
principle in the following terms :“43. The Supreme Court Practice 1995 published by Sweet &
Maxwell in paragraphs 18/19/33 (p.344) explains the phrase
"abuse of the process of the court" thus:
This term connotes that the process of the court must be used bona
fide and properly and must not be abused. The court will prevent
improper use of its machinery and will in a proper case, summarily
prevent its machinery from being used as a means of vexation and
oppression in the process of litigation.... The categories of conduct
rendering a claim frivolous, vexatious or an abuse of process are
not closed but depend on all the relevant circumstances. And for
this purpose considerations of public policy and the interests of
justice may be very material.
44. One of the examples cited as an abuse of the process of the
court is relitigation. It is an abuse of the process of the court and
W.P.(C) No. 1639-41 of 2006

7 of 9

contrary to justice and public policy for a party to relitigate the
same issue which has already been tried and decided earlier against
him. The reagitation may or may not be barred as res judicata.
But if the same issue is sought to be reagitated, it also amounts to
an abuse of the process of the court. A proceeding being filed for a
collateral purpose, or a spurious claim being made in litigation
may also in a given set of facts amount to an abuse of the court.
Frivolous or vexatious proceedings may also amount to an abuse of
the process of the court especially where the proceedings are
absolutely groundless. The court then has the power to stop such
proceedings summarily and prevent the time of the public and the
court from being wasted. Undoubtedly, it is a matter of the
court's discretion whether such proceedings should be stopped or
not; and this discretion has to be exercised with circumspection. It
is a jurisdiction which should be sparingly exercised, and
exercised only in special cases. The court should also be satisfied
that there is no chance of the suit succeeding.”
7. It is a trite law that to find out the ratio of the judgment the same is to be read in its entirety
and the ratio is to be the principle of law laid down by the Court in the particular judgment.
The Supreme Court in its judgment dated 3.2.1997 had upheld the validity of same amended
Rule 26 and had dismissed the petition and appeals, preferred by similarly situated persons,
as the petitioners herein, without giving any relief to them. We fail to understand as to how,
in such a case the petitioners can re-agitate the same all over again relying upon same
purported statement of the respondents. The courts have gone to the extent of holding that
even an erroneous decision would operate as res judicata. Following observations of the
Division Bench of this Court in Aizaz Alam v. Union of India, 2006 (130) DLT 63
(DB), are apt :-

W.P.(C) No. 1639-41 of 2006

8 of 9

“It is fairly well settled that even an erroneous decision would
operate as res judicata between parties. The previous decision was,
in the opinion of the petitioners, or on their understanding of the
legal position contrary to any settled principle of law or decision of
the Supreme Court would not, therefore, make any material
difference so long as that decision had been allowed to attain
finality and so long as that decision had remained undisputed in
appeal filed by the opposite party.”
8. Thus, from any angle the matter is to be looked into, we are of the opinion that second petition
filed by the petitioners and consequently the Review Application were rightly rejected on the
Principles of Res Judicata.
9. This petition is devoid of any merit and is dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.

( A.K. SIKRI )
JUDGE

October 31,2007.
skk

W.P.(C) No. 1639-41 of 2006

(VIPIN SANGHI)
JUDGE

9 of 9

