Unreportable
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
W.P.(C) No.12019 of 2006
DATE OF HEARING: 23.10.2007
DATE OF DECISION : 31.10.2007
IN THE MATTER OF :
R.K. AJMANI

.......

Petitioner.
Thru. Petitioner in person.

- Versus -

UNION OF INDIA & ORS. .........

Respondents.

Thru. Nemo.
CORAM :THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether Reporters of Local papers may be allowed to see the Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
A.K. SIKRI, J.
1. Having regard to the nature of issue raised before us it is not necessary to take note of the
facts in detail, suffice is to state that the petitioner was served with the charge-sheet dated
7.7.2004 and inquiry initiated against him on the basis of said charge-sheet by appointing
Inquiry Officer and Presenting Officer. On the ground that charge leveled in the said

W.P.(C) No.12019 of 2006

1

of 10

charge-sheet was more than 15 years old, the petitioner filed O.A.No.1531/2005 for quashing
of the charge-sheet and protection of his service rights including promotion. This OA was
disposed of vide orders dated 7.11.2005 by the Tribunal. Charge-sheet was not quashed but the
respondents were given two months’ time to complete the inquiry failing which it was directed
that the proceedings would abate. The petitioner even filed Revision Petition which was
dismissed.
2. The inquiry could not be completed within two months and the respondents filed
M.A.No.133/2006 seeking extension of further four months time to complete the inquiry.
Vide orders dated 21.2.2006 three months’ extension was granted to complete the proceedings
and the Department was directed to hold the proceedings on day-to-day basis without fail.
The petitioner sought review of this order as well which review application was dismissed.
Aggrieved against this, the petitioner approached this Court and filed the writ petition
which was disposed of vide orders dated 24.3.2006 observing as under:
“We are of the view that since extension has already been granted,
inquiry should be completed within the period of extension and no
further time is required to be granted for completing the inquiry,
provided the petitioner cooperates for expeditious disposal of the
inquiry. The impugned order states that the disciplinary
proceedings shall be held day-to-day. The petitioner shall cooperate with the inquiry.”
3. The inquiry could not be completed even within the aforesaid extended time. The respondents
again moved M.A.No.992/2006 on 31.5.2006 seeking further extension of one month’s time.

W.P.(C) No.12019 of 2006

2

of 10

This application came up for hearing on 12.7.2006 and was adjourned to 1.8.2006. In the
meantime orders dated 18.7.2006 were passed by the Department imposing the penalty of
censure upon the petitioner. On 1.8.2006 the M.A. filed by the respondents for further
extension of time, taken up for hearing and taking note of the fact that the Disciplinary
Authority had already passed orders dated 18.7.2006, extension of time up to the last date was
granted. The operative portion of this order reads as under:
“Applicant has objected to the passing of final orders beyond the
stipulated period. He stated that period for the purpose should
not be extended. We do not find any substance in the objection
raised by applicant.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, final orders in the
disciplinary proceedings against the applicant having been passed
on 18.7.2006, extension of time up to 18.7.2006 is deemed to have
been granted. MA.992/2006 as such is disposed of.”
4. Challenging this order, present petition is filed. The contention of the petitioner is that vide
orders dated 21.2.2006 time was extended by three months which expired on 21.5.2006. The
respondents, however, did not complete the inquiry within this time even when the petitioner
had fully cooperated. Therefore, inquiry proceedings abated on that date. After the said date
the application M.A.No.992/2006 was filed on 31.5.2006. The impugned order was passed
by the Tribunal without dealing with the objection of the petitioner. He submitted that
specific attention of the Tribunal was drawn to orders dated 24.3.2006 passed by this Court
wherein it was categorically stated that no further extension would be granted and contrary to

W.P.(C) No.12019 of 2006

3

of 10

the said direction the Tribunal granted further extension. Not only that, without giving any
reason, petitioner’s contentions were brushed aside when he specifically submitted that he had
fully cooperated in the inquiry and even reminded the Department about the orders of this
Court and the inquiry was delayed because of the respondents, still benefit was given to the
respondents by extending the time.
5. The respondents have filed a short affidavit explaining the reasons which led to the delay in
completion of the inquiry. However, at the time of arguments nobody appeared on behalf of
the respondents. While reserving the judgment on 23.10.2007, one week’s time was given to the
respondents to file written submissions. No such written submissions are filed. In any case,
we have gone through the averments made in the affidavit filed by the respondents.
6. We find from the perusal of orders dated 21.2.2006 passed in MA.133/2006 that while
granting extension of three months’ time from the date of such orders to complete the inquiry,
the Tribunal dealt with the contentions of the petitioner in opposition to the request of the
Department as the said application was stoutly opposed by the petitioner herein. The
Tribunal found that though some efforts were made by the Department as well as the Inquiry
Officer to carry out the direction issued by the Tribunal, but it was not done either with vigor
or complete sincerity. At the same time, some delay is also attributable to the petitioner
herein as he made belated request for supply of eight additional documents as well as and he

W.P.(C) No.12019 of 2006

4

of 10

also could not complete the formalities of appearing through the defence assistant. To some
extent, the petitioner was also partially responsible for adjournment of proceedings.
7. The Tribunal also found that since the charges leveled against the petitioner vide Memo
dated 7.7.2004 were of grave nature and it was appropriate that proceedings initiated are to be
taken to its logical end.
8. Insofar as extension of time beyond 21.5.2006 is concerned, this extension was sought vide
MA.No.992/2006. It was mentioned in the application that the respondents had been
making all out and sincere efforts to pursue the inquiry proceedings vigorously and inquiry
proceedings before the Inquiry Officer had since been completed and the Inquiry Officer
had submitted his report to the Disciplinary Authority under his letter dated 5.5.2006. The
Disciplinary Authority after going through the report had decided to accept the findings of
the Inquiry Officer and vide letter dated 11.5.2006 the petitioner was afforded an
opportunity to make representation, if any, in the matter giving him 15 days time as prescribed
in CCS(CCA)Rules. This letter was served upon the petitioner along with a copy of the
Inquiry Report on 12.5.2006 and since the reply was awaited and after reply some time was
needed to complete further procedure to conclude the disciplinary proceedings inasmuch as
reference to the Chief Vigilance Officer in the office of respondents as well as reference to
Chief Vigilance Commission for its second stage advice, if necessary, was required before
taking final decision. It is thus clear that when the extension was sought, the proceedings

W.P.(C) No.12019 of 2006

5

of 10

before the Inquiry Officer had already been completed; inquiry report submitted; inquiry
report forwarded to the petitioner giving him an opportunity to make representation. All this
had happened before the date extended earlier and before the last date as per extension given
earlier i.e. 21.5.2006. In such circumstances, allowing the inquiry to lapse and order
abatement only because the time granted earlier had come to an end and proceedings were at the
last leg would not have been proper. We may state at this stage that though petitioner’s case
is that he had cooperated with the inquiry and had even reminded the Department time and
again, the inquiry was not completed by 21.5.2006, the respondents have filed a short affidavit
in this Court wherein the respondents have given the details of hearing before the Inquiry
Officer. Various dates which were fixed before the Inquiry Officer and proceedings
conducted therein are mentioned. It would show that the inquiry was held regularly by giving
short dates of two to three days and it cannot be said that the approach of the Inquiry Officer
or the Disciplinary Authority was lackadaisical. Rather the proceedings show that the
authorities wanted to rap up the proceedings within minimum possible time. If some time,
more than the time granted earlier, is taken that is because of the reason that due procedure
laid down under CCS(CCA) Rules was followed by giving full opportunity to the
delinquent petitioner. The inquiry cannot be brought to an abrupt end showing helplessness
in the matter only because on an earlier occasion it was stated that no further time would be
granted. Such orders are passed in order to ensure that these proceedings are concluded

W.P.(C) No.12019 of 2006

6

of 10

without delay. That would not mean that even when justifiable reason for further extension is
shown, the Court would show its helplessness in granting further time only because some preemptive order is passed earlier. Procedure is handmaid of justice and the endeavour is to give
substantial justice in the matter.
9. The petitioner had informed during the course of hearing that he had challenged the order
passed against him. It would be open for him to pursue the said remedy. Insofar as
impugned order is concerned, we are not inclined to exercise our discretion while sitting in
judicial review of the said order as we do not find any illegality or irrationality in the said
order which are the common grounds on which said orders of the Tribunal should be interfered
with. The Full Bench of this Court in Ravinder Kumar Vs. Union of India & Ors.
2002 VIII AD (Delhi) 252 speaking through Hon'ble Mr.Justice S.B.Sinha, Chief
Justice (as he then was) observed as under:
“The Court in exercise of its power of judicial review has a
limited role to play in this behalf. In A.Ratnam &
Ors. Vs. Government of Andhra Pradesh,
Education Department, Hyderabad 2001 (6)
ALT 661, (of which one of us was a Member), it has been
held thus:51. It is also equally settled that a Court of judicial review would
not ordinarily interfere with the finding of facts however grave
they may be. This Court is only concerned with grave error of law
which is apparent on the face of record. The error of law for
instance may arise when a Tribunal wrongfully rejects admissible
evidence or considers inadmissible evidence and records a finding.
However, as observed by a Constitution Bench of the Supreme
W.P.(C) No.12019 of 2006

7

of 10

Court in Syed Yakoob v. Radhakrishnan, AIR 1964 SC
477, "it is neither possible nor desirable to attempt either to define
or to describe adequately all cases of errors which can be
appropriately described as errors of law apparent on the face of the
record and the same must depend on the facts and circumstances of
each case and upon the nature and scope of the legal provisions
which is alleged to have been misconstrued or contravened." The
principles of judicial review of decisions of the Tribunals noticed
hereinabove were accepted by the Supreme Court in Syed
Yakoob's case (30 supra). It is apposite to excerpt the following
passage which is educative:
The question about the limits of the jurisdiction of High Courts
in issuing a writ of certiorari under Article 226 has been
frequently considered by this Court and the true legal position in
that behalf is no longer in doubt. A writ of certiorari can be issued
for correcting errors of jurisdiction committed by inferior Courts
or Tribunals; these are cases where orders are passed by inferior
Courts or Tribunals without jurisdiction, or is in excess of it, or
as a result of failure to exercise jurisdiction. A writ can similarly
be issued where in exercise of jurisdiction conferred on it, the
Court or Tribunal acts illegally or improperly, as for instance, it
decides a question without giving an opportunity to be heard to the
party affected by the order, or where the procedure adopted in
dealing with the dispute is opposed to principles of natural
justice. There is, however, no doubt that the jurisdiction to issue a
writ of certiorari is a supervisory jurisdiction and the Court
exercising it is not entitled to act as an appellate Court. This
limitation necessarily means that findings of fact reached by the
inferior Court or Tribunal as a result of the appreciation of
evidence cannot be reopened or questioned in writ proceedings. An
error of law which is apparent on the face of the record can be
corrected by a writ, but not an error of fact, however grave it may
appear to be. In regard to a finding of fact recorded by the
Tribunal, a writ of certiorari can be issued if it is shown that in
recording the said finding, the Tribunal had erroneously refused
to admit admissible and material evidence, or had erroneously

W.P.(C) No.12019 of 2006

8

of 10

admitted inadmissible evidence which has influenced the impugned
finding.
52. The decision in Syed Yakoob's case (30 supra) was also
followed in Jagdish Prasad v. Angoori Devi, AIR 1984 SC
1447. In view of the binding authorities, the law is well settled
that(i) The High Court is not an appellate authority over the
decision of the Administrative Tribunals;
(ii) While exercising the power of judicial review, the High
Court cannot be oblivious to the conceptual difference between
appeal and review;
(iii) The petition for a judicial review would lie only on grounds
of grave errors of law apparent on the face of the record and not on
the ground of error of fact, however grave it may appear;
(iv) When the Tribunal renders a decision after determining the
facts, no application for judicial review could be maintainable only
on the ground that the Tribunal committed an error of fact,
however grave it may appear, unless it is shown that such a finding
of the Tribunal is based on no evidence and the error of fact itself
can be regarded as error of law in the sense that admissible evidence
was rejected and inadmissible evidence was relied on;
(v) The orders passed by the Tribunal by exercising discretion
which judicially vests in it cannot be interfered in judicial review
unless it is shown that exercise of discretion itself is perverse or
illegal in the sense the Tribunal did not follow an earlier decision
of the Tribunal or binding authority of the High Court or the
Supreme Court with reference to finding of facts and law;
(vi) When the Tribunal disposes of the original application by
applying the binding precedents of the High Court as well as the
Supreme Court, it cannot be said that the Tribunal has
committed any error of law apparent on the face of the record; in
such cases the limited review before the High Court would be

W.P.(C) No.12019 of 2006

9

of 10

whether the binding principle has been appropriately applied or
not; the Tribunal's decision which is rendered in ignorance of the
statutory law including subordinate legislation as well as the law
laid down by the Supreme Court must be held to suffer an error
apparent on the face of the record and requires judicial review;
(vii) Whether or not an error is error of law apparent on the face
of the record must always depend upon the facts and
circumstances of each case and upon the nature and scope of legal
provision which is alleged to have been misconstrued or
contravened;
(viii) The three parameters of judicial review of administrative
action -illegality, irrationality and procedural impropriety with
necessary changes are equally applicable to cases of judicial review
of the Tribunal's decision; and
(ix) A mere wrong decision without anything more is not enough
to attract jurisdiction of High Court under Article 227; the
supervisory jurisdiction conferred on High Court is limited to
seeing that Tribunal functions within the limits of its authority
and that its decisions do not occasion miscarriage of justice.”
The writ petition stands dismissed.

( A.K. SIKRI )
JUDGE

October 31,2007.
skk

W.P.(C) No.12019 of 2006

(VIPIN SANGHI)
JUDGE

10

of 10

