Reportable
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Company Petition No. 97 of 1985
and
Co. Applns. Nos. 365/97, 1145-46/97 & 562/2001
Pronounced on : November 30, 2007
# Rajinder Sehrawat & Anr.
!

through :

.....Petitioners
Mr. Kuljeet Rawal with
Ms. Samata and Mr. Abhay Mani,
Advocates

VERSUS
$ NOIDA Fabricators & Engineers Pvt. Ltd. & Ors.
!

through :

8.

.....Respondents

Mr. D.R. Thadani, Advocate
for the respondent Nos. 1 & 4 to
Mr. B.N. Nayyar, Advocate
for the respondent No.2.

CORAM :* THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
1.
2.
3.

Whether Reporters of Local papers may be allowed to
see the Judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?

A.K. SIKRI, J.
1.
Alleging oppression and mismanagement on the part of the
respondents, the petitioners have filed this petition under
Sections 397/398 and Section 433 of the Indian Companies Act,
1956 (for short, 'the Act'). The petition substantially proceeds
on the premise that petitioner No.1 and the respondent No.2
were partners in the firm carrying on business activities on
partnership under the name and style of M/s. Engineers &
Technocrats.

Co.P. No. 97/1985

nsk

Thereafter, the respondent No.1 company, with

Page 1 of 17

the name M/s. Noida Fabricators and Engineers (P) Ltd.
(hereinafter referred to as 'the Company'), was incorporated with
the funds of the petitioner No.1, his relations and friends.
Petitioner No.2 is the wife of petitioner No.1 and is a
shareholder in the Company.

Respondent No.3, who is a

Chartered Accountant of the Company, is the brother of
respondent No.2. The purpose of floating this Company was to
expand and diversify the business activities in the field other
than the business of the partnership firm.

Insofar as the

partnership business is concerned, it was considered that the
same be carried and continued as it is.

It is alleged that the

respondent No.2 was controlling all accounts and finances, as
well as records etc., of the Company. It was realized after some
time that respondent No.3, in collusion with respondent No.2,
had been manipulating the accounts etc. and conducting the
affairs of the Company in a manner oppressive to the
petitioners.
2.

Mainly, two types of grievances are mentioned in the petition,
namely :(i)

the petitioners had not been getting intimation of the Board
Meetings, business activities and Annual General Meetings
at least since 1983.

Likewise, no Minutes had been

maintained of the working of the Company and they are
manipulated and created as per the conveniences of the
respondents; and
(ii)

the shareholding of the Company had been increased from
time to time without any notice to the petitioners or giving
them the right to purchase those shares. Such decisions

Co.P. No. 97/1985

nsk

Page 2 of 17

were taken in the Meetings of the Board, for which the
petitioners were not given any intimation and without the
knowledge of the petitioners, the shares were allotted by
respondent Nos. 2 & 3 to themselves and their family
members.

In this manner, though at the time of

incorporation of the Company the petitioners were holding
41% shares, the same got reduced to less than 10%. It is
mentioned that initial authorised capital of the Company
was Rs.1 lakh, in which the petitioners were holding 41%
shares. This was enhanced to Rs. 2.50 lacs in the meeting
of the Board allegedly convened on 9.3.1983.

In the

alleged meeting of 29.6.1983, shares have been allocated
to persons mentioned at S.Nos. 4 to 13, who belonged to
the group of the respondent Nos. 2 & 3.

As per this

meeting, 1155 shares are allotted to them @ Rs.100/- per
share, i.e. against the total amount of Rs.1,15,500/-. The
petitioners further state that in the meeting of 26.3.1984,
the authorised share capital was enhanced from Rs.2.50
lacs to Rs.4.50 lacs and these shares were allotted entirely
to

the

family

members

of

the

respondent

No.2.

Genuineness of these Minutes is challenged on various
grounds, including that the petitioners were not given the
notice of the said meetings.
Learned counsel for the petitioners also endeavoured to
demonstrate various irregularities in the Minutes and the
accounts on the basis of which it was sought to be
contended that these are false and created afterwards just
to cover the lapses committed by the respondent No.2.
Co.P. No. 97/1985

nsk

Page 3 of 17

3.

It is stated that this was done solely with a view to throw the
petitioners out of the Company thereby reducing them into a
minority.

Some other accounts of mismanagement are also

highlighted in the petition. However, the main thrust is upon
the aforesaid twin aspects.
4.

During the pendency of this petition, respondent Nos. 2 & 3
transferred their shareholdings. It was in these circumstances,
those persons were subsequently added as respondent Nos. 4 to
8.

5.

I may also point out at this stage itself that on the directions of
the Court, the respondents had placed on record copies of the
Annual General Meetings of various years, including Balance
Sheets etc., copies of the Ledger and also the Minutes of various
Board Meetings purportedly convened from time to time. It may
also be stated at this stage that though in the petition specific
instances of mismanagement and oppression etc. are not given,
learned counsel for the petitioners made submissions on the
basis of the aforesaid accounts and records filed by the
respondents, to which I shall advert to at the appropriate stage.

6.

The respondent No.2 has contested the petition by filing reply,
inter alia, stating that the Company was not floated with the
funds of the petitioners and his relations and friends, as alleged.
His explanation is to the following effect: In the year 1980, the
respondent No.2, who is an Engineering Graduate from IIT,
Kanpur and has experience as Structural Engineer, having
worked

Co.P. No. 97/1985

at

nsk

TEXMACO

Ltd.,

Belgharia,

Calcutta,

started

a

Page 4 of 17

proprietary firm by the name & style of Noida Fabricators &
Engineers at D-16, Sector-7, Noida for manufacturing of
structural and process plants. He also held a plot bearing No. B8, Sector-7, Noida on which he built a shed for expanding this
business. Later on, he floated a company by the same name, i.e.
Noida

Fabricators & Engineers Pvt. Ltd., simply because

'company' and 'director' was thought to be more fanciful as
compared to 'firm' and 'proprietor'.

The petitioner No.1 was

neither a technical person nor a financier, but was taken as a
Director to help respondent No.2 to run the company.

The

proprietary plot of the respondent No.2 and the structure on this
plot was transferred to the company by the respondent No.2
against shares in the year 1982 for starting a factory for
manufacturing of structural and process plants.

In fact, the

respondent

the

No.2,

as

Founder

Chairman

of

Noida

Entrepreneurs' Association, is a popular figure in Noida and
committed to public cause.

The petitioner No.1 looked after

commercial and account matters in the company as well as
partnership firm, having experience as a Commercial Assistant,
before being sacked for financial fraud in the year 1975 at M/s.
Frick India Ltd., where the respondent No.2 was also working as
Senior Design Engineer & Technical Assistant to the Managing
Director. The services of the respondent No.3 were sought only
when statutory requirement for verification by a Chartered
Accountant arose.

He was always an angry and unwilling

signatory on Company's half baked papers prepared by the
petitioner No.1.
7.

The respondent No.2 has further stated that the alleged

Co.P. No. 97/1985

nsk

Page 5 of 17

grievances raised in the petition are all cooked up stories. The
allegation that no intimation of the Board Meetings, business
activities and Annual General Meetings was given to the
petitioners since 1983 or that no Minutes were maintained or
that the Minutes are manipulated is denied. It is submitted that
the petitioner No.1 was a partner with the respondent No.2 in
the partnership firm and both were actively involved in the
working of the Company as well. In fact, both were practically
together at the same place through out the day.

It is not

possible that the petitioner was well informed from 1980 to
1983 but suddenly stopped getting information in the year
1983.
8.

Insofar as increase in the authorised capital of the Company
from time to time and allotment of the shares is concerned,
version of the respondent No.2 is that the petitioners and their
family members were, in fact, holding shares worth Rs.51,000/and not Rs.41,000/-, which would show that they do not even
know the worth of their shares and it is a clear proof that they
did not pay for these shares from their pocket.

As per the

respondent No.2, at the time of incorporation of the Company in
1980, the authorised capital was Rs.1 lakh and the petitioner
No.1 held 10 shares out of 40 allotted shares. So, in the year
1980, the petitioner's share was 25%.

The respondent No.2

wanted a helping hand to look after day to day working of the
Company and in 1982 financed the petitioner to purchase 110
shares out of 465 allotted on 24.2.1982.

So, the petitioner

No.1's share became 120 shares out of 505 paid up, i.e. 24%.
The authorised capital was Rs. 1 lakh and the paid up was
Co.P. No. 97/1985

nsk

Page 6 of 17

Rs.50,500/- as on 24.2.1982: the same period in which the
petitioner agreed that he was kept informed. This shows that
the petitioner No.1's holding was not more than 24%. In 1983,
the Company decided to implement the project of mustard oil,
instead of structural engineering, and to implement the same
the authorised capital was raised from Rs.1 lakh to Rs.2.50 lacs
on 3.4.1983 as per the requirements of financial institutions and
on 29.6.1983 the Company allotted 1495 shares out of which
390 were allotted, again financed by the respondent No.2 to the
petitioners' relatives and his holding became 510 shares out of
2000 paid up shares, i.e. 25%.

On 26.3.1984, the Company

again raised the authorised capital from Rs.2.50 lacs to Rs.4.50
lacs and allotted another 1000 shares on 27.6.1984, but the
petitioner No.1 still held 510 shares out of 3000 allotted, i.e.
17% and not less than 10%, as alleged.
The respondent No.2 further submits that this reduction of
about 7% in the holding of the petitioner No.1 came about
because the respondent No.2 could not finance him further to
purchase more shares of the Company as he himself was in deep
financial trouble due to ever increasing capital requirements of
the expanding project to finance the setting up of about 50
Kolhus (slow speed mechanized wooden grinders needed to get
the pungent aroma so peculiar to mustard oil, without which
mustard oil of the Company was considered to be of inferior
quality), expansion of building to house these Kolhus, testing
laboratory for Agmark (the mark of Quality for Edible Products)
and creation and launching of a new 'PARIWAR' brand, a
marketing challenge. To finance the above, the respondent No.2
Co.P. No. 97/1985

nsk

Page 7 of 17

had to dispose off his running unit which was the original Noida
Fabricators & Engineers at D-16, Sector-7, Noida. Surely it is not
the case of the petitioner No.1 that all this activity was
unnecessary or without any cost.
9.

Respondent No.2 further states that the authorised capital of the
Company was raised from Rs.1 lakh to Rs.2.50 lacs and further
to Rs.4.50 lacs as it was mandatory to increase the share capital
in order to raise loans from UPFC and SBI. The petitioner No.1
very well knows this fact and agreed on page 6 of the petition
that he signed the loan documents in 1982 and 1983 with UPFC
and in 1983 and 1984 with SBI. He, therefore, knows that the
authorised capital was raised from Rs. 1 lakh to Rs.4.50 lacs in
stages as per requirements of the financial institutions.

The

allotment of shares to persons mentioned at S.Nos. 4 to 13 at
page 155 of the petition is also denied on the ground that the
person mentioned at S.No. 8 is the father of the petitioner No.1.
It is also denied that 1155 shares were allotted in the meeting of
29.6.1993. In fact, 1495 shares were allotted, out of which 390
were allotted to the petitioner No.1's group and 1105 to that of
the respondent No.2. It is stated that above 390 shares to the
petitioner No.1 were again financed by the respondent No.2.
Further allotment was done on 27.6.1984.

By that time, the

petitioner No.1 had already hatched the conspiracy with the
detractors of the respondent No.2 of Noida Entrepreneurs'
Association and had abandoned the Company terming it as a
'sinking ship' and focused all his efforts and energies for ousting
the respondent No.2 from the partnership firm by fudging the
accounts while the respondent No.2 was busy keeping the
Co.P. No. 97/1985

nsk

Page 8 of 17

company afloat and hence could not give any time to the
accounting matters and the partnership firm.
10.

The respondent No.2 has denied any misappropriation of funds
and has stated that the Company was still in implementation
stage and in continuous requirement of capital to make the
project a success. It is a known fact that every new project of
every first generation entrepreneur, who is always short of
capital, has to overcome innumerable hurdles – financial,
technical and commercial or marketing – before it can stabilize.
And the entrepreneur has to beg, borrow or steal and play
various roles single handedly to make the project a success.
The respondent No.2 did not even take salary for his labour and
the

question

of

misappropriation

does

not

arise.

Had

misappropriation taken place, the respondent No.2 could not
have sold his shares and those of his family and friends at face
value when Company's unit was closed, in loss and under
litigation, and would have been disgraced amongst those who
stood by him in the implementation of the project.

The

Company could not have set up a most successful project, meet
all its financial obligations and progressed to an enviable stage.
The petitioner No.1 has produced certain bills and transactions,
about which he seems to have more knowledge than the
respondent No.2, to allege misappropriation. He submits that
all these allegations are false, out of context and at best half
truths. It is also stated that since the shareholding has already
been sold, the averments of oppression and mismanagement of
the Company, allegedly at the behest of the respondent No.2,
would not survive and the petition had become infructuous.
Co.P. No. 97/1985

nsk

Page 9 of 17

Objection is also taken to the employment of respondent No.3
on the ground that he was never a Director or shareholder of the
Company.

It is mentioned that before selling the shares to

respondents 4 to 8, the respondent No.2 had offered the same
to the petitioners, who did not wish to purchase the same.

11.

In respect of irregularities in the Minutes and Accounts pointed
out by the petitioners, explanation of the respondent No.2 is
that certain typographical errors have crept in, which are
highlighted, and undue advantage whereof is sought to be taken
by the petitioners though these errors have not altered the
results in the Balance Sheets.

12.

Respondent Nos. 4 to 8 submit, in addition to the submission
that the petition had become infructuous since allegations of
mismanagement are against the respondent No.2, who left the
company, that the relevant consideration of Sections 397 and
398 of the Act no longer exists. These respondents have also
taken preliminary objection to the effect that with respect to
allotment of shares, there are no pleadings in the petition,
except some vague attempt to refer to further allotment of
shares in para 21 wherein no specific facts are mentioned. The
petitioners have also not shown any loss to them either. It is
further stated that, in any case, the petitioners not only had the
knowledge of the meetings but were also a party to the decision.

13.

I have considered the aforesaid submissions with reference to
the pleadings and the evidence/material brought on record. I
am of the opinion that this petition needs to be dismissed and
the petitioners have not been able to make out any case of

Co.P. No. 97/1985

nsk

Page 10 of 17

oppression and/or mismanagement warranting interference. My
reasons for coming to this conclusion are as under :(a)

the petition does not contain any specific instances of
alleged acts of oppression and mismanagement.
allegations are

of

general nature.

The

No doubt, the

respondents filed certain documents, like Minutes of the
Board of Directors as well as copies of the Ledger etc., and
the petitioners tried to project their case on the basis of
these documents. However, the petitioners never chose to
amend the petition or lead any evidence in this behalf. If
certain discrepancies are sought to be pointed out, in the
absence of pleadings and evidence, no proper opportunity
is given to the respondents to explain the same. It may be
added

here

itself

that

during

the

arguments

the

respondents have, otherwise, given their clarifications to
the points raised. The fact which is emphasized is that the
petition suffers from proper pleadings.
(b)

The first allegation of the petitioners is that the petitioner
No.1 was not given notice of the meetings. In this behalf,
it is also contended that in two alleged meetings decision
was taken to increase the authorised capital and shares
were allotted by the respondent No.2 to his own people.
The record shows that extraordinary meeting of the
shareholders of the Company was held on 3.4.1983 at the
Registered Office of the Company, which at that time was
D-9, Pomposh Enclave, New Delhi – 110 048.

It is the

residential address of the petitioners. On the basis of this
decision, other meeting was held on 29.6.1983 at the
Co.P. No. 97/1985

nsk

Page 11 of 17

factory premises of the company when decision to allot the
shares as per the increased capital was taken. In both the
meetings, the petitioner No.1 is shown to be present. This
fact is not denied by the petitioner No.1 in his pleadings
though the petitioners and their counsel had inspected the
record on 18.7.1986 after orders dated 21.5.1986 were
passed by this Court permitting this inspection.

Even

otherwise, meetings where decision was taken to increase
the authorised capital further from Rs.2.50 lacs to Rs.4.50
lacs, are shown to have taken place at the residence of the
petitioners and this is also not denied by any specific
pleadings.
(c)

In any case, it seems that when these resolutions were
acted upon, the petitioners had the knowledge thereof.
The respondents have shown that the resolutions passed
in these meetings were submitted to the bank as financial
assistance was to be obtained from the bank and the
documents with the bank were signed by the petitioner
No.1. The petitioner No.1 had signed the loan documents
with the bank on behalf of the Company in 1982, 1983
and 1984. He was apprised to sign these documents on
behalf of the Company by virtue of Board Resolutions.
Thus, he cannot feign ignorance to these resolutions vide
which he was given the authority to sign as well and acting
on that authority he signed those documents.

In view

thereof, the petitioners cannot pretend ignorance about
these resolutions.
It also appears from the record that offer was made
Co.P. No. 97/1985

nsk

Page 12 of 17

to the petitioners to purchase the shares, which was not
availed of.

This assertion of the respondents further

supported the fact that even when the respondent No.2
wanted to sell the shares he had made the offer thereof to
the petitioners. Only after the petitioners refused to buy
the same because of lack of funds or otherwise, the
respondent No.2 sold the shareholdings held by him to his
family members, i.e. respondent Nos. 4 to 8. This lends
credence to the allegation of the respondent No.2 that
since the Company was at the stage of implementation of
its project and the petitioners were not very hopeful about
the success thereof, they did not show any interest in
buying those shares.
(d)

Material placed on record also shows that the petitioner
No.1 had been participating in financial transactions and
was signing the cheques and, therefore, he cannot say that
he was not aware of the functioning of the company which
was allegedly managed by the respondent No.2 alone and
his brother, who was a Chartered Accountant. From this,
one can also draw further inference, coupled with the
aforesaid evidence, that the petitioners were having the
knowledge of the meetings as well as the decision about
increase in the authorised capital.

(e)

There are certain other discrepancies pointed out by the
petitioners in the accounts filed by the respondents, which
are explained. The respondent No.2 has stated that in the
Balance Sheet dated 30.6.1983, the authorised capital has
been shown as 20,000 shares of Rs.10/- each instead of

Co.P. No. 97/1985

nsk

Page 13 of 17

2500

shares of Rs.100/-

clerical/typographical error.

each.

This

could

be

a

However, the subscribed

capital is given correctly as Rs.2,00,000/-. Thus, the result
of the Balance Sheet is not altered.

The increase in

authorised capital from Rs.1 lakh to Rs.2.50 lacs was
approved on 9.3.1983 by the Board, on 3.4.1983 by the
Extraordinary General Meeting, and Balance Sheet dated
30.6.1983 correctly shows the subscribed capital as
Rs.2,00,000/-. It does not show that entire story is false,
frivolous or created one. It is submitted that the petitioner
No.1 is trying to confuse by deliberately mixing up the
authorised capital with the subscribed capital.
(f)

Though the petitioners have alleged that the Minutes filed
are created by the respondent No.2 at the time of filing
reply to the petition, pages 130 to 163 of the Minutes are
of the period about which the petitioners have not raised
any grievance and have no problem.

These are the

minutes when shares were allotted to the petitioner No.1
and his relations and proprietary rights in the plot of the
respondent No.2 were transferred in the name of the
Company.

Therefore, for their own convenience, the

petitioners are raising such allegations qua other part of
the Minutes. Merely because there are some blanks left on
page 153 in the Resolution dated 11.6.1983 would not
mean that the Minutes are manipulated. On the contrary,
it goes to show that the Minutes are filed as it is.

Had

there been manipulations, the respondent No.2 would have
filled those blanks and only then filed the same.
Co.P. No. 97/1985

nsk

Page 14 of 17

(g)

The petition is also vague to the extent that it is not
alleged as to when operation started: whether it was in the
year 1981-82 or 1984. Even if it is taken as 1984, as the
petitioners have alleged that since 1984 they did not get
notices of the meetings etc., no grievance is made by the
petitioner No.1 for over 8 months till about April 1985
when the petition is filed. At that time, the Company was
incurring heavy losses and its factory was closed and,
therefore, there could not have been any act of oppression
or mismanagement at that time. The respondent No.2 had
sold his shareholdings to the respondent Nos. 4 to 8 many
years ago. The respondent Nos. 4 to 8 are in control of
the business. It is not denied that the company is doing
good business. It is manufacturing and marketing Mustard
Oil

with

brand

name

“PARIWAR”

and

is

running

successfully.
14.

In taking the aforesaid view, I am guided by the principles laid
down by the Apex Court dealing with the scope of Sections 397
& 398 of the Companies Act. In Shanti Prasad Jain v. Kalinga
Tubes Ltd., (1965) 35 Com. Cases 351, the Court expressed the
legal position in the following terms :“It is not enough to show that there is just and equitable
cause for winding up the company though that must be
shown as a preliminary to the application of section 397.
It must further be shown that the conduct of the majority
shareholders was oppressive to the minority as members
and this requires that events have to be considered not in
isolation but as part of a consecutive story. There must
be continuous acts on the part of the majority
shareholders, continuing up to the date of petition,
showing that the affairs of the company were being
conducted in a manner oppressive to some part of the
members.”

In order that the court may make an order under section

Co.P. No. 97/1985

nsk

Page 15 of 17

397 of the Act, the court must be satisfied, firstly, that the
company's affairs are being conducted in a manner oppressive
to any member or members, secondly, that the facts would
justify the making of a winding up order, on the ground that it
was just and equitable that the company should be wound up
and, thirdly, that a winding up order would unfairly prejudice the
applicant or applicants.
15.

On an analysis of the judgments of Indian and English Courts, it
was observed in Rao (V.M.) v. Rajeswari Ramakrishnan,
(1987) 61 Com Cases 20, 66 (Mad-DB):“These decisions are, therefore, clear
authority for the position (1) that the
oppression complained of must affect a
person in his capacity or character as a
member of the company; harsh or unfair
treatment in any other capacity, e.g. as a
director or a creditor is outside the purview
of the section; (2) there must be continuous
acts constituting oppression up to the date
of the petition; (3) the events have to be
considered not in isolation but as a part of a
continuous story; (4) it must be shown as a
preliminary to the application of section 397
that there is just and equitable ground for
winding up the company; (5) the conduct
complained of can be said to be “oppression”
only when it could be said that it is
burdensome, harsh and wrongful; oppression
involves at least an element of lack of probity
and fair dealing to a member in matters of
his proprietary right as a shareholder.”
Thus, it was imperative on the part of the petitioner to show that
“

16.

the circumstances were such which would show that there is just
and equitable cause for winding up of the company. This is not
so in the present case. On the contrary, as noted above, at the
relevant time the petitioner stopped taking interest in the affairs
of the company thinking it to be a 'sinking ship'.

Today the

company is leading healthy life and is very much alive and

Co.P. No. 97/1985

nsk

Page 16 of 17

kicking.

Furthermore, when the entire events are taken “as a

part of a consecutive story”, the phrase used by the Supreme
Court, the facts of this case would warrant that no interference
is called for.

17.

As a result of the aforesaid discussion, this petition, along with
the pending miscellaneous application, stands dismissed.

November 30, 2007
nsk

Co.P. No. 97/1985

nsk

(A.K. SIKRI)
JUDGE

Page 17 of 17

