Unreportable
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+WP(C) No.153/1988
Date of Hearing: 05.10.2007
Date of Decision: 30.11.2007
#Vijay Kumar
!

....Petitioner
Through: Mr. R.K. Saini
Versus

$Delhi Transport Corporation
^

.....Respondent
Through Mr. Ataul Haque

CORAM :*THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1.Whether Reporters of Local papers may be allowed to see
the Judgment?
2.To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3.Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?

A.K. SIKRI, J.
:
1. Sh. Johri Mal Sharma, father of the petitioner, was an
employee of the respondent-DTC. During the course of his
employment with the DTC, he was allotted Staff Quarter
No. F-108, DTC Colony, Shadipur, New Delhi. He continued
to occupy the said staff quarter during his tenure in the
employment of the DTC from where he retired on
30.6.1987 (AN) on attaining the age of superannuation.

WP(C) No.153/88

Page 1 of 10

While he was still in service, his son Vijay Kumar (the
petitioner herein) was appointed to the post of Assistant
Fitter with the DTC on 7.11.1978.

With effect from

1.7.1983 he was promoted to the post of Fitter.

2. Few days before his retirement, Sh. Johri Mal Sharma
addressed letter dated 10.4.1987 requesting the General
Manager (Admn.), DTC, to allot the said staff quarter, which
was in his occupation, to his son as per the policy in force.
This request was reiterated by Sh. Johri Mal Sharma, when
he was on the verge of his retirement, vide letter dated
12.6.1987.

There was no immediate reply given to the

petitioner's father, who retired on 30.6.1987 and continued
to occupy the said staff quarter, which he was entitled to
occupy for few months after his retirement, in any case.
However, vide letter dated 20.12.1987 the petitioner was
informed that the request for allotment in his name could
not

be

acceded

to

in

view

of

acute

shortage

of

accommodation. According to the petitioner, this was not a
legitimate ground to refuse the allotment of the staff
accommodation to the petitioner and was only a makebelief, inasmuch as, in the very month in which the
WP(C) No.153/88

Page 2 of 10

petitioner had sought allotment, staff quarters were
allotted to other employees, namely, Shri Ashok Kumar, Jr.
Clerk and Shri Pal Singh, Asstt. Electrician (Grade II) on the
ground that they were eligible dependents of retiring
employees.

The

petitioner,

in

these

circumstances,

preferred the instant petition challenging the rejection
order dated 22.12.1987 and has sought mandamus seeking
direction against the respondent to allot the said

Staff

Quarter No. F-108, DTC Colony, Shadipur, New Delhi, to
him.

In the meantime, treating Sh. Johri Mal Sharma as

unauthorised occupant of the said staff quarter, DTC
referred the matter to the Estate Officer, who initiated
proceedings

under

the

Public

Premises

(Eviction

of

Unauthorised Occupants) Act (in short the 'PP Act'). Along
with the writ petition, the petitioner filed application for
stay against dispossession.

While issuing notice to show

cause in the writ petition on 20.1.1988, in the stay
application a Division Bench of this Court directed that
proceedings before the Estate Officer may continue but the
petitioner should not be dispossessed.

On 21.11.1988,

after hearing both the parties, Rule DB was issued and
direction was passed to continue the interim order till the
WP(C) No.153/88

Page 3 of 10

disposal of the writ petition.
3. Before proceeding to discuss the merits of this case, we
may point out that the Estate Officer, after conclusion of
the proceedings, passed eviction order dated 7.2.1992 and
also directed him to pay the damages.

Sh. Johri Mal

Sharma preferred appeal against that order under Section
9 of the PP Act. In the said appeal Sh. Johri Mal Sharma
prayed for stay against the recovery of damages, which
was declined by the learned Additional District Judge.
Challenging the said order he filed CM(M) No.300/1993
wherein stay of recovery was granted, which continued
from time to time. On 28.2.2007 the said petition was
dismissed for non-prosecution as nobody appeared for the
petitioner herein.
4. The claim of the petitioner for allotment of staff quarter is
based

on

the

Government

policy

of

allotting

accommodation occupied by a retiring employee to his/her
son, daughter, wife, husband or father if such persons are
in the same organisation and have been residing with the
retiring employee and further when such son, daughter,
husband,

wife

accommodation.
WP(C) No.153/88

is

entitled

for

that

very

type

of

The conditions which the applicant,
Page 4 of 10

namely, son/daughter etc. of retiring employee has to fulfill
for allotment of accommodation are that: (i) he is a
Government

servant

eligible

for

allotment

of

accommodation and (ii) he has been continuously residing
with the retiring employee for at least three years, namely,
preceding the date of retirement.

5. In

the

counter

affidavit

filed

by

the

respondent,

applicability of the aforesaid policy is not denied. However,
their submission is that the petitioner does not fulfill the
eligibility conditions.

Insofar as the first contention is

concerned, there is no dispute that the petitioner is
employed with the respondent corporation.

There is no

dispute about the dates of appointment as well.

The

petitioner became the employee of the DTC on 7.11.1978,
whereas his father retired from DTC on 30.6.1987. Thus,
by the time his father retired, the petitioner had rendered
service of more than 8½ years. Much before his father's
retirement, the petitioner got promotion to the post of
Fitter with effect from 1.7.1983 and, therefore, in that
capacity also the petitioner had worked for more than three
years before his father's retirement. The entire dispute is
WP(C) No.153/88

Page 5 of 10

on the fulfillment of the second condition, namely, whether
the petitioner had continuously resided with his father for
the last three years immediately preceding his date of
retirement. Interestingly, there is a letter dated 1.5.1986
of the petitioner as per which he started living with his
father with effect from 1.5.1986, as is clear from the
specific assertion made therein to this effect, which is clear
from the following text of the letter :“It is submitted that previously I used to live
somewhere else, but now I have started living with
my father Shri Johri Mal, ATS w.e.f. 1.5.1986 at F109, DTC Colony because my father does not
remain well.
You are, therefore, requested to deduct my house
rent from my salary of this month as per rules and
regulation for which I shall be obliged.”

6. If one is to go by this letter of the petitioner himself, he
would not fulfill the aforesaid requisite of allotment.
However, learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon
communication
petitioner

in

dated
response

11.11.1986
to

his

addressed

aforesaid

letter

to

dated

1.5.1986, which is to the following effect :“This has reference to your application dt. 1.5.86
received vide D.No. 302 dt. 5.5.86 for stoppage of
House Rent allowance from your salary w.e.f. 1.5.86
and onwards because you are residing in the D.T.C.
Quarter allotted to your father.
WP(C) No.153/88

the

Page 6 of 10

“The position has been reviewed from your
personal record wherein you have declared your
residential address as Qrt. No. F-108, D.T.C. Colony,
Shadipur, New Delhi. Accordingly you were asked
to produce the documentary proof to this effect.
Since you failed to submit the documentary proof
and you were not entitled to draw the House Rent
allowance during the period from 8.11.78 to
30.6.86 which worked out to Rs.8358.26 and the
same is to be deposited by you within 72 hours
after the receipt of this memo failing which further
action will be taken without any further reference to
you.”

7. On the basis of this it was submitted that the petitioner
deposited the amount of Rs.8358.26 which was drawn by
him as HRA for the period from 8.11.1978 to 30.6.1986
and, therefore, it would be treated that he fulfilled the
second eligibility condition as well.
However, we are of the opinion that the petitioner
cannot take any such mileage from this letter.

This

communication refers to the petitioner's own application
dated 1.5.1986 in which the petitioner had, as noticed
above, categorically mentioned that he had shifted to his
father's house only with effect from 1.5.1986. On receipt of
this letter, the petitioner was asked to produce the
documentary proof to the effect that he was staying with
his father only from 1.5.1986 onwards, and as he had failed
to submit the proof, it was stated that he was not entitled

WP(C) No.153/88

Page 7 of 10

to draw HRA and under these circumstances he was asked
to deposit back the amount of HRA which was withdrawn
by him. Whether he had withdrawn the HRA correctly, or
the action of the DTC asking him to deposit back the said
HRA covering the period from 8.11.1978 to 30.6.1986 is
proper or not is not the question before us. Fact remains
that the petitioner had claimed that he had started living
with his father with effect from 1.5.1986 and as per the
aforesaid letter he had failed to submit the documentary
proof even with respect to this claim. Therefore, holding
the petitioner to his own admission that he had started
living with his father with effect from 1.5.1986 and
reckoning the period from this date, he failed to satisfy the
condition of living with his father for at least three years
preceding the date of his father's retirement.

8. Confronted with this, learned counsel for the petitioner
made alternative submission to the effect that other
persons similarly situated were also granted the benefit of
allotment of staff quarters, whereas this was denied to the
petitioner. He referred to orders dated 28.5.1987 whereby
allotment of residential accommodation in favour of Shri
WP(C) No.153/88

Page 8 of 10

Ashok Kakkar, Jr. Clerk and Shri Pal Singh, Asst. Elect.
(Grade-II) has been approved in terms of the aforesaid
Government instructions.

The petitioner has also filed list

of some other such wards who were allotted staff quarters
under the same category as Annexure-I.

However, from

the said letters or the list one cannot make out as to
whether those persons were granted the benefit of
allotment even when they were not fulfilling the eligibility
conditions.
mentioned

In the counter affidavit it is specifically
that

those

persons,

who

were

allotted

accommodation after retirement of their father/relations,
were duly eligible and entitled to the allotment of the
accommodation.

Therefore, the petitioner cannot take

advantage of any such orders of allotment. No doubt, the
request of the petitioner was turned down on the ground
that there was shortage of accommodation.

However, in

any case, whether there was shortage of accommodation
or not, the petitioner could lay his claim only on satisfying
the eligibility conditions, which he failed to fulfill.

9. The petitioner was granted stay of dispossession and,
therefore, he has occupied the premises for all these years.
WP(C) No.153/88

Page 9 of 10

Having regard to the long intervening period, one can
legitimately infer that the petitioner would have become
entitled to the said accommodation even as per his own
merit. If that is so, there is no question of dispossession of
the petitioner now.

Insofar as payment of penal rent is

concerned, the Estate Officer had passed order to this
effect against which the petitioner had filed an appeal
under Section 9 of the PP Act, which was dismissed. The
petitioner preferred CM (Main) which has also been
dismissed.

The consequence of that would be that the

petitioner is liable to pay the damages as assessed by the
Estates Officer.

10.Subject to the aforesaid, insofar as the present petition is
concerned, the same is dismissed as devoid of any merits.
No costs.

(A.K. SIKRI)
JUDGE

November 30, 2007
HP/nsk

WP(C) No.153/88

(VIPIN SANGHI)
JUDGE

Page 10 of 10

