*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

FAO (OS) 58/2007
Delhi Development Authority
..... Appellant
Through Ms.Monica Sharma, Advocate
versus
M/s Subhash & Company
..... Respondent
Through Mr.K.R. Gupta with Mr.Nitin Gupta
and Ms.Kiran Dharam, Advocates
CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE S.MURALIDHAR
ORDER
8-8-2008

%
1.

This appeal is preferred against the judgment and order

dated 13th September, 2006 of the learned single Judge whereby
the objections filed by the appellant – DDA under Sections 30 and
33 of the Arbitration Act, 1940 were rejected and the award of
the sole Arbitrator was made a rule of the Court.
2.

The facts relevant for the disposal of this appeal are that

the respondent was awarded the work of construction of M.S.
Building on plot No.1,2 and 3 at the District Centre, Janak Puri,
New Delhi and connected shopping centre (Zone-B) to the West
including

internal

water

supply,

sanitary

installation,

site

development and landscaping work up to plot No.4 at DDA
(FAO(OS) 58/2007)

Page 1 of 12

District

Centre,

15/DDA/A/87-88.

Janak

Puri

vide

agreement

No.4/EE/WD-

The date for the start of the work was 7th

August, 1987 and the work was to be completed by 6 th February,
1989. The work could not be completed by the stipulated date of
completion, and the contract was finally rescinded on 13th March,
1989 by the appellant, Delhi Development Authority.

Disputes

arose between the parties and the Engineer Member, DDA was
pleased to appoint Shri O.P. Mittal as the sole Arbitrator to
adjudicate upon the said disputes. However, due to the demise
of Shri O.P.Mittal, the sole Arbitrator, Shri R.J. Bakhru was
appointed as the sole Arbitrator. Shri Bakhru entered upon the
reference on 9th March, 1993 and made and published his award
on 12th January, 1995.
3.

Aggrieved by the award, the appellant – DDA filed an

objection petition within the statutory period of 30 days, assailing
the findings of the Arbitrator on claim Nos.1 to 6 and counter
claims No.1 & and 7 to 13.
4.

The learned single Judge vide order under appeal rejected

all the challenges to the award and made the award a rule of the
Court.
5.

Before us only one claim was assailed by the counsel

(FAO(OS) 58/2007)

Page 2 of 12

appearing for the DDA and that is claim No.2.
6.

A perusal of the arbitral records show that the respondent

had claimed Rs.6,94,098.40 towards 10% profit on balance work
due to breaches committed by the appellant.

The learned

Arbitrator in his award after noticing that it is a well known fact
that contractors provide for a certain element of profit in their
tenders, which generally varies from 10% to 15% of the value of
work, gave a finding that the respondent had become entitled to
receive the same in view of the fact that the rescission of the
contract had been held by him to be wrong and unjustified vide
para 2.4 of the award. The learned Arbitrator further held that (i)
the appellants were, thus, deprived of their right to earn profit,
(ii) the rates quoted by the claimants were comparable to the
then prevailing market rates, and (iii) as an established practice,
Government / Semi-Government agencies assume an element of
10% of 'Profits Over Heads' in their estimates for such work.
Accordingly, profit at the rate of 7½% of gross value of contract
was considered by the Arbitrator as reasonable.
7.

The

Arbitrator

noted

that

the

contract

value

was

Rs.2,53,78,598/- (after deduction of unconditional rebate of 2%)
against

which

(FAO(OS) 58/2007)

the

value

of

the

work

executed

was

Page 3 of 12

Rs.1,80,79,938/-.

The element of profit deemed to have been

earned by the respondent at the rate of Rs.7.50% of value of
unexecuted portion of the contract work (that is, Rs.72,98,660/-)
works

out

to

Rs.5,47,399.50.

Consequently,

a

sum

of

Rs.5,47,399.50 was awarded by the Arbitrator in favour of the
respondent towards loss of profits.
8.

Learned counsel appearing for the DDA contended that

claim No.2 is not payable to the respondent as the work which
was awarded to the contractor-respondent had to be rescinded as
he miserably failed to complete the work and that no evidence
was led by the contractor to show that he has suffered damages
on account of loss of profits. Whereas the learned counsel for the
respondent supported the impugned judgment stating that the
rescission of the contract was bad and illegal and due such
rescission the respondent had to suffer losses and therefore the
learned single Judge was right in upholding the award of the
Arbitrator.
9.

We are afraid that the issue is no more res integra and is

covered by at least two decisions of the Supreme Court. In M/s
A.T. Brij Paul Singh and others v. State of Gujarat (1984) 4
SCC 59, a three Judge Bench specifically dealt with the issue of
(FAO(OS) 58/2007)

Page 4 of 12

entitlement of loss of expected profit in the work. In that case
the trial court categorically held that since the respondent was
guilty of breach of work contract, part of which was already
performed and for which the appellant-claimant had transported
machinery and equipment from Pune to the work site near Rajkot
in Saurashtra, and the appellant would be entitled to damages.
One of the heads of damages under which claim was made was
“loss of expected profit in the work”. The claim under this head
as canvassed before the High Court was in the amount of
Rs.4,30,314/-, which came to be rejected by the trial court for
want of proof. The High Court after holding that the respondent
was not justified in rescinding the contract proceeded to examine
whether the plaintiff – contractor was entitled to damages under
the head “loss of profit”.

In this connection the High Court

referred to Hudson's Building and Engineering Contracts (1970),
tenth edition and observed that “in major contracts subject to
competitive tender on a national basis, the evidence given in
litigation on many occasions suggests that the head-office
overheads and profit is between 3 to 7 per cent of the total price
of cost” which is added to the tender. In other words, the High
Court was of the view that the claim under this head was
(FAO(OS) 58/2007)

Page 5 of 12

admissible.

The High Court, however, proceeded to reject the

claim observing that the bare statement of the partner of the
contractor's firm that they are entitled to damages in the nature
of loss of profit at the rate of 20 per cent of the estimated cost is
no evidence for the purpose of establishing the claim.

Allowing

the appeal, the Supreme Court held as under:
10. Mr. Aneja, learned counsel for the appellant
urged that the appellant was placed at a
comparative disadvantage on account of his two
appeals arising from two identical contracts inter
parties being heard on two different occasions by
two different Benches even though one learned
Judge was common to both the Benches. Mr. Aneja
pointed out that in the appeal from which the
cognate Civil Appeal No. 1998/1972 arises, the
same High Court in terms held that the claim by
way of damages for loss of profit on the remaining
work at 15% of the price of the work as awarded
by the trial court was not unreasonable. The High
Court had observed in the cognate appeal that
“the basis adopted by the learned Civil Judge in
computing the loss of profit at 15% on the value of
the remaining work contract cannot be said to be
unreasonable”. In fact, the High Court had noticed
that this computation was not seriously challenged
by the State, yet in the judgment under appeal the
High Court observed that actual loss of profit had
to be proved and a mere percentage as deposed
to by the partner of the appellant would not
furnish adequate evidence to sustain the claim. In
this connection the High Court referred to another
judgment of the same High Court in First Appeal
No. 89 of 1965 but did not refer to its own earlier
judgment rendered by one of the Judges
composing the Bench in First Appeal No. 384 of
(FAO(OS) 58/2007)

Page 6 of 12

1962 rendered on 3/6 July, 1970 between the
same parties. When this was pointed out to Mr.
Mehta, his only response was that the court
cannot look into the record of the cognate appeal.
We find the response too technical and does not
merit acceptance. We are not disposed to accept
the contention of Mr. Mehta for two reasons:
Firstly, that in an identical contract with regard to
another portion of the same Rajkot-Jamnagar road
and for the same type of work, the High Court
accepted that loss of profit at 15% of the price of
the balance of works contract would provide a
reasonable measure of damages if the State is
guilty of breach of contract. The present appeal is
concerned with the same type of work for a
nearby portion of the same road which would
permit an inference that the work was entirely
identical. And the second reason to reject the
contention is that ordinarily a contractor while
submitting his tender in response to an invitation
to tender for a works contract reasonably expects
to make profits. What would be the measure of
profit would depend upon facts and circumstances
of each case. But that there shall be a reasonable
expectation of profit is implicit in a works contract
and its loss has to be compensated by way of
damages if the other party to the contract is guilty
of breach of contract cannot be gainsaid. In this
case we have the additional reason for rejecting
the contention that for the same type of work, the
work site being in the vicinity of each other and for
identical type of work between the same parties, a
Division Bench of the same High Court has
accepted 15% of the value of the balance of the
works contract would not be an unreasonable
measure of damages for loss of profit. We are
therefore, of the opinion that the High Court was
in error in wholly rejecting the claim under this
head.
11.

Now

(FAO(OS) 58/2007)

if

it

is

well-established

that

the

Page 7 of 12

respondent was guilty of breach of contract
inasmuch as the rescission of contract by the
respondent is held to be unjustified, and the
plaintiff-contractor had executed a part of the
works contract, the contractor would be entitled to
damages by way of loss of profit, Adopting the
measure accepted by the High Court in the facts
and circumstances of the case between the same
parties and for the same type of work at 15% of
the value of the remaining parts of the work
contract, the damages for loss of profit can be
measured.”
(Emphasis supplied)
10.

In Mohd. Salamatullah and others v. Government of

Andhra Pradesh AIR 1977 SC 1481 the then Hyderabad
Government had placed orders with the plaintiffs-appellants for
manufacture of certain number of guns, the price per gun being
put at Rs.125/-. Although some of the guns were manufactured
the contract could not be completed and it was held concurrently
that there was a breach of contract on the part of the plaintiff.
Although the plaintiff had claimed a much larger sum, the State,
through its counsel, pointed out that the plaintiffs themselves had
estimated the margin of profit at a sum of Rs.1,87,500/- which
worked out to 15 per cent of the total amount invested in the
gun-making. Based on this argument of the government counsel,
the trial court awarded the aforesaid sum of Rs.1,87,500/-.

In

appeal, however, the High Court observed that it will be just and
(FAO(OS) 58/2007)

Page 8 of 12

reasonable to put this profit at 10 per cent of the contract price
which works out to Rs.1,25,000/-. The Supreme Court restored
the order of the trial court by observing as under:
“We are not able to discern any tangible material
on the strength of which the High Court reduced
the damages from 15% of the contract price to
10% of the contract price. If the first was a guess,
it was at least a better guess than the second one.
We see no justification for the appellate court to
interfere with a finding of fact given by the trial
Court unless some reason, based on some fact, is
traceable on the record. There being none we are
constrained to set aside the judgment of the High
Court in regard to the assessment of damages for
breach of contract. We restore the award of Rs.
1,87,500 made by the trial Court on account of
estimated profits (it transpires that when the trial
Court passed the decree the amount was
recovered by the appellants with the result that
there was nothing more to be paid by the State to
the respondents herein).”
11.

Learned counsel appearing for the appellant, however,

submitted that in a recent decision in Bharat Coking Coal Ltd.
v. L.K. Ahuja (2004) 5 SCC 109, a two Judge Bench of the
Supreme Court has taken a different view. According to her in
that case the Supreme Court has clearly held that in the absence
of any evidence led by the claimant to substantiate loss of profit,
the Arbitrator ought not to have passed award under that head.
We are unable to agree with the learned counsel.

(FAO(OS) 58/2007)

In that case,

Page 9 of 12

Claim No.9 was for loss arising out of turnover due to
prolongation of work and the claim made under that head was in
a sum of Rs.10 lacs.

The Arbitrator held that on account of

escalation in wages and prices of materials, compensation was
obtained and, therefore, there was not much justification in
asking for compensation for loss of profits on account of
prolongation of the work.

However, the Arbitrator came to the

conclusion

of

that

a

sum

Rs.6

lacs

will

be

appropriate

compensation in a matter of such nature, being 15% of the total
profit over the amount that has been agreed to be paid. While a
sum of Rs.12,00,00/- would be appropriate entitlement, he held
that a sum of Rs.6,00,00/- would be the appropriate entitlement.
He also awarded interest on the amount payable at 15% p.a.
Allowing the appeal, the Supreme Court held that when the claim
for escalation of wage bills and price of materials compensation
has been paid and compensation for delay in the payment of the
amount payable under the contract or for other extra works is to
be paid with interest thereon, it is rather difficult to accept the
proposition that in addition, 15% of the total profit should be
computed under the heading 'Loss of Profit'. It was observed that
it is not unusual for the contractor to claim loss of profit arising
(FAO(OS) 58/2007)

Page 10 of 12

out of diminution in turnover on account of delay in the matter of
completion of the work.

What he should establish in such a

situation is that had he received the amount due under the
contract, he could have utilised the same for some other business
in which he could have earned profit.

Unless such a plea was

raised and established, claim for loss of profits could not have
been granted.

In the absence of any evidence, the arbitrator

could not have awarded the same. The question before the Court
was about the loss of profit arising out of diminution in turn over
on account of delay in completion of the work.

Moreover the

Court was of the opinion that when the claim for escalation of
wage bill and prices of materials is accepted and when the
compensation for delay in payment of the amount payable under
the contract and for other extra work is to be paid by way of
interest, there was no justification for a separate claim for loss of
profit.

This would virtually amount to claiming compensation

twice under the same head. This decision has no application to
the facts of the present case.
12.

A Division Bench of this Court in Delhi Development

Authority v. Polo Singh & Co. 101 (2002) DLT 401 (DB) has
held that 10% of the contract value was fair and reasonable basis
(FAO(OS) 58/2007)

Page 11 of 12

to work out the amount of loss of profit.
13.

In view of the above discussion, we are of the opinion

that the view taken by the Arbitrator is a plausible view and it is
not permissible for this Court to interfere with the Arbitrator's
view merely because another view of the matter is possible.
14.

The appeal is devoid of any substance and is hereby

dismissed.

CHIEF JUSTICE

S.MURALIDHAR
August 08, 2008

JUDGE

“nm”

(FAO(OS) 58/2007)

Page 12 of 12

