*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CS(OS) No.27/2001
Judgment reserved on : 23rd August, 2007
Date of decision : 1st October, 2007

#
!

M/S. AJANTA OFFSET & PACKAGINGS LTD.
..... PLAINTIFF
Through : Ms. Meenakshi, Advocate
Versus

$
^
%

M/S. GETEX ENTERPRISES LTD. & ORS.
..... DEFENDANTS
Through : Nemo.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
(1) Whether reporters of local paper may be
allowed to see the judgment?
(2) To be referred to the reporter or not?
(3) Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

ARUNA SURESH, J.
1.

Plaintiff has filed the present suit for recovery of

Rs.29,70,750/- against the defendants. The case of the
plaintiff in brief is that plaintiff is a duly incorporated
company having its registered office at 95-B, Wazirpur
Industrial Area, Delhi.

Shri Shankar Karji, legal advisor of

the company is duly authorized and competent to sign,
institute and verify the proceedings on behalf of the plaintiff
company by virtue of Board Resolution dated 8th June, 1990,
that it is engaged in the business of printing of various
CS(OS) No.27/2001

Page 1 of 11

materials like books, posters, leaflets, calendars, danglers
etc. at Delhi and Faridabad and that enjoys the reputation of
being one of the largest printing networks in Northern India,
that M/s. Getex Enterprises Limited, defendant No.1 is a
limited company incorporated under the United Kingdom's
laws having its registered office at London and Mr. Jay
Thakerar, defendant No.3 is the person incharge and
responsible for the day to day affairs of the business of M/s.
Getex Enterprises Limited, defendant No.1 as well as M/s.
Ballward

Limited,

defendant

No.2

another

company

incorporated under the laws of Great Britain, that defendant
No.1 and 2 offered to act as representative of the plaintiff for
the plaintiff's export order in England on the terms that
plaintiff would pay to the defendant No.1 commission on the
value of the order at a pre-determined rate and where the
order was routed through defendant No.1 and 2 and the
invoices were raised on the letter of credits opened by the
defendants the invoices would be paid on net off value
without any commission and in case they were routed
through

the

defendants

and

payment

made

by

the

defendants, the billing was to be on net invoice value basis
and the defendants were to claim their charges for handling
the order directly from the foreign buyers,

that defendant

No.1 and its sister concern, defendant No.2 placed orders
CS(OS) No.27/2001

Page 2 of 11

with the plaintiff for printing of year 2000 diaries on behalf of
the client of defendant No.1 M/s. Europa Office Limited and
M/s. Kingfield, that this order was totally mis-handled by the
defendants as they failed to open the letter of credit within
the stipulated time, whereas time was the essence of the
contract as the order was for year 2000 diaries with a time
bound production schedule and the delivery thereafter to the
client it being a seasonal product, that defendants continued
to revise their purchase order from time to time and due to
last minutes changes in the specifications of the diaries or the
terms of the purchase order, the entire production schedule
was upset and thrown out of gear, that even the quantity of
the consignment was also changed more than once, that M/s.
Europa Office Limited when failed to get the delivery of
goods in time, approached the plaintiff directly through their
purchase Director Mr. Neil Basham who came to India, that
the said company while directly dealing with the plaintiff
company asked for a concessional discount on the agreed
price of the diaries on account of incorrect and faulty price
given by the defendants as well as incorrect distribution cost
forwarded to them by the defendants, that plaintiff was
compelled to agree to give the discount of Pound Sterling
10,000 only to M/s. Europa Office Limited on the entire
consignment and consequently suffered loss to that extent,
CS(OS) No.27/2001

Page 3 of 11

that plaintiff had to incur an expenditure of Rs.2,50,000/- in
air lifting the PVC for diaries in order to meet the dead line of
production schedule because of variation in size and last
minute revision in the purchase order, that plaintiff also had
to incur losses of about Rs.5,00,000/- on account of this
variation on account of wastage of cover board and excess
stock of materials, that M/s. Kingfield decided not to go
ahead with the order of the diaries at all and cancelled the
order which also lead to the substantial loss to the plaintiff as
it had purchased the raw material for supply of diaries to the
said firm, that plaintiff suffered loss of Rs.5,00,000/- on
account of down time of machine, that plaintiff had also
suffered production loss assessed at Rs.5,00,000/- due to last
minute revision in the orders, that the plaintiff company also
suffered loss in reputation due to false propaganda created
by the defendants among the clients of the plaintiff in
England that defendant No.1 held copyright in respect of map
of London Underground Transport from London Transport
Museum and UK Roads and Ferries Map by London
Cartographers, that copyright was obtained by defendant
No.1 on behalf of the plaintiff and were meant to be utilized
for being printed in the diaries being printed by the plaintiff
and that defendants raised some baseless debit notes which
were arbitrary, excessive and without any base. Plaintiff has
CS(OS) No.27/2001

Page 4 of 11

claimed Rs.1,00,000/- as damages for loss of reputation. In all
a sum of Rs.25,50,000/- has been claimed by the plaintiff
besides interest of Rs.4,20,750/- on the said amount till the
filing of the suit @ 18% per annum. In all the plaintiff has
claimed Rs.29,70,750/- against the defendants which the
defendants have failed to pay despite service of legal notice
dated 10th November, 2000, hence the present suit.

2.

Summons were ordered to be served upon defendants

No.1 to 3 vide order dated 29th January, 2002. The plaintiff
could not take effective steps for service of the summons
upon the defendants. However, a letter dated 6th June, 2003
was received by the Court from the defendants Solicitors
indicating that they had information of the institution of the
suit. But none appeared on behalf of the defendants despite
this letter.

On the basis of this letter following order was

passed by this court on 16th September, 2004:-

“I have perused the order dated
9.9.2004 passed by the Joint Registrar.
A letter is purported to have been
issued by the Solicitors of the
defendants stating that this Court ought
not to exercise territorial jurisdiction
over the dispute. The Purchase Order
dated 4.5.1999 has been addressed to
the defendants in Delhi and the goods
were to be dispatched from New Delhi
to the United Kingdom. Prima facie,
therefore, this Court has jurisdiction.
CS(OS) No.27/2001

Page 5 of 11

Secondly, it has been stated that the
documents filed alongwith plaint have
not been supplied. This is a matter in
respect of which submissions can be
made before the Court and appropriate
orders would thereupon be passed.
There is no justification for the
defendants to be absent from the Court.
The defendants are according set ex
parte.
Plaintiff to lead evidence by
means of Affidavits which should be
filed within eight weeks from today.
Matter be listed before the Joint
Registrar for exhibition of documents on
18.11.2004.
However, learned counsel for the
plaintiff is directed to forward a copy of
this order through courier, fax, internet
and e-mail to the defendants and their
Solicitors”.
Thus, defendants were accordingly proceeded exparte.

3.

Plaintiff company filed affidavit of Shri Shankar Karjee

its legal advisor Ex.PW1/A and that of Shri K.K. Aggarwal its
Financial Controller Ex.PW2/A in evidence to support its
case. From the Board of Resolution dated 8.06.1990 it is
proved that company authorized Shri Shanker Kumar Karjee,
Legal Advisor to institute suit and to sign and verify the
petition and other such papers and to engage Advocate on
behalf of the plaintiff company to conduct cases. Copy of the
certificate of incorporation of the plaintiff company Ex.PW1/2
proves that plaintiff company is duly incorporated company
under the Companies Act, 1956. From the testimony of Shri
CS(OS) No.27/2001

Page 6 of 11

Shanker Karjee it is proved that defendant No.1 (M/s. Getex
Enterprises Limited) and defendant No.2 (M/s.Ballward
Limited) through defendant No.3 (Mr. Jay Thakerar) agreed
to represent the plaintiff for the plaintiff's various export
orders in England.

It is further proved that it was agreed

that in case purchase order were placed directly by the
customers,

the

plaintiff

would pay

to defendant No.1

commission on the value of the order at a pre-determined
rate. In case the order was routed through defendant No.1
and 2 and the invoices were raised or letters of credits
opened by the defendants, the invoices would be paid on net
off value and without any commission and in case orders
routed through defendants and payment made by the
defendants the billing was to be on net invoice value basis
and the defendants were to claim their charges for handling
the order directly from the foreign buyers.

4.

It is established on the record from the testimony of

Shri Shankar Karjee, PW1 and Shri K.K. Aggarwal, PW2 that
defendants

No.1

&

2

through

defendant

No.3

placed

purchase orders Ex.PW1/3 (colly) for printing of year 2000
diaries on behalf of M/s. Europa Office Limited and M/s.
Kingfield, clients of defendant No.1. It is proved in evidence
that this order was mis-handled by the defendants as they

CS(OS) No.27/2001

Page 7 of 11

failed to open the letter of credit within the stipulated time
though time was essence of the contract as it was to be
executed within a time bound production schedule, diaries
being a seasonal product. There had been changes in the
purchase

orders

specifications

and

quantities

of

the

consignment more than once at the hands of the defendants.

5.

From the testimony of PW1 and PW2 it is further

proved in evidence which goes unrebutted on the record that
Mr.Neil Basham, Purchase Director of M/s.Europa Office
Limited on whose behalf the order was placed directly dealt
with the plaintiff company when it failed to get the goods
through the defendants and the plaintiff had to release the
entire consignment on discount of Pound Sterling 10,000/-.
Plaintiff also suffered because M/s. Kingfield decided not to
go ahead with the orders of the diaries. This fact is also
proved from various communications Ex.PW1/5 (colly). I am
convinced that plaintiff had to air-lift the PVC because of
modifications in the specifications, size, etc. of the diaries
and in the whole process it had to spend an amount of
Rs.2,50,000/- as the air lifting cost.

Plaintiff has also

assessed loss due to excess material on account of down time
of machine and production loss due to last minute revision in
the order amounting to Rs.5,00,000/-, which in my view is

CS(OS) No.27/2001

Page 8 of 11

reasonable loss assessed by the plaintiff.

6.

Plaintiff has claimed a sum of Rs.1,00,000/- due to loss

in reputation as defendants propagated that they were the
copyright holders in respect of map of London Underground
Transport from London Transport Museum and UK Roads and
Ferries Map by London Cartographers and advertised their
claim to various clients of the plaintiff including M/s. Europa
Office Limited.

Plaintiff did raise objection to this type of

statement made by the defendants as proved on record from
the communication Ex.PW1/4.

This communication clearly

indicates that permission to publish the said maps was
obtained by the defendants on instructions of the plaintiff and
exclusively on their behalf to print the same in the diaries as
ordered by M/s. Europa Office Limited. Letter Ex.PW1/4(A) is
a protest letter written by the plaintiff company to defendant
No.3 Mr.Jay Thakerar informing him that it had received the
communication from M/s. Europa Office Limited dated 5th
November, 1999 informing the plaintiff that defendant No.3
had made a telephone call to them contending that they held
copyright in respect of the London Underground Map that
had been printed in the diaries for the year 2000 by the
plaintiff and called upon defendant No.3 to desist from
making any frivolous claim in respect of the said copyright.

CS(OS) No.27/2001

Page 9 of 11

7.

Letter Ex.PW1/6 is written by the plaintiff to London

Transport Museum

as well as to London Cartographers

seeking clarifications regarding the claim in the copyright in
the maps of the London Underground Transport and UK
Roads and Ferries Map. However, the damages assessed by
the plaintiff for loss of reputation in public are only at
Rs.1,00,000/- which are quite reasonable.

8.

The defendants have failed to pay the amount as

claimed by the plaintiff despite receipt of legal notice
Ex.PW1/7. Plaintiff has claimed interest @ 18% per annum
on the amount of Rs. 25,50,000/- amounting to Rs.4,20,750/till the filing of the suit. Since it is a commercial transaction,
plaintiff is entitled to the interest as claimed.

9.

In view of my discussion as above, I conclude that

plaintiff is entitled to the amount as prayed in the plaint.
Hence I hereby pass a decree of Rs.29,70,750/- in favour of
the plaintiff and against the defendants with cost. Plaintiff is
also awarded interest pendente lite and future interest @
18% per annum on the amount of Rs.25,50,000/- from the
date of the institution of the suit till realization. Decree be
prepared accordingly. File be consigned to record room.

CS(OS) No.27/2001

Page 10 of 11

OCTOBER 1, 2007
vk

CS(OS) No.27/2001

ARUNA SURESH
(JUDGE)

Page 11 of 11

