*

“REPORTABLE”
HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Arb. A. No. 219/2002
Date of decision : November 1st, 2007

# KULJIT SINGH & CO.
..... PETITIONER
!
Through : Mr. Ravi Varma, Advocate
Mr. Atul Sharma, Advocate
Mr. Nilanka Chaudhary,
Advocate
Ms. Surbhi Sharma, Advocate.
Versus
$ ENGINEERING PROJETS (INDIA) LTD.
.....RESPONDENT
^

Through : Ms. C.M. Chopra, Sr. Advocate
Ms. Rajni Sharma, Advocate

%
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
(1) Whether reporters of local paper may be
allowed to see the judgment?
(2) To be referred to the reporter or not?
(3) Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?
ARUNA SURESH, J.
1. Petitioner Kuljit Singh & Co. has filed present application
under Section 11 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
1996 (hereinafter referred to as 'Act') for appointment of
an Arbitrator as according to it, respondent failed to

AA No. 219/2002

Page 1 of 19

appoint Arbitrator in terms of the arbitration agreement
contained in the contract dated 6.5.1996.

2. Briefly narrated the case of the petitioner is that it is
carrying on business under the name and style of Kuljit
Singh & Co. The State of Punjab had awarded M/s Triveni
Structural Limited (TSL) a contract for the work of
“concreting

behind

gate

control

and

juncture

reach

including transition zone pen stock liners and plug of
tunnels P1 and P2 in the Ranjit Sagar Dam (RSD) Project.
M/s. Triveni Structural Limited awarded civil works of the
said contract to Engineering Projects (India) Ltd., the
respondent herein.
concreting

behind

After inviting tenders for work of
gate

Control

and

junction

reach

including transition zone of tunnels P1 and P2 of Ranjit
Sagar Dam at Shahpurkhandi near Pathankot, Punjab,
respondent awarded this work to the petitioner vide letter
No. DL1/CON/TEC/226/66 dated 6.5.1996 for a sum of Rs.
2,40,60,000/-. As required petitioner issued a performance
bank guarantee of Rs. 24,06,000/- and an indemnity bond
of Rs. 3 crores in favour of respondent against Steel which
was to be issued free of costs by the Ranjit Sagar Project
authorities. Petitioner's work was limited to placement of
reinforcement and concrete which was supplied by RSD

AA No. 219/2002

Page 2 of 19

which was under the domain of the State of Punjab. This
placement was to be under the supervision and direction of
the RSD authorities.

3. Petitioner could not start work in time as according to it,
respondent failed to make site available and the work could
not be completed in the stipulated time and the completion
period was extended from time to time.

Petitioner

completed all its work by end of November, 1998 but was
asked to do some extra work which was not within the
scope of work assigned to it.

Respondent was informed

vide letters dated 30.11.1998 and 31.12.1998 by the
petitioner that the entire work had been completed and
requested for releasing the bank guarantee, indemnity
bond and other dues.

4. The contract between the parties contains an arbitration
clause and the respondent is the appointing authority of
the arbitrator while invoking the arbitration agreement.
Since a dispute arose inter se the parties within the
meaning of arbitration agreement, petitioner wrote a letter
dated 4.6.2002 calling upon the respondent to appoint an
independent arbitrator to settle the claims regarding its
final bill and returning of its indemnity bond.
AA No. 219/2002

Since the
Page 3 of 19

respondent failed to appoint arbitrator in terms of the
contract, the present application has been filed for
appointment of an arbitrator to adjudicate the disputes
inter se the parties.

5. This application has been contested by the respondent.
Respondent has refuted all the claims of the petitioner as
raised in the application.

It also denied having received

any communication dated 4.6.2002 to appoint an arbitrator
to enter into reference and decide the disputes inter se the
parties. But on receipt of copy of the said notice/letter with
the process of the Court, respondent had already took
steps under Clause 53 of the Contract and appointed Mr. A.
Sarkar, Engineer working with the respondent, Sole
Arbitrator. The said arbitrator has entered into reference
and

is

seized

of

the

matter

and

therefore

present

application is infructuous and is not maintainable.

6. Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that after an
application under Section 11 (6) of the Act has been filed
by the petitioner when the respondent failed to appoint
arbitrator

after

receipt

of

notice

dated

4.6.2002,

respondent had no authority to appoint Mr. A. Sarkar as an
arbitrator by invoking Clause 53 of the Contract and it is
AA No. 219/2002

Page 4 of 19

for the Court to appoint an Arbitrator.

The act of the

respondent in appointing the arbitrator is therefore against
the provision of Section 11 of the Act. Since the petitioner
has approached the Court for appointment of an arbitrator,
the Court is within its rights to appoint an independent
Arbitrator for adjudication of the dispute inter se the
parties.

It is further argued by the learned counsel for

petitioner that the notice dated 4.6.2002 was duly served
upon respondent as it was sent by UPC.

It is for the

respondent to refute the service of notice upon it as
presumption under Section 114 of the Evidence Act can be
safely raised against the respondent that the notice for
invoking the arbitration clause was duly served upon
respondent. He has also pointed out the order of this Court
dated 8.5.2006 whereby the respondent was asked to
produce relevant receipt register for the relevant period to
show that the said notice was not received by the
respondent and the receipt register has not entry about the
receipt of said notice and has argued that since respondent
has failed to produce this register it has failed to rebut the
presumption that it had received the notice dated 4.6.2002.
Bare denial of receipt of notice cannot be accepted in the
absence of any other proof of non receipt of notice and
therefore he has submitted that the present application is
AA No. 219/2002

Page 5 of 19

maintainable and the Court may appoint an Arbitrator in
accordance with Section 11 of the Act to adjudicate the
disputes inter se the parties. He has referred to following
judgments:
1. Datar Switchgears Ltd. vs.Tata Finance
Ltd. and another – (2000) 8 SCC 151 .
2. Punj Lloyd Ltd. vs. Petronet MHB Ltd. 2006 (3) Scale 299.
3. Jitendra Nath Das vs. Bijoy Lal Das – AIR
1976 Calcutta 473.
4. Surajmall Shiwbhagawan vs. Kalinga Iron
Works – AIR 1979 Orissa 126.
7. Learned counsel for respondent argued that petitioner
cannot invoke section 11(6) of the Act as he failed to give
notice as required under Section 11(6) of the Act before
filing the present petition.

The alleged letter dated

4.6.2002 invoking the arbitration clause by petitioner was
never received by respondent and this notice was received
only along with the process of this Court when notice of the
present petition was served upon the respondent.

On

receipt of the notice, respondent immediately appointed
Mr. A.K. Sarkar as an arbitrator in pursuant to the
arbitration clause who entered into reference.
had also joined the said reference.

Petitioner

It is further pointed

out by the learned counsel for the respondent that since
Sh. A. Sarkar died on 26.10.2004, Sh. H.N. Wahal,
executive director, who at the relevant time was general
AA No. 219/2002

Page 6 of 19

manager, was appointed on 12.1.2005 as an arbitrator.
Therefore, according to her, present application is not
maintainable, as the petitioner could not have invoked the
provisions of Section 11(6) of the Act without calling upon
the respondent to appoint an arbitrator in accordance with
clause 53 of the Contract as it was for the respondent to
appoint an arbitrator to adjudicate the dispute inter se the
parties, the petition is liable to be rejected.

8. Maintainability of the present petition has been challenged
on the principle that notice as required under Section 11 of
the Act was not delivered/served upon the respondent. The
power exercised by the Court while considering an
application under Section 11(6) of the Act are judicial in
nature and not administrative one.

9. In SBP & Co. v. Patel Engineering Ltd. and another –

(2005) 8 SCC 618. It was observed:
“First of all, the power is conferred
not on an administrative authority, but
on a judicial authority, the highest
judicial authority in the State or in the
country. No doubt, such authorities also
perform administrative functions.
An
appointment of an Arbitral Tribunal in
terms of Section 11 of the Act, is based
on a power derived from a statute and
the
statute
itself
prescribes
the
conditions that should exist for the
AA No. 219/2002

Page 7 of 19

exercise of that power. In the process of
exercise of that power, obviously the
parties would have the right of being
heard and when the existence of the
conditions for the exercise of the power
are found on accepting or overruling the
contentions of one of the parties it
necessarily amounts to an order, judicial
in nature, having finality subject to any
available judicial challenge as envisaged
by the Act or any other statute or the
Constitution.”
10.Whenever a Court is approached with an application
under Section 11 of the Act, it has to decide its own
jurisdiction in the sense that the party making the
application has approached the right High Court.

The

Court will have to decide whether there is an arbitration
agreement, as defined in the Act and whether the person
who has made the request to it is a party to such an
agreement.

The Court can also decide the question

whether the claim was a dead one or a long time barred
claim that was sought to be resurrected and whether the
parties have concluded the transaction by recording
satisfaction of their mutual rights and obligations or by
receiving the final payment without objection. Further the
Court has to decide whether the applicant has satisfied the
conditions for appointing an arbitrator under Section 11(6)
of the Act. For the purpose of taking a decision on these
aspects, the Court can take into consideration the affidavits
AA No. 219/2002

Page 8 of 19

of the parties or any other evidence made available on the
record.

The Judge, therefore, exercises its judicial

authorities while considering an application under Section
11(6) of the Act.

Therefore, this Court has the power to

adjudicate on the maintainability of the petition when
receipt of notice under Section 11 of the Act is denied.

11.Section 3 of the Act reads as follows:
“3.
Receipt
of
written
communications.--(1) Unless otherwise
agreed by the parties,-(a) any written communication is
deemed to have been received if it is
delivered to the addressee personally or
at his place of business, habitual
residence or mailing address, and
(b) if none of the places referred to
in clause (a) can be found after making a
reasonable
inquiry,
a
written
communication is deemed to have been
received if it is sent to the addressee's
last known place of business, habitual
residence or
mailing
address
by
registered letter or by any other means
which provides a record of the attempt
to deliver it.”
(2).....
(3).....”
12.Thus, it is clear that written communication sent by one
party to the other party can be deemed to have been
received if it is delivered to the addressee personally or at
his place of business, habitual residence or mailing address
and in case the addressee party is not available at any of
AA No. 219/2002

Page 9 of 19

the business or habitual residence then such written
communication is deemed to have been received if it is sent
at the addressee's last known place of business, habitual
residence or mailing address by registered letter or by any
other means which provides a record of the attempt to
deliver it.

13.There is no prescribed procedure for service of notice
through the Court under the Act. Provisions of this Section
are procedural in nature and apply to all the notices that
are required to be served otherwise than through the
Court. The object to serve such a notice is to bring to the
knowledge of a party the intention to act upon the
arbitration agreement by the person or the party which is
seeking to refer the matter. If a notice is duly sent to the
person's address and there is evidence to that effect, it
must be treated as good and proper notice.

14.In the present case the letter dated 4.6.2002 invoking the
arbitration clause was sent by UPC a method which was
not being followed by the petitioner for communication
between him and the respondent.

There are various

communications placed on the record by the petitioner.
Communications dated 31.12.1998, 15.1.2002, 9.3.2002
AA No. 219/2002

Page 10 of 19

and copies of letter dated 11.10.1999 addressed to various
persons like Mr. P. Shankar and Principle Secretary to
Govt. of Pb. etc. were sent by the petitioner to the
respondent by way of registered AD cover.

Whereas

communications dated 26.3.1999, 7.9.1999, 30.9.1999,
30.7.2001 and 12.2.2002 were all sent by the petitioner to
the respondent by courier service.

15.None of these communications placed on record were sent
by the petitioner to the respondent or any of its official
under postal certificate.

The impugned letter dated

4.6.2002 is stated to have been sent and delivered to the
respondent under postal certificate.

There is no proof

placed on record to indicate that this letter calling upon
the respondent to appoint an arbitrator by invoking the
arbitration clause was ever delivered to the respondent.
Photocopy of the postal certificate has been placed on
record.

The manner in which the petitioner had been

corresponding

with

the

respondent

and

the

method

adopted for delivery of the letters suggest that petitioner
used to ensure that the letters sent by him were duly
delivered to the respondent. There is a departure to this
procedure when the impugned letter dated 4.6.2002 was
sent under UPC.
AA No. 219/2002

Admittedly, this letter was not sent by
Page 11 of 19

registered AD cover or even by courier service.

Under

these circumstances, it is difficult to believe that statutory
requirement

of

delivery

of

letter

calling

upon

the

respondent to appoint arbitrator was duly delivered and
requirement of Section 3 of the Act were met with.
Petitioner has not explained why there was change in
adopting the procedure while sending the letter dated
4.6.2002. Intriguingly, petitioner did not place on record a
copy of this letter along with the petition. Similarly, he has
not placed on record any document to indicate that the
envelope under UPC was delivered to the post office
containing

the

communication

in

question

and

was

delivered to the addressee only.

16.In National Highways Authority of India & Anr. v.

Bumihiway DDB Ltd. (JV) & Ors. - JT 2006 (12) SC
334 it was held that Court under Section 11(6) of the Act
has jurisdiction to make appointment only when the person
including an institution fails to perform any function
entrusted to it under that procedure.

17.This Court in Varun Associates v. Army Welfare

Housing Organisation – 2005 (3) Arb. LR 39 (Delhi) in
similar circumstances when petitioner sought appointment
AA No. 219/2002

Page 12 of 19

of an arbitrator alleging that it had sent a letter to the
respondent for appointment of an arbitrator held that
petitioner had failed to satisfy that the said notice was
served upon the respondent as petitioner failed to file on
record the acknowledgment of notice which is stated to
have been sent through courier and therefore petitioner
under the circumstances could not take advantage of
reference of provisions of Section 11(6) of the Act so as to
disable other side from exercising its right to appoint an
arbitrator. The petition was accordingly dismissed.

18.In the present case, the respondent disputes the very
receipt of the letter dated 4.6.2002 which is the foundation
of the present petition filed by the petitioner/contractor. It
is default of one party to act which gives right to the other
party to invoke the provisions of Section 11 of the Act for
appointment of an arbitrator. The default is a fact which
must be shown to have existed to the satisfaction of the
Court by the petitioner who approached this Court.
Receipt of notice is an acknowledgment in writing of
having received the letter. In the present case, receipt in
other words the delivery of the letter was to be proved by
the petitioner which it has failed.

AA No. 219/2002

Page 13 of 19

19.Learned counsel for the petitioner has referred to Section
114 of the Evidence Act which raises a presumption of
service of notice upon the addressee if sent through a
proper and approved mode of service.

However, this

presumption is rebuttable.

20.In Jitendra Nath Das vs. Bijoy Lal Das (supra) it was
observed that although the presumption under Section 27
of the General Clauses Act does not apply to a case of a
letter sent under certificate of posting, the presumption
under Section 114 of the Evidence Act would apply in such
a case.

However, the Court is at liberty to see if such

presumption has been rebutted in view of the evidence on
record and facts and circumstances of the case.

21. Surajmall Shiwbhagawan vs. Kalinga Iron Works

(supra) case as relied upon by the petitioner is rather
contrary to his submissions. It was held in the said case
that where certificate of posting did not indicate whether
the letter posted was an envelope, inland letter or post
card and there was no direct evidence on record that the
original letter was actually put in an envelope and that
particular envelope was posted under certificate of posting,
the Court cannot draw presumption under Section 114 of
AA No. 219/2002

Page 14 of 19

the Evidence Act that the letter was posted and received.
As already pointed out above, the petitioner did not place
on record the copy of the letter dated 4.6.2002 along with
the present petition under Section 11(6) of the Act.
Therefore, under no circumstance, presumption of posting
of the impugned letter or its delivery to the respondent can
be raised.

22.Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the
Court, vide its order dated 8.5.2006, had asked the
respondent to produce the relevant receipt register for the
relevant period to show that the said notice was not
received by the respondent and the respondent has failed
to produce the said register which indicates that the
respondent

had

received

the

said

notice.

It

was

deliberately not produced by the respondent. Therefore, a
presumption has to be drawn against the respondent that it
had received the notice dated 4.6.2002. These submissions
are devoid of any merits.

In compliance of the Court's

order respondent filed an affidavit of Sh. Narender
Sharma, its Deputy General Manager (legal), who has
categorically stated that no such 'receipt registers' are
maintained in the company nor any such notice was
received by the company.
AA No. 219/2002

The post is received at the
Page 15 of 19

reception and is kept in respective boxes for various
divisions of the office and also CMD of the respondent.
Had this communication dated 4.6.2002 been received by
the respondent, it would have been immediately put up
before the CMD in the box marked for CMD.
reason

to

disbelieve

this

affidavit.

I have no

Under

these

circumstances, no presumption under Section 114 of the
Evidence Act can be raised against the respondent of
having

received

the

impugned

notice

and

if

such

presumption is drawn then it has been successfully
rebutted by the respondent.

23.In Datar Switchgears Ltd. vs.Tata Finance Ltd. and

another (supra) it was observed:
“As far as Section 11(6) of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 is
concerned, if one party demands the
opposite party to appoint an arbitrator
and the opposite party does not make an
appointment within 30 days of the
demand, the right to appointment does
not get automatically forfeited after
expiry of 30 days. If the opposite party
makes an appointment even after 30
days of the demand, but before the first
party has moved the court under Section
11, that would be sufficient. Only then
the right of the opposite party ceases.”
It was further observed:
“When parties have entered into a
contract and settled on a procedure, due
AA No. 219/2002

Page 16 of 19

importance has to be given to such
procedure. Even though rigor of the
doctrine of “freedom of contract” has
been whittled down by various labour
and social welfare legislation, still the
Court has to respect the terms of the
contract entered into by parties and
endeavour to give importance and effect
to it. When the party has not disputed
the arbitration clause, normally he is
bound by it and obliged to comply with
the procedure laid down under the said
clause.”
24.In the present case the petitioner failed to serve upon the
respondent the requisite notice calling upon it to appoint
an arbitrator in terms of the arbitration agreement
contained in the contract.

It is not a case where the

respondent admits the service of notice but appoints
arbitrator only after one party has moved the Court under
Section 11(6) of the Act.

25. In Punj Lloyd Ltd. vs. Petronet MHB Ltd. (supra),

Datar Switchgears Ltd. (supra) has been followed.

26.Respondent received copy of the impugned letter dated
4.6.2002 along with the process of this Court and on
receipt of this letter, though the respondent did not receive
the copy of the petition, it immediately invoked the
arbitration clause and appointed Mr. A. Sarkar as an

AA No. 219/2002

Page 17 of 19

arbitrator to adjudicate upon the dispute inter se the
parties. The objection to the appointment of the arbitrator
after the receipt of the Court process is without any merits
as already pointed out above that respondent did not
receive the letter dated 4.6.2002 and therefore petitioner
had no right to come to this Court under section 11(6) of
the Act.

27.I do not find any infirmity or illegality in the appointment
of Mr. A. Sarkar as an arbitrator and after his death in the
appointment of Mr. H.N. Wahal, Executive Director, as an
arbitrator to adjudicate upon the dispute. Respondent was
within its right to appoint an arbitrator and was so done in
this case.

28.In arbitration application No. 254/2004 titled as M/s.

Khaildas
Projects(I)

Constructions
Ltd.

decided

v.

M/s.

Engineering

on

11.2.2004

in

such

circumstances this Court observed that the disputes having
arisen between the parties were required to be adjudicated
upon and decided through the process of arbitration. The
Court was therefore pleased to direct the Chairman and
Managing Director of the respondent organisation to
appoint an arbitrator with further directions for the
AA No. 219/2002

Page 18 of 19

Chairman and Managing Director to consider appointing
an officer who is unconnected with the project which was
the subject matter of the said petition. In the present case,
the petitioner did not dispute the independence of the
arbitrator appointed and also the fact that he in no manner
is connected with the dispute in question inter se the
parties.

29.Hence, I find no merits in the present application. Same is
accordingly dismissed. Interim stay granted by this Court
is hereby vacated. Arbitrator is at liberty to proceed with
the reference.

ARUNA SURESH, J
NOVEMBER 1, 2007
jk

AA No. 219/2002

Page 19 of 19

