'UN-REPORTABLE'
HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

*
+

RFA No.88/2007
Date of decision:

#

2nd July, 2007.

MRS.SHIELA DAS & ORS.

!

Through:

.......Appellant

Mr. P.V.Yogeswaran, Advocate
Versus

$

M/S HOTEL REGAL & ANR.

^

Through:

......Respondent.

Mr. V.K. Srivastava, Advocate

%
CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K. SIKRI
HON'BLE MS.JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
(1) Whether reporters of local paper may be
allowed to see the judgment?
(2) To be referred to the reporter or not?
(3) Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?
Aruna Suresh, J. (Oral)
1.

Appellants herein are aggrieved by the judgment

dated 26.10.2006 passed by the Trial Court whereby it
decreed the suit of the respondents herein. By the impugned
judgment the learned Trial Court decreed the suit of the
respondents in the following terms:-

RFA No.88/2007

Page 1 of 8

“
In view of my findings on the abovesaid
issues, the plaintiff is entitled to the relief claimed
with respect to possession of the suit premises
and mesne profits. Consequently, the suit of the
plaintiff is decreed for possession in respect of the
premises bearing No.716, First Floor, Church
Mission Compound, Fatehpuri, Delhi, more
specifically shown in RED colour in the site plan
Ex.PW1/1, annexed with the plaint. The plaintiff
is further entitled to mesne profits at the rate of
Rs.1000/- p.m. with effect from the date after the
expiry of six months from the date of death of Shri
T.M.Haridas in the year 1987 to the date of filing
of the present suit i.e. 05.02.1993, Rs.2000/- p.m.
for the period 06.02.1993 to 05.02.2000 and
Rs.3000/- for the period 06.02.2000 till the date of
delivery of possession by the defendants to the
plaintiff. Costs of the suit is also awarded to the
plaintiffs. Decree sheet be drawn accordingly,
subject to deposit of residuary court fee by the
plaintiffs. File be consigned to Record Room.”

2.

Late T.M.Haridas was working as Manager with

M/s Hotel Regal. He was residing in the flat on 2 nd floor of
premises No.716, Church Mission Compound, Fatehpuri,
Delhi (hereinafter referred to as the 'suit premises') as a
licensee of the respondent. In the year 1977 he was made
Manager and since then T.M.Haridas shifted from 2 nd to 1st
floor of the premises. He was in occupation of the premises
as licensee of the respondents/ plaintiffs who were a tenant
of the abovesaid two flats along with a garrage on the ground
floor. T.M.Haridas died in the year 1987. Appellants are the
widow and daughters of deceased T.M.Haridas. Since they
continued to be in occupation of the premises, respondents
RFA No.88/2007

Page 2 of 8

herein filed a suit for possession, declaration and mesne
profits.

Appellant No.1 claimed herself to be in occupation

of the suit premises in her own rights as legal heir of her
father Samuel Daniel who according to her was a tenant in
the suit premises and she was also born in the same house in
the year 1941. The Court disbelieved the defence of the
defendants/ appellants and decreed the suit.

3.

On the pleadings of the parties, following issues

were framed by the Trial Court:-

1. Whether the defendants are in unauthorised
and illegal possession of the suit premises
since 1987?OPP
2. Whether the defendants are liable to pay
damages for use and occupation? If so, at
what rate and for what period?
3.Whether the suit is bad for misjoinder of
parties?
4. Whether the suit is barred by limitation?
5. Whether the suit is properly valued
purposes of court fees and jurisdiction?

for

6. Whether the defendants are in possession of
the premises as tenants/ licensee? If so, to
what effect?OPP
7. Relief.

RFA No.88/2007

Page 3 of 8

4.

Findings of the Trial Court on issues No.1 and 2

as well as on issue No.6 are challenged in the present appeal.

5.

From the evidence as adduced on record and as

appreciated by the Trial Court, it is clear that predecessor in
interest, Shri R.N. Kukreja, father of respondent No.2 was
tenant in the suit premises since the year 1938, though there
is no documentary evidence to prove the tenancy since the
year 1938 but there are documents which indicate that he
was tenant of the suit premises in the year 1958 and
thereafter. There is one letter written by Shri R.N. Kukreja,
father of respondent No.2 (predecessor in interest) dated
12.9.1958 addressed to Rev. K.G.Sharp Esqr. This letter
speaks of some additional accommodation built by Late
Mr.Kukreja over the flats in his occupation as a tenant on the
1st floor as well as on the 2nd floor.

The flat on the 2nd floor

has been described as a smaller flat. The rent was also
increased by him for both the flats w.e.f. 1.6.1963. The other
letter

dated

15.5.1963

Ex.PW-7/2

indicate

that

Mr.R.N.Kukreja had the permission to sub-let the smaller flat
since 1947 whereas the bigger flat was to be kept by him for
his residence or for the residence of the Manager of the Hotel
Regal.

RFA No.88/2007

Page 4 of 8

6.

The flat in question i.e. bigger flat on the 1st floor

was licensed by him to Shri T.M.Haridas when he was made
Manager of the Hotel Regal in the year 1977 and he was
made to shift from 2nd floor to 1st floor. Appellant No.1 in her
cross-examination admitted that T.M.Haridas her husband
was working in Hotel Regal at the time of their marriage at
that time was residing on the 2 nd floor of the same premises.
She also admitted that after the marriage T.M.Haridas
shifted on the 1st floor. Respondents also proved in evidence
rent receipts for the period ranging from 1972 to 1979 to
prove that he has been paying rent to Delhi Diocesan Trust
Association; owner of the Church Compound, as a tenant.

7.

Appellant produced only one rent receipt dated

8.3.1941 to show that Samuel Daniel, father of appellant
No.1 was also residing as a tenant in the St. Stephen's
Church Estate, but this rent receipt has not been proved in
evidence. Similarly, there are two more rent receipts dated
3.1.1994 and 4.6.1997 wherein the name of the tenant is
given as Samuel Daniel.

These rent receipts have not been

proved in evidence. There are documents like Ex.PW-3/3
which certify that Mrs.Shiela Dass appellant No.1 is bonafide
member of the Church Compound residing there since her
birth. However, there is no other documents to indicate that
RFA No.88/2007

Page 5 of 8

suit premises were in fact in occupation of
and

that

after

the

marriage

of

Samuel Daniel

appellant

No.1

with

T.M.Haridas, he (T.M. Haridas) also started living with them.

8.

DW-1, Edward Ram Sahai used to visit the

Church Compound being Inspector of the Corporation. In the
cross-examination he admitted that deceased T.M.Haridas
was residing on the first floor and the accommodation in
occupation of Samuel Daniel is on the other side, indicating
that

Samuel Daniel is a tenant in respect of some other

premises may be in the same compound, where number of
tenants are residing, but he was never in occupation of the
disputed flat as a tenant.

Even DW-2, Rajinder Singh did

state in the cross-examination that he had seen Samuel
Daniel residing in other compound.

9.

The entire evidence, oral as well as documentary,

as placed on record by the parties clearly indicate that there
are number of quarters in the premises No.716, Church
Mission Compound, Fatehpuri, Delhi which are in occupation
of different tenants and none of the flats have their separate
number. Even the rent receipts do not indicate the flat
number in possession of Samuel Daniel or the respondents.
It has also come in evidence that after the marriage of
RFA No.88/2007

Page 6 of 8

appellant No.1 with T.M.Haridas, Samuel Daniel had shifted
to some other place. From the receipt of the year 1941, which
is not proved in evidence, it cannot be said that father of
appellant No.1, Samuel Daniel is the actual tenant of the suit
premises i.e. flat on the first floor of premises No.716,
Church Mission Compound, Fatehpuri, Delhi.

10.

Being

wife

and

children

of

T.M.Haridas,

appellants were living in the flat along with him in the suit
premises.

It was only after the death of T.M.Haridas, a

licensee in the premises, that they were asked to vacate the
premises which they failed. After considering the entire
evidence on record, the learned Trial Court was correct in
observing that late T.M.Haridas was a licensee of the
respondents and after his death his legal heirs i.e. wife and
daughters

are

in

unauthorised

possession

of

the

suit

premises. The appellants could not prove themselves to be
tenant in respect of suit premises. Shri T.M.Haridas was only
a licensee, the appellants had therefore no right to claim
inheritance of tenancy rights.

11.

The suit premises consists of three rooms, one

kitchen, toilet and two varrandah.

No evidence has been

adduced by any of the parties on the quantum of damages/
RFA No.88/2007

Page 7 of 8

mesne profits which should be awarded to the respondents
against the appellants for unauthorised use and occupation of
the suit premises.

12.

Considering the accommodation available on the

first floor and in the absence of any evidence to the contrary,
we do not find any reason to interfere in the assessment of
damages which have been awarded by the learned Trial
Court in favour of the respondents and against the present
appellants.

We do not find any reason to interfere in the

judgment and decree of the Trial Court. The appeal,
therefore, being without any merit is hereby dismissed.

A.K.SIKRI, J.

ARUNA SURESH, J.
July 02, 2007
San.

RFA No.88/2007

Page 8 of 8

