*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Arb.P.No.473/2006
Date of decision : 3rd October, 2007

#

Khosla Sports Industries (Regd.)

!

..... PLAINTIFF

Through : Mr.Anil Kher, Sr.Advocate
with Mr. D.R.Bhatia, Mr.Rishi Manchanda
and Mr.P.K.Mahapatra, Advocates.
Versus

$

Mr.Har Mohinder Bhatia

^

.....DEFENDANT

Through : Mr.Vivek Malik, Advocate

%
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
(1) Whether reporters of local paper may be
allowed to see the judgment?
(2) To be referred to the reporter or not?
(3) Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?
ARUNA SURESH, J. (Oral)
The present application has been filed under
Section 11(6) of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act,1996
(hereinafter referred to as the Act) for appointment of an
Arbitrator as a dispute has arisen inter se the parties in terms
of arbitration clause contained in commission agreement
dated 24.5.78 wherein Shri Shyam Sunder Gosain has been
named as sole arbitrator to be so appointed.
Arb. A. 4 7 3 . 0 6

Mr. Shyam
P ag e No. 1 of 5

Sunder Gosain when appointed as Arbitrator and was
requested to enter into reference and adjudicate upon the
dispute inter se the parties, vide his letter dated 21.12.2005
showed his disinclination to adjudicate upon the dispute as
referred to him vide letter dated 14.4.2005, due to his
personal reasons and other exigencies of work. It was on his
refusal that the present application has been filed for
appointment of an arbitrator by the Court.

2.

Respondent has disputed the nature of document

which has been titled as Commission Agreement containing
the arbitration clause and has alleged that in fact it is a lease
agreement or a rent agreement inter se the parties.

To

emphasis this he has referred to modification of the
agreement vide which commission was fixed at Rs.600/- per
month to be paid before 5th of every month in advance. The
Commission Agreement has a clause which indicates that
initially this agreement was for 11 months only which is
deemed to have been extended if the petitioner did not
terminate the agreement by giving one month's notice. There
is a receipt dated 17.5.1996 issued by Mr.V.Khosla, partner
of the petitioner which clearly indicates that the payment was
being made towards rent and the payment as detailed in this
receipt upto 31.1.1996 was payment of rent which was

Arb. A. 4 7 3 . 0 6

P ag e No. 2 of 5

acknowledged by the petitioner by way of this receipt.
Therefore, according to the respondent it being a rent
agreement, it is only the Rent Controller under the Delhi Rent
Control Act, who has the power to adjudicate upon the
dispute or the claim of the petitioner seeking ejectment of the
respondent from the suit property.

3.
that

Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted
in

view

of

arbitration

clause

contained

in

the

Commission Agreement, even if the plea of the respondent is
accepted as correct, the matter has to be referred to the
arbitrator to be appointed by this Court, who is competent to
decide nature of the agreement executed inter se the parties
and decide about his jurisdiction.

4.

I agree with the contentions of learned counsel

for the petitioner. On the face of it the document is titled as
Commission Agreement and modification dated 4.6.78 is to
the said Commission Agreement dated 24.5.78.

It is not

disputed that Commission Agreement contains an arbitration
clause which reads as follows:-

“If there shall be any dispute between the
parties then the decision of Mr.Sham
Sunder Gosain of B-215, Naraina Industrial
Area will be the final.”

Arb. A. 4 7 3 . 0 6

P ag e No. 3 of 5

5.

Even the sole Arbitrator to be so appointed is

named in this clause. Respondent does not dispute that
petitioner had served notice dated 3.12.2004.

In fact this

notice was duly replied by the respondent on 13.12.2004.
This reply suggests that in a suit filed by the respondent in
the District Courts, petitioner has filed an application under
Section 8 of the Act invoking the arbitration clause for
referring the dispute between the parties to arbitration in
terms of the said arbitration clause contained in the
agreement dated 24.5.78. Therefore, the respondent does
acknowledge that there is an arbitration clause in the
Commission Agreement executed inter se the parties.

6.

Under these circumstances this Court cannot

adjudicate upon the nature of agreement inter se the parties
to decide whether the said agreement is a rent agreement or
a Commission Agreement and whether it is the Rent
Controller

under the Delhi Rent Control Act who has the

power to adjudicate upon the dispute regarding ejectment of
the respondent from the suit property. It is for the Arbitrator
to decide whether he has the jurisdiction to adjudicate upon
the dispute inter se the parties or parties are governed by the
provisions of the Delhi Rent Control Act. If the Arbitrator is
of the view that the parties are governed by the provisions of

Arb. A. 4 7 3 . 0 6

P ag e No. 4 of 5

the Delhi Rent Control Act, then he can so direct the parties
to have recourse to law.

7.

Hence the present petition is allowed.

I hereby

appoint Shri A.K. Garg, Addl. Distt. & Sessions Judge (Retd.),
Flat No.30, Navyug Apartments, Sector-9, Rohini, New Delhi,
as the Arbitrator in this case. His fees is fixed at Rs.40,000/to be borne by the petitioner. Copy of the order be sent to
the Arbitrator for information.

OCTOBER 3, 2007
San.

Arb. A. 4 7 3 . 0 6

ARUNA SURESH
(JUDGE)

P ag e No. 5 of 5

