*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

RFA No.350/2006
Date of decision:

#

JAGMOHAN SINGH

!

Through:

4th July, 2007.
.......Appellant

Mr. D.P. Sharma, Advocate
Versus

$

DARYAO SINGH KHATRI

^

Through:

......Respondent.
Mr. S. S. Chillar, Advocate

%
CORAM :
HON'BLE MR.A.K. SIKRI
HON'BLE MS.JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
(1) Whether reporters of local paper may be
allowed to see the judgment?
(2) To be referred to the reporter or not?
(3) Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?
A.K. Sikri, J. (Oral)
1. Against the appellant herein, respondent herein, filed a suit for
recovery under Order XXXVII CPC for a sum of Rs.4.00 lacs along
with interest and cost. In the plaint it is alleged that the respondent
had given a loan of Rs.4.00 lacs to the appellant and for re-payment of
the said loan, the appellant had given two cheques dated 15.6.2000
and 20.6.2000 for Rs.1.85 lacs and Rs.2.15 lacs respectively and the
said cheques were dis-honoured on presentation. The respondent also
served a notice dated 18.7.2000 upon the appellant under Section 138
of the Negotiable Instruments Act, but it did not bear any results and,
therefore, he filed the suit in question.

The appellant was allowed

leave to contest the claim. Thereafter a written statement was filed;
on the basis of pleadings, issues were framed; the parties led their
RFA 350/2006

Page 1/5

evidence; and ultimately vide judgment and decree dated 17.2.2006,
the learned trial court has decreed the suit in the sum of Rs.4.00 lacs
along with interest @6% per annum from 1.8.2000 till realization.
Cost is also awarded.

Challenging this judgment and decree, the

present appeal is filed.
2. The appellant has taken the plea in his written statement that the suit
was barred under Section 3 of The Punjab Registration of Money
Lenders' Act, 1938 (hereinafter referred to as the said Act) inasmuch
as the respondent was not registered as a money-lender and was not
having any license under the said Act. Issue No.1 was framed on this
plea of the appellant, which has been decided against the appellant
holding that since the appellant is a trader and the loan was advanced
by a trader to a trader, it would not constitute 'loan' within the
meaning of Section 2(7) of the said Act and, therefore, the said Act
would not be applicable.

Learned counsel has referred to the

testimony of the respondent wherein he has, inter alia, stated that the
respondent had retired from the services of Municipal Corporation of
Delhi and his source of income were the service benefits and
agriculture. On this basis, he submits that the respondent could not be
termed as a 'trader'.

He further submitted that in his cross-

examination, the respondent clearly admitted that he had given loan
to three more persons, though without interest and, therefore, money
advanced to the appellant was not

the single transaction and the

respondent should be treated as money-lender within the meaning of
Section 2(8) of the said Act and, thus, was under obligation to obtain
license under the said Act. He further submitted that the suits and
the applications by money-lenders are barred unless money-lender is
registered and licensed, which is a clear mandate of Section 3 of the
said Act.

RFA 350/2006

Page 2/5

3. As defined in Section 2(8) of the said Act, a person is to be treated as
a money-lender if he is carrying on the business of advancing loans
and if he is not in possession of any license, the suit filed by such
money-lender is barred. As per the definition under Section 2(7) of
the said Act loan means an advance whether secured or unsecured of
money or in kind at interest and shall include any transaction which
the Court finds to be in substance a loan. However, seven kinds of
transactions are specifically excluded from the applicability of Section
2(7) of the said Act. These transactions are not treated as loans. One
of such clause is clause (vii) which excludes the following transaction:
“(vii) an advance made on the basis of a negotiable
instrument as defined in the Negotiable Instrument
Act, 1881, other than a promissory note.”
4. Since the advance in the present case was made on the basis of a
negotiable instrument, i.e., the appellant had issued two cheques
which are negotiable instrument other than promissory note as
defined under the Negotiable Instrument Act, 1881, the suit filed
under Order XXXVII CPC was based on these two negotiable
instruments. The transaction in question cannot be treated as 'loan'
as defined under Section 2(7) of the said Act. When the transaction is
excluded as loan, the provisions of the said Act shall not be applicable.
Though the learned trial court is wrong in holding that the respondent
was a trader and, therefore, covered by clause (vi) of Section 2(7) of
the said Act, however, since the matter is covered by clause (vii) of
Section 7 of the said Act, result of issue No.1 would remain the same.
The suit filed by the respondent was not barred under the provisions
of The Punjab Registration of Money Lenders' Act, 1938.
5. The only other submission of learned counsel for the appellant was
that the appellant had taken a loan of Rs.15,000/- only and had given
15 blank signed cheques to the respondent as security of the said
loan. The submission is that the respondent mis-used two cheques by
RFA 350/2006

Page 3/5

filling amounts of Rs.1.85 lacs and Rs.2.15 lacs respectively.

This

submission is rightly rejected by the learned trial court while deciding
issue No.2 holding that it is unbelievable that against an advance of
Rs.15,000/- the appellant would give as many as 15 cheques, that too
blank cheques. The relevant portion of the discussion contained in the
impugned judgment is as under:
“Except bald suggestions, nothing has been brought
in the cross-examination to discard the statement of
the plaintiff.
The Defendant was required to
establish that the blank signed cheques had been
handed over by him on Oct. 1994. The defence of
the Defendant is not acceptable. He wants this
court to believe that for an amount of Rs.15,000/allegedly taken by him in Oct. 1994, the plaintiff had
taken 15 blank signed cheques. The Defendant
wants to make this court believe that he is so simple
that after alleged payment of 16,500/- in March
1995 he had allowed the plaintiff to keep the 15
blank signed cheques. The plea that the cheque
book from out of which the two cheques in question
had allegedly been issued, was handed over to him
by the bank in June 1993, does not support his plea.
A man may not use the cheques issued to him by the
bank. It depends on the individual as to in what
manner he makes use of the cheques. There can not
be any presumption that all cheques of the cheque
book
issued
in
1993
should
have
been
exhosted/utilized in 1993 itself. The statements of
account Ex.DW2/3 and 2/4 indicate that the
Defendant had not made use of the cheques even
upto 2001. The last cheque bearing no.871636 was
of Jan. 1996. If the plaintiff was to indulge in false
hood, he would have filled in all the 15 cheques and
compelled the Defendant to pay a huge amount.”
6. We are in agreement with the aforesaid conclusion arrived at by the
learned trial court. No other argument was addressed.
7. We do not find any merit in this appeal, which is, accordingly,
dismissed.

A.K.SIKRI, J.

ARUNA SURESH, J.
July 04, 2007
'sp'

RFA 350/2006

Page 4/5

RFA 350/2006

Page 5/5

