'UN-REPORTABLE'
*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

RFA No.95/2005
Date of decision : 4th July, 2007

#
!

HOTEL EXCELSIOR PVT. LTD.
..... Appellant
Through : Mr. Harish Malhotra Senior Advocate
Mr. Rajender Aggarwal and
Mr. S.P. Behl Advocates.
Versus

$
^
%

MR. N.N. RAINA
Through : Nemo

... Respondent

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
(1) Whether reporters of local paper may be
allowed to see the judgment?
(2) To be referred to the reporter or not?
(3) Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?
Aruna Suresh, J (Oral)
1.

In the present appeal, the appellant has challenged the

judgment and decree dated 4th January, 2005 passed by
learned Additional District Judge, Delhi whereby the suit of the
appellant

for

mandatory

and

permanent

injunction

was

dismissed as not maintainable. The plaintiff (appellant herein)
took over Hotel Kanishka and Kanishka Shopping Plaza 19,
Ashoka Road, New Delhi owned by India Tourism Development
Corporation Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as “ITDC”) by way of
an agreement dated 25.11.1986 executed between ITDC and

RFA No.95-2005

Page 1 of 6

M/s. Hotel Excelsior Pvt. Ltd, the appellant herein.

The

defendant (respondent herein) was allowed to use Shop No.12,
Ground Floor, Kanishka Shopping Plaza as a licensee by ITDC.
After the transfer of Kanishka Shopping Plaza to the appellant,
the licence of the respondent for the suit premises, was
deemed to have been granted by the appellant. Appellant
permitted the respondent to carry on his business as a licensee
for three years w.e.f. 25th November, 1986.

This period

expired on 24th November, 1989. Thereafter the licence was
not renewed but the respondent failed to vacate the suit
premises

and

continued

to

occupy

as

an

unauthorized

occupant. Appellant issued a Legal Notice dated 12th March,
2003 calling upon the respondent to vacate the premises and
not to re-enter the same. However, respondent continued to
use the premises.

Both the parties put their locks on the

premises and when the respondent failed to vacate the
premises, the appellant filed a suit for mandatory injunction for
issuing a direction to the respondent to hand over the vacant
and peaceful possession of the suit premises with a relief of
permanent injunction for restraining the respondent from
entering in the suit premises and for arrears of damages.

2.

Despite service of process respondent failed to appear in

the court and contest the suit, hence he was proceeded exparte vide order dated 8th October, 2004. Even, in this appeal

RFA No.95-2005

Page 2 of 6

the respondent was duly served on 4th August, 2006 by way of
publication in the newspaper 'Statesman'. Despite service of
process, he did not appear in the Court and contest the present
appeal.

3.

Learned trial judge dismissed the suit of the appellant as

not maintainable with the following observations:-

“The record file shows that the
case of the plaintiff company in Plaint is
that by using force defendant has been
illegally utilizing the licensed premises.
Plaintiff company put one lock on the
shutter of the shop. One lock on the
shutter has been put by the defendant.
This fact shows that defendant is in
possession of the suit premises. In other
words, admittedly plaintiff is not in
possession
of
the
said
premises.
Accordingly, I am of the considered view
that plaintiff company should have filed a
suit for possession and not a suit for
mandatory and permanent injunction.
Further, I am of the considered view that
Suit for damages is a connected relief.
Thus, the suit of the plaintiff for
mandatory and permanent injunction and
also for damages is not maintainable”.
4.

Learned counsel for the appellant has urged that since

the respondent was a licensee, the Suit for mandatory
injunction seeking possession of the Suit premises and for
permanent injunction for restraining respondent to enter into
the suit premises is maintainable.

It is not disputed that

appellant has claimed the relief of possession of the Suit

RFA No.95-2005

Page 3 of 6

property by way of a mandate. Ordinarily, therefore, appellant
should have filed a suit

for possession and permanent

injunction for the reliefs as claimed. However, where plaintiff
has paid the ad valorem Court fee for the relief of mandatory
injunction, appellant can succeed to seek possession of the Suit
property to which he might be found entitled after trial. Even
in a suit for mandatory injunction if the licensor of the property
approaches the court without inordinate delay it may entitle
him to the discretionary relief of mandatory injunction.
However, where

licensor approaches the

court after a

considerable time, he is not entitled to discretionary relief of
permanent injunction and in that case he has to file a suit for
possession.

5.

In “Milka Singh v. Diana” AIR 1964 J&K 99, it

was observed :-

“After the termination of the
licence, the licensee is under a clear
obligation to surrender his possession to
the owner and if he fails to do so, we do
not see any reason why the licensee
cannot be compelled to discharge this
obligation by way of a mandatory
injunction under Section 55 of the
Specific Relief Act. ..............................
Where a licensor approaches the
court for an injunction within a
reasonable time after the licence is
terminated, he is entitled to the
injunction. On the other hand, if the
licensor causes huge delay the court

RFA No.95-2005

Page 4 of 6

may refuse the discretion to grant an
injunction on the ground that the
licensor had not been diligent, and in
that case the licensor will have to bring
a suit for possession which will be
governed by Section 7 (V) of the Court
fees Act”.
6.

In “Sant Lal Jain V. Avtar Singh”, AIR 1985 SC 857,

wherein a similar question arose, it was held :“In the present case it has not
been shown to us that the appellant had
come to the court with the suit for
mandatory
injunction
after
any
considerable delay which will disentitle
him to the discretionary relief. Even if
there was some delay, we think that in a
case of this kind attempt should be made
to avoid multiplicity of suits and the
licensor should not be driven to file
another round of suit with all the
attendant delay, trouble and expense.
The suit is in effect one for possession
though couched in the form of a suit for
mandatory injunction as what would be
given to the plaintiff in case he succeeds
is possession of the property to which he
may be found to be entitled. Therefore,
we are of the opinion that the appellant
should not be denied relief merely
because he had couched the plaint in the
the form of a suit for mandatory
injunction”.
7.

In the present case, respondent was a licensee and it was

his duty to handover the possession of the property to
appellant on receipt of the notice which he failed. Therefore,
appellant is entitled to claim possession of the suit property.
Appellant has also paid ad valorem Court fee for mandatory
injunction which is required to be paid under Section 7 (V) of

RFA No.95-2005

Page 5 of 6

the Court Fees Act for a suit for recovery of possession of
property.

8.

Therefore, we are of the opinion that the approach of the

trial court was not correct when it dismissed the suit of
appellant solely on the grounds that since the relief for
possession was claimed, suit for mandatory injunction was not
maintainable. The Learned trial judge has not discussed the
merits of the case while deciding the suit of the plaintiff.

9.

Hence, we hereby set aside the judgment and decree

dated 4th January, 2005 passed by the learned Additional
District Judge, Delhi. The case is remanded back to the trial
court with the directions to decide the suit on merits as per
law.

10.

Appellant is directed to appear before the Trial Court on

17th August, 2007.

Appeal stands disposed of with the

abovesaid directions.

A.K.SIKRI, J

JULY 4, 2007
vk

ARUNA SURESH, J

RFA No.95-2005

Page 6 of 6

