*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Arb. P.No. 160/2007
Date of decision : 5th October, 2007

#

M/S. SCON CONTRACTS

!

.... PETITIONER

Through : Mr. Jasmeet Singh, Advocate
Versus

$

NEENA DHINGRA

^
%

..... RESPONDENT

Through : Ms. Gunita Pahwa Advocate
Mr. Rupesh, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
(1) Whether reporters of local paper may be
allowed to see the judgment?
(2) To be referred to the reporter or not?
(3) Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

ARUNA SURESH, J. (Oral)
1.

Present petition has been filed by the petitioner M/s.

Scon Contracts against the respondent under section 11
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter
referred to as 'Act') for appointment of an arbitrator. The
petitioner was granted civil work for the respondent's
building at Plot No.33-34, Sector 5, IMT, Manesar,
Gurgaon vide letter of intent dated 4th April, 2005. As per
Arb.P.No.160/2007

Page 1 of 9

the terms of the letter of intent 'Articles of Agreement'
issued alongwith the tender documents were to be
executed on stamp paper but the same could not be
done.

The petitioner executed more than 80% of the

contracted work, however, dispute arose between the
parties. As per the Arbitration Clause 15 contained in the
'Articles of Agreement' all disputes arising inter se the
parties related to the work awarded in terms of the letter
of intent are referable for adjudication to the arbitrator
only.

2.

Respondent failed to appoint an arbitrator despite

service of notice dated 10th January, 2007, hence this
application.

3.

Respondent though has not filed any formal reply to

the application, has contested the same.

One of the

objections raised by the respondent is that there is no
arbitration agreement between the parties and therefore
the present application is not maintainable.

Learned

counsel for the petitioner has referred to letter of intent
dated 4th April, 2005 to say that as per this letter, the
petitioner was appointed as civil contractor by the
Arb.P.No.160/2007

Page 2 of 9

respondent on the terms and conditions contained in
clause 1 to 7 of the said letter of intent. According to him,
'Articles of Agreement' issued alongwith the tender
documents are a part of this letter of intent as is so
specifically mentioned in the last line of the said letter
dated 4th April, 2005. The relevant line of this letter reads
as :-

“Apart from the above the “Articles
of Agreement” issued along with
tender documents shall be executed
on stamp paper.”

After reading this line to say that 'Articles of
Agreement' form part of letter of intent is not correct. The
petitioner was required to execute the Articles of
Agreement on stamp paper.

As admitted by the

petitioner in para 9 of the application 'Articles of
Agreement' could not be executed on stamp paper.

4.

'Les of Agreement' annexed to the letter of intent

when perused is

only a draft

and

lacks material

particulars. All the blanks in this agreement which is a
cyclostyle material have not been filled in by the
employer or by the contractor.
Arb.P.No.160/2007

The first lines of this
Page 3 of 9

agreement are completely blank. Therefore, it cannot be
said that this 'Les of Agreement' was executed between
the petitioner and the respondent.

It is pertinent to

mention here that subsequent two clauses of this
agreement have been dully filled in.

M/s. Architects

Working Group is shown to be appointed as Architects
and Consultant. The name of the petitioner nowhere finds
mention in this draft agreement.

Clause 10 of the

agreement speaks about the payment terms.

Even

blanks in this clause are not filled in by the parties. This
contract is not signed by any of the parties to the present
petition. Therefore, this 'Articles of Agreement' is only a
draft and is not a duly executed document.

Clause 15

contained in this agreement cannot be termed as
arbitration agreement between the parties for referring
their disputes connected with the agreement to the
arbitration of sole arbitrator under the Act.

5.

Schedule I General Conditions of Contract are

equally blank and are devoid of material particulars.
From this document it is difficult to say that there was an
agreement inter se the parties to invoke provisions of
Arbitration Act whenever there was a dispute.
Arb.P.No.160/2007

Page 4 of 9

6.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted

that petitioner has executed more than 80% of the work
as awarded by letter of intent dated 4th April, 2005.

It

may be that the petitioner has executed the work as
awarded but then the execution of work as awarded by
letter of intent does not in any manner raises the
presumption that clauses contained in the draft articles of
agreement, which was not executed, can be invoked and
petitioner can seek appointment of an arbitrator in terms
of the clause 15 of the said 'Articles of Agreement'.

7.

Section 7 of the Act referred to by the learned

counsel for the petitioner also does not apply to the draft
articles of agreement. Section 7 of the Act defines the
arbitration agreement.

According to this definition, the

agreement by the parties to submit to an arbitration all or
certain disputes which have arisen and which may arose
between them in respect of defined legal relationship
whether directly or not is an arbitration agreement. This
arbitration

agreement may be

in the

form

of

an

arbitration clause in a contract or in the form of a
separate agreement. An arbitration Agreement has to be
in writing and an agreement is considered in writing if it is
Arb.P.No.160/2007

Page 5 of 9

contained in the documents singed by the parties by
exchange of letters, telex, telegram or other means of
telecommunication

which

provide

a

record

of

the

arbitration agreement or by exchange of statements of
claim and defence in which the existence of the
agreement is alleged by one party and not denied by the
other party. Even reference in a contract to a document
containing an arbitration clause constitutes the arbitration
agreement if the contract is in writing and the reference is
such as to make that arbitration clause part of the
contract.

8.

In the present case, the 'Articles of Agreement'

containing the arbitration agreement though is in writing,
is not signed by any of the parties. In fact there is no
legally executed agreement inter se the parties to create
a contractual obligation between them.

An arbitration

agreement or a document containing an arbitration
agreement is to be signed by the parties which is not the
case before us. Similarly, the petitioner has not placed on
the record any exchange of letters, telex, telegram or any
other means of telecommunication to convince the court
that they have the records of the agreement and
Arb.P.No.160/2007

Page 6 of 9

therefore clause 15 of the 'Articles of Agreement' can be
invoked in the facts and circumstances of the present
application.

Similarly, the reference of the 'Articles of

Agreement' in the letter of intent does not create any
contractual obligation between the parties as it remained
unexecuted and unsigned by the parties and therefore
there is no arbitration agreement inter se the parties.

9.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has referred to

'Unipack Industries Vs. Subhash Chand Jain and
Others', 2002 (1) Arb. LR, 174 (Delhi), wherein
section 7 of the Act has been interpreted in the following
manner:-

“7. In other words as per
Section 7 read with Section 2(b) of
the Act there has to be an agreement
to refer the disputes or certain
disputes with respect to defined legal
relationship to arbitration.
The
arbitration agreement has to be in
writing but as is apparent from subsection (4) Section 7 even if it is not
signed under certain circumstances
contemplated under Clauses (b) and
(c) of sub-section (4) to Section 7 still
there
can
be
an
arbitration
agreement”.

10.

As observed above none of the requirements

Arb.P.No.160/2007

Page 7 of 9

contained in Section 7 of the Act to create any arbitration
agreement between the parties are fulfilled in the present
case.

11.

Learned counsel for the petitioner further submitted

that the respondent did not send any reply to the notice,
denying the existence of the arbitration agreement and
therefore

admitted

that

there

agreement between the parties.

existed

arbitration

This argument is also

devoid of any merits.

12.

Simply because this notice has not been replied

which only speaks of referring the disputes arising out of
the agreement for arbitration after the expiry of 30 days
from the receipt of notice in case the payment was not
made within 7 days and non reply to the same does not in
any manner can be inferred as an admission to the
execution of an arbitration agreement to the advantage of
the petitioner.

It seems that there has been some

complaint by the petitioner against the respondent to the
SHO, IMT, Manesar, Gurgaon. The petitioner did file the
application under section 9 of the Act and succeed in
getting interim relief to the extent of appointment of a
Arb.P.No.160/2007

Page 8 of 9

Local Commissioner.

13.

Learned counsel for the respondent has submitted

that ex-parte order obtained by the petitioner was by
concealment of facts and the respondent shall file reply
and contest the said application as well on the similar
grounds that there is no arbitration agreement inter se
the parties. Be that as it may, any order received by the
petitioner under section 9 of the Act ex-parte does not
give any right to the petitioner to file the present petition
under section 11 of the Act.

14.

The petition being without any merits is hereby

dismissed as not maintainable.

15.

File be consigned to record room.

OCTOBER 5, 2007
vk

Arb.P.No.160/2007

ARUNA SURESH
(JUDGE)

Page 9 of 9

