*
+

HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CS(OS) No. 2322/2007
Date of decision : 11th December, 2007

#

Advance Magazine Publishers. Inc.
..... PLAINTIFF

!

Through : Ms. Anuradha Salhotra, Adv.
Ms. Divya Vijan, Advocate
Versus

$

Shakeel Ahmed
..... DEFENDANTS

^

Through : Nemo.

%
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
(1) Whether reporters of local paper may be
allowed to see the judgment?
(2) To be referred to the reporter or not?
(3) Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?
ARUNA SURESH, J. (Oral)
1. The territorial jurisdiction of this court is disputed. Learned
counsel for the petitioner has submitted that plaintiff has
its office at Delhi and therefore this Court has territorial
jurisdiction to entertain the present suit.

CS(OS) No. 2322/2007

She has also

Page 1 of 6

referred to para 30 of the plaint wherein it is averred as
follows:-

“The Plaintiff are carrying on
business in New Delhi within the
jurisdiction of this Hon'ble Court
and this Hon'ble Court has
jurisdiction to entertain the said
suit.”

2. However, plaintiff has neither been able to provide its
address of Delhi nor any document has been placed on the
record to show prima facie that plaintiff is carrying on
business in Delhi. Even in this paragraph the address of
the plaintiff is not disclosed. An opportunity was granted
to the plaintiff to provide the particulars of the office which
is alleged to be operating within the territorial jurisdiction
of this Court.

3. Section 134 of the Trade Marks Act permits the plaintiff to
file a suit for infringement of its registered trademark
within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the competent
Court where the plaintiff is carrying on its business for
gain. This provision is an exception to Section 20 of the
Civil Procedure Code. Since plaintiff has not been able to
show prima facie that it is carrying on business within the
local limits of this Court at Delhi at the time of institution
CS(OS) No. 2322/2007

Page 2 of 6

of the suit, the provisions of Section 134 of the Trade
Marks Act do not come to the rescue of the plaintiff.

4. Learned counsel for the plaintiff further submitted that in
their Magazine Vogue which is published from Bombay, the
Delhi address of the plaintiff company is given.

The

documents placed on the record by the plaintiff do not lend
support to these submissions. I have gone through all the
copies of the Vogue placed on the record. None of these
copies contain the address of the plaintiff company which
is claimed to be in Delhi. In the issue of November, 2007,
at page 38, the readers of the magazine have been
provided with the address of the plaintiff as Vogue Letters,
2nd floor, Darabshaw House, Shoorji Vallabhdas Marg,
Ballard

Estate, Mumbai-400

001,

for correspondence

purposes or the readers of the magazine could email the
plaintiff at vogueletters@condenast.in at the Bombay
address given in the plaint.

The other documents placed

on the record are the photocopies of various Vogue
magazines published from time to time. Therefore, even
after perusal of these documents, it cannot be said that
plaintiff has its office in Delhi and it is carrying on its
business or works for gain within the local limits of Delhi.

CS(OS) No. 2322/2007

Page 3 of 6

5. Learned counsel for the plaintiff has referred to Mulla, The
Code of Civil Procedure, Volume-II, Seventeenth Edition
and has argued that the question of jurisdiction has to be
decided only after the summons are served upon the
defendant and an objection is raised challenging the
territorial jurisdiction of this Court by the defendant in the
written statement and evidence is also not to be pleaded in
the plaint. According to her the address of the plaintiff, if
any, of Delhi is a piece of evidence and not a material fact
to be pleaded. I do not agree with the submissions of the
learned counsel for the plaintiff.

Every pleading must

contain a statement of the material facts on which the
party pleading relies but not the evidence by which those
facts are to be proved. The pleadings are required to be
specific containing all necessary details which are to be
substantiated by way of evidence during the trial.

If the

pleadings are silent on particular material fact, a party
cannot be allowed to prove the fact later on by adducing
evidence. In the present case plaintiff has not pleaded the
material fact of its having office at Delhi and the
particulars of the said office are not given despite
opportunity granted.

6. Reliance

is

CS(OS) No. 2322/2007

also

placed

on

Boston

Scientific
Page 4 of 6

International

B.V.

MANU/DE/0331/2007 .

v.

Metro

Hospital

–

In the said case reference was

made to Haryana Milk Foods Ltd. v. Chambel Dairy

Products – 98 (2002) DLT 359 & Gupta Grobters
Conduit Pipe Manufacturing Co. Pvt. Ltd. v. Anil
Gupta and Anr. - 2001 VII AD (Delhi) 838 wherein it
was observed that mere bald assertions in the plaint with
regard to jurisdiction would not confer jurisdiction. Both
those cases were under the Trade Marks Act.

The

Boston's (supra) case was for recovery of money and the
jurisdiction of the Court was to be seen as per Section 20
CPC and therefore, these two judgments were not relied by
the Hon'ble Judge.

7. Similarly,

in

Exphar

SA

and

Anr.

v.

Eupharma

Laboratories Ltd. and Anr. - AIR 2004 SC 1682, it was
observed that the objection to the jurisdiction must
proceed on the basis that the facts as pleaded by the
initiator of the impugned proceedings are true. It has to be
seen that facts stated in the plaint must show that the
Court does not have jurisdiction as a matter of law. It was
further observed that the pleadings contained in the plaint
are to be seen for rejection of plaint for want of jurisdiction
and not the written statement of the defendant.
CS(OS) No. 2322/2007

Page 5 of 6

8. In this case even summons have not been issued and the
jurisdiction of this Court has come under scrutiny of the
Court.

From the pleadings contained in the plaint, it

cannot be inferred that this Court has the jurisdiction to
entertain the present suit.

Both the parties are neither

residing nor working for gain in Delhi. Hence, I hold that
this Court has no territorial jurisdiction to entertain the
present suit.

Plaint with original documents, if any, is

ordered to be returned to the plaintiff in accordance with
Order 7 Rule 10 CPC and the registry is directed to make
necessary endorsement on the plaint as per provisions of
Order 7 Rule 10(2) CPC. Plaint be returned within 15 days.

December 11, 2007
jk

CS(OS) No. 2322/2007

ARUNA SURESH
(JUDGE)

Page 6 of 6

