*

“NON-REPORTABLE”
HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

IA Nos. 13917/06 & 13916/06 in CS (OS) No.1298/2002

Date of decision : October 12th 2007
# Dr. (Mrs.) Daljeet Maudgil
!

.....PLAINTIFF

Through : Mr. Rahul Gupta, Advocate
Mr. Dhiraj Kumar, Advocate
Versus

$ Sh. Anil Kumar Sabharwal & Anr.
..... DEFENDANT
^

Through : Mr. Shailesh K. Kapoor,Advocate

%
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
(1) Whether reporters of local paper may be
allowed to see the judgment?
(2) To be referred to the reporter or not?
(3) Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?
ARUNA SURESH, J.
IA No. 13917/2006
1. By way of this application, plaintiff has sought permission
to lead secondary evidence in view of the provisions
contained in Sections 63 & 65 of the Indian Evidence Act.
Plaintiff has filed the present suit for permanent injunction
against the defendants for restraining them, their agents,
CS (OS) No. 1298/2002

Page 1 of 14

attorneys, employees etc. from encroaching, making illegal
entry, breaking or damaging the bamboo wall belonging to
the plaintiff as shown in the site plan or in any manner
creating interference in the peaceful occupation and
possession of the property of the plaintiff bearing No. 192,
Western Avenue, Sainik Farms, New Delhi.

In criminal

writ No. 655/2000, an inquiry report was prepared by the
area DCP somewhere in October-November, 2000 who
observed that boundary wall had been raised by the
defendant long time back and the said wall is the rear wall
of the property of the defendant. As regards the plaintiff's
private passage, it was reported that plaintiff could seek
remedy by approaching the Civil Court. It is to that effect
that the present suit has been filed.

2. Plaintiff has claimed herself to be the owner in occupation
and possession of the suit property by virtue of registered
sale deeds dated 13.1.1982 executed in her favour which
factor is not disputed by the defendants. However, the sale
deeds were deposited with her safety vaults at Barclays
Premier, Ocfordshire, London, UK.

But when plaintiff

approached the vaults for taking the sale deeds, she found
them missing and misplaced.

She lodged complaint with

the said Barclays Premier on 28.2.2006.

CS (OS) No. 1298/2002

When plaintiff

Page 2 of 14

approached the Sub-Registrar for certified copies of the
said sale deeds, the records relating to the said sale deeds
dated 13.1.982 were found misplaced on account of
renovation work going on in the office of the public
authorities. Therefore, by way of this application, plaintiff
sought permission to prove in evidence the photocopies of
original sale deeds as filed along with the plaint.

3. Application has been contested by the defendants. One of
the objections of the defendants is that the application is
supported by an affidavit of Smt. Jaspreet Gogia who is
neither privy to the transaction set out in the application
nor has any knowledge of the same.

Therefore, the

affidavit which is without any instructions is based on
hearsay and is contrary to the requirements of law. This
affidavit cannot be relied upon.

It is further objected by

the defendants that the original documents were required
to be filed along with the plaint which the plaintiff did not
comply with and at this stage she cannot be allowed to lead
secondary evidence to prove her case. Secondary piece of
evidence sought to be produced on the record is not
permissible under Sections 63 & 65 of the Indian Evidence
Act and therefore application is liable to be dismissed.

CS (OS) No. 1298/2002

Page 3 of 14

4. Application of the plaintiff is accompanied by few copies of
the correspondences which were exchanged between the
plaintiff and Barclays Bank and Sub-Registrar, Asaf Ali
Road, New Delhi.

There is one letter written by the

plaintiff's husband to Barclays Bank Limited which is
undated. From perusal of this letter, it cannot be said that
the plaintiff had asked the bank to locate the sale deeds in
question.

There is also no reference that the sale deeds

pertaining to the property in suit were deposited in the
safety vaults in the said bank. In para 3 of this application,
there is reference of some documents having been located
by the bank on the request of the plaintiff's husband. In
para 5 of this letter, there is mention of some deeds of
property in New Delhi but particulars of the property in
Delhi are not disclosed in this letter.

There is a letter

issued by Barclays Premier to the husband of the plaintiff
on 1.3.2006.

The bank had assured that every endeavour

would be made to trace out the documents latest by
27.3.2006.

The customer's complaint dated 28.2.2006

acknowledged by the bank is written by Doctor Bhagwan
Maudgil, again husband of the plaintiff. The fact remains
that there is no other correspondence placed on record
addressed by the plaintiff to Barclays bank. It is not known
if the bank could fulfil the commitments in tracing out the
CS (OS) No. 1298/2002

Page 4 of 14

documents by 27.3.2006.

However, as the application

indicates, the documents were never traced out by the
bank.

5. Sub-Registrar III, Asaf Ali Road, New Delhi, vide letter
dated 22.11.2006 does certify the registration of sale deed
executed by Sh. Daya Nand and registered as Document
No. 236, in Addl. Book No. I, Volume No. 4603, on Page 11
to 14 dated 13.1.1982 in favour of Mrs. Daljit Maudgil in
respect of agricultural land but informed that due to
renovation of the office, said volume has been misplaced or
is not available at that moment and therefore certified copy
would be given whenever the said record would be traced
out.

Another letter dated 22.11.2006 is on similar lines,

certifying execution of sale deed by Sh. Daya Nand
registered as Document No. 239, in Addl. Book No. I,
Volume No. 4603, on Page 23 to 27 dated 13.1.1982 in
favour of Mrs. Daljit Maudgil in respect of agricultural land
for similar reasons certified copies could not be made
available. It seems that after receipt of these two letters,
the plaintiff has not made any efforts to contact the SubRegistrar to find out if the said volume No. 4603 containing
the registered sale deeds has been traced out and if the
certified copies of the said documents could be made

CS (OS) No. 1298/2002

Page 5 of 14

available.

6. From these correspondences as discussed above, it is
difficult to say that the original documents have been lost
or misplaced or cannot be made available. Section 65 of
the Indian Evidence Act reads as follows:

“65. Cases in which secondary
evidence relating to documents may be
given. -- Secondary evidence may be
given of the existence, condition, or
contents of a document in the following
cases:(a) When the original is shown or
appears to be in the possession or
power-of the person against whom the
document is sought to be proved, or of
any person out of reach of, or not subject
to, the process of the Court, or
of any person legally bound to
produce it,
and when, after the notice
mentioned in section 66, such person
does not produce it;
(b) when the existence, condition
or contents of the original have been
proved to be admitted in writing by the
person against whom it is proved or by
his representative in interest;
(c) when the original has been
destroyed or lost, or when the party
offering evidence of its contents cannot,
for any other reason not arising from his
own default or neglect, produce it in
reasonable time;
(d) when the original is of such a
nature as not to be easily movable;
(e) when the original is a public
document within the meaning of section
74;
CS (OS) No. 1298/2002

Page 6 of 14

(f) when the original is a document
of which a certified copy is permitted by
this Act, or by any other law in force in
India to be given in evidence;
(g) when the originals consists of
numerous accounts or other documents
which cannot conveniently be examined
in Court, and the fact to be proved is the
general result of the whole collection.
In cases (a), (c) and (d), any
secondary evidence of the contents of
the document is admissible.
In case (b), the written admission
is admissible.
In case (e) or (f), a certified copy of
the document, but no other kind of
secondary evidence, is admissible.
In case (g), evidence may be given
as to the general result of the documents
by any person who has examined them,
and who is skilled in the examination of
such documents.”
7. Section 63 of the said Act defines secondary evidence:

“63.
Secondary
evidence.-Secondary
evidence
means
and
includes-(1) Certified copies given under
the provisions hereinafter contained;
(2) Copies made from the original
by mechanical processes which in
themselves insure the accuracy of the
copy, and copies compared with such
copies;
(3) Copies made from or compared
with the original;
(4) Counterparts of documents as
against the parties who did not execute
them;
(5) Oral accounts of the contents of
a document given by some person who
has himself seen it.
(a) A photograph of an original is
secondary evidence of its contents,
though the two have not been compared,
CS (OS) No. 1298/2002

Page 7 of 14

if it is proved that the thing
photographed was the original.
(b) A copy compared with a copy of
a letter made by a copying machine is
secondary evidence of the contents of
the letter, if it is shown that the copy
made by the copying machine was made
from the original.
(c) A copy transcribed from a copy,
but afterwards compared with the
original, is secondary evidence; but the
copy not so compared is not secondary
evidence of the original, although the
copy from which it was transcribed was
compared with the original.
(d) Neither an oral account of a
copy compared with the original, nor an
oral account of a photograph or
machine-copy
of
the
original,
is
secondary evidence of the original.”
8. Thus, it is clear that plaintiff can be allowed to lead
secondary evidence by way of certified copy of the
document but no other kind of secondary evidence is
admissible. A copy compared with the copy of document
made by a copying machine is secondary evidence of the
contents of the documents if it is shown that the copy made
by the copying machine was made from the original.
Similarly a copy transcribed from a copy, but afterwards
compared with the original, is considered in evidence as
secondary evidence but the copy not so compared is not
considered as secondary evidence of the original, though
the copy from which it was transcribed have been
compared with the original.
CS (OS) No. 1298/2002

Page 8 of 14

9. By virtue of Section 65 (e) & (f), it is only a certified copy
of the document which can be admitted as a secondary
evidence but no other kind of secondary evidence is
admissible.

10.In Ashok Dulichand v. Madahavlal Dube and Another

– (1975) 4 SCC 664, some of the provisions contained in
Section

65

of

the

Indian

Evidence

Act

have

been

interpreted in the following manner:

“According to clause (a) of Section
65 of the Indian Evidence Act, secondary
evidence may be given of the existence,
condition or contents of a document
when the original is shown or appears to
be in the possession or power of the
person against whom the document is
sought to be proved, or of any person out
of reach of, or not subject to, the process
of the Court, or of any person legally
bound to produce it, and when, after the
notice mentioned in Section 66, such
person does not produce it. Clauses (b)
to (g) of Section 65 specify some other
contingencies
wherein
secondary
evidence relating to a document may be
given, but we are not concerned with
those clauses as it is the common case of
the parties that the present case is not
covered by those clauses.”

11.Principle of law as laid down in

Ashok Dulichand

(supra) was followed in Smt. J.Yashoda v. Smt. K.
Shobha Rani- 2007(6) SCALE 6 by the Division Bench of
CS (OS) No. 1298/2002

Page 9 of 14

the Supreme Court while interpreting the provisions
contained in Sections 63 & 65 of the Indian Evidence Act
read together. It was observed that secondary evidence as
a general rule was admissible only in the absence of
primary evidence.

If the original itself was found to be

inadmissible through failure of the party who files it to
prove it to be valid, the same party is not entitled to
introduce secondary evidence of its contents.

12.It was further observed :

“Section 65 deals with the proof of the
contents of the documents tendered in
evidence. In order to enable a party to
produce secondary evidence it is
necessary for the party to prove
existence and execution of the original
document.
Under
Section
64,
documents are to be provided by
primary evidence. Section 65, however
permits secondary evidence to be given
of the existence, condition or contents
of documents under the circumstances
mentioned. The conditions laid down in
the said Section must be fulfilled before
secondary evidence can be admitted.
Secondary evidence of the contents of a
document cannot be admitted without
non-production of the original being
first accounted for in such a manner as
to bring it within one or other of the
cases provided for in the Section.”

13.The documents sought to be produced by way

CS (OS) No. 1298/2002

of

Page 10 of 14

secondary evidence by the plaintiff are photocopies of the
original sale deeds which according to the plaintiff have
been misplaced and even the certified copies from the SubRegistrar III, Asaf Ali Road, New Delhi, could not be
obtained.

It is unusual and very difficult to accept that

plaintiff could neither file the original documents on the
record along with the plaint which were required as per
law nor could file the original sale deeds at the time of
filing of the documents to prove her case.

Surprisingly,

documents are alleged to have been lost by Barclays
Premier. There is no document to indicate as to when the
plaintiff had placed the said documents in the safety vaults
with the said bank and when she visited the said bank to
take out the original documents to be filed on the Court
record.

The letters placed on record are of the year 2006

whereas the suit was filed in the year 2002.

14.From the letter of the Sub-Registrar placed on record it is
not known as to when the work of renovation was started
and as pointed out earlier the plaintiff has not tried to
contact the Sub-Registrar to find out if the Volume
containing the registered document was now available or
not.

In fact sincere efforts have not been made by the

plaintiff to get the certified copy of the sale deeds from the

CS (OS) No. 1298/2002

Page 11 of 14

Sub-Registrar, Asaf Ali Road, New Delhi.

15. Learned counsel for the plaintiff has referred to Marwari

Kumhar and others v. Bhagwanpuri Guru Ganeshpuri
(2000) 6 SCC 735. In the said case, copy of the judgment
and certified copy of the decree was placed on the record
as certified copy of the judgment was lost or misplaced or
was not available.

Since the respondent did not contend

that the copy which was produced was not correct copy,
the appellant was allowed to lead secondary evidence by
filing the copy of the judgment. The distinction was made
between the provisions contained under Section 65(c) and
(f) of the Indian Evidence Act when the original was lost or
destroyed secondary evidence of the contents of the
document was admissible.

Clause (c) is independent of

clause (f) according to which secondary evidence can be
led, even of a public document, if the conditions as laid
down under clause (c) are fulfilled.

Therefore, if the

original of the public document has been lost or destroyed
then the secondary evidence can be given of a public
document as per law laid down in this judgment which is
not disputed. The fact remains that it is for the plaintiff to
prove that the original were lost or destroyed.

Only plea

taken by the plaintiff is that originals have been misplaced
CS (OS) No. 1298/2002

Page 12 of 14

and the book (volume) of the Sub Registrar containing the
record of the Sale Deeds have also been misplaced.

16.Learned counsel for the plaintiff has referred to Nawab

Singh v. Inderjit Kaur- (1999)4 SCC 413 to support his
prayer for permission to lead secondary evidence. In that
case the rent note was allegedly in possession of the
respondent and therefore, petitioner sought permission to
lead secondary evidence which was allowed.

17.In the present case the defendant has seriously contested
the request of the plaintiff to lead secondary evidence by
way of proving in evidence the photocopies of the original
sale deeds. Be that as it may, sale deeds are registered
documents though it is not believable that plaintiff has
failed either to get the original sale deeds from the bank
wherein she had allegedly kept them or from the SubRegistrar III, Asaf Ali Road, where the sale deeds were
registered. But since the documents are photocopies of the
original sale deeds at this stage when the ownership of the
plaintiff in respect of the properties in her possession is not
disputed except the passage on which the plaintiff claims
her right, it will be in the interest of justice that the
plaintiff is allowed to lead secondary evidence by way of

CS (OS) No. 1298/2002

Page 13 of 14

photocopies of the sale deeds. But plaintiff shall have to
prove these documents by leading proper evidence and not
through an attorney who was not a party to the execution
of the sale deeds. The defendant is at liberty to raise all
just objections to the admissibility and proof of the
photocopies to the registered sale deeds during their
production in evidence and shall have all the rights to cross
examine the witness pertaining to the said two documents.

IA No. 13916/2006

18.This is an application filed by the plaintiff for seeking
extension of time for taking on record the already filed
documents on 20.3.2006.

This application is allowed,

subject to cost of Rs. 10,000/- to be paid by the plaintiff.

CS (OS) No. 1298/2002

List before the Joint Registrar for evidence on 21 st
January, 2008.

OCTOBER 12, 2007
jk

CS (OS) No. 1298/2002

ARUNA SURESH
(JUDGE)

Page 14 of 14

