*

Reportable
HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

RFA (OS) No. 51-52/2005

Pronounced on : August 14, 2007
# UNION OF INDIA & ANR.

.....Appellants

through : Ms. Rekha Palli, Advocate

!

VERSUS
$ SH. H.C. CHANDEL

.....Respondent

through : Mr. Jagjit Singh, Advocate

!

CORAM :* THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
THE HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
(1) Whether reporters of local paper may be
allowed to see the judgment?
(2) To be referred to the reporter or not?
(3) Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?
ARUNA SURESH, J
1. The present appeal is the outcome of judgment and decree
passed by the learned Single Judge of this Court on
5.11.2001 whereby the suit of the respondent (the plaintiff
in the suit) was decreed with the directions to reinstate the
plaintiff in the service ASC forthwith with consequential

RFA (OS) No. 51-52/2005

Page 1 of 18

benefits like salary,

wages and allowances etc.

The

respondent herein had joined army in the Ranks as a clerk
in the clerical post (General Duty) in March 1991.

He was

promoted as 'Naik' in the ranks and his name was also
recommended for higher departmental promotion through
Army Cadet College (in short ACC) to the post of potential
service cadet.

The respondent qualified the written

examination and interview in between the year 1986-87
and was appointed as Service

Cadet.

He was sent for

training to ACC Wing, Indian Military Academy (in short
IMA), Dehradun, where he took training for three and a
half years and on completion of the training, he was sent
for further training to IMA in December 1990.

On

successful completion of training, he was appointed as
Second

Lieutenant

in

the

regular

Army

and

was

commissioned by the President of India on 14.12.1991.

2. During his training, he was asked to give options of his
service and also the same at SSB interview forms.

The

respondent opted for service cadre of the army giving
reasons that he was above 30 years old and had no
technical aptitude for artillery and related fields. However,
he was posted as officer into Fighting Arm, Regiment of
Artillery form instead of posted in service branch as opted
RFA (OS) No. 51-52/2005

Page 2 of 18

by him.

Reluctantly, the respondent joined the Artillery

School Deolali on 6.1.1992.
representations

to

the

He continued to send his
concerned

authorities

for

considering his transfer to service branch of the army vide
letters dated 5.2.1992, 11.5.1992 and 4.3.1993.

3. When the respondent was making representations for
transfer of his cadre from Arms to Service, he was required
to qualify Young Officers Course which he could not
succeed.

His

Commanding

recommended

his

letter

recommended

by

the

dated

Officer
4.3.1993

Formation

favourably
and

further

Commander

vide

endorsement dated 31.3.1993 for change of cadre of the
respondent from Arms to Service. But no action was taken.
Vide letter dated 21.8.1993, the respondent was asked by
the authorities to submit a detailed case for transfer from
Arms to Service as requested which was duly submitted by
him. In spite of the details provided by the respondent as
well as protests by him for his placement to Platoon
Weapons to the Infantry School, Mhow, his request was
rejected vide letter dated 10.11.1993.

4. The show cause notice dated 23.9.1994 was served upon
the respondent under Army Rule 13A to show cause why he
RFA (OS) No. 51-52/2005

Page 3 of 18

should not be removed from service as he had not qualified
examination of Young Officers Course twice within four
years of his service which was duly replied vide letter
dated 7.10.1994. The respondent was asked to resign or
otherwise he would be compulsorily retired vide letter
dated 10.2.1995.

Since the respondent refused to take

voluntarily retirement giving reasons in the communication
dated 14.2.1995 and 20.2.1995, he was compulsorily
retired vide order dated 27.3.1995 under Section 19 of the
Army Act read with Army Rule 13A on payment of pension
and gratuity etc. This termination order and the action on
the

part

of

the

authorities

was

challenged

by

the

respondent by way of a suit.

5. The appellants before us were duly served with summons
for settlement of issues but none appeared on their behalf;
despite the fact that opportunities were given to file
written statement on different dates. They were ordered to
be proceeded ex parte vide order dated 26.7.1999. After
considering the evidence and the documents on record, the
learned Single Judge was pleased to decree the suit of the
respondent vide his judgment and decree dated 5.11.2001.

6. The appellants filed an application under Order 9 Rule 13
RFA (OS) No. 51-52/2005

Page 4 of 18

CPC for setting aside ex parte decree which was dismissed
by the learned Additional District Judge on 21.3.2005. In
the present appeal, the appellants have assailed the order
of the Additional District Judge dated 21.3.2005 as well as
the final judgment dated 5.11.2001 and prayed for setting
aside the ex-parte judgment dated 5.11.2001 and also the
order rejecting the application of the appellant dated
21.3.2005.

7. Let us first examine the order of the Additional District
Judge

dated

21.3.2005

whereby

she

rejected

the

application of the appellants filed under Order 9 Rule 13
CPC.

It is submitted by the learned counsel for the

appellants that appellants were not in the know of the suit
filed by the respondent till they received the copy of the
final judgment from the respondent on 28.12.2001. It was
on receipt of this judgment that the Government counsel
was contacted who inspected the record on 9.1.2002 and
since the process was not served on MS Branch, the
appellants could not know of the filing of the present suit
and therefore could not defend it.

Immediately, after

coming to know of the ex parte judgment and order, they
moved an application under Order 9 Rule 13 CPC. Learned
counsel for the respondent has refuted that the appellants
RFA (OS) No. 51-52/2005

Page 5 of 18

were not in the know of the pendency of the suit filed him.
He submits that summons were duly served and number of
opportunities were granted for filing the written statement
despite the fact that none was appearing on behalf of the
appellants (defendants in the suit).
rightly proceeded ex parte.

Therefore, the Court

The application was time

barred as it had been filed after 30 days of passing of the
decree and therefore, was not sustainable.

8. After perusal of the order of the learned Additional District
Judge, we agree with the findings given by her. The suit
was filed by the respondent in July 1998. Since thereafter
defendants were sent number of summons on different
dates. As per the record, they were reported to have been
served for 2.12.1998 but non appeared.

The learned

Single

file

Judge

granted

opportunities

to

written

statement on 2.12.1998 and 3.3.1999 and finally on
22.3.1999 cost was also imposed upon the appellants.
Neither the written statement was filed nor cost was paid.
Finally, on 26.7.1999, the appellants were proceeded ex
parte.

9. Despite the fact that the appellants were proceeded ex
parte, vide order dated 1.10.1999, to ensure complete
RFA (OS) No. 51-52/2005

Page 6 of 18

justice fresh steps were ordered to be taken for service on
the respondent. Despite service of notice of default on the
Standing Counsel of Union of India, none appeared on
16.11.1999.

Finally, on completion of trial ex parte the

judgment and decree dated 5.11.2001 was passed against
the appellants.

10.To say that the summons should have been served upon
the MS branch of the appellants is not acceptable as the
summons were served on Chief of Army Staff and Ministry
of Defence which fact is established from acknowledgment
due cards duly registered for the Chief of Army Staff and
Ministry of Defence and received back in the registry of
this Court. Even the summons sent through the process
server were also served upon the appellants in September
1998.

It is pertinent to mention here that the standing

counsel for the Government of India had inspected the
record on 2.11.1999.

Despite this the appellants did not

care to appear and contest the suit.

Therefore, we fully

agree with the observations of the learned Additional
District Judge which are:
“As such, again on 16.11.1999, the
defendant was ordered to be proceeded
ex pate. The record reveals that even
the standing counsel for the defendant
had inspected the file on 02.11.1999.
RFA (OS) No. 51-52/2005

Page 7 of 18

Despite that, no appearance was put.
Under the circumstances, it becomes
clear that despite due service, none
appeared for the defendant without any
satisfactory explanation. It is alleged in
the application that even the standing
counsel never intimated the concerned
department of the notice. However, no
such affidavit of the advocate has been
placed
on
record.
Under
the
circumstances, the defendant has failed
to show that they were not duly served
with the summons.”

11.The appellants have tried to allege that they came to know
of the judgment and decree only when they received the
copy of the judgment and decree on 28.12.2001 from the
plaintiff. From the letter produced on the record under
acknowledgment of the respondent, it is clear that copy of
the judgment was duly delivered to the Ministry of Defence
on 19.12.2001. Even the copy of the judgment sent to the
department by post was also received by the appellants on
21.12.2001 as per the acknowledgment due.

Therefore,

the learned ADJ rightly rejected the plea of the appellants
that they came to know about the judgment only on
28.12.2001.

It is significant to say here that though the

appellants have taken a plea that summons were not
served upon the MS branch of the appellants, they could
not know of the pendency of the suit but they did
acknowledge that they received the copy of the judgment
RFA (OS) No. 51-52/2005

Page 8 of 18

served by the plaintiff on the appellants though it was
never sent to MS branch of the appellants.

Thus it is

obvious that the appellants after coming to know of the
filing of the suit and after service of summons did not take
interest to contest the suit. Therefore, delay in filing the
application under Order 9 Rule 13 CPC being without merit
was rightly dismissed.

We do not find any reasons to

interfere in the order of the learned Additional District
Judge.

12.Coming to the merits of the case, the respondent
challenged the validity of the show cause notice under
Army Rule 13A as it had not been issued by Chief of Army
Staff but by an officer of the Rank of Colonel.

The

respondent also challenged the order of compulsory
retirement on similar grounds as it was not issued by the
Chief of Army Staff and was against the rules. Learned
counsel for the appellants argued that even the rules
shown to the Court and relied upon by the respondents
were not in enforce at the relevant time as Rule 13A had
already been amended and as per the rule, besides the
Chief of Army Staff, Military Secretary is also empowered
to issue show cause notice for compulsory retirement of an
officer.
RFA (OS) No. 51-52/2005

Page 9 of 18

13.Rule 13A of the Army Rules, 1954 as amended, reads as
follows:
“13A. Termination of service of an
officer by the Central Government on his
failure to qualify at an examination or
course.--(1) When an officer does not
appear at or, having appeared fails to
qualify, at the retention examination or
promotion examination or any other
basic course or examination within the
time or extended time specified in
respect of that examination or course,
the Chief of the Army Staff [or the
Military Secretary] shall call upon the
officer to show cause why he should not
be compulsorily retired or removed from
the service.
(2) In the event of the explanation
being considered by the Chief of the
Army Staff [or the Military Secretary] to
be unsatisfactory, the matter shall be
submitted to the Central Government for
orders, together with the officer's
explanation and the recommendation of
the Chief of the Army Staff [or the
Military Secretary] as to whether the
officer should be-(a) called upon to retire; or
(b) called upon to resign.
(3) The Central Government, after
considering the explanation, if any, of the
officer and the recommendation of the
Chief of the Army Staff [or the Military
Secretary] may call upon the officer to
retire or resign, and on his refusing to do
so, the officer may be compulsorily
retired or removed from the service on
pension or gratuity, if any, admissible to
him.”

14.Bare perusal of the provisions clearly indicate that when
RFA (OS) No. 51-52/2005

Page 10 of 18

an officer fails to appear or does not qualify retention
examination or promotion examination or any other basic
course of examination within the time or extended time
specified in respect of that examination or course, it is only
the Chief of Army Staff or the Military Secretary who can
call upon the said officer to show cause why he should not
be compulsorily retired or removed from the service. On
receipt of explanation which is to be considered by the
Chief of Army Staff or the Military Secretary as the case
may be, if found to be unsatisfactory, the matter has to be
sent to the Central Government together with the Officer's
explanation and the recommendations of the Chief of Army
Staff or Military Secretary to decide if the officer should be
called upon to retire or to resign.

It is for the Central

Government to consider the explanation of the officer and
the recommendation of the Chief of the Army Staff or the
Military Secretary, and decide whether to call upon the
officer to retire or resign, and on his refusing to do so the
officer may be compulsorily retired or removed from the
service

on payment of

pension or

gratuity,

if

any,

admissible to him.

15.Coming to the present case, the respondent H.C. Chandel
was served with the show cause notice dated 23.9.1994
RFA (OS) No. 51-52/2005

Page 11 of 18

under Army Rule 13A with a covering letter dated
26.9.1994. This letter is signed by Rajiv Sharma, Colonel.
In this show cause notice respondent was called upon to
submit his written reply within fifteen days.

This show

cause notice is signed by I.K. Koshy, Colonel, MS 8 for
Military Secretary. Thus, it is obvious that this show cause
notice was not served upon the respondent either by the
Chief

of

Army

Staff

or

by

the

Military

Secretary.

Appellants could not have given effect to a show cause
notice issued by a person who had no authority to do the
same.

However, this notice was duly replied by the

respondent.

Therefore, it cannot be said that the show

cause notice dated 23.9.1994 sent to the respondent was in
accordance with the Army Rule 13A as it is invalid and
against the rules.

16.After considering the recommendations on behalf of the
Military Secretary, the Government of India issued an
order dated 3.2.1999 asking the Chief of Army Staff to call
upon the respondent to seek voluntary retirement and in
case of his refusal he should be compulsorily retired on
payment of pension and gratuity.

This order was duly

communicated to the respondent.

Even the compulsory

retirement letter dated 27.3.1995 was signed and issued by
RFA (OS) No. 51-52/2005

Page 12 of 18

J.K.

Sharma,

Civilian

Staff

Officer,

Retirement for Military Secretary.

DANS/Premature

Mr. J.K. Sharma also

signed this letter for and on behalf of Military Secretary.
This letter is neither signed by the Chief of Army Staff or
by the Military Secretary which is in complete violation of
Army Rule 13A.

However, respondent refused to take

voluntary retirement and again requested the department
to consider his representation favourably and transfer him
from Arms to Service.

17.In the case of Government of India, rep. by Secretary,

Ministry of Defence, New Delhi and others v. Captain
H.R. Singha – 1994 (7) SLR 305 , the Division Bench of
the Andhra Pradesh High Court considered the principles
and the provisions of Rule 13A of the Army Rules. It was
observed:
“A reading of Rule 13-A of the
rules, as extracted above, would show a
two tier method for effecting retirement
of an Officer on the ground of his having
failed to pass the promotion examination.
At the first stage, the Chief of the Army
Staff is mandatorily required to issue a
show cause notice to the Officer as to
why he should not be compulsorily
retired or removed from service. If an
explanation is submitted by the Officer,
it is to be considered by the Chief of the
Army
Staff,
which,
if
found
unsatisfactory, he shall report the matter
to the Central Government for orders
RFA (OS) No. 51-52/2005

Page 13 of 18

along with his own recommendation,
which is to be either to call upon the
Officer to retire or to call upon him to
resign. It is to be noticed that such an
action has to be taken by the Chief of the
Army Staff only if he considers the
explanation of the officer unsatisfactory
which means that he has also the
discretion, if he is otherwise satisfied
with the explanation to drop the
proceedings.
If
how
ever
the
recommendation is made to the Central
Government, they are to first consider
the
explanation
along
with
the
recommendation and may call upon the
officer to retire or resign. If the Officer
refuses to comply with that direction, he
may be retired compulsorily or removed
on payment of pension and gratuity, as
may be admissible to him.
The
consideration
by
the
Central
Government, hence, is at two stages.
The first being on receiving the
recommendation from the Chief of the
Army Staff where the explanation of the
officer is also taken into account and
Central Government makes up its mind
as
to
whether
to
accept
the
recommendation or not.
If the
recommendation is accepted, the matter
is to be dropped. On the contrary, if the
recommendation is accepted, direction is
to be issued to the Officer to submit
papers either for retirement or for
resignation. That is the end of the first
stage. if the Officer does not comply
with the direction and refuses, the
Government may pass an order either
retiring him or removing him from
service. The refusal of the Officer may be
either express by his communicating as
such or even by his silence. But if while
refusing to comply with the direction, the
officer brings to the notice of the Central
Government facts justifying his refusal
and pleading as to why he should be
retained in service, it is open to the
RFA (OS) No. 51-52/2005

Page 14 of 18

Central Government to consider that and
decide as to whether the ultimate order
of retirement or removal is to be
passed.”
It was further observed:
“The
above
reading
of
the
provisions of Clause (3) of Rule 13-A is
also in consonance with the principles of
natural justice. Rules of natural justice
are not only sacrosanct but are also to be
read as of in-built provisions of all
statutes even if their compliance is not
expressly provided for.
The only
exception to observance of natural
justice in any State action either in
compliance of the statutory provision or
otherwise is where it has been excluded
expressly or implicity. It is for such
reason that the principles of audi
alteram partem is the unwritten law of
all administrative actions subject to its
exclusion by express words or by
necessary implication. Hence so far as
the second part of sub-rule (3) is
concerned, the observance of the
principles of natural justice before
actually passing the order of compulsory
retirement or removal is a necessary
postulate.”

18. In Capt. Virendra Kumar vs. Union of India – 1981

SC 947, the Supreme Court while interpreting Rule 15A of
the Army Rule, 1954, which is identical to Rule 13A before
us, held that these rules lay down the procedural basis and
prescribe a certain procedure which must be followed. It is
for the Chief of the Army Staff who has to satisfy himself
that the officer is unfit to be retained in service. Such a
RFA (OS) No. 51-52/2005

Page 15 of 18

satisfaction is not purely subjective and only on formation
of opinion that Chief of Army Staff is required to proceed
further. Once the Chief of Army Staff finds the explanation
of the officer unsatisfactory, he has to give opportunity to
the concerned officer to make a representation may be to
the Central Government.

If the basic procedure is not

adhered to by the top officials of the service, while
terminating or removing him from the service, such an
illegal order if enforced is likely to create lawlessness in
the defence force which is a grave risk.

(Also referred to

by the learned Single Judge)

19.The learned Single Judge considering the validity and
legality of the show cause notice rightly observed as
follows:
“There is no gainsaying the fact
that wherever power is conferred upon a
particular
person
it
cannot
be
transferred or usurped by any other
functionary unless it is provided under
the rules. If a particular authority is
required to call for the explanation of an
officer or employee and make his
recommendations for his removal from
service that authority or person alone
has
a
right
to
make
such
recommendations after recording his
non-satisfaction. Even delegation by
such an authority to a lower functionary
is not permissible if the rules do not vest
such a power in the said authority.
Merely because a person vested with the
RFA (OS) No. 51-52/2005

Page 16 of 18

authority
to
call
explanation
or
recommend removal or compulsory
retirement happens to be top brass does
not mean that he has inherent powers to
or can suo motu delegate his authority to
a lower functionary.”...
Thus if any act either in the form of
calling upon the personnel to show cause
as to why he should not be compulsorily
retired or removed from service is done
by any other person or authority than
the one prescribed under the rules, such
an act suffers from vice of illegality as
well as irregularity on account of noncompliance of the mandate of the rules
as the procedure set out in the rule has
to be followed in letter and spirit.”

20.As discussed above, the show cause notice and the
termination notice were neither issued nor signed by the
Chief of Army Staff or Military Secretary for that matter.
Therefore, there is apparent clear violation of Army Rule
13A which renders the order of removal as invalid.

21.The services of the respondent were terminated because
he failed to clear Young Officer's Course examination twice
within four years as was required.

Grievance of the

respondent is justified when he claimed that he made
number of representations to the department after his
selection to be posted as service cadet when he qualified
the written test.
on clerical

post

RFA (OS) No. 51-52/2005

Initially he was in the army in the Ranks
while

under

training

and

even

on

Page 17 of 18

completion of training he had given an option for service
cadre but, he was given army cadre though he was fit for
the service according to his temperament and also on his
various representations strongly recommended by an
Commanding Officer for his transfer from Arms to the
Service. Instead of considering his representations, the
appellants decided to proceed with the show cause notice
and compulsorily retired the respondent. The respondent
has shown few cases of discrimination where the officers
despite having failed to qualify Young Officer's Course
were retained in the service.

This discrimination is in

violation of principles of natural justice.

22.Thus, we are in consonance with the observations of the
learned

Single

5.11.2001.

Judge

given

in

his

judgment

dated

There is no illegality or infirmity in the said

judgment and decree. Therefore, we find no merits in this
appeal which is accordingly dismissed.

ARUNA SURESH, J

A.K.SIKRI, J
AUGUST 14, 2007
jk

RFA (OS) No. 51-52/2005

Page 18 of 18

