*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Arb. A. No. 340/2007
Date of decision : September 14, 2007

# M/S DEEPAK SHARMA GOVT. CONTRACTOR & SUPPLIER
..... PETITIONER
!
Through : Mr. Rajeev Kumar, Advocate
Versus
$ MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF DELHI & ANR.
.....RESPONDENTS
^
%

Through :

Ms. Sumita Kapil, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
(1) Whether reporters of local paper may be
allowed to see the judgment?
(2) To be referred to the reporter or not?
(3) Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

ARUNA SURESH, J. (Oral)
1. Present application has been filed under Section 11 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to
Act) when the respondent corporation failed to appoint an
arbitrator despite service of notice as required under Section 11
of the Act.

2. Petitioner happened to be a Govt. contractor & building material
supplier.

He had been doing construction work for various

departments including the respondent. Petitioner was awarded

AA No. 340/2007

Page 1 of 3

work order No. D/EE(Pr.)CZ/2005/32 dated 14.3.2005.

A

dispute arose between the parties when petitioner requested for
release of the payment due to him for work executed by him
from the respondent but respondent failed.

3. Clause 25 of the Contract contains arbitration agreement. The
relevant part of this arbitration agreement reads as follows:

“25 (i) ....The CE shall give his
decision within 30 days of receipt of
contractors appeal.
If the contractor is
dissatisfied with this decision, the contractor
shall within a period of 30 days from receipt
of the decision, give notice to the
Commissioner, M.C.D. for appointment of
arbitrator....
(ii) Except where the decision has
become final, binding and conclusive in
terms of Sub-Para(i) above disputes or
difference shall be referred for adjudication
through arbitration a sole arbitrator
appointed by the Commissioner, MCD.
....The arbitration shall be conducted
in accordance with the provisions of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (26,
of 1996) or any statutory modifications or reenactment thereof and the rules made
thereunder and for the time being in force
shall apply to the arbitration proceeding
under this clause.”
4. Invoking the arbitration clause, petitioner, after following the
procedure as prescribed under the contract when failed to get
the payment from the respondent, served a notice dated
25.4.2007

on the respondent seeking appointment of an

independent arbitrator to resolve the claims/disputes as detailed
in the notice itself.

AA No. 340/2007

Page 2 of 3

5. Respondent department has not disputed that there is an
arbitration agreement inter se the parties for referring the
dispute in question for adjudication to a sole arbitrator to be so
appointed. It is also not disputed that the respondent failed to
appoint an arbitrator as per the arbitration agreement on
receipt of notice within specified period of thirty days. There is
consensus that there is a dispute inter se the parties within the
meaning of the arbitration clause.

6. Hence I hereby appoint Sh. S.M. Chopra, retired Additional
District & Sessions Judge, Flat No. 181, Deshbandhu Apartment,
Kalkaji, New Delhi, as the sole arbitrator in this case.

His fees

is fixed at Rs. 30,000/- to be shared by both the parties equally.
Copy of the order be served upon the arbitrator so appointed.
Application stands allowed.

7. File be consigned to record room.

ARUNA SURESH, J
SEPTEMBER 14, 2007
jk

AA No. 340/2007

Page 3 of 3

