*

“REPORTABLE”
HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

OMP No. 471/2007 & IA No. 9626/2007
Date of decision : December 17, 2007

# Sh. Satinder Narayan Singh
!

..... Petitioner

Through : Mr. J.M. Sabharwal, Sr.Advocate
Ms. Geetanjali Chaurasia,Adv.
Mr. S.K. Sabharwal, Advocate
Ms. Payal Shrivastava, Advocate
Versus

$ Indian Labour Cooperative Society
Ltd. & Ors.
..... RESPONDENTS
^

Through : Mr. Vivek Singh, Advocate
for respondents No. 1 & 2.
Mr. Somdutt Kaushik, Advocate
for respondent No. 3.

%
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
(1) Whether reporters of local paper may be
allowed to see the judgment?
(2) To be referred to the reporter or not?

Yes

(3) Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

Yes

ARUNA SURESH, J. (Oral)
1. Present objection petition has been filed under section 27
of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter
referred to as “Act”) by the petitioner as dispute inter se
the

parties

is

pending

adjudication

arbitrator Dr.V.K. Aggarwal.

OMP No. 471/2007

before

the

sole

During the proceedings

Page 1 of 6

present petitioner filed an application for summoning of
two witnesses, namely, Chief Executive, Indian Labour
Cooperative
Chairman,

Society
Indian

Ltd.
Labour

and

Shri

R.S.

Cooperative

Nehra,
Society

ExLtd.

However, vide order dated 18th May 2007, the sole
arbitrator allowed the examination of Chief Executive of
Indian Labour Cooperative Society but dis-allowed the
petitioner from examining Shri R.S. Nehra with the
observations that he is not a relevant witness and fixed the
matter for 4th and 5th June 2007 for examination-in-chief of
the Chief Executive of Indian Labour Cooperative Society.
According to the petitioner Shri R.S. Nehra, Ex-Chairman
is a relevant witness and therefore he moved another
application for examination of Shri R.S. Nehra along with
six other witnesses, namely, Dr. N.P. Sharma,

Shri

Narender Singh, Shri Vinod Kumar Sherawat, Shri Arun
Shokeen, Shri P.D. Lohcheb and Shri Kushal K. Sharma.
However, this application was dismissed by the sole
arbitrator holding that the application was without merit
and the matter was fixed for final arguments for 25 th
August, 2007. This has resulted into filing of the present
petition under section 27 of the Act before this court.

2. I have heard learned counsel for the parties in detail and
OMP No. 471/2007

Page 2 of 6

have carefully perused the record.

3. Section 27 of the Act permits the court assistance in taking
evidence if the arbitral tribunal or a party with the
approval of the arbitral tribunal applies to the court for
assistance in taking evidence. In the present case, the
petitioner has not obtained the approval of the arbitral
tribunal before moving the court seeking its assistance for
taking evidence by invocation of section 27 of the Act.
Therefore, the application as filed is not sustainable.

4. The Act is absolute silent about the procedure or the
remedy which may be available to a party if the arbitral
tribunal refuses to examine the witnesses of a party
holding that they are not relevant for the proper disposal of
the dispute inter se the parties pending adjudication before
him. Therefore, the only remedy available to the petitioner
is to file objections under section 34 of the Act, if on
pronouncement of an award, he is of the view that the
arbitrator has not adjudicated upon the disputes under
reference in accordance with law and procedure.

5. In fact, the present application is nothing but an appeal
against the orders of the sole arbitrator dated 18th May,
OMP No. 471/2007

Page 3 of 6

2007 and 23rd July, 2007.

6. By virtue of section 37 of the Act, the aggrieved party has
the right to file an appeal against the order of arbitrator (a)
granting or refusing to grant any measure under section 9,
(b) setting aside or refusing to set aside an arbitral award
under section 34; (c) accepting the plea referred to subsection (2) or sub-section (3) of section 16; or (d) granting
or refusing to grant an interim measure under section 17.
No appeal is permitted against the order passed by an
arbitrator declining the request of a party to examine its
witnesses for the reason that the arbitrator found them as
irrelevant for the purposes of adjudication of the disputes
inter se the parties.

7. By way

of this objection petition, the petitioner has not

sought the assistance of this court in examining the
witnesses.

Rather he has sought directions for setting

aside of the order dated 18.05.2007 and 23.07.2007 and
for allowing the application of the petitioner dated 18th
July, 2007 which was dismissed by the arbitrator on
23.07.2007. Therefore, the relief claimed by the petitioner
is a relief which could be claimed only in an appeal.

OMP No. 471/2007

Page 4 of 6

8. Learned counsel for the petitioner has referred to “Lalit
Madhan Vs. The Building Committee, Council of
Institute of Company Secretaries of India & Anr., AIR
1995 Delhi 180”. However, the said case pertain to the
arbitral proceedings under the Arbitration Act, 1940 which
has been drastically amended by way of the present
provision contains under section 27 of the Act.

9. In the said case the arbitrator had dis-allowed the request
of the petitioner for moving the court for taking the
summons to the witnesses who had already been allowed to
be examined. This is not the case before this court in the
present petition.

10.Similarly in 'Harinarayan

G. Bajaj

Vs. Sharedeal

Financial Consultants Pvt. Ltd. & Anr., 2003(2) Arb.
LR 359 (Bombay)”, the petitioner made an application
during the course of arbitral proceedings for assistance of
the court in taking evidence. This application was rejected
by the Tribunal.

Under these circumstances, it was

observed that on rejection of the application under section
27 of the Act, the petitioner had the option to challenge the
said order.

OMP No. 471/2007

Page 5 of 6

11.As already pointed out above, no such application was
moved by the petitioner before the sole arbitrator for
seeking assistance of the court for examination of the
witnesses. Instead second application was moved for
examining of the witnesses rather the additional evidence,
which was rejected.

12.The arbitrator has already completed the proceedings and
closed the arguments of the parties as they failed to
address their respective arguments on their claims and
objections vide his order dated 11th December, 2007 and
permitted the parties to file their written submission within
two weeks.

13.Therefore, I find no merit in the application, the same is
dismissed. Petitioner is at liberty to file objections under
section 34 of the Act if he is aggrieved of the award which
is likely to be pronounced by the sole arbitrator.

14.

File be consigned to record room.

December 17, 2007
vk

OMP No. 471/2007

ARUNA SURESH
(JUDGE)

Page 6 of 6

