*

“REPORTABLE”
HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

IA No. 3678/07 & CS (OS) No. 2263/2006
Date of decision : November 19th 2007

#
!

SANDEEP BATRA

..... PLAINTIFF

Through : Mr. Tigar Singh, Advocate
Mr. Manmeet Singh, Advocate
Versus

$

GE CAPITAL SERVICES INDIA

.....DEFENDANT

Through : Mr. Sohail Dutt, Advocate
Mr. Ram Gupta, Advocate

^
%

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
(1) Whether reporters of local paper may be
allowed to see the judgment?
(2) To be referred to the reporter or not?

YES

(3) Whether the judgment should be reported YES
in the Digest ?
ARUNA SURESH, J.
1. Present application has been filed by the defendant
under Order 7 Rule 11 read with Section 11, Order 2
Rule 2 Code of Civil Procedure (hereinafter referred to
as CPC) for rejection of the plaint. The facts giving rise
to the present case are that the plaintiff filed a suit for
declaration,

permanent

and

mandatory

injunction

challenging his termination by the defendant company
CS (OS) No. 2263/2006

Page 1 of 14

vide letter dated 11.8.2000 before the Civil Judge, Tis
Hazari Court, Delhi.

In the said suit, declaration was

sought that the said letter be declared bad in law and by
way of mandatory injunction he sought direction to be
issued to the defendant to reinstate the plaintiff into the
services and pay entire salary and by way of permanent
injunction restrained order to be issued against the
defendant from carrying out any recovery of housing
loan from the plaintiff.

Vide judgment dated 1.10.2004,

the learned trial judge was pleased to decree the suit of
the plaintiff as regards his relief for declaration holding
that termination letter dated 11.8.2000 is bad in law
being not in conformity with the terms and conditions of
the appointment letter. However the suit for mandatory
and perpetual injunction was dismissed in view of the
provisions contained in Section 41 of the Specific Relief
Act. The learned trial court also awarded one month's
salary in lieu of the notice period and three months'
salary at the rate last drawn as the nominal damages
suffered by the plaintiff.

It seems that an appeal is

pending adjudication against the said judgment and
decree before learned District Judge, Tis Hazari Court,
Delhi. However, decree was prepared on 5.7.2006 after
plaintiff paid the deficient court fees.
CS (OS) No. 2263/2006

Page 2 of 14

2. Now by way of the present suit, plaintiff has claimed
damages for termination of his services for the period
from August 2000 when his services were terminated for
a period of 74 months i.e. till the date of the filing of the
present suit calculated at the rate of Rs. 35,000/-, the
gross salary which the plaintiff was allegedly getting at
the time of termination of his services.

3. Defendant in its written statement as well as by way of
this application has challenged the maintainability of the
present suit as according to the defendant, it is barred
under the provisions of Order 2 Rule 2 and principle of
constructive resjudicata under Section 11 of the CPC.

4. Learned counsel for the applicant/defendant has argued
that contract of employment is personal in nature and
relief of damages as claimed by the plaintiff in the
present suit was available to him when he filed suit for
declaration and injunction in the year 2000.

Since

plaintiff did not claim damages in the said suit he is
debarred from claiming damages by way of present suit
by virtue of Order 2 Rule 2 and Section 11 of the CPC.
He has referred to Nandganj Sihori Sugar Co. Ltd.,
CS (OS) No. 2263/2006

Page 3 of 14

Rae Bareli and another v. Badri Nath Dixit and
others – AIR 1991 SC 1525, Emani Venkataramayya
and another v. Lalbibi Saheba and others – Air 1935
Madras 90, K.V. George v. The Secrtary to Govt,
Water and Power Dept. Trivandrum and another –
AIR 1990 SC 53 and Haridas Mondal v. Anath Nath
Mittra – AIR 1961 SC 1419 to support his submissions.

5. Learned counsel for the plaintiff has submitted that at
the time when the present suit was filed the plaintiff
could not have known about the maintainability of his
suit for the relief of mandatory and perpetual injunction
and therefore, he could not claim damages against the
defendant in the said suit. Therefore, it being a distinct
relief the present suit is not hit by the provisions of
Section 11 and Order 2 Rule 2 CPC.

6. Order 2 Rule 2 CPC reads as follows:
“2. Suit to include the whole
claim.--(1) Every suit shall include
the whole of the claim which the
plaintiff is entitled to make in
respect of the cause of action; but
a plaintiff may relinquish any
portion of his claim in order to
bring
the
suit
within
the
jurisdiction of any Court.
(2) Relinquishment of part of
claim.--Where a plaintiff omits to
CS (OS) No. 2263/2006

Page 4 of 14

sue in respect of, or intentionally
relinquishes, any portion of his
claim, he shall not afterwards sue
in respect of the portion so omitted
or relinquished.
(3) Omission to sue for one of
several reliefs.-- A person entitled
to more than one relief in respect
of the same cause of action may
sue for all or any of such reliefs,
but if he omits, except with the
leave of the Court, to sue for all
such
reliefs,
he
shall
not
afterwards sue for any relief so
omitted.”
7. From careful reading of these provisions, it is obvious
that once the plaintiff comes to a court of law for getting
relief basing his case on existing cause of action he must
include in a suit the whole claim pertaining to the cause
of action.

If, however, plaintiff gives up a part of the

claim pertaining to that cause of action or based on the
said cause of action as pleaded in the suit or he omits to
sue in connection with the same he is subsequently
debarred to resurrect the said claim based on the same
cause of action. However, as per sub clause 3 of Rule 2,
defendant must show to the Court that the second suit is
based on the same cause of action on which the earlier
suit was based and if he succeeds in showing that the
second suit is based on the same cause of action on
which the earlier suit was filed and the plaintiff had not

CS (OS) No. 2263/2006

Page 5 of 14

claimed the relief which was available to him at the time
of filing of the earlier suit, he is debarred from claiming
such relief by way of a subsequent suit unless he had
obtained leave in the first suit for filing another suit for
the relief based on the same cause of action from the
Court where earlier suit was filed.

8. In the present case, plaintiff neither claimed the relief of
damages nor sought any permission under Order 2, sub
clause 3 CPC seeking permission to file a suit for
damages by way of another suit. Now it has to be seen if
the present suit for damages is based on a different
cause of action and is independent of the reliefs claimed
by the plaintiff in the earlier suit and if the present suit is
maintainable as filed.

Cause of action has been

explained in Halsbury's Law of England (Fourth Edition)
in the following manner:
“'Cause of Action' has been
defined as meaning simply a
factual situation the existence of
which entitles one person to obtain
from the Court a remedy against
other person. The phrase has been
held from earliest time to include
every fact which is material to be
proved to entitle the plaintiff to
succeed, and every fact which a
defendant would have a right to
traverse. 'Cause of action' has also
been taken to mean that particular
CS (OS) No. 2263/2006

Page 6 of 14

act on the part of the defendant
which gives the plaintiff his cause
of complaint, or the subject matter
of grievance founding the action,
not merely the technical cause of
action” (Quoted from AIR 2004 SC
1761).
9. In Kunjan Nair Sivaraman Nair v. Narayanan Nair

and others – AIR 2004 SC 1761, it has been observed:
“We shall first deal with the
question regarding applicability of
Order II, Rule 2 of the Code. Said
provision lays down the general
principle that suit must include
whole claim which the plaintiff is
entitled to make in respect of a
cause of action, and if he does not
do so then he is visited with the
consequences indicated therein. It
provides that all reliefs arising out
of the same cause of action shall
be set out in one and the same
suit, and further prescribes the
consequences if the plaintiff omits
to do so. In other words Order II,
Rule 2 centers round one and the
same cause of action.”
10.Coming to the facts of this case, the cause of action in
the present suit for damages is the same as was the
cause of action in suit No. 449/2003 for declaration,
mandatory and perpetual injunction. In the said suit, the
cause

of

11.8.2000.

action

was

the

termination

letter

dated

In the present suit also in para 14 of the

plaint, plaintiff has averred that cause of action had

CS (OS) No. 2263/2006

Page 7 of 14

accrued in his favour on 11.8.2000 when he was thrown
out of job and again on 1.10.2004 when the suit was
decided and on 5.7.2006 when the decree was prepared.
This Court in its order dated 15.1.2007 observed that the
cause of action could not have accrued from the date of
judgment or the decree as the decree of declaration
merely declared the rights of the parties as they existed
at the relevant time.

In this case, the decree of

declaration with regard to termination of service would
relate back to the date of termination.

The cause of

action in this case arose in favour of the plaintiff only
when his services were terminated vide letter dated
11.8.2000.

This Court had made these observations

while deciding the question of limitation regarding the
claim of the plaintiff. Therefore, the cause of action in
the earlier instituted suit decided by the learned Civil
Judge and the cause of action which is the basis of the
present suit are the same.

11.Learned counsel for the plaintiff has referred to State

of

Maharashra

and

another

v.

National

Construction Company, Bombay and another –
(1996) 1 SCC 735 where a subsequent suit filed for
damages for breach of the contract was held as not
CS (OS) No. 2263/2006

Page 8 of 14

barred under Order 2 Rule 2 CPC or Section 11 of CPC.
In the said case the first suit was for enforcement of the
bank guarantee against the guarantor as the bank
guarantee was going to expire and the second suit was
for damages for breach of contract.

Both the claims

being independent of each other, it was held that
provisions of Order 2 Rule 2 CPC did not apply to the
second suit. Learned counsel for the plaintiff referred to

Kunjan Nair Sivaraman Nair v. Narayanan Nair and
others (supra) wherein an earlier suit was filed for a
decree for declaration of right and title of plaintiffs to
plaint schedule property and their possession.

In the

first suit the title of the plaintiff was upheld but prayer
for injunction was rejected as possession was not found.
Subsequent suit was filed for recovery of possession.
Under these circumstances, it was held that the second
suit was not barred as both the suits were different.
Facts of the present case are different and are not
covered by any of the above cited two judgments relied
upon by the plaintiff.

12.While dismissing the claim of the plaintiff for mandatory
and permanent injunction, provisions of Section 41 of the
Specific Relief Act were kept in mind by the trial court.
CS (OS) No. 2263/2006

Page 9 of 14

Section 40 of the Specific Relief Act reads as follows:
“40. Damages in lieu of, or in
addition to, injunction.--(1) The
plaintiff in a suit for perpetual
injunction under section 38, or
mandatory
injunction
under
section 39, may claim damages
either in addition to, or in
substitution for, such injunction
and the court may, if it thinks fit,
award such damages.
(2)
No
relief
for
damages shall be granted under
this section unless the plaintiff has
claimed such relief in his plaint:
Provided that where no such
damages have been claimed in the
plaint, the court shall, at any stage
of the proceedings, allow the
plaintiff to emend the plaint on
such terms as may be just for
including such claim.
(3) The dismissal of a suit to
prevent the breach of an obligation
existing in favour of the plaintiff
shall bar his right to sue for
damages for such breach.”
13.Thus, it is clear that the plaintiff in a suit for perpetual
or mandatory injunction can claim damages either in
addition to, or in substitution for, such injunction and the
Court, if thinks fit, may award such damages.

The

dismissal of a suit to prevent the breach of an obligation
existing in favour of the plaintiff shall bar his right to sue
for damages for such breach.

Plaintiff should have

claimed the relief of damages in addition to, or in
substitution

for

CS (OS) No. 2263/2006

perpetual

injunction

or

mandatory
Page 10 of 14

injunction as claimed. However, the plaintiff chose not
to claim the relief of damages.

Now when his suit for

perpetual and mandatory injunction has been dismissed,
he is debarred from filing the present suit for damages
for breach of contract on termination of his services vide
letter dated 11.8.2000.

14.In Nandganj Sihori Sugar Co. Ltd., Rae Bareli and

another v. Badri Nath Dixit and others (supra), it
was observed
plaintiff

was

performance.

that the only relief available to the
to

claim

damages

and

not

specific

Similar were the observations made in

K.V. George v. The Secrtary to Govt, Water and
Power

Dept.

Trivandrum

and

another

(supra).

Similarly, in Percept D'Mark (India) (P) Ltd. v.

Zaheer Khan and another – 2006 (4) SCC 227 it was
observed the only remedy available to the plaintiff was to
claim damages and not specific performance.

15.In the present case plaintiff who was employed with the
defendant on a contract of personal character should
have filed a suit for damages as stated above may be in
the alternative or in addition to the relief of injunction as
claimed.

Under these circumstances, I conclude that

CS (OS) No. 2263/2006

Page 11 of 14

present suit of the plaintiff is hit by provisions of Order 2
Rule 2 CPC.

16.As regards Section 11 of the CPC, the principles
underlying this provision are different from principles
laid down in Order 2 Rule 2 CPC. To invoke Section 11
of the CPC i.e. doctrine of resjudicata, it is required from
the plaintiff to exhaust all available grounds in support of
his claim

while under Order 2 Rule 2 CPC plaintiff is

required to include whole of his claim in framing the suit.
The principles underlying Section 11 of the CPC is
multifarious litigation inter se the parties and not make
the defendant to face litigation twice for the same cause
of action arising from a transaction. Plaintiff cannot split
the cause of action into parts so as to bring separate
suits on those separate parts. In Daryao v. State of UP

- AIR 1961 SC 1457, it has been observed:
“Now, the rule of res
judicata as indicated in S. 11 of
the Code of Civil Procedure has no
doubt some technical aspects, for
instance the rule of constructive
res judicata may be said to be
technical; but the basis on which
the said
rule rests is founded
on considerations of public policy.
It is in the interest of the public at
large that a finality should attach
to
the
binding
decisions
pronounced
by
Courts
of
CS (OS) No. 2263/2006

Page 12 of 14

competent jurisdiction, and it is
also in the public interest that
individuals should not be vexed
twice over with the same kind of
litigation. If these two principles
form the foundation of the general
rule of res judicata they cannot be
treated
as
irrelevant
or
inadmissible even in dealing with
fundamental rights in petitions
filed under Art. 32.”
17.The principles of constructive res judicata under the
circumstances of this case are in a way applicable to the
present case. The defendant cannot be harassed twice
over the same cause of action which it faced in the
earlier suit for declaration, mandatory and perpetual
injunction.

Explanation IV read with Section 11 CPC

clearly show that a plea which might or ought to have
been taken in the earlier instituted suit as a ground of
attack or defence, if not taken in the earlier suit should
be

deemed

to

have

been

a

matter

directly

and

substantially in issue in the earlier suit and decided
against the

person raising the same plea

subsequent suit.

in the

Plaintiff in the present suit ought to

have taken a plea for claim of damages in the earlier suit
but omitted to take the matter of damages in the said
suit. Hence the matter in issue in this case is covered by
the principles underlying explanation IV to Section 11 of

CS (OS) No. 2263/2006

Page 13 of 14

CPC.

Plaintiff was awarded three months' salary as

damages by the trial court though plaintiff had not
claimed any damages in the earlier instituted suit.

18.In view of my discussion above, I conclude that present
suit of the plaintiff is hit by provisions of Order 2 Rule 2
CPC as well as principles of constructive res judicata.
Hence, suit of the plaintiff is hereby dismissed.

There

are no orders as to cost. File be consigned to record
room.
(ARUNA SURESH)
JUDGE
November 19, 2007
jk

CS (OS) No. 2263/2006

Page 14 of 14

