*
+

“REPORTABLE”
HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
IA Nos.1726/07, 1727/07
and CS (OS) No. 1196/2006
Date of decision : December 20, 2007

# M/S ARINITS SALES PVT. LTD.
!

..... PLAINTIFF

Through : Mr. Ram Kumar, Advocate
Mr. Ajay Malviya, Advocate
Versus

$

^

M/S. ROCKWELL PLASTIC PVT. LTD. & ORS.
..... RESPONDENTS
Through : Mr. K.K. Aggarwal, Advocate

%
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
(1) Whether reporters of local paper may be
allowed to see the judgment?
(2) To be referred to the reporter or not?

Yes

(3) Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?
Yes
ARUNA SURESH, J.
1. Present suit has been filed by the plaintiff company against
the defendants for recovery of Rs. 20,53,944/- under the
summary provisions of Order 37 Code of Civil Procedure
(hereinafter referred to 'CPC') and also interest @ 18% per

CS (OS) No. 1196/2006

Page 1 of 16

annum on the said amount till the filing of the suit
amounting to Rs.12,16,766/-. In all a sum of Rs.32,70,710/has been claimed against the defendants. Defendants No.
2 to 5 are the directors of the defendant No. 1 company.
Defendant No. 1 through defendant No. 4 had been
purchasing goods from the plaintiff against various bills
(numbering 6) on different dates. The defendant issued ST
– 15 form towards liability of Central Sales Tax. The goods
were duly received by the defendant No. 1.

Defendants

issued 19 cheques towards payment of the price of the
goods

so

purchased.

However,

the

cheques

on

presentation were dishonoured as the defendants had
stopped the payment of the cheques.

Despite service of

legal demand notice which the defendant refused to
accept, the defendants failed to make the payment to the
plaintiff. Hence, the present suit for recovery of money on
the basis of above said dishonoured cheques.

2. After the summons for appearance were received by the
defendants, they entered appearance within the statutory
period.

Thereafter, plaintiff moved an application for

service of summons for judgment upon the defendants.
The summons for judgment were duly served upon the
defendants and they filed their application for leave to

CS (OS) No. 1196/2006

Page 2 of 16

defend the present suit.

Defendants also moved an

application under Order 7 Rule 10 CPC for return of the
plaint disputing the territorial jurisdiction of this Court to
entertain the present suit.

3. I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have
carefully perused the record regarding the issue of
territorial jurisdiction of this Court.

Learned counsel for

the defendants has submitted that this Court has no
territorial jurisdiction to entertain the present suit as the
defendant company had placed the purchase order with the
plaintiff company at Faridabad.

The plaintiff had supplied

the goods and raised its invoices/bills from Faridabad. The
defendant company is situated at village Kassar, Tehsil
Bahadurgarh, District Jhajjar, Haryana and works for gain
at the same address.

It is urged that in view of the

provisions of Section 20 CPC, no part of cause of action
arose in Delhi. The cause of action, if any, arose within the
jurisdiction of the State of Haryana and the plaintiff cannot
invoke the jurisdiction of this Court for relief as sought by
him in the suit. It is further argued that the ST-15 forms
were issued by the defendant company towards liability of
sales tax for all the purchases made from the plaintiff
company which are applicable to inter state sales between

CS (OS) No. 1196/2006

Page 3 of 16

the parties, whereas if there is a sale/purchase at Delhi, the
Central Sales i.e. C-Forum is required to be issued and this
transaction also indicates that this Court has no territorial
jurisdiction to entertain the present suit. The final limb of
the argument is that all the cheques were issued by the
defendant company in favour of the plaintiff drawn on
State Bank of Bikaner & Jaipur, Delhi Rohtak Road,
Bahadurgarh, District Rohtak in the State of Haryana.
Therefore, present plaint is liable to be returned to the
plaintiff for presentation in the competent Court of
jurisdiction.

4. Learned

counsel

for

the

plaintiff

has

refuted

these

submissions and submitted that the defendants No. 2 & 3
are ordinarily residing and working for gain in Delhi and
therefore, the suit falls under Section 20(b) CPC.

He

further submitted that on the reverse of the invoices it is
specifically written that all disputes are subject to Delhi
jurisdiction and were signed by the defendant No. 4 on
behalf of all the defendants.

Therefore, by consent the

parties have agreed to submit to the jurisdiction of this
Court their disputes which have arisen out of their business
transactions.

It is further pointed out by the learned

counsel for the plaintiff that the cheques were deposited by

CS (OS) No. 1196/2006

Page 4 of 16

the plaintiff for clearance at Delhi. The defendants were
liable to pay the payments to the plaintiff at Delhi and the
plaintiff had instructed its employees to deliver the goods
to the defendant from New Delhi on the request of the
defendant.

Defendants are appearing in the complaints

filed under Section 138 of Negotiable Instruments Act at
Patiala House Courts, Delhi and therefore, have submitted
to the jurisdiction of Courts at Delhi.

It is further alleged

that the purchase orders were placed by the defendant and
received by the plaintiff at head office of the plaintiff at
New Delhi and it was the suggestion of the defendant to
save the Central sales tax that the goods be supplied from
Haryana.

Therefore,

the

order

was

executed from

Faridabad. According to him, this Court has the territorial
jurisdiction to entertain the present suit.

5. For appreciating the submissions of the learned counsel for
the parties, I feel the necessity of reproducing Section 20
CPC which reads as under:

“20. Other suits to be
instituted where defendants reside
or cause of action arises.--Subject
to the limitations aforesaid, every
suit shall be instituted in a Court
within the local limits of whose
jurisdiction-(a) the defendant, or each of
CS (OS) No. 1196/2006

Page 5 of 16

the defendants where there are
more than one, at the time of the
commencement
of
the
suit,
actually and voluntarily resides, or
carries on business, or personally
works for gain; or
(b) any of the defendants,
where there are more than one, at
the time of the commencement of
the suit, actually and voluntarily
resides, or carries on business, or
personally
works
for
gain,
provided that in such case either
the leave of the Court is given, or
the defendants who do not reside,
or carry on business, or personally
work for gain, as aforesaid,
acquiesce in such institution; or
(c) the cause of action,
wholly or in part, arises.”
6. Thus, it is clear that plaintiff can file a suit within the local
limits of the jurisdiction of a Court within which

(1) the defendant or each of the defendants where there
are more than one, at the time of the commencement of the
suit, actually and voluntarily resides, or carries on business,
or personally works for gain.

(2) any of the defendants, where there are more than
one, at time time of the commencement of the suit, actually
and voluntarily resides, or carries on business, or personally
works for gain, provided the plaintiff gets the leave of the
Court, or the defendants who do not reside, or carry on
business,

or

personally

CS (OS) No. 1196/2006

work

gain

concedes

to

such

Page 6 of 16

institutions.

(3) where the cause of action, wholly or in part, has
arisen in favour of the plaintiff.

7. Section 20 CPC covers all the personal actions relating to
person or movable property and the jurisdiction of the
Court where such a claim can be filed.

Such personal

actions can be instituted in a court where the defendant
actually resides or carries on business and either the leave
of the Court has been taken or the other defendants
consent to it or where the cause of action or part of it
arises. The principle underlying clauses (a) and (b) is that
the suit be instituted at the place where the defendant is
able to defend it without any difficulty or problem. Under
clause (c) all classes of suits can be instituted where the
cause of action arose wholly or in part. It is for the plaintiff
to prove that the Court has the jurisdiction to entertain the
suit. Where no cause of action has arisen or where none of
the defendants are residing or working for gain within the
jurisdiction of a Court the said Court has no jurisdiction to
entertain a suit.

8. Cause of action has to be ascertained from the facts stated

CS (OS) No. 1196/2006

Page 7 of 16

in the plaint and not from the pleadings raised in the
written statement.

9. In the present case, defendant No. 1 company works for
gain at village Kassar, Tehsil Bahadurgarh, District Jhajjar,
Haryana. Defendants No. 2 to 5 are its directors. Since the
defendant No. 1 is a company, defendants No. 2 to 5, who
are its directors, cannot be held personally liable for the
acts done for and on behalf of the company by them unless
they make themselves personally liable by way of an
agreement or any other document enforceable in law. As
per the case of the plaintiff itself, defendant No. 4 had been
placing the orders, receiving the goods and had issued the
cheques on behalf of the company.

Defendant No. 4 is

residing at Bahadurgarh and is working for gain at
Bahadurgarh only. Defendants No. 2 & 3 are residing in
Delhi. Though pleaded in the plaint, the plaintiff has not
shown their active participation in the business of the
defendant No. 1 while having business dealings with the
defendant No. 1. Not only this, the counsel for the plaintiff
is unsuccessful in its efforts to invoke the jurisdiction of
this Court under Section 20(b) CPC. It is nowhere pleaded
in the plaint nor any document has been placed on the
record to indicate that defendants No. 2, 3 & 5 had

CS (OS) No. 1196/2006

Page 8 of 16

acquiescenced to the presentation of the plaint within the
territorial jurisdiction of this Court.

10.Learned counsel for the defendant referred to the
following judgments:

1. Steel Authority of India Ltd. v.
M/s. Century Tubes Ltd. & Ors.
- 117 (2005) DLT 655.
2. Gujrat Insecticides Ltd. v.
Jainsons Minerals & Anr. - 140
(2007) DLT 465.
3. Mountain Mist Agro India
(Pvt.) Ltd & Anr. v. Mr. S.
Subramaniyam – 2007 X AD
(Delhi)
143
decided
on
24.10.2007.
11. In Steel Authority of India Ltd. (supra) it was held by
this Court that a company is an entity distinct from its
directors and shareholders in absence of instrument
fastening liability, liability can be fastened on directors of
company

only

when

malfeasance

or

misfeasance

is

established.

12.In this case, plaintiff has not pleaded any malfeasance or
misfeasance on the part of the directors of the company i.e.
defendants No. 2 to 5 so as to fasten their liability to pay
the suit amount.

13.Learned counsel for the plaintiff has tried to state that as
CS (OS) No. 1196/2006

Page 9 of 16

per the terms and conditions contained at the back of the
invoices which were signed by the defendant No. 4 on
behalf of the defendant No. 1, the parties had agreed that
all disputes are subject to Delhi jurisdiction only. Learned
counsel for the defendants has submitted that by consent
the parties cannot confer jurisdiction on a Court which
does not have inherent jurisdiction to entertain a suit if no
part of cause of action has arisen within the territorial
limits of the said Court.

14. 'Cause of action' means bundle of facts which are
necessary to be proved by the plaintiff, if traversed, in
order to invoke the jurisdiction of a Court to get the
judgment of that Court. Generally, the expression 'cause of
action' is understood to mean a situation or state of facts
that entitles a party to maintain an action in a Court.

15. In contracts regarding purchase of goods cause of action
arises at a place where the contract is executed or a place
where contract was to be performed or place where
performance thereof was completed. Cause of action also
arises in such like circumstances where money was
expressly or impliedly payable.

A suit can be filed where

goods were delivered or price payable.

CS (OS) No. 1196/2006

Page 10 of 16

16.There is no dispute that where cause of action has arisen
at different places, the parties can confer jurisdiction on a
particular Court where a part of cause of action has arisen,
for redressal of their disputes.

In a suit on contract where

two Courts have jurisdiction, choice of forum is with the
plaintiff. Parties cannot confer jurisdiction even by consent
on a Court where no part of cause of action has arisen and
has no inherent jurisdiction to entertain a suit. Ouster of
jurisdiction of all the courts which would have jurisdiction
over the subject matter of dispute is unlawful and void.
However, where there may be two or more competent
courts which can entertain a suit consequent upon a part of
the cause of action having arisen therewith, if the parties
to the contract agree to vest jurisdiction in one such court
to try the dispute which might arise between the parties,
the agreement is valid and this agreement cannot be
construed an agreement against the statue.

17. Now it is to be seen if in the present suit any part of
cause of action arose within the jurisdiction of Delhi so as
to invoke the jurisdiction of this Court to entertain the
present suit. In reply to the application of the defendants
under Order 7 Rule 10 CPC, the plaintiff admitted that the
goods were supplied from Faridabad to Bahadurgarh at the

CS (OS) No. 1196/2006

Page 11 of 16

instance of the defendant. Whatever may be the reasons
assigned for this supply, the fact remains that the goods
were not supplied from Delhi as alleged in para 22 of the
plaint. The plaintiff itself has contradicted its plea raised
in the plaint that the goods were supplied from its office at
New Delhi when he admitted in the reply to the application
that the goods were supplied from Faridabad. Therefore,
part of cause of action arose in Faridabad from where the
goods were supplied or at Bahadurgarh where the goods
were received by the defendant No. 1.

All the

invoices/bills were issued by the plaintiff company at
Faridabad in the name of defendant No. 1 and the goods
were to be delivered at Bahadurgarh, District Jhajjar,
Haryana.

Consequently, the defendant No. 1 issued the

ST-15 form which relates to inter-state sale/purchase
transactions so as to meet the liability of the defendants to
pay the sales tax.

Plaintiff in the plaint has also admitted

that defendant had issued form ST-15 towards their
liability to pay the sales tax for the goods received at
Bahadurgarh.

There is not a single document placed on

the record to indicate that there was supply of chemicals
from the head office of the plaintiff at Delhi. Plaintiff has
also not placed on record any document to indicate that the
purchase orders were placed by the defendants at Delhi.
CS (OS) No. 1196/2006

Page 12 of 16

18.The cheques numbering 19 which were issued by the
defendant No. 1 towards payment of the due amount are
drawn on State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur, Bahadurgarh.
These cheques on presentation were dishonoured by the
drawee bank either for insufficiency of funds or payments
stopped.

Therefore, the cause of action if any arose on

dishonourment of cheques was at Bahadurgarh. Learned
counsel for the plaintiff has tried to convince the Court by
stating that the cheques were presented for encashment at
Delhi and there is a clause in the invoices i.e. Clause 4 that
the cheques shall be drawn in the name of plaintiff Arinits
Sales Corporation marked “A/C payee to be payable at
Delhi only. I do not find any force in these submissions. It
seems that plaintiff has filed a complaint under Section 138
of the Negotiable Instruments Act against the defendants.
The fact remains that the jurisdiction of the criminal court
may differ from the civil court to entertain a claim.
Therefore, simply because the complaints have been filed
at Delhi will not confer any jurisdiction in this Court.

19.Even the legal demand notice was sent by the plaintiff to
defendants No. 1 & 4 at their Bahadurgarh addresses.
From the pleadings placed on record, the plaintiff has
failed

to

convince

CS (OS) No. 1196/2006

the

Court

that

it

has

territorial

Page 13 of 16

jurisdiction to entertain the present suit.

20.In Gujrat Insecticides Ltd. (supra) it was held:

“It is trite law that when
more than one Court has the
jurisdiction,
parties
may,
by
agreement,
confer
exclusive
jurisdiction on one Court to the
exclusion of all other Courts. At
the same time, if a particular
Court has no jurisdiction and it
lacks inherent jurisdiction, the
parties cannot confer jurisdiction
upon the said Court by their
consent. Therefore, what is to be
seen is as to whether part of cause
of
action
arose
within
the
jurisdiction of Bharuch Court. If
answer to this question is in the
affirmative, then Bharuch Court
will have exclusive jurisdiction.
On the other hand if Bharuch
Court lacks inherent jurisdiction,
such a clause contained in the
invoices would not be of any help
to the defendants and the same
would be void.”
21.In Mountain Mist Agro India (Pvt.) Ltd & Anr.

(supra) where territorial jurisdiction of the Court was
questioned, place of cause of action in respect of payment
by cheque was shown to be the place where the cheques
were presented for encashment, it was observed:

“Section
64(1)
of
the
Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881,
insofar as it relates to cheques,
CS (OS) No. 1196/2006

Page 14 of 16

stipulates that the cheques must
be presented for payment to the
drawee by or on behalf of the
holder and that in default of such
presentment, the other parties
thereto are not liable thereon to
such holder.
This provision
specifically indicates that unless
there is proper presentment of the
cheque, the drawer cannot be held
liable in respect of the same.
Proper presentment of the cheque
requires that the same must be
presented for payment to the
drawee. In this case the drawee is
the Oriental Bank of Commerce at
Ootacamund.
Therefore, in the
facts of the present case, the
presentment for payment of the
amount represented by the cheque
had to be made to the drawee, i.e.,
the Oriental Bank of Commerce at
Ootacamund. The deposit of the
cheque by the plaintiffs at their
bankers (ICICI Bank, New Delhi)
for collection is of no consequence.
What is of importance is only the
fact of presentment for payment
and that has to be to the drawee
which is the Oriental Bank of
Commerce at Ootacamund.”
22. Thus, it is clear that merely because the plaintiff had
presented the cheques for encashment in Delhi with its
bankers would not be of any indication that a part of cause
of action had arisen in Delhi. In these circumstances, I find
that the objections of the defendants raised in the
application for leave to defend as well as in the application
under Order 7 Rule 10 CPC regarding the territorial

CS (OS) No. 1196/2006

Page 15 of 16

jurisdiction of this Court is correct and is to be upheld by
the Court.

23. Consequently, the application is allowed to the extent that
this Court has no territorial jurisdiction to entertain the
present suit.

Therefore, the plaint along with original

documents, if any, is ordered to be returned to the plaintiff
for presentation in the competent court of jurisdiction with
the

directions

to

the

registry

to

make

necessary

endorsements on the plaint in accordance with order 7
Rule 10(2) CPC within a period of one week.

DECEMBER 20, 2007
jk

CS (OS) No. 1196/2006

ARUNA SURESH
(JUDGE)

Page 16 of 16

