'UN-REPORTABLE'
HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

*
+

RFA No.577/2003
Date of decision : 24th July, 2007

#
!

SHYAM SUNDER KAKKAR
..... Appellant
Through :Mr. Pradeep Kumar, Advocate
Versus

$
^

SUBHASH CHANDER KAKKAR
... Respondent
Through :Mr. L.S. Chaudhary, Advocate

%
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
(1) Whether reporters of local paper may be
allowed to see the judgment?
(2) To be referred to the reporter or not?
(3) Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?
A.K.SIKRI, J (Oral)
1.

The appellant herein was defendant in the suit

No. 52/2000 filed by the respondent herein for possession,
damages and future mesne profits in respect of property
bearing No.14-F/AB, Moti Nagar, New Delhi.
predicated

It was

by the respondent on the premise that the

aforesaid property was the

RFA No.577/2003

self acquired property of his

Page 1 of 11

father late Shri Dina Nath Kakkar which was allotted to the
latter by the Land & Development Office (L&DO) and
accordingly deed of conveyance was also executed by the
L&DO in favour of late Shri Dina Nath Kakkar in the year
1955.

It was also averred that Shri Dina Nath Kakkar

migrated from Pakistan along with his family after partition
of the country in the year 1947.

His mother as well as

appellant herein, who was the younger brother of Shri Dina
Nath Kakkar, minor at that time, was maintained by him.
The respondent also asserted that in these circumstances
appellant lived with his father Late Shri Dina Nath Kakkar in
the said house which belonged to Shri Dina Nath Kakkar.
According to the respondent, appellant was, thus, only
licensee in

the house in question.

It is also stated in the

plaint that late Shri Dina Nath Kakkar had executed Will
dated 18.07.1991 during his life time which was duly
registered with the office of the Sub Registrar on 22.07.1991
as

document

No.

3336

Book

No.

3

Volume

No.614

bequeathing the property in question (hereinafter referred to
as `the suit property') to the respondent.

Shri Dina Nath

Kakkar died on 11.02.2000 and on his demise, suit property
had been devolved upon the respondent on the basis of the
aforesaid Will and he became the exclusive owner thereof.
The respondent served legal notice dated 12.08.2000 upon
RFA No.577/2003

Page 2 of 11

the appellant terminating the licence and called upon him to
hand over and deliver back part of the premises, i.e., two
rooms occupied by the appellant in the suit property. As the
appellant failed to vacate the premises in spite of the service
of legal notice the suit in question was filed by the
respondent.

The appellant contested the suit by filing the

written statement in which it was inter alia pleaded that the
suit property was joint property of the appellant and as such
respondent had no right to file such a suit claiming
possession and damages etc. The submission in nut shell was
that after the migration of the family on the partition of the
country Shri Dina Nath Kakkar applied for the allotment of
the property mentioning the names of family members which
included Shri Dina Nath Kakkar himself, his wife, four
children and also his mother and the appellant, younger
brother of Dina Nath Kakkar.
2.

Following issues were framed on the basis of

pleadings between the parties:i. Whether the property in question is joint Hindu Family
property ? OPD.
ii. Whether the suit is bad for mis-joinder and non-joinder
of necessary parties? OPD.
iii. Whether the defendant is residing in the suit premises
as licencee? OPD.
iv. Whether the suit is barred by limitation? OPD.
v. Whether there is no cause of action to file the present
suit? OPD.
vi. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to a decree for
possession of the suit property as prayed ? OPP.
RFA No.577/2003

Page 3 of 11

vii.Whether the plaintiff is entitled to a decree for
damages, if so, at what rate and for which period? OPP.
viii.If issue no.7 is proved, whether the plaintiff is entitled
to any interest, if so, at what rate? OPP.
ix. Relief.
3.

The learned Trial Court by means of impugned

judgment and decree dated 26.03.2003 has decided these
issues in favour of the respondent as a consequence whereof
the suit of the respondent is decreed.

The Trial Court has

passed decree for possession in respect of two rooms unit
with common latrine and open space as shown in red colour
in the site plan annexed with the plaint. Decree for damages
@ Rs.1,500/- per month from the date of filing of the suit till
the delivery of the possession thereof is also passed in favour
of the respondent and against the appellant and interest @
9%

per

annum

on

these

damages

is

also

awarded.

Challenging this judgment and decree, the present appeal
was preferred by the defendant/appellant.
4.

We may state at the outset that submission of the

appellant before the Trial Court was three-fold.

(1) The

property in question was joint family property in which
appellant was also co-owner/coparcener and, therefore suit
for possession was not maintainable. (2) The appellant also
challenged

the

validity

of

the

Will

projected

by

the

respondent herein and submissions were that there was no

RFA No.577/2003

Page 4 of 11

such Will executed by Shri Dina Nath Kakkar. (3) The
appellant

claimed

ownership

on

the

basis

of

adverse

possession as well.
5.

As pointed out above, all these questions were

decided against the appellant by the Trial Court. Before us,
the finding regarding adverse possession was not pressed.
Some arguments were advanced on genuineness of the Will
alleging that two Wills were projected though both were of
the same day and identically worded but there were certain
discrepancies. One was the original Will

produced by the

respondent and other was the certified copy of the registered
Will obtained from the office of the Sub Registrar. The
infirmities/contradictions which were pointed out relates to
the attesting witnesses, i.e., in the original Will there were
three attesting witnesses whereas in the certified copy
produced, there were two attesting witnesses were shown.
Second purported contradiction relates to the testimony of
Shri L.M. Kapoor, who is one of the three attesting witnesses,
in the original Will, but had not appeared before the Sub
Registrar at the time of registration of the Will. On this basis
it was tried to argue that he could not have appeared in the
witness box as PW-1 to depose about the execution of the said
Will.

However, when we queried learned counsel for the

appellant as to what would turn on the issue regarding Will
RFA No.577/2003

Page 5 of 11

inasmuch as the appellant was not class I heir of Shri Dina
Nath Kakkar and factum of Will was executed by the siblings
of respondent namely his other brother and two sisters on the
basis of which the property also were mutated in the name of
the respondent herein, learned counsel for the appellant was
candied in conceding that keeping in view the nature of
dispute in the instant case the issue regarding Will would be
irrelevant and, therefore, he gave up this plea also. In these
circumstances,

the

only

question

that

remains

to

be

considered and decided in this appeal is as to whether
property in question is a joint family property and whether
appellant has any right, title or interest in the same.
6.

It is not in doubt that the conveyance deed

regarding the said property was executed by the L&DO is in
the name of late Shri Dina Nath Kakkar. Therefore, as per
the title deeds owner of the property is Shri Dina Nath
Kakkar.

However, submission of the learned counsel for the

appellant was that the property in question was purchased
from the joint funds and also that the allotment was made
specifically keeping in mind that appellant was also member
of the family and, therefore, property should be teated as
joint family property. In support of this submission learned
counsel relied upon the following documents:- (1) He referred
to application dated 23.05.1995 preferred by Shri Dina Nath
RFA No.577/2003

Page 6 of 11

Kakkar with the rehabilitation Minister in Delhi State
Government wherein request was made for allotment of two
rooms quarter. In this application he mentioned the names of
the family members including his mother and brother,
namely,

the

appellant

and

requested

for

two

accommodation to accommodate large family.

rooms
Learned

counsel also pointed out that in this application he also
referred to the verified claim of Rs.9345/- which Shri Dina
Nath Kakkar wanted to be adjusted against the consideration
payable

for

the

accommodation

to

be

allotted.

His

submission was that without the inclusion of his mother and
the appellant as family members, Shri Dina Nath Kakkar
could not have been alloted two rooms accommodation and
would have got only one room accommodation.

Therefore,

when two room accommodation was alloted it was to take
care of other persons including appellant and appellant in
these circumstances has became entitled to stay in one of
those two rooms.

He also submitted that mentioning of

verified claim of Rs.9345/- in this application would signify
that consideration there against was paid from the aforesaid
claims which were the claims given to the family in lieu of
properties left behind in West Pakistan. And, therefore, the
property should be treated as joint family property.
Second

document

RFA No.577/2003

which

was

referred

is

letter

(2)

dated

Page 7 of 11

29.05.1955 addressed by Shri Dina Nath Kakkar to the
Housing & Rent Officer Delhi. In this, Shri Dina Nath Kakkar
reiterated that he was to financially support his mother and
younger brother and, therefore, he should be allotted two
rooms accommodation.

The learned counsel specifically

referred to the endorsement made on this application by the
officer while recommending allotment of two rooms quarter,
wherein the endorsement was to be affected, that applicants
(i.e., Dina Nath Kakkar's family members) be considered with
him and be alloted double room accommodation.
7.

Before dealing with these arguments it would be

apposite to take note of the discussion contained in the
impugned judgment referred by the learned Additional
District Judge on this issue. The learned Additional District
Judge has returned the finding to the fact that there is no
corroborating evidence on behalf of the appellant herein to
prove that property in dispute is joint Hindu family property.
He referred to the deposition of the appellant himself wherein
appellant had admitted that no papers or documents are with
him to prove that Shri Dina Nath Kakkar was the karta of the
HUF, actually on the ground that he was elder brother, the
appellant had stated that he was karta of the family.

The

learned Judge disbelieved the contention that there was a
joint family property.
RFA No.577/2003

Page 8 of 11

8.

As already pointed out above, conveyance deed in

respect of the property is only in the name of Shri Dina Nath
Kakkar, the appellant could not produce any evidence to
show that consideration thereof was given after realising the
claims from some joint family properties left behind in
Pakistan.

No doubt in the letter dated 23.05.1959 there is

reference to verify claim of Rs.9345/-.

However, it was

necessary for the appellant to supply the missing link,
namely, that this claim was the result of properties which
were joint family properties and not the self acquired
properties of Shri Dina Nath Kakkar in Pakistan against
which this claim was given. No such evidence is produced by
the appellant.

That apart, we find from letter dated

26.06.1961 (Exhibit DW4/P-2) that certain claims were
purchased by Shri Dina Nath Kakkar from third parties. It is
a matter of common knowledge that the claims which were
sanctioned by the Government of India to displace persons
from Pakistan against their properties left there, those claims
were transferable. Therefore, merely because Shri Dina Nath
referred to verify claim of Rs.9345/- would not mean that
these claims related to joint family properties of the parties in
Pakistan.
9.

It would be of interest to note that the appellant

had summoned official from the office of L&DO as DW-4 to
RFA No.577/2003

Page 9 of 11

prove the record relating to the allotment of suit property.
The documents which he produced have rather proved the
case of the respondent and deposition of this witness has
gone against the appellant. The documents produced by him
namely Exhibits DW4/1, DW4/PW and DW4/P2 have proved
that it is late Shri Dina Nath Kakkar who made payment in
respect of the property in question.

When it has been

established on record that the sale consideration in respect of
the suit property was given by Shri Dina Nath Kakkar and at
the same time, it could not be proved by the appellant that
this sale

consideration was

realized

from any

of the

properties belonging to the family or that there was any joint
family properties at all.

The conclusion recorded by the

learned Trial Court to the fact that Shri Dina Nath Kakkar
was the owner of the property in question and property was
not joint Hindu family property is correct conclusion in fact,
as well as in law.

No doubt in order to accommodate his

large family, in question, Shri Dina Nath Kakkar wanted two
rooms' accommodation.

However, merely because of this

reason if Shri Dina Nath Kakkar was able to get allotment of
two rooms accommodation but the consideration thereof was
paid by him exclusively from his own funds, property in
question would not become joint family property. Equally in
such an allotment the appellant could not claim any right,
RFA No.577/2003

Page 10 of 11

title or interest. The fact remains that Shri Dina Nath Kakkar
allowed the appellant to stay in the suit property all these
years being his younger brother.

The ownership of this

property now vests in the respondent and there is no legal
obligation on the part of the respondent to continue to allow
the appellant to remain in this property. We, therefore, do
not find any merit in this appeal which is, accordingly,
dismissed.
10.

Trial Court record be sent back.

A.K. SIKRI, J.

ARUNA SURESH, J.
July 24, 2007
ns

RFA No.577/2003

Page 11 of 11

