*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CS (OS) No. 2214/2006
Date of decision : September 26, 2007

#
!

N.K.PALIWAL, ADVOCATE

Through :

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

..... PLAINTIFF
R.P.Bansal Senior Advocate
Rakesh Mahajan,
Prabhat Ranjan,
Sheetesh Khanna, Advocate

Versus
$
^

F.C.PAHWA & ORS.

.....DEFENDANTS

Through : Mr. Anil Shrivastav, Advocate

%
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
(1) Whether reporters of local paper may be
allowed to see the judgment?
(2) To be referred to the reporter or not?
(3) Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?
ARUNA SURESH, J. (Oral)
1.

Plaintiff has filed the present suit for declaration

against the defendants seeking declaration to the effect that
defendant No. 3 Ms. Razia S. Ismail Abbasi is not a valid
candidate eligible to contest for the post of Secretary General
of Indian Council for Child Welfare in the election 2006 and

CS (OS) No. 2214/2006

Page 1 of 10

also declaration to the effect that plaintiff being only valid
candidate be declared to be elected as Secretary General of
the Indian Council for Child Welfare.

2.

Briefly narrated the facts are that defendant No. 2

Indian Council for Child Welfare is a registered society and
plaintiff is a life member and voter of the said society at serial
No. 9 under Uttranchal State; plaintiff was contesting for the
post of Secretary General for the election fixed for 8.12.2006;
defendant society has its own constitution and its affairs are
run as per the provisions of the constitution; as per Para 5,
Schedule-II Bye Laws of the society no candidate can contest
for more than one post of office bearers; as per clause 5 Bye
Laws, Schedule-II of the society, the returning officer shall
scrutinize the nomination papers and declare the names of
the valid candidates who will contest the elections for various
posts of office-bearers and for membership of the Executive
Committee; that elections of the office bearers and members
of the executive committee are held in the annual general
meeting after every three years; elections for the year 2006
were announced in the General Body Meeting held on
20.9.2006 and date of polling was scheduled as 8.12.2006;
defendant No. 1 was

appointed as Returning Officer;

pursuant to the circular dated 9.10.2006, plaintiff filed his

CS (OS) No. 2214/2006

Page 2 of 10

nomination papers for the post of secretary general and
defendant No.3 filed her nomination papers for the post of
vice president and secretary general in violation of the
provisions of the constitution of the society; defendant No. 3
could not be allowed to contest the elections; while declaring
the list of valid candidates, defendant No. 1 returning officer
included the name of defendant No. 3 for both the posts as
valid and eligible to contest for both the posts of office
bearers; had defendant No. 1 acted in accordance with the
provision of the constitution and declared defendant No. 3 as
not eligible to contest the elections, plaintiff would have been
the only candidate for the post of secretary general of the
society; defendant No. 1 refused the objection of the plaintiff
in violation of the constitution of the society and without
making any rectification proceeded with the holding of the
elections. Hence the present suit.

3.

Defendants have contested the suit of the plaintiff

on various grounds, contending, inter alia, that as per clause
5 of the Bye Laws contained in Schedule II, no candidate can
contest for more than one post of office bearers but the said
bye laws do not in any manner debar a candidate from filing
nomination for more than one post of office bearer which
must be withdrawn before the date/time for withdrawal of

CS (OS) No. 2214/2006

Page 3 of 10

nomination which in this case was fixed for 22.11.2006-5.00
PM; that it is only after final list of candidates is published
after the last date for withdrawal of nomination, it could be
cleared as to who were the final candidates contesting for the
post of office bearers; that defendant No. 3 though had filed
her nomination for more than one post of office bearer but by
22.11.2006 she had withdrawn her nomination for the other
post of Vice President and contested only for the post of
secretary general; that at the time when the final list was
published, defendant No. 3 was shown as contestant for the
post of secretary general only and there is no violation of the
clause 5 of the bye laws by defendant No.3; that suit of the
plaintiff is not maintainable; that objections of the plaintiff
were rightly rejected and he was informed that there was no
violation of clause 5 of bye laws of schedule II; that there is
no cause of action in favour of the plaintiff and suit is
therefore liable to be dismissed.

4.

Plaintiff in his replication refuted the defence of

the defendants as raised in the written statement and
reasserted his stand as taken in the plaint.

5.

On the pleadings of the parties following issues

were framed on 13.8.2007:

CS (OS) No. 2214/2006

Page 4 of 10

1. Whether the nomination papers filed by the
defendant No. 3 for the post of Secretary
General are in accordance with the rules and
bye-laws, if so, its effect? OPD
2. Whether the plaint does not disclose any cause
of action against the defendants? OPD

6.

No other issue was pressed or claimed. Since the

entire case was based on interpretation of rules and bey-laws
of the society, counsel for the parties stated that no oral
evidence was required.

7.

I have heard learned counsel for the parties and

have carefully perused the record.

My observations on the

above issues are as follows:

Issue No. 1:

8.

Learned counsel for the plaintiff

submitted that withdrawal from the contest for the post of
vice

president

by

defendant

No.

3

after

declaration/publication and circulation by returning officer of
the list of valid candidates eligible to contest is of no
consequence as regards the validity of nomination papers is
concerned.

It is at the stage of scrutiny of the nomination

CS (OS) No. 2214/2006

Page 5 of 10

papers itself returning officer is required to see or check that
no candidate had filed nominations for contesting for more
than one post to be eligible candidate. Since defendant No. 3
had filed nomination for two different posts, it was the duty of
the returning officer at the stage of scrutinizing the
nomination papers to cancel the candidature of defendant No.
3 as she had violated schedule II, clause 5 of the bye laws. It
is emphasized that withdrawal of the nomination for the post
of vice president by defendant No. 3 thereafter is of no
consequence and does not make her eligible to contest the
elections for the post of secretary general and in case she is
allowed to contest the elections it is detrimental to the
interest of the plaintiff as he being the only other candidate
to be declared as elected secretary general of the society.

9.

These submissions are refuted by the learned

counsel for the defendants who has submitted that proper
interpretation of clause 5 of the bye laws would be that valid
candidate is entitled to contest the election when final list is
prepared. Since in this case defendant No.3 had withdrawn
her nomination for the post of Vice President on the date
scheduled for withdrawal of the nominations, she remained
contesting candidate only for the post of secretary general.
Therefore, there is no violation of the rules and bye laws of

CS (OS) No. 2214/2006

Page 6 of 10

the society and the defendant No. 3 is eligible to contest the
elections for the said post.

10.

Clause Nos. 5 & 6 of schedule II of the society

read as follows:
5. The Returning Officer shall
scrutinise
the
nomination
papers and declare the names
of the valid candidates who
will contest the elections for
(i) the various posts of Office
Bearers,
and
(ii)
for
Membership of the Executive
Committee. No candidate can
contest for more than one post
of Office Bearers.
6. The Returning Officer will
communicate to all members
of the General Body the
declared
valid
lists
of
candidates at least 15 days
before the date of elections.”
11.

After the elections were declared to be conducted

on 8.12.2006, nominations were invited from the members of
the society to contest the elections for the post of office
bearers and for executive members. List of valid candidates
for the posts of eight office bearers and fifteen posts for
Executive Committee dated 2.11.2006 bearing the time as
9.00 PM Ex. P-3 was taken out by the returning officer. As
per this list, defendant No. 3 Ms. Razia Ismail Abbasi filed
her nominations for the post of vice president and for the post
of secretary general. These nominations were scrutinized by

CS (OS) No. 2214/2006

Page 7 of 10

defendant No.1. Thereafter list of valid nominations Ex.P-4
for

fifteen

members

of

the

executive

committee

was

published. As per this list, name of Ms. Razia Ismail Abbasi,
defendant No. 3, appears only at serial No. 36. This list was
published after the withdrawal of the nominations.

This is

the final list of candidates who were found eligible to contest
the elections scheduled for 8.12.2006.

12.

Para 5 of schedule II bye laws restrains a

candidate from contesting for more than one post of office
bearers.

It does not restrain a member to file his/her

nominations for more than one post.

Had defendant No. 3

not withdrawn her nomination for the post of vice president
and continued with her nominations for two posts even after
the date of withdrawal of nominations, she would have been
debarred from contesting elections and her nomination would
have been invalid.

However, since she withdrew her

nomination for the post of vice president, her name has been
rightly shown in the list of eligible candidates/contestants in
the elections of the society.

13.

It is pertinent to mention here that there were

two other candidates namely Smt. Kasturi Mahapatra and
Prof. B.R. Nayak who had also filed their nominations for two

CS (OS) No. 2214/2006

Page 8 of 10

posts respectively. They withdrew their nominations for one
post respectively and as admitted by the plaintiff they were
allowed to contest the elections held on 8.12.2006.

Their

nominations as contesting candidates were never challenged
by any of the members including the plaintiff in any Court of
law. Plaintiff has tried to convince the Court by stating that
he has no locus standi to challenge the nominations of those
two persons as he was not contesting for any of those posts
for which Smt. Kasturi Mahapatra and Prof. B.R. Nayak had
filed their nominations.

I am not convinced with his

submissions. Plaintiff being member and voter of the society
had every right to challenge the nomination of Smt. Kasturi
Mahapatra and Prof. B.R. Nayak on the same grounds on
which

the

candidature

of

defendant

No.

3

has

been

challenged in the suit.

14.

Therefore, I am of the considered opinion that the

candidature of defendant No. 3 has been rightly accepted by
the defendant No.1; returning officer and she was allowed to
contest the elections for the post of secretary general in
accordance with the rules, regulations and bye laws of the
society. Therefore, she has a right to contest the elections for
the said post. This issue is accordingly decided in favour of
the defendants and against the plaintiff.

CS (OS) No. 2214/2006

Page 9 of 10

15.

Issue No. 2: One of the objections raised in the

written statement is that the plaint does not disclose any
cause of action. Perusal of the plaint shows that plaintiff in
fact has not disclosed any cause of action in his favour. He
wanted a decree of declaration for declaring that defendant
No. 3 was not a valid candidate so as to get benefit of being
elected as secretary general being the only other valid
candidate eligible to contest for the post of secretary general.
The entire averments in the plaint do not show any cause of
action in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendants so
as to file the present suit. This issue is accordingly decided.

16.

In view of my discussion on the issues as above,

suit of the plaintiff is hereby dismissed.

Under the

circumstances of the case, parties are left to bear their own
cost. Interim order dated 5.12.2006 is hereby vacated. File
be consigned.

(ARUNA SURESH)
JUDGE
September 26, 2007
jk

CS (OS) No. 2214/2006

Page 10 of 10

