*

Reportable
HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

OMP No.356/2004
Date of decision : 30th November, 2007

#

AHLUWALIA CONTRACTS (INDIA) LTD.
... PETITIONER

!

Through : Mr. Ashish Bagat Advocate.
Versus

$

HOUSING & URBAN DEVELOPMENT
CORPORATION & ANR.
..... RESPONDENTS

^

Through : Mr. Anurag Kumar with
Mr. P.N. Kumar, Advocates.

%
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
(1) Whether reporters of local paper may be
allowed to see the judgment?
(2) To be referred to the reporter or not?

Yes

(3) Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?
Yes
ARUNA SURESH, J.
1.

This petition under section 12 and 14 of the Arbitration

and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as “Act”)
has been filed by the petitioner seeking revocation of
mandate of the sole arbitrator Shri W.D. Dandage appointed
by respondent No.1 in accordance with the arbitration clause
9.2 of the General Conditions of the Contract.

2.

Petitioner is an engineering and designing construction

OMP No.356/2004

Page 1 of 19

company. It entered into an agreement dated 8th April, 1994
with respondent No.1 for executing the work of construction
of car parking basement at HUDCO Place, Khelgaon,
Andrewsganj, New Delhi.

A dispute arose regarding the

payments claimed by the petitioner for the work executed by
it which were not released by respondent No.1. Petitioner
invoked the arbitration clause of the agreement vide letter
dated 26th April, 2004 to the appointing authority for
reference of the dispute having arisen between the parties to
arbitration and also requesting the petitioner to appoint an
arbitrator. This letter also included the points of dispute in
reference.

Consequently, respondent No.1 appointed Mr.

L.R. Gupta, Ex.DG, CPWD as the sole arbitrator to enter into
reference and decide the dispute which had arisen between
the petitioner and respondent No.1.

However, Mr. L.R.

Gupta vide his letter dated 15th June, 2004 declined to accept
the appointment.

Therefore, petitioner sent another letter

dated 21st June, 2004 requesting respondent No.1 for
appointment

of

another

arbitrator.

Respondent

No.1

accordingly appointed Mr. W.D. Dandage, respondent No.2
as the sole arbitrator vide letter dated 29th June, 2004.

3.

Mr. W.D. Dandage as a sole arbitrator had

adjudicated an earlier dispute between the same parties

OMP No.356/2004

Page 2 of 19

pertaining to the work “Construction of Guest Houses Cluster
“B” at HUDCO Place, Andrews Gunj, New Delhi”.

Award

pronounced in the said proceedings by the said arbitrator has
been challenged by the petitioner and the objections are
pending adjudication.

Under these circumstances, the

petitioner has alleged that he has a strong apprehension that
the arbitral tribunal would be carrying a pre-conceived notion
with colours of biasness against the petitioner particularly in
the context that the earlier award suffered from inherent
colour of biasness which resulted in the gross miscarriage of
justice. The petitioner therefore forwarded his objections to
the appointment of respondent No.2 as the sole arbitrator
vide letter dated 1st July, 2004 and requested for change of
the arbitrator.

Before petitioner could get reply from

respondent No.1, it received notice from respondent No.2
informing it that he had fixed the matter for 17.07.2004 as
the date for holding preliminary hearing and also called upon
the parties to provide immediate an Executive Class air ticket
for journey to and fro from Delhi to Pune as respondent No.2
is a resident of Pune.

4.

Petitioner

thereafter

filed

his

objection

application before the Arbitral Tribunal under section 13 (2)
of the Act containing his objections to the appointment of

OMP No.356/2004

Page 3 of 19

respondent No.2 as the sole arbitrator for the reasons of his
apprehension of biasness.

This application was dismissed by

the sole arbitrator vide detailed order dated 21st July, 2004
certifying that neither at the time of the appointment as sole
arbitrator

in

the

present

case

nor

thereafter

any

circumstances existed which is likely to give rise to justifiable
doubts as to his independence and impartiality to decide the
dispute referred to him by the CMD HUDCO.

5.

Aggrieved, the petitioner has filed the present

petition before this court seeking the termination of mandate
of respondent No.2 and appointment of any other person as
an

arbitrator,

may

be

a

person

having

engineering

background and is on the panel of Indian Council of
Arbitration.

6.

Respondent No.1 has contested this objection

petition on the following grounds:-

(a)

The present petition for revocation of mandate is not

maintainable and is an abuse of process of law and the only
remedy available to the petitioner is to take action under
section 34 of the Act if he is aggrieved of the award after its
final pronouncement by the arbitrator.

OMP No.356/2004

Page 4 of 19

(b)

The arbitrator has been appointed in terms of the

arbitration clause incorporated in the agreement and the
arbitrator has already entered into reference.

(c)

The objection petition filed by the petitioner before the

arbitrator was decided in accordance with section 16 of the
Act.

(d)

The respondent has also filed objections against the

award

pronounced by Mr. W.D. Dandage in the matter of

dispute regarding construction of Guest Houses Cluster “B”
at HUDCO Place, Andrews Gunj, New Delhi.

(e)

The present petition is not maintainable as it cannot be

said that the arbitrator will be biased and unfair while
adjudicating upon the claim of the parties.

7.

Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the

present objection as filed is maintainable as petitioner has
availed of the provisions of section 13 (3) of the Act before
filing the present objection in the court. Since the arbitrator
rejected the application, petitioner has every right to
challenge the appointment of the arbitrator as he apprehends
that the arbitrator

will not adjudicate upon the disputes

independently or impartially. Under these circumstances, the
OMP No.356/2004

Page 5 of 19

court has the power to appoint an independent arbitrator to
enter into reference and adjudicate upon the disputes.

8.

Learned counsel for the respondent submitted

that perusal of the entire scheme of the Act indicate that the
only remedy available to the petitioner is to file objections to
the Arbitral award under section 34 of the Act if he is
aggrieved of the arbitral award and he can also challenge the
appointment of the arbitrator, his independence and his
biasness in the said objections.

9.

Section 12 of the Act lays down grounds for

challenge. Whereas section 13 of the Act lays down the
procedure to be followed for such a challenge. Section 14 of
the Act permits the termination of mandate of an arbitrator
for the reasons stated therein. Section 15 of the Act speaks
of an appointment of an arbitrator in case the mandate of the
arbitrator already appointed is terminated. Since these are
the relevant provisions of the Act and have a bearing on the
facts and circumstances of the present petition, they are
reproduced as follows:-

“12. Grounds for challenge.
(1) When a person is approached in
connection with his possible appointment as an arbitrator, he shall disclose
OMP No.356/2004

Page 6 of 19

in writing any circumstances likely to
give rise to justifiable doubts as to his
independence or impartiality.
(2) An arbitrator, from the time of his
appointment
and
throughout
the
arbitral proceedings, shall, without
delay, disclose to the parties in writing
any circumstances referred to in subsection (1) unless they have already
been informed of them by him.
(3) An arbitrator may be challenged
only if—
(a) circumstances exist that give rise to
justifiable doubts as to his independence or impartiality, or
(b)
he
does
not
possess
the
qualifications agreed to by the parties.
(4) A party may challenge an arbitrator
appointed by him, or in whose
appointment he has participated, only
for reasons of which he becomes aware
after the appointment has been made”.
“13. Challenge procedure.
(1) Subject to sub-section (4), the
parties are free to agree on a procedure
for challenging an arbitrator.
(2) Failing any agreement referred to in
sub-section (1), a party who intends to
challenge an arbitrator shall, within
fifteen days after becoming aware of
the constitution of the arbitral Tribunal
or after becoming aware of any circumstances referred to in sub-section (3) of
section 12, send a written statement of
the reasons for the challenge to the
arbitral Tribunal.
(3) Unless the arbitrator challenged
under sub-section (2), withdraws from
his office or the other party agrees to
the challenge, the arbitral Tribunal
shall decide on the challenge.

OMP No.356/2004

Page 7 of 19

(4) If a challenge under any procedure
agreed upon by the parties or under the
procedure under sub-section (2) is not
successful, the arbitral Tribunal shall
continue the arbitral proceedings and
make an arbitral award.
(5) Where an arbitral award is made
under sub-section (4), the party
challenging the arbitrator may make an
application for setting aside such an
arbitral award in accordance with
section 34.
(6) Where an arbitral award is set aside
on an application made under subsection (5), the Court may decide as to
whether
the
arbitrator
who
is
challenged is entitled to any fees.”
“14. Failure or impossibility to act.
(1) The mandate of an arbitrator shall
terminate if—
(a) he becomes de jure or de facto
unable to perform his functions or for
other reasons fails to act without undue
delay; and
(b) he withdraws from his office or the
parties agree to the termination of his
mandate.
(2) If a controversy remains concerning
any of the grounds referred to in clause
(a) of sub-section (1), a party may,
unless otherwise agreed by the parties,
apply to the Court to decide on the
termination of the mandate.
(3)If, under this section or sub-section
(3) of section 13, an arbitrator
withdraws from his office or a party
agrees to the termination of the
mandate of an arbitrator, it shall not
imply acceptance of the validity of any
ground referred to in this section or
sub-section (3) of section 12.”

OMP No.356/2004

Page 8 of 19

“15. Termination of mandate and
substitution of arbitrator.
(1) In addition to the circumstances
referred to in section 13 or section 14,
the mandate of an arbitrator shall
terminate—
(a) where he withdraws from office for
any reason; or
(b) by or pursuant to agreement of the
parties.
(2) Where the mandate of an arbitrator
terminates, a substitute arbitrator shall
be appointed according to the rules that
were applicable to the appointment of
the arbitrator being replaced.
(3) Unless otherwise agreed by the
parties, where an arbitrator is replaced
under sub-section (2), any hearings
previously held may be repeated at the
discretion of the arbitral Tribunal.
(4) Unless otherwise agreed by the
parties, an order or ruling of the
arbitral Tribunal made prior to the
replacement of an arbitrator under this
section shall not be invalid solely
because there has been a change in the
composition of the arbitral Tribunal.”
10.

Petitioner in the present petition has prayed for

termination of the mandate of the arbitrator, respondent No.2
who

has

been

appointed

by

respondent

No.1,

as

it

apprehends biasness on his part and also doubts his
independence and impartiality. Therefore, the grounds for
challenge to the mandate of the arbitrator falls under section
12 sub-section 3 (a) of the Act.

Section 13 (3) of the Act

makes it very clear that unless the arbitrator challenged

OMP No.356/2004

Page 9 of 19

withdraws from his office or the other party agrees to the
challenge, the arbitral tribunal shall decide on the challenge.
Undoubtedly, this procedure was followed by the petitioner
and the arbitral tribunal dismissed the challenge made by the
petitioner. However, by virtue of section 13 (4) of the Act if a
challenge under any procedure agreed upon by the parties or
under the procedure under sub-section (2) fails, the arbitral
tribunal has to continue the arbitral proceedings and make an
arbitral award.

Sub-section 5 of Section 13 of the Act

empowers a party challenging the arbitrator to make an
application for setting aside such an arbitral award made
under sub-section 4 in accordance with section 34 of the Act.

11.

Under Section 14 (2) of the Act, the court has the

power to decide on the termination of the mandate on any of
the grounds referred to in clause (a) of Sub Sec. (1) and also
in the circumstances enumerated in section 15 of the Act and
appoint an arbitrator. Under section 14 of the Act the
mandate of an arbitrator stands terminated if he becomes de

jure or de facto unable to perform his functions or for other
reasons fails to act without unnecessary delay or he
withdraws from his office or the party agreed to the
termination of his mandate.

As per section 14 (1) (b) the

mandate of an arbitrator shall terminate if he withdraws from

OMP No.356/2004

Page 10 of 19

his office or the parties agree to the termination of his
mandate. Section 15 provides for a procedure which has to
be followed when mandate of the arbitrator is terminated and
substitution of the arbitrator in the circumstances set out
under sub-section 1 including those referred under section 13
and 14 of the Act is required. As per section 15 sub-section 2
of the Act where the mandate of an arbitrator terminates, a
substitute arbitrator has to be appointed according to the
rules that were applicable to the appointment of the
arbitrator being replaced.

12.

In the present case, the petitioner instead of

pursuing the remedy available to him for challenging the
arbitrator as laid down in section 13 has sought appointment
of a substitute arbitrator through the court on the grounds
that the arbitrator so appointed by respondent No.1 also
adjudicated upon the disputes between the petitioner and
respondent No.1. It will not be out of place to mention here
that both the parties have filed their objections to the said
award pronounced by respondent No.2 in an earlier reference
pertaining to another dispute between the parties to the
present petition. Petitioner can challenge the mandate of the
arbitrator after the arbitral award is pronounced by the
arbitrator while filing objection in accordance with section 34

OMP No.356/2004

Page 11 of 19

of the Act.

13.

It is not disputed that there is no provision

contained in the Act which permits the court to terminate the
mandate of the arbitrator on challenge by a party under
section 12 or 13 of the Act. It is not disputed that respondent
No.2 has been appointed as an arbitrator by respondent No.1
in terms of the arbitration agreement inter se the parties.
Therefore, this court has no power to substitute an arbitrator
so appointed by respondent No.1 in terms of the arbitration
agreement. The meaningful interpretation of these sections if
read together is that challenge to the appointment of the
arbitrator has to be raised by the petitioner before the
arbitral tribunal itself. If he succeeds in the challenge, the
petitioner has no cause of grievance left. But if he fail then
he has to participate in the arbitral proceedings and if
aggrieved by the award, to challenge the same in accordance
with the provision of section 34 of the Act including the
mandate of the arbitrator.

14.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has referred to

“Firm Ashok Traders & Anr. Vs. Gurumukh Das Saluja &
Ors, AIR 2004 Supreme Court 1433”. In the said case the
point in issue before the court was regarding the applicability

OMP No.356/2004

Page 12 of 19

of section 69 of the Partnership Act and also its effect on the
maintainability of application filed under section 9 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. A relief which can be
claimed by a party under section 9 of the Act is in the nature
of interim relief and it does not speak of composition of
arbitral tribunal, its appointment, termination, etc. Therefore,
this judgment is of no help to the petitioner in this case.

15.

In “Dharam Prakash Vs. Union of India &

Anr., 2007 (94) DRJ 431 (DB)”, wherein constitutionality
of section 13

(3), 13(4), 13(5) as well as section 34 of the

Act were under challenge, it was held by the Division Bench
of this court :-

“We have considered the aforesaid
submission of the learned counsel for
the petitioner. It is to be noted that the
aforesaid Act is enacted mainly in the
pattern of the Modern Law adopted by
the United Nations Commission on
International Trade law. The object and
the reasons of the Act clearly indicate
that the intention of the Act is to lay
emphasis on speedy disposal of
arbitration proceedings. The Act also
seeks to minimise judicial intervention
in the progress and completion of
arbitration
proceedings,
which
is
crystal clear from a bare reading of
Section 5 of the Act which provides that
no judicial authority would intervene
except where so provided in the Act.
Consequently,
the
bar
on
court
interference on challenging the arbitral
OMP No.356/2004

Page 13 of 19

tribunal during the pendency of the
arbitration proceeding was meant to
minimise judicial intervention at that
stage as any interference at that stage
would be against the spirit with which
the Act was enacted. Sub-section (5) of
Section 13 of the Act lays down that
challenging an arbitral award is
permitted even on the grounds taken by
the aggrieved party on which the
challenge to the arbitral tribunal was
made. There is no provision in the Act
which would enable the court to remove
an Arbitrator during the arbitration
proceedings. But, at the same time the
party having grievance against an
Arbitrator cannot be said to be without
a remedy and the said remedy becomes
available as soon as the arbitral award
is made by the Arbitrator or the arbitral
tribunal.”
16.

Reference is

also

made

to “Bharat

Heavy

Electricals Ltd. Vs. C.N.Garg & Ors., 2001 (57) DRJ 154
(DB)”. In the said case also it was observed :“The legislature was more than cautious
while providing in explicit term that no
judicial Authority shall intervene except
where so provided (Section 5). Thus
clear mandate is to bar judicial
interference except in the manner
provided in the Act. Conversely if there
is no provision to deal with a particular
situation,
Courts
cannot
assume
jurisdiction and interfere. Comparing
this
legislation
with
the
earlier
legislation on the subject-namely the
Arbitration Act, 1940, the message is
loud and clear. The legislature found
mischief in various provisions contained
in the Arbitration Act, 1940 which
would enable a party to approach the
Court time and again during the
pendency of arbitration proceedings
OMP No.356/2004

Page 14 of 19

resulting into delays in the proceedings.
Law makers wanted to do away with
such provisions. So that arbitration
proceedings are not unduly hampered.
The very purpose of arbitration, which
is an alternate Dispute Redressal
Forum, is defeated once the Courts
interfere with these proceedings. The
experience in the working of the old
Arbitration Act showed that it was
resulting in more delays than in civil
suits.
Therefore,
not
only
such
provisions were omitted in the new Act,
provision in the form of Section 5 was
inserted to convey the message. The
scheme of the new Act is clear enough,
i.e. during the arbitration proceedings
Court's interference is done way with.
The new Act deals with the situation
even when there is challenge to the
constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal. It
is left to the Arbitrator to decide the
same in the first instance. If a challenge
before the Arbitrator is not successful,
the Arbitral Tribunal is permitted to
continue the Arbitral proceedings and
make an Arbitral award. Such a
challenge to the constitution of the
Arbitral Tribunal before the Court is
then deferred and it could be only after
the arbitral award is made that the
party challenging the Arbitrator may
make an application for setting aside an
arbitral award and it can take the
ground regarding the constitution of
Arbitral Tribunal while challenging such
an award. Thus course of action to be
chartered in such contingency is spelt
out in the Act itself. Court interference
on basis of petitions challenging
Arbitral Tribunal during the pendency
of the arbitration proceedings would be
clearly against the very spirit with
which the Arbitration and Conciliation
Act,
1996 has been enacted. The mischief
which existed in the earlier enactment
OMP No.356/2004

Page 15 of 19

and
is sought to be removed by the present
enactment cannot be allowed to be
introduced
by
entertaining
writ
petitions in the absence of any provision
in the new Act in this respect. A statute
is an edict of the legislature and the
conventional way of interpreting or
construing a statute is to seek the
'intention' of its maker. A statute is to
be construed according “to the intent of
them that make it” and “the duty of
judicature is to act upon the true
intention of the legislature - the mens or
sententia legis”.”
It was further observed :“A possible question in this connection
may arise about there being no
provision for removal of an Arbitrator
during the arbitration proceedings by
the Court. Admittedly the Act does not
contain any provision where the Court
can remove an Arbitrator during the
pendency of arbitration proceedings. In
this connection we have to remind
ourselves of the intention behind the
legislation, i.e. the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996. As already
observed, the Act is modelled after the
UNCITRAL Model Law. This Model Law
has been adopted by various countries.
The need for such a Model Law arose
because of increased international
commercial activity. Such activity in
modern times is at Government or
Semi-Government
level.
In
such
circumstances it was only fair and
proper that all the participating
countries should have similar legal
provisions when it came to Arbitration.
In fact Arbitration is envisaged as a
method for speedy alternate redressal
of disputes between the parties to
commercial transactions. If Court
interference was permitted during
OMP No.356/2004

Page 16 of 19

arbitration proceedings, the very object
of speedy redressal of disputes would
have been frustrated. That is why
keeping the peculiar conditions in India,
coupled with
the need for speedy resolution of
disputes, the provision of Court
interference
was
avoided.
Rather
Section 5 was inserted which provides
that
there
will
be
no
judicial
intervention. We have already noted
that a party having grievances against
an Arbitrator on account of bias and
prejudice is not without remedy. In has
only to wait till the arbitral award
comes and it can challenge the award
on various grounds including bias and
prejudice on the part of the Arbitrator.
Before the stage of challenge of award
under Section 34 comes, Sub-sections
(1), (2) and (3) of Section 13 envisage a
situation where the Arbitrator may on
his own recluse himself on objection
being taken qua his functioning as an
Arbitrator or where both the parties
agree to his removal as per procedure
accepted by them. If both fail, the
Arbitrator is required to decide on the
challenge to his functioning as an
Arbitrator levelled by a party. The
Arbitrator is expected to be a fair
person and if he finds that there is
substance in the allegations, an
Arbitrator is expected to dispassionately
rule on such an objection. Failing all
this the last resort for an aggrieved
party is the challenge under Section
13(5) read with Section 34. Thus going
on with the ethos of the new Act of
speedy
progress
of
arbitration
proceedings
without
judicial
interference coupled with the fact that
an aggrieved party is not without
remedy, it cannot be said that the
absence of a provision regarding
removal of an Arbitrator renders the
relevant provisions of the statute ultra
OMP No.356/2004

Page 17 of 19

vires the Constitution. We are of the
considered view that absence of a
provision of removal of an Arbitrator
does not render the relevant statutory
provisions invalid or ultra vires the
Constitution of India.”
17.

In “Newton Engineering & Chemicals Ltd. V/s.

Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. & Two Ors.”, 2007 (93) DRJ
127” while relying upon “Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd.
Vs. C.N.Garg & Ors.” (supra),

this court concluded as

follows:“To conclude, I have no hesitation
in holding that there is no provision in
the Act empowering this Court to
terminate the mandate of the Arbitrator
who has entered upon the reference
and/or to substitute the same with an
Arbitrator appointed by this Court. The
necessary corollary is that the challenge
to the appointment of the Arbitrator
must be raised by the petitioner before
the Arbitral Tribunal itself. If such
challenge succeeds, the petitioner shall
have no cause for grievance left. If,
however, the petitioner is unable to
succeed before the Arbitral Tribunal, it
shall have no option except to
participate in the arbitral proceedings
and if aggrieved by the arbitral award,
to challenge the same in accordance
with the provisions of Section 34 of the
Act.”
18.

In view of my observations as above, I conclude

that the present objection petition is not maintainable. The
remedy available to the petitioner is to file objections under
section 34 of the Act including his challenge to the

OMP No.356/2004

Page 18 of 19

appointment of the arbitrator on the grounds of biasness and
unfairness, if he is aggrieved of the arbitral award which may
be pronounced by the arbitrator; respondent No.2 after
completing the arbitral proceedings before him. Hence, the
objection petition is accordingly dismissed.

19.

Interim order of this court dated 13th October,

2004 is hereby vacated. Respondent No.2 shall proceed with
the reference and adjudicate upon the disputes inter se the
parties as referred to him after giving them notice and fixing
a date for appearance before him. The arbitrator shall make
every endeavor to expedite the adjudication without any
unnecessary delay.

17.

Objection Petition is accordingly dismissed. All

pending applications also stand disposed of.

File be consigned to record room.

NOVEMBER 30, 2007
vk

OMP No.356/2004

ARUNA SURESH
(JUDGE)

Page 19 of 19

