THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on : 04.01.2008

+

IA No. 21/2008 & CS (OS) 458/2007

INTEX TECHNOLOGIES(INDIA) LTD & ANOTHER ......Plaintiffs
- versus PERVEZ AIBANI

....Defendant

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Plaintiffs
For the Defendant

: M Pratibha M Singh with Ms Pema Yeshey
: Mr Manmohan Singh.

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

By way of this application, the parties request this

court to decree the suit in terms of the settlement arrived at
between them and in terms of paragraph 38(i) of the plaint and
the parties be left to bear the costs of the present application
and suit.

2.

The plaintiffs had instituted the suit for permanent

injunction, restraining infringement of copyright, passing off

IA NO. 21/2008 & CS(OS) 458/2007

Page No.1 of 3

etc. The plaintiffs are using the mark INTEX in respect of the
computers and various other electric and electronic products
including electronic games.

The defendant is also using the

mark INTEX in respect of non-electronic toys and sporting,
swimming and other water related goods and air inflated toys
and other similar items.

The defendant is marketing these

products under the mark INTEX which is registered in respect
of those goods.

3.

The plaintiffs and the defendant have now arrived at

a settlement inasmuch as the plaintiffs shall continue to use
the mark INTEX in respect of computers and electronic items
including electronic games and the defendant would also be
entitled to manufacture and sell non-electronic toys, sporting,
swimming, water related goods and air inflated toys bearing
the mark INTEX. The defendant has also given an assurance
that he shall not expand his business beyond that of nonelectronic toys, sporting, swimming, water related goods and
air inflated toys employing the mark INTEX. The other terms of
settlement are given in detail in the application itself.

The

application is signed by Mr Nishant Mukund on behalf of the
plaintiffs and by Mr Pervez Aibani who is the defendant. It is

IA NO. 21/2008 & CS(OS) 458/2007

Page No.2 of 3

also signed by the respective counsel for the parties and is also
supported by affidavits of said Mr Pervez Aibani and Mr Nishant
Mukund. The application is marked as Exhibit C-1.

4.

I have examined the terms of the settlement arrived

at between the parties and I am satisfied that the same are
lawful. The settlement / compromise is taken on record. The
suit is decreed in terms of the settlement and, particularly, in
terms of paragraph 38(i) of the plaint. The parties are left to
bear their own costs. The formal decree be drawn up. Exhibit
C-1 shall form part of the decree. This application, the suit and
all other pending applications stand disposed of.

January, 04. 2008
M

IA NO. 21/2008 & CS(OS) 458/2007

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)

Page No.3 of 3

