THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on :

+

01.08.2007

WP(C) 5581/2007

MAHESH PANDEY

... Petitioner
versus -

N.D.M.C. & ORS

... Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr Mr Subhash Mohanty for the Petitioner.
For the Respondent/NDMC : Mr Arjun Pant.

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J
1.

The petitioner has prayed for the setting aside of the impugned

order passed by the Estate Officer dated 31.07.2003. However, the said order
was the subject matter of appeal under Section 9 of the Public Premises
(Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 before the learned Additional
District Judge. The appeal was disposed of by an order dated 12.03.2007
whereby, in substance, the Estate Officer's order dated 31.07.2003 was upheld.
However, with regard to the computation of damages, the rate of interest was

WP(C) 5581/2007

Page No.1 of 3

reduced from 24% to 12% p.a.

2.

The grievance of the petitioner is that the respondent No.4 ought to

have been permitted to be impleaded in the proceedings before the Estate
Officer as well as before the learned Additional District Judge. The petitioner
says that the shop was handed over to the respondent No.4 pursuant to a
partnership agreement and the said handing over was notified to the concerned
authorities. Accordingly, it is submitted by the counsel for the petitioner that
whatever the damages, the same need to be recovered from the respondent No.4
who was in actual possession and not from the petitioner. In connection with
this argument, the learned Additional District Judge observed as under :
“Admittedly, the said shop was allotted to the appellant on
license basis. It is the appellant only, who is liable to pay
license fee/damages in terms of the license deed entered into
with the appellant, unless the said shop is transferred to
someone else. The appellant has failed to place on record,
either before the Estate Officer or before this court, any
document to show that the said shop had been licensed/
transferred to Smt. Reena Arora. Thus, I find no force in
appellant's contention that he is not liable to pay the arrears
of license fees/damages.”

3.

The learned counsel for the petitioner drew my attention to clause

12 of the original license which stands in the name of the petitioner. The said
clause 12 reads as under :
“12.

WP(C) 5581/2007

That the licensee during the tenure of this license shall
not transfer, assign or part with the licensed premises or
Page No.2 of 3

any part thereof permanently or temporarily to anybody
else and he shall not be allowed to take any person to
share the accommodation in partnership without the prior
written permission of the licensor nor shall he be entitled
to allow any person to occupy the licensed premises or to
use any part thereof save with the prior permission in
writing of the licensor.”
4.

A reading of the said clause makes it abundantly clear that before a

license could be transferred to any other person or possession could be parted
with, prior written permission of the licensor was necessary. Admittedly, no
prior written permission of the licensor has been taken in the present case. The
only contention of the petitioner is that the intimation of the entering into of the
partnership deed and the handing over of possession to the respondent No.4
was sent to the concerned authority. In my view, this does not amount to prior
written permission as required under the terms of the licence. As such, no
interference with the order of the learned Additional District Judge is called for.
This writ petition is dismissed.
BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
August 01, 2007
M

WP(C) 5581/2007

Page No.3 of 3

