THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 05.09.2007

+

WP(C) 2753/2007

S.K.N. ASSOCIATES PVT. LTD & ANOTHER

... Petitioners

- versus UNION OF INDIA AND ANOTHER

... Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioners
: Mr Parag Tripathi, Sr Advocate with Ms Neelima Tripathi,
Mr Deepesh Ahuja and Ms Taru Gupta
For the Respondent No.1 : Mr Gaurav Duggal
For the Respondent No.2 : Mr Vikas Singh, ASG with Mr B.K. Sood and
Mr Yogesh Kumar

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.
2.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

Yes

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ? Yes
BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J
1.

This writ petition is directed against the deletion contained in

the 14th Endorsement to the petitioner No.1's certification marks licence
No. CM/L-2341642 for IS: 9798: 1995 which seeks to delete “single
stage low pressure regulators for use with LPG mixtures, suitable for
valves having 25.6 mm collar diameter and maximum rated capacity =
0.5 m3/hr” from the said licence. The petitioners also seek a writ of
WP(C) 2753/07

Page No.1 of 22

mandamus directing the respondents to grant renewal of the licence
without the aforesaid deletion.

2.

The petitioner No.1 is engaged in the manufacture of various

appliances, including LPG pressure regulators marketed under the trade
name and style “SKN”. The petitioner No.2, who is a citizen of India, is
a share-holder and Director of the petitioner No.1. In 1987, the petitioner
No.1 is said to have commenced production of LPG pressure regulators
used for regulation of the flow of LPG from the gas cylinder to the
burner of the stove. Shortly after the commencement of production, the
petitioner No.1 entered into correspondence with the Bureau of Indian
Standards (Respondent No.2) as also the Chief Controller of Explosives,
Nagpur for the grant of ISI certification. In March, 1988, the LPG
(Regulation of Supply and Distribution) Order, 1988 was passed. The
petitioner had challenged the same by way of a writ petition being CW
2143/1988. The petitioners had also made a grievance that the Bureau of
Indian Standards and the Chief Controller of Explosives, had failed and /
or neglected to deal with the petitioner's application for the grant of ISI
certification.

By an order dated 06.12.1990, in CW 2143/1988, a

Division Bench of this court directed the Bureau of Indian Standards to

WP(C) 2753/07

Page No.2 of 22

depute competent persons to visit the factory of the petitioner and inspect
the regulators manufactured by the petitioner and pass appropriate orders
within a month.

On 01.10.1991, the Controller of Explosives had

informed the Director, Bureau of Indian Standards that the drawings in
respect of the LPG regulators manufactured by the petitioner No.1 met
with the approval of the Department of Explosives.

Thereafter, on

28.02.1992, the Bureau of Indian standards granted ISI certification to
the LPG regulators manufactured by the petitioner No.1.

The

certification marks licence No. CM/L-2341642, which had been granted
to the petitioner in respect of IS: 9798-1981 Specification for Low
Pressure Regulators for use with Liquefied Petroleum Gas had been
continuously renewed thereafter on 15 occasions. The last such renewal
was done in the year 2006. It is only in the renewal of 09.04.2007, that
the 14th Endorsement has been made by deleting the single stage low
pressure

regulators for use with LPG mixtures, suitable for valves

having 25.6 mm collar diameter and maximum rated capacity = 0.5
m3/hr. The petitioners are aggrieved by this deletion.

3.

It may be noted that in the meanwhile, in 1993, the LPG

(Regulation of Supply and Distribution) Order, 1993 came into force, in

WP(C) 2753/07

Page No.3 of 22

supersession of the 1988 LPG Order. The petitioners were aggrieved by
the 1993 LPG Order also and another writ petition being WP 4476/1994
was filed. Rule D.B. was issued in the said writ petition on 27.10.1994.

4.

On 31.08.2006, when WP(C) 2143/1988 came up for hearing

before a Division Bench of this court, it was pointed out by the learned
Additional Solicitor General that the LPG (Regulation of Supply and
Distribution) Order, 2000 had by then come into force and the said order
had repealed the LPG Order, 1993.

On that date (31.08.2006), the

learned counsel for the petitioner sought time to examine the matter. On
the next date, i.e., on 14.09.2006, the learned counsel for the petitioner
informed the court that the petitioner had filed a fresh writ petition
challenging the validity of the LPG (Regulation of Supply and
Distribution) Order, 2000 being WP(C) 14682-83/2006. In view of the
fact that the LPG Order, 2000 had repealed the LPG Order of 1993
which, in turn, had repealed the LPG Order of 1988, the earlier writ
petitions challenging the repealed orders were dismissed.

5.

By a letter dated 05.01.2007, the Bureau of Indian Standards

informed the petitioner No.1 that its certification marks licence was valid

WP(C) 2753/07

Page No.4 of 22

upto 15.03.2007 and that, as per the Bureau of Indian Standards
(Certification Regulations), 1988 [Regulation 4 (2) and 4 (6)] licence
renewal has to be applied at least one month before the expiry date of the
licence. Consequently, the petitioner No.1 applied for renewal of the
licence and completed all the requisite formalities. In response to the
renewal application, by the impugned letter dated 09.04.2007, the Bureau
of Indian Standards informed the petitioner that the licence had been
renewed from 16.03.2007 to 15.03.2008, but it was subject to the 14 th
Endorsement by which LPG regulators suitable for valves having 25.6
mm collar diameter and maximum rated capacity = 0.5 m3/hr were
deleted.

6.

The main ground urged on behalf of the petitioners by way of

challenge to the impugned deletion is that it amounts to a cancellation of
the certification marks licence in respect of single stage low pressure
regulators for use with LPG mixtures, suitable for valves having 25.6 mm
collar diameter and maximum rated capacity = 0.5 m3/hr. Mr Parag
Tripathi, the learned senior counsel who appeared on behalf of the
petitioners, submitted that a licence granted by the Bureau of Indian
Standards may be cancelled in terms of the provisions of Regulation 5 (5)

WP(C) 2753/07

Page No.5 of 22

(a)1 of the Bureau of Indian Standards (Certification) Regulations, 1988
(hereinafter referred to as 'the BIS Certification Regulations, 1988'). He
submitted that the licence could be cancelled only on the four grounds
mentioned in the said Regulation 5 (5) (a). None of these grounds exist
in the present case and, therefore, according to Mr Tripathi, the
cancellation was bad.

It was submitted by Mr Tripathi that more

importantly, the provisions of Regulation 5 (5) (c)2 of the said Regulation
were not followed at all. The said provision stipulates that before the
Bureau cancells any licence, it shall give the licencee not less than 14
days notice of its intention to cancel the licence. He submits that no such
notice was given and no explanation was called for from the petitioners.
Thus, according to Mr Tripathi, the fundamentals of natural justice,
which are enshrined in the BIS Certification Regulations, 1988, have
been given a complete go-by by the Bureau of Indian Standards and,

1 “5. Conditions of a Licence - (5)(a) Any licence granted by the Bureau may be suspended or
cancelled by it, if it is satisfied that the i. articles marked with the Standard Mark under a licence do not comply with the related Indian
Standard or Standards; or
ii. licencee had used the mark in respect of a process which does not come up to the related
Indian Standard or Standards; or
iii. licencee failed to provide reasonable facilities to any Inspecting Officer to enable him to
discharge the duties imposed on him; or
iv. licencee has failed to comply with any of the terms and conditions of the licence.”
2

“(c) Before the Bureau suspends or cancels any licence, it shall give the licencee not less than
fourteen days' notice of its intention to suspend or cancel the licence.”

WP(C) 2753/07

Page No.6 of 22

therefore, the deletion carried out by the 14th Endorsement was liable to
be set aside on this ground alone.

7.

Mr Vikas Singh, the learned Additional Solicitor General,

who appeared on behalf of the Bureau of Indian Standards, straightway
drew my attention to the provisions of Section 153 of the Bureau of
Indian Standards Act, 1986 (hereinafter referred to as 'the BIS Act'). He
submitted that under the heading 'Grant of Licence', the said provision
enabled the Bureau to grant, renew, suspend or cancel a licence. He then
referred to section 2 (j)4 of the BIS Act which defines “licence” to mean a
licence granted under Section 15 to use the Indian Standards
Certification Mark in relation to any article or process which conforms to
the Indian Standards and includes any licence granted under the Indian
Standard Institution (Certification Marks) Act, 1952 as was in force
immediately before the date of establishment of the Bureau. Emphasis
3 “15. Grant of licence.—(1) The Bureau may, by order, grant, renew, suspend or cancel a licence in
such manner as may be determined by regulations.
(2) The grant or renewal of the licence under sub-section (1) shall be subject to such conditions
and on payment of such fees as may be determined by regulations.”
4 “2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, xxxx
j.

xxxx

xxxx

xxxx

xxxx

xxxx

"Licence" means a licence granted under section 15 to use the Indian Standards
Certification Mark in relation to any article or process which conforms to the Indian
Standard and includes any licence granted under the Indian Standards Institution
(Certification Marks) Act, 1952 and is in force immediately before the date of
establishment of the Bureau;”

WP(C) 2753/07

Page No.7 of 22

was laid by Mr Vikas Singh on the expression “to use the Indian
Standards Certification Mark in relation to any article or process”. He
submitted that the certification marks licence is not a licence issued in
the abstract. The licence is issued so that the same can be used by a
manufacturer in relation to any article or process. He submitted that
unless and until a manufacturer was permitted to manufacture the goods
in question, the licence could not be granted in respect thereof. He made
this submission in the context of the fact that under the prevalent LPG
Control Orders, regulators having a collar size of 25.6 mm were only
reserved for oil companies and could not be used by private
manufacturers. Therefore, he submitted that such a licence could not at
all be issued in respect of LPG regulators having a collar size of 25.6
mm. The deletion that is impugned in the present writ petition was a
consequence of this and, therefore, cannot be faulted.

8.

Mr Vikas Singh then drew my attention to Regulation 4 (1) 5

of the BIS Certification Regulations, 1988 where, again, he laid stress on
the expressions “is fit to use the Standard Mark” and “authorising the use
5 “4. Grant of Licence - (1) If the Bureau, after a preliminary inquiry, is satisfied that the applicant
having regard to requisite skill, equipment, systems, resources, previous performance and antecedents
relevant to the issuance of the licence is fit to use the Standard Mark, the Bureau shall grant a licence in
Form II authorising the use of the Standard Mark in respect of the article or class of articles
manufactured by the applicant or in respect of the process employed in any manufacture or work,
subject to such terms and conditions as specified in these regulations. The Bureau shall intimate the
applicant about grant of licence.”
WP(C) 2753/07

Page No.8 of 22

of the Standard Mark”. These expressions were also highlighted by Mr
Vikas Singh in continuation of his argument that a certification licence
could only be valid if the same was used in respect of articles or class of
articles which the licencee could manufacture legitimately.

9.

Mr Vikas Singh also argued that, in any event, the present

writ petition ought not to be entertained inasmuch as a provision for
appeal has been made in the BIS Act itself. He immediately referred to
Section 166 of the said Act whereunder any person aggrieved by an order
made under Section 15, could prefer an appeal to the Central
Government within such period as may be prescribed. Thus, Mr Vikas
Singh submitted that this court ought not to entertain the present writ
petition inasmuch as the petitioners had an adequate, alternative and

6 “16.

Appeal—.(1) Any person aggrieved by an order made under section 15 may prefer an appeal
to the Central Government within such period as may be prescribed.
(2) No appeal shall be admitted if it is preferred after the expiry of the period prescribed
therefor :
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the period prescribed
therefor if the appellant satisfies the Central Government that he had sufficient cause for
not preferring the appeal within the prescribed period.
(3) Every appeal made under this section shall be made in such form and shall be
accompanied by a copy of the order appealed against and by such fees as may be
prescribed.
(4) The procedure for disposing of an appeal shall be such as may be prescribed:
Provided that before disposing of an appeal, the appellant shall be given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard.”

WP(C) 2753/07

Page No.9 of 22

efficacious remedy available to them and they ought to have filed an
appeal before the Central Government.

10.

The learned Additional Solicitor General also drew my

attention to the provisions of Regulation 5 (5) (f)7 which stipulates that
where a licence has been suspended or cancelled, or the term thereof has
not been renewed on the expiry of the period of its validity, the licencee
shall discontinue forthwith the use of the Standard Mark notwithstanding
the pendency of any appeal before the Central Government under Section
16 of the Act. He submitted that the provision is so stringent inasmuch
as it stipulates that if there be, with the licencee or his agents, any articles
in stock which have been improperly marked, the licencee or his agents,
as the case may be, are required to take necessary steps to get the
Standard Mark on such articles either removed, cancelled, defaced or
erased.

11.

In response to the argument that the principles of natural

justice had not been followed and that no notice had been given under
7 “(f) Where a licence has been suspended or cancelled, or the term thereof has not been renewed on
the expiry of the period of its validity, the licencee shall discontinue forthwith the use of the
Standard Mark notwithstanding the pendency, of any appeal before the Central Government under
section 16 of the Act and if there be, with the licencee or his agents, any articles in stock which have
been improperly marked, the licencee or his agents, as the case may be, shall take necessary steps to
get the Standard Mark on such articles either removed, cancelled, defaced or erased.”
WP(C) 2753/07

Page No.10 of 22

Regulation 5 (5) (c) of the BIS Certification Regulations, 1988, the
learned Additional Solicitor General submitted that the present case was
merely one of non-renewal and was not a case of cancellation. For this
purpose, he placed reliance on a decision of a Division Bench of this
court in the case of M/s Gayco Private Ltd and Another v. Excise
Commissioner, Delhi State and Another: ILR 1974 (1) Delhi 585. The
Division Bench had observed as under:“The non-renewal of a licence as distinct from its
cancellation or suspension is not the deprivation of a
vested right of the holder of an expired licence.”
The above observation was made in the context of a non-renewal of an
L-1 licence for the wholesale and retail vend in respect of trade of
foreign liquor. Rule 5.12 of the Delhi Excise Manual, Vol. II stipulated
that whenever it was proposed not to renew a licence, the competent
authority was required to give a notice to the holder of the licence, to
record objections, if any, put forward by the licencee and to pass a
definite order in writing. In this context, it was argued that the show
cause notice which had been issued in that case under Rule 5.12 was
vague and that a proper opportunity had not been allowed to the
appellants therein. The refusal to renew the licence, it was contended,
amounted to cancellation of the licence and the orders of the Collector
WP(C) 2753/07

Page No.11 of 22

and the Excise Commissioner, were, therefore, submitted to be bad. The
Division Bench observed that the notice issued under Rule 5.12 was not
vague and that three grounds mentioned for the proposed non-renewal of
the licences were objective facts which constituted the reason why the
Collector proposed not to renew the licences of the appellants. The court
held that the mention of these facts alone was sufficient.

The

proceedings envisaged under Rule 5.12 were not punitive in the sense
that they amounted to a deprivation of a right of a person which he
otherwise had in law and the proceedings were meant only to inform the
mind of the Collector whether he should renew the licence or not in the
facts of a particular case. It was in these circumstances that the aforesaid
observations, which had been relied upon by the learned Additional
Solicitor General, had been made.

12.

The next decision relied upon by Mr Vikas Singh was that of

a Division Bench of this court in the case of Kaushalya Devi v.
Municipal Corporation of Delhi and Another: 48 (1992) DLT 92.
According to Mr Vikas Singh, this decision clearly established that there
was no room for providing a hearing before renewal of a licence. The
court was considering the question of renewal of a licence in respect of a

WP(C) 2753/07

Page No.12 of 22

kiosk allotted by the MCD. It was contended by the petitioner therein
that she had a right to be heard if the MCD did not wish to renew the
licence. This contention was repelled by the court primarily on the
ground that the petitioner did not have a right to have the licence
renewed. He then referred to another decision of a Division Bench of
this court in the case of Falcon Air Cargo & Travels (P) Ltd v. Union of
India: 2001 (93) DLT 843. He relied on this decision for the proposition
that non-renewal would not amount to revocation of a licence. The
Division Bench held that revocation or suspension essentially relate to a
stage when a licence is in force. On the other hand, renewal comes at a
stage when the period of currency of the licence is over.

13.

Mr Vikas Singh then referred to the decision of a learned

single Judge of this court in the case of Bentex Motor Control Gear
Industries & Another v. Bureau of Indian Standards: 2001 (II) AD
(Delhi) 404 = 2001 (89) DLT 437. In that case, the petitioner therein
had filed a writ petition seeking the quashing of a letter issued by the
Bureau of Indian Standards which required the petitioner to first seek and
produce the approval by the oil companies for the manufacture of the
pressure regulators having a diameter of 25.6 ± 3 mm to enable the

WP(C) 2753/07

Page No.13 of 22

Bureau of Indian Standards to process the petitioner's application for
grant of certification by them. The petitioner therein had approached the
court seeking a direction that the respondent BIS be asked to accord
approval and certification for IS 9798 relating to pressure regulators by
inspecting its factory without insisting upon prior approval from the oil
companies. In that decision, the order passed by the Division Bench in
the present petitioner's writ petition [CW 2143/1988] was referred to by
the petitioners therein. It was contended by the petitioners therein that
the order passed by the Division Bench had not been assailed by the
Bureau of Indian Standards and, therefore, ought to be accepted as a
precedent for that case. It was contended on behalf of the Bureau of
Indian Standards that the order of the Division Bench was passed when
the LPG Order of 1993 was in force and it was contended that under the
new LPG Order, the provisions relating to parallel marketeer, public
distribution system, manufacture, supply and possession of pressure
regulators and the restrictions on supply or sale of liquefied petroleum
gas equipments, etc. had entirely changed the situation. It was submitted
that there was a prohibition on the sale of pressure regulators of the size
of 25.6 mm to any person other than the oil companies. The supply of
regulators of the size other than 25.6 mm collar diameter was permitted.

WP(C) 2753/07

Page No.14 of 22

14.

The learned single Judge took note of the submission that

under the 1993 LPC Order, there was a prescribed size for pressure
regulators which was to be supplied only to the oil companies. It was
noted that it was for this reason that the Bureau of Indian Standards, with
a view to discourage all and sundry from applying for certification of
pressure regulators of prescribed size, was now requiring that the consent
of the oil companies be obtained, prior to the Bureau entertaining any
application for certification by it. In that case, the counsel appearing on
behalf of the Bureau of Indian Standards conceded that in case the oil
companies state that for accepting the petitioner as a supplier or having it
registered with them, they require certification from the Bureau first, then
it would process the application of the petitioner. In this background, the
learned Single Judge observed that the petitioner therein was not entitled
to the relief sought by it without first approaching the oil companies.
The writ petition was disposed of by directing that the petitioner therein
may approach the oil companies in the first instance and obtain their
confirmation as an acceptable manufacturer.

WP(C) 2753/07

Page No.15 of 22

15.

The learned Additional Solicitor General also submitted that

no mandamus could be issued to violate a law. He submitted this on the
strength of the observation of the Supreme Court in the case of Santosh
Kumar Verma and others v. State of Bihar through Secretary,
Department of Urban Development, Govt. of Bihar, New Secretariat,
Patna and others: 1997 (2) SCC 713 (para 5). He also referred to the
decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Vice-Chancellor,
University of Allahabad and Ors. v. Dr Anand Prakash Mishra and
Ors.: 1997 (10) SCC 264 (para 13). In this decision, the Supreme Court
observed that it is the settled legal position that a mandamus cannot be
issued to violate the law or to act in violation of the law. He submitted
that the prayer made by the petitioners for issuance of a certificate in
respect of the deleted item would amount to issuance of a mandamus
contrary to law and that is impermissible. He submitted that by virtue of
the LPG Order, 2000, the petitioners cannot manufacture LPG regulators
having a collar diameter of 25.6 mm.

Therefore, any mandamus

directing the issuance of the certification marks licence in respect of this
size of LPG regulators would be contrary to law and such a mandamus
cannot be issued. The learned Additional Solicitor General submitted
that the LPG Order of 2000 was in operation. Although the writ petitions

WP(C) 2753/07

Page No.16 of 22

challenging the same had been filed by the petitioners, no stay had been
granted by this court. He referred to the various provisions of the LPG
Order, 2000 to indicate that there was a restriction on persons making
and supplying LPG regulators. He referred to Schedule II to the said
LPG Order, 2000 to indicate that the same was applicable to distributors
of a government oil company. The pressure regulator prescribed for such
distributors was to conform to IS: 9798 specifications having an inlet
diameter of 25.6 mm. In other words, such regulators were restricted for
use by Government oil companies. Schedule III to the LPG Order, 2000
had application to the Parallel Marketing System. Parallel marketing was
permitted under the Parallel Marketing System to deal with and use, inter
alia, pressure regulators conforming to IS specifications 9798 of any size
and having an inlet diameter “other than of 22.0 mm”. According to the
learned Additional Solicitor General, reference to 22.0 mm is a mistake
and it should actually be 25.6 mm. There was a great deal of debate on
this aspect. Mr Tripathi, who appeared for the petitioners, submitted that
what appears in the Gazette cannot be wished away by calling it a
mistake or a misprint. Therefore, according to him, there was no bar with
regard to 25.6 mm regulators.

WP(C) 2753/07

Page No.17 of 22

16.

Having examined and discussed the arguments advanced by

the counsel for the parties, the crucial question that needs to be answered
is – whether the impugned deletion would amount to a cancellation ? In
my view, the deletion of regulators having a collar diameter of 25.6 mm
would not amount to a cancellation. A plain reading of the provisions of
Section 15 (1) indicates that the Bureau may, by order, grant, renew,
suspend or cancel a licence in such manner as may be determined by
regulations.

The regulations have prescribed that before the Bureau

cancels any licence, it shall give the licencee not less than 14 days notice
of its intention to cancel the licence [See: Regulation 5 (5) (c) of the BIS
Certification Regulations, 1988]. It is further provided under Regulation
5 (5) (d) that on receipt of such notice, the licencee may submit an
explanation on his behalf to the Bureau within seven days thereof. If an
explanation is submitted, the Bureau may consider the explanation and
give a hearing to the licencee within 14 days from the date of receipt of
such explanation or before the expiry of the notice whichever is longer.
Regulation 5 (5) (e) provides that if no explanation is submitted, the
Bureau may, on the expiry of the period of notice, cancel the licence.
Under Regulation 5 (8), it is provided that the decision of the Bureau
under Regulation 4 (4) or Regulation 5 (5) together with the grounds for

WP(C) 2753/07

Page No.18 of 22

arriving at such decision shall be communicated, in writing by registered
post, to the applicant or the licencee, as the case may be. It is, therefore,
clear that as per the manner determined by the Regulations, a licence can
be cancelled only after a notice is given and if an explanation is
submitted by the noticee after hearing is given to him. The decision is
also required to be a reasoned decision in writing and is required to be
communicated to the licencee by registered post. But, there is no such
procedure or requirement for renewal or non-renewal.

17.

If one looks at Section 15 of the said Act one finds that it has

reference to (a) grant of a licence; (b) renewal of a licence; (c)
suspension of a licence; and (d) cancellation of a licence. All these fall
in distinct and different categories. Renewal of a licence is not the same
as a grant and it is definitely distinct from suspension or cancellation.
The three Division Bench decisions of this court in Gayco Pvt. Ltd
(supra), Kaushalya Devi (supra) and Falcon Air Cargo (supra) make it
very clear that a non-renewal does not amount to a cancellation. The
primary reason for this cancellation is that a licence does not have a
vested right in renewal. Whereas in the case of a cancellation a right
vested in the licence is taken away. It is for this reason that renewal and

WP(C) 2753/07

Page No.19 of 22

cancellation have been treated differently. While the right to hearing
incumbent before a vested right is taken away by a cancellation of a
licence, no such right enures in favour of a licencee while his licence is
being considered for renewal. In the present case, what has happened is
that the renewal has been granted by excluding regulators of collar
diameter of 25.6 mm. The effect of this is that the licence in respect of
such regulators has not been renewed. It is not a case of cancellation as
is sought to be made out by the petitioner. The previous licence had run
for its entire term. The renewal has been done sans this size. The
petitioner had no vested right in regulators of this size. Therefore, nonrenewal of the licence in respect of this size of regulators does not
amount to a cancellation of the licence. Consequently, the provisions of
Regulation 5 (5) (c) do no get attracted.

18.

This leaves for discussion the question of alternative remedy

raised by the learned Additional Solicitor General. Section 16 provides
for an appeal by any person who is aggrieved of an order made under
Section 15.

The learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon the

decision of the Supreme Court in Whirlpool Corporation v. Registrar of
Trade Marks, Mumbai & Ors.: 1998 (8) SCC 1, wherein it is observed

WP(C) 2753/07

Page No.20 of 22

that the existence of an alternative remedy shall not operate as a bar in at
least three contingencies, namely, where the writ petition has been filed
for enforcement of any fundamental right; or where there has been a
violation of the principles of natural justice; or where the order or
proceedings are wholly without jurisdiction; or the vires of an Act is
challenged. The words used by the Supreme Court are as under:“15. Under Article 226 of the Constitution, the High
Court, having regard to the facts of the case, has
discretion to entertain or not to entertain a writ
petition. But the High Court has imposed upon itself
certain restrictions one of which is that if an effective
and efficacious remedy is available, the High Court
would not normally exercise its jurisdiction. But the
alternative remedy has been consistently held by this
court not to operate as a bar in at least three
contingencies, namely, where the Writ Petition has
been filed for the enforcement of any of the
Fundamental rights or where there has been a
violation of the principle of natural justice or where
the order or proceedings are wholly without
jurisdiction or the vires of an Act is challenged. There
is a plethora of case law on this point but to cut down
this circle of forensic whirlpool we would rely on
some old decisions of the evolutionary era of the
constitutional law as they still hold the field.”

The learned counsel for the petitioner had placed reliance on this
decision on the basis of his submission that there has been a violation of
the principles of natural justice. But, I have already held that there has
been no such violation. Therefore, the petitioner can derive no assistance
WP(C) 2753/07

Page No.21 of 22

from this decision. Thus, on the ground of an alternative remedy being
available, also, this writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
In these circumstances, the writ petition is dismissed. No
costs.
BADAR DURREZ AHMED
( JUDGE )
September 05, 2007
δυττ

WP(C) 2753/07

Page No.22 of 22

