THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 04.07.2007

+

CRL REV. P. No.652/2004

SATISH KUMAR ARORA

... Petitioner
- versus -

CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION

... Respondent

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr C.L. Gupta.
For the Respondent/CBI
: Mr R.M. Tiwari.

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J
1.

This Criminal Revision Petition is directed against the order on

charge dated 20.9.2004 passed by the learned Special Judge, Delhi directing
that a charge under Section 120B IPC read with Sections 7, 13 (2) read with
Section 13 (1) (d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 be framed against
all the accused persons including the petitioner herein (Satish Kumar Arora). A
separate charge was also directed to be framed against all the accused under
Sections 7, 13 (2) read with Section 13 (1) (d) of the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988. The charge against the petitioner is that he, being a public servant,

CRLREVP 652/04

Page No.1 of 16

working as Deputy Regional Director, National Saving Organisation, Ministry
of Finance, Tis Hazari, Delhi, during the period 1999, demanded and accepted
different amounts ranging between Rs 200/- to Rs 800/- from different agents
who were running National Saving Agencies for a motive or reward of clearing
their commission bills and for renewal of their savings agencies. It is also
alleged that the petitioner by abusing his official position or otherwise by
corrupt or illegal means obtained pecuniary advantage of different amounts
ranging between Rs 200/- to Rs 800/- from the agents of his organisation.
Furthermore, there was an allegation of conspiracy between the petitioner and
the two other co-accused. It is in these circumstances, that the charges, as
directed by the impugned order dated 20.9.2004, were framed against the
petitioner as well as the other co-accused by separate orders of the same date,
i.e. 20.9.2004.

2.

The facts are that on 6.5.1999 a complaint against Shri H.K. Pal,

District Savings Officer, National Savings, Tis Hazari, Delhi, was lodged with
the Regional Director, National Savings Organisation, Deen Dayal Upadhaya
Marg, New Delhi, by the agents of the National Savings Organsation, alleging
inter alia, corruption on the part of the said Shri H.K. Pal. On the basis of the
said complaint, statements of several agents were recorded.

Two of the

statements contained allegations also against the present petitioner. On the
basis of this complaint and the said statements, the petitioner was put under
CRLREVP 652/04

Page No.2 of 16

suspension by an order dated 30.9.1999. Thereafter, the petitioner was chargesheeted and a departmental inquiry was ordered. The two articles of charge
related to:(1)

Corruption charges;

(2)

Failure to take appropriate action against subordinate
officers indulging in gross misconduct and harassing the
agents and demanding and accepting bribes.

3.

The Inquiry Officer sent his report to the National Savings

Commissioner, Nagpur, on the basis of which Mr U.K. Sinha, Joint Secretary,
Ministry of Finance, issued an order, exonerating the petitioner from the first
article of charge which related to corruption inasmuch as the same had not been
proved. With regard to the second article of charge the same was held against
the petitioner and a minor penalty was imposed thereon with regard to
reduction of pay.

4.

It is contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the

present case being prosecuted by the CBI, inter alia, against the petitioner is
based on the same allegation of corruption and alleged illegal gratification. It is
submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner that at the stage of framing
of charges three legal objections were raised before the learned Special Judge,
to indicate that the charges cannot at be framed against the petitioner. The first
objection was that the sanctioning authority which is also the appointing and

CRLREVP 652/04

Page No.3 of 16

removing authority is the National Savings Commissioner, Nagpur, who retired
in July, 2001and thereafter, nobody was appointed till 24.7.2002. On that date
Shri U.K. Sinha, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Finance, was appointed as
Disciplinary Authority, but no Gazetted Notification was placed on record in
respect of such appointment. It was, therefore, contended that the sanction
granted to Shri U.K. Sinha in the absence of the Gazetted Notification is illegal
and bad in law and, therefore, the Court could not have taken cognizance and
the charge could not be framed.

5.

The second objection to the framing of charge is that, in any event,

the sanction granted was without any application of mind. This is apparent
from the fact that the sanction so granted by Mr U.K. Sinha is by his order
dated 16.4.2004 whereas it was the same Mr U.K. Sinha who had, by virtue of
his order dated 3/7.4.2003, exonerated the petitioner in respect of the corruption
charges in consultation with the Central Vigilance Commission. As indicated
above, only a minor penalty against the subordinate officer was imposed. It
was, therefore, contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that it is
obvious that while granting sanction Mr U.K. Sinha had not applied his mind at
all because earlier he had passed an order exonerating the petitioner of the same
charges of corruption. It was further pointed out by the learned counsel for the
petitioner that in the sanction order dated 16.4.2003 it had been mentioned that
the departmental proceedings had been initiated against the petitioner and
CRLREVP 652/04

Page No.4 of 16

others whereas on that day i.e. on 16.4.2003, the proceedings were already
completed insofar as the petitioner was concerned and the action of minor
penalty had already been imposed against the petitioner. This also shows that
there was a complete non-application of mind while granting sanction for
prosecution. It is further submitted that had the sanctioning authority informed
the CBI that the petitioner had not been found guilty in the departmental inquiry
and had been exonerated in respect of the charges of corruption, the case
against the petitioner may not even have been registered by the CBI.

6.

The third objection taken on behalf of the petitioner was that as the

petitioner had been exonerated from corruption charges in the departmental
inquiry, there was no question of framing of charges on the same ground in a
criminal case against the petitioner. The learned counsel for the petitioner
relied upon the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of P.S. Rajya v.
State of Bihar: (1996) 9 SCC I.

7.

With regard to the question of non-application of mind by the

sanctioning authority, the learned counsel for the petitioner had relied upon the
decision of this Court in the case of State through CBI V. Ravinder Singh:
1995 (3)Recent CR 772. He also placed reliance on a decision of the Punjab
and Haryana High Court in Harmesh Kumar v. State of Punjab: 1999 (2) RCR

CRLREVP 652/04

Page No.5 of 16

(Crl.) 351 and upon the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of
Mansukhlal Vithaldas Chauhan v. State of Gujarat: AIR 1997 SC 3400.

8.

The learned counsel for the petitioner also drew my attention to

the impugned order dated 20.9.2004, where it is recorded that the learned senior
public prosecutor submitted that the prosecution shall be filing a copy of the
Gazetted Notification before summoning the sanctioning authority. However,
it is pointed out by the learned counsel for the petitioner that after the framing
of the charge on 20.9.2004, the sanctioning authority (Mr U.K. Sinha) was
examined as PW5 on 11.4.2005. The Gazette Notification had not been filed
before summoning PW5. Apart from this, he submitted that PW5 (Mr U.K.
Sinha) has admitted in his cross-examination to the following effect:“It is correct that only office order was there assigning me the
duties of disciplinary authority and there is no notification to that
effect in my name.”
Thus, according to the learned counsel for the petitioner, there is no Gazette
Notification and, accordingly, the purported sanctioning authority had no power
to grant sanction.

9.

Mr R.M. Tiwari, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

CBI, submitted that the charges had been appropriately framed and this Court
ought not to interfere with the same. His first argument was that as per the law

CRLREVP 652/04

Page No.6 of 16

laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of State of Orissa V. Debendra
Nath Padhi: (2005) 1 SCC 568, at the stage of framing of charge, hearing the
submissions of the accused has to be confined to the material produced by the
prosecution. He submitted that there is no provision in the Code which grants
to the accused any right to file any material or document at the stage of framing
of charge and that such a right is available to the accused only at the stage of
trial. In this context, Mr Tiwari submitted that the order dated 3/7.4.2003
exonerating the petitioner in respect of the corruption charges, has neither been
supplied to the CBI by the petitioner/accused nor has the same been relied upon
by the CBI in the charge sheet. He submits that the said order dated 3/7.4.2003
had not been produced or placed on record by the CBI and, therefore, cannot be
looked into at the stage of framing of charges. He also submitted that in his
deposition, PW5 (Mr U.K. Sinha) has stated that “CBI was not intimated by our
department that accused No.1 was exonerated in departmental inquiry in respect
of the first charge i.e. corruption charge.” Thus, according to Mr Tiwari, the
petitioner cannot take this plea for the purpose of impugning the order on
charge as well as the charges framed.

10.

Mr Tiwari also submitted that as per the provisions of Section 19

(3) (a) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, no finding, sentence or order
passed by a Special Judge, ought to be reversed or altered by a Court in Appeal,
Confirmation or Revision on the ground of the absence of, or any error,
CRLREVP 652/04

Page No.7 of 16

omission or irregularity in, the sanction required under Sub-Section (1), unless
a failure of justice has in fact been occasioned thereby. He placed reliance on
the Supreme Court Judgment in Satya Narayan Sharma v. State of Rajasthan:
(2001) 8 SCC 607 (Paragraph 14 and 26). Mr Tiwari concluded by saying that
there is no incorrectness, illegality, irregularity or impropriety in the impugned
order on charge and that the petitioner shall have ample opportunity to defend
himself during the trial before the learned Special Judge. He submitted that the
impugned order ought not to interfered with and the petition ought to be
dismissed.

11.

In rejoinder, the learned counsel for the petitioner, apart from

reiterating his earlier contentions, submitted that the documents produced by
the petitioner can be looked into at the stage of considering the question of
discharge and/or of framing of charges under Section 227 and 228 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973. He urged that the submissions of the accused
have to be heard and taken into account and the documents filed by the accused
in his favour are also to be considered. For this proposition, he placed reliance
on the Supreme Court decision in the case of State of Madhya Pradesh v.
Mohan Lal Soni: 2000 [2] JCC [SC] 676.

12.

In P.S. Rajya (supra), the short question that arose for

consideration before the Supreme Court was whether the respondent therein
CRLREVP 652/04

Page No.8 of 16

was justified in pursuing the prosecution against the appellant therein under the
provisions of Section 5(2) read with Section 5(1)(e) of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1947, notwithstanding the fact that on an identical charge the
appellant was exonerated in departmental proceedings in the light of a report
submitted by the Central Vigilance Commission and concurred by the Union
Public Service Commission. In the background of this question, the Supreme
Court observed as under:“17. At the outset we may point out that the learned counsel for
the respondent could not but accept the position that the standard
of proof required to establish the guilt in a criminal case is far
higher than the standard of proof required to establish the guilt in
the departmental proceedings. He also accepted that in the
present case, the charge in the departmental proceedings and in
the criminal proceedings is one and the same. He did not dispute
the findings rendered in the departmental proceedings and the
ultimate result of it. On these premises, if we proceed further
then there is no difficulty in accepting the case of the appellant.
For if the charge which is identical could not be established in a
departmental proceedings and in view of the admitted
discrepancies in the reports submitted by the valuers one wonders
what is there further to proceed against the appellant in criminal
proceedings.”
The Supreme Court decided the question in favour of the appellant therein and
quashed the criminal proceedings against him. The learned counsel for the
petitioner has placed strong reliance on this decision. It was submitted, as
noted above, that the petitioner had been exonerated in the departmental
proceedings in respect of the corruption charges and, therefore, the criminal
case based upon the same facts and charges could not be continued. As a

CRLREVP 652/04

Page No.9 of 16

general proposition, it is correct that the standard of proof required to establish
guilt in a criminal case is far greater than the standard of proof required to
establish liability in departmental proceedings. Therefore, if a person has been
exonerated in departmental proceedings, there would be little hope of the same
person being found guilty in a criminal case. But there are two difficulties in
applying the said principle to the present case. The first difficulty is that the
order exonerating the petitioner of the corruption charges in the departmental
proceedings has not been filed by the prosecution. It is a document which has
been introduced by the accused. The question is whether this document could
be looked into by the Court while framing charges? This will be dealt with in
detail shortly. The other difficulty is that in P.S. Rajya (supra), the counsel
appearing on behalf of the respondent had accepted that the charge in the
departmental proceedings and in the criminal proceedings was one and the
same. He also did not dispute the finding in the departmental proceedings and
the ultimate result of it. It is based on these concessions that the Supreme Court
observed that there would be no difficulty in accepting the case of the appellant
because if the identical charge could not be established in a departmental
proceedings “what is there further to proceed against the appellant in criminal
proceedings”. Unfortunately, for the petitioner herein, the learned counsel for
the CBI has made no such concession. He has not accepted that the charge in
the departmental proceedings with regard to corruption and the charge in the
present proceedings are identical. It is also not the case that the learned counsel
CRLREVP 652/04

Page No.10 of 16

for the CBI does not dispute the findings rendered in the departmental
proceedings and the ultimate result of it. Therefore, the decision in P.S. Rajya
(supra) was rendered under different circumstances and, while the general
proposition that the degree of proof required to establish guilt in a criminal case
is far greater than that required in departmental proceedings is unexceptionable,
it must also be seen whether the charge in the departmental proceedings is
identical to the charge in the criminal proceedings. At the stage of framing of
the charges, the record of the departmental proceedings was not before the
learned Special Judge. This Court has to examine the legality and propriety
and correctness of the impugned order on charge dated 20.9.2004 based upon
the material available to and the material that could be looked into by the
learned Special Judge on the date on which it passed the order on charge.

13.

This brings me to the discussion of whether any document

produced by the accused can be looked into by the trial Court at the time of
framing of charges. In Debendra Nath Padhi's case (supra), the Supreme
Court after discussing several of its earlier decisions including P.S. Rajya
(supra) and the State of M.P. Vs. Mohan Lal Soni (supra) came to the
conclusion that:“.........law is that at the time of framing charge or taking
cognizance the accused has no right to produce any material.
Satish Mehra's case [(1996) 9 SCC 766] holding that the trial court
has powers to consider even materials which the accused may

CRLREVP 652/04

Page No.11 of 16

produce at the stage of Section 227 of the Code has not been
correctly decided.”
In Satish Mehra (supra), observations had been made to the effect that if the
accused could produce any reliable material even prior to the stage of trial
which might totally affect the case, the refusal to look material so produced,
may result in injustice, apart from wasting valuable or judicial public time.
These observations in Satish Mehra (supra) were held to be obiter dicta by the
Supreme Court in the case of Debendra Nath Padhi (supra). The Supreme
Court also observed:“Further, the observations cannot be understood to mean that the
accused has a right to produce any document at the stage of framing
of charge having regard to the clear mandate of Sections 227 and
228 in Chapter XVIII and Sections 239 and 240 in Chapter XIX.”
It must be reiterated that both the decisions relied upon by the learned counsel
for the petitioner in the case of P.S. Rajya (supra) and State of Madhya
Pradesh v. Mohan Lal Soni (supra) were considered and distinguished by the
later decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Debendra Nath Padhi
(supra). While it is true that in Mohan Lal Soni's case (supra), the Court was
of the view that documents produced by the accused could be looked into, that
view was based on the earlier decision in the case of Satish Mehra (supra).
Since Satish Mehra (supra) stands overruled by the later decision of a larger
Bench in the case of Debendra Nath Padhi (supra), no reliance can be placed
on the decision in Mohan Lal Soni (supra). The law, as stated in Debendra
CRLREVP 652/04

Page No.12 of 16

Nath Padhi (supra), is that at the time of framing of charge, the accused has no
right to produce any material because if he was permitted to do so and if he was
permitted to present his defence at the stage of framing of charge, it would
amount to the consideration of the entire case at that stage itself which is
against criminal jurisprudence.

14.

In view of this discussion, it is apparent that the purported

exoneration order dated 3/7.4.2003 which has been filed on behalf of the
petitioner could not be looked into by the Court framing charges because the
same did not form part of the documents accompanying the charge sheet.

15.

This being the position, I am left to consider only the question of

sanction. Mr Tiwari has rightly pointed out that as per the provisions of
Section 19 (3) (a) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, no finding,
sentence or order passed by a Special Judge, can be reversed or altered by a
Court in Appeal, Confirmation or Revision on the ground of the absence of, or
any error, omission or irregularity in, the sanction required under Sub Section
(1), unless a failure of justice has, in fact, been occasioned thereby. In the
arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the parties, it has not been
established that any failure of justice has been occasioned. Therefore, the
arguments with regard to the points of validity of sanction and the Gazetted
Notification not being produced would be of no consequences at this stage.
CRLREVP 652/04

Page No.13 of 16

16.

It would be pertinent to refer to a decision of the Supreme Court in

the case of Superintendent of Police (C.B.I.) v. Deepak Chowdhary and
Others: 1995 (6) SCC 225. In that case, the accused was working as a Brnach
Manager of United Bank of India at Calcutta and it was realised that certain
officers working in that bank had conspired with a creditor and the bank had
been defrauded for an amount of Rs.45,000/-. The competent authority had
accorded sanction under Section 6 (1-c) of the Prevention of Corruption Act,
1947 for proceeding with the criminal case against the accused for various IPC
offences as well as offences under the Prevention of Corruption Act. The
accused filed a writ petition in the High Court to quash the sanction so
accorded. The High Court quashed the sanction on two grounds, namely, that
the accused was not given an opportunity of hearing before granting sanction
and that in the departmental inquiry conducted by the bank, the accused had
been exonerated of the charge. With regard to the first ground, namely, the
requirement of opportunity of hearing, the Supreme Court held that the grant of
sanction is only an administrative function and, therefore, there was no need to
provide an opportunity of hearing to the accused before according sanction.
The Supreme Court held that the High Court was, therefor, in error in holding
that the sanction was vitiated by violation of principles of natural justice. With
regard to the ground of exoneration in departmental proceedings, the Supreme
Court held as under:CRLREVP 652/04

Page No.14 of 16

“6.
The second ground of departmental exoneration
by the disciplinary authority is also not relevant. What is
necessary and material is whether the facts collected during
investigation would constitute the offence for which the
sanction has been sought for.”

17.

It is apparent that the Supreme Court was of the view that

exoneration in the departmental proceedings was of no consequence at the time
of considering the sanction by the competent authority. All that was necessary
and material was whether the facts collected during investigation would
constitute the offence for which the sanction had been sought.

The plea taken

by the petitioner that he had been exonerated in departmental proceedings and,
therefore, the sanction ought not to have been granted for initiation of criminal
proceedings has to be rejected.

18.

In view of the aforesaid discussion, I find that there is no infirmity

with the order on charge and, accordingly, this revision petition is dismissed. It
is made clear that the observations made herein are only for the purpose of
construing the appropriateness of the order framing the charge. They shall not
be taken into account at the time of trial of the case and it would be open to the
parties to urge all issues before the Trial Court.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
( JUDGE )
July 04, 2007
CRLREVP 652/04

Page No.15 of 16

J.

CRLREVP 652/04

Page No.16 of 16

