THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Judgment delivered on :09.03.2007
WP(C) No.12455/2005
GANGA MALHOTRA

...Petitioner
- versus -

LAND & DEVELOPMENT OFFICER & ORS.

...Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr M. Dutta
For the Respondent
: Mr Gaurav Duggal
CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

YES

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

YES

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

YES

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner submits that the

only point involved in this case is whether the respondent No.1 (The Land and
Development Officer) can impose a condition of requiring the petitioner to pay
50% unearned increase at the time of giving consent/permission to the transfer
of the lease in respect of premises situated in Plot No. 4, Block No. 160, known
as 7, Sikandra Road, New Delhi.
WP(C)12455/2005

Page No.1 of 5

2.

The letter impugned in this petition has been issued on 11.3.2005

by the respondent No.1. By virtue of the said letter the petitioner has been
informed that as per Clause 2 (11) of the Lease Deed, the lessee is required to
obtain permission at the time of assignment or transfer of the premises or any
part thereof from the Lessor or the Chief Commissioner of Delhi, or such
officer or body as the Lessor may authorize on this behalf in writing of the said
assignment or transfer. The said Clause is also said to prescribe that, after such
permission is given, all such assignees and transferees and the heirs of the
lessee shall be bound by all the covenants and conditions therein contained and
be answerable in all respects therefor. Citing the above provision of the lease
deed the Respondent No.1 has indicated that 50% unearned increase calculated
on a pre-determined rate amounting to Rs 10,09,56,339.00 is payable by the
petitioner in respect of the transfer of the said property by the petitioner.

3.

The petitioner and the other owners namely, respondents Nos. 2 to

16 hold the said property jointly under a perpetual lease dated 16.9.1933 which
was made in favour of Mrs Chandrani Bhagyabhari Kaula ( Nee Wanchoo)
wife of Mr Ganga Ram Kaula.

The petitioner and the said respondents are the

legal heirs of Mrs Chandrani Bhagyabhari Kaula. The lease, in question, has
been placed as Annexure P-1 to the present petition. Clause 2(11) of the Lease
Deed which is relevant for the purpose of this case is reproduced hereinbelow:WP(C)12455/2005

Page No.2 of 5

“11. The Lessee shall before every assignment or transfer of the said
premises hereby demised or any part thereof obtain from the
Lessor or the Chief Commissioner of Delhi, or such officer or
body as the Lessor may authorize on this behalf approval in
writing of the said assignment or transfer and all such assignees
and transferees and the heirs of the Lessee shall be bound by all
the covenants and conditions herein contained and be
answerable in all respects therefor.”

4.

The learned counsel for the petitioner, with reference to the above-

mentioned Clause, submitted that there is no provision therein for the
Respondent No.1, acting on behalf of the lessor, to claim any unearned increase
as a condition for permitting transfer of the lease property. He submitted that
there is also no other provision or clause in the perpetual lease deed which
entitles the respondent No.1 to claim unearned increase. He further submitted
that this issue has been decided and is no longer debatable. He referred to the
decision in the case of Sunil Vasudeva and Others v. Delhi Development
Authority: 34 (1988) DLT 37 wherein a learned Single Judge of this Court held
that such a lease, being a Government grant, would have to be interpreted
according to its own tenor under Section 3 of Government Grants Act, 1895. It
was further held, interpreting a similar clause in the perpetual lease involved in
the case, that there being no condition for grant of any levy, any fee, cess or
payment in the lease itself, the DDA (in that case) was not authorised to make
any claim for any such charges. The principle is very clear that unless the
perpetual lease itself provides for the

WP(C)12455/2005

charging of unearned increase, the

Page No.3 of 5

respondent by itself cannot impose any such condition for transfer.

The

relevant clause in Sunil Vasudeva's case (supra) read as under:“Without first obtaining such consent not to sub-divide the said
land or to part with the possession or transfer or sub-lease a part
only of the said land.”

Interpreting this clause, the learned Single Judge concluded that the defendant
(DDA) had no right to charge the unearned increase under this clause.

5.

After having heard the counsel for the parties, I am of the view that

this case is entirely covered by the decision in the case of Sunil Vasudeva
(supra) and Jor Bagh Association (Regd.) & Others v. Union of India &
Others: 112 (2004) DLT 690. The ratio of these decisions, which is based on
decisions of the Supreme Court, is that unless and until the perpetual lease deed
provides for the charging of unearned increase, the respondent by itself cannot
impose any such condition for transfer. The reason being that the lease in
question is a government grant under the Government Grants Act, 1895 and in
terms of Section 3 thereof, the same has to be considered and interpreted
according to its own tenor, notwithstanding any statutory provisions. That
being the case, this petition is liable to succeed. The impugned order/ notice
dated 11.03.2005 is set aside to the extent of the demand for unearned increase.
As regards the other charges, mentioned therein, there is no challenge by the
petitioner and the same shall be paid, if not already paid.
WP(C)12455/2005

Page No.4 of 5

This writ petition is allowed to this extent. No costs.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
March 09, 2007
J/SR

WP(C)12455/2005

Page No.5 of 5

