THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 02.07.2007

+

CRL REV. P. No.799/2005

RAVINDER KUMAR SEHRAWAT @ R.K. SEHRAWAT ... Petitioner
- versus CBI

... Respondent

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr R. N. Mittal, Sr Advocate with Mr Puneet Mittal and
Ms Shahida Begum
For the Respondent/CBI
: Mr R.M. Tiwari

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ?

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J
1.

This revision petition is directed against the order on charge dated

02.09.2005 and the charge framed on 14.09.2005. The petitioner has been
charged of having committed offences under Sections 7, 13 (2) read with
Section 13 (1) (d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. The petitioner
has also been charged of the offences under Section 120-B of Indian Penal
Code, 1860 for having conspired with co-accused (Ram Singh Rawat). In
substance, the charge against the petitioner and the co-accused (Ram Singh
Rawat) is that from 1997 till 11.06.2003, the petitioner while working as UDC

CRL REV.P.799/05

Page No.1 of 9

in the office of the Deputy Assessor and Collector, House Tax, MCD at Green
Park allowed co-accused Ram Singh Rawat, a private person, to illegally sit on
his seat and conduct official work for him and that the co-accused (Ram Singh
Rawat) had demanded and accepted Rs.5,000/- from the complainant (Shri
Alok Gupta) on behalf of the petitioner on 11.06.2003 as illegal gratification
for issuing a “No Objection Certificate” (NOC) to the complainant (Mr Alok
Gupta) to reconstruct his house. Since it is alleged that the petitioner and the
co-accused conspired in the act an offence punishable under Section 120-B IPC
was allegedly committed by them. In addition, the petitioner, being a public
servant, has also been charged, as mentioned above of having committed
offences under Section 7 and 13 (2) read with Section 13 (1) (d) of the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.

2.

It was contended by Mr Mittal, the learned senior counsel

appearing on behalf of the petitioner, that the complainant wanted an NOC for
reconstruction of his house at J-263, Saket. As per the allegations, the coaccused (Ram Singh Rawat) demanded money for the issuance of the NOC. He
held himself out to be a clerk in the department. The complainant lodged a
complaint with the CBI based on a tape-recorded conversation which the
complainant had with the co-accused (Ram Singh Rawat). A trap was laid by
the officials of CBI and the co-accused (Ram Singh Rawat) was, after having

CRL REV.P.799/05

Page No.2 of 9

been paid a sum of Rs.5,000/- on 11.06.2003, apprehended on the spot. He was
produced before the Special Judge on 12.06.2003.

3.

Mr Mittal drew my attention to the disclosure statement of co-

accused (Ram Singh Rawat) recorded on 11.06.2003.

In the disclosure

statement, it is stated that the co-accused (Ram Singh Rawat) had developed
close proximity with the petitioner as also with one Mr S.K. Sharma who was
posted as the Assistant Assessor and Collector in the concerned office. It is
also stated in the disclosure statement that he (R.S. Rawat) started assisting the
petitioner (R.K. Sehrawat) in his official work as the latter was overburdened.
It is stated that R.S. Rawat used to maintain the files of the petitioner (R.K.
Sehrawat) and was very well acquainted with the record in his possession. It
was also stated that R.K. Sehrawat had been transferred out of the office in
May, 2003, but he had not given charge to the new person.

Mr Mittal

specifically drew my attention to the following portion of the disclosure
statement:“I used to give the amount of bribe taken from various
persons to Shri R.K. Sharma, A&C who used to give my
share to me and also to other officials of the office
including Sh. R.K. Sehrawat. I don't know whether Sh.
S.K. Sharma AA&C used to give the amount of bribe or a
part of that to Dy. Assessor & Collector.”

CRL REV.P.799/05

Page No.3 of 9

The above portion of the disclosure statement was stressed upon by Mr Mittal
to indicate that the key person was Mr S.K. Sharma, but Mr S.K. Sharma was
not being prosecuted by the CBI. Mr Mittal then referred to the statement made
by R.S. Sehrawat before the Special Judge on 12.06.2003. The statement as
recorded in the order of the Special Judge reads as under:“I have heard the Ld. P.P. as well as the accused and his
Counsel. The accused states that he used to collect
money and hand over to AA&C Mr. S.K. Sharma and
used to retain a small share out of it which never
extended Rs.500/-. CBI wants custodial interrogation of
the accused to find out involvement of other persons and
to confront him with the persons named by him.”
4.

Reading the disclosure statement as well as the statement made

before the Special Judge, Mr Mittal submitted that while in the disclosure
statement, both the names of Mr R.K. Sehrawat (the petitioner herein) and Mr
S.K. Sharma have been mentioned, in the statement made before the Special
Judge, only the name of Mr S.K. Sharma was mentioned. He submitted that the
statement made before a judicial officer would have greater credence than a
disclosure statement recorded by the CBI officials. Accordingly, Mr Mittal
submitted that there was nothing on record to suggest that the petitioner was
involved in the alleged offences.

5.

He further submitted that the petitioner had been transferred out of

the office on 27.05.2003. He was transferred to the Legal Branch, MCD,
Chandni Chowk, Town Hall.
CRL REV.P.799/05

The order of transfer had been issued on
Page No.4 of 9

27.05.2003 and was received by the petitioner on the same day. He submitted
that as per the attendance register maintained at the Town Hall, the petitioner
had attended office on 28.05.2003 onwards. Therefore, according to Mr Mittal,
the petitioner having been transferred w.e.f. 27.05.2003, had no connection
with the alleged bribe accepted by the co-accused (R.S. Rawat) on 11.06.2003.

6.

According to Mr Tiwari, who appeared on behalf of the CBI, the

charge has been properly framed and no interference is called for.

He

submitted that during investigation sufficient documentary and oral evidence
was collected to establish that co-accused (Ram Singh Rawat) had demanded
and accepted bribe from the complainant (Sh. Alok Gupta) on behalf of the
present petitioner (R.K. Sehrawat). He further submitted that the application
for grant of the NOC was not processed by the petitioner in conspiracy with
Ram Singh Rawat even after the approval and signature of the competent
officer (S.K. Sharma) had been obtained on 26.05.2003. He submitted that the
NOC was not despatched till 10/11.06.2003 when, in the normal course, the
petitioner ought to have despatched the same within a day or two of the
approval by the competent officer. The NOC was despatched and handed over
to the complainant only after receipt of the bribe amount and till such time, the
same was in the possession of the co-accused (R.S. Rawat).

Mr Tiwari

submitted that insofar as R.S. Rawat was concerned, there was sufficient
material to implicate him inasmuch as he was caught red-handed in the trap
CRL REV.P.799/05

Page No.5 of 9

which was laid by the CBI officials. It is also clear that R.S. Rawat was a
private person and was not discharging any official duties. His presence in the
concerned office and his working therein could not have been done without the
complicity of the petitioner. He further submitted that there was sufficient
documentary and oral evidence to show that R.S. Rawat was specifically
working for and assisting the petitioner in his official work. The documentary
evidence which was referred to was the charge list which was suspected to be
in the handwriting of R.S. Rawat and the same was collected by the successor
in office of the petitioner who ultimately took charge from the petitioner. A
note dated 08.04.2002 was also collected during investigation which contained
notings of Mr S.K. Sharma to the effect that no outsider was to assist any
Inspector / Official. But, contrary to this note, the accused (R.S. Rawat) was
assisting the petitioner in the conduct of his official work. Notices issued
during 2000 – 2003 to tax payers of 11 different properties falling under the
jurisdiction of the petitioner herein were also collected during investigation.
These notices were suspected to be in the handwriting of the co-accused (R.S.
Rawat). Similar other pieces of evidence were also referred to by Mr Tiwari to
show that there was a clear connection between co-accused (R.S. Rawat) and
the petitioner and that they were working in unison. He also referred to the
circumstance that the petitioner had been using a mobile phone No 9810263997
which was owned by co-accused (R.S. Rawat) since July, 2002. This mobile
phone was recovered from the petitioner during the search conducted at his
CRL REV.P.799/05

Page No.6 of 9

residence. A driving licence of R.S. Rawat was also recovered from R.S.
Rawat. The address given in the said driving licence was that of the present
petitioner. It was further mentioned by Mr Tiwari that the documents which are
suspected to be in the handwriting of co-accused (R.S. Rawat) had been sent to
the CFSL, New Delhi for its opinion and the handwriting expert has given a
positive opinion thereon.

7.

Mr Tiwari also submitted that the petitioner cannot take the plea

that he did not demand any money from the complainant inasmuch as he had
already been relieved from the Mehrauli Sub Zone Office on 27.05.2003. He
submitted that such a plea could not be taken because there was sufficient
evidence to indicate that the petitioner, although he had joined at Town Hall,
had not handed over charge to his successor at the Mehrauli Sub Zone Office
till 11.06.2003. It was also contended by Mr Tiwari that there was evidence to
establish that the demand was raised by the co-accused (R.S. Rawat) on behalf
of the petitioner because R.S. Rawat had been working from the seat of the
petitioner and all the files and keys of the almirah pertaining to the petitioner
were in the possession of R.S. Rawat till 11.06.2003.

8.

Considering the arguments advanced by the counsel for the parties

and upon examining the material on record, I am of the view that the learned
Special Judge has correctly framed the charges. All these factors which have
CRL REV.P.799/05

Page No.7 of 9

been stated by the learned counsel for the petitioner have been considered by
the learned Special Judge. In Union of India v. Prafulla Kumar Samal and
Another: AIR 1979 SC 366, the Supreme Court observed that a judge while
considering the question of framing of charges has the undoubted power of
sifting and weighing the evidence for the limited purpose of finding out
whether or not a prima facie case has been made out. The Supreme Court
further observed that where the material placed before the court discloses a
grave suspicion against the accused which has not been properly explained, the
court would be fully justified in framing a charge and proceeding with the trial.
Taking a prima facie view of the documentary evidence in the present case, it
cannot be said that the petitioner was not at all involved in the alleged offences.
It is also not a case of a slight suspicion. Since the co-accused (Ram Singh
Rawat) could not have functioned in the manner he did without the active
complicity of the petitioner, there is a grave suspicion that the petitioner was
involved in the commission of the alleged offence. This is, of course, a prima
facie view and it may very well by proved wrong in the course of the trial. At
this stage, however, the petitioner cannot be discharged. Furthermore, the
submission that Mr S.K. Sharma has not been prosecuted is also no ground for
not proceeding against the petitioner. What has to be seen is whether there is
sufficient material against the present petitioner for proceeding further. This is
entirely independent of the circumstance that another person, against whom
some material is alleged, has not been prosecuted. It is also not the case that
CRL REV.P.799/05

Page No.8 of 9

unless and until Mr S.K. Sharma is included as an accused, there can be no
allegation against the petitioner.

9.

Considering the circumstances mentioned above, I see no reason

for interfering with the impugned order.

It is made clear that the views

expressed in this order are only of a prima facie nature and are not to be looked
into in the course of the trial of the case.
This revision petition is dismissed.
BADAR DURREZ AHMED
( JUDGE )
July 02, 2007
δυττ

CRL REV.P.799/05

Page No.9 of 9

