THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on :08.02.2007

+

WP (C) 895/2007 & CM No. 1552/2007

KRITI SISODIA THROUGH HER GUARDIAN/
FATHER SHRI ANIL KUMAR SISODIA

...Petitioner

- versus DIRECTORATE OF EDUCATION & ANOTHER

...Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr Ranjan Kumar.
For the Respondent No.1
For the Respondent No.2

: Mr S Sirish Kumar with Mr Manish Shukla and Mr Rabindernath.
: Mr Romy Chacko and Mr Girish Pandey.

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

YES

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

YES

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

YES

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
CM No. 1553/2007
Allowed subject to all just exceptions.
WP (C) 895/2007 & CM.No. 1552/2007
1.

Rule.

2.

With the consent of the parties, this petition is taken up for

disposal.

WP(C) 895/2007 & CM1552/2007

Page No.1 of 14

3.

The petitioner (Kriti Sisodia) has filed this petition through her

guardian/father Shri Anil Kumar Sisodia seeking admission to the lower KG
class of in Montfort Senior Secondary School (Respondent No.2) (hereinafter
referred to as the Montfort School). The contention raised on behalf of the
petitioner is that the petitioner was denied admission to the school by
employing its own criteria of admission and not following the recommendation
of the Ganguly Committee. The contention of the learned counsel for the
petitioner is that this would be in clear violation of the directions given by a
Division Bench of this court in LPA 196/2004 which stipulated that, for the
academic session 2007-2008, admissions in schools would be governed by the
recommendations of the Ganguly Committee.

A copy of the order dated

17.10.2006 passed in LPA 196/2004 is placed on record as annexure P-1. The
relevant portion of the order dated 17.10.2006 reads as under:
“Counsel appearing for the various parties pray for
some time to go through the report. We make it clear
that as an experimental basis we would like the
recommendations of the Committee to be given a trial
for the next year nursery admission. If there are other
suggestions they may also be given to the Court.”
The above order was followed by an order dated 08.12.2006 passed by the
Division Bench in the same LPA 196/2004. The relevant portion of the order
dated 8.12.2006 reads as under:
“.......... In our opinion, it will be appropriate that for
nursery admissions for the coming academic year, the
guidelines which were framed by the Committee could
WP(C) 895/2007 & CM1552/2007

Page No.2 of 14

be given a trial, on an experimental basis. We make it
clear that this is only a stop gap arrangement, made to
tide over the present situation which remains fluid, till
all the parties concerned address the Court on the
recommendations given by the Committee, by filing
their suggestions.........”
4.

According to the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

petitioner, these two orders passed by the Division Bench in LPA 196/2004
make it abundantly clear that the Ganguly Committee Recommendations have
to be applied to nursery/lower KG admissions by schools in Delhi. Continuing
with his submissions, the learned counsel pointed out that, as per the Ganguly
Committee Recommendations, weightage is to be given for 7 different
categories.

The categories being (1) Neighbourhood Schools; (2) sibling

categories; (3) alumni category; (4) Children with special needs; (5) Girl child;

(6) Educational qualifications of parents and (7) School specific criteria. As
per the recommendations of the Committee, it is apparent that the Committee
had decided to device a method and assigned criteria by which each applicant
can be assessed on a scale by giving weightage points under the different
heads/categories referred to above.

It was felt by the Ganguly Committee that

since weightage points would be clearly indicated, the applicant could
himself/herself do the marking and count the total before handing the form to
the school. The school could then display the entire list along with cut off
points in a descending order of the weightage points. Parents would, according

WP(C) 895/2007 & CM1552/2007

Page No.3 of 14

to the Committee, find the exercise completely transparent inasmuch as those
who secured admission would know how they have got it and those who were
not able to get admission would also know the reasons for the same. On the
basis of these recommendations a suggested form, indicating the weightage for
each category, was given by the Committee. The same reads as under:
Sl.
No.

1

Criteria

Neighbourhood

Specifications

Range of
Points

0-3 km

20

Above 3 and below 5
km

16

Above 5 and below 8
km

12

Above 8 and below 10
km

08

Above 10 km
2.

Sibling

3.

Alumni

No weightage
20

Father

05

Mother
4.

Put a tick( )
mark at the
appropriate
place

05

Any child with Child with special
special needs
needs who can be
mainstreamed
under
inclusive education

05
Mother Father

WP(C) 895/2007 & CM1552/2007

Page No.4 of 14

Sl.
No.

5.

Criteria

Education
Qualifications

Specifications

Post-graduation which
includes professional
qualifications

Sr. Secondary
Class X
Girl Child

7.

Any
other
parameters which
the school may like
to fix as per their
needs/requirements

10

08

08

06

Put a tick( )
mark at the
appropriate
place

10

06

04

Graduation

6.

Range of
Points

04
05

20

Total Points:

5.

The learned counsel for the petitioner submits that Montfort

School, instead of applying the aforesaid criteria of weightage, applied its own
criteria for admission and did not follow the Ganguly recommendations as
directed by the Division Bench of this court. He points out that the criteria
followed by the Montfort school and the relative weightage given to each
category is given in annexure P3 at page 21, the relative portion reads as under:
“4.
The criteria for short listing students from among
2200 and more candidates for possible admission is scheduled
here below :

WP(C) 895/2007 & CM1552/2007

Page No.5 of 14

Once they are short listed individual will be given
time to produce original documents and credentials to ensure
that the points allotted to each is in order before arriving at a
final decision.
1.

Proximity :- First k.m. from the school gates -20 points
Second k.m. - 15 points
Third k.m. - 10 points
Fourth k.m. - 7 points
Fifth and above – 5 points.

2.

Parent education

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

Postgraduate/or above/Professionals Degree–7.5+7.5
Graduates – 6 + 6
Below Graduation – 5 + 5
Other heads are self explanatory.
Sibling – 20
Father – Alumni – 05
Mother – Alumni - 05
Backward classes / Weaker Section – 05
Police, Paramilitary, Defence, etc. - 05
Single parent – 05
Physically challenged – 05
Student from Montfort, Shalimar Bagh – 10
Girl child – 05.
Total – 100 points”

6.

According to the learned counsel for the petitioner the points of

difference between the criteria adopted by Montfort school and those
recommended by the Ganguly Committee, insofar as they relate to the
petitioner, are only two and these two pertain to the neighbourhood / proximity
criterion and the education qualification/parents education criterion.

With

regard to the neighbourhood criterion, 20 points are awarded under the Ganguly
Committee Recommendations if the applicant resides within 3 km radius from
the school whereas the criterion prescribed by the school is more stringent and
WP(C) 895/2007 & CM1552/2007

Page No.6 of 14

it provides 20 points for the applicant residing within 1 km radius of the school
gate. Therefore, according to the learned counsel for the petitioner, a different
criterion is prescribed by the school to that recommended by the Ganguly
Committee and this would be a violation of the directions passed by the
Division Bench. He submits that the applicant does not reside within 1 km
radius of the school, but the applicant resides within 3 km of the school. If the
Ganguly Committee recommendation was taken into account then the applicant
would have got full 20 points whereas going by the school recommendation,
she got only 10 points. It may be clarified that the exact distance at which the
applicant resides from the school is also in dispute as the learned counsel for
the school submitted that, in point of fact, the applicant resides between 4 and
5 km from the school and, therefore, she would only have been entitled to 7
points.

7.

The second point of difference pertains to the category- “education

qualification/parents education”.

The learned counsel for the petitioner

submitted that while the Ganguly Committee recommended ten points for each
parent with postgraduate and professional qualification the school has
prescribed only 7.5 points for each parent under the same category. In respect
of graduates, the Ganguly Committee recommendation is of 8 points for each
parent whereas the school has recommended 6 points for each parent and so on.
Therefore, according to the learned counsel for the petitioner, a lower
WP(C) 895/2007 & CM1552/2007

Page No.7 of 14

weightage was being granted by the school for education qualification than that
recommended by the Ganguly committee. It is the case of the petitioner that
had the Ganguly Committee been adopted in toto then the petitioner would
have achieved 50 points. The cut-off point specified by the school is 40.5 and,
therefore, according to the learned counsel for the petitioner, the petitioner
would have been eligible for admission to the Lower KG class. The learned
counsel for the respondent, however, controverted the factum of the petitioner
attaining 50 points even as per the Ganguly Committee. According to him, the
petitioner would, even if the Ganguly committee is followed strictly, be entitled
to 40 points.

8.

The main controversy in the present petition is whether the Ganguly

Committee recommendations are to be followed or not by the respondent No.2
(Montfort School). It is the contention of the petitioner that the school must
follow the Ganguly Committee Recommendations in view of the explicit
directions given by the Division Bench in LPA 196/2004. He submits that
Montfort school is also a party in those proceedings. The learned counsel for
the Respondent No.2 (Montfort School), however, submits that even as per the
Ganguly Committee Recommendations, the school is excluded from the
aforesaid criteria of admission. He made pointed references to paragraphs 4.7
and 5.8 which read as under:
“4.7.

School Specific Criteria.

WP(C) 895/2007 & CM1552/2007

Page No.8 of 14

The framework for admission process should
have an inbuilt mechanism for flexibility to enable each
school to adapt it according to its context and local
requirements. Without such a provision the admission
procedure may end up as a strait jacket, becoming selfdefeating and counter productive. Schools, as responsible
partners with parents over an extended period of 12-14 years,
should have the freedom to specify their own philosophy,
value systems, specific needs and then decide on certain
parameters for admission. However schools have to fix such
parameters and declare them on their website and notice
Board and print them in their prospectus and registration
from. It will enable parents to fill in the relevant details in
the registration forms under this category besides making the
process completely transparent. This will also help the
parents to make an appropriate choice of school for their
children. It would be advisable for schools to identify one or
more criteria under this section and demarcate weightage for
each. An illustrative list of examples has been provided in
the section dealing with `admission procedure'. Schools may
add to this list or change the criteria according to their needs
and requirement. They may also allocate weightage for
children of underprivileged section, as mentioned in the
preceding section.
There is a wide variety of schools set up in Delhi,
each with its own specific characteristics, obligations and
client groups. Thus some schools cater to those from the
armed forces and have the mandate to provide admission to
that category of children. It will not be fair to make these
school change their admission priorities completely since they
have specific obligations. These schools can give all the
weightage under school specific criteria to children of parents
who they have been mandated to serve in the first place. So
in the case of this category of schools the weightage need not
be further broken down under more than one parameter as has
been recommended for other schools.
There are also schools established and run by
religious or linguistic minorities under Article 30(1) of the
Constitution. The freedom to administer and, in this instance,

WP(C) 895/2007 & CM1552/2007

Page No.9 of 14

to admit children of the minority to the school, remains
safeguarded.”
(underlining added)
“5.8

Special Category Schools

There are schools that are catering mainly to the
educational needs of the children of armed forces and
paramilitary forces. Such schools will follow the policy
norms criteria laid down for admission of the children of the
personnel whom they are serving now. For the remaining
general category, they will follow the above-mentioned point
system. For minority schools established under Article 30(1)
of the Constitution, the freedom to administer and admit
children remains safeguarded. ”
(underlining added)
With particular reference to the last sentence of paragraph 5.8 quoted above,
the learned counsel for the respondent No2 (school) submitted that minority
schools established under Article 30(1) of the Constitution have been given
freedom to administer and admit children as the Ganguly Committee
recommendations also state that their rights remain safeguarded.

9.

Considering the arguments advanced by the counsel for the parties,

the only issue that needs to be decided in the present case is whether the criteria
specified in the Ganguly Committee recommendations for giving weightage to
the various categories has to be followed by Montfort School or not. In view of
the directions of the Division Bench in LPA 196/2004, the schools are required
to follow the same for the academic year 2007 on an experimental basis. But,
does this extend to minority schools. The rights of minority institutions are
governed by Articles 29 and 30 of the Constitution which read as under:
WP(C) 895/2007 & CM1552/2007

Page No.10 of 14

“29.

Protection of Interests of minorities. - (1)
Any
section of the citizens residing in the territory of India or
any part thereof having a distinct language, script or
culture of its own shall have the right to conserve the
same.
(2)

30.

No citizen shall be denied admission into any
educational institution maintained by the State or
receiving aid out of State funds on grounds only
of religion, race, caste, language or any of them.

Right of minorities to establish and administer educational
institutions. - (1)
All minorities, whether based on
religion or language, shall have the right to establish and
administer educational institutions of their choice.
1

[(A)

In making any law providing for the compulsory
acquisition of any property of an educational
institution established and administered by a
minority, referred to in clause (1), the State shall
ensure that the amount fixed by or determined under
such law for the acquisition of such property is such
as would not restrict or abrogate the right guaranteed
under that clause.]

(2)

The State shall not, in granting aid to educational
institutions, discriminate against any educational
institution on the ground that it is under the
management of a minority, whether based on
religion or language.”

There is no dispute that the respondent No.2 is an unaided minority Institution.
And, insofar as unaided minority institutions are concerned, the Supreme Court,
in a recent decision in the case of P.A. Inamdar and others v State of
Maharashtra and others : (2005) 6 SCC 537, held as under:
“ 133. So far as the minority unaided institutions are concerned
to admit students being one of the components of “the
right to establish and administer an institution”, the State
1 Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, sec.4 (w.e.f.20-6-1979).
WP(C) 895/2007 & CM1552/2007

Page No.11 of 14

cannot interfere therewith.
Up to the level of
undergraduate education, the minority unaided
educational institutions enjoy total freedom.”
In the same judgment it is also observed as under:
“118. 1Pai Foundation is unanimous on the view that the right to
establish and administer an institution, the phrase as employed
in Article 30(1) of the Constitution, comprises of the following
rights : (a) to admit students; (b) to set up a reasonable fee
structure; (c) to constitute a governing body; (d) to appoint
staff (teaching and non-teaching); and (e) to take action if there
is dereliction of duty on the part of any of the employees. (Para
50)
119. A minority educational institution may choose not to take any
aid from the State and may also not seek any recognition or
affiliation. It may be imparting such instructions and may have
students learning such knowledge that do not stand in need of
any recognition. Such institutions would be those where
instructions are imparted for the sake of instructions and
learning is only for the sake of learning and acquiring
knowledge. Obviously, such institutions would fall in the
category of those who would exercise their right under the
protection and privilege conferred by Article 30(1) “to their
hearts' content” unhampered by any restrictions excepting
those which are in national interest based on considerations
such as public safety, national security and national integrity or
are aimed at preventing exploitation of students or the teaching
community. Such institutions cannot indulge in any activity
which is violative of any law of the land.
120. They are free to admit all students of their own minority
community if they so choose to do. (para 145, Pai
Foundation2)”
10.

The position in law is, therefore, absolutely clear that the unaided

minority institutions have the complete freedom insofar as the procedure to be
adopted for admissions are concerned. This is, of course, subject to the larger
1 T.M.A. Pai Foundation v State of Karnataka (2002) 8 SCC 481
2 T.M.A. Pai Foundation v State of Karnataka, (2002) 8 SCC 481.
WP(C) 895/2007 & CM1552/2007

Page No.12 of 14

interest of public safety, national security and national integrity which have
been referred to in the Supreme Court decision above. It is, therefore, clear
that the Ganguly Committee was alive to the situation and specifically provided
in paragraph 5.8 that the rights of minority schools established under Article
30(1) of the Constitution to have the freedom to administer and admit children
remain safeguarded. The Committee, therefore, consciously, in view of the
Constitutional mandate, did not interfere with the admission procedure to be
adopted by such schools.

11.

A submission was made by the learned counsel for the petitioner

that the exception granted to such a minority school was only with respect to
and limited to category No.7, that is, with respect to School Specific Criteria
and was, consequently, limited only to 20 points. Therefore, according to him,
as in the case of the schools for children of persons belonging to the armed
forces, the school could give full 20 points for such persons under this category,
minority schools could, at best, give 20 points under this category to the
applicants from the minority community. According to the learned counsel for
the petitioner, this is what is meant by the last sub-paragraph of paragraph 4.7
of the recommendations also. I am unable to agree with the learned counsel for
the petitioner.

A reading of paragraph 4.7 makes it clear that while schools

which cater to those from the armed forces have been given liberty to give full
weightage for children of parents serving in the armed forces. Under the school
WP(C) 895/2007 & CM1552/2007

Page No.13 of 14

specific criteria, insofar as the minority schools are concerned, their rights have
been clearly safeguarded not only with regard to admitting children of the
minority community but also other children in general.

This is further

buttressed by the contents of 5.8 which are quite explicit. And, in any event,
this is the law as declared by the Supreme Court in P.A. Inamdar (supra).
Unaided minority schools are, therefore, not covered by the Ganguly
Committee Recommendations. In these circumstances, the writ petition must
fail. There shall be no order as to costs.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
February 08, 2007
M

WP(C) 895/2007 & CM1552/2007

Page No.14 of 14

