THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on : 05.03.2007

+

WP (C) 3026/2003

MR K.K. VERMA AND ANOTHER

...Petitioners

- versus PRADESHIYA INDUSTRIAL INVESTMENT
CORPORATION OF UTTAR PRADESH(PICUP)

...Respondent

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioners
: Ms Sobhana Takiar.
For the Respondent/PICUP : Mr Sandeep Aggarwal with Mr Ravi S. S. Chauhan.

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

YES

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

YES

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

YES

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.
The issue involved in this petition at the threshold is with regard to
territorial jurisdiction. The petitioners are guarantors to a loan taken by Crystal
Steering Limited from PICUP and UPFC to the extent of Rs.46.65 lacs. The
loan agreement was executed on 14.5.1987 in Lucknow. The said Crystal
Steering Ltd could not repay the loan amount in time and, therefore, PICUP
sought to take remedies for recovery of the loan amount from the principal
debtor as well as the guarantors. PICUP had remedies under the State Financial
Corporations Act, 1951 read with U.P. Public Moneys (Recovery of dues) Act,
WP(C)3026/2003

Page No.1 of 7

1972.

2.

In the present petition, the prayer that has been made is for the

quashing of recovery notice issued to the guarantors (the petitioners herein) by
the Collector Grade-II (South-West District), New Delhi on 7.10.2002. The
said recovery notice was issued for the sum of Rs.5,61,56080.70 + 16.5%
interest w.e.f. 1.11.2001 + other Misc Expenses amounting to Rs 13,13,168.79.
It was mentioned in the notice that the same was recoverable from the
petitioners as arrears of land revenue. The recovery notice which was issued by
the Collector, Grade-II (South-West District), New Delhi was on the basis of
recovery certificates which had been issued by the PICUP on 4.12.2001 against
the petitioner Nos 1 and 2 under the U.P. Public Moneys (Recovery of dues)
Act, 1972. A copy of the recovery certificate was marked as annexure R-3 filed
along with the “short affidavit” filed on behalf of the respondent Nos 1 and 2.
It was submitted that the said recovery certificate was issued by PICUP at
Lucknow and, therefore, the courts at Delhi did not have jurisdiction inasmuch
as what is sought to be quashed by way of this petition are recovery notices
which are based upon the said recovery certificates issued at Lucknow and
unless and until the recovery certificate issue at Lucknow is set aside, the
setting aside of the recovery notice at Delhi would have no meaning.

3.

According to the learned counsel, appearing on behalf of the

WP(C)3026/2003

Page No.2 of 7

respondents, the issue involved in the present case with regard to jurisdiction is
no longer open for debate in view of the decision of this court in Callipers
Naigai Ltd & Others v Government of NCT of Delhi & Ors : 2004 (73) DRJ
104 wherein one of the questions raised was “whether the mere issuance of a
recovery notice at Delhi would clothe this court with the territorial jurisdiction
to entertain a writ petition?” This question was answered in the negative.
While answering this question, the provisions of Section 3 of the U.P. Public
Moneys (Recovery of dues) Act, 1972 was examined thread-bare. From a
reading of Section 3(1) of the said Act, it would become clear that whenever
there is a default in repayment of loan or advance or any installment thereof, the
Managing Director of the Corporation (in this case PICUP) may send a
certificate to the Collector mentioning the sum due from such person and
requesting that such sum together with costs of the proceedings be recovered as
if it were an arrear of land revenue. Section 3(2) of the said Act made it clear
that the Collector, on receiving the certificate, was required to proceed to
recover the amount stated therein as an arrear of land revenue. Section 3(5) of
the said Act made it further clear that subject to the exceptions provided
therein, every certificate sent to the Collector under Section 3(1) of the said Act
would be final and could not be called in question in any original suit,
application or in any reference to arbitration, and no injunction could be
granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or
intended to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under the Act.
WP(C)3026/2003

Page No.3 of 7

4.

Thereafter, the provisions of the Revenue Recovery Act, 1890 were

also considered to indicate the manner in which an arrear of land revenue is to
be recovered. Sections 3, 4 and 5-A of the said Revenue Recovery Act, 1890
were considered in detail and the court came to the following conclusion :
“Upon a reading of the aforesaid provision, it becomes
clear that under Section 3 of the RR Act, where an
arrear of land revenue or a sum recoverable as an arrear
of land revenue is payable to a Collector by a defaulter
being or having property in a district other than that in
which the arrear accrued or the sum is payable, the
Collector may send to the Collector of that other
district a certificate in the form as nearly as may be of
the Schedule stating the name of the defaulter and such
other particulars as may be necessary for his
identification or the amount payable by him or the
account on which it is due. Section 3(2) stipulates that
the certificate shall be signed by the Collector making
it, and save as otherwise provided by this Act, shall be
conclusive proof of the matters therein stated. Sub
Section (3) of Section 3 mandates that the Collector of
the other district shall, on receiving the certificate,
proceed to recover the amount stated therein as if it
were an arrear of land revenue which had accrued in
his own district. Two things are clear. Firstly, the
certificate issued by the Collector in the district where
the arrears accrued shall be conclusive proof of the
matter stated therein and secondly, the collector of the
other district is duty-bound to give effect to this
certificate and proceed to recover the amount stated
therein. From this, it becomes apparent that the
Collector who receives such a recovery certificate has
no role to play except to recover the amount stated in
the recovery certificate as arrears of land revenue. He
merely performs a ministerial function. He does not
decide any lis and any action taken by him does not
have the trappings of a quasi-judicial function.

WP(C)3026/2003

Page No.4 of 7

7.2
Section 4 of the RR Act provides for the
remedy available to a person denying liability to pay
under such a notice. The remedy is that he must pay
the amount under protest made in writing at the time of
payment and signed by him or his agent and thereafter
institute a suit for the repayment of the amount or the
part thereof so paid. Section 4(2) further provides that
such a suit must be instituted in a civil court having
jurisdiction in the local area in which the office of the
Collector who made the certificate is situate and the
suit shall be determined in accordance with the law in
force at the place where the arrear accrued or the
liability for the payment of the sum arose. Section 5-A
is relevant for the purpose that the certificate may be
sent by the Collector of a District in Uttar Pradesh to
authorities in respect of defaulters being or having
property outside Uttar Pradesh.”
Thereafter, this court concluded as under :
“7.3.

5.

The gravamen of the matter is the Managing Director
of PICUP issued a recovery certificate which was sent
to the collector, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh who in turn
sent it to concerned Collector in Delhi and on the basis
of which the impugned notice dated 30.4.2001 has been
issued by the respondent No.1. In the context of the
foregoing provisions it becomes abundantly clear that
the respondent No.1 had merely performed a ministerial
function in issuing the impugned notice dated
30.4.2001. As such, in the first instance, it does appear
to me that no writ of certiorari can at all be issued
quashing the impugned recovery notice dated 30.4.2001
which has merely been issued in exercise of a
ministerial function. There is the added question as to
whether mere issuance of such a recovery notice would
constitute a part of the cause of action for this petition
or not?”
In the decision of Callipers Naigai Ltd & Others (supra) another

decision of this court in the case of Vinod Kumar Mehta & Ors v Haryana
Financial Corporation and Others : 2003 (71) DRJ 348 was also referred and
WP(C)3026/2003

Page No.5 of 7

with reliance upon the same, this court held in Callipers Naigai Ltd & Others
(supra) as under :
“9.

In the aforesaid decision, which clearly dealt with a
similar situation, it was held that recovery notices such as
the one impugned herein do not form an integral part of
the cause of action and, therefore, this court would not
have territorial jurisdiction to entertain the writ petition
challenging the recovery notice. I see no reason to depart
from this view. The lis is with PICUP. Consequently the
cause of action is qua PICUP. Unfortunately that has
entirely arisen outside the territorial jurisdiction of this
Court. The issuance of the recovery notice has no
relevance with the lis that is involved in the case. It is
the result of a purely ministerial act on the part of
Respondent No.1 who cannot be faulted for acting in the
manner he did. The statute required him to do so. He
had no discretion in the matter. He had no lis to decide.
The recovery notice is merely an effect and not the cause.
It is the cause which confers jurisdiction and not the
effect. Then, the answer to question No.2 is that the
mere issuance of the impugned recovery notice at Delhi
does not clothe this court with the territorial jurisdiction
to entertain this petition.”

It is therefore clear that this court would not have territorial jurisdiction to
entertain the present writ petition.

6.

Before parting with this decision, it would be necessary to mention

another complication which has occurred in this case. The petitioners had
initially approached the Allahabad High Court by filing a writ petition before
that court. Unfortunately, for them, a Division Bench of the Allahabad High
Court hearing the matter dismissed the same on 2.4.2003 on the ground that the
Allahabad High Court did not have jurisdiction and it was the court at Delhi
WP(C)3026/2003

Page No.6 of 7

which had jurisdiction to entertain the petition. The learned counsel for the
petitioners submitted that the petitioners had correctly approached the
Allahabad High Court but after the Division Bench dismissed the petition it had
no option but to approach this court and the petitioners ought not to be faulted
/penalized for this.

7.

It is unfortunate that the Allahabad High Court did not entertain the

petition of the petitioners on the ground of lack of territorial jurisdiction but this
does not mean that this court should entertain a petition which, according to the
precedents of this court, would not fall within the territorial jurisdiction of this
court. Two wrongs do not make a right. For these reasons, this petition is
dismissed on the ground of lack of territorial jurisdiction. The interim order
passed in this matter shall continue for a period of four weeks to enable the
petitioners to take appropriate steps in this matter.
BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
March 05, 2007
M

WP(C)3026/2003

Page No.7 of 7

