THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 08.10.2007

+

CS(OS) 591/2007

M/S K & K HEALTH CARE (P) LIMITED

... Plaintiff

- versus M/S FITNESS WORLD & OTHERS

... Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Plaintiff
: Mr K.G. Bansal with Mr S.K. Bansal and
Mr Suwarn Rajan
For the Defendants
: None

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3. Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ?
BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

This is a suit filed for, inter alia, a decree of permanent

injunction to restrain the defendants from passing off their products as
those of the plaintiff's. Summons of the suit were issued and served upon
the defendants and, at one point of time, the defendants had entered
appearance through their counsel as would be indicated by the order
dated 09.07.2007.

Thereafter, nobody appeared on behalf of the

defendants and on 31.08.2007, the defendants were directed to be
CS(OS) No.591/07

Page No.1 of 4

proceeded with ex parte. The plaintiff was directed to lead its ex parte
evidence.

2.

The plaintiff has filed an affidavit of Mr Dinesh Kapur by way

of evidence. The said Mr Dinesh Kapur is a Director of the plaintiff
company. The documents have also been exhibited as PW-1/1 to PW-1/5
as well as Ex. PW1/D1. Since the allegations made in the plaint have
been supported by the affidavit of Mr Dinesh Kapur and the same have
gone uncontroverted, the same are to be accepted. As per the statements
made in the plaint and the affidavit, the plaintiff has adopted the word
mark “FITNESS WORLD” since 1993. It has instituted this passing off
action on the basis of prior user.

According to the plaintiff, the

defendant has threatened to use the same mark “FITNESS WORLD” as
would be apparent from the brochure (Ex. PW-1/D-1). This action of the
defendant came to the knowledge of the plaintiff towards the end of
2006. It is thereafter that the present suit was instituted. Since there is
no denial of the allegations contained in the plaint, it will have to be
accepted that the plaintiff is the proprietor of the word mark “FITNESS
WORLD” and that it has been using the same in respect of its goods
since 1993. It is also established that the defendant had threatened to use

CS(OS) No.591/07

Page No.2 of 4

the same some time towards the end of 2006. Therefore, on the basis of
prior uninterrupted use, the plaintiff is entitled to a decree of passing off
in its favour and against the defendants.

2.

Accordingly, the suit is decreed in terms of prayer (a)

contained in para 28 of the plaint. The learned counsel for the plaintiff
gives up the prayers indicated in para 28 (b) (c) & (d) of the plaint.

3.

Insofar as the prayer for damages is concerned, which is

contained in sub-para (e) of para 28 of the plaint, the learned counsel for
the plaintiff has been unable to demonstrate the extent of damages
suffered by the plaintiff on account of passing off action on behalf of the
defendants. However, he states that in such cases, punitive damages may
be imposed on the defendants. He submitted that such a procedure was
adopted by this court in several cases beginning with the decision in
Time Incorporated v. Lokesh Srivastava & Another: 2005 (30) PTC 3
(Del).

4.

The plaintiff is also entitled to a decree of punitive damages

against the defendants which I quantify at Rs 50,000/-. The suit is

CS(OS) No.591/07

Page No.3 of 4

decreed as indicated above with costs. The suit as well as all the pending
applications stand disposed of. The formal decree be drawn up.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
( JUDGE )
October 08, 2007
δυττ

CS(OS) No.591/07

Page No.4 of 4

