IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+

IA No.4439/2001 in CS (OS) No.2443/2000

%

Judgment delivered on :08.08.2007

RAJDHANI COLD STORAGE PVT. LTD.

.... Plaintiff

versus
PUNJAB AND SIND BANK

.... Defendant

Advocates who appeared in this case:For the Plaintiff
: Mr J.R. Midha
For the Defendant
: Mr Rajinder Wali.

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the judgment ?

Yes

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ?

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J

1.

This is an application filed on behalf of the defendant/Bank under

Section 31 of the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial
Institutions Act, 1993 (hereinafter referred to as the “Said Act”) seeking
transfer of the present suit to the Debt Recovery Tribunal.

The

contention of the defendant/applicant is that the present suit is concerned
with the return of title deed of the property which has been mortgaged
with the bank and the mortgage itself is the subject matter of the pending
application (OA 677/2000) before the Debt Recovery Tribunal for
recovery of money based upon the mortgage. Another application, being

IA 4439/01 in CS(OS)2443/00

Page No. 1 of 9

O.A. 24/2004, in respect of the same transaction is also pending before
the Debt Recovery Tribunal.

The plaintiff is a party in both the

applications either in the capacity of a mortgager or principal borrower.

2.

The learned counsel for the defendant Bank referred to the

provisions of Section 31 (1) of the said Act which reads as under:“31. Transfer of pending cases – (1) Every suit or other
proceeding pending before any court immediately before the
date of establishment of a Tribunal under this Act, being a
suit or proceeding the cause of action where on it is based is
such that it would have been, if it had arisen after such
establishment, within the jurisdiction of such Tribunal, shall
stand transferred on that date to such Tribunal:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to
any appeal pending as aforesaid before any court.
xxxx

xxxx

xxxx

xxxx”

He submitted that since the Tribunal has jurisdiction in respect of the
subject matter of the present suit, the same ought to be transferred to the
Tribunal and ought not to be continued before this Court. The learned
counsel also referred to the provisions of Section 19 (6) to 19 (11) which
read as under:“19. Application to the Tribunal.xxxx

xxxx

xxxx

xxxx

(6) Where the defendant claims to set-off against the
applicant's demand any ascertained sum of
money legally recoverable by him from such
applicant, the defendant may, at the first hearing
of the application, but not afterwards unless
permitted by the Tribunal, present a written
statement containing the particulars of the debt
sought to be set-off.
IA 4439/01 in CS(OS)2443/00

Page No. 2 of 9

(7) The written statement shall have the same effect
as a plaint in a cross-suit so as to enable the
Tribunal to pass a final order in respect both of
the original claim and of the set-off.
(8) A defendant in an application may, in addition to
his right of pleading a set-off under sub-section
(6), set up, by way of counter-claim against the
claim of the applicant, any right or claim in
respect of a cause of action accruing to the
defendant against the applicant either before or
after the filing of the application but before the
defendant has delivered his defence or before the
time limited for delivering his defence has
expired, whether such counter-claim is in the
nature of a claim for damages or not.
(9)

A. counter-claim under sub-section (8) shall
have the same effect as a cross-suit so as to
enable the Tribunal to pass a final order on the
same application, both on the original claim and
on the counter-claim.

(10) The applicant shall be at liberty to file a written
statement in answer to the counter-claim of the
defendant within such period as may be fixed
by the Tribunal.
(11)

Where a defendant sets up a counter-claim and
the applicant contends that the claim thereby
raised ought not to be disposed of by way of
counter-claim but in an independent action, the
applicant may, at any time before issues are
settled in relation to the counter-claim, apply to
the Tribunal for an order that such counterclaim may be excluded, and the Tribunal may,
on the hearing of such application, make such
order as it think fit.”

The aforesaid provisions clearly demonstrate that they relate to set off
and counter-claims and empower the Tribunal to pass final orders in
respect of both, a set-off as well as a counter claim.

IA 4439/01 in CS(OS)2443/00

Page No. 3 of 9

3.

After referring to the aforesaid provisions, the learned counsel for

the defendant/applicant referred to the decision in the case of United
Bank of India, Calcutta v Abhijit Tea Co. Pvt. Ltd. & Others: (2000) 7
SCC 357 and, in particular, he placed reliance on paragraph 38 of the
said decision which reads as under:
“38. In our view, the above pleas raised by the respondent
Company are all inextricably connected with the
amount claimed by the Bank. The plea of the
Company is that interest is not to be charged or is to
be charged at a lesser rate, that instalments are to be
permitted and more monies should have been
advanced. In our view, these claims made by the
Company in its Suit No. 272 of 1985 against the bank
amount to “counter-claim” and fall within sub-sections
(8) to (11) of Section 19 of the Act ( as introduced by
Act 1 of 2000). The plea for deduction of damages is
in the nature of a “set-off” falling under sub-sections
(6) and (7) of Section 19.”
The aforesaid paragraph indicates that the suit which was in question
before the Supreme Court was “inextricably connected” with the
application pending before the Debt Recovery Tribunal and, therefore,
the same could be construed to be a set-off / counter-claim falling within
the provisions of Section 19 (6) to 19 (11) of the said Act. It is in this
context that the learned counsel submits that the present suit should also
be transferred under Section 31 of the said Act to the Tribunal to be
treated as a counter claim and be adjudicated upon by the Tribunal along
with the applications of the bank referred to above.

4.

Mr Midha, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the plaintiff,

IA 4439/01 in CS(OS)2443/00

Page No. 4 of 9

submits that the position has been made very clear by a subsequent
decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Indian Bank v. ABS
Marine Products Pvt. Ltd: 2006 IV AD (SC) 315. The decision of the
Supreme Court in

Indian Bank (supra) was concerned with the

following three questions:“(a) Whether the subject-matter of the borrower's suit
before the High Court and Bank's application before the
Tribunal were inextricably connected?
(b) Whether the provisions of Debts Recovery Act
mandate or require the transfer of an independent suit filed
by a borrower against a Bank before a civil court to the
Tribunal, in the event of the Bank filing a recovery
application against the borrower before the Tribunal, to be
tried as a counter-claim in the Bank's application?
(c) Whether the observation in Abhijit (supra) that the
suit filed by the borrower against the Bank has to be
transferred to the Tribunal for being tried as a counter-claim
in the applications of the Bank, is to be construed as a
principle laid down by this Court, or as an observation in
exercise of power under Article 142 in order to do complete
justice between the parties?”
Insofar as question No.1 was concerned, on the facts of the case before
the Supreme Court, it was held that the matter before the Court and the
Bank's application before the Tribunal were not inextricably connected.
Insofar as question No.2 was concerned, the Supreme Court observed
that it is evident from Sections 17 and 18 of the said Act that a civil
court's jurisdiction is barred only in regard to an application by a bank or
a financial institution for recovery of its debts. The jurisdiction of civil
courts is not barred in regard to any suit filed by a borrower or any other
person against a bank for any relief.
IA 4439/01 in CS(OS)2443/00

The Supreme Court further
Page No. 5 of 9

observed that there is no provision in the Act for transfer of suits and
proceedings, except section 31, which relates to suit/proceeding by a
Bank or financial institution for recovery of a debt. It is evident from
Section 31 that only those cases and proceedings (for recovery of debts
due to banks and financial institutions), which were pending before any
court immediately before the date of establishment of a Tribunal under
the Debts Recovery Act, stood transferred to the Tribunal. It was noted
that as far as sub-sections (6) to (11) of Section 19 are concerned, they
are merely enabling provisions. The court also made it clear that the
effect of sub-sections (6) to (11) of Section 19 of the said Act was that
any defendant in a suit or proceeding initiated by a bank or financial
institution could: (a) claim set off against the demand of a Bank/financial
institution in respect of any ascertained sum of money legally
recoverable by him from such bank/financial institution; and (b) set-up
by way of counter-claim against the claim of a Bank/financial institution,
any right or claim in respect of a cause of action accruing to such
defendant against the bank/financial institution, either before or after
filing of the application, but before the defendant has delivered his
defence or before the time for delivering the defence has expired,
whether such a counter-claim is in the nature of a claim for damages or
not. It was observed that what is provided and permitted by the said
provision is a cross-action by a defendant in a pending application by the
bank / financial institution, the intention being to have the claim of the
bank/financial institution made in its application and the counter-claim
IA 4439/01 in CS(OS)2443/00

Page No. 6 of 9

or claim for set off of the defendant being treated as a single unified
proceeding, to be disposed of by a common order. In conclusion to its
answer to question No.2, the Supreme Court observed as under:“16. Making a counter claim in the Bank's application
before the Tribunal is not the only remedy, but an option
available to the borrower/defendant. He can also file a
separate suit or proceeding before a civil court or other
appropriate forum in respect of his claim against the Bank
and pursue the same. Even the Bank, in whose application
the counter-claim is made, has the option to apply to the
tribunal to exclude the counter-claim of the defendant while
considering its application. When such application is made
by the Bank, the Tribunal may either refuse to exclude the
counter-claim and proceed to consider the Bank's
application and the counter-claim together; or exclude the
counter-claim as prayed, and proceed only with the Bank's
application, in which event the counter-claim becomes an
independent claim against a bank/financial institution. The
defendant will then have to approach the civil court in
respect of such excluded counter claim as the Tribunal does
not have jurisdiction to try any independent claim against
the bank/financial institution.
A defendant in an
application, having an independent claim against the Bank,
cannot be compelled to make his claim against the Bank
only by way of a counter-claim. Nor can his claim by way
of independent suit in a court having jurisdiction, be
transferred to a Tribunal against his wishes.”
5.

With regard to the third question posed by the Supreme Court, the

following is the conclusion arrived at:
“22. Though there appears to be some merit in the first
Respondent's submission, we do not propose to examine that
aspect. Suffice it to clarify that the observations in Abhijit
that an independent suit of a defendant (in Bank's application)
can be deemed to be a counter claim and can be transferred to
the Tribunal, will apply only if the following conditions were
satisfied:(i) The subject matter of Bank's suit, and the suit of
the defendant against the Bank, should be
inextricably connected in the sense that decision in
IA 4439/01 in CS(OS)2443/00

Page No. 7 of 9

one would affect the decision in the other.
(ii) Both parties (the plaintiff in the suit against the
Bank and the Bank) should agree for the independent
suit being considered as a counter-claim in Bank's
application before the Tribunal, so that both can be
heard and disposed of by the Tribunal.
In short the decision in Abhijit is distinguishable both on facts
and law.”
6.

From the aforesaid examination of the decision of the Supreme

Court in the Indian Bank (supra) it is apparent that the decision cited by
the learned counsel for the defendant Bank has been considered in
Indian Bank (supra). The Supreme Court came to the clear conclusion
that the observations in Abhijit (supra) would apply only if two
conditions mentioned above are satisfied. Even if it is assumed, as a
matter of argument, that the present suit and the application filed by the
bank before the Debt Recovery Tribunal are inextricably connected, the
second condition is not satisfied.

This is so because the plaintiff is not

agreeable for the present suit being considered as a counter-claim in the
bank's application before the Tribunal. As such, the second condition is
not satisfied and, therefore, the observations in Abhijit (supra) would not
be applicable. That being the case, the present suit cannot be transferred
to the Debt Recovery Tribunal.
This application is dismissed.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
August 08, 2007
IA 4439/01 in CS(OS)2443/00

Page No. 8 of 9

J

IA 4439/01 in CS(OS)2443/00

Page No. 9 of 9

