THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 08.10.2007
ARB.P. 5/2007

INDO PACIFIC AVIATION PRIVATE LTD

....Petitioner

-versusM/S PAWAN HANS HELICOPTERS LIMITED

...Respondent

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr N Waziri with Mr Somesh Arora, Mr Praveen Agarwal
For the Respondent
: Mr Sandeep Sethi, Sr Advocate with Mr Amit Kumar,
Ms Rekha Bakshi, Mr Ashish Kumar and Mr Vivek Singh

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

This is an application filed under Section 11(6) of the

Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as the said
“Act”) for the appointment of an arbitrator.

2.

Admittedly, an agreement between the petitioner and the

respondent had been entered into on 18.05.2006. Clause 18 of the said

ARB.P. 5/2007

Page No.1 of 10

agreement contains provisions with regard to the arbitration. The said
clause reads as under :
“18.

ARBITRATION

18.1
In the event of any dispute or difference relating to
the interpretation and application of the provision of this
Agreement, such dispute or difference shall be referred by
either party to the arbitration under the Arbitration &
Conciliation Act 1996. The arbitration shall be made by a sole
arbitrator nominated by CMD of Pawan Hans Helicopters Ltd.
The award of the Arbitrator shall be binding upon the parties
to the dispute. The parties to the dispute will share equally the
cost of arbitration as intimated by the Arbitrator.
Place of Arbitration shall be Delhi.”
A plain reading of the aforesaid clause indicates that if there is a dispute or
difference relating to the interpretation or application of any of the
provisions of the agreement, such dispute or difference is to be referred by
either party to arbitration under the said Act and the arbitration is to be
conducted by a sole arbitrator to be nominated by the CMD (Chairmancum-Managing Director) of Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited (Respondent
herein).

3.

The undisputed facts are that certain differences and disputes

arose between the parties. By a letter dated 03.10.2006, the petitioner,
through its advocates, called upon the respondent to make payment of an
ARB.P. 5/2007

Page No.2 of 10

amount of Rs 1,37,26,620/- with interest @ 12% per annum within 7 days
on account of various claims, details of which were given in paragraph 21
of the said letter. The letter specifically stated that, in case, the payment is
not made within 7 days of receipt of the notice, the petitioner would
initiate appropriate legal proceedings against the respondent at the cost,
risk and consequences of the respondent. According to the learned counsel
for the petitioner, this amounted to an invocation of the arbitration clause.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondent submitted that
this letter was only a letter notifying the respondent of the petitioner's
claims and that, in case, the respondent did not pay within 7 days then the
petitioner would initiate appropriate legal proceedings. He submitted that
this cannot be construed as an invocation of the arbitration clause.

4.

The respondent did not pay within 7 days or at any point

thereafter. According to the learned counsel for the petitioner the 30 days
period, as indicated in the Supreme Court decision in Datar Switchgears
Ltd v Tata Finance Ltd and Another : (2000) 8 SCC 151, had expired
and, therefore, the petitioner filed the present petition under Section 11(6)
of the said Act on 14.12.2006 for the appointment of an arbitrator. On
08.01.2007 when the matter came up for hearing before this court for the
first time, notice was issued, returnable on 19.03.2007. On that date, the
ARB.P. 5/2007

Page No.3 of 10

counsel for the respondent appeared and directions were issued with regard
to completion of pleadings.

The next date of hearing was fixed for

17.08.2007. But before 17.08.2007 was to arrive, the respondent issued a
legal notice on 23.07.2007 setting out its claims against the petitioner to
the extent of Rs 81 lacs. The petitioner was called upon to make the
payment of Rs 81 lacs along with interest @ 18% per annum within a
week, failing which the respondent indicated that it would invoke the
arbitration clause as provided in the contract between them. Since no
response was received from the petitioner within the stipulated period of 7
days, the respondent purportedly invoked the arbitration clause and
appointed an arbitrator on 03.08.2007 in respect of its claims against the
petitioner.

The matter has now come up for hearing and it has been

contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that even if the notice
issued on 03.10.2006 cannot be regarded as an invocation of the arbitration
clause, the present petition itself may be construed as a request for
arbitration. Even thereafter the respondent did not bother to apprise this
court of its intention to appoint an arbitrator.

Instead the respondent

thought it fit to present a fait accompli by issuing the notice dated
23.07.2007 and by appointing an arbitrator on 03.08.2007 in respect of its
claims against the petitioner, completely side-stepping the claims of the
petitioner against the respondent and the pendency of the present petition.
ARB.P. 5/2007

Page No.4 of 10

In these circumstances, the learned counsel for the petitioner submitted
that an independent arbitrator ought to be appointed by this court in
exercise of the power under Section 11(6) of the said Act.

5.

The learned counsel for the respondent submitted that, as per

the agreement between the parties, the Chairman-cum-Managing Director
of the respondent was to nominate the arbitrator. He submitted that the
letter dated 03.10.2006 does not contain any invocation for arbitration and
only indicates an intention that, in case, the demand made by the petitioner
is not made by the respondent then the petitioner would initiate legal
proceedings. According to him, this meant that if the respondent did not
make the payment to the petitioner, as demanded, then the petitioner would
take the next step by invoking the arbitration clause. He submitted that
next step has not been taken by the petitioner and no request for arbitration
had been made prior to the filing of the present petition under Section
11(6) of the said Act. The learned counsel then referred to the provisions
of Section 21 of the said Act which indicate that arbitral proceedings
commence on the date on which a request that the dispute be referred to
arbitration is received by the respondent. He submits that no such request
was received. He then referred to the provisions of Section 11 and, in
particular, to Section 11(6) which outlines the pre-conditions which need
ARB.P. 5/2007

Page No.5 of 10

to be fulfilled before which the Chief Justice or his designate could
exercise powers for appointment of an arbitrator. He submitted that one of
the conditions is that the party called upon to act under the agreement, fails
to act as required under that procedure. Inter alia, it is also provided that
where a person, including an institution, fails to perform any function
entrusted to him or it under that procedure then the Chief Justice or his
designate may exercise powers under Section 11(6) and appoint an
arbitrator. None of these pre-conditions stand satisfied, according to the
learned counsel for the respondent.

He submitted that, therefore, this

petition under Section 11(6) is per se not maintainable. He also referred to
the decision of the Supreme Court in Datar switchgears Ltd (supra) and, in
particular, he referred to a portion of paragraph 6 thereof which reads as
under :
“........ An application under sub-section (6) of Section 11
can be filed when there is a failure of the procedure for
appointment of an arbitrator. This failure of procedure can
arise under different circumstances. It can be a case where
a party who is bound to appoint an arbitrator refuses to
appoint the arbitrator or where two appointed arbitrators
fail to appoint the third arbitrator. If the appointment of an
arbitrator or any function connected with such
appointment is entrusted to any person or institution and
such person or institution fails to discharge such function,
the aggrieved party can approach the Chief Justice for
appointment of an arbitrator.”

ARB.P. 5/2007

Page No.6 of 10

6.

I have considered the rival contentions of the parties. Before

the provisions of Section 11(6) of the Arbitration Act can be invoked, it is
necessary that the pre-conditions stipulated in clauses (a), (b) and (c) are
fulfilled. In the present case, we are not concerned with clause (b) of SubSection (6) of Section 11 of the said Act. However, for the fulfillment of
the pre-conditions stipulated in clauses (a) or (c), it is necessary that a
party must fail to act as required under the agreed procedure for
appointment of an arbitrator or the concerned person or institution must
fail to perform any function entrusted to him or it under the procedure for
appointment of an arbitrator. In the present case, the arbitration clause
stipulated that the arbitrator was to be appointed by the Chairman-cumManaging Director. But, before there could be a failure to act or a failure
to perform a function as required under clauses (a) and (c), it must be
shown that the arbitration clause was invoked by one party. If, upon such
invocation, the respondent failed to act as per the agreed procedure or the
Chairman-cum-Managing Director failed to nominate a person to act as a
sole arbitrator. Then, the power under section 11(6) could be exercised,
not otherwise. In the present case, I find that the letter dated 03.10.2006
did not invoke the arbitration clause. As submitted by the learned counsel
for the respondent, it merely raised a claim against the respondent and
disclosed an intent to initiate legal proceedings in case the respondent did
ARB.P. 5/2007

Page No.7 of 10

not pay the claimed amount. There was no request from the petitioner to
the respondent in terms of clause 18 of the agreement, calling upon the
respondent to appoint an arbitrator. Therefore, there was no question of
the respondent failing to act under the agreed procedure stipulated in
Clause 18 of the said Agreement.

Consequently, the Chairman-cum-

Managing Director also cannot be said to have failed to perform his
function of nominating the sole arbitrator. The conclusion, therefore, is
that the petition under Section 11(6) of the said Act filed by the petitioner
is not maintainable as the pre-conditions for exercise of the powers of the
Chief Justice or his designate under that provision have not been satisfied.

7.

However, this court cannot also lose sight of the manner in

which the respondent has gone about and appointed an arbitrator on
03.08.2007. The respondent was well aware of the fact that a petition
under Section 11(6) was pending before this court. It was also well aware
that the petition was for the appointment of an arbitrator in respect of the
claims which had already been notified by the petitioner to the respondent.
The respondent, however, went ahead during the pendency of these
proceedings and issued a notice dated 23.07.2007 in respect of its claims
against the petitioner. The letter dated 23.07.2007 does not even mention
the pendency of the present proceedings with regard to the appointment of
ARB.P. 5/2007

Page No.8 of 10

an arbitrator in connection with the claims raised by the petitioner. Again,
the letter dated 03.08.2007, whereby the arbitrator was sought to be
appointed by the petitioner, is only in respect of the claims made by the
respondent against the petitioner.

To my mind, such a practice, though

not amounting to contempt, does border on that. The respondent has shown
scant regard for the pendency of the proceedings before this court and has
attempted at presenting the court with a fait accompli. This cannot be
permitted by this court. Consequently, while I dismiss the present petition
as being not maintainable I also set aside the appointment of the arbitrator
by the respondent appointed by its letter dated 03.08.2007. Giving the
benefit of doubt to the respondent with regard to its intent, I direct that
since the request has now been made by the petitioner and also by the
respondent and as there exist disputes which need to be referred to
arbitration, the Chairman-cum-Managing Director, as per the agreed
procedure, shall appoint an arbitrator within two weeks. I also make it
clear that the Chairman-cum-Managing Director, while considering the
persons to be appointed as an arbitrator, may broaden his vision and may
consider the question of appointment of a former Judge of this court to be
appointed as an arbitrator to go into the disputes raised by the petitioner as
well as by the respondent. This would also be appropriate in view of the
history of this case.
ARB.P. 5/2007

Page No.9 of 10

The petition stands disposed of accordingly.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
October 08, 2007
M

ARB.P. 5/2007

Page No.10 of 10

