THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Judgment delivered on :01.02.2007
WP(C) No.11615/2006
BHUPINDER SINGH

...Petitioner
- versus -

DELHI COMMISSION FOR WOMEN & ORS

...Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr K. P. Mavi
For the Respondent No.1
: Ms Veena Goswami
For the Respondent No.2
: Mr Gaurav Sarin
For the Respondent No.3
: Mr Kapil Jain

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

YES

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

YES

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

YES

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

This writ petition is directed against the letter dated 03.07.2006 issued

by a member of the Delhi Commission for Women to the Accounts Officer, MTNL,
Telephone Exchange, 4th Floor Hari Nagar, New Delhi. The subject of the letter is
interim maintenance.

It appears that a complaint was filed with the Delhi

Commission for Women by the respondent No.3, who is the wife of the petitioner.
The petitioner is an employee of MTNL. As per the respondent No.3's case, she
WP(C)11615/2006

Page No.1 of 6

and her two minor children are living along with her aged mother and her husband
(the petitioner) was not maintaining her for the last five years. On the basis of this
submission, the Commission, by virtue of the impugned letter made the following
instruction:“The Commission has granted Smt. Sonia interim maintenance of
Rs.6000/- (Rupees six thousand only) per month, considering her
miserable condition till such time she gets an order from the Court.
This amount be deducted from Sh. Bhupinder Singh's salary before
5th of every month and may send directly to Smt. Sonia and inform
the Commission on the action taken on this.”
2.

The petitioner submits that such an instruction/direction issued by the

Delhi Commission for Women is wholly without jurisdiction and the Commission
does not have any power to pass an order on interim maintenance. The learned
counsel for the petitioner submitted that if such a direction/instruction is permitted
to run its course then it would amount to supplanting the Commission over the
Courts. He submitted that the rights and obligations with regard to maintenance of
the petitioner and the respondent No.3 are governed by the Hindu Adoption and
Maintenance Act, 1956 and, in case of emergent situations, under Section 125 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. He further submits that the respondent No.3
has already filed an application under Section 125 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 and the same is pending before the Metropolitan Magistrate,
Rohini Courts. It is further submitted that in that matter, an application for interim
maintenance has also been moved and that has been receiving consideration from
WP(C)11615/2006

Page No.2 of 6

the court. He, therefore, submits that in these circumstances this letter whereby the
MTNL has been directed to deduct an amount of Rs.6,000/- each month from the
salary of the petitioner and to send the deducted amount directly to the respondent
No.3, is entirely without jurisdiction and is liable to be set aside.

3.

In response, the respondent No. 1 (the Delhi Commission for Women)

has filed an affidavit and the relevant portion of the affidavit reads as under:“8.
That it is pertinent to mention that in the petitions for
maintenance under Section 125 Code of Criminal Procedure being
heard in the court of concerned Metropolitan Magistrate, Rohini
Courts Delhi, for Rohini Police Station even a notice of the petition
on 1.7.2006 was being issued to the respondent for 14.05.2007 which
clearly shows more than 10-1/2 months adjournment was being given
while the need of maintenance is always an urgent for which reason
the deponent was forced to write a letter to the department of
petitioner. As such no order for maintenance was passed by
respondent No.1 it was only in the peculiar circumstances of the
subject matter, the letter was written by the deponent in order to help
the respondent no. 3 who is in miserable condition, already being
widow at the time of marriage to the petitioner having a child from
her first marriage and staying with her old aged mother without any
source of income.
9.
That the deponent had not intentionally defied any provision of
law. It is pertinent to mention that although even the direction was
made on 30.06.2006 and according to the petitioner, he came to know
about the letter dated 3.7.2006 and 13.07.2006, the petitioner never
asked for the review of the direction on any of the following date of
his appearance before respondent No.1. It seems the petitioner
himself thought the amount of Rs.6,000/- per month normal for his
child and wife as his salary is more than Rs.25,000/- per month
besides other benefits like medical, LTC, etc. while the respondent
no.3 has no source of income, but as an after thought, the petitioner
WP(C)11615/2006

Page No.3 of 6

filed the present writ petition.”
The learned counsel appearing for the respondent No.1 submitted that this letter is
not actually in the form of an order and was issued in exceptional circumstances in
the sense that the respondent No.3's condition was found to be quite miserable.
4.

The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent No.3

submitted that the grievance of the respondent No.3 is that no maintenance was
being provided by the petitioner.

5.

After considering the aforesaid submissions made by the counsel for the

parties, I am of the view that the Delhi Commission for Women had no power
under the Delhi Commission for Women Act, 1994 for issuing such a direction.
An examination of the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the said Act would
indicate that the main task of the Commission is to study and monitor all matters
relating to the constitutional and legal safeguards provided for women, to review
the existing legislations and suggest amendments wherever necessary.

The

Commission for Women is also required to look into the complaints and take suo
moto notice of the cases involving deprivation of the rights of women in order to
provide support, legal or otherwise, to helpless women. The Commission is also
required to monitor the proper implementation of all the legislations made to protect
the rights of women so as to enable them to achieve equality in all spheres of life
and equal participation in the development of the nation.
WP(C)11615/2006

Section 10 of the said
Page No.4 of 6

Act describes the functions of the Commission.

While it is true that the

Commission by virtue of Section 10(3) has been vested with all the powers of a
civil court in carrying out an investigation with regard to the matters relating to
safeguards provided for women under the constitution and other laws as also with
regard to the matters relating to deprivation of women's rights, there is, however, no
power granted to the Commission to pass orders and or directions for maintenance.
These powers are vested in the courts, both civil and criminal. The rights and
obligations in respect of maintenance pertaining to parties, who are Hindus, are to
be determined under the Hindu Maintenance and Adoption Act, 1956. Such matters
are to be adjudicated by a civil court.

Recognizing the fact that such an

adjudication may take some time, the legislature has enacted Section 125 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to provide immediate relief to such persons who
deserve maintenance as an interim measure till the civil court decides the entire
disputes with regard to maintenance.

6.

In the present case it is an admitted fact that proceedings under Section

125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 are pending and even an application
for interim maintenance has been filed on behalf of the respondent No.3. I am
informed that the next date of hearing before the learned Metropolitan Magistrate is
05.04.2007. Since it is the case of the respondent No.3, that the situation with

WP(C)11615/2006

Page No.5 of 6

regard to the maintenance is quite emergent, both parties are agreed that on the
respondent No.3 moving an application for early hearing of the interim maintenance
application, the petitioner shall not oppose such an application for early hearing.
And, it is expected that the learned Metropolitan Magistrate shall take up the
hearing of the application for interim maintenance at the earliest because that is the
requirement of the provisions of law.

7.

With these observations, the impugned letter dated 03.07.2006 is set

aside. This petition stands disposed of. The learned counsel for the respondent
No.3 submits that the application for early hearing would be moved within two
days. Upon the making of such application, it is hoped that the court shall take up
the matter of interim maintenance and shall dispose of the same promptly.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
February 01, 2007
sr

WP(C)11615/2006

Page No.6 of 6

