THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%
+

Judgment delivered on: 05.02.2008
CS(OS) 944/2005

H.G. GUPTA & SONS

... Plaintiffs
- versus -

MESSRS SILVERTONE MOTORS PRIVATE
LIMITED & OTHERS

... Defendants

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Plaintiffs
: Mr Sudhir Chandra Aggrawala, Sr Advocate with
Mr Vikas Dhawan and Mr Abhimannyu Mahajan
For the Defendants
: Mr Manoj K. Singh with Ms Gunita Pahwa and
Mr Rajiv Kapoor

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ?

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
IA 4236/2006 (U/O 12 Rule 6, CPC)
1.

This is an application filed on behalf of the plaintiff seeking

judgment on admissions in favour of the plaintiffs and against the
defendants for directing the defendants to hand over to the plaintiffs
IA No.4236/06 in CS(OS) 944/05

Page No.1 of 12

physical vacant and peaceful possession of the suit premises, as more
specifically described in the site plan annexed as Annexure-B to the plaint.
The application has been made on the basis of purported admissions on the
part of the defendants. The suit has been filed for possession and for mesne
profits in respect of premises No.31, Najafgarh Road, New Delhi measuring
approximately 24003 sq. ft. The defendant was inducted as a tenant in the
said suit property by virtue of a document which is titled as “Agreement to
Let”, but in effect is a lease deed. The said lease deed has been admitted by
the defendant and is marked as Exhibit P-1. It is a registered document.
The lease deed was entered into on 01.09.2002 and was registered on
19.10.2002 as document No.14646, Addl. Book No.-I, Volume No.10614 at
pages 83-91 with the Sub-Registrar, West District, Delhi.

The lease

(Exhibit P-1) contains several clauses. The relevant ones are discussed
below:i)

Clause 3 of the lease specifically provides that the premises
shall be let with effect from 01.09.2002 to 30.04.2006.

ii)

Clause 4 provides that the initial rent for the period upto
30.04.2004 would be Rs 3.25 lakhs per month.

For the

remaining period of the lease, i.e., 01.05.2004 to 30.04.2006,
the rent payable was Rs 3.75 lakhs per month.
iii)

Clause VI of the Lease Covenants clearly states that upon the
expiry of the lease period or sooner determination of the lease,
the lessee shall peacefully and quietly yield up and return the

IA No.4236/06 in CS(OS) 944/05

Page No.2 of 12

demised premises in good repair and tenantable position by
removing its belongings from the premises.
iv)

Clause VIII of the very same Covenants clearly stipulates that
the lessee shall be liable to pay damages in case the lessee does
not remove his belongings after the determination of the lease
either by efflux of time or earlier as provided in the lease.

2.

There are four provisos added at the end of the lease. The first

three are relevant and they read as under:“1.
That the lease is subject to the court order dated
th
30 August 1999 in suit no. 1794/85 wherein the property
has been ordered to be sold by the receiver of the firm,
either to an outside party or inter se between the co-owner
of the property. If the property is not sold, the lease is
valid for the period as agreed between the parties, but if it
is sold and the new owner wishes to terminate the lease,
First party shall give the Second Party 3 months notice for
the termination of the lease & a further sum equal to six
months rent towards the cost of damages of interiors /
Fixtures / loss of business. The Second party is bound to
vacate this property without any demur or claim other than
that specified above.
2.
That the parties hereby agree with each other
that the lease is terminable by either side by giving three
months clear notice of determination of tenancy during the
lease period without assigning any reason. However, it is
further agreed between the parties that the party
terminating the tenancy prematurely through a registered
notice of the above stipulated time shall also be liable to
pay six months rent as damages to the other party besides
the notice of clear three months for termination of the
tenancy.

IA No.4236/06 in CS(OS) 944/05

Page No.3 of 12

3.
That the lease shall automatically come to an
end upon the expiry of the term of the lease unless
determined earlier.”

2.

On 22.12.2004, the lease was determined by a notice of

termination of the tenancy. This document is admitted and has been marked
as Exhibit P-2. The said notice to quit was issued specifically under the
second proviso referred to above where it was clearly indicated that the
lease was terminable by either side by giving three month's clear notice of
termination of the tenancy during the lease period without assigning any
reason. The plaintiff had issued the said notice to quit through its advocate
and had agreed to be liable to pay six months' rent as damages to the
defendant in terms of the said second proviso contained in the said lease
deed. In paragraph 7 of the said document (Exhibit P-2), it was clearly
stated as under:“7.
That, any amount henceforth paid by you and /
or received and appropriated by our client shall be so
accepted and / or appropriated by our client without
prejudice to this notice and upon determination of the
tenancy and all such payments shall be adjusted towards
satisfaction of any part of mesne profits and / or damages
for use and occupation of the said premises due from you
in the event you fail, neglect and default in handing over
vacant and peaceful possession of the premises on the
expiry of the period of the present notice, i.e. on or before
31-3.2005, as stated above.”

3.

This paragraph makes it clear that any amount henceforth paid

by the defendant to the plaintiff and / or received or appropriated by the

IA No.4236/06 in CS(OS) 944/05

Page No.4 of 12

plaintiff would be without prejudice to the notice to quit and upon
determination of the tenancy, all such payments would be adjusted towards
satisfaction of any part of mesne profits and / or damages for the use and
occupation of the said premises due from the defendant in the event the
defendant failed, neglected or defaulted in handing over vacant and peaceful
possession of the premises on the expiry of the period of the said notice, i.e.,
on 31.03.2005. The said notice had been replied to by way of Exhibit P-3.
Since the defendant did not vacate the premises in question despite service
of notice, the present suit was filed on 30.05.2005.

Thereafter, the

pleadings were completed and because of the admissions made in the
pleadings, the present application had been filed. It is the case of the
learned counsel for the plaintiff / applicant that all that needs to be
established by the plaintiff for a decree of possession and eviction of the
defendant is that the lease had been executed, the lessee came into
occupation of the premises under the lease, the lease had been terminated
either by a notice or by efflux of time and that the defendant continued to be
in occupation despite the end of the tenure of the lease. Mr Sudhir Chandra,
the learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the plaintiff submitted that
these facts are clearly admitted and, therefore, a judgment on admissions in
favour of the plaintiff to the extent of relief of eviction can be granted. He
referred to a few decisions. The first decision that was referred to by Mr
Sudhir Chandra was the case of Charanjit Lal Mehra and Others v. Smt
Kamal Saroj Mahajan and Another: JT 2005 (3) SC 213. He placed

IA No.4236/06 in CS(OS) 944/05

Page No.5 of 12

reliance on paragraph 8 of the said decision wherein it was particularly
stated that Order 12 Rule 6, CPC is enacted for the purpose of and in order
to expedite the trials if there is any admission on behalf of the defendants or
an admission can be inferred from the facts and circumstances of the case
without any dispute; then, in such a case, in order to expedite and dispose of
the matter, such an admission can be acted upon. In the case before the
Supreme Court, the terms of the lease had been looked into and it had been
found that the lease was a joint tenancy and not individual leases as was
sought to be made out by the defendant and in view of these admitted facts,
the learned single Judge of the High Court decided in favour of the lessor.
Such a decision was confirmed by the Supreme Court. The key point that
was made by Mr Sudhir Chandra was that the aforesaid decision of the
Supreme Court recognises the fact that Order 12 Rule 6 can be invoked
where there are admissions on behalf of the defendant as well as where
admissions can be inferred from the facts and circumstances of the case. In
this light, he submitted that as of today, the lease, which is an admitted
document has also expired.

Therefore, the defendant has no case for

continuing in possession.

4.

Mr Sudhir Chandra then referred to the order dated 21.02.2006

passed in IA No.1234/2006 which was an application filed by the plaintiff
for permission to encash the cheques which had been issued by the
defendants during the currency of the suit.
IA No.4236/06 in CS(OS) 944/05

That application had been
Page No.6 of 12

allowed by the said order dated 21.02.2006 without prejudice to the rights
and contentions of the parties.

The order dated 30.05.2007 was also

referred to by Mr Sudhir Chandra wherein the amounts deposited for the
period April 2006 to July, 2006 by the defendant were allowed to be
appropriated towards charges for use and occupation of the premises. That
order was also without prejudice to the rights and contentions of the parties.

5.

Mr Sudhir Chandra then referred to the provisions of Section

111, 113 and 116 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882. He submitted that
the defendant could only have a case if the provisions of Section 113 could
be invoked or the defendant could show that there was holding over as
indicated in Section 116 of the Transfer of Property Act. He submitted that
neither the ingredients of Section 113 constituting a waiver of the notice nor
the ingredients of Section 116 constituting holding over have been set out
by the defendant. He submitted that from the conduct of the parties, the
admission can be easily inferred that the defendant is in occupation of the
premises in question without him having any legitimate right to be in such
occupation.

6.

Mr Sudhir Chandra then referred to the decision in the case of

Sarup Singh Gupta v. S. Jagdish Singh and Others: 2006 (4) SCC 205
which was rendered in the context of the provisions of Section 113 as well
as 116 of the Transfer of Property Act. The Supreme Court observed that
IA No.4236/06 in CS(OS) 944/05

Page No.7 of 12

mere acceptance of rent for the subsequent months in which the lessee
continued to occupy the premises even after the expiry of the period of lease
cannot be said to be a conduct signifying assent to the continuance of the
lease even after the expiry of the lease period. The following observation of
the Supreme Court is also noteworthy:“... We cannot ignore the fact that in any event, even if rent
was neither tendered nor accepted, the landlord in the event of
success would be entitled to the payment of the arrears of rent.
To avoid any controversy, in the event of termination of lease
the practice followed by courts is to permit the landlord to
receive each month by way of compensation for the use and
occupation of the premises, an amount equal to the monthly
rent payable by the tenant. It cannot, therefore, be said that
mere acceptance of rent amounts to waiver of notice to quit
unless there be any other evidence to prove or establish that
the landlord so Intended ...”

7.

The last decision referred to by Mr Sudhir Chandra was that of

Shanti Prasad Devi and Another v. Shankar Mahto and Others: 2005 (5)
SCC 543 wherein the Supreme Court once again considered the provisions
of Section 116 of the Transfer of Property Act.

The Supreme Court,

agreeing with the High Court and the first appellate court, noted that mere
acceptance of rent for the subsequent months in which the lessee continued
to occupy the lease premises could not be said to be a conduct signifying
assent to the continuance of the lease even after the expiry of the lease
period.

IA No.4236/06 in CS(OS) 944/05

Page No.8 of 12

8.

The learned counsel for the defendant submitted that although

the lease is an admitted document as well as the notice to quit, the plaintiff
had accepted rent after the termination of the lease / expiry of the lease and,
therefore, this constituted holding over. He submitted that in this context,
while the plaintiff was alleging that the plaintiff did not accept any rent for
the period subsequent to termination of the lease, the defendant had
contended that the plaintiff had accepted the rent and thereby constituted
holding over on the part of the plaintiff. He submitted that this in itself was
an issue which was triable and for which evidence was necessary and a
judgment on admissions could not be granted. The learned counsel referred
to the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Bhuneshwar Prasad &
Another v. United Commercial Bank & Others: JT 2000 (9) 392 which
was also a decision considering Section 116 of the Transfer of Property Act.
That was a case in which the lease was for five years with an option for
renewal for two terms. The option was to be exercised one month prior to
the expiry of the lease period. The first option had been exercised in time,
but the second option had not been and the request to renew had been
declined. However, the tenant had deposited rent in the account of the
landlord, but without his consent. The tenant, therefore, claimed month-tomonth tenancy. In that case, the rent was also withdrawn by the landlord at
the increased rates as was being deposited on a monthly basis. In these
circumstances, the Supreme Court was of the view that the acceptance and
withdrawal of increased rent was in token of landlord's assent to the tenant

IA No.4236/06 in CS(OS) 944/05

Page No.9 of 12

to continue in possession of the premises after expiry of the lease, thereby
creating tenancy from month to month. The facts of that case and the facts
of the present case are entirely different. There is nothing to indicate that
the plaintiff assented to the continuance of the defendant in the suit
property. Unless and until such an assent is discernible from the conduct of
the parties, it cannot be held that the defendant was holding over and that
the defendant continued to be in occupation of the suit premises with the
clear consent and assent of the plaintiff. Such an inference cannot be drawn
in the facts and circumstances of the present case which are entirely
different from the facts and circumstances which arose before the Supreme
Court in Bhuneshwar Prasad (supra).

9.

The learned counsel for the defendant then referred to the

decision of a learned single Judge of this court in the case of Parivar Seva
Sansthan v. Dr.(Mrs.) Veena Kalra & Ors.: AIR 2000 (Delhi) 349. That
decision also is not of much help to the defendant inasmuch as on facts it
was decided that when issues had been raised which required evidence and
determination post-evidence, the purported admission on the part of the
defendants could not be construed to be unequivocal or positive admission.
Apart from this, there is nothing in the said decision which goes in favour of
the defendant.

IA No.4236/06 in CS(OS) 944/05

Page No.10 of 12

10.

The facts of the present case are very simple. The plaintiff had

executed a lease in favour of the defendant. The lease was to terminate on
30.04.2006. The lease was also terminable by giving three months notice
by either party.

The lease is admitted.

The plaintiff gave a notice

terminating the lease on 22.12.2004. The defendant did not vacate the
premises despite such notice.

Consequently, the plaintiff instituted the

present suit. During the pendency of the present suit, the plaintiff filed this
application for a judgment on admissions on the ground that the lease has
been admitted as well as the notice to quit. During the pendency of the suit,
certain payments were made by the defendants.

Those payments were

accepted by the plaintiff with the rider that they are without prejudice to
their rights and contentions and without prejudice to the notice to quit. The
payments were also directed to be appropriated towards use and occupation
of the premises during the pendency of the suit.

Such acceptance of

payments cannot constitute acceptance of rent as contemplated under
Section 116 of the Transfer of Property Act. Clause 7 of the notice dated
22.12.2004 had also made it clear that any payments that may be made by
the defendant in favour of the plaintiff and which may have been accepted
by the plaintiff would be without prejudice to the notice and without
prejudice to the fact that the defendants do not have a right to continue in
occupation. Apart from this, another event that has taken place is that
during the pendency of the suit, the lease period itself has expired and the
lease stands determined by efflux of time by virtue of Section 111 (a) of the

IA No.4236/06 in CS(OS) 944/05

Page No.11 of 12

Transfer of Property Act. There is no answer whatsoever on the part of the
defendant as to how he can continue in occupation after the determination
of the lease. The only answer is that certain payments were accepted by the
plaintiff and this constitutes holding over. I am unable to agree with the
submissions of the learned counsel for the defendants because, as indicated
in the Supreme Court decisions referred to above by Mr Sudhir Chandra,
there is nothing on record to enable this court to come to the conclusion that
the plaintiff assented to the continued illegitimate occupation of the
defendants in the suit premises. There is nothing on record to establish that
the plaintiffs had accepted any payment from the defendant by way of rent
as contemplated under Section 116 (3) of the Transfer of Property Act.

11.

This is a clear case of admissions having been made by the

defendant and / or admissions which can be inferred from the facts and
circumstances of the case.

The defendant has no right to continue in

occupation, the lease having expired.

Consequently, this application is

allowed. The plaintiff is entitled to a decree of possession. Insofar as the
question of mesne profits and damages are concerned, the suit will continue.
The decree sheet be drawn up for the relief of possession.
This application is allowed.
BADAR DURREZ AHMED
February 05, 2008
δυττ

IA No.4236/06 in CS(OS) 944/05

( JUDGE )

Page No.12 of 12

