IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+ IA No.4162/2001 in CS (OS) 802/1999
%

Judgment delivered on : 09.07.2007

NATIONAL WESTMINSTER BANK

.... Plaintiff

versus
M/S INTRAPORT INDIA LIMITED

.... Defendant

Advocates who appeared in this case:For the Plaintiffs
: Mr Kapil Kher
For the Defendant
: Mr M. Dutta

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the judgment ?

YES

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

YES

3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ?

YES

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J
1.

This application has been filed on behalf of the defendant for rejection

of the plaint under the provisions of Order VII Rule 11 read with Section 151 of
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter referred to as “the CPC”) and, in
the alternative, under Order XXXVII Rule 3 (5) of the CPC for grant of
unconditional leave to defend. Although the application primarily purports to
be under Order VII Rule 11 for rejection of the plaint, the same was not argued
before this Court. In any event, nothing has been pointed out so as to warrant

IA 4162/2001 in CS(OS) 802/99

Page No. 1 of 10

the rejection of the plaint under Order VII Rule 11 CPC. Only two questions
arise for consideration:(1)

(2)
2.

Whether this suit, which is essentially for recovery of
money paid under mistake, can fall under Order XXXVII
CPC and be tried as a summary suit?
If yes, whether the applicant/ defendant is entitled to
unconditional leave to defend?

Before I embark upon a discussion relating to the above two questions, it

would be necessary to point out the nature of the suit, as indicated in the plaint.
The plaintiff is a bank incorporated under English Law in the United Kingdom.
There were some dealings between the defendant with regard to supply of
garments and M/s Inwear Fashions, New York, USA. On 13.03.1997, the
plaintiff received a communication from one Fleet Bank N.A., New York, USA
authorising one wire transfer for Pound Sterling 80,000 on behalf of its
customer M/s Inwear Fashions.

The remittance was to be made to the

defendant through their bankers, UTI Bank Limited, 18 Barakhamba Road,
Kanchanjunga Building, New Delhi. Since the plaintiff did not maintain a
Sterling Account for the UTI Bank, New Delhi, it opened a Query file in its
information system and asked the Fleet Bank N.A. New York to inform as to
how the payment should be made. On 18.03.1997, the said Fleet Bank N.A.
New York reverted to the plaintiff and requested the plaintiff to pay the amount
through Chase Manhattan Bank, London, U. K.

Accordingly, the plaintiff

made the payment on 19.03.1997 for Pound Sterling 79,964 being the principal

IA 4162/2001 in CS(OS) 802/99

Page No. 2 of 10

sum excluding the bank charges.

Due to an inadvertent mistake of the

employees of the plaintiff, although the payment had been made, the said Query
file was not deleted from the records.

3.

On 25.03.1997, Fleet Bank N.A. New York, contacted the plaintiff and

stated that the beneficiary, that is, the defendant was claiming non-receipt of the
payment against the above transfer made by the plaintiff. On receiving the
above information, the plaintiff noticed that the Query file opened on
13.03.1997 did not reflect the fact that payment had already been made through
Chase Manhattan Bank, London, U.K. on 19.03.1997.

Consequently, the

plaintiff immediately remitted the amount once again as a third party CHAPS
payment to Chase Manhattan Bank, London, for Pound Sterling 79,988 being
the principal sum less bank charges. Subsequently, in the course of verification
of transactions of the plaintiff, the duplication of the payment to the defendant
came to light and the plaintiff requested Chase Manhattan Bank to refund the
said Pound Sterling 79,988 paid erroneously for onward payment to the
defendant. It is averred that Chase Manhattan Bank in turn had taken up the
matter with UTI Bank Limited, which informed that the amount had been
credited to the account of the defendant and that the funds had already been
withdrawn by the defendant from the said account.

It is further averred that

the New Delhi office of UTI Bank had been following up the matter with the
defendant for refund of the double payment and various efforts had been made
IA 4162/2001 in CS(OS) 802/99

Page No. 3 of 10

in this regard but did not yield any result. It is in these circumstances that the
plaintiff filed the present suit for a sum of Pound Sterling 1,06,220, out of
which Pound Sterling 79,988 was the principal sum payable by the defendant
and Pound Sterling 26,232 was the interest thereon calculated at the rate of
18% per annum from 04.04.1997 till 28.01.1999.

4.

From the aforesaid averments made in the plaint, the case of the plaintiff

is simply this, that through inadvertence and under mistake of fact, the plaintiff
paid the defendant twice. Although M/s Inwear Fashions had only instructed
the plaintiff to pay once. The defendant had received both the payments in its
bank and had withdrawn the same.

5.

The defendant has stated in the application that a suit under Order

XXXVII CPC is not maintainable inasmuch as it does not fall under the six
categories of suits referred to in Order XXXVII Rule 1 (2). It is also contended
on behalf of the defendant that there is no privity of contract between M/s
Inwear Fashions and the plaintiff or between the plaintiff and Chase Manhattan
Bank or between the plaintiff and UTI Bank. As regards the receipt of the
payments, the defendant has admitted that it had received two payments dated
20.03.1997 and 04.04.1997 of Pound Sterling 79,964 and Pound Sterling
79,988. The defendant has, however, stated that the defendant had received

IA 4162/2001 in CS(OS) 802/99

Page No. 4 of 10

only what was due to it from its buyer and that no amount was recoverable from
the defendant.

6.

Order XXXVII Rule 1 (2) of the CPC specifies that the summary

procedure prescribed under the said Order applies to the following classes of
suits, namely:“(a)

suits upon bills of exchange, hundies and promissory notes;

(b) suits in which the plaintiff seeks only to recover a debt or
liquidated demand in money payable by the defendant, with
or without interest, arising, —
(i) on a written contract, or
(ii) on an enactment, where the sum sought to be
recovered is a fixed sum of money or in the
nature of a debt other than a penalty; or
(iii) on a guarantee, where the claim against the
principal is in respect of a debt or liquidated
demand only”

There is no difficulty with stating straightway that the present suit is not
covered under Clause (a) inasmuch as it is not a suit upon a bill of exchange,
hundy or a promissory note. It has been contended on behalf of the defendant
that the present suit, which seeks to recover a sum of money from the
defendant, does not arise out of any written contract or on an enactment or on a
guarantee and, therefore, even Clause (b) would not be applicable.

IA 4162/2001 in CS(OS) 802/99

Page No. 5 of 10

7.

In order to arrive at a conclusion as to whether the present suit can

qualify as a suit under Clause (b) of Rule 1(2) of Order XXXVII, it would be
necessary to ascertain the meaning of the word “debt”. In Union of India v.
Raman Iron Foundry: AIR 1974 SC 1265, the Supreme Court observed that:“The classical definition of 'debt' is to be found in
Webb v Stenton, (1883) 11 QBD 518 where Lindley
L.J., said: “........ a debt is a sum of money which is
now payable or will become payable in the future by
reason of a present obligation.””
In J. Jermons v. Aliammal: (1999) 7 SCC 382, the Supreme Court considered
the word “debt” in the following manner:“.... Ordinarily, “debt” means money that is owed; an
existing obligation to pay a certain amount; a sum of
money due from one person to another. Debts can be
classified, having regard to the criteria for payment,
into three categories:
(i) debt which has become due and is payable at
present (debitum in praesenti) e.g. in monthly tenancy,
rent becomes due after the expiry of each month like
rent for the month of January becoming due and
payable on February 1;
(ii) debt which has become due but is payable at a
future date (debitum in praesenti solvendum in futuro);
in the above example if under an agreement of tenancy
rent is payable on the 15th of the following month, the
rent for January becomes due on February 1, but is
payable on February 15; and
(iii) contingent debt which becomes payable on the
happening of a certain event which may or may not
occur; in the above instance the rent for the month of
January will not be a debt in the preceding month of
December for the tenant may or may not reside in the
next month.

IA 4162/2001 in CS(OS) 802/99

Page No. 6 of 10

Thus, rent that has not become due is not debt. It
follows that rent for the unexpired period of lease is
not debt...”

8.

The meaning of “debt”, therefore, is that it has reference to a sum of

money which is now due and payable as also a sum of money which has been
promised at a future date. But this distinction is not relevant for the purposes of
the present case as will become clear shortly. The question then is whether the
amount, which the plaintiff is seeking to recover by virtue of this suit, could be
construed as a “debt”. On the basis of the averments in the plaint and on the
basis of the statement made by the defendant that it received the two payments,
it is clear that the money was paid twice by the plaintiff to the defendant. The
second payment was made by the plaintiff under mistake. By virtue of Section
72 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 a person to whom money has been paid, or
anything delivered, by mistake or under coercion, must repay or return it.
Illustration (a) to the said Section gives a further clue as to the meaning and
purport of the said word. The said illustration indicates that where A and B
jointly owe 100 rupees to C, if A alone pays the amount to C, and B, not
knowing of this fact, pays 100 rupees over again to C, then C is bound to repay
the amount to B.

This makes it clear that the recipient of money paid under

mistake is obliged under law to repay it.

In the present case, money has been

paid by mistake twice over to the defendant by the plaintiff.

By virtue of

Section 72 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, the defendant is obliged to repay
IA 4162/2001 in CS(OS) 802/99

Page No. 7 of 10

it. The plaintiff seeks to recover only the said debt and it would clearly be
arising on an enactment. The enactment being the Indian Contract Act, 1872
and in particular Section 72 thereof. The sum sought to be recovered is a fixed
sum of money. It is also in the nature of debt other than a penalty. Therefore,
in my view, the present suit, as framed, falls within Order XXXVII Rule
1(2)(b)(ii) and the first question that has been posed above, is accordingly
decided in favour of the plaintiff.

9.

This leads me to the discussion of the second question. The principles

for grant of leave to defend are well settled and they were set out in the
Supreme Court decision in M/s Mechelec Engineers & Manufacturers v
Basic Equipment Corporation: (1976) 4 SCC 687. Paragraph 8 of the said
decision reads as under:“8. In Sm Kiranmoyee Dassi v Dr. J. Chatterjee10, Das, J.,
after a comprehensive review of authorities on the subject,
stated the principles applicable to cases covered by Order 37
C.P.C. in the form of the following propositions (at p. 253) :
(a)
If the defendant satisfies the court that he
has a good defence to the claim on its merits the
plaintiff is not entitled to leave to sign judgment
and the defendant is entitled to unconditional
leave to defend.
(b)
If the defendant raises a triable issue
indicating that he has a fair or bona fide or
reasonable defence although not a positively
good defence the plaintiff is not entitled to sign
judgment and the defendant is entitled to
10 49 CWN 246, 253: AIR 1949 Cal 479: ILR (1945) 2 Cal 145.
IA 4162/2001 in CS(OS) 802/99

Page No. 8 of 10

unconditional leave to defend.
(c)
If the defendant discloses such facts as
may be deemed sufficient to entitle him to
defend, that is to say, although the affidavit does
not positively and immediately make it clear that
he has a defence, yet, shews such a state of facts
as leads to the inference that at the trial of the
action he may be able to establish a defence to
the plaintiff's claim the plaintiff is not entitled to
judgment and the defendant is entitled to leave
to defend but in such a case the court may in its
discretion impose conditions as to the time or
mode of trial but not as to payment into court or
furnishing security.
(d)
If the defendant has no defence or the
defence set up is illusory or sham or practically
moonshine then ordinarily the plaintiff is
entitled to leave to sign judgment and the
defendant is not entitled to leave to defend.
(e)
If the defendant has no defence or the
defence is illusory or sham or practically
moonshine then although ordinarily the plaintiff
is entitled to leave to sign judgment, the court
may protect the plaintiff by only allowing the
defence to proceed if the amount claimed is paid
into court or otherwise secured and give leave to
the defendant on such condition, and thereby
show mercy to the defendant by enabling him to
try to prove a defence.”
10.

Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, I am of the view

that the defendant has no defence. It has admitted the double payment and has
sought to only set up an illusory or a sham defence by suggesting that it has
only received what was owed to it by M/s. Inwear Fashions. This defence
completely glosses over the fact that M/s. Inwear Fashions gave one instruction

IA 4162/2001 in CS(OS) 802/99

Page No. 9 of 10

for payment. That instruction ought to have, ordinarily, resulted in only one
payment. Through inadvertence and mistake on behalf of the employees of the
plaintiff, the single instruction for payment to the defendant resulted in two
payments. The second being clearly under mistake. There is no doubt in my
mind that the defendant has no defence and has only purported to set up one
which, in any event, is illusory and is practically a moonshine defence. Though
I hold these views, I would “show mercy” to the defendant by enabling him to
try to prove a defence, but, that can only be done, as indicated by the Supreme
Court, in

M/s Mechelec Engineers (supra) by protecting the plaintiff.

Accordingly, conditional leave to defend is granted to the defendant. The
condition being that the entire amount claimed in the suit be deposited in Court
within a period of six weeks.
With these directions, this application stands disposed of.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
July 09, 2007
SR

IA 4162/2001 in CS(OS) 802/99

Page No. 10 of 10

