THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 01.04.2008

+

IA 1610/2008 IN CS (OS) 383/2007

BDA PRIVATE LIMITED

... Plaintiff /Applicant
- versus -

PAUL P. JOHN & ORS.

...Defendants/ Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Plaintiff
: Mr Sudhir Chandra, Sr. Advocate with Mr Mohit Lahoti
and Mr Sanjay S. Chabra
For the Defendants
: Mr Sanjay Jain, Sr. Advocate with Mr Manmohan Singh,
Mr Sushant Singh and Ms Nitika Mangla

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment ?
Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ? Yes

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J
1.

The plaintiff has filed this application under Section 124 of the

Trademarks Act, 1999 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘said Act’) praying for
an order that the present suit be stayed pending final disposal of proceedings
before the Intellectual Property Appellate Board (IPAB). It is contended by
the plaintiff that the defendants filed an amended written statement on
15.01.2008 wherein they have pleaded that their trademark ‘ORIGINAL
CHOICE’ and the device in Class 33 for ‘wines, spirits and liqueurs’ has
been registered under No.722161.

It is further contended that the

defendants, on the strength of the said registration, have raised the plea that
IA 1610/2008 in CS(OS) 383/07

Page No.1 of 29

in view of the provisions of Section 28 (3) read with Section 30 (2) (e) of
the said Act, the plaintiff’s relief for infringement of trademark as, inter
alia, prayed in this suit, would not be maintainable against the defendants.
It is further stated by the plaintiff that on 29.01.2008, an amended
replication to the defendants’ amended written statement was filed on its
behalf. In the amended replication, the plaintiff has challenged the validity
of the defendants’ said registration of the trademark ‘ORIGINAL CHOICE’.
It is also stated that the plaintiff has filed an appeal on 31.12.2007 before
the IPAB challenging the order passed by the Deputy Registrar. It is the
contention of the plaintiff that during the pendency of the said appeal before
the IPAB this suit cannot be proceeded with in view of the provisions of
Section 124 of the said Act.

2.

The present suit has been filed on the basis of the alleged

infringement of the plaintiff’s registered trademark ‘OFFICER’S CHOICE’.
The defendants had applied for registration of their trademark ‘ORIGINAL
CHOICE’. The plaintiff had filed a notice of opposition in Form TM-5 on
31.03.2004 accompanied by a cheque for the prescribed fee. However, the
cheque was not signed and, therefore, it was returned to the plaintiff on
01.04.2004. It is material to note that on 02.04.2004 the period of four
months (which included the extension that could be granted under Section
21) from the date of advertisement in the Trademark Journal (02.12.2003)
expired. On 13.04.2004, the plaintiff allegedly submitted the cheque after
signatures, which was received at the Trademark Registry on 15.04.2004.
IA 1610/2008 in CS(OS) 383/07

Page No.2 of 29

Thereafter, hearing was held on 10.11.2005 and ultimately the Deputy
Registrar at the Trademark Registry, Chennai passed an order dated
17.07.2007 to the effect that the notice of opposition to the defendants’
application for registration filed on behalf of the plaintiff in Form TM-5 was
beyond the prescribed time limit of four months inasmuch as it was received
in its completed form only on 15.04.2004.

Consequently, the said

opposition was not taken on record and the defendants’ trademark was
subsequently registered. The plaintiff filed a review application which was
also dismissed. The plaintiff then preferred an appeal against the order
dated 17.07.2007 and the said appeal is pending before the IPAB.

3.

Section 124 of the said Act reads as under:“124. Stay of proceedings where the validity of
registration of the trade mark is questioned, etc.—(1)
Where in any suit for infringement of a trade mark—
(a) the defendant pleads that registration of the
plaintiff's trade mark is invalid ; or
(b) the defendant raises a defence under clause (e)
of sub-section (2) of section 30 and the plaintiff
pleads the invalidity of registration of the
defendant's trade mark,
the court trying the suit (hereinafter referred to as the
court), shall,—
(i) if any proceedings for rectification of the
register in relation to the plaintiff's or
defendant’s trade mark are pending before the
Registrar or the Appellate Board, stay the suit
pending the final disposal of such proceedings;
(ii) if no such proceedings are pending and
the court is satisfied that the plea regarding the
invalidity of the registration of the plaintiffs or

IA 1610/2008 in CS(OS) 383/07

Page No.3 of 29

defendant's trade mark is prima facie tenable,
raise an issue regarding the same and adjourn
the case for a period of three months from the
date of the framing of the issue in order to
enable the party concerned to apply to the
Appellate Board for rectification of the
register.
(2)

If the party concerned proves to the court that he has
made any such application as is referred to in clause
(b) (ii) of sub-section (1) within the time specified
therein or within such extended time as the court may
for sufficient cause allow, the trial of the suit shall
stand stayed until the final disposal of the rectification
proceedings.

(3)

If no such application as aforesaid has been made
within the time so specified or within such extended
time as the court may allow, the issue as to the validity
of the registration of the trade mark concerned shall be
deemed to have been abandoned and the court shall
proceed with the suit in regard to the other issues in
the case.

(4)

The final order made in any rectification proceedings
referred to in subsection (1) or sub-section (2) shall be
binding upon the parties and the court shall dispose of
the suit conformably to such order in so far as it
relates to the issue as to the validity of the registration
of the trade mark.

(5)

The stay of suit for the infringement of a trade mark
under this section shall not preclude the court from
making any interlocutory order (including any order
granting an injunction, directing account to be kept,
appointing a receiver or attracting any property),
during the period of the stay of the suit.”

In the context of the provisions of Section 124 (1) (i) and (ii), the following
questions arise for consideration:-

(1)

Whether the appeal pending before the IPAB could be
construed as a proceeding for rectification of the register in

IA 1610/2008 in CS(OS) 383/07

Page No.4 of 29

relation to the defendants’ trademark in terms of Section
124 (1) (i) of the said Act?

(2)

If not, whether this Court is satisfied that the plea regarding
the invalidity of the registration of the defendants’
trademark is, prima facie, tenable in the backdrop of the
provisions of Section 124 (1) (ii) of the said Act?

QUESTION No. 1
4.

Mr Sudhir Chandra, the learned senior counsel appearing on

behalf of the plaintiff, urged before this Court that the appeal pending
before the IPAB was a proceeding for rectification of the register in relation
to the defendants’ trademark. He submitted that if the IPAB were to allow
the plaintiff’s appeal then the impugned order dated 17.07.2007 would be
set aside and consequently the registration of the defendants’ trademark
‘ORIGINAL CHOICE’ would also have to be cancelled. It was, therefore,
contended by him that the appeal pending before IPAB was nothing but a
proceeding for rectification of the register in relation to the defendants’
trademark. To further substantiate his plea, Mr Sudhir Chandra referred to
an order dated 07.03.2008 passed by the IPAB wherein it was observed:“6.

As regards the prayer as to recalling the certificate
of registration is concerned, we are of the opinion
that granting such a prayer would literally amount
to rectifying the trademark on the Register, a relief
which is not available at this stage of appeal. Such
relief, if at all, can be granted after hearing of the
appeal and not on a prima facie.”

IA 1610/2008 in CS(OS) 383/07

Page No.5 of 29

5.

On the other hand, Mr Sanjay Jain, the learned senior counsel

appearing on behalf of the defendants, submitted that the appeal pending
before the IPAB could not be regarded as a proceeding for rectification of
the register. He submitted that Section 57 was the specific provision which
provided for an application being made for the purposes of, inter alia,
rectification of the register. He further submitted that Section 57 fell under
Chapter VII of the said Act which specifically deals with the subject of
“rectification and correction of the register”. The said Chapter included
Section 57 to 60. He submitted that Section 57 (1) stipulated that the person
aggrieved could make an application “in the prescribed manner” to the
Appellate Board or to the Registrar for the purposes of rectification of the
register. Such an application, in view of Rule 92 of the Trademark Rules
2002 (hereinafter referred to as the 'said Rules') would have to be made in
Form TM-26 in triplicate. The said Form TM-26, inter alia, requires a
declaration to be made that there is “no action concerning the trademark in
question pending in any court”. The said Form is also to be accompanied by
the prescribed fee.

6.

Mr Sanjay Jain submitted that no such rectification application in

Form TM-26 has admittedly been filed by the plaintiff and, therefore, the
provisions of Section 124 (1) (i) of the said Act are not at all attracted. He
submitted that the appeal which is pending before the IPAB cannot be
regarded as a proceeding for rectification of the register.

IA 1610/2008 in CS(OS) 383/07

Page No.6 of 29

7.

Considering the arguments advanced by the counsel for the

parties, I am inclined to accept those of the counsel for the defendants. It is
clear that an application for rectification has to be made in the prescribed
manner as indicated in Section 57 of the said Act. The prescribed manner
has been indicated in Rule 92 which requires such an application to be in
Form TM-26. Admittedly, the plaintiff has not filed any application in
Form TM-26 for the rectification of the register insofar as the defendants’
registration is concerned. The appeal that has been filed by the plaintiff is
against the order dated 17.07.2007 which merely disregards the purported
opposition filed by the plaintiff on the ground of limitation. The original
proceeding was one of opposition and not of rectification. The appeal from
such a proceeding would also be in the nature of opposition and not in the
nature of rectification. Even the order dated 07.03.2008 passed by the IPAB
and on which reliance was placed by Mr Sudhir Chandra, only has reference
to the prayer for recalling the certificate of registration during the pendency
of the appeal. The IPAB was of the view that if such a prayer was granted,
it would literally amount to rectifying the register and such a relief was not
available at that stage of the appeal. The IPAB was of the view that such a
relief, if at all, could be granted after hearing of the appeal and not on a
prima facie view.

Without commenting further on the merits of the

observations of the IPAB, I am of the view that the appeal pending before
the IPAB is not a proceeding for rectification of the register, although such
an appeal may ultimately lead to the rectification of the register.

IA 1610/2008 in CS(OS) 383/07

Page No.7 of 29

8.

It is pertinent to note Section 125 of the said Act which also

refers to an application for rectification of the register to be made to the
Appellate Board in certain cases. This Section provides that in the case of a
suit for infringement of a registered trademark, where, inter alia, the
defendant raises a defence under Section 30 (2) (e) and the plaintiff
questions the validity of the registration of the defendant’s trademark, the
issue as to the validity of the registration of the trademark concerned (i.e.
the defendant’s trademark) shall be determined only on an application for
the rectification of the register and, notwithstanding contained in Section 47
or Section 57, such an application shall be made to the Appellate Board and
not to the Registrar. The purpose of this provision is that when the validity
of registration is in question in a suit for infringement, it can only be
determined by the Appellate Board and not by the Registrar. It has been
noted earlier that Section 57 gave liberty to an aggrieved party to apply
either to the Registrar or to the Appellate Board. That liberty has been
curtailed and limited to applications before the Appellate Board in cases
where suits for infringement are pending and where, inter alia, the defence
under Section 30 (2) (e) has been raised by the defendants and the plaintiffs
have questioned the validity of the defendants’ trademark. This provision
also indicates that the rectification proceeding in contemplation is one
which is initiated on an application filed in terms of Section 57 and
consequently in Form TM-26 in view of the provisions of Rule 92 of the
said Rules.

IA 1610/2008 in CS(OS) 383/07

Page No.8 of 29

9.

Furthermore, when the Act itself gives a definitive meaning to

rectification and a procedure is prescribed under the rules, which procedure
has to be followed in terms of the Act, then any other proceeding which
incidentally or ultimately may result in the rectification of the register,
cannot be regarded as a proceeding for rectification of the register in the
context of Section 124 (1) (i) of the said Act. Consequently, the appeal
pending before the IPAB would not be a proceeding for rectification and,
therefore, in the present case, Section 124 (1) (i) of the said Act, would not
be attracted.

QUESTION No.2
10.

Mr Sudhir Chandra submitted that the plea regarding invalidity

of the registration of the defendants' trademark is prima facie tenable. He
submitted that the opposition filed under Section 21 was within time i.e
before 02.04.2004. The fact that the cheque submitted along with the said
opposition was inadvertently not signed was, according to him, merely a
curable defect and the moment the cheque was signed and sent back to the
Registry on 15.04.2004, it would relate back to the date of the actual filing
of the opposition, that is, on 31.03.2004. He submitted that the provision
with regard to the payment of fee, as contained in Section 21 of the said
Act, was directory and not mandatory. According to him it was merely a
procedural provision and, therefore, would have to be regarded as not being
mandatory unless some prejudice was caused to the other side. It was also
contended by him that this Court ought to look at substantial compliance on
IA 1610/2008 in CS(OS) 383/07

Page No.9 of 29

the part of the plaintiff and not mere technical compliance or compliance in
form.

11.

Reliance was placed on Pratap Singh v. Shri Krishna Gupta:

AIR 1956 SC 140 wherein the Supreme Court observed in paragraph 3 that
“it is the substance that counts and must take precedence over mere form”.
It was further observed that “some rules are vital and go to be root of the
matter: they cannot be broken; others are only directory and a breach of
them can be overlooked provided there is substantial compliance with the
rules read as whole and provided no prejudice ensues”. The Supreme
Court further noted that when the legislature does not itself state which is
which (i.e mandatory or directory) judges must determine the matter and,
exercising a nice discrimination, sort out one class from the other along
broad based, commonsense lines.

12.

Mr Sudhir Chandra then referred to a decision of the Supreme

Court in the case of Sharif-ud-din v. Abdul Gani Lone: (1980) 1 SCC 403
where the Supreme Court held that the difference between a mandatory rule
and a directory rule is that while the former must be strictly observed, in the
case of the latter, substantial compliance may be sufficient to achieve the
object regarding which the rule is enacted. The Supreme Court also held
that in order to find out the true character of the legislation, that is, whether
it is mandatory or directory, the Court has to ascertain the object which the
provision of law in question has to subserve and its design and the context
IA 1610/2008 in CS(OS) 383/07

Page No.10 of 29

in which it is enacted. If the object of a law is to be defeated by noncompliance with it, it has to be regarded as mandatory. It was also observed
that a procedural rule ordinarily should not be construed as mandatory if the
defect in the act done in pursuance of it can be cured by permitting
appropriate rectification to be carried out at a subsequent stage unless by
according such permission to rectify the error later on, another rule would
be contravened. It is also relevant to note that the Supreme Court held that
whenever a statute prescribes that a particular act is to be done in a
particular manner and also lays down that failure to comply with the said
requirement leads to a specific consequence, it would be difficult to hold
that the requirement is not mandatory and the specified consequence should
not follow. Another decision relied upon by Mr Sudhir Chandra was that
of the Supreme Court in Dove Investments (P) Ltd. v. Gujarat Industrial
Investment Corpn.: (2006) 2 SCC 619 wherein the Supreme Court held that
whether a statute would be directory or mandatory will depend upon the
scheme thereof and that ordinarily a procedural provision would not be
mandatory even if the word “shall” is employed therein unless a prejudice is
caused.

12.

It was then contended by Mr Sudhir Chandra that the expression

prima facie tenable used in Section 124 (1) (ii) simply meant a substantial
triable issue. For this proposition he placed reliance on the Supreme Court
decision in Dalpat Kumar v. Prahlad Singh: (1992) 1 SCC 719 (para 5).
On the basis of the aforesaid decision it was contended by Mr Sudhir
IA 1610/2008 in CS(OS) 383/07

Page No.11 of 29

Chandra that the provision with regard to filing the notice of opposition
accompanied by the payment of the prescribed fee was merely procedural
and, therefore, it would ordinarily have to be construed as being directory
unless some prejudice was caused to the other side. He submitted that the
application was filed on 31.03.2004. The unsigned cheque was filed along
with it. It was returned on 01.04.2004 and again filed, after being signed,
on 15.04.2004, only two weeks later. Therefore, no prejudice whatsoever
was caused to the other side as no decision had been taken by the Registry
in the meanwhile. In fact, the impugned order was filed much later on
17.07.2007. Mr Sudhir Chandra, therefore, submitted that the rejection of
the opposition application, as being time barred, was therefore not proper
and even if it was not ex facie illegal, the plaintiff has been able to raise a
substantial triable issue with regard to the rejection of the opposition
application on the ground of limitation. Since the defendants' registration
was a consequence of the rejection of the opposition application, therefore,
the validity of the defendants' registration is also implicitly in question
when the rejection of the opposition application is challenged. On the basis
of these submissions Mr Sudhir Chandra submitted that the plaintiff has
raised a plea regarding the validity of registration of the defendants'
trademark and since such plea is a substantial triable issue, it is prima facie
tenable and, therefore, the provisions of Section 124 (1) (ii) would be
attracted. This would entail the Court staying the proceedings in this suit
and enabling the plaintiff to move an application for rectification before the
IPAB and await its decision.
IA 1610/2008 in CS(OS) 383/07

Page No.12 of 29

13.

In the course of arguments, Mr Sudhir Chandra also took up the

point that the defendants' mark (ORIGINAL CHOICE) could not have been
registered in view of Section 11 (1) (b) of the said Act. Section 11 (1) (b)
specifically provides that, save as provided in Section 12, a trademark shall
not be registered if, because of its similarity to an earlier trademark and the
identity or similarity of the goods or services covered by the trademarks,
there exists a likelihood of confusion on the part of the public, which
includes the likelihood of association with the earlier trademark. It was
contended that there is identity and/ or similarity of the goods or services
covered by the plaintiff's mark as well as the defendants' mark. There is
also similarity between the plaintiff's trademark 'OFFICER'S CHOICE' and
the defendants' trademark 'ORIGINAL CHOICE'. And, therefore, there
exists a likelihood of confusion on the part of the public.

In such a

situation, in view of the provisions of Section 11 (1) (b), the defendants'
trademark could not have been registered. It was contended by Mr Sudhir
Chandra that similarity of the marks cannot be denied by the defendants
inasmuch as they themselves have admitted that 'OFFICER'S CHOICE' and
'ORIGINAL CHOICE' are deceptively similar.

He also referred to the

affidavit of the Managing Director of the defendants filed by way of
evidence wherein it was stated that the two marks are deceptively similar.
He submitted that there are nine such affidavits, all stating the same. He
then referred to the decision of the Supreme Court in Nagindas v.
Dalpatram: 1974 SC 471 wherein the Supreme Court held that admissions,
IA 1610/2008 in CS(OS) 383/07

Page No.13 of 29

if true and clear, are by far the best proof of the facts admitted. It was held
by the Supreme Court that admissions in pleadings or judicial admissions,
admissible under Section 58 of the Evidence Act, made by the parties or
their agents at or before the hearing of the case, stand on a higher footing
than evidentiary admissions. The former class of admissions are fully
binding on the party that makes them and constitute a waiver of proof. They
by themselves can be made the foundation of the rights of the parties. On
the other hand, evidentiary admissions which are receivable at the trial as
evidence, are by themselves, not conclusive. They can be shown to be
wrong. Mr Sudhir Chandra submitted that the admissions made by the
defendants are judicial admissions and, therefore cannot be retracted. He
also referred to the decisions of the Supreme Court in the case of Narayan
v. Gopal: AIR 1960 SC 100 and Modi Spinning & Weaving Mills v.
Ladha Ram & Co. : AIR 1977 SC 680 for the same propositions.

14.

From the above discussion, it is apparent that Mr Sudhir Chandra

has taken a two pronged approach insofar as the question of the prima facie
tenability in respect of invalidity of the registration of the defendants'
trademark is concerned. In the first instance he took the stand that the
rejection of the plaintiff's opposition application by virtue of the order dated
17.07.2007 was wrong and consequently the registration of the defendants'
trademark was not valid.

Secondly, he contended that the defendants'

trademark could not at all have been registered in view of the provisions of
Section 11 (1) (b) of the said Act on account of the similarity between the
IA 1610/2008 in CS(OS) 383/07

Page No.14 of 29

plaintiff's earlier mark and the defendants' mark as also the similarity of the
goods and services for which the said marks were employed by the plaintiff
and the defendants and the likelihood of confusion on the part of the public.
It was contended that the similarity between the marks had been admitted by
the defendants and, therefore, the plaintiff had clearly raised a prima facie
tenable issue with regard to the invalidity of the registration of the
defendants' trademark.

15.

Mr Sanjay Jain, who appeared on behalf of the defendants,

contended straightaway that the provisions of Section 21 with regard to the
filing of an application of opposition were mandatory and not directory as
suggested by Mr Sudhir Chandra. It was mandatory that the application
should have been made in the prescribed manner and on payment of the
prescribed fee. If the same was not done then the consequences thereof
would flow as provided under the said Act and Rules. As regards the
second issue that Mr Sudhir Chandra raised relating to the provisions of
Section 11 (1) (b) of the said Act, Mr Sanjay Jain submitted that such a plea
has not been raised by the plaintiff in the amended replication and the
invalidity of the defendants' registration has been sought only on the ground
of rejection of the opposition application. There is no plea whatsoever with
regard to the provisions of Section 11 (1) (b) of the said Act and, therefore,
the second plea of Mr Sudhir Chandra does not even deserve consideration.

IA 1610/2008 in CS(OS) 383/07

Page No.15 of 29

16.

Amplifying on his submissions with regard to the rejection of the

plaintiff's opposition application as being beyond time, Mr Jain referred to a
full Bench decision of this Court in Hastimal Jain v. Registrar of Trade
Marks: 2000 PTC 24 (FB) to show that the Legislature provided a fixed
term for moving the application under Section 21 (1). It was contended that
the initial period prescribed for an opposition application is three months
from the date of advertisement or re-advertisement of an application for
registration.

Section 21 (1) itself provides for a further period, not

exceeding one month in the aggregate, which may be allowed by the
Registrar on an application made to him. In the present case, Mr Jain
submitted that the extension for time was applied for on 01.03.2004. The
same was found to be in order and time was, therefore, extended up to
02.04.2004.

The notice of opposition in Form TM-5 was filed on

31.03.2004 but as the signed cheque was submitted only on 15.04.2004, the
notice of opposition in Form TM-5 would be construed as having been filed
on 15.04.2004 and not on 31.03.2004. That being the case, it would be
beyond time and, therefore, the Deputy Registrar had correctly rejected the
same on the ground of limitation by virtue of the order dated 17.07.2007.

17.

It was further contended by Mr Jain that the provision as to fees

is given in Rule 11 of the said Rules. Sub-rule (5) of Rule 11 specifically
provides, subject to the provisions of Rule 25 (19), that where a fee is
payable in respect of filing of a document and where the document is filed
without fee or with insufficient fee, such document shall be deemed not to
IA 1610/2008 in CS(OS) 383/07

Page No.16 of 29

have been filed for the purposes of any proceedings under these rules. It
was contended by Mr Jain that the notice of opposition in Form TM-5
requires a fee to be paid at the time of filing. Since the fees were paid only
on 15.04.2004, the notice of opposition in Form TM-5 would be deemed not
to have been filed on 31.03.2004 but only on 15.04.2004. Consequently,
the notice of opposition was clearly beyond time and was ex facie liable to
be rejected on this ground alone. This is exactly what the Deputy Registrar
did in passing the order dated 17.07.2007 and, therefore, there is no
question of the plaintiff's plea being prima facie tenable. Mr Jain relied
upon the decision of a learned Single Judge of this Court in Hindustan
Pencils Ltd. v. Aptudat Industries: 1993 PTC 65 which was rendered in
respect of Section 111 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958,
which is similar to the provisions of Section 124 of the said Act to contend
that for invoking the provisions of Section 111 of the 1958 Act it would be
necessary that rectification application ought to have been pending before
institution of the suit. However, I am of the view that this decision is not
relevant for the purposes of considering Section 124 (1) (ii) of the said Act
where the issue relates to the prima facie tenability of the plea regarding
invalidity of the defendants' registration and the said provision operates
where no proceedings for rectification are pending. Consequently, the said
decision cited by Mr Jain is clearly inapplicable insofar as the argument
under Section 124 (1) (ii) of the said Act is concerned.

Similarly the

decision in the case of Kedar Nath v. Monga Perfumery and Flour Mills,
Delhi: AIR 1974 Delhi 12 would also be in applicable.
IA 1610/2008 in CS(OS) 383/07

Page No.17 of 29

18.

Mr Jain next submitted that the plaintiff does not want to file an

application for rectification under Section 57 of the said Act. It has insisted
that the appeal pending before the IPAB is a proceeding for rectification.
Mr Jain submitted that in this backdrop the avenue under Section 124 (1)
(ii) is not available to the defendants. He further reiterated that no plea on
merits has been taken with regard to the invalidity of the registration of the
defendants' trademark.

In this context, Mr Jain drew my attention to the

amended replication filed on behalf of the plaintiff. The amended portion
merely states that the defendants' registration for the trademark 'ORIGINAL
CHOICE' and device is not a valid registration under the said Act. This is
followed by the statement that the defendants' application proceeded to
registration in the facts and circumstances narrated therein. These facts and
circumstances, from paragraph (a) to (g), all relate to the filing and rejection
of the plaintiff's opposition. This is followed by a reference to the appeal
pending before the IPAB and finally it is stated as under:“It is, therefore, denied that the subject registration gives the
defendants the exclusive right to use the said trademark in
registration to the above mentioned goods and that the
plaintiff's relief for infringement of the trademark is not
maintainable against the defendants.”
This is followed by the following sub-paragraph:“However, without prejudice to the aforesaid, it is pertinent to
note that the defendants by relying on the defence to Section
28 (3) of the Trade Marks Act, 1999 has once again consented
to the fact that the defendants' mark 'ORIGINAL CHOICE' is
identical with or nearly resembles the plaintiff's mark
'OFFICER'S CHOICE'.”
IA 1610/2008 in CS(OS) 383/07

Page No.18 of 29

It was, therefore, contended by Mr Jain that the entire argument with regard
to invalidity of the defendants' registration centres around the rejection of
the plaintiff's opposition application. There is no mention of the ground
under Section 11 (1) (b) of the said Act as was sought to be raised by Mr
Sudhir Chandra in the course of arguments.

19.

Mr Jain placed reliance on the decision of a learned Single Judge

of this Court in the case of Mohd. Rafiq Mohd. Shafiq v. Modi Sugar
Mills Ltd.: ILR (1970) II Delhi 246. In the said decision it was observed
with reference to Section 111 of the 1958 Act (which is similar to Section
124 of the said Act) that the statutory provisions have taken good care to see
that the claim for rectification, which necessitates stay of the suit, must be
prima facie tenable and that it is not the object of the law that in every
action for infringement of trademark, stay should be granted, as soon as the
defendant raises a howsoever false plea of the invalidity of the trade mark
and rectification of the register.

It was held that any other construction

would lead to the bad result that every defendant would be entitled to obtain
stay of action for infringement by simply raising the plea or by in fact
subsequently instituting proceedings for rectification, however, frivolous
they may be. Mr Jain also referred to the passing observation made in the
said decision that the suit had not remained at the initial stage and
considerable advance had been made in the matter of recording evidence
and it would not be in the interests of justice to stop its further progress.
Similarly Mr Jain submitted that the present suit is also at the stage of final
IA 1610/2008 in CS(OS) 383/07

Page No.19 of 29

arguments and, therefore, it would not be in the interest of justice to stay
further proceedings in the suit.

20.

In rejoinder Mr Sudhir Chandra submitted that there is no time

prescribed under the Act for the payment of the fee in respect of a notice of
opposition. He reiterated that this is a case of a clerical error in that the
attorney who filed the notice of opposition inadvertently did not sign the
cheque for the fee covering the notice of opposition. He submitted that this
was a curable error and, therefore, once the signed cheque had been
submitted on 15.04.2004, it would relate back to the date on which the
notice of opposition in Form TM-5 was filed, i.e., on 31.03.2004. He
submitted that the present case was different from a case where no fee is
paid at all. In that case, it would be well within the powers of the Registrar
to reject the notice of opposition as being incompetent but not in the present
case. Mr Sudhir Chandra referred to the decision of a learned Single Judge
of this Court in the case of AIA Engineering Ltd. v. Controller of Patents
& Anr.: 2007 (34) PTC 457 (Del.) wherein it was noted that the nonpayment of the fee was a curable error. However, that decision has been
rendered in respect of the Patents Act, 1970 and the specific provisions
contained therein as well as under the Patent Rules, 2003. In the present
case we are not concerned with that Act or Rules and the same has to be
decided within the four corners of the said Act and the said Rules.
Therefore, this decision would not be of much relevance in the present
case.
IA 1610/2008 in CS(OS) 383/07

Page No.20 of 29

21.

Mr Sudhir Chandra then referred to the amended replication and

stated that while the plea with regard to invalidity of the registration had
been taken both on account of the wrongful rejection of the plaintiff's
opposition as well as on merits, it is true that the plea of wrongful rejection
was dealt with in detail whereas the plea on merits was not elaborated upon.
He referred to the amended replication and submitted that the plaintiff had
specifically taken the point of the two trademarks being identical or nearly
resembling each other in the context of Section 28 (3) of the said Act. This,
in his view, was sufficient and although Section 11 (1) (b) of the said Act
was not mentioned, the plea concerning the said provision had been taken.
And, the plaintiff could not be shut out from raising the plea on merits. Mr
Sudhir Chandra referred to the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of
Ram Sarup Gupta v. Bishun Narain Inter College: AIR 1987 SC 1242
wherein it was observed in paragraph 6 that it is well settled that in the
absence of pleading, evidence, if any, produced by the parties cannot be
considered. But that it was equally well settled that no party should be
permitted to travel beyond its pleading and that all necessary and material
facts should be pleaded by the party in support of the case set up by it. The
Supreme Court held that the pleadings, however, should receive a liberal
construction and a pedantic approach should not be adopted to defeat justice
on hair splitting technicalities.

It was observed in this context that

sometimes pleadings are expressed in words which may not expressly make
out a case in accordance with strict interpretation of law, in such a case, it is
IA 1610/2008 in CS(OS) 383/07

Page No.21 of 29

the duty of the Court to ascertain the substance of the pleadings to
determine the question.

The Supreme Court cautioned that it is not

desirable to place undue emphasis on form, instead the substance of the
pleadings should be considered.

In this backdrop, Mr Sudhir Chandra

submitted that the substance of the pleadings clearly indicate that the
validity of the registration of the defendants' trademark has also been
challenged on merits.

22.

The issue before this Court is whether the plea regarding the

invalidity of registration of the defendants' trademark is, prima facie,
tenable. The first attack on validity of the registration of the defendants'
trademark is based on the alleged wrongful rejection of the opposition
application filed by the plaintiff.

The contention being that had the

opposition application not been rejected, the defendants' mark would not
have been registered. It is necessary to examine the requirements of law in
respect of a notice of opposition. As discussed above, the relevant question
here would be to consider whether the provisions of Section 21 of the said
Act are mandatory or directory. An examination of Section 21 (1) of the
said Act reveals that any person may give a notice in writing “in the
prescribed manner” to the Registrar of his opposition in respect of an
application for registration. Such notice is required to be given within three
months from the date of advertisement or re-advertisement of the
application for registration. It may, however, be given during a further
period, not exceeding one month in the aggregate, as the Registrar allows.
IA 1610/2008 in CS(OS) 383/07

Page No.22 of 29

However, the extension has to be applied for “in the prescribed manner and
on payment of the prescribed fee”. What is interesting is that Section 21 (1)
refers to the application for extension of time as also to the notice of
opposition. Insofar as the application for extension of time is concerned,
the said provision uses the expression “in the prescribed manner and on
payment of the prescribed fee”.

However, in respect of the notice of

opposition the expression used is— “in the prescribed manner.”

It is

important to note that the expression “and on payment of the prescribed fee”
is absent in respect of the notice of opposition. Rule 47 deals with notice of
opposition.

Sub-rule (1) prescribes that a notice of opposition to the

registration of a trademark under Section 21 (1) shall be given in triplicate
in Form TM-5 within the stipulated period. Sub-rule (6) pertains to the
application for extension of the period within which a notice of opposition
may be given. It stipulates that such an application shall be made in Form
TM-44 “accompanied by the fee prescribed in First Schedule” before the
expiry of the period of three months under Section 21 (1). Here, again, one
notices the distinction between the requirement of the prescribed fee
accompanying the application for extension of the period within which a
notice of opposition may be given and the provision pertaining to the notice
of opposition being filed in triplicate in Form TM-5 without any reference
to it being accompanied by the prescribed fee.

However, Rule 47 (2)

indicates that where a notice of opposition has been filed in respect of a
single application for registration of a trademark, it shall bear the fee in
respect of each class in relation to which the opposition is filed in Form
IA 1610/2008 in CS(OS) 383/07

Page No.23 of 29

TM-5.

23.

Another provision which needs consideration is Section 150 (1)

of the said Act. It deals with fees and surcharge. Section 150 (1) provides
that there shall be paid in respect of applications and registration and other
matters under the Act such fees and surcharge as may be prescribed by the
Central Government. Sub-section (3) stipulates that where a fee is payable
in respect of the filing of a document at the Trade Marks Registry, the
document shall be deemed not to have been filed at the registry until the fee
has been paid. This provision is open to the interpretation that unless and
until the prescribed fee is paid on the document, the document shall not be
deemed to have been filed at the Registry. In the context of the facts of the
present case, it could be interpreted as meaning that on 31.03.2004 when the
notice of opposition was filed in Form TM-5 since the fee was paid only on
15.04.2004, it shall be deemed to have been filed on 15.04.2004 and not on
31.03.2004. Thereby, implying that the notice of opposition was beyond
time which expired on 02.04.2004. Another interpretation could be that till
the fee is paid, the document is deemed not to have been filed but once the
fee is paid, the document would be considered to have been filed on the date
on which it was physically presented to the Registry. In the context of the
facts of the present case this would mean that the receipt of the cheque duly
signed on 15.04.2004 would relate back to the date on which the document
i.e., the notice of opposition in Form TM-5, was filed and that date would be
31.03.2004.
IA 1610/2008 in CS(OS) 383/07

Page No.24 of 29

24.

Rule 11 pertains to fees. Sub-rule (1) provides that the fees that

are to be paid in respect of applications, oppositions, registration, and
renewal, expedited examination or reports or any other matters under the
Act and the rules shall be those specified in the First Schedule and shall be
referred to as the prescribed fees.

Entry No. 12 in the First Schedule

indicates that fee payable on a notice of opposition, inter alia, under Section
21 (1) for each class opposed would be Rs 2,500.00. Sub-rule (2) of Rule
11 provides that where in respect of any matter, a fee is required to be paid
under the rules, the form or the application or the request of the petition
thereof, it shall be accompanied by the prescribed fee. Sub-rule (3) provides
that fees may be paid in cash or sent by money order addressed to th
Registrar or by a bank draft issued or by a cheque drawn on a scheduled
bank at the place where the appropriate office of the Trade Marks Registry
is situated and if sent through post, shall be deemed to have been paid at the
time when the money order or the properly addressed bank draft or cheque
would be delivered in the ordinary course of post.

Sub-rule (4) stipulates

that bank drafts and cheques shall be crossed and shall be paid at the
appropriate office of the Trade Marks Registry and they shall be drawn on a
scheduled bank at the place where the appropriate office of the Trade Marks
Registry is situated.

Sub-rule (5) stipulates that subject to the provisions

contained in sub-rule (19) of Rule 25, where a fee is payable in respect of
filing of a document and where the document is filed without fee or without

IA 1610/2008 in CS(OS) 383/07

Page No.25 of 29

insufficient fee, such document shall be deemed not to have been filed for
the purposes of any proceedings under these rules.

25.

A survey of the above provisions indicates that while Section 21

(1) speaks of a prescribed manner and prescribed fee in relation to the
application for extension of time, it does not mention the expression
“prescribed fee” insofar as the notice of opposition is concerned.

This

distinction is material because it occurs in the very same provision.
Similarly, Rule 47, which deals with the notice of opposition, does not
mention that the application must be accompanied by the fee prescribed.
However, Rule 47 (6), which deals with the application for extension of the
period within which a notice of opposition to the registration of a trademark
may be given, stipulates that such an application is required to be made in
Form TM-44 “accompanied by the fee prescribed.” Thus, it is apparent that
both the legislature when it enacted the said Act and the Central
Government when it framed the said Rules was mindful of the distinction
that while an application for extension of time for filing of the notice of
opposition must be accompanied by the prescribed fee, there was no such
requirement in respect of the notice of opposition to be filed in Form TM-5.
It is true that the provisions of Section 150 (3) and Rule 11 do indicate that
where fees are to be paid in respect of, inter alia, oppositions and other
documents, they would be deemed not to have been filed if they are filed
without fee or with insufficient fee. However, as would be apparent upon a
reading of Section 150 (3) it is a possible interpretation that such a
IA 1610/2008 in CS(OS) 383/07

Page No.26 of 29

document will be deemed not to have been filed “until the fee has been
paid” in the sense that once the fees are paid, the document shall be taken as
filed and shall relate back to the date on which it was physically filed. Such
an interpretation would clearly mean that the provisions of Section 21 (1)
with regard to the filing of a notice of opposition would be mandatory
insofar as the actual filing of the notice in Form TM-5 is concerned but
would be directory in respect of the fee to be paid thereon accompanying
the notice.

26.

This discussion leads me to the conclusion that the interpretation

that is sought to be put forth by the learned counsel for the plaintiff is not
frivolous and definitely raises a substantial triable issue even in respect of
the question of the rejection of the plaintiff's notice of opposition by virtue
of the order dated 17.07.2007 on the ground of limitation. This, of course,
is an issue which shall have to be determined by the IPAB. Even on merits,
the plaintiff's arguments with regard to the invalidity of the defendants'
registration on account of the provisions of Section 11 (1) (b) of the said
Act cannot be thrown out at the threshold. I do not agree with the learned
counsel for the defendants that this plea was not taken by the plaintiff in the
amended replication. The plaintiff has clearly and categorically challenged
the validity of the defendants' registration. One ground elaborated upon was
with regard to the alleged wrongful rejection of the plaintiff's notice of
opposition. The other ground which was not elaborated upon was with
regard to the deceptive similarity of the two marks and the defence taken by
IA 1610/2008 in CS(OS) 383/07

Page No.27 of 29

the defendants under Section 28 (3) which would consequently translate
also to the defence under Section 30 (2) (e) of the said Act. Although the
provisions of Section 11 (1) (b) have not been mentioned in the amended
replication, the plaintiff has laid down the basis of challenge to the validity
of the defendant's registration under that provision on account of similarity
of the trademarks and identity or similarity of the goods. Therefore, to
submit that the plaintiff has not raised the plea of invalidity of registration
of the defendants' trademark on merits, would not be correct.

27.

It is also clear that the grounds raised on merits are not such

which can be deemed as frivolous or vexatious.

Substantial triable issues

arise with regard to the challenge to the validity of the registration of the
defendant's trademark. Consequently, I am satisfied that the plea regarding
the invalidity of the registration of the defendants' trademark is, prima facie,
tenable on both counts — the alleged improper rejection of the plaintiff's
notice of opposition and the alleged non-registerability of the defendants'
mark in view of Section 11 (1) (b) of the said Act. Accordingly, the issue
regarding the same is raised and this case is adjourned for a period of three
months in order to enable the plaintiff to apply to the IPAB for rectification
of the register in the prescribed manner.
This application stands allowed accordingly.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
April 01, 2008
SR
IA 1610/2008 in CS(OS) 383/07

Page No.28 of 29

IA 1610/2008 in CS(OS) 383/07

Page No.29 of 29

