THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on :03.04.2007

+

WP (C) 14148/2006 & CM 11096/2006.

ANOOP KUMAR BARA

...Petitioner
- versus -

UNION OF INDIA & ORS.

...Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr P.P. Khurana with Ms Ranjana Pattanayak.
For the Respondents
: Mr Pushkar Sood with Ms Archana Gaur for UOI.
For the Respondents 2,3

: Ms Kamini Jaiswal.

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

This writ petition has been filed by the petitioner being aggrieved

by the communication dated 31.7.2006 issued by the Principal of the Institute
of Hotel Management Catering Technology & Applied Nutrition, Maharajpura,
Airport Road, Gwalior. By virtue of this communication, the petitioner has
been notified that as per the order of National Council, New Delhi, the
petitioner was declared failed because he was found copying in the annual
examination of the year 2006 as a regular/re-appearing student.
WP(C)14148/2006

No.1 of 6

2.

The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that first of all,

the petitioner has been debarred for two years whereas he ought to have been
debarred only for one year even if all the allegations are taken to be correct.
Secondly, it was stated by Mr Khurana, the learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner, that in any event, the order passed by the National Council ought to
be set aside because the principle of natural justice had not been followed and
the petitioner had not been given an opportunity of personal hearing. In this
connection, he submitted that the notice dated 11.5.2006 that was sent to the
petitioner, was sent at an address where the petitioner did not reside. It was
sent to 150G, Sector IV, Pushp Vihar, New Delhi. The said notice was not
served on the petitioner and the endorsement on the returned envelop reads as
under:“ No such person in 150G.”
Based on this endorsement on the envelop, Mr Khurana submits that the
petitioner was not aware of the hearing which was to be conducted on
24.5.2006 as indicated in the notice dated 11.5.2006. Obviously, the petitioner
did not appear and, therefore, the order of National Council is liable to be set
aside because of non-grant of opportunity of hearing.

3.

The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents 2 and 3

submitted that the order passed by the National Council does not call for any
WP(C)14148/2006

No.2 of 6

interference both on the ground of the period of debarment as well as on the
question of natural justice.

4.

Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, I find that insofar

as the question of period of debarment is concerned, the petitioner can have no
grievance.

Rule 9.2 of the National Council for Hotel Management and

Catering Technology Examination Rules, 2001 (as amended up to May 2004)
reads as under:“9.2

A candidate found exchanging answer book or question
paper with solution or copying or having in his/her
possession or accessible to him/her papers, books or notes
or material relating to the subject of the question paper
shall be disqualified for a minimum period of one academic
session following the examination in question and is liable
to be disqualified for a maximum period of three years
following the examination in which he/she (deliberately)
adopted unfair means. The candidate found to have thus
indulged in unfair means shall be deemed to have failed in
all subjects. After expiry of the period of disqualification
such candidate shall have to reappear in the entire
examination.”

A reading of the said Rule clearly indicates that where a candidate is found
inter alia to be copying, the said candidate has to be disqualified for a minimum
period of one academic session following the examination in question and is
liable to be disqualified for a maximum period of three years following the
examination in which the candidate adopted unfair means. The petitioner was
found copying in the examination held on 24.4.2006. Accordingly, as per Rule

WP(C)14148/2006

No.3 of 6

9.2 the minimum period of disqualification was one year following the
examination in question. It means that the petitioner, if awarded the minimum
period of disqualification could at the earliest take the examination in the year
2008.

This is so because the examination of 2006 is not to be counted and the

disqualification would be for the next year.

Therefore, the contention raised

by Mr Khurana is not tenable.

5.

As regards the alleged violation of principle of natural justice, I

find that the notice dated 11.5.2006 was sent to the petitioner at the address
given by him in the application form itself. A copy of the application form is
Annexure R-3 to the counter affidavit filed on behalf of the respondents. In the
rejoinder affidavit filed on behalf of the petitioner the factum of filing the said
application (annexure R-3) is not denied. The allegation that it was sent to the
address as mentioned in the application form is also not specifically denied.
The only statement made in the rejoinder affidavit is as under:“.......Further, the letter was allegedly sent on the address of the
Petitioner at 150G, Sector-IV, Pushp Vihar, New Delhi, whereas
the Petitioner's address on the record of the Respondent is 147-C,
Sector-IV, Pushp Vihar, New Delhi appearing on the Scheduled
Caste Certificate Annexure-A to the writ petition.”
This statement cannot but be regarded as evasive and does not directly answer
the statement contained in the counter affidavit which is as under:“......The Petitioner was thereafter asked to depose before the
Examination Committee vide its letter dated 11.05.2006 for a
WP(C)14148/2006

No.4 of 6

personal hearing on 24.05.2006 at 10.00 am. It is pertinent to
mention that the letter/notice of personal hearing was sent on the
address mentioned by the Petitioner in his own handwriting in the
admission form. A true copy of the admission form is annexed
herewith and marked as ANNEXURE R-3”
6.

The petitioner has attempted to give the impression that he did not

reside at 150G, Sector IV, Pushp Vihar, New Delhi, which impression is not
borne out by the record. The application for admission for the term 2006
examination, filled in the handwriting of the petitioner, itself indicates the
permanent address for correspondence as 150-G, Sector IV, Pushp Vihar, New
Delhi.

This clearly indicates that the address to which the notice dated

11.5.2006 was sent, was the address indicated by the petitioner himself and,
therefore, he cannot now take the ground that the notice was sent to the wrong
address and that consequently, he was denied an opportunity of hearing.
Accordingly, I find no infirmity with the order passed by the National Council.

7.

Mr Khurana however, submits that even if it was to be held that the

notice was sent at the address given by the petitioner himself, the fact that the
petitioner did not receive the notice, is still not disputed. That being the case,
the petitioner may be given an opportunity to answer the case against him. Ms
Jaiswal, who appears on behalf of the respondents 2 and 3, submits that the
Committee would be meeting after the examination sometime in May, 2007 and
if the correct address is provided by the petitioner, then a notice would be sent

WP(C)14148/2006

No.5 of 6

to him to appear before

the Committee sometime in May.

Mr Khurana

undertakes to provide the correct address within a week.

8.

This writ petition is disposed of with the direction that the

impugned order shall continue to stand subject to any other order that may be
passed by the Committee after hearing the petitioner. No costs.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
April 3, 2007
J

WP(C)14148/2006

No.6 of 6

