IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+

IA No.245/2004 in CS (OS) No.26/2004

%

Judgment delivered on :03.07.2007

M/S G.M. MODULAR PVT. LTD

.... Plaintiff
versus

M/S TM MARKETING (INDIA) & OTHERS

.... Defendants

Advocates who appeared in this case:For the Plaintiff
: Mr S.K. Bansal with Mr Suwarn Rajan
For the Defendants
: Mr Amarjit Singh

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the judgment ?

Yes

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ?

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J

1.

In this application, the plaintiff seeks an interim injunction

restraining the defendants, etc. from using, manufacturing, selling,
offering for sale, advertising or displaying directly or indirectly or
dealing in any other manner or mode in electronic goods, accessories,
appliances, electronic components and goods of same / similar / allied /
cognate description thereto under the impugned “TM” trademark / label
as per Annexure D-A-I or any other trademark / label identical with or

IA 245/03 in CS(OS)26/04

Page No. 1 of 15

deceptively similar thereto or bearing the word / mark “TM” either by
itself or in an artistic manner and the impugned trade dress (Annexure-DB-I) or any other identical or deceptively similar trade dress which would
amount to or result in passing off and violation of the plaintiff's “GM”
trademark / label being (Annexure -A) or passing off and violation of the
plaintiff's trade dress / cartons being (Annexure-B). The application also
seeks injunction against infringement, passing off and violation of the
plaintiff's copyrights in the said mark / label / trade dress.

2.

Before dealing with the arguments advanced by the counsel for the

parties, it would be appropriate to set out the nature of the controversy
and it cannot be better demonstrated than by visually depicting the same.
The trademark / label of the plaintiff as given in Annexure -A is as
under:-

Annexure -A

IA 245/03 in CS(OS)26/04

Page No. 2 of 15

The trademark / label of the defendant as per Annexure-D-A-I is as
under:Annexure -D-A-I

The trade dress of the box / carton of the plaintiff as per Annexure-B is
as under:Annexure -B

The trade dress of the defendant's box / carton is as under:-

IA 245/03 in CS(OS)26/04

Page No. 3 of 15

Annexure -D-B-I

3.

The plaintiff has filed the suit for passing off of the trademark as

well as for infringement of its copyrights. The plaintiff claims to be the
proprietor of the trademark “GM” and its artistic label in relation to
electrical goods, including electrical switches, etc. as per Annexures-A
and B depicted above. According to the learned counsel for the plaintiff,
the plaintiff's company was incorporated on 25.06.1999 and the mark
“GM” forms a material part of the plaintiff's trademark, the plaintiff
company's name being “GM Modular Private Ltd.” It is stated that the
plaintiff adopted the trademark “GM” and its label in the year 1999 and
claims continuous user thereafter.

In the plaint, the plaintiff has

mentioned that it had applied for registration of the trademark. During
the pendency of the suit, the trademark has been registered. It is stated
that the plaintiff is now the registered proprietor of the trademark “GM”
in relation to electrical goods, including electrical switches in Class 09.

IA 245/03 in CS(OS)26/04

Page No. 4 of 15

A copy of the trademark registration certificate which was granted during
the pendency of the suit has been filed alongwith the list of documents
dated 13.01.2005.

The said certificate indicates the details of the

registration as under:“Trade Mark
Trade Mark Number
Date of Registration

4.

:
:

:
GM Label
934452 in Class 09
26.06.2000”

It is also pointed out by the learned counsel for the plaintiff that

the copyright for the “GM” label is also registered under No.A64280/03.
The plaintiff has claimed exclusive rights in the trademark “GM” Label
under Sections 28 and 29 of Trade Marks Act, 1999 and exclusive rights
in its copyrights on account of its origination under Section 2 (c) of
Indian Copyright Act, 1956. The plaintiff has also stated that it has built
up an extensive goodwill and reputation in the trademark “GM”. The
sales figures for the year 2002-03 indicate sales of more than Rs.76
lakhs.

A copy of the certificate of approval with regard to quality

standards conforming to ISO 9001:2000 dated 25.07.2002 has also been
placed on record.

Copies of advertisements appearing in prominent

magazines as well as in hoardings around the stadia in international
cricket matches have also been filed. Invoices in respect of the particular
goods under the trademark / label “GM” commencing from the year 2001
have also been filed. Certain government test reports in respect of the
brand name “GM” have also been filed. The earliest report being of
31.05.2000. These factors were pointed out by the learned counsel for
IA 245/03 in CS(OS)26/04

Page No. 5 of 15

the plaintiff to indicate the extensive use, reputation, goodwill and prior
adoption and use by the plaintiff of the mark / artistic work.

5.

It was contended by the learned counsel for the plaintiff that the

defendant has adopted a deceptively similar mark / label “TM” in
relation to similar goods. The defendants' label and trade dress of the
packing / carton have already been indicated above. According to the
learned counsel for the plaintiff, the trademark / label of the defendant is
identical with and / or deceptively similar to the trademark / label of the
defendant and accordingly, the plaintiff is entitled to an order of
injunction being issued against the defendant in respect of the use of the
trademark “TM” and its artistic features.

6.

On behalf of the defendants, it has been firstly contended that

while arguments have been addressed with regard to infringement of a
registered trademark, there is no pleading with regard to the registration
of the mark No.934452. Accordingly, the plaintiff is not entitled to
argue the case of infringement of trademark or to rely upon registration
No.934452.

It was next contended by the learned counsel for the

defendants that the plaintiff has made certain false statements. It is
pointed out that while the plaintiff claims to have used the trademark
“GM” since 1999, the plaintiff's documents themselves show the
introduction of the trademark “GM” in May, 2000.

The sales tax

registration is only of 29.02.2000. It was also pointed out that the label
IA 245/03 in CS(OS)26/04

Page No. 6 of 15

shown as Annexure-A and Annexure-D-A-I are only portions of the
labels / marks and not the complete labels. It was next contended on
behalf of the defendants that the plaintiff has suppressed material facts.
The plaintiff had earlier instituted Suit No.1068/2003 claiming identical
reliefs, but that suit was withdrawn on a flimsy ground. The plaintiff has
not mentioned the filing of the earlier suit and its withdrawal. According
to the learned counsel for the defendant, this fact in itself disentitles the
plaintiff to the discretionary relief of injunction.

In support of this

submission, the learned counsel for the defendants relied upon the
following decisions:“i)
ii)

Fair Deal Corporation Pvt.
Pharmaceuticals: 1985 PTC 80;

iii)

Chandra Shashi v. Anil Kumar Verma: 1994 (4)
Scale 994;

iv)

Indian Bank v. Satyam Fibres India Pvt. Ltd: JT
1996 (7) SC 135;

v)

SPC Naidu v. Jagan Nath: AIR 1994 SC 583;

vi)

7.

Virumal Praveen Kumar v. Gokal Chand Hari
Chand: 2000 PTC 507;

Smithkline Beecham & Others v. G.D. Rathore &
Others: 2002 (25) PTC 243.”

Ltd

v.

Vijay

The learned counsel for the defendants also submitted that no

copyright subsists in a font and that the use of “TM” in ordinary letters
on the part of the defendants does not constitute infringement of a
copyright.
IA 245/03 in CS(OS)26/04

Page No. 7 of 15

8.

The learned counsel for the defendants also submitted that the

plaintiff's suit is barred under the principles of Order 2 Rule 2 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter referred to as 'CPC'). The
plaintiff had instituted a suit No.854/2003 with respect to the alleged
infringement of the design of switches as were being sold by the plaintiff
under the trademark “GM”. According to the learned counsel for the
defendants, the plaintiff, while instituting the said Suit 854/2003, omitted
to sue on the alleged cause of action of passing off arising out of the use
of mark “TM” on the part of the defendant. The plaintiff was entitled to
claim more than two reliefs, including the relief of passing off and
having omitted to do so, the plaintiff was not entitled to maintain the
present suit. It was also contended on behalf of the defendant that the
defendants' user was prior in time. According to the learned counsel, the
defendant was in the business of the said goods much prior to the
plaintiff. The defendant had stated on oath that the mark “TM” was
being used since 1998 and that merely because the word “TM” is not
mentioned in the invoices filed on behalf of the defendant does not prove
that the said mark was not being used by the defendant.

9.

Finally, on the key issue of deceptive similarity, it was contended

on behalf of the defendants that there is no similarity between the label
marks of the plaintiff and the defendants taken as a whole. It was
submitted that for the purpose of comparing the competing marks in
IA 245/03 in CS(OS)26/04

Page No. 8 of 15

order to decide the question of likelihood of confusion and deception,
marks are to be compared as a whole. It was also submitted that the
marks at Annexure-B of the plaintiff and Annexure-D-B-1 of the
defendant have no similarity.

It was also submitted by the learned

counsel for the defendants that the essential features of the plaintiff's
label mark are “G Magic” as against the essential feature of the
defendants mark “Touch Me”. According to the learned counsel, the
comparison of the label marks has to be made with reference to the
essential features of the marks. Reliance was placed on the decisions of
the Supreme Court in the cases of Corn Products Refining Co. v.
Shangrila Food Products Ltd: AIR 1960 SC 142 and F. Hoffimann-La
Roche and Co. Ltd v. Geoffrey Manners and Co. Pvt. Ltd: AIR 1970
SC 2062. It was further submitted that the colour combination of the
Annexures B and D-B-I were totally different and that there were
sufficient added matters in the label of the defendant to establish
distinction between the goods of the defendants from that of the plaintiff.
For this proposition, reliance was also placed on the judgment of the
Supreme Court in the case of Kaviraj Pandit Durga Dutt Sharma v.
Navaratna Pharmaceutical Laboratories: AIR 1965 SC 980. It was
also contended that the test for comparison of the word mark consisting
of two or three ordinary letters of the English alphabet is different from
the test applicable to word marks having phonetic similarity. It was
submitted that the initial letter difference in a short word mark or two
letter marks is sufficient to distinguish the marks. Reliance was placed
IA 245/03 in CS(OS)26/04

Page No. 9 of 15

on an English decision of the Chancery Division reported in 1979 R.P.C.
355.

10.

With regard to the submission of the defendants that the plaintiff

cannot rely upon the registration of the trademark because of an absence
of pleading in the plaint, it is relevant to point out that the plaintiff had
stated in paragraph 12 of the plaint that in order to have statutory rights
of registration conferred upon it, the plaintiff has duly filed for
registration of its trademark / label under the Trade and Merchandise
Marks Act, 1958. The registration of the trademark was granted only
subsequently during the pendency of the suit.

However, once the

trademark is registered it shall relate back to the date of application as
mentioned above. Therefore, in my view, there is sufficient pleading in
the plaint with regard to the registration of the trademark and the
objection of the defendants is not sustainable. As regards the alleged
false claims made by the plaintiff with regard to the user of the trademark
“GM” since 1999, that would be a matter of evidence. At this, prima
facie, stage, all that needs to be seen is that the plaintiff has been using
the trademark “GM”. While the plaintiff has filed various documents
indicating user of the trademark “GM” since at least the year 2000, no
document whatsoever has been filed by the defendants indicating any
prior user. The invoices that have been filed by the defendants did not
mention the trademark “TM” and as of now, there is no evidence on
record to show that the defendants had a prior user.
IA 245/03 in CS(OS)26/04

Page No. 10 of 15

11.

As regards the submission that only portions of the labels have

been indicated in Annexure-A and Annexure-D-A-I, it must be pointed
out that Annexure-A and Annexure-D-A-I are the trademarks / labels
which are, in point of fact, to be compared and Annexures-B and D-B-1
are the trade dresses of the packing / cartons in which the electrical items
are sold. Therefore, this plea of the defendants is also not tenable.

12.

As regards the allegation of suppression of the material fact of

having earlier instituted the suit No.1068/2003 claiming an identical
relief, it must be pointed out that the earlier suit No.1068/2003 had been
filed against some of the defendants herein. The plaintiff wanted to add
further defendants and sought leave of the court to add some more
parties. The court permitted withdrawal of the said suit with liberty to
file a fresh suit. The order passed by this court on 11.07.2003 reads as
under:“11.07.2003
Present: Mr S.K. Bansal for the plaintiff.
S.No.1068/03
Counsel for the plaintiff requests for leave to withdraw this
suit with liberty to file a fresh suit since according to him
some more parties are to be added. The leave prayed for is
granted. Suit is dismissed with liberty to file a fresh suit on
the same subject in accordance with law.”

Thus, while dismissing the earlier suit, this court had granted liberty to
the plaintiff to file a fresh suit on the same subject in accordance with

IA 245/03 in CS(OS)26/04

Page No. 11 of 15

law. While it is true that the withdrawal of the said suit is not mentioned
in the plaint, it is not, in my opinion, a material fact in view of the liberty
granted by this court for filing a fresh suit.

13.

With regard to the submission that the present suit is barred under

the principles of Order 2 Rule 2 of CPC, it would be pertinent to note
that two suits had been filed by the plaintiff in 2003, one being suit
No.1068/2003 and the other being Suit No.854/2003 [renumbered as
CS(OS) 497/2005]. While Suit No.1068/2003 had been withdrawn, as
indicated above, with liberty to file a fresh suit after adding certain other
parties, Suit No.854/2003 [renumbered as CS(OS) 497/2005] was
continued.

The latter suit was for permanent injunction to restrain

infringement of the registered design, passing off, delivery up, etc. The
prayers in that suit were different from the prayers in Suit No.1068/2003.
The causes of action were also distinct. Therefore, this objection of the
defendants would also not be tenable at this stage.

14.

Coming to the crux of the matter as to whether the trademark /

label of the plaintiff and that of the defendant is deceptively similar or
not, it would be pertinent to note that in a recent decision of the Supreme
Court in the case of Ramdev Food Products Ltd v. Arvindbhai Rambhai
Patel & Others: 2006 (8) SCC 726, the Supreme Court has observed that
the test for determining deceptive similarity in an infringement action
would be the same as in the case of a passing off action. The court
IA 245/03 in CS(OS)26/04

Page No. 12 of 15

observed that although the defendants might not be using the actual
trademark of the plaintiff, the get up of the defendant's goods may be so
much like the plaintiff's that a clear case of passing off could be proved.
The Supreme Court observed that in a case for infringement where the
defendant's trademark is identical with the plaintiff's mark, the court will
not enquire whether the infringement is likely to deceive or cause
confusion. However, in the case of deceptive similarity, the test would
be as to the likelihood of confusion or deception arising from similarity
of marks and the test is the same, both in infringement and passing off
actions. A reference to various decisions cited by the learned counsel for
the plaintiffs with regard to deceptively similar trademarks would also be
fruitful. In N. Ranga Rao & Sons v. Anil Garg and Others: 2006 (32)
PTC 15 (Del), the trademarks 'DIA' and 'LIA' were held to be
deceptively similar. In M/s. Pidilite Industries Pvt. Ltd v. M/s. Mittees
Corporation and Another: 1989 PTC 151, the trademarks 'TREVICOL'
was held to be deceptively similar to the trademark 'FEVICOL'. In Asha
Soap Factory v. Dhanthak & Co. and Another: 1985 Arb. L. R. 176,
the trademarks 'BB' and '88' were held to be deceptively similar. In
M/s.Hitachi Ltd v. Ajay Kr. Agarwal & Others: 1996 PTC (16) (DB),
the trademark 'Hitashi' was held to be deceptively similar to the
trademark 'Hitachi'. Other decisions of deceptively similar trademarks
are as under:“i)

TISCO and FISCO : 1992 (I) Arbitration Law
Reporter 417 (The Tata Iron & Steel Co. Ltd.,
versus Mahavir Steels and Ors).

IA 245/03 in CS(OS)26/04

Page No. 13 of 15

ii)
iii)

NIREX and MIREX : 1984 PTC 97 (Nirex
Industries (P) Ltd., Vs Man Chand Foot Wear
Industries);

iv)

M2 TONE and MV – TONE : 2004 (2) PTC 458
(Del) (Charak Pharma Private Limited Vs Prashi
Sharma Private Limited) ;

v)

15.

LAKME and LIKE -ME : 1996 PTC (16) 567
(Lakme Ltd., Versus Subhash Trading);

G.E.C. and A.E.C. : AIR 1974 Punjab & Haryana
14 (The General Electric Co., Vs Pyara Singh).

The test for determining whether one trademark is deceptively

similar to another is based on the likelihood of confusion or deception
arising in the minds of the consumers. Visually comparing the trade /
label “GM” with the trademark / label “TM”, one finds that they are
prone to be confused for each other. The background, colour (red) is the
same. The letters “GM” and “TM” are similar. The manner and style in
which “GM” and “TM” are indicated are prone to be confused for one
another. Looking at Annexures-A and D-A-I and comparing the two,
there is no doubt in my mind that the two are deceptively similar. As
regards Annexure B and Annexure D-B-I, if the elements of the
trademarks “GM” and “TM” as indicated in Annexure-A and D-A-I
(respectively) are removed, there would be no deceptive similarity
between them (Annexure B and Annexure D-B-I).

If the essential

features as submitted by the learned counsel for the defendants were “G
Magic” and “Touch Me”, then the defendants ought to have no objection

IA 245/03 in CS(OS)26/04

Page No. 14 of 15

to the deletion or removal of the trade mark / label “TM” because even as
per their submissions, this is not an essential feature.

16.

Accordingly, the plaintiff has been able to establish a prima facie

case in its favour and the balance of convenience also lies in passing an
order of injunction whereby the defendants are injuncted from using the
trademark / label “TM” as indicated in Annexure-D-B-I in respect of the
products in question. However, the plaintiffs are not entitled, at this
stage, to any injunction with regard to the trade dress of the box / carton
as indicated in Annexure-D-B-I.

The trade dress, as indicated in

Annexure D-B-I can continue to be used by the defendants provided the
trademark / label “TM” is removed therefrom.
With these directions, this application stands disposed of.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
July 03, 2007
δυττ

IA 245/03 in CS(OS)26/04

Page No. 15 of 15

