THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 04.02.2008

+

IA No. 12232/2007 in CS (OS) 2085/2006
(Under Order 16 Rule 1 CPC)

DR AMITABHA SEN.

...Plaintiff
- versus -

M/S SPORTS WORLD IN TERNATIONAL
LIMITED AND OTHERS

...Defendants

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Plaintiff
: Plaintiff in person along with Ms Pooja Singh,
Ms Bhavna Gulati, Mr P.R. Jaipuria, Ms Neha Singh
and Ms Rohini Aggarwal.
For the Defendants
: Mr Rajiv Nayyar Sr Advocate with Mr Mudit
Sharma, Ms Misha and Mr Muazzam Khan

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.
2.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?
To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ? Yes

Yes
Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J(ORAL)
1.

This application has been filed by the plaintiff for summoning

of three witnesses who have been listed as PW-II, PW-III and PW-IV.
PW-II (Mr Mike Ashley) is the sole shareholder of the defendant No.1
(M/s Sportsworld International Limited). PW-III (Mr Justin Barnes) is
the defendant No.2 and PW-IV (Mr Peter Barnes) is the defendant No.4.
IA12232/07INCS(OS) 2085/2006

Page No.1 of 16

It is an admitted position between the parties that PW-III, Mr Justin
Barnes and PW-IV Mr Peter Barnes are both partners of defendant No.6.
Mr Justin Barnes is also the CEO and owner of defendant No.3.

2.

The controversy between the parties is that the plaintiff, who

is an advocate, was engaged for services to be rendered to defendant
No.1. The case of the plaintiff is that his dues on account of professional
fees have not been cleared by the defendants.

Apart from this, the

plaintiff has also claimed damages from the defendants. The case of the
defendants is that the defendant No.6, which is an international firm of
trade mark attorneys and had been looking after the interests of
Defendant No.1, had dealt with the plaintiff for the purposes of filing
oppositions in respect of certain trade mark applications in India. The
said oppositions were to be filed by the plaintiff in respect of the trade
marks of the defendant No.1. It is also pertinent to note that initially the
plaintiffs' services had been engaged on behalf of Dunlop Slazenger
Group Limited. The latter company was acquired by the defendant No.1
in 2001. Mr Mike Ashley, who is sought to be summoned as one of the
witnesses, is the sole shareholder of the said defendant No.1 company. It
is pointed out by counsel appearing on both sides that initially, the

IA12232/07INCS(OS) 2085/2006

Page No.2 of 16

plaintiff had been engaged by the Dunlop Slazenger Group Limited.
Subsequently, on the acquisition by the defendant No.1, the plaintiff was
dealt with, on behalf of the defendant No.1, by defendant No.6. The
arrangement was terminated by the defendant No.6 sometime in June,
2006 and another firm of lawyers was appointed to represent

the

interests of the defendant No.1. The said termination and appointment of
the fresh set of attorneys was done by defendant No.6 acting for on
behalf of the defendant No.1.

3.

These are the background facts. Mr Amitabha Sen, who is the

plaintiff and has appeared in person, submits that there is no bar to
calling any person as a witness so as to bring out the truth in the case.
He referred to various decisions. The first decision referred to by him
was the case of Sardar Gurbakhsh Singh v. Gurdial Singh and
another: AIR 1927 Privy Council 230. This case was referred to by him
to highlight the fact that some times a party adopts a manoeuvre whereby
the party does not call essential witnesses but endeavours to force the
other party to call them and so suffer the discomfiture of having them
treated as their witnesses. He submitted that in this decision, the Privy
Council has deprecated

IA12232/07INCS(OS) 2085/2006

such a practice.

He submitted that the

Page No.3 of 16

defendants were adopting such a procedure and manoeuvre by not calling
Mr Mike Ashley and Peter Barnes as their witnesses. Insofar as Mr
Justin Barnes is concerned, he has been cited as a witness on behalf of
the defendants and, therefore, this application insofar as Mr Justin
Barnes is concerned, does not survive. The plaintiff would have the right
to cross-examine the said witness.

4.

The next decision referred to by Dr Sen was Salem Advocate

Bar Association, T.N. v. Union of India: (2003) 1 Supreme Court
Cases 49. The following passage was referred to.
“17. In Order 18, Rule 4 has been substituted and sub-rule (1)
provides that in every case examination-in-chief of the
witnesses shall be on affidavits and copies thereof shall be
supplied to the opposite parties by the party who calls them
for evidence. It was contended by Mr Vaidyanathan that it
may not be possible for the party calling the witness to
compel the witness to file an affidavit. It often happens that
the witness may not be under the control of the party who
wants to rely upon his evidence and that witness may have to
be summoned through court. Order 16 Rule 1 provides for
list of witnesses being filed and summons being issued to
them for being present in court for recording their evidence.
Rule 1-A, on the other hand, refers to production of witnesses
without summons where any party to the suit may bring any
witness to give any evidence or to produce documents.
Reading the provisions of Order 16 and Order 18 together, it
appears to us that Order 18 Rule 4 (1) will necessarily apply
to a case contemplated by Order 16 Rule 1-A i.e. where any
party to a suit, without applying for summoning under Rule 1
brings any witness to give evidence or produce any
IA12232/07INCS(OS) 2085/2006

Page No.4 of 16

documents. In such a case, examination-in-chief is not to be
recorded in court but shall be in the form of an affidavit.”
5.

Dr Sen then relied upon the decision of a learned single Judge

of the Gujarat High Court in Pushpaben Champaklal Shah & Another
v. Rikhavdev Tirthram Sharma & Others: AIR 2006 Gujarat 66,
wherein it was observed that “there is no express prohibition in
examining other side as witness.” It was also observed in this decision
that “ both the parties can examine such contesting party or witness”. It
must also be pointed out that in this very decision it is also indicated that
an application for summoning such a witness should not be granted as a
matter of course but at the appropriate stage the Court can pass such an
order keeping the facts of the case and the conduct of the contesting
parties in mind.

6.

In Sri Awadh Kishore Singh and Another v. Sri Brij Bihari

Singh and Others: AIR 1993 Patna 122, another decision relied upon by
Dr Sen, a Division Bench of the Patna High Court observed that no
provision could be brought to their notice on behalf of any of the parties
to show that a party is debarred from examining its adversary as a
witness on his behalf. The Court observed that a plaintiff can examine

IA12232/07INCS(OS) 2085/2006

Page No.5 of 16

any witness he so likes – the witness may be a stranger may be a man of
his own party or the party himself or may be a defendant or his man.
Therefore, if a plaintiff wants to examine a defendant as a witness on his
behalf, he cannot be precluded from examining him on the ground that
the said defendant has neither appeared in the suit nor, upon appearance,
filed a written statement. In V.K. Periasamy alias Perianna Gounder v.
D. Rajan: AIR 2001 Madras 410, a learned Single Judge of the Madras
High Court observed that there was no bar on the right of a party to
summon another party to give evidence as a witness. The learned Judge
was of the view that if there existed such a bar then the provision of
Order 16 Rule 21 would not have found place in the Code. It was
observed that the inclusion of this provision itself shows that there may
be situations where a party may be called upon by another to give
evidence as the latter's witness.

7.

Dr Sen then relied upon the decision of a learned Single Judge

in the case of Syed Yasin v. Syed Shaha Mohd. Hussain: AIR 1967
Mysore 37, wherein it was observed that a close examination of the
provisions of Order 16 of the Code leads to the conclusion that one party
can apply for the examination of the other party as a witness. It was also

IA12232/07INCS(OS) 2085/2006

Page No.6 of 16

noted that was no restriction in the Order 16 Rule 1 CPC against that and
that if the intention of the Legislature was to prohibit the examination of
one party by the other as his witness it would have stated so. It is also
significant to note that in the very same decision it has also been
observed that there was nothing on record to show that the application of
the petitioner was not bona fide or that it was vexatious or that it was an
abuse of the process of the Court. It was categorically noted that though
the party has a right to summon the other party to the suit and examine
him as a witness, it was open for the Court, if it came to the conclusion
that the said application was an abuse of the process of the Court, to
disallow such an application.

8.

Dr Sen also place reliance on paragraph 32 of the decision in

Salem Advocate Bar Association T.N. v. Union of India: (2005) 6 SCC
344. The said passage reads as under:
“32. Order 18 Rule 2 (4) which was inserted by Act 104 of
1976 has been omitted by Act 46 of 1999. Under the said
rule, the court could direct or permit any party, to examine
any party or any witness at any stage. The effect of
deletion is the restoration of the status quo ante. This
means that law that was prevalent prior to the 1976
amendment, would govern. The principles as noticed
hereinbefore in regard to deletion of Order 18 Rule 17 (a)
would apply to the deletion of this provision as well. Even
prior to the insertion of Order 18 Rule 2 (4), such a
IA12232/07INCS(OS) 2085/2006

Page No.7 of 16

permission could be granted by the court in its discretion.
The provision was inserted in 1976 by way of caution. The
omission of Order 18 Rule 2 (4) by the 1999 amendment
does not take away the court's inherent power to call for
any witness at any stage either suo motu or on the prayer of
a party invoking the inherent powers of the court.”
9.

He then submitted that the best evidence should be made

available to the Court so as to prove the facts or the points in issue. For
this proposition, he placed reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court
in the case of Mohanlal Shamjisoni v. Union of India and Another:
1991 Supp (1) SCC 271. The exact passage relied upon by Dr Sen was
as under:“10. It is a cardinal rule in the law of evidence that the best
available evidence should be brought before the court to
prove a fact or the points in issue. But it is left either for the
prosecution or for the defence to establish its respective case
by adducing the best available evidence and the court is not
empowered under the provisions of the Code to compel
either the prosecution or the defence to examine any
particular witness or witnesses on their sides. Nonetheless it
either of the parties withholds any evidence which could be
produced and which, if produced be unfavorable to the
party withholding such evidence, the court can draw a
presumption under Illustration (g) to Section 114 of the
Evidence Act. In such a situation a question that arises for
consideration is whether the presiding officer of a court
should simply sit as a mere umpire at a contest between two
parties and declare at the end of the combat who has won
and who has lost or is there not any legal duty of his own,
independent of the parties, to take an active role in the
proceedings in finding the truth and administering justice?”

IA12232/07INCS(OS) 2085/2006

Page No.8 of 16

10.

Finally, Dr Sen referred to the decision of the Supreme Court

in the case of Janki Vashdeo Bhojwani and Another v. Indusind Bank
Ltd. And Others: (2005) 2 SCC 217. The portions relied upon by him
read as under:“11. Dr. Singhvi, learned senior counsel appearing for the
respondent-bank vehemently contended that the appellants
did not grace the box to lead evidence but authorised Mr.
V.R. Bhojwani (power of attorney holder) to appear on
behalf of the appellants. Learned counsel contended that Mr.
Bhojwani was not an independent person to the litigation but
was a judgment debtor in the suit and a co-owner of the
property and there was a clash of interest between the
husband and wife and as such he could not have been
permitted to grace the box on behalf of the appellants. He
further contended that under Order III Rules 1 & 2 CPC a
power of attorney holder can appear, apply or act in any
court but such act cannot be extended to depose in the
witness box. He further submitted that in the present case a
power of attorney holder is not acting as a witness on behalf
of the principal but he is representing the principal himself.
He further contended that deposing in a witness box and
being cross- examined is a personal act and cannot be done
through an agent/power of attorney holder.
12. In the context of the directions given by this Court,
shifting the burden of proving on to the appellants that they
have a share in the property, it was obligatory on the
appellants to have entered the box and discharged the
burden by themselves. The question whether the appellants
have any independent source of income and have
contributed towards the purchase of the property from their
own independent income can be only answered by the
appellants themselves and not by a mere holder of power of
attorney from them. The power of attorney holder does not
have the personal knowledge of the matter of the appellants
and therefore he can neither depose on his personal
IA12232/07INCS(OS) 2085/2006

Page No.9 of 16

knowledge nor can he be cross-examined on those facts
which are to the personal knowledge of the principal.”

11.

Mr Rajiv Nayyar, the learned senior counsel appearing on

behalf of the defendants 1 to 6, submitted that the dealings of the
plaintiff have been with the defendant No.6. The defendant No.3 was an
agency of the defendant No. 6. Mr Justin Barnes (defendant No.2) was
the CEO of the defendant No.3 as also the partner in defendant No.6.
Defendant No. 5 was the accounts manager of Defendant No.6 and Mr
Peter Barnes (defendant No.4), apart from being Mr Justin Barnes' father,
was also a partner in defendant No. 6. He submitted that the defendants
2 to 6 are virtually the same entity and it is this entity which has
collectively and severally dealt with the plaintiff.

The services of

defendant No.6 had been engaged by the defendant No.1 and in turn the
defendant No. 6 had dealings with the plaintiff. He submitted that there
were no direct dealings between the plaintiff and the defendant No.1 or,
more particularly, Mr Mike Ashley, who was the sole shareholder of
defendant No.1. The four E-Mails on the basis of which the plaintiff
makes all his submissions, with regard to the involvement of Mr Mike
Ashley, were all post termination. He further submitted that the payment
for the services rendered by the plaintiff for the period prior to

IA12232/07INCS(OS) 2085/2006

Page No.10 of 16

termination were all made by the defendant No.6. The invoices for that
period were also raised by defendant No.6. The files were also handed
over by the plaintiff to the newly appointed attorneys on the instructions
of defendant No. 6 and the payment equivalent to U.S. $ 18290 was also
made to the plaintiff through the newly appointed attorneys (M/s Anand
& Anand). According to Mr Nayyar, the money had been placed at the
hands of M/s Anand & Anand for transfer under instructions from
defendant No. 6.

12.

Mr Nayyar, on the basis of the aforesaid submissions, stated

that the application was mala fide, it was vexatious and was an abuse of
the process of Court. He submitted that the sole objective behind calling
Mr Mike Ashley as a witness was to cause harassment to him. He
submits that whatever is known to defendants 2 to 6 shall be stated by Mr
Justin Barnes, who has already cited as a witness. Insofar as Mr Mike
Ashley is concerned, he had no direct dealing with the plaintiff and,
therefore, his deposition is not at all necessary for the purpose of arriving
at the truth. He referred to a few decisions. The first decision referred to
by Mr Nayyar was the case of Union of India v. M/s Orient Engg. &

IA12232/07INCS(OS) 2085/2006

Page No.11 of 16

Commercial Co. Ltd.: (1978) 1 SCC 10, wherein, in the context of
summoning of certain arbitrators, the Supreme Court observed:“It is not right that every one who is included in the witness
list is automatically summoned; but the true rule is that, if
grounds are made out for summoning a witness he will be
called; not if the demand is belated, vexatious or frivolous.
Thus the court also has not approached the question from the
proper perspective.”
The next decision referred to by Mr Nayyar was that of a learned Single
Judge of the Bombay High Court in the case of Pirgonda Hongonda v.
Vishwanath Ganesh and Others: AIR 1956 Bombay 251, wherein the
learned Judge had noted and observed that there has been a practice in
some of the Courts in India of calling the party's opponent as a witness
and they have observed that this practice is highly objectionable. The
Court observed that normally a party to the suit is expected to step into
the witness box in support of his own case and if the party does not
appear in the witness box it would be open to the trial Court to draw an
inference against him. It was further observed that if a party fails to
appear in the witness box, it should normally not be open to his opponent
to compel his presence by the issue of a witness summons. Mr Nayyar,
thereafter, referred to the decision of the Madras High Court in the case
of Union Bank of India v. Muthiah: (1999) 1 MLJ 679, wherein the
Court observed that it has been repeatedly held by various courts that the
IA12232/07INCS(OS) 2085/2006

Page No.12 of 16

practice of summoning an opposite party as a witness has to be
deprecated.

Lastly,

Mr Nayyar referred to another decision of the

Madras High Court in the case of Sri Aurobindo Ashram Trust and
another v Kamal Dora: AIR 2000 Madras 494, wherein the Court
summarised the legal position in the following words:
“9. So, the legal position is that a party who seeks for a
prayer to the Court to issue summons to a witness, must
reveal to the Court the purpose for which the witness is
proposed to be summoned. Once such an application is filed,
it is for the Court to use its discretion and to decide whether
summons are to be issued to those witnesses. It has to be
pointed out that the issue of summons is not automatic and in
appropriate cases or in cases where objections are raised, the
bona fides of the request has to be looked into and
appropriate orders passed.”

13.

After having considered the arguments advanced by the

counsel for the parties and having examined the decisions cited by them,
it is abundantly clear that while there is no bar to a party seeking the
summoning of another party in the same suit as his witness, it is also
clear that such an act is unusual and that it should only be permitted if
the application for summoning the opposite party is bona fide and is not
vexatious or an abuse of the process of the Court. Apart from this, there
is the standard question which the Court has to consider in the case of
summoning any witness as to whether it is necessary to summon the

IA12232/07INCS(OS) 2085/2006

Page No.13 of 16

witness for which the application has been moved. Order 16 Rule 1 (2)
CPC clearly stipulates that the party desirous of obtaining any summons
for the attendance of any person shall file in Court an application stating
therein the purpose for which the witness is proposed to be summoned.
This in itself indicates that it is not as if the Court has to allow every
application for summoning of a witness.

The party seeking the

summoning of a person as a witness has to specifically indicate the
purpose for which he or she is proposed to be summoned. It is obvious
that the Court has to apply its mind and exercise discretion in a judicial
manner.

14.

Considering the present application in the light of the legal

position indicated above, it is apparent that insofar as Mr Justin Barnes
is concerned, he is not at all required to be summoned as the plaintiff's
witness inasmuch as he has already listed as a witness on behalf of the
defendants. As regards Mr Peter Barnes, he is a partner in defendant
No.6 just as Mr Justin Barnes is a partner in defendant No.6. He also
happens to be a father of Mr Justin Barnes. It is for the defendants to
take the risk of not producing both the witnesses and, instead, only rely

IA12232/07INCS(OS) 2085/2006

Page No.14 of 16

upon the testimony of one of the two witnesses who are placed in
identical or, if not identical, similar set of circumstances.

15.

Coming now to the question of summoning Mr Mike Ashley,

I am in agreement with the submissions made by the learned counsel for
the defendants that Mr Mike Ashley, being the sole shareholder of the
defendant No.1 is being summoned perhaps with the object of putting
some pressure on him and allowing the application would not be in the
interest of justice. Apart from this, I find that there is nothing which has
been produced by the plaintiff to indicate that he had any direct dealings
with Mr Mike Ashley at any time during the currency of his engagement
on behalf of the defendant No.1 through defendant No. 6.

All the

dealings of defendant No.1 with the plaintiff have been through
defendant No.6 and the other associated defendants, being defendants 2
to 5. It is clear that summoning by an opposite party witness or an
opposite party is an unusual step and should be allowed only where
exceptional circumstances are shown. No such circumstances exist in
this case.

IA12232/07INCS(OS) 2085/2006

Page No.15 of 16

16.

Thus, both on the point of propriety as well as on the point of

standard criteria for summoning of a witness, I am not in agreement with
the submissions of the plaintiff and this application is, accordingly,
rejected.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
February 04, 2008
J

IA12232/07INCS(OS) 2085/2006

Page No.16 of 16

