THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 07.02.2008

+

IA.Nos. 11702/2007 & 12433/2007 in CS(OS) 2015/2007

M/S MICOLUBE INDIA LTD

... Plaintiff
- versus -

MAGGON AUTO CENTRE & ANOTHER

... Defendants

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Plaintiff
: Mr S.K. Bansal with Mr K.G. Bansal.
For the Defendant No.2 : Mr Sandeep Sethi, Sr Advocate with Mr Jawaharlal
and Mr Kalyan V.

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ? Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J
1.

This order shall dispose of IA. No. 11702/2007 filed under

Section 39 Rules 1 and 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 on behalf of
the plaintiff as well as IA. No. 12433/2007 which has been filed on behalf
of the defendant No.2 under Order 39 Rule 4 CPC. The question involved
in the present suit is with regard to the use of the mark MICO in relation to
petroleum products including oils, greases and lubricants for automotive
vehicles and automobiles, including engine oils, gear oils, tractor oils, 2T
oils, transmission and hydraulic fluids and coolants.

IA.Nos12433.07&11702/2007 in CS(OS) 2015/2007

Page No.1 of 29

2.

On 09.10.2007, when the suit had come up for admission and the

plaintiff's application for ex parte injunction was taken up by this court, it
was contended by the learned counsel for the plaintiff that the mark MICO
has been used by the plaintiff since 1960 in respect of the said petroleum
products and that the same stands registered in the plaintiff's name as of
12.02.1985. The plaintiff has two registrations – one in respect of the trade
mark MICO and the second in respect of the label mark which includes the
word MICO. It was also contended by the learned counsel for the plaintiff
that the word MICO also forms a key and vital part of the plaintiff's
cooperate name MICOLUBE INDIA LIMITED. It was further submitted
that the plaintiff came to know in September, 2007 that the defendant No.2
had started manufacturing lubricants from Bangalore using the trademark
MICO and that the defendant No.1 is the dealer of defendant No.2 though
the exact connection was unknown. On the basis of these submissions, this
court passed the following ex parte ad interim orders:
“The defendants are restrained from using, selling, soliciting,
exporting, displaying, advertising by visual, audio, print mode
or by any other mode or manner or deal in or use the
impugned trademark/ label “MICO” or any other identical
and/ or deceptively similar word/ mark/ label in relation to
lubricants, petroleum products including engine oil, gear oil.
The defendants are also restrained from doing any other acts
or deeds amounting to or likely to infringe the registered
trademark of the plaintiff No. 433800 and 433801 in class 04
as also from passing off their goods as those of the plaintiff.”
3.

The learned counsel, appearing on behalf of the defendant No.2,

submitted that the plaintiff had not come to court with clean hands and has
been guilty of suppression and / or concealment of material facts. It was
IA.Nos12433.07&11702/2007 in CS(OS) 2015/2007

Page No.2 of 29

also contended that the plaintiff's conduct has been dishonest. First of all,
it was stated that the plaintiff did not disclose in the plaint that the
defendant No.2 also has a trade mark registration in respect of MICO in
class 4 itself.

The application for such a registration was made on

06.01.2004 and was allowed on 17.10.2005. The defendant's registration in
class 4 is under No. 1259864. He submitted that this fact was not at all
disclosed in the plaint with a view to mislead this court into passing the
order that it did on 09.10.2007 and that, on this ground alone, the said order
is liable to be vacated.

4.

It was further contended on behalf of the learned counsel for the

defendant No.2 that, in any event, apart from the question of concealment
and suppression, such an injunction cannot be granted against the defendant
No.2 in view of the specific provisions of Section 28(3) of the Trade Marks
Act, 1999. It was contended that the plaintiff being the holder of the
registered trade mark MICO could not seek exclusivity against the
defendant No.2 which was also the holder of the registered trade mark
MICO in the same class of goods. He submitted that both the plaintiff and
the defendant No.2 could restrain the third party from using the mark MICO
but they could not claim any right of exclusivity in respect of each other.

IA.Nos12433.07&11702/2007 in CS(OS) 2015/2007

Page No.3 of 29

5.

Faced with this situation, the learned counsel for the plaintiff

submitted that the action brought by the plaintiff is not merely of
infringement of a trademark under the provisions of the Trade Marks Act,
1999 but is also one of passing off. He submitted, with reference to the
decision of the Supreme Court in the case of N.R. Dongre and Others v
Whirlpool Corporation and Others : AIR 1995 DELHI 300, that a passing
off action can be brought by a prior user even against a registered holder of
a trademark.

He placed reliance on paragraphs 29 and 30 of the said

decision which read as under:“29. According to section 28(1) of the Act, registration
of a trade mark gives to the registered proprietor thereof
exclusive right to use the same in relation to the goods in
respect of which it has been registered. But from the
opening words of section 28(1) namely, "subject to other
provisions" it is clear that the right conferred on a trader
is not an indefeasible right as the same is expressly made
subject to other provisions of the Act. This is further,
made clear by section 27(2) of the Act, which provides
that " nothing in this Act shall he deemed to affect the
right of action against any person for passing off the
goods as goods of another person or the remedies in
respect thereof." Thus it is manifest that Section 28 of
the Act and all other provisions come within the over
riding sway of section 27(2) of the Act. Similarly section
33 of the Act also saves vested rights of a prior user. It
lays down that nothing in the Act shall entitle a
registered proprietor of a trade mark to interfere with the
use of the trade mark by a prior user of the same. Thus
the right created by section 28(1) of the Act in favour of
a registered proprietor of a trade mark is not an absolute
right and is subservient to other provisions of the Act
namely sections 27(2), 33 etc. Neither section 28 nor any
other provision of the Act bars an action for passing off
by an anterior user of a trade mark against a registered
user of the same. In other words registration of a trade
mark does not provide a defence to the proceedings for
passing off as under section 27(2) of the Act a prior user
IA.Nos12433.07&11702/2007 in CS(OS) 2015/2007

Page No.4 of 29

of a trade mark can maintain an action for passing off
against any subsequent user of an identical trade mark
including a registered user thereof. Again this right is
not affected by section 31 of the Act, under which the
only presumption that follows from registration of a
mark is its prima facie evidentiary value about its
validity and nothing more. This presumption is not an
unrebuttable one and can be displaced. Besides section
31 is not immune to the over-riding effect of section
27(2). Placing reliance on section 28(3) of the Act the
learned counsel for the appellant contended that when
two registered proprietors of identical or near similar
trade marks cannot be deemed to have acquired
exclusive right to the use of any of those trade marks
against each other, how can an unregistered user of the
trade mark maintain an action for passing off against a
registered user of the same mark and seek an injunction
restraining him from using it. This argument of the
learned counsel seems to stem from a misconception
about the real purpose and intent of section 28(3).
Actually section 28(3) protects registered proprietor of a
trade mark from an infringement action by another
registered proprietor of an identical or near similar trade
mark. In this regard it will also be necessary to extract
Section 28(3) and section 30(1)(d) which carries out the
intent of section 28(3). These sections read as under:"28(3) Where two or more persons are registered
proprietors of trade marks, which are identical with or
nearly resemble each other, the exclusive right to the use
of any of those trade marks shall not (except so far as
their respective rights are subject to any conditions or
limitations entered on the register) be deemed to have
been acquired by any one of those persons as against any
other of those persons merely by registration of the trade
marks but each of those persons has otherwise the same
rights as against other persons (not being registered
users using by way of permitted use) as he would have if
he were the sole registered proprietor.
30(l)(d). Notwithstanding anything contained in this
Act, the following acts do not constitute an infringement
of the right to the use of a registered trademark.............the use of a registered trade mark,
being, one of two or more trade marks registered under
this Act which are identical or nearly resemble each
IA.Nos12433.07&11702/2007 in CS(OS) 2015/2007

Page No.5 of 29

other, in exercise of the right to the use of that trade
mark given by registration under this Act." '
A reading of section 28(3) with section
30(l)(d) shows that the proprietor of a registered trade
mark cannot file an infringement action against a
proprietor of an identical or a similar trade mark. While
sections 28(3) and 30(l)(d) on the one hand deal with the
rights of registered proprietors of identical trade marks
and bar action of infringement against each other,
section 27(2) on the other hand deals with the passing
off action. The rights of action under section 27(2) are
not affected by section 28(3) and section 30(l)(d).
Therefore, registration of a trade mark under the Act
would be irrelevant in an action for passing off.
Registration of a trade mark in fact does not confer any
new right on the proprietor thereof than what already
existed at common law without registration of the mark.
The right of goodwill and reputation in a trade mark was
recognised at common law even before it was subject of
statutory law. Prior to codification of trade mark law
there was no provision in India for registration of a trade
mark. The right in a trade mark was acquired only by use
thereof. This right has not been affected by the Act and
is preserved and recognised by sections 27(2) and 33.
(30) The law of 'passing off' as it has developed, permits
an action against a registered proprietor of a trade mark
for its mendacious use for inducing and misleading the
consumers into thinking that his goods are the goods of
or are connected with the goods of a prior user of the
trade mark. It seems to us that in so far as this Court is
concerned, this position cannot be disputed in view of
the judgment of the Division Bench in Century Traders
vs. Roshan Lal Duggar & Co. 1978, Delhi 250 where,
while construing sections 27(2) and 106 of the Act, it
was held as follows:"From a reading of the above sections it is
clear that registration of mark in the trade mark registry
would be irrelevant in an action for passing off.
Thus, the law is pretty well settled that in
order to succeed at this stage the appellant had to
establish user of the aforesaid mark prior in point of time
than the impugned user by the respondents. The
IA.Nos12433.07&11702/2007 in CS(OS) 2015/2007

Page No.6 of 29

registration of the said mark or similar mark prior in
point of time to user by the appellant is irrelevant in an
action for passing off and the mere presence of the mark
in the register maintained by the trade mark registry did
not prove its user by the persons in whose names the
mark was registered and was irrelevant for the purposes
of deciding the application for interim injunction unless
evidence had been led or was available of user of the
registered trade marks. In our opinion, these clear rules
of law were not kept in view by the learned single Judge
and led him to, commit an error."
6.

Considering the submissions made by the parties up to this point

and the observations of the Supreme Court in the case of Whirlpool (supra),
it is apparent that the injunction order passed on 09.10.2007 cannot stand
against the defendant merely on the basis of an infringement action. But if
the plaintiff is able to establish his case under the common law right of
passing off then an injunction can be granted in favour of the plaintiff.

7.

Insofar as the passing off action is concerned, the learned

counsel for the plaintiff submitted that the plaintiff had adopted the mark
MICO in 1960 in respect of its lubricants and petroleum products. There is
no dispute that in this field the plaintiff is the prior user. He submitted that
the plaintiff has been using the said mark openly and exclusively as would
be apparent from the series of advertisements that have been filed by the
plaintiff along with the plaint. The advertisements, prima facie, do indicate
that the plaintiff had been openly advertising the same since the 1980s even
in Bangalore where the defendant No.2's registered office is situated. He
submitted that because of long user, the mark has become distinctive of the
IA.Nos12433.07&11702/2007 in CS(OS) 2015/2007

Page No.7 of 29

plaintiff's goods. He submitted that these averments have been made in the
plaint. On the other hand, the defendant's user in respect of the mark MICO
has been admitted by the defendant only from February, 2007. The learned
counsel for the plaintiff submitted that there is no dispute with regard to the
user of the trademark MICO by the defendant No.2 in respect of the other
automotive parts and the goods which fall under classes 7, 9 and 12. The
question, in the present proceeding, is limited to the user of the mark in
respect of lubricants which fall under class 4. He submits that insofar as
this category of goods is concerned, the admitted position is that the
plaintiff is the prior user and there has been continuous and long user on the
part of the plaintiff and that the defendant No.2 is only a new entrant which,
as per the defendant's own admission, is from February, 2007.

8.

The learned counsel for the plaintiff then referred to the decision

of a learned Single Judge of this court in the case of Sona Spices Pvt. Ltd.
v. Soongachi Tea Industries Pvt. Ltd : 2007 (34) PTC 91 Delhi. In that
case, the plaintiffs were the owners of the registered trade mark SONA in
respect of spices which fell under class 30. They were also the prior users
of the said trademark in respect of spices. The defendant, on the other hand,
was the registered proprietor of the trademark SONA in respect of the tea
which fell under class 30. The defendant was also the prior user of the said
trademark in respect of tea. The plaintiffs had ventured into the business of
tea. The defendant had filed a cross suit and in that cross suit, filed by the

IA.Nos12433.07&11702/2007 in CS(OS) 2015/2007

Page No.8 of 29

defendant, the court had restrained the plaintiff from using the mark SONA
in respect of tea although it was a prior user in respect of the spices and a
registered user in respect thereof. However, the learned counsel for the
defendant No.2 drew my attention to paragraph 18 of the said decision
which reads as under :
“18. It may be noted that it is not as if the Defendant is
trying to pass off its goods as those of the Plaintiff. The
Defendant is an independent manufacturer of tea and is an
established player in the market. There is nothing to
suggest, at least so far, that any person has been misled into
believing that the tea sold by the Defendant is actually being
passed off as the tea manufactured by the Plaintiff. Indeed,
from the facts presented before me, it appears that such an
eventuality is quite unlikely. The Plaintiff has a limited
territorial market even in respect of spices and there is
nothing to suggest that tea manufactured by the Plaintiff is
well recognized even within the existing market of the
Plaintiff. Therefore, the question of any consumer being
misled into believing that tea manufactured by the
Defendant is actually being passed off as tea manufactured
by the Plaintiff would not arise, particularly in the absence
of any evidence in this regard.”
9.

He lay emphasis on the fact that, before any passing off action

can be established, there must be evidence or material to show that any
consumer was being misled into believing that the goods of one are being
passed off as the goods of other.

In the aforementioned observations in

Sona Spices Pvt Limited (supra), it was noted that the question of any
consumer being misled into believing that the tea manufactured by the
Defendant was actually being passed off as tea manufactured by the
Plaintiff would not arise and it is for this reason that the court restrained the
plaintiff from using Trademark “Sona” in respect of tea, although the

IA.Nos12433.07&11702/2007 in CS(OS) 2015/2007

Page No.9 of 29

plaintiff was the registered proprietor of the mark “Sona” in respect of
spices much earlier. It was also submitted that the sales of the defendant in
that case in respect of the tea was much more than that of the plaintiff.

10.

The learned counsel for the plaintiff then referred to the English

decision in the case of Provident financial PLC and Another v Halifax
Building Society : 1994 Fleet Street Reports 81 (ChD). This was a case
where the plaintiff No. 2 was in the motor insurance business and was
using the trademark “Halifax” since 1966. The defendant, on the other
hand, was a building society and was in that business since 1928 and was
also using the mark “the Halifax” as well as “the Halifax Building Society”.
The defendant subsequently ventured into the business of building and
house contents insurance and ultimately expanded this business to motor
vehicle insurance in 1992.

The plaintiff was aggrieved by this and

complained about the use of the mark “the Halifax” in respect of the motor
insurance business. The court injuncted the defendant in that case from
venturing into the motor insurance business from using the mark “Halifax”.
Various observations were made in the said decision. However, the most
material observations to my mind are contained at pages 95, 96 and 97. The
said observations are as under:
“Passing Off
The plaintiff submitted that over the last 25 years
of trading, it had built up a substantial reputation amongst
people engaged in the insurance trade and, to a limited extent
amongst the public, as a company providing motor insurance.
IA.Nos12433.07&11702/2007 in CS(OS) 2015/2007

Page No.10 of 29

That reputation had been built up using the name Halifax
Insurance and the name Halifax. It submitted that the
defendant by moving into the motor insurance business using
the X logo and its name was misrepresenting to a substantial
section of the public that the defendant was connected or in
some way associated with the plaintiff. That, it was
submitted, would damage the plaintiff because of loss of
business, damage to reputation and erosion of goodwill.
Thus, it was submitted that the five characteristics of passing
off, identified by Lord Diplock in Erven Warnink Besloten
Vennootschap and Another v J. Townend & Sons (Hull) Ltd.
and Another [1979] A.C. 731, at 742, were present:
My Lords, A.G. Spalding & Bros. v A.W. Gamage
Ltd. 84 L.J.Ch.449 and the later cases make it
possible to identify five characteristics which must
be present in order to create a valid cause of action
for passing off : (1) a misrepresentation (2) made by
a trader in the course of trade, (3) to prospective
customers of his or ultimate consumers of goods or
services supplied by him, (4) which is calculated to
injure the business of goodwill of another trader (in
the sense that this is a reasonably foreseeable
consequence) and (5) which causes actual damage
to a business or goodwill of the trade by whom the
action is brought or (in a quia timet action) will
probably do so.”
xxxx

xxxx

xxxx

xxxx

xxxx

“The first two characteristics require the court to
identify a misrepresentation made by the defendant in its
literature in exhibit ACJ20. The submission that such a
misrepresentation exists is supported by the affidavits of
brokers and the public filed on behalf the plaintiff, to which I
have already referred.
The defendant submitted that no such
misrepresentation was made as the plaintiff had no reputation.
To support that submission, the defendant commissioned a
survey which was carried out by Gordon Simmons Research
Group Limited. The results of that survey were set out in Mr
Gordon's affidavit. That survey was criticised by Mr. Vicken
in his affidavit with, I believe, justification. However, I will
disregard those criticisms. The results do not help the
defendant's case. The 841 people surveyed were shown a
IA.Nos12433.07&11702/2007 in CS(OS) 2015/2007

Page No.11 of 29

copy of one of the plaintiff's leaflets and were asked. “Who
do you think is offering this service?”. Further questions
were asked to try and clarify the answers given . According
to the conclusion drawn by Mr Gordon, over 60 per cent of
those surveyed thought that the service referred to in the
plaintiff's leaflet was being offered by the defendant. Thus
pesons seeing the plaintiff's literature believed that there was
a connection between the plaintiff and the defendant. It is not
possible to find out whether any of the 841 interviewed had
ever heard of the plaintiff before. Thus it does not throw
doubt upon the evidence filed by the plaintiff to the effect that
persons who know of or had heard of the plaintiff believed
that there were two separate companies using the word
“Halifax” as part of their titles, but when they saw that the
defendant was offering motor insurance, they concluded that
the two companies were associated or connected.
Clearly, there is a dispute as to the extent of the
plaintiff's reputation, but in the light of the plaintiff's
activities since 1966, I cannot conclude that it does not
reasonably arguably have a sufficient reputation.
The plaintiff, I believe, accepted that once the
defendant started to expand its activities, confusion
between the two companies became more likely.
However, it believes that its reputation and goodwill in
motor insurance should not be swamped and crushed by
the plaintiff. The plaintiff believes that if the defendant is
allowed to move into motor insurance, the defendant will
misrepresent that the parties were and are in some way
connected and that is calculated to cause the plaintiff
damage. If so, the plaintiff's rights will have been
infringed. I believe that such a case is reasonably
arguable and it is not possible on motion to decide the
issues of fact implicit in the parties' submissions.
I therefore turn to consider whether damages
would be adequate compensation for the plaintiff. It it be
assumed that the defendant will pending trial, offer motor
insurance thereby misrepresenting that the parties are
connect, I believe that damages would not properly
compensate the plaintiff. First, prospective customers of
the plaintiff, either attracted by avertising or by
recommendation, would be lost to the defendant. I would
not be possible to estimate how many of such customers
of the defendant fell within that category. Secondly, the
IA.Nos12433.07&11702/2007 in CS(OS) 2015/2007

Page No.12 of 29

plaintiff is dependent upon the goodwill of its brokers and
therefore has a policy of never dealing direct with the
public. The defendant's literature could lead brokers to
assume that the plaintiff and the defendant were connected
and the plaintiff was not dealing direct. That would affect
the plaintiff's relationship with brokers and would be
likely to cause damage. Thirdly, there is evidence that the
plaintiff might have to change its name. That, at the
moment, is speculative, but the plaintiff would seriously
have to reconsider its advertising policy. There would
seem little point in arranging radio commercials if a
substantial section of the public attracted by the
advertising would go to the defendant for their insurance.
Fourthly, the defendant is so large that I anticipate its
reputation will tend to swamp that of the plaintiff. Any
goodwill the plaintiff has at the moment will be subsumed
into the defendant's goodwill.”
11.

Apart from this, the learned counsel for the defendant No.2 also

submitted that the circumstances in which the said decision was rendered
ought to be noted. The circumstances being that the material had been
produced before the court in the form of evidence from the broker with
regard to the possibility of deception and secondly a survey was conducted
which covered 841 persons, as already noted in the above quoted
observation, to show that there was likelihood of deception and likelihood
of the defendant passing off its goods and services as those of the plaintiff
which, in that case, was the motor insurance business.

12.

The learned counsel for the plaintiff referred to a decision of a

Division Bench of this court in the case of Shri Swaran Singh Trading as
Appliances Emporium v M/s Usha Industries (India) and Another : 1986
PTC 287. The said decision was relied upon for the proposition that one

IA.Nos12433.07&11702/2007 in CS(OS) 2015/2007

Page No.13 of 29

mark can be used by different persons for different goods. In that case, the
court had permitted the use of the trademark “Usha” by the plaintiff and the
defendant but for different categories of goods. This decision was cited by
the learned counsel for the plaintiff for advancing the arguments that while
the defendant No.2 could use the mark MICO in respect of other classes of
goods for which it was using except in the case of lubricants for which the
plaintiff was the prior user. He was, therefore, suggesting that the plaintiff
had the exclusive right to use the word MICO in respect of the lubricants
irrespective of the fact that the defendant No.2 had the exclusive right to use
the trademark MICO in respect of other products. The learned counsel for
the defendant No.2 submitted that there was no dispute with the proposition
in general. However, the plaintiff had to establish that it had a right under a
passing off action to exclusive use of the mark MICO even in respect of the
lubricants. According to the learned counsel appearing for the defendant
No.2, the plaintiff had failed to establish such a case.

13.

The learned counsel for the plaintiff then referred to the decision

of the Bombay High Court in the case of Bal Pharma Ltd v Centaur
Laboratories Pvt Ltd & Anr : 2002 (24) PTC 226 (Bom) (DB) and,
particularly, referred to paragraph 9 thereof for the proposition that the
defendant No.2 ought to have been aware of the plaintiff's registration of the
mark MICO because the plaintiff's registration in respect of the lubricants
falling under class 4 was prior in time. Therefore, it can be inferred that the

IA.Nos12433.07&11702/2007 in CS(OS) 2015/2007

Page No.14 of 29

defendant No.2 being aware of the plaintiff's user of the mark permitted the
plaintiff to continue to use the mark without any hindrance and, in fact, had
not taken any action against the plaintiff. It is the plaintiff who has come to
court for an injunction against the defendant No.2.

14.

The learned counsel for the defendant No.2, with reference to the

decision in Bal Pharma Ltd (supra) submitted that the said case is entirely
different as it involved an action by a registered proprietor of a trademark
against a non registered user of the trademark. The case also involved the
question of concurrent user and not of passing off as such. Therefore, he
contended that the decision would be of no application in the facts of the
present case. The learned counsel for the plaintiff, however, submitted that
he was only relying on the principle.

15.

Mr Sethi, the learned senior counsel, who appeared for the

defendant No.2 submitted, with reference to the order dated 09.10.2007, that
the same, upon a plain reading, would clearly indicate that it was passed
merely on the basis of the fact that the plaintiff had stated that it was the
registered proprietor of the trademark MICO. He submitted that had the
fact of the defendant's registration in respect of the very same mark in class
4 also be made known to this court then the order dated 09.10.2007, in all
probability, would not have been passed by this court. The learned counsel
for the defendant No.2 also submitted that the plea of passing off has not

IA.Nos12433.07&11702/2007 in CS(OS) 2015/2007

Page No.15 of 29

been taken in the manner in which it should be. He submitted that the plaint
has been drafted in such a manner as if to appear as an action for
infringement of the trademark and the pleas with regard to passing off have
been taken incidentally as is the usual practice in such suits. He submitted
that the foundation for an action of passing off has not been laid in the
plaint.

The learned counsel also took objection on the ground of

concealment. He submitted that the plaintiff was aware of the defendant
No. 2's registration under class 4 and yet withheld this information from the
court. He further submitted that even if it is assumed for the sake of
argument that the plaintiff did not know about the registration of the
trademark in favour of the defendant No.2 under clause 4, before a plaint is
instituted in the court for an infringement action, it is incumbent upon the
plaintiff to carry out a search to see as to whether there is any trademark
registered in the name of the defendant. He submitted that the plaintiff is
duty bound to carry out such a search because on the basis of averments
made in the plaint, he is requesting the court to pass an ex parte order of
injunction which would have serious ramifications and which could even
lead to ruination of the defendant's business and goodwill. It was, therefore,
contended that although for the sake of argument, it may be assumed that
the plaintiff was not aware of the defendant No.2's registration, before the
plaint was filed, he ought to have definitely carried out a search and ought
to have then known that the defendant No.2 had a registration in its favour.
Consequently, it was submitted that the manner in which the plaint has been

IA.Nos12433.07&11702/2007 in CS(OS) 2015/2007

Page No.16 of 29

styled and the factum that the registration of the defendant No.2's mark
under class 4 has not been disclosed to this court, would itself disentitle the
plaintiff from seeking any equitable relief including that of injunction based
on alleged passing off.

16.

Mr Sethi further submitted that the manner in which the parties

have been mentioned in the memo of parties also discloses the plaintiff's
intention to deceive. He submitted that the principal party in the present
action is the defendant No.2 i.e., Motor Industries Company Limited ( an
acronym of which is MICO). The said company has not been arrayed as
defendant No.1 but as defendant No.2. The defendant No.1 is one Maggon
Auto Centre which is merely a dealer of the defendant No.2. He submitted
that when the counsel go through the cause list of the court, only the name
of the defendant No.1 appears and even the cause list of the day discloses
the case as Micolube India Ltd v Maggon Auto Centre and the name of the
defendant No.2 does not figure in the daily cause list of the court. This
being the case, it would be impossible for the representatives of the
defendant No.2 and / or its retained counsel to scan the list and to become
aware of any litigation concerning them. He submitted that had the name of
defendant No.2 been shown as defendant No.1 then somebody might have
been present on the very first day to draw the notice of this court to the fact
that the mark also stands registered in the name of the defendant No.2 in
class 4. He submitted that all these factors cumulatively go to show that the

IA.Nos12433.07&11702/2007 in CS(OS) 2015/2007

Page No.17 of 29

plaintiff did not approach this court with clean hands and has managed to
get an order of ex parte ad interim order in its favour by withhelding the
material information.

17.

Mr Sethi further submitted that the entire case that is sought to

be built up on the ground of passing off by the plaintiff in the course of
hearing has not even been pleaded. He also submitted that reliance of the
learned counsel for the plaintiff on the case of Provident financial PLC
(supra) and the argument in respect of a large player versus a smaller player
has been built merely on the basis of oral submissions and is not supported
by any pleadings. He submitted that it might have been entirely a different
case had the plaintiff come to court honestly and stated that the defendant
No.2 is an established concern and has several registered trademarks under
several categories and that the trademark of the defendant would fall within
the definition of well known trademark as indicated in Section 2(2g) of the
Trade Marks Act, 1999. He submitted that the plaintiff's case ought to have
been that although the defendant No.2 has trademark registrations in respect
of the mark MICO which is known worldwide, the same pertain only to
other commodities and goods which do not fall within class 4. The plaintiff
ought to have stated that because of the size of defendant No.2 and its late
entry into the field of lubricants, the plaintiff feared that it would be
swamped out and that such an action would be deceitful on the part of the
defendant No.2. It is only if such averments were contained in the plaint

IA.Nos12433.07&11702/2007 in CS(OS) 2015/2007

Page No.18 of 29

that the plaintiff could raise the arguments of it being swamped as is sought
to be raised in the course of the hearing, but according to the learned
counsel for the defendant No.2 no such pleas have been taken in the plaint.
And, therefore, no amount of arguments can fill in this lacuna.

18.

It was then contended by the learned counsel for the defendant

No.2 that the adoption of the mark MICO by the defendant is not something
which is dishonest or unnatural. The defendant's corporate name is Motor
Industries Company Ltd and MICO is merely an acronym. Secondly, he
submitted that MICO is a well known brand, particularly, in respect of spark
plugs in India as well as abroad and that MICO has been registered in India
in the defendant No.2's name since 1953 in several classes. He submitted
that it cannot be possible that the plaintiff was unaware of these
registrations and the use of the mark by the defendant No.2. Referring to
the case in Provident financial PLC (supra), the learned counsel drew the
attention of the court once again to the five principles which are necessary
for a passing off action as indicated in page 95 thereof. He submitted that
these principles have also been reiterated by the Supreme Court in the case
of Cadila Health Care Ltd v Cadila Pharmaceuticals Ltd : (2001) 5 SCC
73 at page 80 wherein the Supreme Court observed as under :
“As per Lord Diplock in Erven Warnink BV v J. Townend &
Sons the modern tort of passing off has five elements i.e. (1)
a misrepresentation, (2) made by a trader in the course of
trade, (3) to prospective customers of his or ultimate
consumers of goods or services supplied by him, (4) which is
calculated to injure the business or goodwill of another trader
IA.Nos12433.07&11702/2007 in CS(OS) 2015/2007

Page No.19 of 29

(in the sense that this is a reasonably foreseeable
consequence), and (5) which causes actual damage to a
business or goodwill of the trader by whom the action is
brought or (in a quia timet action) will probably do so.”
19.

Similar observations have been made by the Supreme Court in

the case of Wander Ltd and Another v Antox india P Ltd : 1990 (Supp)
SCC 727 in paragraph 16 which reads as under :
“An infringement action is available where there is
violation of specific property-right acquired under and
recognised by the statute. In a passing-off action,
however, the plaintiff's right is independent of such a
statutory right to a trade mark and is against the conduct
of the defendant which lends to or is intended or
calculated to lead to deception. Passing-off is said to be a
species of unfair trade competition or of actionable unfair
trading by which one person, through deception, attempts
to obtain an economic benefit of the reputation which
another has established for himself in a particular trade or
business. The action is regarded as an action for deceit.
The tort of passing-off involves a misrepresentation made
by a trader to his prospective customers calculated to
injure, as a reasonably foreseeable consequence, the
business or goodwill of another which actually or
probably, causes damage to the business or goodwill of
the other trader. Speaking of the legal classification of this
form of action, Lord Diplock said :
Unfair trading as a wrong actionable at the suit of
other traders who thereby suffer loss of business
or goodwill may take a variety of forms to some
of which separate lables have become attached in
English law. Conspiracy to injure a person in his
trade or business is one, slander of goods another
but most protean is that which is generally and
nowadays, perhaps misleadingly, described as
"passing off". The form that unfair trading takes
will alter with the ways in which trade is carried
on and business reputation and goodwill acquired.
Emerson's maker of the better mousetrap if
secluded in his house built in the woods would
today be unlikely to find a path beaten to his door
in the absence of a costly advertising campaign to
IA.Nos12433.07&11702/2007 in CS(OS) 2015/2007

Page No.20 of 29

acquaint the public with the excellence of his
wares".3
20.

At this juncture, the learned counsel for the plaintiff submitted

that he also relies upon certain observations made in this very judgment
which are to be found in paragraph 9 thereof which reads as under :
“5.

21.

Usually, the prayer for grant of an interlocutory
injunction is at a stage when the existence of the legal
right asserted by the plaintiff and its alleged violation are
both contested and uncertain and remain uncertain till
they are established at the trial on evidence. The court, at
this stage, acts on certain well settled principles of
administration of this form of interlocutory remedy
which is both temporary and discretionary. The object of
the interlocutory injunction, it is stated
“...... is to protect the plaintiff against injury by violation
of his rights for which he could not adequately be
compensated in damages recoverable in the action if the
uncertainty were resolved in his favour at the trial. The
need for such protection must be weighed against the
corresponding need of the defendant to be protected
against injury resulting from his having been prevented
from exercising his own legal rights for which he could
not be adequately compensated. The court must weigh
one need against another and determine where the
"balance of convenience lies". The interlocutory remedy
is intended to preserve in status quo, the rights of parties
which may appear on a prima facie. The court also, in
restraining a defendant from exercising what he
considers his legal right but what the plaintiff would like
to be prevented, puts into the scales, as a relevant
consideration whether the defendant has yet to
commence his enterprise or whether he has already been
doing so in which latter case considerations somewhat
different from those that apply to a case where the
defendant is yet to commence his enterprise, are
attracted.”
The learned counsel for the defendant No.2 submitted that the

essential feature of a passing off action is that one party must attempt to
3.

See Erven Warnink v. J. Townend & Sons (Hull) Ltd. 1979 AC 731, 740 (1979) 2 All.

IA.Nos12433.07&11702/2007 in CS(OS) 2015/2007

Page No.21 of 29

pass off his goods as those belonging to and identifiable with another. He
submitted that no evidence whatsoever has been produced by the plaintiff to
indicate as to how the defendant No.2 has passed off its goods as those of
the plaintiff. He submitted that unless there is material to show that the
defendant No.2 had or intends to pass off its goods as those of the plaintiff,
no

action for passing off can be maintained.

In this connection, he

submitted that the defendant No.2 is a very large concern having sales of Rs
3783 crores in India in respect of its other automotive products. There is
also no doubt that the defendant No.2 is a new entrant in the field of
lubricants but there is no doubt that it has a large presence in the automotive
industry since 1951 and that its mark MICO is identifiable and distinctive of
its products. The learned counsel for the defendant No.2 also submitted that
the defendant No.2 is a subsidiary of Robert Bosch GmBH which is a
company registered in Germany and which has a worldwide turnover of
Euro 43.7 billion. He, therefore, submitted that, in this background, it is
difficult to conceive that the defendant No.2 is trying to pass off its goods as
those of the plaintiff whose market presence and extent of sales is also
unclear inasmuch as there has been no mention of it by the plaintiff.

22.

Based on these submissions, the key questions that arise for

determination are:
(1)

Whether the plaintiff has concealed and/or suppressed material
facts from this court ? If so, its effect ?

IA.Nos12433.07&11702/2007 in CS(OS) 2015/2007

Page No.22 of 29

(2)

Whether the plaintiff, prima facie, has been able to establish
the existence of the ingredients of a passing off action as
discussed above?

Question No.1:
23.

With regard to the question of concealment and / or suppression

of the material facts from this court, it is pertinent to note that in paragraph
20 of the plaint, it is averred that the defendant is not the proprietor of the
trademark 'MICO' and has adopted the same in relation to the impugned
goods (lubricants) in the course of the trade without the leave and licence of
the plaintiff. It is also averred that the defendants have no right to use the
said mark in any manner in relation to the impugned goods and business and
such user would be in violation of the plaintiff's rights therein.

The

impression one gets by reading the said paragraph as well as the other
averments contained in the plaint is that while the plaintiff is the registered
proprietor of the trademark 'MICO' under class 4 which includes lubricants,
the defendants do no have any such registration. A reading of the order
dated 09.10.2007 also suggests that the ex parte ad interim injunction
granted in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendants was based
entirely on the averments that the plaintiff is the registered proprietor of the
trade mark insofar as the lubricants are concerned and that the defendant
No.2 has no right whatsoever to use the said mark in respect of the said
goods. As noted earlier in this order, it has now become clear that the
defendant No.2 also has a trade mark registration in respect of the mark
IA.Nos12433.07&11702/2007 in CS(OS) 2015/2007

Page No.23 of 29

'MICO' in class-4 itself which includes lubricants. The defendant No.2 had
applied for such a registration on 06.01.2004 which was allowed on
17.10.2005 under registration No.1259864. From this, it is apparent that
what the plaintiff has averred in the plaint and particularly in paragraph 20
thereof is not true.

24.

The next point that arises is whether the plaintiff intentionally

withheld the information and made false averments or it did so
unintentionally and inadvertantly. In considering this aspect of the matter,
it is important to note the submissions made by the learned counsel for the
defendants that when a party comes to court for an infringement action, then
it is duty bound to conduct a search to ascertain as to whether the
defendants have any registration in respect of the trade mark in question. I
agree with this submission made by the learned counsel for the defendants.
It is relevant to note that based on the averments made in the plaint with
regard to registration of the trademark in question, the court takes a prima
facie view at the ex parte stage and decides to grant or not to grant an
injunction. It is, therefore, the duty of the plaintiff to state clearly as to
whether the defendants have or do not have a trade mark registration in
respect of the mark in question and in respect of the impugned goods and
services. In the present case, the plaintiff cannot be let off by accepting its
plea of feigned ignorance. If it was ignorant of the registration of the trade
mark in favour of the defendant No.2 in respect of the lubricants, it was its

IA.Nos12433.07&11702/2007 in CS(OS) 2015/2007

Page No.24 of 29

duty to have informed itself by conducting a search and thereafter placing
the full facts before the court.

25.

Another factor which goes against the plaintiff is the manner in

which the parties have been arrayed. The defendant No.2 is the main
defendant who has the registration of the well known mark 'MICO' in
respect of automotive parts. However, the plaintiff has chosen to array
Maggon Auto Centre as the main defendant when, according to the
averments made in paragraph 17 of the plaint, it is averred that the
defendant No.1 is only a dealer of the impugned goods of the defendant
No.2 and that the exact relationship between them is not known to the
plaintiff and that the defendant No.2 is called upon to disclose the exact
relationship between them. It is unfortunate that the main defendant (Motor
Industries Co. Ltd.) has been arrayed as defendant No.2 and Maggon Auto
Centre, who is alleged to be a dealer of the main defendant and whose exact
relationship is unknown to the plaintiff is arrayed as defendant No.1. It is
not only in this case, but in serveral other cases that this court has noticed
this unhealthy trend on the part of the plaintiffs to array the main defendant
as defendant No.2 or defendant No.3 while naming some innocuous dealer
or retail outlet as defendant No.1. The object is easily discernible. When
the counsel for the main defendants scan the list of cases, they would not be
able to know as to whether any case has been filed against them so as to
enable them to appear on the very first date on which the case is listed

IA.Nos12433.07&11702/2007 in CS(OS) 2015/2007

Page No.25 of 29

before court. The very fact that the plaintiff has also indulged in this
practice is also an indicator that it did not want the counsel for the
defendant No.2 to appear on the first date on which the matter was taken up
for consideration of the grant or non-grant of ad interim injunction. This
fact also dis-entitles the plaintiff to any equitable relief. I am of the view
that the plaintiff has concealed and suppressed material facts from this
court.

Question No.2:
26.

This by itself would be sufficient to vacate the ex parte ad

interim injunction granted on 09.10.2007. However, with regard to the
second aspect of whether the plaintiff has been able to establish the
existence of the ingredients of a passing off action also, the answer is in the
negative. As pointed out in several decisions noted above and particularly
in the Supreme Court decision in the case of Cadila Healthcare Ltd
(supra), the well recognised ingredients of the modern tort of passing off
are 5 in number:- (1) there must be a misrepresentation, (2) made by a trader
in the course of trade, (3) to prospective customers of his or her ultimate
consumers of goods or services supplied by him, (4) which is calculated to
injure the business or goodwill of another trader (in the sense that this is a
reasonably foreseeable consequence), and (5) which causes actual damage
to a business or goodwill of the trader by whom the action is brought or (in
a quia timet action) will probably do so. In the facts narrated above, it is

IA.Nos12433.07&11702/2007 in CS(OS) 2015/2007

Page No.26 of 29

apparent that there is no misrepresentation on behalf of the defendant No.2
to any prospective customers much less a misrepresentation calculated to
injure the business or goodwill of the plaintiff.

27.

The defendant No.2 has been using the mark 'MICO' in respect

of various automotive parts worldwide.

The plaintiff also admits that

insofar as these automotive products are concerned, the defendant No.2 has
exclusive right to use the mark “MICO”. The plaintiff is only claiming
exclusivity of the right to use the mark in respect of lubricants. There is no
doubt that the plaintiff has alleged that it has been in the market for
lubricants and petroleum products since 1960 and has been selling its
products under the mark 'MICO'. But, there is no indication as to the extent
of the presence of the plaintiff in the market. On the other hand, the
defendants' mark 'MICO' which has been used for other automotive
products is extremely well-known worldwide as also in India. In fact,
prima facie, it appears that when the trademark 'MICO' is employed
prospective customers would link it with the defendant No.2 rather than the
plaintiff.

Therefore, because of the overwhelming market share of the

defendant No.2 in respect of automotive parts sold under the mark 'MICO',
it would be difficult to accept, at this prima facie stage, that the defendant
No.2 has misrepresented to prospective customers of the plaintiff with an
object of injuring the plaintiff's business or goodwill. It is more likely that
the defendant No.2 has entered into the field of lubricants and has employed

IA.Nos12433.07&11702/2007 in CS(OS) 2015/2007

Page No.27 of 29

its registered mark 'MICO' being oblivious of the plaintiff's presence in the
market. There is no material which has been placed by the plaintiff to
indicate, as was done in the case of Halifax Building Society (supra), to
show that the consumers were being misled into believing that the goods of
the defendant No.2 were actually those of the plaintiff. There is also no
material to indicate as to whether the entry of the defendant No.2 in the field
of lubricants was calculated to injure the business or goodwill of the
plaintiff.

Consequently, the ingredients of passing off as per settled

principles are not established, prima facie.

28.

In view of the aforesaid discussion on the two issues, indicated

above, it has to be held that the plaintiff is not entitled to the confirmation
of the injunction order passed on 09.10.2007.

On the contrary, the

defendants and in particular the defendant No.2 has made out a case for
vacation of the said order.

29.

Before I part with these applications, the argument with regard to

'swamping' also needs to be considered. It was contended by the learned
counsel for the plaintiff that the entry of the defendant No.2 using the mark
“MICO” for lubricants and other petroleum products would completely
swamp the plaintiff's business and would run him out of business. He
submitted that this course of action was not permissible and, therefore, an
injunction of the type given in the case of Halifax Building Society (supra)

IA.Nos12433.07&11702/2007 in CS(OS) 2015/2007

Page No.28 of 29

was liable to to be passed in the plaintiff's favour in this case also. This
argument is easily dispelled by what was submitted by the learned counsel
for the defendant that before an argument can be advanced, it must be based
on a foundation which it laid down in the pleadings.

Insofar as this

argument is concerned, there are no averments in the plaint with regard to
the plaintiff being swamped or the fear of the plaintiff being swamped by
the sheer magnitude and size of the defendant No.2 on account of its entry
into the field of lubricants. Since there is no such pleading in the plaint, no
amount of evidence or of arguments can be raised on this aspect of the
matter.

30.

The plaintiff's application under Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 of CPC

(IA No.11702/2007) is dismissed, the defendant No.2's application under
Order 39 Rule 4, CPC (IA No.12433/2007) is allowed. The said order dated
09.10.2007 stands vacated.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
February 07, 2008
M/δυττ

IA.Nos12433.07&11702/2007 in CS(OS) 2015/2007

Page No.29 of 29

