THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 09.04.2008

+

ARB. P. 64/2002

MR BRAITHWAITE & CO. LTD.

...Petitioner

- versus CENTRAL ORGANISATION FOR
MODERNISATION OF WORKSHOPS

...Respondent

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr D. Ray Chaudhuri, Sr. Advocate with Mr S. S. Jauhar
For the Respondent
: Sanat Kumar with Mr Sanjay Sharma

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

This is a petition under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration and

Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as the 'said Act') whereby
the petitioner has sought the appointment of a retired judge of this Court
or any other person as this Court may deem fit to act as presiding third
arbitrator in the Arbitral Tribunal including the two nominated arbitrators
nominated by the parties. The alternative prayer is that this Court may
ARB. P. 64/2002

Page No.1 of 7

appoint a sole arbitrator to decide the disputes and claims of the parties
arising out of the said contract.

2.

The counsel for the parties have been heard at length. The

very foundation of this application is without substance. The application
has been filed on the premise that there was an arbitration agreement
between the parties for referring the matter for arbitration by three
arbitrators.

The original contract between the parties contained the

arbitration clause, namely, Clause 3200. It is admitted by the parties that
the said arbitration clause had reference only to a sole arbitrator being
appointed.

However, it is the case of the petitioner that during the

pendency of the arbitration proceedings before the sole arbitrator (Mr
Arun Bhatnagar) there was an agreement between the parties that the
arbitration proceedings be conducted not under the old Act but under the
1996 Act. It is also the petitioner's case that at the same time the parties
had agreed that the arbitration was to be conducted by a Tribunal
comprising of three arbitrators and not by the sole arbitrator.

3.

Insofar as the first point is concerned, there is no difficulty

inasmuch as the counsel for the respondent concedes that the parties had

ARB. P. 64/2002

Page No.2 of 7

agreed that the arbitration proceedings shall be deemed to have been
conducted under the new Act and not under the old Act. However,
insofar as the constitution of a Tribunal comprising of three arbitrators is
concerned, there is no agreement between the parties. On a pointed
question put to the learned counsel for the petitioner as to whether there
was any written agreement between the parties for the constitution of a
three-member Arbitration Tribunal, he clearly stated that there was no
such written agreement. However, he submitted that such an agreement
can be discerned from the arbitrator's letter dated 12.02.2001. The said
letter, on examination, reveals that the said Mr Arun Bhatnagar had been
appointed as the sole arbitrator. Subsequently, the parties made a joint
request that the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 may be made
applicable to the proceedings before him. The letter also reveals that the
petitioner had thereafter made a request for arbitration proceedings to be
conducted by a panel of three arbitrators as per the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996. After noting the aforesaid, the learned arbitrator
concluded the letter with the following sentence:“Therefore, fresh Arbitrator (s) may be appointed
as per law.”

ARB. P. 64/2002

Page No.3 of 7

According to the learned counsel for the petitioner this sentence clearly
indicates that the parties had acknowledged that the arbitration was to be
conducted by a Tribunal comprising of three arbitrators.

4.

Unfortunately, it cannot be so concluded. This is because

earlier, on 21.01.2000, the proceedings recorded by the arbitrator
disclosed that:“The parties have jointly made a request that
Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 may be made
applicable to proceedings before me and I have agreed
to such a request.”
(underlining added)
A copy of the above proceedings was sent to both the parties and had
been accepted by them without any demur. It is clear that the parties had
agreed that arbitration would be conducted under the new Act and that it
would be conducted before the arbitrator already appointed. Hence the
expression “before me”. It is only as an afterthought that the petitioner
sent the letter dated 15.03.2000 and also moved an application to the
same effect. The prayer made in the letter as well as in the application
was that an Arbitral Tribunal of three arbitrators requires to be
constituted and that the petitioner had nominated its arbitrator (one Mr S.
Bhomik), the other arbitrator being Mr Arun Bhatnagar (purported
ARB. P. 64/2002

Page No.4 of 7

nominee of the respondent).

The request made by the letter dated

15.03.2000 was that the two nominees should appoint the presiding
officer of the Arbitral Tribunal. The prayer made in the application was
that the newly nominated arbitrator (S. Bhomik) be permitted to proceed
with this arbitration and both the arbitrators should jointly nominate and
appoint the third arbitrator and the arbitration proceedings be conducted
by the said Tribunal in accordance with the Arbitration and Conciliation
Act, 1996. This application was ultimately disposed of by Mr Arun
Bhatnagar on 06.12.2001 whereby he gave his opinion that the number
of arbitrators shall be only one and the sole arbitrator shall be appointed
by the Chief Administrative Officer of the respondent. By virtue of the
said order dated 06.12.2001 the said Mr Arun Bhatnagar stated that his
authority to continue as an arbitrator would be deemed to have been
terminated in view of the fact that he was appointed under the old Act
and the new arbitrator ought to be appointed under the new Act.
Thereafter, it appears that on 08.04.2002 the Chief Administrative
Officer of the respondent appointed one Mr Narottam Dass as the sole
arbitrator in place of the said Mr Arun Bhatnagar. This is where the
matter rests.

ARB. P. 64/2002

Page No.5 of 7

5.

This petition has been founded on the premise, as noted

above, that there is an agreement between the parties that arbitration is to
be conducted by a Tribunal comprising of three arbitrators. But there is
nothing on record to show that such an agreement existed between the
parties. In fact, what the parties had agreed was that the proceedings be
conducted under the new Act and, that is it. They did not have any
agreement with regard to the change in the constitution of the Arbitral
Tribunal. Since there is no agreement with regard to the constitution of
the Arbitral Tribunal comprising of three arbitrators. The invocation of
Section 11 (6) of the said Act would be bad. As per the arbitration
clause, which still governs the parties, the arbitration is to be conducted
by a sole arbitrator. The sole arbitrator is to be appointed by the Chief
Executive Officer, MCD. Mr Arun Bhatnagar had earlier been appointed
and, on termination of his mandate, Mr Narottam Dass has been
appointed by the persona designata. Since the arbitrator is already in
place, the question of invoking the provisions of Section 11 (6) of the
said Act does not arise.

This petition is not maintainable.

It is

dismissed.

ARB. P. 64/2002

Page No.6 of 7

6.

In case the petitioner has any grievance with regard to the

authority of Mr Narottam Dass to continue as an arbitrator, it is open to
him to take recourse to the provisions of the said Act which allow him to
challenge the authority of an arbitrator.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
April 09, 2008
SR

ARB. P. 64/2002

Page No.7 of 7

