IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+

IA No.11300/2007 & CS (OS) No.513/2005

%

Judgment delivered on: 01.10.2007

COLGATE-PALMOLIVE COMPANY & ANOTHER

.... Plaintiffs

versus
M/S HINDUSTAN RIMMER

.... Defendant

Advocates who appeared in this case:For the Plaintiffs
: Ms Ishani Sahiwal with Mr Bhagwati Prasad
For the Defendant
: Mr Gaurav Miglani & Mr Kapil Kumar Giri

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the judgment ?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ?
BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)

1.

The defendant and the plaintiffs have decided to settle the matter.

This is an application filed jointly by the plaintiffs and the defendant
under Order 23 Rule 3 read with Section 151 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 for recording the settlement and / or compromise and
decreeing the suit in terms thereof.

2.

The defendant has acknowledged the plaintiffs to be the

proprietors of Colgate Label Mark, which is the subject matter of the
present suit as well as of the registered trademark for the dental cream
red and white label under No.190279 and the label marks under
No.319139, 319140. The defendant has also undertaken that it will not
IA 11300/07 & CS(OS) 513/05

Page No. 1 of 3

manufacture, sell, offer for sale, advertise, directly or indirectly deal in
goods and services under a label / packaging / design as contained in
Annexure J, K, K-1 and L filed with the plaint or any other label /
packaging / design identical or deceptively and / or confusingly similar
to the plaintiffs' distinctive get up or trade dress as contained in
Annexures A to H to the application and / or confusingly similar to the
plaintiffs distinctive get up or trade dress amounting to or likely to lead
to passing off their goods or business as and for those of the plaintiffs.
The defendant has also given other undertakings which are recorded in
the application.

3.

In view of the agreement entered into between the parties and the

undertakings given by the defendant as recorded in the application itself,
it is prayed that the compromise be recorded and a decree be passed in
terms of para 26 (i) to (iii) of the amended plaint in favour of the
plaintiffs and against the defendant. It is also stated that the plaintiffs
give up their claims in respect of the prayers contained in para 26 (iv),
(v), (vi) and (vi) (a) of the amended plaint. The application has been
signed by Mr K.V. Vaidyanathan, who is the constituted attorney of the
plaintiff No.1 and by Mr Sanjeev Shrivastav, who is the authorised
signatory of the plaintiff No.2.

Mr Shobhan Lal Jain, who is the

proprietor of the defendant has also signed this application. The same
has also been signed by the respective counsel for the parties. It is

IA 11300/07 & CS(OS) 513/05

Page No. 2 of 3

supported by the affidavits of the said Mr Shobhan Lal Jain, Mr K.V.
Vaidyanathan and Mr Sanjeev Shrivastav.

4.

I have gone through the terms of the settlement agreement entered

into between the parties. The same appears to be lawful and there is no
impediment in recording the compromise / settlement and a decree being
passed in the suit as prayed for. This application alongwith its annexures
is marked as Exhibit C-1.

The suit is decreed in terms of prayers

contained in para 26 (i) (ii) and (iii) of the amended plaint in favour of
the plaintiffs and against the defendant. The prayers contained in subpara (iv) (v), (vi) and (vi) (a) of para 26 of the amended plaint are given
up by the plaintiffs and the suit is dismissed in respect of these prayers.

5.

This application (Exhibit C-1) shall form part of the decree. It is

clarified that the defendant shall be permitted to use his trademark
Cosmo as indicated in para 6 of this application.
This application, the suit and all other pending applications stand
disposed of. The next date fixed in the matter stands cancelled.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
October 01, 2007
δυττ

IA 11300/07 & CS(OS) 513/05

Page No. 3 of 3

