THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Judgment delivered on :04.05.2007
WP(C) No.3124/2007
KRBL LIMITED

...Petitioner
- versus -

UNION OF INDIA & OTHERS

...Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr Bishwajit Bhattacharya with Mr Md. Qamar Ali
For the Respondent/UOI
: Mr Rajeeve Mehra with Mr Dincur Bajaj

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

This writ petition has been filed by the petitioner being aggrieved

by the interim order dated 24.04.2007 passed by the Director General of
Foreign Trade, Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Government of India, New
Delhi. By virtue of this order, the petitioner's IEC No. 0595031790 has been
suspended with immediate effect till further orders. The impugned order has
been passed on the assumption that the petitioner has committed violations of
the provisions of the Customs Act, 1962 and the provisions of the Foreign
Trade Policy made under the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act,

WP(C)3124.07

Page No.1 of 6

1992 and, therefore, the provisions of Section 8(1)(a) of the latter Act have
been attracted.

2.

Mr Bhattacharya, who appears on behalf of the petitioner,

submitted that this order suffers from various infirmities.

First of all, he

submitted that the impugned order has been passed under Section 8(1)(a) of the
Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992 (hereinafter referred to
as the 'said Act') whereas the show cause notice issued on 09.04.2007 to the
petitioner was under Section 8 (1)(b) of the said Act.

3.

Secondly, Mr Bhattacharya submitted that the allegation mentioned

in the show cause notice was that the petitioner had made fraudulent
amendments / manipulations and had made exports referred to in the show
cause notice in a fraudulent manner in violation of the provisions of the Act.
He submitted that no details of the purported fraudulent amendments /
manipulations have been mentioned in the show cause notice. It is also not
indicated as to how the provisions of the Customs Act as also of the Foreign
Trade Policy and the said Act have been violated. Therefore, according to Mr
Bhattacharya, the petitioner was not made fully aware of the allegations against
him and did not know as to what the petitioner had to answer to.

WP(C)3124.07

Page No.2 of 6

4.

Thirdly, Mr Bhattacharya submitted that the show cause notice

made no mention of any report of the Director of Revenue Intelligence. Yet,
the impugned order has reference to the said report in paragraph 4. In fact, the
impugned order is based upon the said report. The learned counsel submits that
this report was not disclosed to the petitioner and no copy of it was given to
him and therefore, it could not have been relied upon against the petitioner.

5.

Fourthly, Mr Bhattacharya

submitted that no opportunity of

personal hearing was granted to him. He states at the Bar that in the impugned
order it is erroneously recorded that a personal hearing was granted to the
petitioner on 13.04.2007. He states, as a responsible officer of the Court, that
he was the counsel for the petitioner before the Director General of Foreign
Trade and the “hearing” did not last for more than a few seconds. He submits
that he was not even permitted to sit. According to him, this clearly indicates
that the bogey of personal hearing was a sham.

6.

Fifthly, Mr Bhattacharya submitted that the principles of natural

justice are inbuilt, in express terms, into Section 8 of the said Act, which
requires the Director General to give a notice in writing informing the effected
person of the grounds on which the IEC number is proposed to be suspended or
cancelled. The provisions of Section 8 also make it clear that a reasonable
opportunity of making a representation in writing within such reasonable time
WP(C)3124.07

Page No.3 of 6

as may be specified in the notice be also given.

The provision also stipulates

that if the person so desires, he shall be heard.

It is only thereafter that the

Director General may suspend the Importer-exporter Code Number and that too
for a specified period of time. In the present case, Mr Bhattacharya points out
that the show cause notice was issued on 09.04.2007 and was served upon the
petitioner through a special messenger on the same day. The date for the
purported personal hearing was fixed on 13.04.2007 granting the petitioner only
three days time to reply to the show cause notice. Furthermore, documents
referred to in the impugned order were not supplied to the petitioner. The
grounds that were given in the show cause notice were vague. The hearing that
was given on 13.04.2007, if it could be called a hearing, was illusory. And,
finally, the suspension order itself did not specify the period of suspension but
was an open ended suspension order for all times to come.

7.

Mr Bhattacharya lastly submitted that while under Section 8 (1)(b)

of the said Act an interim order of suspension may be passed, if the provisions
of Section 8(1)(a) of the said Act are to be invoked then the order of suspension
can only be a final order and cannot be an interim order because the said
provision requires the Director General to return conclusive findings with
regard to contravention etc. He submitted that, merely on the basis of a prima
facie view, the Importer-exporter Code Number cannot be suspended under
Section 8(1)(a) of the said Act.
WP(C)3124.07

Page No.4 of 6

8.

Although Mr Bhattacharya made submissions with regard to the

merits of the matter, in my view, it is not necessary for this Court to go into the
same at this stage.

9.

Mr Rajeeve Mehra, who appears on behalf of the respondents,

submitted that the mentioning of Section 8 (1) (b) in the show cause notice was
a typographical error and the show cause notice is one which was issued under
Section 8 (1)(a) and under Section 13 of the said Act. However, with regard to
the other objections which have been raised by the learned counsel for the
petitioner, while controverting the same, Mr Mehra submitted that in order to
obviate any further difficulty in the adjudication proceeding which is going on,
he has instructions from Mr C. Gangadaharan, Deputy D.G.F.T to submit that a
fresh show cause notice would be issued to the petitioner along with all relied
upon documents and a full opportunity would be granted for making a written
representation as well as of a personal hearing if they so desire and it is only
thereafter that an appropriate order would be passed in accordance with law.

10.

Without commenting any further on the merits of the matter, in my

view, this is a very fair statement made by the learned counsel for the
respondent and it would serve the ends of justice if the provisions of Section 8
are followed both in letter and spirit. Accordingly, the impugned order is set
WP(C)3124.07

Page No.5 of 6

aside. It would be open to the respondents to issue a fresh show cause notice,
along with documents upon which they rely, giving the petitioner full
opportunity of submitting a written representation as well as of being personally
heard, if they so desire.

The sum and substance of this order is that the

respondents shall comply with the requirements of natural justice embodied in
Section 8 of the said Act. With these directions, this writ petition stands
disposed of.
Dasti.
BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
May 04, 2007
sr

WP(C)3124.07

Page No.6 of 6

