THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 04.07.2007

+ WP(C) No.10254/2006
SMT GANNY KAUR

...Petitioner
- versus -

THE STATE (NCT) & OTHERS
Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
For the Respondent No.2.
For the Respondent No.3

...Respondents
: Mr Gurbaksh Singh
: Mr R. P. Sharma
: Mr O. P. Arya

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ?

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

This writ petition raises the interesting question as to whether

compensation granted by the State for the 1984 Riot victims should be given to
persons in accordance with their entitlement to inherit property from the
deceased persons as per the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 or that the State is not
governed by the personal laws and is required to award compensation equitably
to the next of kin ?

WP(C)10254/06

Page No.1 of 14

2.

The petitioner (Smt Ganny Kaur) was married to Late Ladha Singh.

They had a daughter (Ishwari Kaur) who was married to one Laxman Singh.
Laxman Singh is the son of Kishan Singh (Respondent No.3) herein. Ishwari
Kaur and Laxman Singh had two children, Sajan Singh and Laxmi. In the
unfortunate events which took place in 1984 and which go under the name 'The
1984 Riots', Ishwari Kaur, Laxman Singh and their two children were burnt to
death by the rioters. The entire family of four perished at the hands of the
murdering marauders. At that point of time, Sajan Singh was four years old
and Laxmi was two years old.

3.

After the 1984 Riots, the Government of NCT of Delhi

(Respondent No.1) sanctioned an ex gratia payment of Rs 10,000/- to the
surviving family members of each riot victim.

This amount was

subsequently enhanced to Rs 20,000/-. It is stated by the petitioner that she had
been living in a distant village. Therefore, all the compensation amount was
claimed by Kishan Singh (Respondent No.3) and the same was paid to him.
After Bhajan Kaur's case, this court had directed the Government to pay a sum
of Rs 3.5 lakhs to the family members of the victims of the 1984 Riots. On the
basis of the said judgment, a further compensation was to be awarded. The
petitioner filed the claim with the respondent No.2, but as the respondent No.2
was not inclined to pay compensation to the petitioner with respect to the death
of her daughter and two grand children. The petitioner, finding no alternative,
WP(C)10254/06

Page No.2 of 14

filed a writ petition before this court being CW 3123/1998. By virtue of an
order dated 24.08.1998, a learned single Judge of this court directed that in case
compensation had not been handed over to the respondent No.3 (Kishan Singh),
a sum of Rs 3.3 lakhs shall not be disbursed to him. However, after the passing
of the said order, the respondent No.3 approached the petitioner for settlement
and the matter was compromised. As a consequence thereof, the writ petition
being CW 3123/1998 was withdrawn on 22.07.1999.

4.

On 16.01.2006, the Government of India through the Ministry of

Home Affairs informed, inter alia, the Chief Secretary, Government of NCT of
Delhi that in pursuance of the assurances given by the Prime Minister and the
Home Minister during discussion on the Report of Justice Nanawati
Commission of Inquiry into the 1984 Riots in the Lok Sabha and the Rajya
Sabha, the matter had been considered by the Government and it had been
decided to sanction, inter alia, the payment of an ex-gratia amount of Rs 3.5
lakh in each case of death during the riots. The said ex-gratia amounts were to
be in addition to the amounts already paid by the respective State Governments.
The entire expenditure was to be borne by the Central Government, though
routed through the State Government.

The said communication dated

16.01.2006 also stipulated that:“(iv)
No new claims for grant of ex-gratia for death
or injury would be entertained. Only those who received
ex-gratia earlier should be eligible for the enhanced
WP(C)10254/06

Page No.3 of 14

additional ex-gratia amount. However, if there are any
pending or disputed cases which are awaiting decision for
want of the necessary proof / evidence, such cases can be
considered if they are finally accepted as genuine claims.”
5.

It was contended on behalf of the petitioner that applications had

been invited from the family members of the riot victims for the grant of
additional ex gratia relief. The additional relief that is to be given in respect of
the deaths of Ishwari Kaur, Laxman Singh, Sajan Singh and Laxmi admittedly
comes to Rs 14 lakhs. The petitioner also submitted her application with the
respondent No.2. However, she has been informed that she will not get the
compensation on account of the death of her daughter and two grand children
because the compensation amount can be disbursed only to those persons who
were paid earlier. It is in these circumstances that the present writ petition has
been filed.

6.

The case of the petitioner is that the enhanced compensation

amount of Rs. 14 lakhs be paid to the petitioner and Kishan Singh (Respondent
No.3) in equal measure. Meaning thereby, that the petitioner should be paid Rs
7 lakhs and Kishan Singh (Respondent No.3) should be paid Rs 7 lakhs. It was
contended by the petitioner that the petitioner lost her daughter, whereas Kishan
Singh lost his son. It is further contended that both the petitioner and Kishan
Singh lost their grand children (Sajan Singh and Laxmi). Therefore, according
to the petitioner, there is no difference in the position of the petitioner and that
WP(C)10254/06

Page No.4 of 14

of Kishan Singh (Respondent No.3) and, therefore, both of them are equally
entitled to receive the compensation. On the other hand, it has been contended
on behalf of Kishan Singh that the entire amount of Rs 14 lakhs is to be paid to
him alone and nothing to the petitioner (Smt Ganny Kaur).

7.

It was contended on behalf of the petitioner that the general rules of

succession provided in Section 15 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 do not
provide any indication with regard to the compensation on account of death of a
girl. It was submitted that this court has to decide whether the non-obstante
clause of Section 15 (2) (a) would be applicable in the case of compensation
and whether it would have overriding effect over Section 15 (1) (b). Pertinent
questions were also raised with regard to the eligibility of the parents of a
married girl with respect to compensation for her death. It was also submitted
that upon the marriage of the daughter, the parents do not divest themselves of
their responsibility to look after her well-being. The traditional view of giving
away the daughter at the time of marriage for all times to come does not hold
good any more. It was submitted that judicial notice can be taken of the
multitude of dowry harassment cases and cases of cruelty on the part of the
husband and the girl's in-laws. In such situations, the parents of the girl have to
suffer not only the financial burden, but also the mental trauma associated
therewith. In this context, it was submitted that if the compensation is granted
in this case only to Respondent No.3, then it would run counter to all the
WP(C)10254/06

Page No.5 of 14

principles of fairness and equity and would mean that the State as well as the
courts give recognition to the rights of the parents of the husband but none to
the rights of the parents of the wife.

8.

The SDM (Riots Cell, 1984), Preet Vihar, Delhi in his counter-

affidavit has stated that the petitioner has no locus standi to approach this
court. It is further stated that an ex tratia payment was sanctioned to the
surviving family members of each right victim and, accordingly, an amount
of Rs 10,000/- was paid to Respondent No.3 as the surviving member of the
family. This was later on enhanced to Rs 20,000/- and further enhanced to Rs
3.5 lakhs, including the above amounts. The entire compensation amount till
date was paid to the respondent No.3. The said amount has now been further
enhanced to another Rs 3,50,000/- in respect of each death in addition to the
earlier amount. According to the respondent No.2, the said amount has to be
disbursed only to the persons who had earlier been paid and as per the records
the entitlement stands in favour of the respondent No.3 only since he had
received the earlier payment also. It was further stated that:“No new person can take place of respondent no.3 as per
the succession.”

9.

The counter-affidavit filed by the Respondent No.3 (Kishan Singh)

discloses that he whole-heartedly supports the stand taken by the respondent

WP(C)10254/06

Page No.6 of 14

No.2 that he alone is entitled to receive the enhanced compensation because he
was paid the compensation earlier. It was also contended on behalf of the
respondent No.3 that the ex gratia compensation was granted earlier on the
basis of Hindu Succession Act, 1956 after proper inquiries and verification and
the enhanced amount has to be awarded on the same basis. It was submitted by
the respondent No.3 that the compensation is to be paid to the legal heirs of the
deceased—married women and her children—as per the hierarchy provided in
the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 which places the heirs of her husband on a
higher footing than her mother.

10.

The learned counsel for the respondent No.3 submitted that the

amount of compensation was payable to the legal representatives and,
according to him, Section 2 (11) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
(hereinafter referred to as 'the CPC') which defines legal representative would
be applicable. Section 2 (11) of the CPC defines legal representative to mean a
person who in law represents the estate of a deceased person.

11.

The learned counsel for the respondent No.3 further submitted that

the law contemplates two categories of compensation on the death of a person.
The first is the pecuniary loss sustained by the dependent members of the
family of the deceased. The second is a loss caused to the estate of the
deceased as a result of such death. It was contended that where the claim is by
WP(C)10254/06

Page No.7 of 14

the legal representatives of the deceased who are not dependents of the
deceased, the basis of award of compensation is the loss of estate, i.e., the loss
of savings by the deceased. It was, therefore, contended that while deciding the
entitlement of claims, the definition of legal representatives in Section 2 (11) of
the CPC and the personal laws of the deceased should not be overlooked.

12.

The learned counsel for the respondent No.3 referred to various

provisions which deal with compensation in death cases under different Acts.
The Acts being the Indian Fatal Accidents Act, 1855, The Motor Vehicles Act,
1923, The Railways Act, 1989, The Employees State Insurance Act, 1948, The
Insurance Act, 1938 and the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972. He also referred to
the following decisions:i)

Gobald Motor Service Ltd and Another v. R.M.K.
Veluswami and Others: AIR 1962 SC 1 (7);

ii)

Gujarat State Road Transport Corporation, Ahmedabad v.
Ramanbhai Pradhatbhai and Another: AIR 1987 SC 1690;

iii)

New India Assurance Co. Ltd v. Ashwin Vrajlal Rajgor: IV
(2005) ACC 304 (DB);

iv)

A. Manavalagan v. A. Krishnamurthy & Others: I (2005)
ACC 304 (DB);

(v)

Sarabati Devi v. Usha Devi: 1984 (6) DRJ 190;

vi)

Maharashtra State Road Transport Corporation
Darabkhan & Others: II (2005) ACC 678.

vii)

Veena Rani v. Mangat Ram & Another: 1992 (1) ACC 485
(487) (P&H).

WP(C)10254/06

v.

Page No.8 of 14

13.

The learned counsel for the respondent No.3 concluded by saying

that the position in law on entitlement of compensation under the various Acts
and the judgments would make it safe to conclude that:a)
b)

The basis for award of compensation / damages is loss of
estate and pecuniary loss; and

c)

14.

The compensation / damages in respect of death of a person
forms part of the Estate of a deceased;

The amount of compensation / damages can be claimed by
dependents / legal representatives / heirs of such deceased
person in accordance with the law of succession governing
them.

It was submitted that in the present case, both the parties are

governed by Hindu Succession Act, 1956. Smt Ishwari Kaur and her two
children died intestate. As per the rules of succession, in Sections 8, 15 and 16
of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956, the respondent No.3 is on a higher footing
in comparison to the petitioner. It was further submitted that the petitioner
neither represents the estate of the deceased nor was she ever financially
dependent on her married daughter and her two deceased grand children. It was
also suggested that the petitioner is residing at Village Latifpur, District
Meerut, U.P. with her three sons, namely, Surender Singh, Tirath Singh and
Bachan Singh.

WP(C)10254/06

Page No.9 of 14

15.

Having considered the submissions made by the counsel for the

parties, I am of the view that the compensation awarded in respect of the death
of 1984 Riot victims cannot be equated with estate of an intestate which
devolves as per the principles of succession and inheritance prescribed under
personal laws. The compensation which is in question was never part of the
property held by the deceased, therefore, in my view, there can be no question
of there being any succession thereto or inheritance in respect thereof. The
reference to the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 made by both the parties,
therefore, would be irrelevant. The ex gratia compensation that is provided by
the State is not under any personal law, but under the secular laws of the State
governed by the principles enshrined in the Constitution of India and in
particular Article 21 thereof because there has been a loss of life which it was
the duty of the State to have protected. When the compensation is provided by
the State, the State is blind to the religion of the parties as also to the personal
laws that may be followed by them based on their religion. The State has to
provide compensation so as to somewhat assuage the hurt, both financial as
well as mental which the surviving members of the family feel every day of
their lives. There have been a number of cases where compensation has been
awarded for custodial deaths, deaths due to negligence of the State or some
agency of the State, for crime victims, etc. These decisions are too well-known
to be reproduced herein. Compensation in all such cases has been awarded in
two parts. The first part being the standard compensation or what is known as
WP(C)10254/06

Page No.10 of 14

'the conventional amount' which is awarded for the mental pain and agony, loss
of consortium, loss of company, etc. The second part is the compensation for
pecuniary loss which has relation to dependency.

16.

The compensation in question has to be viewed from this

perspective, i.e., standard compensation and compensation for pecuniary loss.
Insofar as both these elements are concerned, there is no difficulty in
straightway coming to the conclusion that the position of the petitioner is no
different from that of the respondent No.3. The petitioner lost her daughter and
her grand children as also her son-in-law. Kishan Singh (respondent No.3) lost
his son, his grand children as also his daughter-in-law. The extent of the pain
and hurt that could be suffered by both would not be any different. The agony
of the loss of a daughter cannot be less than the agony of loss of a son.
Similarly, the agony of the loss of the daughter's children cannot be any less
than the agony of the loss of the son's children. I do not see how it can even be
contended that the right of the respondent No.3 to receive compensation is on a
higher footing than that of the petitioner. Reliance placed on the personal law
of succession is of no consequence in this case.

This is a matter of

compensation being awarded by the State which does not function under any
personal law. It only functions under the Constitution of India which has
established it as a secular state. Wherever the relationship between the State
and a Citizen is in issue, the personal law of the citizen has little or no
WP(C)10254/06

Page No.11 of 14

relevance. Personal laws operate mostly in the domain of Citizen v Citizen
contests.

17.

This discussion is sufficient to conclude this case. However, for

the sake of completeness, I would also like to refer to some relevant statutory
provisions. Section 1 A of the The Indian Fatal Accidents Act, 1855 provides
that a suit can be brought for compensation by the family of a person for loss
occasioned to the family by the death on account of an actionable wrong. The
said section provides specifically that every such action or suit shall be for the
benefit of the “wife, husband, parent and child, if any, of the person whose
death shall have been so caused.” It is further provided in the said Section 1 A
that in every such action, the court may give such damages as it may think
proportioned to the loss resulting from such death to the parties respectively,
for whom and for whose benefit such action shall be brought. It is further
provided that the amount so recovered, after deducting all costs and expenses,
including the costs not recovered from the defendant, shall be divided amongst
the parties for whose benefit the suit was brought in such shares as the court by
its judgment or decree shall direct. By virtue of this provision, the parents of a
woman as well as the parents of a man would be entitled to compensation. It is
also clear that if there were more than one person entitled to damages, then the
same would have to be apportioned by the court as per its judgment or decree.
Significantly, it has not been indicated that the personal law would apply. The
WP(C)10254/06

Page No.12 of 14

apportionment has been left to the court which, in any event, when no specific
direction is given by a statute, has to decide according to justice, equity and
good conscience. The manner of paying the compensation to the persons who
are entitled to receive compensation under Section 357 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 in respect of offences resulting in death is the same as
provided under the Indian Fatal Accidents Act, 1855 [See: Section 357 (1) (c)
Cr.P.C.]. The same principles would have to be applied in the present case as
compensation is being paid in respect of the deaths of the riot victims which are
definitely victim of crime.

18.

When this court in exercise of its writ jurisdiction is called upon to

determine the apportionment of the compensation between the petitioner on the
one hand and Kishan Singh (respondent No.3) on the other, it cannot but act
equitably. As already pointed out above, there is no difference whatsoever
between the position of the petitioner and that of Kishan Singh insofar as the
death of Ishwari Kaur, Laxman Singh, Sajan Singh an Laxmi are concerned.
The only manner in which the compensation, to my mind, would serve the ends
of justice, would be by directing that the compensation be awarded not
according to personal laws, but equitably to the next of kin. The only two
claimants are the petitioner and the respondent No.3 and, therefore, I direct that
the ex gratia amount of Rs 14 lakhs which is to be awarded now in respect of
the deaths of Ishwari Kaur, Laxman Singh, Sajan Singh and Laxmi be paid
WP(C)10254/06

Page No.13 of 14

to the petitioner and Kishan Singh (respondent No.3) in equal measure. A sum
of Rs 7 lakhs be paid to the petitioner and a sum of Rs 7 lakhs be paid to the
respondent No.3. These directions be complied with by the respondents 1 and 2
within four weeks.
The writ petition stands disposed of. No order as to costs.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
July 04, 2007
δυττ

WP(C)10254/06

Page No.14 of 14

