THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on :06.03.2007

+ WP(C) No.5686-87/2006
COL. T. PRASAD & ANOTHER

...Petitioners
- versus -

UNION OF INDIA & OTHERS

...Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioners
: Ms Rekha Palli with Ms Punam Singh
For the Respondent No.1
: Mr Rajeev Mehra with Mr Arjun Hrakauli
For the Respondent No.3
: Mr Ravindra Singh
For the Respondent No.4
: Mr Neeraj Kishan Kaul, Sr Advocate with Mr Ajit Warrior

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ?

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

This petition has been filed by two officers of the Indian Army. The

grievance of the petitioners is that when persons belonging to the Armed Forces, such
as the petitioners, cross over from Delhi to Uttar Pradesh or vice-versa through Delhi
Noida Direct Flyway (hereinafter referred to as the 'DND Flyway') they have to pay a
fee for each such crossing.

According to the petitioners, such personnel were

exempted from paying any toll or fee in view of Section 3 of the Indian Tolls (Army &
Air Force) Act, 1901 (hereinafter referred to as the '1901 Act').

WP(C) 5686-87/06

Page No.1 of 15

2.

In response, the respondent No.4, namely, the Noida Toll Bridge Company

Ltd (hereinafter referred to as 'the company') has taken the preliminary objection that
this petition is not maintainable before this court on account of lack of territorial
jurisdiction. Another plea that has been taken by the respondent No.4 is that the
interpretation of the 1901 Act cannot be stretched to such an extent as to include the
fee charged by the company which is not a public authority. It is further contended
that the fee that is being charged by the company is for the use of the DND Flyway
and it is being charged on the basis of a Concessionaire Agreement entered into
between the company and the New Okhla Industrial Development Authority (NOIDA)
[Rrespondent No.3] on 12.11.1997. It is further contended that this Concessionaire
Agreement was entered into in terms of the New Okhla Industrial Development Area
(Levy of Infrastructure Fee) Regulations, 1998 which, in turn, were formulated in
exercise of powers under Section 19 of the Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development
Act, 1976. It was contended that the Act as well as the regulations permitted NOIDA,
either by itself or through a developer on the basis of the agreement, to develop,
construct, provide or maintain or continue to provide or maintain the infrastructure in
the area covered under the New Okhla Industrial Development Area. Regulation 3 of
the 1998 regulations also specifically provides for this. Regulation 2 (e) defined the
term “developer” as a person who constructs, develops, maintains or provides an
infrastructure or collects fee therefor in the New Okhla Industrial Development Area
on the basis of an agreement. Regulation 2 (f) defines fee to mean, in relation to an
WP(C) 5686-87/06

Page No.2 of 15

infrastructure, an amount levied upon or payable by a person under the said
regulations for the use of an infrastructure in the New Okhla Industrial Development
Area. Regulation 3 (b) specifically provides that the agreement that may be entered
into with a developer, as indicated above, may provide for, inter alia, the fee to be
levied and collected for the said infrastructure and Regulation 5 of the 1998
regulations further provide that the respondent No.3 would have the powers to
authorise the developer to collect and appropriate the fee levied under the regulations
in accordance with the agreement and that the developer's right to collect or
appropriate the fee assignable to the lenders or the developer. It was also provided
that where the respondent No.3 authorises the developer to collect and appropriate the
fee, the agreement should also provide for a mechanism for determination of levies
and publication of the rate of fee.

3.

The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent No.4 as well as

on behalf of the respondent No.3 have stated that the collection of fee by the company
is pursuant to an agreement entered into between them and in terms of the 1998
Regulations and the Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development Act, 1976. It is
contended that the company by virtue of the aforesaid agreement, regulations and the
Act, have been granted exclusive rights to build, operate and transfer the DND Flyway
connecting Delhi and Noida and charge the users of such facility a fee as defined in
the Concessionaire Agreement.

The relevant portions of the Concessionaire

Agreement are indicated hereinbelow:WP(C) 5686-87/06

Page No.3 of 15

“Fee—means the amount of money demanded, charged, collected,
retained and appropriated by the Concessionaire for and on behalf
of NOIDA from the users of the Noida Bridge as fee for the
provision of the Noida Bridge, in accordance with the rules
prepared by NOIDA under Section 19 of the Act and the
provisions of Article 13 herein.”
“Noida Bridge—means the bridge which will connect Maharani
Bagh at the Delhi end with Okhla Barrage at the Noida end and
shall include (a) an eight lane, 552.5 meter bridge which will
expand over the Yamuna River, (b) three interchange bridges, (c)
cloverleaf flyovers, (d) a toll plaza, located at the Noida end, (e)
river protection works and (f) inter-change roads to inter-face with
the existing road network, all as more fully described in Appendix
A to D hereto.”
“User—means the persons who travel over or utilise the Noida
Bridge for the purpose of commuting across the River Yamuna in
any motor vehicle.”
“Grant of Concession
(a)
NOIDA hereby irrevocably grants to the Concessionaire the
exclusive right and authority during the Concession Period
to develop, establish, finance, design, construct, operate
and maintain the Noida Bridge as an Infrastructure Facility
for the benefit of the residents, and industries, and for the
development of commerce in Noida and permits it to enter
into the Ashram Flyover Construction Agreement and the
Concessionaire hereby accepts the Concession granted to it
by NOIDA and further agrees to implement the Project, in
accordance with the terms and conditions of this
Agreement.
(b)

NOIDA further grants to the Concessionaire the exclusive
right and authority during the Concession Period to in
accordance with the terms and conditions of this
Agreement:
(i)

WP(C) 5686-87/06

develop, establish, finance, design, construct, own,
operate, maintain use and regulate the use by third
parties of the Noida Bridge;

Page No.4 of 15

(ii)

enjoy complete and uninterepted possession and
control of the lands identified as consisting the
Bridge Site;

(iii)

own all or any part of the Project Assets;

(iv)

determine, demand, collect, retain and appropriate a
Fee from the users of the Noida Bridge and apply
the same in order to recover the Total Cost of
Project and the Returns thereon;

(v)

restrict the use of the Noida Bridge to motorized
vehicles, bicycles and pedestrians and to debar
animal drawn vehicles, cycle-rickshaws and cattle
from the Noida Bridge.

(vi)

enforce the collection of Fee from delinquent Users
of the Noida Bridge and impound the vehicles and
goods of any such delinquent User for the purpose
of enforcing collection;

(vii)

develop, establish, finance, design, construct,
operate, maintain and use any facilities to generate
Development Income arising out of the
Development Rights that may be granted in
accordance with the provisions of Article 4 herein;

(viii)

enter into private contracts with the Users for any
use or any special use of Noida Bridge and to sell,
distribute or issue, at various outlets as may be
determined by the Concessionaire, coupons or
tokens against payment of Fee in advance, thus
providing the Users with ready access to Noida
Bridge without the necessity of paying Fee on each
incidental use of the Noida Bridge; and

(ix)

appoint subcontractors or agents on its behalf to
assist it in fulfilling its obligations under this
Agreement.”

“13.1 Collection of Fee
(a)
The Fee shall be determined by the Fee Review
Committee in accordance with the provision of this
WP(C) 5686-87/06

Page No.5 of 15

Article 13 except for the Base Fee Rates which
have already been determined and approved by the
Steering Committee and has been specified in
Section 13.2 hereinbelow.
(b)

The Fee shall be, collected, retained and
appropriated from the users of the Noida Bridge by
the Concessionaire, commencing on the Project
Commission Date.

(c)

The Concessionaire may delegate its function to
collect Fee to the O&M Contractor under the O&M
Contract, in accordance with the Rules framed by
NOIDA under the Act. In such event, the O&M
Contractor shall collect the Fee for and on behalf of
the Concessionaire.

(d)

NOIDA and the Concessionaire expressly
recognizes (i) the right of the Fee Review
Committee to determine Fee in accordance with the
provisions of this Agreement, and the rules framed
by NOIDA in relation to levy of Fee under the Act
(ii) the right of the Concessionaire to, demand,
collect, retain, and to appropriate Fee in accordance
with the terms of this Agreement and the rules
framed by NOIDA in relation to levy of Fee under
the Act, (iii) to exercise all rights and remedies
available under law for the recovery of the Fee and
(iv) the right of the O&M Contractor to demand
and collect Fee on behalf of the Concessionaire.

(e)

In the event that the Fee is not recoverable for any
reason related to a Change in Law or as a result of
any restriction or injuction based on any process of
law, the Concessionaire shall be entitled to receive
compensation from NOIDA in accordance with
Section 18.”

“13.4 Fee Review Committee
(a)
Within 60 days prior to the scheduled Project
Commissioning Date, the NOIDA and the
Concessionaire shall establish a Fee Review
Committee for the purpose of determining any
WP(C) 5686-87/06

Page No.6 of 15

revision to the rate of Fee levied or revision of the
formula for calculation of the Fee Rate submitted
by the Concessionaire under the provisions of
Section 13.5 The Fee Review Committee shall
comprise of three Persons; NOIDA and the
Concessionaire
shall
each
appoint
one
representative who shall be duly qualified Persons
having adequate experience in the field of
management, operation and maintenance of bridges
and roads. The third member shall be a duly
qualified Person appointed by the representatives
appointed by NOIDA and the Concessionaire,
respectively.
In the event the representative
appointed by NOIDA and the Concessionaire are
unable to agree on the third member, within a
period of 7 days from their appointment, the Person
recommended by the Lenders shall be appointed as
the third member, provided such Person is an
Indian Citizen.
(b)

4.

The third member shall be the Chairman of the Fee
Reviewing Committee.
The Fee Reviewing
Committee shall meet upon 7 days notice by the
Chairman, at the request of the Concessionaire, or
at such time intervals as required by the Parties. In
the event that any Party is absent from any meeting
of the Fee Reviewing Committee or determines not
to cast a vote or in the event of a parity of votes in a
meeting, the Chairman shall have the casting vote.”

Mr Kaul, the learned senior counsel, who appears on behalf of the

company [Respondent No.4] made a two-fold submission, as indicated above, that first
of all, this writ petition ought not to be entertained by this court inasmuch as the entire
cause of action has arisen in Uttar Pradesh. He submitted that the cause of action for
filing this petition is the charge of the fee and the fee is collected at the Toll Plaza
which is situated in Uttar Pradesh. As a corollary to this submission, he submits that
WP(C) 5686-87/06

Page No.7 of 15

even if it is construed that some part of the cause of action has arisen in Delhi,
inasmuch as part of the DND Flyway falls within the territorial jurisdiction of NCT of
Delhi, it is only a small and a minuscule part. To support this contention, he relied
upon the decision of a learned single judge of this court in the case of Jitendra Nath
Banerjee & Ors v. Union of India & Ors: 2006 V AD (Delhi) 26. And, for the
purpose of contending that the courts, while exercising writ jurisdiction under Article
226, should also take into account the forum of convenience, he also relied upon the
decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Kusum Ingots & Alloys Ltd v. Union of
India and Another: (2004) 6 SCC 254 (para 30).

5.

The second line of argument advanced by Mr Kaul is that even if this

court has territorial jurisdiction, on merits, the petition ought to be dismissed on the
ground that the fee that is being charged by the company, as indicated above, would
not fall within the expression “tolls” appearing in the 1901 Act. The submission made
by him in this regard is that the 1901 Act had in contemplation only tolls levied and
collected by the Government and other public authorties. It did not contemplate a
situation such as the one arising in the present case where the entire project was, by an
agreement, given over to a private developer to build, operate and own and ultimately
transfer it back to the Government authorities. He submitted that in this light, the
decision of the Supreme Court in the case of B.N. Sinha v. Union of India and
Others: 1998 (3) SCC 157 ought to be kept in mind. He referred, in particular, to
paragraph 10 of the said decision which reads as under:WP(C) 5686-87/06

Page No.8 of 15

“10.
The Tribunal, by the impugned judgment, by
stretching the Recruitment Rules, 1975 to a post, namely, the post
of Chief Engineer (Civil) Level II, has only attempted to legislate
on a subject which was not its business. The Rules of Statutory
Interpretation or the Rules relating to the interpretation of a
subordinate legislation, including Rules made under Article 309 of
the Constitution, do not empower any judicial or quasi-judicial
body to apply the law to a situation or object which was not
contemplated by the legislature while making a law, or by the
Government while making the rule.
The Tribunal, thus,
committed a manifest error of law in holding that in the absence of
any rule regulating the appointment on the post of Chief Engineer
(Civil) Level II, the Recruitment Rules of 1975 would apply to
that post.”
(Underlining added)

6.

The main thrust of his argument was that while interpreting any Act, the

object of the Act must not be lost sight of. The provisions of an Act must not be
interpreted in a manner which would have been completely beyond the contemplation
of the Legislature while enacting that piece of legislation. He submitted that it could
safely be said that in 1901 the situation such as the present one was completely beyond
the contemplation of the Legislature.

7.

The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent No.3 also

supported these contentions.

8.

Insofar as the Union of India is concerned, their stand has been made clear

in their affidavit. According to the Union of India, the DND Flyway does not form
part of any National Highway. And, insofar as National Highways are concerned, they
WP(C) 5686-87/06

Page No.9 of 15

have already issued a circular exempting, amongst others, Army personnel from
paying tolls. To particularise the stand taken by the Union of India, a reference to
paragraphs 2, 3 & 7 of their affidavit would be necessary. The same read as under:“2.

It is further submitted that DND Flyway from DELHINOIDA-DELHI or any part thereof, does not fall under the
category of National Highway under the National Highways
Act, 1956, and therefore no toll tax has been imposed on the
DND Flyover by the Answering Respondent herein.

3.

It is further submitted that answering respondent herein vide
circular No.NH-110065/12/2003-P&M dated 15th September,
2004, has exempted the defence vehicles from payment of
user fee (toll tax) for use of a section of National Highway /
permanent bridge / temporary bridge on National Highway, in
conformity with the Indian Tolls (Army and Air Force) Act,
1901.
xxxxx

7.

9.

xxxxx

xxxxx

xxxxx

xxxxx

It is most respectfully submitted that Levying of Toll Tax
upon DND Flyover is beyond the purview of the Answering
Respondent herein, as the same does not fall under the
category of highways, as provided by the National Highways
Act, 1956 and no Toll Tax, whatsoever, has been imposed by
the Answering Respondent herein on DND Flyover.”

The circular issued on 15.09.2004 by the Government of India, Ministry of

Shipping, Road Transport and Highways, Department of Road Transport and
Highways, so far as it is relevant herein, reads as under:
“2.
Extracts from the Indian Tolls (Army and Air Force)
Act, 1901 are enclosed (Annex-I). This Ministry has notified
National Highways (Collection of fee by any person for use of
section on National Highways, permanent bridge/temporary bridge
on National Highways) amendment rules 2003 vide GSR No.834
(F) dated 27th October, 2003. According to these rules certain
categories vehicles, including defence vehicles, are exempted from
WP(C) 5686-87/06

Page No.10 of 15

payment of users fee given in the notification. The details of all
such defence vehicles/persons exempted from payment of users
fees are enclosed (Annex II). These exemptions have also been
made applicable for public funded projects.”
Therefore, the position of the Government of India is clear that the DND Flyway being
neither a National Highway or a public funded project, it has no authority over the
same.

10.

Considering the arguments advanced by the counsel for the parties, I take

up the first question of maintainability of the writ petition on the ground of territorial
jurisdiction. It has been contended by Mr Kaul that this court ought not to exercise
jurisdiction in this case because, firstly, no part of the cause of action has arisen within
the territory of Delhi and, secondly, even if it is considered that a small part of the
cause of action arises within Delhi, the substantial part arose in Uttar Pradesh and,
therefore, the High Court at Allahabad would have jurisdiction. The learned counsel
for the petitioner replied to this submission by submitting that the cause of action was
a bundle of facts which took within its fold the user of the DND Flyway as well as the
charge for such user. She submitted that part of the DND Flyway was within the
territory of Delhi, therefore, part of its user would be within Delhi. Secondly, she
submitted that the mere fact that the fee for such user was collected in Uttar Pradesh,
would not take away the jurisdiction of this court to entertain this petition.

WP(C) 5686-87/06

Page No.11 of 15

11.

I am in agreement with the submission made by the learned counsel for the

petitioner that user of the DND Flyway, as defined in the Concessionaire Agreement
itself, would indicate that part of it would arise within the territory of Delhi and would
definitely constitute part of the cause of action and, therefore, this court would have
jurisdiction to entertain the present writ petition. Insofar as the issue of forum of
convenience is concerned, it cannot be said that the High Court at Allahabad is more
convenient than the High Court at Delhi. The reason being that NOIDA is closer to
Delhi than it is to Allahabad and part of the flyway happens to be in Delhi also. So, on
this ground also, I am of the view that this petition is maintainable on the count of
territorial jurisdiction.

12.

Coming, now, to the merits of the matter, the key question that has to be

answered is the manner in which the 1901 Act is to be interpreted. The relevant
provisions of the said Act are Sections 2 (j) and Section (3). The same, so far as are
relevant, are set out hereinbelow:“2.

Definitions.—In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant
in the subject or context,—
xxxxx

(j)

xxxxx

xxxxx

xxxxx

“tolls” includes duties, dues, rates, fees and charges, but
does not include customs duties levied under the Indian
Tariff Act, 1934, octroi duties or town duties on the import
of goods, or fares paid for the conveyance of passengers on
a tramway.
xxxxx

WP(C) 5686-87/06

xxxxx

xxxxx

xxxxx

xxxxx

xxxxx

Page No.12 of 15

3.

Exemptions from tolls.—The following persons and
property, namely :(a) all officers, soldiers and airmen of—
(i) the Regular Forces.
xxxxx

xxxxx

xxxxx

xxxxx

xxxxx

shall be exempted from payment of any tolls—
(i)

on embarking or disembarking or on being shipped or
landed, from or upon any landing-place, or
(ii) in passing along or over any turnpike or other road or
bridge, or
(iii) on being carried by means of any ferry,
otherwise demandable by virtue of any Act, Ordinance, Regulation,
order or direction of any legislature or other public authority in
India:
Provided that nothing in this section shall exempt any
boats, barges or other vessels employed in conveying the said
persons or property along any canal from payment of tolls in like
manner as other boats, barges and vessels.
Explanation.—The persons or property exempted under
clauses (d), (e), (g) and (j) shall be deemed to accompany the
Forces, troops, persons or property concerned, when the move of
the former is the direct result of, or is connected with the move of
the latter, irrespective of the interval of space and time between the
two moves.”
13.

It can be seen that the expression “tolls” used in Section 3 which grants

the exemption has been defined in Section 2 (j) to include duties, dues, rates, fees and
charges, but not customs duties, octroi duties or town duties on the import of goods or
fares paid for the conveyance of passengers on a tramway. A reading of this definition
indicates that the word fees has been used alongwith duties, dues, rates and charges
which all indicate some manner of a public levy by a Government authority or a public
WP(C) 5686-87/06

Page No.13 of 15

authority under the Government. It is the contention of Mr Kaul that it would not
include the levy of private fees for user of the DND Flyway by a private company
which cannot be brought in within the fold of the expression “public authority”. It is,
therefore, to be seen that there is a difference between tolls / fees, charged for a
private funded project and tolls / fees charged for a project which has been funded
entirely by Government funds at public expense. The distinction that is sought to be
drawn is that while in the case of a toll charged by the Government or a public
authority, the same would normally be charged on a no-profit no-loss basis, where the
costs of the project would be recovered, in part or whole, through such tolls or or fees,
but, the funding would have come through raising of revenues by the Government. In
the case of the fees charged by the company, the funding is entirely private. No part of
it has come from tax revenues or other revenues raised by the Government. It is for
this reason that the company has been permitted by the Uttar Pradesh Act of 1976 and
the 1998 regulations framed thereunder as well as the Concessionaire Agreement to
not only collect the fees, but also to appropriate and retain the same so as to recover
the entire cost of the project and also to make profit thereon. Clearly, such a situation
was not in the contemplation of the Legislature when the 1901 Act came to be passed.
It is further clear that if exemptions are to be granted, then the whole object and
purpose of the project would be undermined as the company would not be in a
position to recover its costs for the project. Therefore, the provisions of Section 3
must be read in the light of the observations of the Supreme Court in the case of B.N.
Sinha (supra) wherein the Supreme Court had clearly stated that the interpretation of
WP(C) 5686-87/06

Page No.14 of 15

the statute must not be extended to such an extent which was not in the contemplation
of the Legislature at the time of passing of the particular statute. This being the case, I
am in agreement with the submissions made by Mr Kaul that the fee charged by the
company would not fall within the exemption granted by virtue of Section 3 of the
1901 Act.

14.

Lastly, it was contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the

company was not charging the fee on its own account, but it was charging the fee for
and on behalf of the respondent No.3. As submitted by Mr Kaul, it must be noted that
the company was not acting as a collecting agent for the respondent No.3. It was
entitled under the agreement to not only collect, but also to appropriate and retain the
same. In fact, the agreement goes to the extent of indemnifying the company by virtue
of Article 13.1 (e) in cases where, for reasons beyond their control, they are unable to
make the collections, as contemplated under the agreement.

15.

Accordingly, while I hold that this writ petition is maintainable, the same

is not tenable on merits. Therefore, the writ petition stands dismissed.
BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
March 06, 2007

δυττ

WP(C) 5686-87/06

Page No.15 of 15

