THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 04.05.2007

+

CRLREV. P. No.498/1997

DR AJIT GUPTA

... Petitioner
- versus -

STATE AND ANOTHER

... Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr P.N. Lekhi, Sr Advocate with Ms Seema Gulati,
Ms Rajni Gupta and Mr Anurag Ahluwalia
For the Respondent/State
: Mr V.K. Malik
For the Complainant
: Mr Kanwal Nain with Mr Praveen Singhai

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

YES

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

YES

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

YES

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J
1.

This revision petition is directed against the order dated 18.11.1997

passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge allowing the revision petition
filed by the complainant (Yashpal Singh) in respect of an order dated
19.02.1997 whereby the petitioner had been discharged by the learned
Metropolitan Magistrate.

2.

A complaint was filed by the respondent No.2 (Yashpal Singh)

alleging that offences under Sections 403/405/420 IPC had been committed by
CRL REV.P. 498/97

Page No.1 of 16

the petitioner [Dr Ajit Gupta] (referred to as accused No.1 in the complaint)
and one Mr Chaman Lal (referred to as the accused No.2 in the complaint). It
was alleged that on 29.07.1983 the petitioner dishonestly and fraudulently
misrepresented that he was competent to sell the bus bearing Registration No.
DEP 4301. It is alleged that the respondent No.2, the complainant, agreed to
purchase the said bus for a sum of Rs.2,55,000/- less the bank loan to the tune
of Rs.1,65,000/-. The complainant was, therefore, required to pay a sum of
Rs.90,000/- only and the petitioner was to hand over all the papers of the said
bus and transfer the complete rights of the bus. It is further alleged that
thereafter the petitioner represented that the complainant could pay Rs.55,000/and the remaining Rs.35,000/- would be collected by him through cheques from
the Delhi Transport Corporation (DTC) as the bus was running under the DTC
operation. It was further alleged that the complainant was to bear the diesel,
maintenance, salary of driver and cleaner and other maintenance and
operational charges. On this representation, it is alleged that the complainant
paid Rs.5,000/-. On 03.09.1983, the petitioner is alleged to have received a
sum of Rs.50,000/- against receipt.

In this way, it is alleged that the

complainant paid the agreed amount of Rs.55,000/-. It is alleged that in the
second / third week of November, 1983, the complainant came to know that a
sum of Rs.10,000/- was to be deposited in Bank as installment of the loan. The
petitioner had promised to deposit the said installment of loan alongwith road
tax arrears and the insurance premium. The complainant allegedly incurred all
CRL REV.P. 498/97

Page No.2 of 16

the maintenance and operational charges.

It is alleged that the petitioner

received Rs.51,754.72 from DTC. Apparently, on 12.01.1984, the bus met with
an accident and the complainant asked the petitioner to inform the insurance
company on which the petitioner reportedly disclosed that the bus was not
insured. Thereafter, the complainant was asked to compromise the matter. The
complainant spent a certain amount of money on repairs and came to know that
the road tax was also not deposited since 04.04.1983. It is alleged that on
29.02.1984, the complainant was surprised to learn from the office of the DTC
that the accused (Chaman Lal) stopped the delivery of cheques. On being
contacted, both the accused persons, i.e., Dr Ajit Gupta and Mr Chaman Lal
agreed that the road tax and insurance premium as well as the bank installments
would be paid by Mr Chaman Lal and thereafter, necessary transfer papers
would be executed. In this manner, the accused persons dishonestly induced
the complainant to continue to operate the bus and the complainant incurred
maintenance and operational charges. The complainant allegedly took a loan of
Rs.80,000/- for incurring the said maintenance and operational charges. It is
alleged that Mr Chaman Lal collected cheques for Rs.18,292.60 and
fraudulently encashed the same by depositing them in some other account. In
May, 1984, it is alleged that Mr Chaman Lal and the complainant opened a
joint account in New Bank of India in its branch at Subzi Mandi, Ghantaghar,
Delhi. It is alleged that the complainant used to deposit cheques collected by
him from DTC in the said account. Apparently, on 19.09.1984, the bus was
CRL REV.P. 498/97

Page No.3 of 16

seized by the Traffic Police on account of non-production of the Registration
Certificate and fitness certificate and on 04.10.1984, the DTC directed the
suspension of operation of the said bus. On 10.12.1984, the bus is said to have
met with an accident and for which a case under Section 279/304-A IPC was
registered at Police Station Kalkaji. It is alleged that Mr Chaman Lal took the
bus on superdari and removed the same for repairs. Thereafter, the accused
persons did not return the bus to the complainant and, therefore, the complaint
was made for offences under Sections 420/406 IPC.

3.

It is noted in the order of the Metropolitan Magistrate dated

19.02.1997 that after recording of the preliminary evidence, the petitioner (Dr
Ajit Gupta) was summoned by an order dated 28.01.1987, whereas the
complaint against Mr Chaman Lal was dismissed. In the same order dated
19.02.1997, it is noted that pre-charge evidence was recorded and the
complainant examined four witnesses, including himself. It appears that PW-1
[Ratan Singh] was a witness of the Agreement to Sell and the payment of
Rs.5,000/-. PW-2 [S.P. Gupta] deposed with regard to the opening of the joint
account of the complainant [Mr Chaman Lal]. PW-3 [Ram Nath] was from the
DTC and he deposed about payments made by DTC to the authorised person.
PW-4 (Yash Pal) was the complainant himself and he reiterated the allegations
made in the complaint. The learned Metropolitan Magistrate noted that the
offence of cheating is sought to be made out from the allegations that the
CRL REV.P. 498/97

Page No.4 of 16

petitioner (Dr Ajit Gupta) dishonestly misrepresented that he was competent to
sell the bus. But the learned Metropolitan Magistrate was of the view that this
has not been established because the co-accused [Chaman Lal] never disputed
the authority of Dr Ajit Gupta to dispose of the bus. With regard to nonpayment of road tax and not getting the bus insured, the learned Metropolitan
Magistrate was of the view that these facts ought to have been verified by the
complainant before he entered into the deal.

The learned Metropolitan

Magistrate also observed that the complainant only paid Rs.55,000/- and he was
to pay an additional amount of Rs.1,65,000/- towards the bank loan and adjust a
sum of Rs.35,000/- out of the cheques to be collected by the accused from
DTC. The operational changes were to be incurred by him. The learned
Metropolitan Magistrate came to the conclusion that the sum total of the
amounts payable by the petitioner did not come to more than the amount to be
paid by the complainant and that, therefore, the complainant was not a loser.
The learned Metropolitan Magistrate concluded that simply because the
agreement to sell the bus did not materialise, it did not amount to the making
out of an offence. He further observed that the complainant could have availed
his remedy by filing a civil suit for specific performance of the agreement.
Accordingly, he did not find any prima facie case against the petitioner also and
discharged him.

CRL REV.P. 498/97

Page No.5 of 16

4.

Being aggrieved by this order of discharge, the complainant (Yash

Pal Singh) filed a revision petition (CR No.231/1997) before the learned
Additional Sessions Judge. It was contended on his behalf that the petitioner
had been discharged at the pre-summoning stage and the petitioner had yet to
go to trial and there was sufficient prima facie material for framing a notice
against the petitioner in view of the averments made in the complaint as also in
the pre-summoning evidence. It was argued on behalf of the complainant that
the petitioner had all along held out that he had the authority to sell the bus
which had been purchased by the complainant from the petitioner. It was
submitted that this was a misrepresentation made by the petitioner with
fraudulent intent and that the petitioner knew well that he did not have the
authority to make these representations.

Therefore, according to the

complainant, the ingredients of the offences under Section 420 IPC were clearly
made out.

The learned Additional Sessions Judge, after considering the

arguments advanced by the counsel for the parties and examining the presummoning evidence, was of the view that there were allegations that the
petitioner had misrepresented fraudulently that he would pay the road tax,
insurance premium and the bank installment arrears and thereafter in
conspiracy with Chaman Lal, both of them connived together to cheat him of
the bus. It is further indicated that on the misrepresentation of Dr Ajit Gupta
and Chaman Lal, the petitioner agreed to incur further maintenance charges but
after the accident the said Chaman Lal took away the bus on superdari and
CRL REV.P. 498/97

Page No.6 of 16

thereafter did not return the same to the petitioner. The learned Additional
Sessions Judge came to the conclusion that at this stage, the role of Dr Ajit
Gupta in the alleged offence cannot be excluded totally and that, therefore, the
order of the learned Metropolitan Magistrate was liable to be set aside and,
accordingly, directed that the petitioner be summoned as, prima facie, the
ingredients of Section 420 were made out against him. The learned Additional
Sessions Judge concluded as under:“Admittedly the initial transaction of the complainant
Yashpal was with Dr. Ajit Gupta and it was on his
misrepresentation that he had paid a sum of Rs.55,000/- for
the purchase of the bus but thereafter on subsequent
assurances by Dr. Ajit Gupta the complainant entered into
direct negotiations and dealings with accused Chaman Lal.
The complainant nevertheless has been deprived on his bus
which he had purchased and for which he had paid a sum of
Rs.55,000/- balance of which had to be paid in the course of
the running of the bus. Complainant had also incurred
operational charges for running the vehicles. Intention of
Dr. Ajit Gupta was prima facie dishonest causing a
wrongful loss to the complainant and this is clear from the
body of the complaint as also in the pre-summoning
evidence including the deposition on oath of CW-1 Yashpal
prima facie there is sufficient material for proceeding with
those accused Dr. Ajit Gupta U/s 420 IPC and he
accordingly be summoned. Revision petition allowed in the
aforesaid terms. Trial court record be returned. Parties to
appear before the ld. Trial court on 8.12.97.”
5.

Mr P.N. Lekhi, the learned senior counsel who appeared on behalf

of the petitioner, referred to the provisions of Section 245 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Code') which relates to
the discharge of an accused. The said section provides that if, upon taking all
CRL REV.P. 498/97

Page No.7 of 16

the evidence referred to in section 244, the Magistrate considers, for reasons to
be recorded, that no case against the accused has been made out which, if
unrebutted, would warrant his conviction, the Magistrate shall discharge him.
Mr Lekhi also submitted that it was clearly within the powers of the
Metropolitan Magistrate to have discharged the petitioner, after taking into
account the evidence referred to in Section 244 of the Code. He submitted that
the dispute between the parties was entirely of a civil nature without any
trappings of a criminal offence.

He also submitted that the Metropolitan

Magistrate had noted categorically that in the complaint it is nowhere indicated
that Chaman Lal had disputed the purported authority of the petitioner to sell
the bus. In the absence of such an allegation, it cannot be said that there was
material on record to indicate that the petitioner sold the bus or negotiated its
sale even when he did not have the authority to do so.

6.

He referred to the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of

Hari Prasad Chamaria v. Bishun Kumar Surekha and Others: 1973 (2) SCC
823. Paragraph 4 of the said decision was read out and the same reads as
under:“4.
We have heard Mr. Maheshwari on behalf of the
appellant and are of the opinion that no case has been made
out against the respondents under Section 420 Indian Penal
Code. For the purpose of the present appeal, we would
assume that the various allegations of fact which have been
made in the complaint by the appellant are correct. Even
after making that allowance, we find that the complaint does
CRL REV.P. 498/97

Page No.8 of 16

not disclose the commission of any offence on the part of the
respondents under Section 420 Indian Penal Code. There is
nothing in the complaint to show that the respondents had
dishonest or fraudulent intention at the time the appellant
parted with Rs.35,000. There is also nothing to indicate that
the respondents induced the appellant to pay them Rs.35,000
by deceiving him. It is further not the case of the appellant
that a representation was made by the respondents to him at
or before the time he paid the money to them and that at the
time the representation was made, the respondents knew the
same to be false. The fact that the respondents subsequently
did not abide by their commitment that they would show the
appellant to be the proprietor of Drang Transport Corporation
and would also render accounts to him in the month of
December might create civil liability for them, but this fact
would not be sufficient to fasten criminal liability on the
respondents for the offence of cheating.”
Reading the above extract, it is apparent that the Supreme Court found the
various allegations of fact made in the complaint to be correct for the purposes
of coming to the conclusion as to whether the offence under Section 420 IPC
was made out or not. The Supreme Court concluded on the facts of that case
that even after making that allowance, the complaint did not disclose any
offence on the part of the respondents therein under Section 420 IPC.
Importantly, the Supreme Court noted that there was nothing in the complaint
to show that the respondents had dishonest or fraudulent intention at the time
the appellant parted with the money. There was nothing to indicate that the
respondents induced the appellant to pay the money by deceiving him. The fact
that the respondents subsequently did not abide by the commitment would
render them liable to civil action, but would not be sufficient to fasten criminal

CRL REV.P. 498/97

Page No.9 of 16

liability on the respondents for the offence of cheating. This decision of the
Supreme Court was relied upon by Mr Lekhi to show that in the complaint, as
in the present case also, in the pre-summoning evidence, there is no averment
that from the very inception, the petitioner knew the representation to be false
and not to be acted upon. Subsequently, if the events have worked out to the
detriment of the complainant, it cannot be a ground for constituting an offence
under Section 420 IPC.

7.

The next decision referred to by Mr Lekhi was that of the Supreme

Court in the case of Haridaya Ranjan P.D. Verma v. State of Bihar and
Another: 2000 (4) SCC 168 wherein the Supreme Court brought out the
distinction between a mere breach of contract and the offence of cheating. The
Supreme Court held as under:“15.
On a reading of the section it is manifest that in
the definition there are set forth two separate classes of acts
which the person deceived may be induced to do. In the
first place he may be induced fraudulently or dishonestly to
deliver any property to any person. The second class of acts
set forth in the section is the doing or omitting to do
anything which the person deceived would not do or omit to
do if he were not so deceived. In the first class of cases the
inducing must be fraudulent or dishonest. In the second
class of acts, the inducing must be intentional but not
fraudulent or dishonest.
16.
In determining the question it has to be kept in
mind that the distinction between mere breach of contract
and the offence of cheating is a fine one. It depends upon
the intention of the accused at the time of inducement
which may be judged by his subsequent conduct but for this
CRL REV.P. 498/97

Page No.10 of 16

subsequent conduct is not the sole test. Mere breach of
contract cannot give rise to criminal prosecution far
cheating unless fraudulent or dishonest intention is shown
right at the beginning of the transaction, that is the time
when the offence is said to have been committed.
Therefore it is the intention which is the gist of the offence.
To hold a person guilty of cheating it is necessary to show
that he had fraudulent or dishonest intention at the time of
making the promise. From his mere failure to keep up
promise subsequently such a culpable intention right at the
beginning that is, when he had the promise cannot be
presumed.”
8.

The last decision referred to by Mr Lekhi was that of the Supreme

Court in the case of Alpic Finance Ltd v. P. Sadasivan & Another: 2001 I AD
(Cr.) S.C. 467. In particular, he referred to paragraphs 10, 11 and 12 of the
said judgment which read as under:“10.

The facts in the present case have to be appreciated
in the light of the various decisions of this Court. When
somebody suffers injury to his person, property or reputation, he
may have remedies both under civil and criminal law. The injury
alleged may form basis of civil claim and may also constitute the
ingredients of some crime punishable under criminal law. When
there is dispute between the parties arising out of a transaction
involving passing of valuable properties between them, the
aggrieved person may have right to sue for damages or
compensation and at the same time, law permits the victim to
proceed against the wrongdoer for having committed an offence
of criminal breach of trust or cheating. Here the main offence
alleged by the appellant is that respondents committed the offence
under Section 420 I.P.C. and the case of the appellant is that
respondents have cheated him and thereby dishonestly induced
him to deliver property. To deceive is to induce a man to believe
that a thing is true which is false and which the person practicing
and deceit knows or believes to be false. It must also be shown
that there existed a fraudulent and dishonest intention at the time
of commission of the offence. There is no allegation that the
respondents made any willful misrepresentation. Even according
to the appellant, partiest entered into a valid lease agreement and
the grievance of the appellant is that the respondents failed to
CRL REV.P. 498/97

Page No.11 of 16

discharge their contractual obligations. In the complaint, there is
no allegation that there was fraud or dishonest inducement on the
part of the respondents and thereby the respondents parted with
the property. It is trite law and common sense that an honest man
entering into a contract is deemed to represent that he has the
present intention of carrying it out but if, having accepted the
pecuniary advantage involved in the transaction, he fails to pay
his debt, he does not necessarily evade the debt by deception.
11.
Moreover, the appellant has no case that the
respondents obtained the article by any fraudulent inducement or
by willful misrepresentation. We are told that respondents,
though committed default in paying some installments, have paid
substantial amount towards the consideration.

Having regard to the facts and circumstances, it
is difficult to discern an element of deception in the whole
transaction, whereas it is palpably evident that the appellant
had an oblique motive of causing harassment to the
respondents by seizing the entire articles through magisterial
proceedings. We are of the view that the learned judge was
perfectly justified in quashing the proceedings and we are
disinclined to interfere in such matters.”
12.

On the basis of these decisions, Mr Lekhi submitted that the impugned order
was incorrect and was liable to be set aside and that of the learned Metropolitan
Magistrate ought to be restored and the petitioner ought to be discharged.

9.

The learned counsel for the complainant was also heard. He, first

of all, referred to PW-1/A which is the receipt in respect of the said bus and this
receipt shows the sale of the bus and the name of the seller has been shown as
Dr Ajit Gupta. He has also signed the same. The learned counsel for the
complainant submitted that this document is sufficient to indicate that it was a

CRL REV.P. 498/97

Page No.12 of 16

clear cut case of cheating because the petitioner has signed the same as the
seller when he admittedly did not own the bus. He has pretended to sell the bus
even though he did not own the same. The learned counsel referred to the
provisions of Section 415 of the IPC and in particular to illustrations (a) and (i)
thereof which read as under:“(a) A, by falsely pretending to be in the Civil Service,
intentionally deceives Z, and thus dishonestly induces Z to
let him have on credit goods for which he does not mean to
pay. A cheats.
xxxx
(i)

10.

xxxx

xxxx

xxxx

xxxx

A sells and coveys an estate to B. A, knowing that in
consequence of such sale he has no right to the property,
sells or mortgages the same to Z, without disclosing the fact
of the previous sale and conveyance to B, and receives the
purchase or mortgage money for Z. A cheats.”
The learned counsel appearing for the complainant then referred to

the deposition of PW-4 (Yashpal Singh). In his examination-in-chief, he has
stated as under:“Dr Ajit Gupta knew it well that the bus was not in his name
and that it was in the name of Chaman Lal. If I knew this
fact, I would not have paid any money; nor would I have
spent any money.”
In cross-examination, PW-4 (Yashpal Singh) has, inter alia, stated as under:“I had never run any transport business earlier. It is correct
that I was working as conductor on a DTC bus. I do not
know how the bus is being financed from Financing
Authorities. The total deal for the bus was Rs.2,55,000/- out
of that Rs.55,000/- was paid in cash. It is correct that after
paying Rs.55,000/- I took the bus and started plying it in
CRL REV.P. 498/97

Page No.13 of 16

DTC. It is correct that I was aware that the rest of the
amount is a bank loan which has to be paid by me. I do not
know who used to get cheques from DTC as the said bus was
plying under DTC prior to my purchasing the said bus. After
purchasing the bus Dr. Ajit Gupta used to give me authority
letter about which I do not know whose signature used to be
on that authority letter but on the basis of that authority letter,
I used to collect cheques from DTC and used to give it to Dr.
Ajit Gupta. I have brought four or five cheques from DTC.
It is wrong that Dr. Ajit Gupta deposited the road tax and
insurance premium of the said bus after 4-9-83. It is correct
that Dr. Ajit Gupta deposited Rs.10,000/- towards the bank
loan after 4-9-83 i.e. after I had purchased the bus. It is
correct that I did not have the money to deposit two
installments towards the bank oloan of the bus as a result I
requested Dr. Ajit Gupta to deposit Rs.10,000/- towards the
bank loan. It is also correct that I told Dr. Ajit Gupta that he
can recover this amount alongwith the amount of Rs.35,000/because I had to pay Rs.35,000/- to Mr. Ajit Gupta. It is
correct that I did not pay any cash other than Rs.55,000/- to
Dr. Ajit Gupta. I also did not take any loan from Dr. Ajit
Gupta. It is correct that despite my asking Dr. Ajit Gupta did
not deposit the road tax and insurance premium of the bus
after I had purchased the bus. I did not know Chaman Lal
before 19.2.84. After 19.2.84 I and Chaman Lal opened a
joint account in the bank. I used to deposit cheque received
from DTC in that account and withdraw the amount. After
May, 84, the bus plied with DTC till November 84. During
this 7/8 months I did not lodge any report of cheating. It is
wrong to suggest that I did not deposit any installment of
bank loan during the said period, or that Chaman Lal took the
bus on account of non-deposit of the installment.
I met Chaman Lal of my own at the information
of DTC. It is wrong to suggest that accused Dr. Ajit Gupta
introduced me with Chaman Lal as the owner of the bus. I
told Chaman Lal that I have purchased the bus from Dr. Ajit
Gupta. It is wrong to suggest that I have deposed falsely or
that I had filed a false complaint as Chaman Lal has taken
my bus.”

CRL REV.P. 498/97

Page No.14 of 16

11.

The learned counsel then referred to the decision of Shivanarayan

Kabra v. The State of Madras: 1967 Cri. L.J. 946 and in particular paragraph
4 thereof which reads as under:“4.
It was argued, in the first place, on behalf of the
appellant that on the admitted or proved facts no case of
cheating has been made out against the appellant and,
therefore, his conviction under S. 420, Indian Penal Code
was illegal. We are unable to accept this argument as
correct. It has been found that the appellant sent a letter,
Ex. P-34 along with a copy fo the business terms, Ex.34 a)
“on which we undertake business of four clients”. In this
document the appellant has made the representation that he
could do business in forward contracts in cotton, grains,
seeds, bullion, black pepper, etc., in accordance with the
pucca adatia system and “in accordance with the usual
practice and usage of the various associations concerned.”
In Exhibit P-33 the appellant sent a telegram to P.W. 2
intimating that “buying is advisable for quick profits”. The
appellant knew fully well that he had no right to do forward
business and that he was not a member of any recognised
association and that he could not lawfully advertise to P.W.
2 for investment in forward contracts. It is not necessary
that a false pretence should be made in express words by the
appellant. It may be inferred from all the circumstances
including the conduct of the appellant in obtaining the
property and in Ex. P-34 (a) the appellant stated something
which was not true and concealed from P.W.2 the fact that
he was not a member of any recognised association and that
he was not entitled to carry on the forward contract
business. It is clear that P.W.2 would not have parted with
the sum of Rs.12,000 but for the inducement contained in
Ex.P-34 and the representation of the appellant that he
could lawfully carry on forward contract business.”
12.

Considering the arguments advanced by the counsel for the parties

and examining the material on record, it does appear that the complaint as well
as the pre-summoning evidence discloses that the petitioner held himself out to
CRL REV.P. 498/97

Page No.15 of 16

be the owner of the bus, when, in fact, he was not the owner. On the basis of
this misrepresentation, he induced the complainant to part with money and also
expend money on the maintenance and operation of the bus. Despite this, the
bus has not been transferred to the complainant. Therefore, in my view, the
learned Additional Sessions Judge was correct in holding that, prima facie, a
case was made out on the basis of the averments contained in the complaint and
the pre-summoning evidence to proceed against the petitioner for the alleged
offence punishable under Section 420 IPC.

13.

Accordingly, the impugned order does not call for any interference

and this revision petition is dismissed.
BADAR DURREZ AHMED
( JUDGE )
May 04, 2007

CRL REV.P. 498/97

Page No.16 of 16

