THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Judgment delivered on :02.07.2007
WP(C) No.18188/2006
AMITY UNIVERSITY UTTAR PRADESH

...Petitioner

- versus UNION OF INDIA & ORS.

...Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr Neeraj Kaul, Sr. Advocate with Mr Vinay Garg and
Mr Rajesh Yadav
For the Respondent No.1
: Mr Mukesh Anand with Mr Shailesh Tiwry and
Ms Zeba Tarannum
For the Respondent No.2
: Mr Vikas Singh, ASG with Mr Amitesh Kumar
For the Respondent No. 3
: Mr Ved Prakash Garg

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J
1.

This writ petition is directed against the inaction of the respondent

No.2 [University Grants Commission] (UGC) in not including the petitioner in
the list maintained by it of universities as defined under Section 2(f) of the
University Grants Commission Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the UGC
Act).

The writ petition is also directed against the respondent No.3 (Indian

Nursing Council) inasmuch as the respondent No.3 has not granted approval for

WP(C)18188.06

Page No.1 of 21

recognition to the petitioner university under the Indian Nursing Council Act,
1947 on the ground that the petitioner university is not included in the list
maintained by the University Grants Commission.

2.

The UGC has a website on the internet (www.ugc.ac.in). Under the

category of “Inside Higher Education” there is a sub-category —
“universities”.

The list of universities can be examined State-wise. The

petitioner is a university in Uttar Pradesh. The list of universities in respect of
Uttar Pradesh does not include the petitioner's name. The list includes various
other universities such as a central university (funded by UGC), deemed
university (not funded by UGC), deemed university (funded by UGC), state
university (funded by UGC), state university (not funded by UGC), state private
university (not funded by UGC) and Institute of National Importance (not
funded by UGC).

3.

The grievance of the petitioner is that because of the non-inclusion

of the petitioner in the said list of universities for Uttar Pradesh, the petitioner is
suffering serious consequences.

As an illustration, it has been pointed out by

Mr Neeraj Kaul, the learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the
petitioner, that students of the petitioner university have been denied admission
by foreign universities in higher courses on the ground that the petitioner
university is not in the UGC list. Copies of letters from such students have
WP(C)18188.06

Page No.2 of 21

been placed on record at pages 73-77 of the paper book. The Institute of
Chartered Accountants of India had denied registration to one of the students of
the petitioner university on the ground that he is ineligible because he is a
student of an unrecognized university.

The Indian Nursing Council has

refused recognition to the petitioner because of want of “UGC Notification”. A
copy of a letter dated 26.06.06 from the said Council returning the inspection
fees is annexed as Annexure P-5 to the petition. Organizations in USA dealing
with equivalence of degrees have refused to entertain the status of the petitioner
university on account of the fact that it is not listed with the UGC and is not
included in the list of universities maintained on the UGC website. Copies of
e-mails to this effect are placed at pages 115-116 of the paper book.

4.

The petitioner is, therefore, aggrieved by the non-inclusion of its

name in the list of universities maintained by the UGC in its website. It is in
this context that the petitioner has prayed for a writ, direction or order in the
nature of mandamus directing the respondent No.2 (UGC) to incorporate the
name of the petitioner in the list of universities as maintained by it.

A further

prayer has been sought in respect of the Indian Nursing Council to consider the
application of the petitioner for grant of recognition to its qualification under
the Indian Nursing Council Act without insisting for the Notification listing the
petitioner in the list maintained by UGC. It is also prayed that a writ, direction
or order in the nature of mandamus be issued declaring the degree awarded by
WP(C)18188.06

Page No.3 of 21

the University as a degree specified under Section 22 of the UGC Act without
listing of the university by the UGC.

5.

Looking at the contentions and the grievances of the petitioner, it is

apparent that the main issue in this writ petition is whether the UGC is within
its rights not to include the name of the petitioner university in the non-statutory
list maintained by it of universities falling within the meaning of Section 2 (f)
of the UGC Act.

6.

It has been contended by Mr Kaul that the petitioner university

clearly falls within the definition of “University” given in Section 2(f) of the
UGC Act. Section 2(f) reads as under:“2.
Definitions. — In this Act, unless the context
otherwise, requires,(a)

xxxxxxxx

(b)

xxxxxxxx

(c)

xxxxxxxx

(d)

xxxxxxxx

(e)

xxxxxxxx

(f)
“University” means a University established or
incorporated by or under a Central Act, a Provincial Act or
a State Act, and includes any such institution as may, in
consultation with the University concerned, be recognized
by the Commission in accordance with the regulations made
in this behalf under this Act.”
WP(C)18188.06

Page No.4 of 21

Mr Kaul further submitted that the petitioner university was established and
incorporated under a State Act, namely, the Amity University Uttar Pradesh
Act, 2005. Therefore, according to him, it was a university falling under
Section 2(f) of the UGC Act. He submitted that this in itself was sufficient and
did not require further consideration of the inclusive definition which only
pertains to other institutions which could, in consultation with the university
concerned, be recognized by the Commission in accordance with the
regulations made in this behalf under the UGC Act.

He submitted that the

moment a university was incorporated and established by a State Act, it was a
university as defined under Section 2(f) of the UGC Act. He further submitted
that the list of universities that is being maintained by the UGC on its website
is, admittedly, a list of universities falling under Section 2(f) of the UGC Act.
In this context, he referred to paragraph 13 and 14 of the counter-affidavit filed
on behalf of the UGC which read as under:“13.
That it is respectfully submitted that UGC
maintains a list of Universities recognized under Section 2(f)
of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956. A new
private university is included in the said list after evaluating
the physical and academic infrastructure and other aspects
pertaining to maintenance of standard of higher education with
help of an expert committee. The UGC while considering the
request of a private University also requires certain
information from the concerned University.
14.
That it is respectfully submitted that for inclusion
of a private University under Section 2(f) of the UGC Act,
1956, the UGC deputes an expert Committee for physical
verification of academic and physical infrastructure of the
WP(C)18188.06

Page No.5 of 21

concerned University and all other aspects for maintenance of
standard of education. It is submitted that thereafter, the
report of the expert committee is considered by the
Commission and after the approval of the Commission, the
name of such private University is included in the list of
recognized University being maintained by the UGC.”
It was submitted that the list pertains to universities falling under Section 2(f)
of the UGC Act. The recognition, however, mentioned in the extracted portion
of the counter-affidavit would only relate to the inclusive part of the definition
of Section 2(f) of the UGC Act and would pertain to institutions which are not
universities established and / or incorporated under a Central Act or a
Provincial Act or a State Act.

7.

Mr

Kaul

submitted

that

the

expression

“established

or

incorporated” appearing in Section 2(f) of the UGC Act has to be read as
“established and incorporated” in view of the Supreme Court decision in the
case of Prof. Yashpal and Another v. State of Chhattisgarh and Others:
(2005) 5 SCC 420 (see paragraph 59 thereof) to the following effect:“............. We are of the opinion that having regard to the
constitutional scheme and in order to ensure that the
enactment made by Parliament, namely, the University
Grants Commission Act is able to achieve the objective for
which it has been made and UGC is able to perform its
duties and responsibilities, and further that the State
enactment does not come in conflict with the Central
legislation and create any hindrance or obstacle in the
working of the latter, it is necessary to read the expression
“established or incorporated” as “established and

WP(C)18188.06

Page No.6 of 21

incorporated” insofar as the private universities
concerned.”

are

It was submitted by Mr Kaul that there is no difficulty with this interpretation
inasmuch as the petitioner has been both established and incorporated by the
Amity University Uttar Pradesh Act, 2005. The preamble of this Act reads as
under:“An Act to establish and incorporate a teaching University
sponsored by Ritnand Balved Education Foundation, New
Delhi at Gautam Buddha Nagar in Uttar Pradesh and to
provide for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.”
Section 3 of the said Act reads as under:“3.
Establishment of the University.— (1) There
shall be established at Gautam Buddha Nagar, Uttar Pradesh
a University by the Foundation in the name of the Amity
University Uttar Pradesh.
(2)
8.

The University shall be a body corporate.”

In the context of the aforesaid provisions, it was submitted by Mr

Kaul that the petitioner university was established and incorporated by the
enactment itself and, therefore, the petitioner was a university as contemplated
under section 2 (f) of the UGC Act. It was further contended that the Amity
University Uttar Pradesh Act, 2005 itself required stringent conditions for the
establishment of the university. The conditions were prescribed in Section 4
with regard to possession of a minimum 50 acres or more of contiguous land.
It was also necessary to construct, on the said land, buildings of at least 24,000

WP(C)18188.06

Page No.7 of 21

sq. mts carpet area out of which at least 50% was to be used for academic and
administrative purposes.

It was incumbent upon the university to install

equipments in offices and laboratories worth a minimum of Rs.5 crores in the
said buildings. The university was required to appoint teachers and establish
infrastructure of the departments/ schools for the purpose of teaching and / or
research in at least seven subjects as per standards laid down by the UGC.
There were other conditions also stipulated. Section 5 of the Act required that
the university shall start operation only after the State Government issues to the
Foundation a letter of authorization for the commencement of the functioning
of the University.

The said Section also provided that the State Government

shall issue the letter of authorization on receipt of an unambiguous affidavit
along with documents by the Foundation to the effect that all conditions
referred to in Section 4 had been fulfilled. Section 8 of the Amity University
Uttar Pradesh Act, 2005, inter alia, provided that the university shall ensure
that the academic standards of the courses offered by it would be in accordance
with the guidelines of the UGC and that the teacher-student ratio shall also be
in accordance with the guidelines of the UGC.

Reading the aforesaid

provisions, Mr Kaul submitted that the petitioner was not a mere “Shell” or
“Paper entity” but had been duly established and incorporated with full
infrastructure and functionality in the sense contemplated under Section 2(f) of
the UGC Act and by the Supreme Court in Prof. Yashpal (supra). There is no
dispute also with the jurisdiction of the UGC in laying down the standards of
WP(C)18188.06

Page No.8 of 21

education and or in maintaining the same.

That is not disputed by the

petitioner. The only question here, according to Mr Kaul, is the arbitrary,
discriminatory and unreasonable exclusion of the petitioner from the list of
universities notified on the website of UGC.

9.

It was pointed out that in the context of the conditions prescribed

under Section 4 of the Amity University Uttar Pradesh Act, 2005, the petitioner
university had in possession more than 60 acres of land. The university already
had 1,10,000 sq. mts of built up area and a further 70,000 sq. mts was under
construction. The petitioner university had also installed equipments worth
approximately Rs.20 crores.

The petitioner university had also appointed

teachers and established an infrastructure far in excess of the requirements
indicated in Section 4 of the said Act. After fulfilling the conditions stipulated
in Section 4 of this Act, an affidavit had been filed as indicated in Section 5 and
the State Government through its letter dated 31.05.2005, issued by the
Secretary, Higher Education Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh,
granted approval for issuance of the authorization letter for the commencement
of functioning of Amity University.
Annexure P-1 to the petition.

A copy of this letter is annexed as

It was also pointed out in the petition that the

petitioner has also established a permanent endowment fund of Rs.2.25 crores
as against the requirement of Rs. 1 crore under Section 40(1) of the Amity
University Uttar Pradesh Act, 2005. Apart from all this, it is stated that the
WP(C)18188.06

Page No.9 of 21

petitioner university has campuses at Gautam Budh Nagar and Lucknow where
the petitioner is imparting higher education in many fields including
Nanotechnology,

Biotechnology,

Forensic

Science,

Management

and

Engineering and approximately 15,400 students had been enrolled and were
studying in various courses conducted by the petitioner university. It is also
mentioned in the petition that the Government of India, Ministry of Science &
Technology has accorded recognition to the petitioner university as a Scientific
and Industrial

Research Organization under the scheme of recognition of

Scientific and Industrial Research Organizations. The letter of recognition was
issued by the Government of India, Ministry of Science & Technology on
06.03.2006. The sum and substance of the reference to all this, according to Mr
Kaul, is that the petitioner university is not a shell or a hollow concern. It is not
one of those universities which were frowned upon by the Supreme Court in the
case of Prof. Yashpal (supra) and which had sprouted in the State of
Chhattisgarh under the provisions of Section 5 and 6 of the Chhattisgarh
Private Universities Act, 2004. It was contended by Mr Kaul that in the case of
Prof. Yashpal (supra), Sections 5 and 6 of the Chhattisgarh Act were under
challenge as they permitted incorporation or establishment of a university
through State Government Notifications on mere proposals on paper without
establishment of any infrastructure or teaching facilities etc. In Prof. Yashpal
(supra), it was noted that under the provisions of Section 5 & 6 of the
Chhattisgarh Act about 112 universities were established within a year and
WP(C)18188.06

Page No.10 of 21

many of them had no building or campuses and were running from one room
tenements. It is in this context that Sections 5 & 6 of the Chhattisgarh Act were
declared as unconstitutional by the Supreme Court in Prof. Yashpal (supra).
The situation is entirely different in the present case because, firstly, the
petitioner university has been incorporated and established by a separate State
Act. Secondly, the petitioner university is not the kind of university which was
under the scanner in Prof. Yashpal (supra). It has full infrastructural facilities
and, in fact, beyond the requirements of the Amity University Uttar Pradesh
Act, 2005, as indicated above.

10.

Mr Kaul further submitted that the petitioner after having been

incorporated and established, made an application on 01.06.2005 to the UGC
for inclusion of its name in the list of universities maintained by it. Thereafter,
the UGC constituted an expert committee and required the petitioner to submit
information in the prescribed format. The letter was issued by the UGC on
28.07.2005 notifying the list of members of the UGC expert committee to
consider the proposal for inclusion of its name under Section 2(f) of the UGC
Act.

The information for enlistment of the petitioner university under Section

2(f) of the UGC Act was provided by the petitioner finally by the letter dated
20.02.2006 (Annexure P-7) and it was requested that the date of visit of the
expert committee be indicated.

However, it was pointed out by Mr Kaul that

although the committee had been constituted to carry out the inspection and the
WP(C)18188.06

Page No.11 of 21

request had been made, neither the inspection was carried out nor the name of
the petitioner was included in the list of universities maintained by it. It is
because of this complete inaction on the part of the UGC that the present writ
petition has been filed. He submitted that on the one hand the inspection was
not being carried out and on the other hand, the UGC was contending that until
and unless the inspection is carried out the petitioner's name cannot be included
in the said list. Ultimately, Mr Kaul submitted that the only requirement for a
university to fall within Section 2(f) of the UGC Act was that it should have
been incorporated and established by or under a Central Act, a Provincial Act
or a State Act. The petitioner university was incorporated and established by a
State Act and, therefore, there was no reason as to why the UGC did not
include the name of the petitioner in the list of the Section 2(f) universities
maintained by it on its website. This is apart from the question that the UGC in
terms of UGC Act and provisions made thereunder can carry out periodic
inspections and point out deficiencies which need to be rectified from time to
time. No such inspection had been carried out by the UGC nor had any
deficiencies been pointed out which required rectification. Therefore, the noninclusion of the petitioner's name in the list is clearly unreasonable, arbitrary
and discriminatory and is working to the detriment of the university and its
students.

WP(C)18188.06

Page No.12 of 21

11.

On behalf of the UGC, Mr Vikas Singh, the learned Additional

Solicitor General, submitted that the prime issue involved in this writ petition
from his point of view was whether the petitioner had any enforceable right to
seek a mandamus from this Court for getting its name included in the nonstatutory list maintained on the website of the UGC.

The related issues were

whether the UGC was permitted to maintain a list of those universities which
the UGC had inspected and found to be conforming to the standards prescribed
by it?

The question also was whether the UGC could insist on inspecting a

new university to ensure that the same had been properly established before
including the name of such a university in the list maintained by the UGC on its
website? He submitted that the UGC Act had been enacted to make provisions
for the coordination and determination of standards in universities and the said
Act has been enacted in exercise of powers conferred by Entry 66 of List I of
the VIIth Schedule to the Constitution of India. According to Mr Vikas Singh,
the answers to the questions posed by him are to be found in the interplay of
Entry 32 List II and Entry 66 List I of the VIIth Schedule to the Constitution of
India.

According to him, the Supreme Court in the case of Gujarat

University, Ahmadabad v. Krishna Ranganath Mudhokar & Ors. : 1963
Suppl. (1) SCR 112, in the context of Gujarat University, held that a field
occupied by the Central List (List I) was not available for legislation by the
State, even if no Central Law covers the same.

In this context he submitted

that in the instant case, the field is occupied by the Central Act, that is, the
WP(C)18188.06

Page No.13 of 21

UGC Act and, therefore, no part of the said field could be occupied by a State
enactment. Consequently, the power to determine as to whether a university is
up to the requisite standard or not, is exclusively vested in the UGC and no
State enactment can confer the said power onto the State as that would amount
to denuding the UGC of its authority in the matter.

He also referred to the

Supreme Court decisions in the case of Osmania University Teachers'
Association v. State of Andhra Pradesh and Anr.: 1987 (4) SCC 671, State
of T.N. and Anr. v. Adhiyaman Educational & Research Institute and
Ors.: 1995 (4) SCC 104 and State of A.P. v. K. Purushotham Reddy and
Ors.: 2003 (9) SCC 564.

He submitted that the power of the UGC to ensure

that the proper standards are being maintained by the universities also includes
the power to ensure that institutions are not set up without the requisite facility.
He then referred to the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Prof.
Yashpal (supra) to submit that a private university even though incorporated
and established by the State Government cannot be considered to be validly
established unless the standards being maintained in such private universities
are verified and approved by the UGC.

According to Mr Vikas Singh, the

ratio of the judgment in Prof. Yashpal (supra) is that a private university,
although it may have been incorporated and established by a State Government,
would not be considered as a validly established until and unless it has been
duly inspected and verified by the UGC. It was contended that the State
legislature cannot take up the functions which are exclusively vested in the
WP(C)18188.06

Page No.14 of 21

UGC.

He, therefore, contended that the petitioner did not have any

enforceable right to seek a mandamus from the Court for getting its name
included in the non-statutory list maintained on the website of the UGC because
it was well within the rights of the UGC not to include the name of the
petitioner university until and unless it was inspected and verified by the UGC.

12.

In rejoinder, Mr Kaul reiterated that he has no difficulty with the

proposition that the UGC has jurisdiction in laying down the standards of
higher education as well as in ensuring the maintenance of the standards. He
also submitted that there is no conflict between the powers of the UGC under
the Central Act and of the provisions of the State Act (The Amity University
Uttar Pradesh Act, 2005). He also reiterated that the decision of the Supreme
Court in the case of Prof. Yashpal (supra) does not at all relate to a university
such as the petitioner university. Sections 5 and 6 of the Chhattisgarh Act,
which had been struck down by the Supreme Court, permitted the State
Government to establish universities by a notification. In the present case the
State by a legislative enactment has established the petitioner university. It has
not been instituted through a notification. The thrust of the Supreme Court in
the case of Prof. Yashpal (supra) was that universities which have no
infrastructure and are only in the nature of a “shell” should not be permitted to
function and they must be established in the true sense and for this purpose the
UGC had full rights to oversee that the establishment was proper. However, in
WP(C)18188.06

Page No.15 of 21

the present case the petitioner university was established by a specific
legislative

enactment

requiring

rigorous

conditions

with

regard

to

infrastructure. Those conditions have been met and the petitioner university is
not the kind of the university which was frowned upon by the Supreme Court in
the case of Prof. Yashpal (supra).

If there are any shortcomings or

deficiencies, it is always open to the UGC to inform the petitioner university of
its shortcomings and to require the petitioner to remove the shortcomings /
deficiencies. Under Section 26 of the UGC Act, regulations have been framed
which include the UGC (Establishment of and Maintenance of Standards in
Private Universities) Regulations, 2003.

These Regulations and particularly

Regulation 3 thereof clearly provide for the UGC to inspect such private
universities which have been established by a separate State Act. The UGC
after such inspection can ask the private university to remove the shortcomings.
The UGC is also empowered to carry out periodic inspections as provided by
Regulation 4 of the 2003 Regulations. The consequences of violations are
given in Regulation 5, which include the power of the UGC to pass an order
prohibiting the private university from offering any course for the award of the
first degree and/ or the post-graduate degree / diploma, as the case may be, till
the deficiency is rectified. Mr Kaul also submitted that during the pendency of
the present writ petition, a show cause notice was issued to the petitioner in
January, 2007 indicating that the petitioner was running off-campus centres,
that the petitioner had no AICTE approval and directions given in the case of
WP(C)18188.06

Page No.16 of 21

Prof. Yashpal (supra) were not being complied with. He submits that this was
replied to by stating that the petitioner has no off-campus centres and that it
does not require AICTE approval and that no guidelines applicable to the
university were issued in the case of Prof. Yashpal (supra) and as such there
was no question of such guidelines being violated. It was further indicated in
the reply that the petitioner university had complied with all the norms and
standards as laid down by the UGC. Finally, it was submitted by Mr Kaul that
no inspection had been carried out by the UGC and no deficiencies had been
pointed out till date.

13.

Having set out the arguments and counter-arguments of the counsel

in detail, it appears that, first of all, there is no dispute with regard to the power
and jurisdiction of the UGC in laying down standards for higher education and
also to ensure the maintenance of such standards. There is also no need for any
debate on the issue as to whether the expression used in Section 2(f) of the
UGC Act ought to read as “established or incorporated” or as “established and
incorporated”. This dispute has been settled by the Supreme Court in the case
of Prof. Yashpal (supra) by holding that the expression has to be read as
“established and incorporated”. There is also no difficulty with the fact that the
Amity University Uttar Pradesh Act, 2005 by its provisions both incorporated
and established the petitioner university. There is, therefore no necessity, in my
view, to examine the question of interplay between the provisions of Entry 32
WP(C)18188.06

Page No.17 of 21

List II and Entry 66 List I of the VIIth Schedule to the Constitution of India.
The only issue that arises for consideration in the present case is whether the
petitioner is entitled to a direction that its name should be included in the nonstatutory list maintained on the website of the UGC.

14.

There is no dispute that the UGC maintains a non-statutory list of

universities, which according to it, fall under the definition provided in Section
2(f) of the UGC Act. A plain reading of the said provision clearly indicates that
all universities, which have been established and incorporated by a Central Act
or a Provincial Act or a State Act, would be universities contemplated under
Section 2(f) of the said Act. The latter part of the definition, which gives an
inclusive meaning to the word university, relates to institutions other than the
universities which have been established and incorporated by a Central Act or a
Provincial Act or a State Act.

The recognition of the University Grants

Commission is relatable to such institutions and not to the universities which
are referred to in the first part of the definition. It is of course within the power
of the University Grants Commission to undertake inspection of any university
falling within Section 2(f) of the UGC Act and to require any such university to
remove any shortcomings / deficiencies, if found, during the inspection. It is
also open to the UGC to take consequential action as stipulated in Regulation 5
of the 2003 Regulations in respect of private universities incorporated and
established by such enactments. However, I find that there is no provision
WP(C)18188.06

Page No.18 of 21

either in the UGC Act or in the Regulations that has been referred to by the
counsel for the parties, which require a recognition/ approval of the UGC
before a university is regarded as one under Section 2(f) of the UGC Act. All
that is necessary is that the university must have been incorporated and
established by virtue of a Central Act, a Provincial Act or a State Act. This
condition is clearly satisfied in the case of the petitioner university by virtue of
the enactment of the Amity University Uttar Pradesh Act, 2005 and by the
petitioner's compliance with the conditions stipulated in sections 4 and 5
thereof.

15.

The next issue that arises is whether the petitioner can claim

inclusion of its name in the non-statutory list maintained by the UGC on its
website. Normally, the petitioner would not have had any right to have its
name included in a non-statutory list. However, the exclusion of the petitioner
from the list maintained by the UGC on its website has serious consequences,
which have been detailed above.

Therefore, the non-inclusion of the

petitioner's name in the list works to the detriment of the petitioner.

On the

one hand, the UGC has not inspected the petitioner university for over two
years despite repeated requests and on the other hand, it is taking the excuse of
non-inspection as a ground for denying the petitioner its legitimate place in the
list maintained by it. It is beyond the pale of any debate that the UGC is a
public body and performs public functions and although it has discretion in
WP(C)18188.06

Page No.19 of 21

maintaining or not maintaining a list of universities, once the discretion is
exercised, it must be reasonable and not arbitrary. It was open to the UGC not
to maintain a list of universities falling under Section 2(f) of the UGC Act but
having exercised the option of maintaining such a list, it is not open to the UGC
to pick and choose and arbitrarily and unreasonably deny inclusion of the
petitioner's name in the said list even though it falls within the definition of the
word “university” given in Section 2(f) of the UGC Act. This Action on the
part of the UGC is detrimental to the interests of the petitioner as well as to the
students of the petitioner university.

The instances have already been

mentioned above whereby students have been denied admission in foreign
universities in higher courses. The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
has denied registration to the students of the petitioner university and the Indian
Nursing Council has refused recognition merely on the ground that the
petitioner's name is not to be found in the list maintained by the UGC on its
website.

16.

It is in these circumstances that I deem it proper to direct the UGC

to include the name of the petitioner university in the list of universities, as per
Section 2(f) of the UGC Act that is being maintained by it on its website. It is,
of course, open to the UGC to carry out periodic inspections of the petitioner
university and to point out deficiencies, if any, and to require the petitioner

WP(C)18188.06

Page No.20 of 21

university to remove those shortcomings/

deficiencies as also to take

consequential action in case the deficiencies / shortcomings are not removed.

17.

In view of the direction to include the petitioner's name in the said

list maintained by UGC, the other prayers, which relate to situations of noninclusion in the list become irrelevant and no other directions would be
necessary. This writ petition is allowed to the extent indicated above.

No

order as to costs.
BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
July 02, 2007
SR

WP(C)18188.06

Page No.21 of 21

