THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%
+

Judgment delivered on: 08.08.2007
OMP 179/2004

M/S GEO MILLER & CO. PVT. LTD

... Appellant

- versus INDIAN OIL CORPORATION LTD & OTHERS

...Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Appellant
: Mr S.D. Singh with Mr Rahul Kumar Singh
For the Respondents
: None

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3. Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ?
BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

The present appeal is directed against the order passed by the learned

Arbitrator on 12.02.2004 whereby the respondent's application under Section
16 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as 'the
said Act') has been allowed. The respondent had been issued a notice in the
present matter and the respondent has also filed its reply but has chosen not to
appear before this court today. The matter was passed over on first call to
enable the respondent's counsel to be present. Even on second call, nobody is
present on behalf of the respondent, therefore, this court is left with no
alternative but to proceed with the matter in the absence of the respondents.
OMP 179/04

Page No.1 of 5

2.

Certain disputes had arisen between the appellant and the respondent

(Indian Oil Corporation) and the same had been referred to arbitration. During
the course of arbitration, an application under Section 16 of the said Act was
filed by the respondent contending that the issues in dispute before the
Arbitrator could not be referred to arbitration because the claim was not a
notified claim in terms of the contract. Other grounds were also mentioned for
closing the arbitration proceedings.

3.

In the impugned order passed by the learned Arbitrator, the issues

involved have been crystalised. They are:“1)
2)

4.

Whether the present claim is not a notified claim ?
Whether, with the issuance of a no claim certificate
on 03.11.1999 and payment being received thereafter
on 18.11.1999, the contract stood discharged
alongwith the arbitration clause and, therefore, the
present claim could at all be referred to arbitration ?”

Insofar as the first question was concerned, the learned Arbitrator held

that the claim filed by the appellant was not a notified claim. Reliance was
placed on para 6.6.1.0 which reads as under:“Should the contractor dispute the validity of any
deductions made or threatened by the Owner from any
Running Account Bills or any payments due to him in
terms of the Contract, the Contractor shall forthwith give
notice in writing of his claim in this behalf to the
OMP 179/04

Page No.2 of 5

Engineer-in-Charge and the Site Engineer within ten (10)
days from the date of the issue of orders or instructions
relative to any works for which the Contractor claims
such additional payment or compensation, or on the
happening of other event upon which the Contractor
bases such claim, and such notice shall give full
particulars of the nature of such claim, grounds on which
it is based, and the amount claimed.”
It is further provided that:
“The Contractor shall not be entitled to raise any claim
nor shall the Owner be in anyway liable in respect of any
claim by the Contractor unless notice of such claim shall
have been given by the Contractor to the Engineer-inCharge and the Site Engineer in the manner and within
the time aforesaid and the Contractor shall be deemed to
have waived any or all claims and all his rights in respect
of any claim not notified to Engineer-in-Charge and the
Site Engineer in writing in the manner and within the
time aforesaid.”
5.

According to the learned Arbitrator, the final bill which was styled as

RA Bill No. 20 was not a notified claim. Therefore, in view of clause 6.6.1.0,
the same was not arbitrable. Having examined the said clause as well as the
final bill, I am unable to accept the view taken by the learned Arbitrator. First
of all, clause 6.6.1.0 refers to a situation where the contractor disputes the
validity of any deductions made or threatened by the owner from any running
account bill. The question of any deduction or threatened deduction by the
owner of any running account bill does not arise in the present case because the
contractor (the appellant herein) had submitted its final bill and the same had
not been paid in terms of the contract, as alleged by the appellant. Because the

OMP 179/04

Page No.3 of 5

same had not been paid, a dispute arose between the appellant and the
respondent and that was subjected to arbitration. Therefore, in my view, the
said clause 6.6.1.0 would not come in the way of the appellant as the same
would not be applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case.

6.

Insofar as the letter of 03.11.1999 is concerned, the learned Arbitrator

held that the same was given by the appellant voluntarily and once a no claim
certificate has been issued in this manner, then no arbitrable dispute remains.
The learned counsel for the appellant pointed out that Annexure-A to the reply
filed on behalf of the respondents is a copy of the said letter dated 03.11.1999.
Significantly, the cheque number and the date as well as the amount had
originally been left blank and they were subsequently filled in hand. The fact
that they were subsequently filled in, is apparent because the date of the cheque
is 18.11.1999, whereas the letter purportedly issued by the appellant was dated
03.11.1999. The endorsement on the letter also shows that the cheque was
received on 18.11.1999, therefore, it was not a case of receipt of a post dated
cheque. Clearly, therefore, the letter dated 03.11.1999 did not contain the
relevant details, such as the cheque number, the date or the amount and,
therefore, the finding of the learned Arbitrator that the said letter was given
voluntarily and without any duress cannot be taken to be well-founded.

OMP 179/04

Page No.4 of 5

7.

In these circumstances, I feel that the disputes between the appellant and

the respondent ought to have been taken to their logical conclusion through the
arbitration proceedings as the claim of the appellant was arbitrable.
Accordingly, the impugned order is set aside. This appeal is allowed. The
matter be placed before the learned Arbitrator or his successor for further
proceedings within two weeks. The record received from the learned Arbitrator
be sent back forthwith.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
August 08, 2007
δυττ

OMP 179/04

Page No.5 of 5

