THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Judgment delivered on :07.03.2007
WP(C) No.18366/2006
MAHINDER KUMAR BANSAL

...Petitioner
- versus -

THE STATE ELECTION COMMISSION
GOVT. OF NCT OF DELHI, DELHI

...Respondent

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Ch. Rabindra Singh with Mr Harinder Chowdhary
For the Respondent
: Mr Suresh Tripathi.

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

The petitioner is aggrieved by the orders dated 7.12.2004 and

13.11.2006 passed by different State Election Commissioners. By virtue of the
order dated 7.12.2004 purportedly passed under the provisions of Rule 92H of
the Delhi Municipal Corporation (Election of Councillors) Rules, 1970
(hereinafter referred to as the “said Rules”) the petitioner was disqualified for
contesting the election and for being chosen as a Councillor of the Municipal

WP(C)18366.06

Page No.1 of 17

Corporation of Delhi for a period of six years from the date of the order. The
order dated 13.11.2006 is an order passed on a petition under Rule 92I of the
said Rules whereby the State Election Commissioner was of the view that there
was no ground warranting any interference with the order dated 7.12.2004.
Meaning thereby that the disqualification of the petitioner for six years with
effect from 7.12.2004 was upheld.

2.

The learned counsel for the petitioner challenged the said orders

essentially on two grounds. The first ground that was taken by him, was that the
order dated 7.12.2004 did not disclose any application of mind or reasons for
disqualifying the petitioner.

It was further contended that the order dated

13.11.2006 by maintaining the said order of 7.12.2004 was also liable to be set
aside because of the same reason. The second contention raised by the learned
counsel for the petitioner was that in any event, the delay in the passing of the
two orders itself was ground enough for their being set aside.

3.

The facts which would be necessary for deciding this petition are

that the general election for electing the Councillors for the MCD were held on
24.3.2002. The petitioner participated in the said election and contested as an
independent candidate from Ward No. 67- Trilok Puri. The result of the election
was declared on 27.3.2002. The petitioner was unsuccessful. The petitioner
was required to lodge an account of his election expenses with the Returning

WP(C)18366.06

Page No.2 of 17

Officer within ten days from the date of election of the returned candidate in
terms of Rule 92B. The tenth day in this case happened to be 7.4.2002 which
was a Sunday and, therefore, the petitioner was required to have lodged the
account of expenses by 8.4.2002. Unfortunately, the petitioner did not do so
but, was able to lodge the account of election expenses only on 9.4.2002 i.e., a
day later.

4.
notice

Thereafter, nothing happened till 5.12.2002 when a show cause
was

issued

to

the

petitioner

by

the

Joint

Election

Commissioner/Secretary, State Election Commission, Delhi, to show cause as to
why he should not be disqualified for the delay in submitting the election
expenses account by the prescribed date. The petitioner was required to explain
the reasons for the delay within ten days of the issuance of the show cause
notice. On receipt of the show cause notice the petitioner promptly filed his
reply on 13.12.2002. In this reply the petitioner indicated that due to defeat in
the election and consequent mental tension, coupled with illness, the election
expenses account could not be submitted by him within time and that he was
only one day late in submitting the same, which was regretted. It was requested
that considering his illness, his explanation be accepted and the delay of one day
in filing the election expenses be condoned. Along with this reply the petitioner
had enclosed the medical certificate to indicate that he was not keeping well.
After the reply was filed by the petitioner an opportunity of hearing was granted

WP(C)18366.06

Page No.3 of 17

to the petitioner to appear before the State Election Commissioner. Thereafter,
on 7.12.2004, i.e., two years after the issuance of the show cause notice, the
State Election Commissioner passed the order. Since this order is the bone of
contention, it would be appropriate to set out the same in its entirety.
“(TO BE PUBLISHED IN DELHI GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY
PART.IV)
STATE ELECTION COMMISSION
N.C.T. OF DELHI, NIGAM BHAWAN, KASHMERE GATE,
DELHI-110 006
No.SEC/MCD/101(9)/2004/9751

Dated 7-12-2004

ORDER
Whereas the MCD General Election – 2002 for the election
of Councillors was held on 24.3.2002 and the result thereof was
declared/announced on 27.3.2002 and
2.
Whereas every nominated/contested candidate was required
to maintain a true and correct account of election expenses either by
himself/herself or through his/her election Agent under the provisions of
Rules 92 (A) of the Delhi Municipal Corporation (election of
Councillors) Rules, 1970 and
3.
Whereas under the provisions of Rule 92 (B) of the Rules,
nominated/contested candidate was required to lodge an account of
election expenses to the concerned Returning Officer within ten days
from the declaration of the result i.e. 7th April, 2002; but 7th being
Sunday the following day ie 8th April, 2002.
4.
Whereas the nominated/contested candidates specified in
Column 4 of the table attached as annexure 'A' in the above election to
the Municipal wards specified in Column No.3 against their names have
failed to lodge an account of their election expenses as required under
Rules 92 (B) ibid as shown in column No.5 of the table, and
5.
Whereas the above candidates were issued 'Show Cause
Notice' by Regd. AD post giving thereby 10 days time to explain the
WP(C)18366.06

Page No.4 of 17

reasons/cause for the said failure to submit the election expenses
account to the concerned Returning Officer or the Office of State
Election Commission.
6.
Whereas after considering their representation & replies to
the above Show Cause Notice, they were given appropriate opportunity
to defend their case in person before the State Election Commission vide
letter sent to them by Regd. AD post.
7.
Whereas their representations/reply, if given, and statements
or the statements of their representative duly authorized by them
recorded before the Commission, has been considered under the
provisions of Rule 92 – F (8) of the Delhi Municipal Corporation
(Election of Councillors) Rules 1970 and the Commission is satisfied
that the above candidates have no good reasons or justification for the
failure to lodge their account as required under Rule 92 (B) of the rules
ibid and
8.
Now, therefore, in pursuance of the Rule 92 (H) of the Delhi
Municipal Corporation (Election of Councillors) Rules, 1970, the State
Election Commission hereby declares the above nominated/contested
candidates to be disqualified for contesting the election and for being
chosen as a Member/Councillor of the Municipal Corporation of delhi
for a period of six years from the date of this order.
( M.P. TYAGI )
STATE ELECTION COMMISSIONER
No.SEC/MCD/101(9)/2003/9751
Dated 7-12-2004”
Thereafter, the petitioner moved a petition under Rule 92I of the said Rules on
21.12.2004.

The State Election Commissioner gave the petitioner an

opportunity for hearing on 26.9.2006 and on 13.11.2006 passed the impugned
order refusing to interfere with the order of disqualification dated 7.12.2004.
This order is also material and, therefore, the same is reproduced in its entirety
as under:“ORDER

WP(C)18366.06

Page No.5 of 17

This order disposes of petition dated 21.12.2004 under
rule 92-I of Delhi Municipal Corporation (Election of Councillors)
Rules, 1970.
The facts in the case are that Shri Mahinder Kumar
Bansal contested from Ward No. 67 (Trilok Puri) in the MCD
General Elections 2002 held on 24.3.2002.
Rule 92B of the said rules requires that every contesting
candidate at an election of a Ward shall, within ten days from the
date of election of the returned candidate, lodge with Returning
Officer an account of His election expenses which shall be a true
copy of the account kept by him or by his election agent. Rule 92 H
says that if the Election Commission is satisfied that the person :a) has failed to lodge an account of election expenses
within the time and in the manner required by these
rules, and
b) has no good reason or justification for the failure, the
Election Commission shall, by order published in the
official Gazette, declare him to be disqualified and any
such person shall be disqualified for a period for six
years from the date of the order.
The returned candidate was elected on 27.3.2002 and
therefore the petitioner was required under rules to lodge with the
Returning Officer account of his election expenses by 8.4.2002
(7.4.2002 being Sunday). The petitioner filed the account of his
election expenses on 9.4.2002. On issuance of a Show Cause
Notice as to why he should not be disqualified for not filing the
account of election expenses on time, he appeared before the State
Election Commission and submitted that delay in filing the account
of election expenses was due to the mental tension he was
undergoing because of the defeat in the polls. He explained that he
had not read the instructions contained in the register because of
language problem. He also filed a Medical Certificate to the effect
that he was suffering from Bronchites (P) for the period from
3.4.2002 to 8.4.2002. The State Election Commission, holding that
the petitioner has no good reason or justification for non-submission
of account of election expenses declared him disqualified for
contesting election or being chosen as a Councillor to Delhi
Municipal Corporation for a period of 6 years from the date of his
order i.e. December 7, 2004.
WP(C)18366.06

Page No.6 of 17

The petitioner was given a personal hearing by me on
26.9.2006 when he appeared before me and stated that he had earlier
explained the reason for delay in filing the election expenses before
Shri M.P. Tyagi the then State Election Commission in the hearing
held before him, and has nothing more to add.
I have gone through the record and have carefully
considered all the relevant facts. His explanation put up before me
was duly considered by the State Election Commissioner while
passing the impugned order dated December 7, 2004. No additional
material evidence which may warrant review of the order passed by
the earlier SEC is put forth. Therefore, I do not see any grounds
warranting to interfere with the impugned order dated 7.12.2004.
In view of the above, the petition filed by Shri Mahinder
Kumar Bansal is hereby rejected, and I order accordingly.
Sd/- S.P. MARWAH
STATE ELECTION COMMISSIONER.”

5.

The learned counsel for the respondent submitted that the petitioner

was unable to give a satisfactory response to the show cause notice and that is
why the order dated 7.12.2004 disqualifying him for a period of six years came
to be passed. He submitted that the length of the period of delay in filing the
statement of election expenses is not material.

What is material is the

explanation given for the delay. He submitted that if the explanation is not
satisfactory, then the State Election Commissioner has no option but to
disqualify the person concerned for a period of six years. There was also no
discretion with regard to the period of disqualification. He further submitted
that the impugned order dated 13.11.2006 was also passed after having provided
an opportunity for hearing to the petitioner. The petitioner's explanation in the
WP(C)18366.06

Page No.7 of 17

delay was considered fully by the State Election Commissioner and after
applying his mind, he came to the conclusion that no interference either with the
order of disqualification or the period of disqualification was called for and,
therefore, the order dated 13.11.2006 cannot be faulted.

6.

The learned counsel for the petitioner had referred to three decisions

in support of his contention. These decisions are:1. Guinness Hotte Paksha Rangaswamy v. The Chief Election
Commissioner of India and Others: AIR 2000 Karnataka 117.
2. State of Gujarat v. Patel Raghav Natha and Others: AIR 1969 SC
1297.
3. Jawahar Lal Gupta v. The Rajya Nirvachan Ayog, Bhopal and
another: AIR 2003 MP 161.

7.

The learned counsel for the respondent, on the other hand relied

upon the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of L.R. Shivaramagowda
and Others v. T.M. Chandrashekar (Dead) by Lrs and Others: (1999) 1 SCC
666 at page 683.

8.

As indicated above, every contesting candidate at an election of a

ward is required to lodge an account of his election expenses with the Returning
Officer within ten days from the date of election of the returned candidate by
virtue of the provisions of Rule 92B of the said Rules. Rule 92F of the said
Rules prescribes the procedure to be followed by the Returning Officer on the
WP(C)18366.06

Page No.8 of 17

expiration of the time specified in Rule 92B for the lodgment of account of
election expenses. The same is relevant and material for the purposes of the
controversy at hand and, therefore, the same is set out hereinbelow:“92F.
Report by the Returning Officer as to the lodging of
the account of election expenses and the decision of the Election
Commission thereon :- (1) As soon as may be after the
expiration of the time specified in rule 92 B for the lodging of the
accounts of election expenses at any election to a ward, the
Returning Officer shall report to the Election Commission :(a) the name of each contesting candidate ;
(b) whether such candidate has lodged his account of
election expenses and if so, the date on which such
account has been ledged ; and
(c) whether in his opinion such account has been lodged
within the time and in the manner required by these rules.
(2)
Where the Returning Officer is of the opinion that the
account of election expenses of any candidate has not been lodged
in the manner required by these rules, he shall with every such
report forward to the Election Commission the account of election
expenses of that candidate and the vouchers lodged alongwith.
(3)
Immediately after the submission of the report
referred to in sub-rule (1) the Returning Officer shall publish a
copy thereof by affixing the same to his notice board.
(4)
As soon as may be after the receipt of the report
referred to in sub-rule (1) the Election Commission shall consider
the same and decide whether any contesting candidate has failed
to lodge the account of election expenses within the time and in
the manner required by these rules.
(5)
Where the Election Commission decides that a
contesting candidate has failed to lodge his account of election
expenses within the time and in the manner required by these rules
it shall by notice in writing call upon the candidate to show cause
WP(C)18366.06

Page No.9 of 17

why he should not be disqualified under rule 92H for the failure.
(6)
Any contesting candidate who has been called upon to
show cause under sub-rule (5) may within twenty days of the
receipt of such notice submit in respect of the matter a
representation in writing to the Election Commission, and shall at
the same time send to the Returning Officer a copy of his
representation together with a complete account of his election
expenses if he had not already furnished such an account.
(7)
The Returning Officer shall, within five days of the
receipt thereof, forward to the Election Commission the copy of
the representation and the account, if any, with such comments as
he wishes to make thereon.
(8)
If after considering the representation submitted by
the candidate and the comments made by the Returning Officer
and after such inquiry as it thinks fit, the Election Commission is
satisfied that the candidate has no good reason or justification for
the failure to lodge his account, it shall declare him to be
disqualified under rule 92 H for a period of six years from the date
of the order, and cause the order to be published in the Official
Gazette.”
9.

A reading of the above Rule indicates that where the Returning

Officer is of the opinion that the account of election expenses of any candidate
has not been lodged in the manner required by these rules, he shall, with every
such report forward to the Election Commission the account of election
expenses of that candidate and the vouchers lodged therewith. Furthermore,
after a report is received under Sub-Rule (1) of Rule 92F, the Election
Commission is required to consider the same and decide whether any contesting
candidate has failed to lodge the account of election expenses within the time
and in the manner required by these rules. It is pertinent to note the expression

WP(C)18366.06

Page No.10 of 17

used in Sub-Rule (4) of Rule 92F to the effect:- “as soon as may be after the
receipt of the report referred to in Sub-Rule 1”. This clearly indicates that the
Election Commission must proceed with expedition and must not delay its
action in this behalf. Sub-Rule (5) of Rule 92F clearly specifies that where the
Election Commission decides that a contesting candidate has failed to lodge his
account of election expenses within the time and in the manner required by these
rules, it shall, by notice in writing, call upon the candidate to show cause why he
should not be disqualified under Rule 92H for the failure. By virtue of SubRule (6) of the said Rule 92F, the contesting candidate who has been called
upon to show cause is required to, within 20 days of the receipt of such notice,
submit a representation in writing to the Election Commission and, at the same,
to send to the Returning Officer a copy of the representation together with a
complete account of his election expenses, if not already furnished.

10.

In the context of the facts of the present case, it is to be noted that

the election expenses were to be lodged by 8.4.2002, the petitioner lodged them
on 9.4.2002.

But contrary to the requirement of the Rules, the Election

Commission took about eight months to issue the show cause notice on
5.12.2002. Moreover, the show cause notice prescribed only a period of ten
days for reply to be submitted by the petitioner whereas Rule 92F (6) clearly
stipulated a period of twenty days. Sub-Rule (7) of Rule 92F requires the
Returning Officer to forward to the Election Commission, within five days of

WP(C)18366.06

Page No.11 of 17

the receipt thereof, a copy of the representation and the account, if any, with
such comments as he wishes to make thereon. All these provisions, referred to
above, clearly indicate that the Election Commission as well as the Returning
Officer were required to act expeditiously and not to delay the matter. It is true
that there is no time limit prescribed under Rule-Rule (8) of Rule 92F for
considering the representation submitted by the candidate and for passing an
order of disqualification but it is settled law that when no time limit

is

prescribed for doing a particular act, then the same must be done within a
reasonable period. This position is made absolutely clear by the decision of the
Supreme Court in the case of Mansaram v. S.P. Pathak and Others: AIR 1983
SC 1239 wherein the Supreme Court observed:“.......when the power is conferred to effectuate a purpose, It has to
be exercised in a reasonable manner. Exercise of power in a
reasonable manner inheres the concept of its exercise within a
reasonable time.
The same view was expressed by the Supreme Court in Ram Chand v. Union of
India and Others: (1994) 1 SCC 44 when it observed:“.......It is settled that in a statute where for exercise of power no
time-limit is fixed, it has to be exercised within a time which can be
held to be reasonable.”
Again in Mohamad Kavi Mohamad Amin v. Fatmabai Ibrahim: (1997) 6 SCC
71, the Supreme Court observed as under:“........But in view of the settled position by several judgments of this
Court that wherever a power is vested in a statutory authority
without prescribing any time-limit, such power should be exercised
within a reasonable time.”
WP(C)18366.06

Page No.12 of 17

It was also observed in the same decision as under:“.........where no time-limit is prescribed for exercise of a power
under a statute it does not mean that it can be exercised at any time;
such power has to be exercised within a reasonable time.”
These decisions have been relied upon in the decision cited by the learned
counsel for the petitioner which is reported in AIR 2000 Karnataka 117. In that
decision the Karnataka High Court was considering a case under Rule 89 of the
Conduct of Elections Rules, 1961 and the disqualification under Section 10A of
the Representation of People Act, 1951 which are in pari materia to Rule 92F
and Rule 92H of the said Rules, respectively. The Karnataka High Court,
considering the said provisions of Rule 89 and the said Section 10A, concluded
that the said provisions required the Election Commission to act expeditiously
and within a reasonable period of time. In fact, the Supreme Court decisions
referred to above, themselves indicate this to be a well settled position. The
learned counsel for the petitioner is right in submitting that the Election
Commission ought to act expeditiously even though there is no time limit
prescribed for taking a decision with regard to disqualification, the provisions of
Rule 92F clearly indicate the manner and speed at which the proceedings were
to progress. The report was to be sent as soon as the period of the lodgment of
account was over. The show cause notice was to be sent immediately after the
Election Commission decided that there was a delay in lodgment of account.
The candidate concerned was required to submit his reply within 20 days. The
Returning Officer was required to forward the representation and his comments
WP(C)18366.06

Page No.13 of 17

within five days. When proceedings are to take place in this manner, it cannot,
by any stretch of imagination, be submitted that the Election Commission had
two years to take a decision. But, that is what the Election Commission had
done. It further aggravated the situation as the petition under Rule 92I was not
disposed of expeditiously. The State Election Commission took a further two
years to decide the same. There is, therefore, no question that the State Election
Commission has been guilty of delay and in fact, inordinate and unexplained
delay in disposing of the question of disqualification and the review filed by the
petitioner.

11.

Apart from this, a reading of the impugned orders dated 7.12.2004

and 13.12.2006 would indicate that insofar as the first order, i.e. the order dated
7.12.2004 is concerned, the same is bereft of any reasons. It appears to be a
general order issued in respect of several candidates inasmuch as even the name
of the candidate does not figure in the printed order. There is only a slip pasted
at the end which gives the name of the candidate and the reason for
disqualification as “failure to lodge any account of election expenses on time”.
Paragraph 6 of the order makes interesting reading where it says that after
considering “their representation and replies ......they were given appropriate
opportunity to defend their case in person before the State Election Commission
vide letter sent to them by Registered A.D. Post.” It must be remembered that
the petitioner was issued a show cause notice in his individual capacity. The

WP(C)18366.06

Page No.14 of 17

petitioner contested the election in his individual capacity and the liability of
disqualification is also personal to him.

Yet, the order speaks of various

representations and replies. Even the letter number and date is not specified.
Paragraph 7 of the order dated 7.12.2004 is even more surprising. It begins with
the words “whereas their representation/reply, if given”. It continues, “that if
such replies have been given ........has been considered..........and the
Commission is satisfied ......”.

This displays nothing but a complete non-

application of mind on the part of the State Election Commission. It is on the
basis of such a lack of consideration that the order of disqualification has been
passed by virtue of paragraph 8 of the order dated 7.12.2004.

I have no

hesitation in holding that the order dated 7.12.2004 has been passed upon a
complete non-application of mind and is clearly bad in law.

12.

Unfortunately, while passing the order under Rule 92I of the said

Rules on 13.11.2006 the succeeding State Election Commissioner made the
following observations:“I have gone through the record and have carefully considered all
the relevant facts. His explanation put up before me was duly
considered by the State Election Commissioner while passing the
impugned order dated December 7, 2004. No additional material
evidence which may warrant review of the order passed by the
earlier SEC is put forth. Therefore, I do not see any ground for
warranting the impugned order dated 7.12.2004.”
(underlining added)
This observation of the State Election Commissioner in the order dated

WP(C)18366.06

Page No.15 of 17

13.11.2006 is clearly erroneous inasmuch as nothing at all was considered by the
said Election Commissioner while passing the impugned order dated December
7, 2004. Yet, the order dated 13.11.2006 records that the same was “duly
considered by the State Election Commissioner” while passing the impugned
order dated 7.12.2004. It may be noted that this case pertains to just one day's
delay in the lodgment of the account of Election expenses. The petitioner has
given various reasons for the delay. One of them, being mental tension because
of the defeat he suffered in the election. This reason, of course, in my view, is
no reason at all. In every election there are several candidates and only one is
declared elected. It does not follow that all the defeated candidates can delay
the submission of election expenses on account of the mental depression of
having lost the elections. However, the petitioner's main reason for the delay in
lodgment of the account was that he was unwell. His medical certificate was
submitted promptly with his reply to the show cause notice. The same was not
at all considered by the State Election Commissioner on 7.12.2004. It was
referred to by the State Election Commissioner in the order dated 13.11.2006 but
the petitioner was not granted any benefit on the ground that the matter had
been considered while passing the order dated 7.12.2004, which was clearly not
the case. Rule 92F (8) requires the satisfaction of the Election Commission that
the candidate had
account.

good reason or justification for his failure to lodge his

For arriving at this “satisfaction” or otherwise the Election

Commission is required to consider the material on record and the explanation

WP(C)18366.06

Page No.16 of 17

offered by the candidate. If this consideration is missing, then an order of
disqualification cannot be sustained.

13.

I am, therefore, very clear in my mind that the orders are not in

accordance with law and have not been based upon an application of mind in
the proper perspective. The same require to be set aside and, accordingly, the
impugned order dated 7.12.2004 as well as the order dated 13.11.2006 are set
aside.

This writ petition is allowed.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
March 7, 2007
J

WP(C)18366.06

Page No.17 of 17

