THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Judgment delivered on : 03.07.2007
CRL.REV.P.255/2000
SMT SARASWATI AND OTHERS

Petitioners

- versus SHRI SHIV SHANKAR AND OTHERS

...Respondent

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioners
: Mr K.S. Bindra, Sr Advocate with
Mr Manjeet Singh Ahluwalia.
For the Respondents

: Mr Mohit Mathur.

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J
1.
This criminal revision petition has been filed on behalf of the
complainant party against an order of acquittal passed by the learned
Additional Sessions Judge, Delhi on 01.04.2000. The State has chosen not to
file an appeal against the said order of acquittal. By virtue of the impugned
judgment and order dated 01.04.2000 all the accused – Shiv Shankar,
Virender, Narender, Ashok Kumar and Satya Prakash (Respondent Nos 1 to 5

CRL.REV.P. 255/2000

Page No.1 of 11

herein) were acquitted, after giving them the benefit of doubt, in respect of the
offences punishable under Sections 308 / 452 / 506 / 323 /325 /34 IPC arising
out of FIR No.298/92 registered at Police Station Narela.

2.

As per the challan filed in the case, on 03.11.1992 the statement

of Smt Saraswati (petitioner No.1 herein) was recorded to the effect that she
resided at 1573, Pana Maumpur, Delhi with her parents and was a student of
class XII. That on that date at about 4.20 p.m. she was present at her said
house when her neighbours Shiv Shankar, Virender and Ashok Kumar entered
the house and started beating her. It was further stated that they dragged her
out of the house and that her mother Smt Omwati (petitioner No.3 herein) and
her aunt Smt Krishna (petitioner No.4 herein) came to her rescue. In the
meanwhile, Narender arrived at the scene with iron rods, jelli, sword and lathi
and handed the same to the others who used the same to assault the three
women. It was also stated that when her father Surat Singh (petitioner No.2
herein) returned from duty, Shiv Shankar exhorted the others that he should
also be killed and that he would manage the affairs. On such exhortation all
the accused persons started beating Surat Singh as well. It was stated that
Surat Singh received serious head injuries and fell down on the ground and
that he also received injuries on his entire body. It was also stated that Smt
Krishna also received head injuries. Smt Omwati was also stated to have
received injuries. It was mentioned that the assailants had caused injuries due
CRL.REV.P. 255/2000

Page No.2 of 11

to old enmity and that after assaulting and beating the members of the
complainant party, the accused left the scene and Shiv Shankar proclaimed
that this was sufficient for the time being and that they would kill the entire
family in future. On the basis of this statement of Smt Saraswati, the police
registered the case. Since the offence of Section 308 IPC was also involved,
the case was committed for trial to the court of Sessions. Charges had been
framed against the accused under Sections 452/308/323/325/506/34 IPC.
Since the accused pleaded not guilty, the matter went up for trial.

15

prosecution witnesses were examined. The witnesses of importance were
PW3 (Saraswati), PW4 (Surat Singh), PW5 (Omwati) and PW6 (Krishna).
All of whom were members of the complainant party. PW7 Ram Chander
deposed about the arrest of the accused persons as also with regard to the
preparation of the site plan. PW13 Dr Ashok Tyagi and PW15 Dr Anil Sahni
deposed with regard to the MLC of Omwati.

3.

The learned Additional Sessions Judge discussed the evidence of

all the witnesses and came to the conclusion that the prosecution was unable
to prove its case. It gave the benefit of doubt to the accused and acquitted
them of all the charges.

4.

The learned counsel for the petitioners pointed out that the trial

court did not return any finding with regard to the offences punishable under
CRL.REV.P. 255/2000

Page No.3 of 11

Sections 308 and 506 IPC. With regard to the offences punishable under
Sections 323/325 IPC, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
petitioners submitted that the trial court completely misdirected itself in
holding that, firstly, the injuries were simple and not grevious and secondly, in
coming to the conclusion that since only an offence punishable under Section
323 IPC was involved, the same being non-cognizable, the investigation
conducted by the police without obtaining an order from the Magistrate was
illegal and, therefore, the accused could not be convicted for the offence under
Section 323 IPC. The exact manner in which the trial court considered this
issue is as under:
“The doctors had opined the injuries received by Surat
Singh, Saraswati and Krishna to be simple caused by blunt
object which makes out only the offence under sec.323
IPC which is a non-cognizable offence. It is settled law
that the police will have to obtain an order from the
concerned Metropolitan Magistrate under Section.155(2)
Cr.P.C. and in the absence of such order, the
investigation, if any, conducted by the police in respect of
that offence is illegal. In the present case, the police has
not obtained any such order from the Magistrate. As such
the investigation conducted by the police in respect of an
offence punishable under Sec.323 IPC, anon-cognizable
offence, is illegal and as such accused persons cannot be
convicted for the offence under Sec.323 IPC.”

5.

It was contended by the learned counsel for the petitioners that

this is clearly contrary to the provisions of Section 155(4) of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 which reads as under:

CRL.REV.P. 255/2000

Page No.4 of 11

6.

“155 (4) Where a case relates to two or more offences of
which at least one is cognizable, the case shall be deemed
to be a cognizable case, notwithstanding that the other
offences are non-cognizable.”
Since there were other offences other than Section 323 and the

other offences were cognizable, by virtue of Section 155(4) of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, the case was deemed to be cognizable case.
Therefore, according to the learned counsel for the petitioners the
investigation conducted by the police could not have been held to be illegal.
Consequently, it was submitted that the accused could not have been acquitted
under Section 323 IPC merely on this ground.

7.

It was also contended on behalf of the learned counsel for the

petitioners that the trial court completely ignored Exhibit PW13/B (MLC of
Omwati) which was in the handwriting of Dr. Ashok Tyagi (PW13) which
indicated that the nature of injury on Smt Omwati was grevious. In the
presence of such a recording on the MLC in the hand writing of PW13
himself, it could not have been held by the trial court that no grevious injury
was caused. The learned counsel for the petitioners also contended that there
was also no finding with regard to the offence under Section 452 IPC.

8.

The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents

advanced submissions in support of the impugned order passed by the trial
court.
CRL.REV.P. 255/2000

Page No.5 of 11

9.

With regard to the submission that there is no finding in respect of

Section 452 IPC, I find that this is not correct. The trial court has specifically
examined this issue with regard to the question of place of occurrence. In this
context, the trial court examined the deposition of PW8 (Chander Singh) as
well as PW7 (Ram Chander). According to the testimony of PW8 (Chander
Singh), the place of occurrence was near the Chowk Chauda and not in the
house of the complainant. The trial court observed that even PW3 Saraswati
had admitted in her cross-examination that the incident had taken place in
Chowk Chauda in front of her house. It is on the basis of this, that the trial
court concluded that this proves that the accused persons had not tresspassed
into the house of the complainant as alleged and, therefore, there could be no
conviction of the accused persons for the offence punishable under Section
452 IPC.

This is a clear finding recorded by the trial court negating

conviction under Section 452 IPC. In this context, the trial court also noted
that the site plan had been prepared at the instance of the PW7 (Ram Chander)
who was not even present on the spot at the time of the incident as admitted by
him in his deposition. Consequently, the trial court, and in my view, correctly
held that this fact creates a serious dent in the prosecution case and makes the
site plan doubtful.
10.

With regard to the submission that the trial court had erred in

recording that the investigation was illegal, I am of the view that the learned
counsel for the petitioners is right.
CRL.REV.P. 255/2000

At the time when the police was
Page No.6 of 11

confronted with the case, the alleged offences included cognizable as well as
non-cognizable offences. That being the case, Section 155(4) of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 would be applicable and the entire case would have
to be deemed to be cognizable one. In such eventuality it was open to the
police to investigate without obtaining any order from a Magistrate.
Consequently, the trial court was in error in holding that the investigation
conducted by the police in respect of the offence under section 323 IPC was
illegal.

11.

Having so held, does it mean that the order of acquittal has to be

set aside and re-trial has to be ordered?

12.

Before I examine this question, it would be relevant to also

consider the related question that no specific findings have been returned with
respect to the offences under Sections 308/506 IPC. I find that while there is
no specific discussion of these offences there is a general discussion
throughout the impugned judgment with regard to the incident itself. The
conclusion arrived at by the trial court is that there was great doubt as to
whether the incident occurred at all and as to whether the accused persons
were involved in the same. The trial court took note of the fact that the first
call that had been received by the police about an alleged incident was in

CRL.REV.P. 255/2000

Page No.7 of 11

respect of a quarrel amongst ladies as indicated by PW9 Lady H.C. Sheela. It
is in this context that the trial court observed :“It is surprising that inspite of the admitted fact that the
quarrel was going on between the ladyfolk not a single
lady is an accused in the present case.”

13.

Apart from this, the trial court also observed that the presence of

Virender and Ashok Kumar at the scene was also doubtful if not entirely ruled
out because of their presence at their respective places of work. In sum, it
could be said that the trial court acquitted the accused on the basis of (i) the
place of occurrence being uncertain; (ii) injuries being simple, therefore, the
investigation was bad (this aspect has already been discussed above); (iii)
accused Virender and Ashok Kumar were not present on the scene and were
on duty; (iv) there were serious contradictions in the depositions of the
prosecution witnesses; (v) it had been alleged that a group of people had
gathered at the time of the incident but not a single independent public witness
had been examined and all the witnesses of the incident were interested
witnesses; (vi) the weapons allegedly used did not match the injuries; (vii)
there was previous enmity between the complainant party and the accused;
and (viii) there was great delay in the recording of the statements of the
injured.

CRL.REV.P. 255/2000

Page No.8 of 11

14.

For all these reasons, the trial court came to the conclusion that

there was enough doubt to acquit the accused. It is clear that the powers of
the High Court in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction in respect of a revision
petition filed by a private party against an order of acquittal is very limited.
The revisional court does not function as a court of appeal and cannot
reappraise evidence. It cannot also interfere with an order of acquittal unless
it is an exceptional case of some procedural irregularity or overlooking of
material evidence or misreading of the same which is manifest and which
results in flagrant miscarriage of justice. These principles are well settled by
the Supreme court in various decisions starting from D Stephens v Nosibolla :
AIR 1951 SC 196. The other decisions being K Chinnaswamy Reddy v State
of Andhra Pradesh & Another : AIR 1962 SC 1788;

Mahendra Pratap

Singh v Sarju Singh : (1968) 2 SCR 287; Ramu v Jagannath : 1995 SCC
(Cri) 181; Vimal Singh v Khuman Singh & another : 1998 SCC (CRI) 1574
; Hydru v State of Kerala : (2004) 13 SCC 374.

15.

Keeping these principles in mind, this court has to consider as to

whether the incorrect findings of the trial court to the effect that the police
investigation was illegal would call for interference with the impugned order.
It must be remembered that the well settled principles are that not only must
there be manifest illegality or glaring defect in the procedure but there must
also have been a flagrant miscarriage of justice. I have examined this matter
CRL.REV.P. 255/2000

Page No.9 of 11

in great detail and have considered all aspects particularly as some findings of
the trial court are not correct as already pointed out above. If it is assumed
that the police investigation was legal, which it was, then clearly the offence
under Section 323 IPC ought to have been discussed by the trial court. That
was not done. But the trial court discussed in general as to whether the
accused were at all involved in the incident.

The trial court came to the

conclusion that the PWs 3 to 6 were not entirely reliable as they were
interested witnesses.
groups.

There was admitted previous enmity between two

The trial court also came to the conclusion that the place of

occurrence itself was indeterminate.

The trial court also concluded that

Virender and Ashok Kumar could not have been present on the scene at the
time of the alleged incident. The delay with regard to the recording of the
statements of the injured was also considered as a material factor by the trial
court in concluding that there was doubt as to whether the accused were at all
involved in the incident. So, although it may be established that this was not a
case of merely simple injuries but also of a grevious injuries, it does not in
any way go to fill in the gap of linking the accused with the said injuries.

16.

Considering the matter in this light I find that although there are

errors in the trial court judgment, it has not resulted in any miscarriage of
justice. Therefore, no interference with the impugned judgment is called for.
This revision petition is dismissed.
CRL.REV.P. 255/2000

Page No.10 of 11

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
July 03, 2007
M

CRL.REV.P. 255/2000

Page No.11 of 11

