IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+

IA No.1717/2004 in CS (OS) No.255/2004

%

Judgment delivered on: 05.07.2007

DIAGEO NORTH AMERICA, INC. AND ANOTHER

.... Plaintiff

versus
SHIVA DISTILLERIES LIMITED

.... Defendants

Advocates who appeared in this case:For the Plaintiff
: Mr C.M. Lal with Mr Gaurav Bhati & Ms Shikha Sachdev
For the Defendants
: Mr Ajay Sahni

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether the Reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the judgment ?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J
1.

This order shall dispose of IA 1717/2004 filed under Order 39 Rules 1 and

2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. The plaintiffs have the filed the suit for
permanent and mandatory injunction, passing off, infringement of trade mark,
rendition of accounts, delivery up, damages and for unfair competition.

The

plaintiff no.1 (Diageo North America Inc) is a corporation organised and existing
under the laws of the State of Connecticut, USA. The plaintiff no.2 (UDV India
Ltd) is an Indian company and has been licensed by plaintiff no.1 to use various

brands and trade marks, one of which is the trade mark SMIRNOFF which is in
question in the present proceedings.

2.

The plaintiffs claim to be the registered proprietors of the trade mark

SMIRNOFF label under reg. no.189744 dated 31.03.1959; the PIERRE
SMIRNOFF label under reg. no. 202251 dated 04.05.1961; the SMIRNOFF mark
with eyebrow device under reg. no. 904318 dated 17.02.2000. It is stated by the
plaintiffs that while SMIRNOFF is disclaimed in the first registration there is no
disclaimer in the other two. In particular, reg. no. 904318 – SMIRNOFF with
eyebrow device – according to the plaintiffs, gives the plaintiffs the exclusive right
to the use of SMIRNOFF under section 28 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999.

3.

It is also contended by the plaintiffs that they are admittedly the prior users

of SMIRNOFF, internationally since 1930 and in India since 1994. The defendant
has adopted the mark BRISNOFF only in July 2003. By way of this application
the plaintiffs are seeking an interim injunction restraining the defendant from using
the trade mark BRISNOFF and the eyebrow device or any other trade mark or
trade marks which are deceptively or confusingly similar to the plaintiffs registered
trade mark SMIRNOFF and the eyebrow device in respect of any goods or of
manufacturing or authorising the manufacture, sale or offering for sale, marketing,
advertising, promoting, displaying or in any other manner whatsoever using the

trade marks infringing the plaintiffs rights in and to their registered trade mark
SMIRNOFF and/or the eyebrow device. An injunction is also sought in respect of
passing off the defendant's goods as those of the plaintiffs'.

4.

Various arguments have been advanced by the counsel for the parties

however, the issue, in main, is whether the trade mark BRISNOFF is deceptively
or confusingly similar to the plaintiffs' registered trade mark SMIRNOFF. The
respective trade marks are used by the plaintiffs and the defendant in respect of
vodka. The plaintiffs' trade mark SMIRNOFF is represented, according to the
plaintiffs, in a unique and distinctive art shape with a red background and golden
border and white lettering. This is referred to as the eyebrow device. A visual
representation of the same is as under: --

According to the plaintiffs, the defendant has been using the trade mark
BRISNOFF which is deceptively and confusingly similar to the plaintiffs' mark
SMIRNOFF. The defendant is also alleged to have represented its trade mark
BRISNOFF in a stylised manner which is virtually identical to the eyebrow device

of the plaintiffs. A visual representation the defendant's trade mark BRISNOFF
using the eyebrow device is as under:-

5.

For a proper appreciation of the similarities or dissimilarities between the

trade mark of the plaintiffs and that of the defendant, admitted photographs of the
bottles in which the vodka manufactured by each of them is marketed are given as
under: --

[The SMIRNOFF bottle]

6.

[The BRISNOFF bottle]

It ought to be pointed out that in the course of arguments, the learned

counsel for the defendant had indicated that the defendant was willing to give up
the eyebrow device.

The learned counsel also submitted that the colour

combination which is being used by the defendants could also be altered and the
defendant would have no difficulty or problem in giving up the colour combination
used by it at present. As a consequence of these submissions, the debate is limited
to whether BRISNOFF is similar to SMIRNOFF.

For the purpose of this

application it is safe to assume that the plaintiffs are the registered proprietors of
the trade mark SMIRNOFF. It may also be relevant to note to that the defendant
has applied for registration of its trade mark BRISNOFF but, the plaintiffs have
filed their opposition to the same.

7.

The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the plaintiffs placed reliance on

the Supreme Court decision in Kaviraj Pandit Durga Dutt Sharma v. Navaratna
Pharmaceutical laboratories: 1965 (1) SCR 737. In that decision the Supreme
Court observed that where the similarity between the plaintiff's and the defendant's
Mark is so close either visually, phonetically or otherwise and the court reaches the
conclusion that there is an imitation, no further evidence is required to establish

that the plaintiff's rights are violated. He submitted that the marks SMIRNOFF
and BRISNOFF are such marks and BRISNOFF is an imitation of SMIRNOFF.
Relying upon Amritdhara Pharmacy v. Satyadeo Gupta: 1963 (2) SCR 484, the
learned counsel for the plaintiffs submitted that the test of similarity has to be
viewed from the point of view of a man of average intelligence and imperfect
recollection. He referred to the Supreme Court observation to the following effect:
-"The question where a trade mark is likely to deceive or cause
confusion by its resemblance to another already registered is a
matter of first impression........ The resemblance has to be viewed
from the point of view of a man of average intelligence and in
perfect recollection."

8.

The learned counsel for the plaintiffs submitted that this test was also

applied for alcoholic products in the case of The Panipat Co-operative Sugar
Mills Ltd v. Mohan Meakin Breweries Ltd: 1978 IPLR 53. He submitted that
confusion is possible even where one alcoholic brand is a high-priced deluxe band
and the other is much cheaper. For this proposition he relied upon the decision in
William Grant & Sons v. McDowell & Co. Ltd: 1994 FSR 690 as well as on
John Haig & Co. Ltd v. Forth Blending Co. Ltd and W. R. Paterson Ltd: Vol.
LXX (1953) RPC 259. It was contended by the learned counsel for the plaintiffs
that in N. R. Dongre v. Whirlpool Corporation: (1996) 5 SCC 714, the price of
the defendant's product was one third the price of the plaintiff's product and in

William Grant (supra) the plaintiff's product only sold through duty-free outlets,
yet, in both cases an injunction was granted.

9.

It was further contended by the learned counsel for the plaintiffs that where

there is dishonesty, greater attention must be paid to the items of similarity and less
to the items of dissimilarity. Relying upon William Grant (supra) the learned
counsel for the plaintiffs submitted that impairment and debasement of reputation
and dilution and erosion of a distinctive mark is also actionable. On the basis of
these submissions, the learned counsel for the plaintiffs requested that this court
ought to grant the interim injunction in favour of the plaintiffs.

10.

In the suit, the learned counsel for the defendant raised various issues

including that of lack of territorial jurisdiction, deficiency in court fees and delay
in filing of the plaint. However, for the purposes of this application the main issue
is whether the defendant's trade mark BRISNOFF is similar to the plaintiffs trade
mark SMIRNOFF. In this context it was submitted by the learned counsel for the
defendant that the intending purchasers of the competing products were literate
persons belonging to an affluent class of society who could easily distinguish one
product from the other. According to him, the two products were entirely different
and their packaging as well as names were different and distinct. He then referred
to a number of decisions of courts to indicate circumstances where the courts on

making overall comparisons including the nature of goods, class of intending
purchasers etc., came to the conclusion that the competing marks were dissimilar.
He submitted that in BDA Breweries and Distilleries Ltd v. Shree Durga
Distillery: 2002 (25) PTC 704 (Karn), the High Court of Karnataka held that the
trade marks OFFICERS CHOICE and OFFICERS FAVOURITE were different
and dissimilar. Furthermore, he submitted that in Sunstar Lubricants Ltd v.
Federal Chemical Industries: 1997 (17) PTC 64 (Del), this High Court found that
the trade mark SUN CRUISER 2001 was not deceptively similar to the trade mark
GOLDEN CRUISER 2001. Again, in Frito-Lay India v. Amit Goswamy: 1999
PTC 647, this court found that the trade mark TAZO was not similar to the trade
mark AMAZZO. He submitted that in Pfizer Products Inc v. BL & Co.: 2002
(25) PTC 262 (Del), this court denied the interim injunction on an action for
passing off by holding that there was no likelihood of confusion between the trade
marks VIAGRA and PENEGRA.

The decision of this court in the case of

Sakalain Meghjee v. BM House: 2002 (24) PTC 207 (Del) was also referred to by
the learned counsel for the defendant.

11.

It was also contended on behalf of the defendant that the defendant was not

a fly-by-night company and was a large industrial concern. It was contended that
the defendant was, therefore, in a position to compensate the plaintiff in the
unlikely event of the suit being decreed in favour of the plaintiff. Hence this court

was requested not to pass any ad interim injunction against the defendant. It was
also submitted that the two trade marks are clearly not identical and the test
applicable with regard to passing off is that they must be compared taking into
account the totality of circumstances.

12.

The learned counsel for the plaintiffs in rejoinder tried to distinguish each

of the cases that were cited on behalf of the defendant. He submitted that in 2002
(25) PTC 704 the plaintiff, whose trade mark was OFFICERS CHOICE, claimed
rights since 1988 whereas the defendant was using the trade mark OFFICERS
FAVOURITE since 1972. It was in these circumstances that the plaintiff was not
granted the injunction as the defendant was held to be a prior user of its mark.
With regard to 1997 PTC (17) 64, it was submitted that the marks in issue were
GOLDEN CRUISER and SUN CRUISER. In that case the court noted that there
was evidence that at least six other parties had used the word CRUISER for carcoolants and accordingly the word CRUISER was held to be descriptive. This was
a distinguishing feature. Referring to 1999 PTC 647, the learned counsel for the
plaintiffs submitted that that was a case of design infringement in respect of discs
inserted into packets of chips. The mark of the plaintiff was TAZO. The discs
were placed inside the packet of chips selling under the brand name LAYS. The
defendant put its discs, under the name AMAZZO, in the packet of chips branded
as Uncle chips. According to the learned counsel for the plaintiffs, the mark in

that case was not registered and the product was also put inside the packets of
chips hence the court concluded that there was no case for confusion or passing
off.

He further submitted that the decision in the VIAGRA - PENEGRA

controversy was essentially based on the fact that the plaintiff's product was not
available in India nor was it registered in India. Thus, according to the learned
counsel for the plaintiffs, all the cases referred to by the learned counsel for the
defendant were distinguishable.

13.

Having set out the arguments in detail, the crux of the matter remains to be

—whether the plaintiffs' mark SMIRNOFF and the defendant's marked
BRISNOFF are similar. The same has to be considered from the standpoint of an
average person with imperfect recollection. Viewed in this manner, there is no
doubt in my mind that the trade mark BRISNOFF used in the eyebrow device and
in the colour combination represented above is quite similar to the trade mark
SMIRNOFF used in similar fashion. But, the defendant has agreed, as pointed out
earlier, to not only drop the eyebrow device but also completely alter the colour
combination. The impression of similarity that one gets is by looking at not only
the eyebrow device but also the colour combination. If these two vital elements
are removed then we are left with only a "bland" comparison of the words
SMIRNOFF and BRISNOFF and this is where the first impression of similarity
recedes into the background. There is no doubt that the second syllable in the two

words is common. But, as pointed out by the learned counsel for the defendant
this syllable NOFF has been used by third parties in respect of vodka. Although
the learned counsel for the plaintiffs had submitted that oppositions have been
filed by them in respect of each such third-party, the fact remains that the syllable
NOFF has been in use in respect of alcoholic products and particularly in the case
of vodka. Perhaps, the same is used to indicate a Russian connection as vodka is
generally discerned as a Russian drink. Whether it has become a descriptive term
or not is debateable but, at this prima facie stage it cannot be said that the plaintiffs
have established their exclusive right to use the same.

14.

So much for the second syllable. As regards the first syllable, I find

that there is no similarity between SMIR and BRIS. Although the learned counsel
for the plaintiffs had submitted that all the letters are common except the letter and
M in SMIR and the letter B in BRIS, this, to my mind, is of no consequence
because the arrangement of the letters is entirely different, as is the phonetic and
visual result. I also agree with the submission made by the learned counsel for the
defendant that the intending purchasers of the competing products are literate
persons belonging to the affluent class of society and who would be in a position
to easily distinguish SMIRNOFF from BRISNOFF particularly when the eyebrow
device and the colour combination is sought to be given up by the defendant. The
average person with imperfect recollection would have to be from amongst the

sub-set of such persons ie., discerning consumers of vodka. My prima facie view is
that the trade mark BRISNOFF is not deceptively similar to, nor can it be confused
with the Plaintiffs' trade mark SMIRNOFF.

15.

In these circumstances, this application is disposed of by directing

the defendant to stop using the eyebrow device and to alter the colour combination
as offered by the learned counsel for the defendant in the course of the arguments.
Once this is done, there would be no need to pass any further order restraining the
defendant from using its trade mark BRISNOFF. No costs.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
July 05, 2007
ΗJ

