THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Judgment delivered on :02.03.2007
WP(C) No.1586/2007
CENTRAL BANK OF INDIA

...Petitioner
- versus -

UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS

...Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr A. S. Chandhiok, Sr. Advocate with Mr S. N. Relan,
Rajbir Singh and Ms Sonia
For the Respondent No.1 : Mr Ashwani Bhardwaj with Mr Shishir Singh
For the Respondent No.3 : Mr Ajay Kapur with Mr G. Panmei

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

YES

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

YES

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

YES

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
CM NO. 2929/2007 in WPC 1586/2007
Allowed subject to all just exceptions.
WPC 1586/2007
1.

This writ petition has been filed by a Public Sector Undertaking under

the Central Government.

WP(C)1586/2007

The petitioner is the Central Bank of India.

The

Page No.1 of 7

respondent No.3 is also a Public Sector Undertaking under the Central
Government. The respondent No.3 is the India Tourism Development Corporation
Ltd. (ITDC). The issue is with regard to the premises taken on licence by the
Central Bank of India from the ITDC in the Ashok hotel run by the ITDC at
Chanakya Puri, New Delhi. Proceedings have been taken at the instance of the
ITDC under the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants) Act, 1971.
The proceedings are pending before the Estate Officer.

2.

The primary issue that is raised is whether the respondent No.3 could

have initiated those proceedings against a Public Sector Undertaking, itself being a
Public Sector Undertaking under the same Central Government without first
getting a clearance from the High-Powered Committee. The second question that
arises is whether the petitioner could have filed this writ petition before this Court
without having taken a clearance of the High-Powered Committee. In either
event, if a reference to the High-Powered Committee is to be made, the matter
would not be with either the Estate Officer or before this Court and would first
require the clearance of the High-Powered Committee.

3.

The learned counsel for the respondent No.3 straightaway referred to a

decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Steel Authority of India Ltd. v. Life

WP(C)1586/2007

Page No.2 of 7

Insurance Corporation of India: AIR 1997 SC 2590. That was a case in which
the Steel Authority of India had taken on rent a premises on 4th Floor of Jeevan
Deep Building, Parliament Street, New Delhi, which belonged to the Life
Insurance Corporation.

Since the Steel Authority of India had not vacated the

premises, action was taken at the instance of the Life Insurance Corporation under
the provisions of the said Act. The question of whether a clearance of the HighPowered Committee was necessary or not arose before the Supreme Court as the
matter ultimately reached there. The Steel Authority of India had contended that
a reference to the High-Powered Committee ought to have been made.

The

Supreme Court, in the said decision, repelled this contention in the following
manner:“3. The object of issuing direction in those matters was to
decide the fiscal disputes in case of major policy mattes to save
the public money and courts valuable time, and disputes could
amicably be settled between the Public Sector Undertaking and
the Government of India or the State Governments. The
intention was not to resolve the disputes like eviction of a
Company or Public Undertaking under Public Premises
(Unauthorised Occupants) Act; such petty disputes are not
directed to be dealt with by the high level officers whose
otherwise duty and time is of very important nature. Under
these circumstances, the High Court has not committed any
error warranting interference.”
4.

Undoubtedly, that was a decision of two Hon'ble Judges of the

Supreme Court and subsequent in time to the decision in the case of Oil and

WP(C)1586/2007

Page No.3 of 7

Natural Gas Commission v. CCE: 1992 Supp (2) SCC 437 and Oil and Natural
Gas Commission v. CCE: 1995 Supp (4) SCC 541. However, the law has been
stated and restated in several decisions of the Supreme Court including the
decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Ltd.
v. Chairman, Central Board, Direct Taxes: (2004) 6 SCC 431 as follows:
“8.
Undoubtedly, the right to enforce a right in a court of
law cannot be effaced. However, it must be remembered that
courts are overburdened with a large number of cases. The
majority of such cases pertain to government departments and/or
public sector undertakings. As is stated in Chief Conservator of
Forests case5 it was not contemplated by the framers of the
Constitution or CPC that two departments of a State or the Union
of India and/or a department of the government and a public sector
undertaking fight a litigation in a court of law. Such a course is
detrimental to public interest as it entails avoidable wastage of
public money and time. These are all limbs of the Government and
must act in coordination and not confrontation. The mechanism set
up by this Court is not, as suggested by Mr Andhyarujina, only to
conciliate between the government departments. It is also set up
for purposes of ensuring that frivolous disputes do not come before
courts without clearance from the High-Powered Committee. If it
can, the High-Powered Committee will resolve the dispute. If the
dispute is not resolved the Committee would undoubtedly give
clearance. However, there could also be frivolous litigation
proposed by a department of the Government or a public sector
undertaking. This could be prevented by the High-Powered
Committee. In such cases there is no question of resolving the
dispute. The Committee only has to refuse permission to litigate.
No right of the department/public sector undertaking is affected in
such a case. The litigation being of a frivolous nature must not be
brought to court. To be remembered that in almost all cases one or
the other party will not be happy with the decision of the HighPowered Committee. The dissatisfied party will always claim that
its rights are affected, when in fact, no right is affected. The
5 (2003) 3 SCC 472
WP(C)1586/2007

Page No.4 of 7

Committee is constituted of highly placed officers of the
Government, who do not have an interest in the dispute, it is thus
expected that their decision will be fair and honest. Even if the
department/ public sector undertaking finds the decision
unpalatable, discipline requires that they abide by it. Otherwise the
whole purpose of this exercise will be lost and every party against
whom the decision is given will claim that they have been wronged
and that their rights are affected. This should not be allowed to be
done.
9.
In this case this is absolutely what has happened. The
appellants wanted to approach the court only against a show-cause
notice. It is settled law that against a show-cause notice litigation
should not be encouraged. The decision of the High-Powered
Committee, set out hereinabove, merely emphasises the wellsettled position. It is an eminently fair and correct decision. The
purpose of the decision was to prevent frivolous litigation. No
right of the appellants is being affected. It has been clarified that
the appellants could move a court of law against an appealable
order. By not maintaining discipline and abiding by the decision
the appellants have wasted public money and time of the courts.
The clarificatory order, relied upon by Mr Andhyarujina, clarifies
in para 5 as to what is to happen if clearance is not given by the
Committee. It is set out that in the absence of the clearance the
proceedings must not be proceeded with. This position is further
clarified in Chief Conservator of Forests case5 where again this
Court has held that the decision taken by such a Committee is
binding on all departments concerned and it is the stand of the
Government.
(underlining added)
5.

There is another decision in the case of ONGC itself and that is

reported in (2004) 6 SCC 437. This decision had been rendered by a Bench
comprising of three Hon'ble Judges of the Supreme Court and would obviously
have precedence over all other decisions which have been rendered by Benches

WP(C)1586/2007

Page No.5 of 7

comprising of two Hon'ble Judges of the Supreme Court. In this decision, the
entire law had been reviewed and it has been noted in paragraph 2, referring to the
earlier ONGC decision reported in 1995 Supp (4) SCC 541, that the Cabinet
Secretariat has issued instructions from time to time to all departments of the
Government of India as well as to public sector undertakings of the Central
Government to the effect that all disputes, “regardless of the type”, should be
resolved amicably by mutual consultation or through the good offices of
empowered agencies of the Government or through arbitration and “recourse to
litigation should be eliminated”.

In paragraph 3 of this decision it is noted that

the purpose of setting up this High-Powered Committee was to ensure that, as far
as possible, the controversies between a Ministry and a Ministry of the
Government of India, a Ministry and a public sector undertaking of the
Government of India and between public sector undertakings themselves are
resolved by recourse to the High-Powered Committee and that time-consuming
and expensive litigation is avoided. At the end of paragraph 4, the Court observed
as under:-

“It is abundantly clear that the machinery contemplated is
only to ensure that no litigation comes to court without the
parties having had an opportunity of conciliation before an
in-house committee.”
(underlining added)

WP(C)1586/2007

Page No.6 of 7

A reading of the said decision makes it abundantly clear that the direction applies
even to pending matters before any court or tribunal. In paragraph 7 of the said
decision, the Supreme Court, approving of its decision in the case reported in 1995
Supp (4) SCC 541, held that it shall be the obligation of every court and every
tribunal where such a dispute is raised hereafter to demand a clearance from the
Committee in case it has not been so pleaded and in the absence of the clearance,
the proceedings would not be proceeded with.

5.

In the present case, there is no clearance taken either by the respondent

No.3 or by the petitioner and, therefore, this writ petition cannot be entertained
any further. The petitioner as well as the respondent No.3 are directed to approach
the High-Powered Committee for a clearance for their respective litigations. Till
such clearance is obtained, the proceedings before the Estate Officer cannot, also,
continue.
This writ petition stands disposed of.
Dasti.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
March 02, 2007
sr

WP(C)1586/2007

Page No.7 of 7

