THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 03.05.2007

+ WP(C) No.2293-94/2006
ABHIJAY & ANOTHER

...Petitioners
- versus -

A.I.C.T.E. & OTHERS
Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioners
For the Respondent Nos.2, 5 & 6
For the Respondent No.3
For the Respondent No. 4

...Respondents
: Mr Sudhanshu Batra with Mr Bhuvan Gugnani
: Ms Avnish Ahlawat with Ms Latika Chaudhary
and Ms Nidhi Gupta
: Mr A. Mariarputham
: Mr M.A. Siddiqui

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

YES

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

YES

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ?

YES

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

By way of this writ petition, the petitioners, who are two in number,

are seeking a writ of mandamus to be issued to the respondents to implement
“the directions” issued by the respondent No.1 (AICTE) allowing lateral entry
to engineering diploma holders to the second year of undergraduate engineering
programmes in all approved colleges and courses in terms of the document
entitled “Admission Regulations, 1992” dated 11.07.1992.

WP(C)2293-94/06

Page No.1 of 19

2.

The petitioners are diploma holders and they sought admission to

the second year undergraduate Engineering Programmes of Jamia Millia
Islamia University (Respondent No.4) and the Delhi College of Engineering
(Respondent No.5) and Netaji Subhash Institute of Technology (Respondent
No.6). The respondent Nos. 5 and 6 are affiliated to and part and parcel of the
University of Delhi.

3.

Coming straightway to the Admission Regulations, 1992 which

contained the guidelines for admission to Engineering Degrees and Engineering
Programmes issued by the All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE)
in purported exercise of the powers conferred under Sections 23 (1) and 10 (o)
of the All India Council for Technical Education Act, 1987 (hereinafter referred
to as 'the said Act'), the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners
drew my attention to paragraph 2.0 of the said guidelines which pertain to
lateral entry to Degree Engineering Programmes. The relevant portion of the
said paragraph 2.0 reads as under:“2.0
LATERAL ENTRY
ENGINEERING PROGRAMMES

TO

DEGREE

Although Engineering diploma programmes are conceived as
terminal in nature, some flexibility has to be built in, to
enable the meritorious amongst diploma holders to obtain
Engineering degrees. There is evidence of diploma holders
pursing an Engineering programme having performed well
not only in their academic carrier but also in their jobs.

WP(C)2293-94/06

Page No.2 of 19

A student who has acquired a diploma in Engineering
through a minimum of three years of institutional study, after
10+(Secondary School Leaving Certificate Examination) can
be considered to be academically equivalent to a student who
has passed the first year of the four year Engineering degree
programme for which the qualifying examination is of the 12
+ level.
Lateral entry for diploma holders will be allowed in the
second year third semester level. Seats in addition to the
sanctioned intake at first year level, limited to a minimum of
10% will be reserved for such students.”
(underlining added)

4.

The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners drew my

attention to Section 10 (o) of the said Act and Section 23 thereof. The same
read as under:“10.
Functions of the Council.—It shall be the duty
of the Council to take all such steps as it may think fit for
ensuring co-ordinated and integrated development of
technical education and maintenance of standards and for the
purposes of performing its functions under this Act, the
Council mayxxxxx

xxxxx

xxxxx

xxxxx

(o)
provide guidelines for admission of students to
technical institutions and Universities imparting technical
education”
“23.
Power to make regulations.—(1) The Council
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, and the Rules
generally to carry out the purposes of this Act.

WP(C)2293-94/06

Page No.3 of 19

(2)
In particular, and without prejudice to the
generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:(a)

regulating the meetings of the Council and the
procedure for conducting business threat;

(b)

the terms and conditions of service of the officers
and employees of the Council;

(c)

regulating the meetings of the Executive
Committee and the procedure for conducting
business threat;

(d)

the area of concern, the constitution, and powers
and functions of the Board of Studies;

(e)

the region for which the Regional Committee be
established and the constitution and functions of
such Committee.”

Referring to the said Sections, the learned counsel for the petitioners submitted
that the guidelines that have been issued by the AICTE have a statutory flavour
and they have to be implemented by the Universities. He referred to the
decision of a learned single judge of this court in the case of Prakash Kumar
Ashiyana & Others: 2007 (93) DRJ 512 as also the Supreme Court decision in
the case of State of Tamil Nadu and Another v. Adhiyaman Educational &
Research Institute and Others: JT 1995 (3) SC 136 to indicate that once the
said Act came into operation, it being a Central Act, would have precedence
over all other enactments which pertain to technical education.

WP(C)2293-94/06

Page No.4 of 19

5.

With reference to the provisions for lateral entry given in the

guidelines, it was contended on behalf of the petitioners that a student who
acquired a diploma in engineering through a minimum of three years of
institutional study after class 10 could be considered to be academically
equivalent to a student who had passed the first year of the Four Year
Engineering Degree Programme for which the qualifying examination would be
10 + 2. He also referred to the guidelines pertaining to lateral entry and
submitted that lateral entry for diploma holders had to be allowed in the second
year, third semester level and that seats in addition to the sanctioned intake at
the first year level, limited to a maximum of 10% need to be reserved for such
students. Reading these provisions, it was contended by him that these were
mandatory and the University of Delhi as well as Jamia University were bound
to follow these guidelines and accordingly, this court was requested to issue a
writ of mandamus directing them to follow the same and permit the petitioners'
lateral entry into the second year degree courses.

6.

Mr Siddiqui, who appeared on behalf of Jamia Millia Islamia

University, referred to the Supreme Court decision in the case of
Bharathidasan University and Another v. All-India Council for Technical
Education & Others: 2001 (8) SCC 676 and submitted that the AICTE does
not have all pervasive powers with regard to technical education imparted by
universities and particularly those universities which have been set up on the
WP(C)2293-94/06

Page No.5 of 19

basis of Central Legislations. He submitted that the object of setting up the
AICTE by virtue of the said Act was only to harness private institutions /
universities which had sprung up for imparting of technical education and to
ensure that proper norms and standards are followed by them both in matters of
admission as well as in matters of grant of diplomas / degrees.

7.

With reference to the same decision, Mr Siddiqui also submitted

that, at best, insofar as Jamia University and other similarly situated Centrally
established universities are concerned, the role of AICTE was merely advisory
and recommendatory and it was certainly not directory.

8.

Mr Siddiqui, referring to said paragraph 2.0 of the guidelines in

question, submitted that, in any event, even if it is, for the sake of argument,
assumed that the guidelines are directory and not merely advisory or
recommendatory, the provisions would have to be read in the manner indicated
in the guidelines itself. He referred to the three words “can be considered” in
para 2.0 of the guidelines to indicate that even if it was a direction from the
AICTE, all that it directed was that a student who had acquired a diploma in
engineering through a minimum three years of institutional studies, could be
considered to be equivalent academically to a student who had passed the first
year of the four year degree course. It was in the nature of a permission granted
to the universities to grant such an equivalence and not a direction that the
WP(C)2293-94/06

Page No.6 of 19

universities must, in all cases, consider the diploma to be equivalent to the first
year of the four year degree programme. Therefore, Mr Siddiqui submitted that
the guideline was not binding in that sense. He then referred to the third subpara of paragraph 2.0 where the expression “will be allowed” was used. He
interpreted this in the manner that if lateral entry for diploma holders was
granted by the universities in the second year, third semester level, then the
AICTE would have no objection to the same. According to him, the provisions
contained in the paragraph 2.0 were merely permissive and not mandatory.

9.

Thereafter, Mr Siddiqui referred to the Jamia Millia Islamia Act

and referred to its objects as contained in Section 5 which granted ample
discretion to the university by use of the expression “as it may deem fit”. He
also referred to the provisions of Section 6 and in particular Section 6 (iii) and
Section 6 (xxiv) to indicate that the university had wide discretion to determine
the course of study, the manner of grant of degrees and all other powers which
would go to supplement such discretion. He also referred to Section 25 to
indicate that the university had power to make ordinances with regard to
admissions, award of degrees, etc. He then drew my attention to Ordinance I
and, in particular, to para 1.3 thereof which prescribed that candidates seeking
admission to a course of study in the university were required to fulfill the
conditions prescribed for it by the Majlis-i-Talimi (Academic Council) as
published in the prospectus from time to time. The prospectus of the Faculty of
WP(C)2293-94/06

Page No.7 of 19

Engineering and Technology for the year 2006-07 has been annexed as
Annexure-P-1 to the counter-affidavit filed on behalf of the respondent No.4.
The prospectus does not contain any provision for permitting lateral entry into
the four year Engineering Degree Programme. Therefore, according to Mr
Siddiqui, lateral entry, as advised by the AICTE, is not permissible under the
Jamia Millia Islamia Act, 1988, which is also a Central Legislation. He also
referred to the minutes of a meeting held on 2 nd of January, 2006 of all the
departmental heads of the Faculty of Engineering & Technology which
considered this very notification on which the petitioners rely upon and an
extract of the minutes has been placed alongwith the counter-affidavit which
clearly indicates that the said departmental heads consciously took the decision,
noting the ambit and scope of the university's powers as well as those of
AICTE, that lateral entry was not to be permitted because, according to Mr
Siddiqui, that would compromise the standards of education imparted by the
university. Mr Siddiqui also submitted that the guidelines issued under Section
10 (o) of the said Act ought to be distinguished from the directions which could
be issued under Section 10 (q) of the said Act to technical institutions. While
Section 10 (o) merely permitted the issuance of the guidelines, Section 10 (q)
contemplated the issuance of directions.

Furthermore, he submitted that

Section 23 of the said Act related to the power to make regulations, but none of
the powers indicated in Section 23 (2) which are indicative of the general
powers granted under Section 23 (1) included the power to issue regulations of
WP(C)2293-94/06

Page No.8 of 19

the nature which are in question in the present petition.

Therefore, the

notification of 11.07.1992 can only be regarded as a guideline under Section 10
(o) of the said Act and not as a regulation under Section 23.

10.

Mr Siddiqui submitted that, in any event, the object of lateral entry

to Degree Engineering Programmes was to provide an avenue to the diploma
holders in engineering to pursue a degree course in engineering. He submits
that the Jamia University has its own programme whereby diploma holders are
permitted to pursue engineering degrees and this is also another reason as to
why the university thought it fit not to implement the guideline issued by
AICTE.

11.

Mr Mariarputham, who appears for the University of Delhi,

adopted all these arguments advanced by Mr Siddiqui and made some
supplemental submissions. His first submission was that the scope of the
petition, as discernible from the prayer clause, was that the petitioners want a
mandamus to be issued by this court in respect of a mere permissive provision.
He submitted that the principles with regard to issuance of mandamus are
settled and that only those petitioners can approach the court who have a right
to the issuance of such a direction. There must be some mandatory provision
which has not been followed in respect of which the petitioners seek a
mandamus. In this regard, Mr Mariarputham submitted once again with regard
WP(C)2293-94/06

Page No.9 of 19

to para 2.0 of the guidelines that the expressions “can be considered” and “will
be allowed” appearing therein merely indicate permission on the part of the
AICTE and discretion on the part of the university to implement the same. He
also submitted that the expression “will be allowed” appearing in the third subparagraph is merely indicative of the circumstance that, if equivalence is to be
granted, then lateral entry will be permitted only in the second year, third
semester and at no other point of the four year degree programme.

Mr

Mariarputham also submitted that in case a view is taken that the aforesaid
directions are mandatory, then it would be ultra vires the Constitution of India
and in particular Entry 66 List I read with Entry 25 List III read with Entry 63
List I of the VIIth Schedule to the Constitution of India.

12.

Mr Mariarputham also submitted that just as in the case of Jamia

University, Delhi University also has a programme whereby diploma holders
can pursue degrees in engineering and, therefore, the very object of introducing
the concept of lateral entry is served and it is for this reason also that the
guideline issued by the AICTE need not be followed by the University of Delhi.
He submitted that similar to the Jamia University's prospectus, the prospectus
of the Delhi University also does not permit lateral entry.

13.

Lastly, Mr Mariarputham referred to the case of State of Tamil

Nadu and Another v. S.V. Bratheep (Minor) and Others: 2004 (4) SCC 513 to
WP(C)2293-94/06

Page No.10 of 19

indicate that the University may fix a higher norm than that imposed by the
AICTE. This was submitted in the context that the conditions imposed by the
University are more stringent than that of AICTE and, therefore, they cannot
be faulted.

14.

Mrs Avnish Ahlawat, who appears on behalf of the respondents 2,

5 & 6 adopts the arguments advanced by Mr Siddiqui and Mr Mariarputham.
She submits that the respondents 5 & 6 are affiliated to the University of Delhi
and the examinations that are conducted and the degrees that are awarded are of
the Delhi University. She has nothing further to add to the submissions made
by Mr Mariarputham insofar as University of Delhi is concerned.

15.

Nobody appeared on behalf of the AICTE, however, the learned

counsel for the petitioners made detailed references to the counter-affidavit
filed on behalf of the AICTE and, in particular, he referred to paragraphs 6, 9
and 10 which essentially relate that the AICTE has power under Section 10 (o)
of the said Act to issue guidelines for admissions of students. References were
also made to the Supreme Court decision in Adhiyaman Educational &
Research Institute (supra) which I shall deal with presently.

16.

Having heard the submissions advanced by the counsel for the

parties, I shall first consider the decisions relied upon by them. On behalf of
WP(C)2293-94/06

Page No.11 of 19

the petitioners reliance was placed on a decision of a learned single judge of
this court in the case of Prakash Kumar Ashiyana (supra).

In the said

decision, it was observed that Section 10 (o) provides for formulation of the
guidelines for admission of students to technical institutes and universities
imparting technical education. It was observed that it cannot be disputed that
the AICTE framed the guidelines under Section 10 (o) of the said Act and that
the same were duly notified on 11.07.1992 and they provide for lateral entry of
diploma holders to the degree courses to the second year in the third semester
level. The learned single judge referred to the decision of the Supreme Court in
the case of Adhiyaman Educational & Research Institute (supra) with
particular reference to the portion where the Supreme Court held that the
AICTE Act fell under Entry 66 of List I and Entry 25 of List III of the 7 th
Schedule to the Constitution of India and that if the provisions of the said Act
were in conflict or inconsistent with the State Act then to the extent of such
inconsistency, the provisions of the State Act were void and the State could not
lay down the standards and requirements higher than those prescribed by the
Central Act for technical institutions and could not deny admission to
applicants on the ground that they do not fulfill the higher standards /
requirements. The Supreme Court further held that since the standards have to
be laid down on a national level, they have necessarily to be uniform
throughout the country as without this the coordindated and integrated
development of technical education all over the country would not be possible
WP(C)2293-94/06

Page No.12 of 19

and would defeat one of the main objects of the said Act.

17.

In my view, the decision in Prakash Kumar Ashiyana (supra) is

not relevant for the purposes of the present case. This is because, firstly, the
said decision was not concerned with any university or degree course. It was
concerned with a diploma course, although the same notification was under
consideration. Secondly, it merely reflected the opinion of the Supreme Court
in Adhiyaman Educational & Research Institute (supra) which, in turn, was
with regard to the conflict between the said Act which was a Central Act and
the Madras University Act, 1923 which was a State Act. It is in that context
that the Supreme Court in the case of Adhiyaman Educational & Research
Institute (supra) held that the State Legislation would have to give way to the
Central Act and, therefore, higher standards could not be prescribed than the
ones prescribed by AICTE. In the present case, neither the decision in Prakash
Kumar Ashiyana (supra) nor the Supreme Court decision in Adhiyaman
Educational & Research Institute (supra) is applicable because the
universities, i.e., Jamia Millia Islamia and University of Delhi are both
universities constituted under Central Acts. Therefore, the argument of conflict
between the State Act and Central Act and the former having to give way to the
latter is not available to the petitioners in this case.

WP(C)2293-94/06

Page No.13 of 19

18.

I shall now refer to the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of

Bharathidasan University (supra) which was relied upon by Mr Siddiqui. It
was argued before the Supreme Court in view of the provisions of Section 10 of
the said Act that the AICTE would have pervasive control over the universities
also in addition to it having control over technical institutions. This argument
was repelled by the Supreme Court in the following manner:-

“8.
We have bestowed our thoughtful consideration
to the submissions made on either side. When the legislative
intent finds specific mention and expression in the provisions
of the Act itself, the same cannot be whittled down or
curtailed and rendered nugatory by giving undue importance
to the so-called object underlying the Act or the purpose of
creation of a body to supervise the implementation of the
provisions of the Act, particularly when the AICTE Act does
not contain any evidence of an intention to belittle and
destroy the authority or autonomy of other statutory bodies,
having their own assigned roles to perform. Merely
activated by some assumed objects or desirabilities, the
courts cannot adorn the mantle of the legislature. It is hard
to ignore the legislative intent to give definite meaning to
words employed in the Act and adopt an interpretation which
would tend to do violence to the express language as well as
the plain meaning and patent aim and object underlying the
various other provisions of the Act. Even in endeavouring to
maintain the object and spirit of the law to achieve the goal
fixed by the legislature, the courts must go by the guidance
of the words used and not on certain preconceived notions of
ideological structure and scheme underlying the law. In the
Statement of Objects and Reasons for the AICTE Act, it is
specifically stated that AICTE was originally set up by a
government resolution as a national expert body to advise the
Central and State Governments for ensuring the coordinated
development of technical education in accordance with
approved standards was playing an effective role, but,
“However, in recent years, a large number of private
engineering colleges and polytechnics have come up in
WP(C)2293-94/06

Page No.14 of 19

complete disregard of the guidelines, laid down by the
AICTE” and taking into account the serious deficiencies of
even rudimentary infrastructure necessary for imparting
proper education and training and the need to maintain
educational standards and curtail the growing erosion of
standards statutory authority was meant to be conferred upon
AICTE to play its role more effectively by enacting the
AICTE Act.
xxx

xxx

xxx

xxx

xxx

xxx

10.
Since it is intended to be other than a university,
the Act defines in Section 2(i) “university” to mean a
university defined under clause (f) of Section 2 of the
University Grants Commission Act, 1956 and also to be
inclusive of an institution deemed to be a university under
Section 3 of the said Act. Section 10 of the Act enumerates
the various powers and functions of AICTE as also its duties
and obligations to take steps towards fulfilment of the same.
one such as envisaged in Section 10(1)(k) is to “grant
approval for starting new technical institutions and for
introduction of new courses or programmes in consultation
with the agencies concerned”. Section 23, which empowers
the Council to make regulations in the manner ordained
therein emphatically ad specifically, mandates the making of
such Regulations only “not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act and the Rules”. The Act, for all purposes and
throughout maintains the distinct identity and existence of
“technical institutions” and “universities” and it is in keeping
tune with the said dichotomy that wherever the university or
the activities of the university are also to be supervised or
regulated and guided by AICTE, specific mention has been
made of the university alongside the technical institutions
and wherever the university is to be left out and not to be
roped in merely refers to the technical institution only in
Sections 10, 11 and 22(2)(b). It is necessary and would be
useful to advert to Sections 10(1)(c), (g), (o) which would go
to show that universities are mentioned alongside the
“technical institutions” and clauses (k), (m), (p), (q), (s) and
(u) wherein there is conspicuous omission of reference to
universities, reference being made to technical institutions
alone. It is equally important to see that when AICTE is
WP(C)2293-94/06

Page No.15 of 19

empowered to inspect or cause to inspect any technical
institution in clause (p) of sub-section (1) of Section 10
without any reservation whatsoever when it comes to the
question of universities it is confined and limited to
ascertaining the financial needs or its standards of teaching,
examination and research. The inspection may be made or
cause to be made of any department or departments only and
that too, in such manner as may be prescribed as envisaged
in Section 11 of the Act. Clause (t) of sub-section (1) of
Section 10 envisages AICTE to only advice UGC for
declaring any institution imparting technical education as a
deemed university and not do any such thing by itself.
Likewise, clause (u) of the same provision which envisages
the setting up of a National Board of Accreditation to
periodically conduct evaluation of technical institutions or
programmes on the basis of guidelines, norms and standards
specified by it to make recommendation to it, or to the
Council, or to the Commission or to other bodies, regarding
recognition or derecognition of the institution or the
programme. All these vitally important aspects go to show
that AICTE created under the Act is not intended to be an
authority either superior to or supervise and control the
universities and thereby superimpose itself upon such
universities merely for the reason that it is imparting teaching
in technical education or programmes in any of its
departments or units. A careful scanning-through of the
provisions of the AICTE Act and the provisions of the UGC
Act in juxtaposition, will show that the role of AICTE vis-avis the universities is only advisory, recommendatory and a
guiding factor and thereby subserves the cause of
maintaining appropriate standards and qualitative norms and
not as an authority empowered to issue and enforce any
sanctions by itself, except submitting a report to UGC for
appropriate action. The conscious and deliberate omission to
enact any such provision in the AICTE Act in respect of
universities is not only a positive indicator but should be also
one of the determining factors in adjudging the status, role
and activities of AICTE vis-a-vis universities and the
activities and functioning of its departments and units. All
these vitally important facets with so much glaring
significance of the scheme underlying the Act and the
language of the various provisions seem to have escaped the
notice of the learned Judges, their otherwise well-merited
WP(C)2293-94/06

Page No.16 of 19

attention and consideration in their proper and correct
perspective. The ultra-activist view articulated in M.
Sambasiva Rao case: 1997 (1) An L. T. 629 (FB) on the
basis of supposed intention and imagined purpose of AICTE
or the Act constituting it, is uncalled for and ought to have
been avoided, all the more so when such an interpretation is
not only bound to do violence to the language of the various
provisions but also inevitably render other statutory
authorities like UGC and universities irrelevant or even as
non-entities by making AICTE a superpower with a
devastating role undermining the status, authority and
autonomous functioning of those institutions in areas and
spheres assigned to them under the respective legislations
constituting and governing them.”
(underlining added)

A reading of the above extract from the Supreme Court decision makes it clear
that the Supreme Court was of the view that the role of AICTE vis-a-vis
universities is only advisory, recommendatory and a guiding factor and thereby
sub-serve the cause of maintaining appropriate standards and qualitative norms
and not as an authority empowered to issue and enforce any sanctions by itself,
except submitting a report to UGC for appropriate action. This, to my mind,
makes it clear that insofar as universities are concerned and that too universities
constituted under the Central Acts, the role of the AICTE even in respect of
technical education imparted by the said universities would be of an advisory
nature and would not be required to be followed mandatorily by the said
universities. It is in this context that paragraph 2.0 of the guidelines needs to be
considered. If these guidelines, as mentioned by the Supreme Court, are merely
advisory and recommendatory, then clearly they are not directory and,
WP(C)2293-94/06

Page No.17 of 19

therefore, it would be open to the university to adopt them or not to adopt them.
In such a situation, it would not be open to the petitioners to approach this court
for a writ of mandamus because they do not have a right to the same. It is at the
discretion of the university to adopt such guidelines or not to adopt such
guidelines. As has been mentioned while recording the submissions of Mr
Siddiqui and Mr Mariarputham, both the universities have considered these
guidelines and have decided consciously not to adopt them so that their
standards are not adversely affected. At the same time, both the universities
have taken care to serve the objective of the guidelines and that is to provide an
avenue for diploma holders to pursue their further studies to obtain degrees in
engineering.

19.

Apart from these considerations, even if it is assumed that the

AICTE guidelines are directory, I would agree with the submissions made by
Mr Siddiqui that the guidelines have to be read in the manner in which they
have been laid down.

The expressions “can be considered” and “will be

allowed”, to my mind, indicate that they are suggestions and recommendations
to the universities. Furthermore, it provides that it would be permissible for the
university to permit lateral entry in the manner indicated in the guidelines. The
said para 2.0 cannot be regarded as a binding direction even on its own
meaning.

WP(C)2293-94/06

Page No.18 of 19

20.

In these circumstances, a writ of mandamus cannot be issued and,

accordingly, the writ petition is dismissed.

May 03, 2007
δυττ

WP(C)2293-94/06

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
( JUDGE )

Page No.19 of 19

