THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Judgment delivered on :01.05.2007
WP(C) No.3171/2007
DESH RAJ SHARMA

...Petitioner
- versus -

ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA

...Respondent

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr Bankim K. Kulshreshta with Mr Shivanand
For the Respondent/ECI
: Mr Sunil Goel

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
+ CM NO. 5977/2007 in WP (C) 3171/2007
*
Allowed subject to all just exceptions.
WP (C) 3171/2007
1.
By way of this writ petition the petitioner (Desh Raj Sharma),
claiming himself to be the President of Himachal Vikas Congress as also
Himachal Vikas Party, is seeking a direction to be issued to the Election
Commission of India to grant temporary permission for contesting the
forthcoming municipal election and the bye-election from the Hamirpur
Parliamentary Constituency under the banner of Himachal Vikas Party and with
WP(C)3171.07

Page No.1 of 7

the symbol of mobile phone. It is alleged by the petitioner that the nomination
process for the forthcoming elections would commence on 02.05.2007.

2.

It may be pointed out that a Letters Patent Appeal being LPA No.

157/2006 filed by this very petitioner is pending before a Division Bench of this
Court. The question there is with regard to the recognition of Himachal Vikas
Congress.

The Election Commission by its order dated 31.03.2005 had

accepted the merger of Himachal Vikas Congress with Indian National
Congress and the name of Himachal Vikas Congress had been struck off from
the list of political parties maintained by the Commission. It is alleged by the
petitioner that the said merger was wrongful and that Mr Sukhram, who was the
President at that point of time of the said Himachal Vikas Congress, did not
have the authority to bring about the merger with the Indian National Congress.
The learned Single Judge, before whom the writ petition was filed, dismissed
the same.

The petitioner, being aggrieved, had filed the aforesaid LPA, which

is pending before the Division Bench. It is also necessary to note that an
interim application had been filed in the said LPA and that was disposed of by
an order dated 04.12.2006 passed by the Division Bench. The prayer in that
application was for an interim direction to the Election Commission allowing
the appellant therein to use the election symbol of the political party “Himachal
Vikas Congress”. The Division Bench disposed of the said application on,
inter alia, the following terms:WP(C)3171.07

Page No.2 of 7

3.

“Having considered the pleadings of the parties in the writ petition, the
impugned order was passed. The said order is under challenge in this
appeal. In case we pass any interim order in favour of the appellant in
terms of his prayer, the same will amount to allowing the appeal at this
stage. Besides, prima facie it is proved that Himachal Vikas Congress
merged with the Congress Party and therefore, no order could be
passed allowing the appellant to use the symbol of Himachal Vikas
Party at this stage. The said prayer can only be considered at the time
of hearing of the appeal itself.”
Thereafter, another application was filed by the petitioner in the

said LPA No. 157/2006 seeking early hearing and disposal of the Letters Patent
Appeal. The reasons for early hearing were the impending municipal elections
and the bye-election for the Hamirpur Parliamentary Constituency.

After

considering the arguments advanced by the counsel for the parties, the Division
Bench by an order dated 26.02.2007 disposed of the application in the
following terms:“CM No. 2904/2007
This is an application for early hearing of the appeal
filed by the appellant.
This matter came up for consideration before this
Court on 04.12.2006, when CM No. 1452/2006 filed by the
appellant was disposed of. Thereafter, the matter was listed
on 05.02.2007.
On 05.02.2007, the matter was again directed to be
listed on 23.07.2007 for hearing of the appeal.
We find no reason to prepone the said date as the
said date was fixed in the presence of the petitioner who
was present on that date.”

WP(C)3171.07

Page No.3 of 7

In view of these circumstances, it would not be possible for this Court to pass
any interim direction on this writ petition.

4.

In any event, it will be seen that the petitioner had moved an

application on 20.03.2007 before the Election Commission of India for granting
permission to Himachal Vikas Congress to contest the election of the Municipal
Corporation of Simla as also the bye-election for Hamirpur Parliamentary
Constituency on another symbol on urgent basis. The other symbol that the
petitioner had sought was that of a mobile phone. This application was made
despite the fact that the Division Bench was seized of the matter and no interim
order had been passed in favour of the petitioner. Anyhow, this application was
considered by the Election Commission of India and disposed of by an order
dated 26.04.2007. The application was rejected in the following manner:“I am directed to refer to your application dated 20.03.2007 on
the subject cited. In this regard, your attention is invited to the
Commission's Order dated 31st March, 2005, whereby the
merger of Himachal Vikas Congress with Indian National
Congress has been accepted by the Commission and the name
of the Himachal Vikas Congress has been struck off from the
list of political parties maintained by the Commission. Since,
the party has ceased to exist as a political party, the question of
allotment of any symbol as requested in your application, does
not raise.”
5.

Now, the petitioner has come up with another story and that is that

instead of permitting the petitioner and his associates to contest the said
elections under the name Himachal Vikas Congress, they be permitted to
WP(C)3171.07

Page No.4 of 7

contest the same under the party name of Himachal Vikas Party and be alloted
the symbol of a mobile phone. For this purpose an application for registration
of Himachal Vikas Party under Section 29-A of the Representation of the
People Act, 1951 was made to the Election Commission on 27.04.2007, i.e,
only three days prior to the filing of the present petition.

A copy of the said

application is annexure P-10 to the writ petition, which is at page 41 of the
paper book. The application makes interesting reading. First of all, the symbol
given at the top shows a telephone of an older type and beneath the symbol are
the three letters HVC, which obviously do not denote Himachal Vikas Party.
Secondly, the letter shows Himachal Vikas Party as a registered party when,
admittedly, it is not.

Thirdly, in paragraph 5 of the said application it is

mentioned that the executive committee of Himachal Vikas Congress on
14.03.2007 had taken the decision to contest the forthcoming election under the
name and style of Himachal Vikas Party.

A copy of the resolution of

14.03.2007 has also been filed and is at page 40 of the paper book.

The

resolution nowhere mentions the name of Himachal Vikas Party nor is there any
such decision to contest the forthcoming election with the name and style of
Himachal Vikas Party.

6.

The prayer contained in the application dated 27.04.2007 is that

Himachal Vikas Party be registered as a new political party and be allotted the
symbol of mobile phone and that under emergent circumstances temporary
WP(C)3171.07

Page No.5 of 7

orders may be passed by 29.04.2007 so that “the legitimate expectation of the
people of Himachal Pradesh” could be fulfilled.

7.

Without commenting any further on the application dated

27.04.2007 it is quite clear that the procedure for registration of political parties
is set out in Section 29-A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951. First
of all, the application has to be made in an appropriate format and giving the
requisite particulars as indicated in Section 29-A (4).

The application is

required to be accompanied by a copy of the memorandum or rules and
regulations of the association or body, as indicated in sub-section (5). It is
thereafter that the Commission may call for such other particulars as it may
deem fit from the association or body making such an application. Under subsection (7) of Section 29-A, the Commission is required to consider all the
particulars in its possession and other necessary and relevant factors and is
required to give the representatives of the association or body a reasonable
opportunity of being heard and only thereafter the Commission can decide
either to register the association or body as a political party for the purposes of
Part IV-A of the said Act or not so to register it. The Commission is thereafter
required to communicate its decision. The proviso to sub-section (7) of Section
29-A clearly stipulates that no association or body shall be registered as a
political party under this sub-section unless the memorandum or rules and
regulations of such association or body conform to the provisions of subWP(C)3171.07

Page No.6 of 7

section (5). Sub-section (8) provides that the decision of the Commission shall
be final. This stage has not yet been reached and, therefore, on this ground also
this writ petition itself cannot be maintained because it is premature.
8.

As regards allotment of symbols, the Election Symbol (Reservation

and Allotment) Order, 1968 will be applicable. Symbols are allotted to political
parties after they are registered and recognized. It is quite possible that a
political party may be registered but may not be recognized in a particular State.
Without recognition, no reserved symbol can be allotted to the political party.
In such eventuality, when the party is not a recognized party in a particular
State, the members of such party can contest the elections, provided they fulfill
the other requirements, as independent candidates and they can opt for the free
symbols only.

8.

For all these reasons, this writ petition is not maintainable and is

dismissed with costs of Rs.10,000/-.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
May 01, 2007
sr

WP(C)3171.07

Page No.7 of 7

