THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 02.07.2007

+

WP(C) No.1039/1999

ASHOK SHARMA AND OTHERS

...Petitioners
- versus -

UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS
Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioners
For the Respondent Nos.1, 2 & 3
For the Respondent No.4

...Respondents
: Mr P.S. Vates with Mr L.B. Rai
: Mr Maninder Singh and Mr Harpreet
: Ms Rachna Rai

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ?

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J
1.

The six petitioners are the fathers of six children who lost their

lives on 06.06.1999 in what is known as 'The Vikas Nagar Drowning Tragedy'.
The six boys who lost their lives and whose fathers have filed the present writ
petition were between 14 to 17 years of age.

2.

The respondent Nos. 1 to 4 had arranged an annual training camp

of the NCC w.e.f. 30.05.1997 to 09.06.1997 at Asha Ram Vedic Inter College,

WP(C)1039/99

Page No.1 of 13

Vikas Nagar, Dehradun, U.P. The six boys alongwith other fellow cadets had
gone to attend the said training camp. Part of the training included the exercise
of firing at a firing range which was at village Dhimawala near the Yamuna
River. On 06.06.1999, some of the companies of the student cadets went for a
firing exercise in the firing range at about 6.00 a.m. in the morning. Lt. Col.
D.K. Bansal, who was the Commandant of that camp, had given clear
instructions to all the incharges of the camps as well as the students that no
student should be allowed to go towards the river and take a bath therein for the
reason that a very strong flow of water affects the river all of a sudden and this
may endanger the lives of the students. It was also alleged that after the firing
exercise was over, the respondent No.4 (D.P. Saini) took a number of students
with him for the purposes of taking a bath in the river. While the said persons,
which included the six boys mentioned above, were taking a bath in the river, a
huge quantity of water was released from the Dak Pathar Barrage as a
consequence of which 11 children in total, including the six mentioned above,
drowned in the water and lost their lives.

3.

According to the petitioners, the respondents failed and neglected

in performing their duties and handling the cadets with due care. The cadets
who were under their custody lost their lives because of the negligence
on the part of the respondents. It is pointed out by the petitioners that a sum of
Rs 2.75 lakhs have been received for the loss of lives of each of the cadets.
WP(C)1039/99

Page No.2 of 13

This amount had been received prior to the filing of the present writ petition. It
had been paid in the following manner:i)
ii)
iii)
iv)

NCC Cadets Welfare Society
Government of NCT of Delhi
U.P. Government
Delhi Government School
Students Insurance Fund
Total

4.

Rs 1,00,000/Rs 1,00,000/Rs 50,000/Rs 25,000/Rs 2,75,000/-

The present petition has been filed by the petitioners praying for

enhancement of compensation to them. The learned counsel for the petitioners
referred to some cases where, according to him, compensation to the extent of
Rs 7.5 lakhs and Rs 10 lakhs have been awarded by courts in death cases. The
learned counsel referred to the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of
Chairman, Railway Board and Others v. Mrs Chandrima Das & Ors: JT
2000 (1) SC 426. In this case, as pointed out by the learned counsel for the
petitioners, the Supreme Court had awarded compensation of Rs 10 lakhs to a
lady who had been raped by an employee of the Railway Yatra Niwas. In Mrs
Sudha Rasheed v. Union of India and Others: 1995 (1) Scale 77, the Supreme
Court had awarded compensation of Rs 7.5 lakhs for the custodial death of a
lawyer. In Smt. Geeta and Others v. Lt. Governor and Others: 75 (1998)
DLT 822, this court had awarded a compensation of Rs 5.5 lakhs in favour of
the petitioner for the custodial death of her husband. The learned counsel for
the petitioner then referred to the decision in the case of Malkiyat Singh v.
State of U.P.: 1998 (9) SCC 351 where the Supreme Court awarded the
WP(C)1039/99

Page No.3 of 13

compensation of Rs 5 lakhs to the petitioner whose son had been killed in an
alleged encounter. The learned counsel also referred to the decision of the
Karnataka High Court in the case of Soubhagya Devi v. Chief Secretary, State
of Karnataka: 2001 Crl. L.J. 238. In this case, the Karnataka High Court had
awarded compensation of Rs 5 lakhs to the petitioner in respect of the custodial
death of her husband.
5.

Lastly, the learned counsel for the petitioners placed strong reliance

on the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of M.S. Grewal and another
v. Deep Chand Sood and Others: 2001 (8) SCC 151. According to the learned
counsel, this case is identical to the present case. In M.S. Grewal (supra), 14
school children were taken by the school for a picnic near a river. Those 14
students lost their lives by drowning in the river while taking a bath. The
learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that the Supreme Court, after
discussing the entire case law, awarded a compensation of Rs 5 lakhs to each of
the petitioners. According to the learned counsel, this decision entirely covers
the present case. Accordingly, the learned counsel for the petitioners submitted
that the compensation amount be enhanced to at least a sum of Rs 7.5 lakhs for
each of the petitioners.

6.

Mr Maninder Singh, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

respondents 1 to 3 took the stand that each of the petitioners have already been
paid a sum of Rs 2,75,000/- despite no case of negligence being established
WP(C)1039/99

Page No.4 of 13

against the respondents. He submitted that the compensation amount was paid
to the family members of all the 11 cadets who lost their lives. The same has
been accepted by the others and only the six persons have filed the present
petition.

He, therefore, contended that the proper remedy for the present

petitioners for further compensation was in filing a suit in a civil court and not
in invoking the writ jurisdiction of this court.

7.

The next ground taken by Mr Maninder Singh is that the

respondents 1 to 3 are not at all liable because there has been no negligence on
their part. According to him, the negligence was on the part of the respondent
No.4 [D.P. Saini]. It may be pointed out, at this stage itself, that the respondent
No.4 on the other hand has stated that he was not, in any way, responsible and
his duty was only to follow the instructions of his superiors which included the
Commandant D.K. Bansal and the Deputy Commandant, Major A.S. Atrie. He
submitted that subsequent to the said incident, two inquiries had been
conducted and that in the Magisterial inquiry the respondent No.4 had been
acquitted, though an appeal is pending. Secondly, the disciplinary inquiry
which has been initiated in respect of the said incident does not include the
respondent No.4 as a person who has been charge-sheeted, but, on the contrary,
he has been summoned as a witness. It is further contended by the respondent
No.4 that there is evidence to show that he risked his life and jumped into the
river to save the drowning children and was, through his best efforts, able to
WP(C)1039/99

Page No.5 of 13

save five children. He submitted that while the other officers kept shouting
near the river, it was he (respondent No.4) who risked his life to save the
cadets.

8.

Mr Maninder Singh appearing on behalf of the respondents 1 to 3

also submitted that the writ petition was not maintainable because the
petitioners had given undertakings at the time of enrollment of their wards as
cadets that they would have no claim on the authorities in the event of any
injury or death due to accident during the training or during the training camps /
courses and while travelling. It was also submitted that the decision to put their
wards in the training camp was their own decision arrived at voluntarily. It was
also submitted that indemnity bonds had been filled in by the petitioners in
respect of their wards. It was also contended that the petitioners were entitled
to receive payments out of the NCC Cadets Welfare Society which they have
already received and, therefore, there is no question of any further enhancement
in the compensation to be paid to the petitioners.

9.

It must be mentioned that the claim for compensation under Article

226 of the Constitution of India in respect of the rights guaranteed under
Article 21 of the Constitution is a remedy available in public law. In D.K.
Basu v. State of West Bengal: 1997 (1) SCC 416, the Supreme Court had
clearly observed that the claim in public law for compensation for
WP(C)1039/99

Page No.6 of 13

unconstitutional deprivation of the fundamental right to life and liberty, the
protection of which is guaranteed under the Constitution, is a claim based on
strict liability and is in addition to the claim available in private law for
damages for tortious acts of public servants. The Supreme Court also observed
that public law proceedings serve a different purpose than the private law
proceedings. In the same judgment, the Supreme Court held as under:“45. The old doctrine of only relegating the aggrieved to the
remedies available in civil law limits the role of the courts
too much, as the protector and custodian of the indefeasible
rights of the citizens. The courts have the obligation to
satisfy the social aspirations of the citizens because the
courts and the law are for the people and expected to
respond to their aspirations. ...”

10.

In M.S. Grewal (supra), the position of law was stated by the

Supreme Court as under:“28. Currently judicial attitude has taken a shift from the
old draconian concept and the traditional jurisprudential
system — affectation of the people has been taken note of
rather seriously and the judicial concern thus stands on a
footing to provide expeditious relief to an individual when
needed rather than taking recourse to the old conservative
doctrine of the civil court’s obligation to award damages.
As a matter of fact the decision in D.K. Basu has not only
dealt with the issue in a manner apposite to the social need
of the country but the learned Judge with his usual felicity
of expression firmly established the current trend of
“justice-oriented approach”. Law courts will lose their
efficacy if they cannot possibly respond to the need of the
society — technicalities there might be many but the
justice-oriented approach ought not to be thwarted on the
basis of such technicality since technicality cannot and
ought not to outweigh the course of justice.”
WP(C)1039/99

Page No.7 of 13

11.

In view of the aforesaid clear pronouncements of the Supreme

Court in respect of claims arising under public law, the contention of Mr
Maninder Singh that the petitioners be relegated to pursue the remedies in civil
courts cannot but be rejected. I also see no merit in the contention made on
behalf of the respondents 1 to 3 that the petitioners had given undertakings and
had executed indemnity bonds in favour of the respondents and, therefore, the
respondents would not be liable. The indemnity bonds were in respect of any
accidents or injuries occurring during the training programme and / or
connected with the training and was clearly not in respect of the incident which
took place. Because, if one were to hold so, then it would mean that the
petitioners indemnified the respondents even from killing their sons.
Therefore, this argument also has no merit. With regard to the shifting of the
blame between the respondents 1 to 3 on the one hand and the respondent No.4
on the other, that is a matter with which this court is not concerned. The
primary liability lies with the respondents 1 to 3 and what the inter se liability
between the respondents 1 to 3 on the one hand, and the respondent No.4 on the
other, is best left to be determined by other fora. The only issue, therefore, that
remains to be decided in the present case is whether the petitioners are entitled
to enhancement in the compensation already granted. I had occasion to deal
with the question of compensation in the case of Smt. Kamla Devi v.
Government of NCT of Delhi: 2004 (114) DLT 57. After examining various
WP(C)1039/99

Page No.8 of 13

decisions of the Supreme Court as well as of other courts and examining the
international norms with regard to grant of compensation, it was, inter alia,
concluded in Kamla Devi (supra) as under:“5.

The compensation to be awarded by the
Courts, based on international norms and previous
decisions of the Supreme Court, comprises of two
parts:(a) `standard compensation' or the so-called
`conventional amount' (or sum) for nonpecuniary losses such as loss of consortium,
loss of parent, pain and suffering and loss of
amenities; and
(b) Compensation
dependency.

for

pecuniary

loss

of

6.
The `standard compensation' or the
`conventional amount has to be revised from time to
time to counter inflation and the consequent erosion of
the value of the rupee. Keeping this in mind, in case of
death, the standard compensation in 1996 is worked out
at Rs. 97,700/-.
This needs to be updated for
subsequent years on the basis of the Consumer Price
Index for Industrial Workers (CPI-IW) brought out by
the Labour Bureau, Government of India.
7.
Compensation for pecuniary loss of
dependency is to be computed on the basis of loss of
earnings for which the multiplier method is to be
employed. The table given in Schedule II of the MV
Act, 1988 cannot be relied upon, however, the
appropriate multiplier can be taken therefrom. The
multiplicand is the yearly income of the deceased less
the amount he would have spent upon himself. This is
calculated by dividing the family into units - 2 for each
adult member and 1 for each minor. The yearly income
is then to be divided by the total number of units to get
WP(C)1039/99

Page No.9 of 13

the value of each unit. The annual dependency loss is
then calculated by multiplying the value of each unit by
the number of units excluding the two units for the
deceased adult member. This becomes the multiplicand
and is multiplied by the appropriate multiplier to arrive
at the figure for compensation of pecuniary loss of
dependency.
8.
The total amount paid under 6 and 7 above is
to be awarded by the Court along with simple interest
thereon calculated on the basis of the inflation rate
based on the Consumer Prices as disclosed by the
Government of India for the period commencing from
the date of death of the deceased till the date of payment
by the State.
9.
The amount paid by the State as indicated
above would be liable to be adjusted against any amount
which may be awarded to the claimants by way of
damages in a civil suit or compensation under the
Criminal Procedure Code.”

12.

In the present case, the two components of compensation, i.e.,

standard compensation and compensation for pecuniary loss of dependency
need to be ascertained

based

on

the

aforesaid

principles

and / or

adaptations thereof. Insofar as the standard compensation or the conventional
amount is concerned, there is not much difficulty. The standard compensation
of Rs 50,000/-awarded by the Supreme Court in the case of Lata Wadhwa and
Others v. State of Bihar and Others: 2001 (8) SCC 197 in respect of the year
1989 needs to be updated for the deaths which took place on 06.06.1997.
Employing the same Consumer Price Index for Industrial Workers (CPI-IW)

WP(C)1039/99

Page No.10 of 13

brought out by the Labour Bureau, Government of India, I find that the index
for the year 1989 was 171 where the base year was 1982 (= 100). However, in
1997 the index was 358. Therefore, the inflation corrected value of Rs 50,000/in 1989 would work out to be Rs 1,04,678.36 (or Rs 1,04,678/-) in 1997 [(5000
x 358) ÷ 171].

13.

With regard to the compensation for pecuniary loss of dependency,

a somewhat different approach would have to be employed in this case. This is
because, whereas in Kamla Devi (supra), the victim was an adult earning
member of the family, in the present case, the victims were all children between
the ages of 14 – 17 years and who were not earning members. It can be
assumed that the children would complete their education and be employed and
that they would contribute to their respective house-holds upon such
employment. In the maximum, it can be assumed that the victims who lost
their lives would have contributed to an extent of half of their annual incomes
towards the house-hold. This is so because while the victims would be earning
as adults, the petitioners would also for some length of time be earning
members of the family and their dependency would not be very much.
Secondly, it can be safely assumed that the children who lost their lives would
have also got married and would have had families of their own to support out
of their incomes. Therefore, it cannot be expected that the entire incomes of
such children, had they survived, would have gone towards the upkeep of their
WP(C)1039/99

Page No.11 of 13

parents. In my view, in the maximum, only half of their incomes can be
construed as going towards dependency.

14.

The next step, therefore, would be to compute the income which

could be reasonably expected to be earned by the deceased children, had they
survived. Normally, the incomes of the parents can be taken as a standard
measure for arriving at the expected annual income of the children.
Unfortunately, in this case, the petitioners have not provided any such figure
and there is also no hard and fast rule that the figures, if provided, would be the
incomes that the victims would have been reasonably expected to earn. In such
a situation, there would be an element of guess work involved. To minimise
the element of guess work, it would be appropriate if the minimum wages are
taken as a basis for determining the expected incomes. However, I feel that
taking the minimum wages itself would not be appropriate because that is the
rock bottom of legally permissible wages. The same may be multiplied by a
factor of 1.5 to arrive at a reasonable estimate. The minimum wages for skilled
workers notified by the Office of the Labour Commissioner, Government of
NCT of Delhi for the year 1997 was Rs 2208/- per month. If the same is
multiplied by a factor of 1.5, it comes to Rs 3312/- per month. As per the ratio
in Kamla Devi (supra), the multiplicand would be that part of the annual
income which was to be expended on the dependents. In the present case, I
have already explained as to why a maximum upto half of the expected income
WP(C)1039/99

Page No.12 of 13

ought to be taken for the purposes of computing pecuniary loss of dependency.
Accordingly, the figure of Rs 3312/- per month ought to be divided by 2 to
provide us with a monthly figure of Rs 1656/- and an annual figure of
Rs 19,872/- This is the multiplicand in the present case and the same needs to
be multiplied by a multiplier of 16 as per the Second Schedule to the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988 which brings us to the figure of Rs 3,17,952/-. Thus, the
standard compensation for each of the petitioners comes to Rs 1,04,678/- and
the compensation for pecuniary loss of dependency for each of the petitioners
comes to Rs 3,17,952/-, the total being Rs 4,22,630/-. But an amount of Rs
2,75,000/- has already been received as compensation by each of the
petitioners. This leaves a balance of Rs 1,47,630/- which was payable to each
of the petitioners.
15.

Accordingly, each of the petitioners would be entitled to receive

this additional sum of Rs 1,47,630/- alongwith interest thereon w.e.f. the date
of the filing of the writ petition till the date the actual payment is made @ 6%
per annum simple interest. The said amount shall be paid by the respondent
Nos. 1 and 3 within eight weeks.
This writ petition stands disposed of accordingly.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
July 02, 2007
δυττ

WP(C)1039/99

Page No.13 of 13

