THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%
+

Judgment delivered on: 07.02.2008
CS (OS) No.265/2006

M/S FAIR DEAL AGENCIES & ANOTHER

... Plaintiffs

- versus M/S INNER MONGOLIA MUWANG ANIMAL
BY-PRODUCT COMPANY LIMITED & OTHERS ... Respondents
Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Plaintiffs
: Ms Amrita Sanghi with Mr Devendra Singh
For the Defendant No.1
: Mr Jayant Bhushan, Sr Advocate with Ms Mamta Tiwari,
Mr Prateek Kumar
For the Defendant No.2
: Mr N.S. Bajwa
For the Defendant No.3.
: Mr A.P.S. Ahluwalia

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ?

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

By the order dated 23.07.2007, the following issues were framed:“1.

Whether the letters of credit are not liable to be honoured
on account of any fraud ? OPP

2.

Whether this Court has no territorial jurisdiction to try
and determine the present suit ? OPD

CS(OS) 265/06

Page No. 1 of 13

3.

Relief”

Issue No.2:
2.

Since issue No.2 pertains to the jurisdiction of this court to try and

determine the present suit, it would be appropriate to take up consideration
of that issue first. The objection as to jurisdiction had been taken by the
defendant No.3. The entire case as set out in the plaint concerns two Letters
of Credit. The plaintiff had filed this suit seeking an injunction against the
defendant No.3 (the issuing bank of the two letters of credit) restraining it
from making payments. The letters of credit were issued at the request of
the plaintiff because the plaintiff had ordered certain goods from the
defendant No.1 through the defendant No.2. It is the case of the plaintiff
that the documents submitted by the plaintiff to its bankers (Bank of China)
[the negotiating bank] were contrary to the terms of the letters of credit. It
is alleged by the plaintiff that this constituted not only breach of terms of
the letters of credit, but the breaches were grave enough to be construed as
fraud. It was also contended on behalf of the plaintiff that since there is no
established legal system in China, if the injunction is not granted, then the
plaintiff would be left without any recourse insofar as payments under the
letters of credit are concerned. It was also contended on behalf of the
plaintiff that the plaintiff had ordered non-alloy steel, whereas what had
been shipped to the plaintiff by the defendant No.1 was alloy steel. This,
however, has been controverted by the learned counsel appearing on behalf

CS(OS) 265/06

Page No. 2 of 13

of the defendant No.1 that the plaint does not carry any such statement. It
has also been contended that the goods were supposed to have been on CIF
basis, but the plaintiff was required to pay freight at ICD, Tughlakabad and
this, according to the plaintiff, would clearly indicate that the condition of
the letters of credit that the goods were to be shipped on CIF basis had been
violated. It is on the basis of these alleged breaches and discrepancies that
the present suit had been filed seeking an injunction against the defendant
No.3 (issuing bank) from releasing payments in respect of the documents
submitted to it through the negotiating bank (Bank of China). This is the
background of the case.

3.

It was contended by the learned counsel for the defendant No.3 that

this court does not have jurisdiction to entertain the present suit. He drew
my attention to the memo of parties which clearly indicated that both the
plaintiffs have their businesses at Jallandhar, Punjab. The defendant No.1 is
located in China and the defendant No.3 (Punjab National Bank,
International Banking Branch) is also located at Civil Lines, Jallandhar,
Punjab. The learned counsel drew my attention to paragraph 1 of the plaint
which states that the plaintiff No.1 is a trading division of the plaintiff No.2
which has its registered office at Nehru Garden Road, Jallandhar, Punjab. It
is an admitted position between the parties that the plaintiffs approached the
defendant No.3 at Jallandhar for the purposes of opening the letters of credit
in question. Both the letters of credit were opened by the defendant No.3 at

CS(OS) 265/06

Page No. 3 of 13

its Jallandhar Branch. Paragraph 28 of the plaint was also brought to my
notice. The contents thereof relate to the averments with regard to cause of
action. It is alleged therein that the cause of action arose in favour of the
plaintiff and against the defendant in the first week of July, 2005 when the
agent of the defendant No.1 contacted the plaintiff with regard to sourcing
of the goods in question from China. It is further alleged that the cause of
action also arose when the plaintiff opened the letters of credit in favour of
the defendant No.1 on 22.08.2005 and that it again arose in favour of the
plaintiff and against the defendant No.1 when the plaintiff was required to
pay demurrage charges for release of the goods in question in Delhi as well
as in Mumbai on or about 25.11.2005 on the alleged fraud of the defendant
No.1. The plaintiff also alleged that the cause of action was a continuing
and subsisting one since the defendant No.1 had failed to honour its
commitment under the commercial bargain as stipulated in the letters of
credit opened in favour of the defendant No.1. The only allegation with
regard to cause of action in respect of defendant No.3 was as under:“... Defendant No.3 is also intending to remit the payment
under the two outstanding Letters of Credit to Defendant
No.1 despite being aware of the fraud and that the documents
were not in accordance with the Letters of Credit.”
4.

Having read the contents of paragraph 28 of the plaint, the learned

counsel for the defendant No.3 submitted that as per the pleadings, no part
of the cause of action has even been alleged to have taken place in Delhi.
He submits that the prayers also indicate that the only relief that is sought in

CS(OS) 265/06

Page No. 4 of 13

this suit is with regard to injuncting and / or restraining the defendant No.3
from negotiating and / or releasing payments in respect of the Letters of
Credit bearing Nos. LC No.2999FLC02004/05: USD 1,52,880 and LC
No.2999FLC02005/05: USD 1,09,200 which had been issued by the
defendant No.3 at the request of the plaintiff in favour of the defendant
No.1. It was contended that no relief whatsoever has been claimed either
against the defendant No.1 or defendant No.2.

5.

The learned counsel appearing for the defendant No.3 submitted that

the question of jurisdiction has to be decided in terms of the provisions of
Section 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter referred to as
'CPC'). He submits that although the defendant No.3 has its registered
office in Delhi, but no part of the cause of action has arisen in Delhi.
Therefore, reading the provisions of Section 20 (a) CPC with the
explanation appended to the said provision, the only place which would
have jurisdiction would be Jallandhar inasmuch as no part of the cause of
action had arisen in Delhi and the entire cause of action had arisen, if at all,
insofar as the defendant No.3 is concerned, at Jallandhar.

He further

submitted that Section 20 (b) may also be considered because in this case,
there are more defendants than one and both the defendant No.1 and the
defendant No.3 are admittedly not residing within the territorial jurisdiction
of this court. In this regard, he submits that the leave of the court ought to
have been taken for suing the defendant No.3 in this court. Such leave was

CS(OS) 265/06

Page No. 5 of 13

not even applied for apart from the fact that it could not have been granted
in any event, because no part of the cause of action arose in Delhi and no
relief was claimed against the defendant No.2 which was the only defendant
located in Delhi.

6.

The learned counsel for the defendant No.3 placed reliance on the

following decisions:1)
2)

Kensoft Infotech Ltd v. R.S. Krishnaswami & Others:
146 (2008) DLT 657;

3)

7.

M/s Patel Roadways Limited, Bombay v. M/s Prasad
Trading Company: AIR 1992 SC 1514;

Shri Ganesh Research Institute v. Union of India and
Others :115 (2004) DLT 410.

He submitted that since the entire alleged cause of action, insofar as

the letters of credit are concerned, had arisen in Jallandhar and no part of the
cause of action had arisen in Delhi, this court would not have any
jurisdiction to entertain the present suit.

8.

The learned counsel for the plaintiff was of the view that this court

would have jurisdiction. She submitted that her case was for grant of
injunction in respect of the said letters of credit on three separate grounds.
The first being fraud; the second being irreparable injustice and the third
being discrepant documents. She submitted that the letter of credit itself, as
can be seen from Exhibit P-15, carried the condition that the goods were to

CS(OS) 265/06

Page No. 6 of 13

be shipped to ICD Tughlakabad, New Delhi. It was her contention that
since the letter of credit itself mentions Delhi as a destination for the goods,
therefore, this court would have territorial jurisdiction in deciding the
disputes raised in this suit. The learned counsel then placed reliance on the
Supreme Court decision in the case of A.B.C. Laminart Pvt. Ltd. and Anr.
v. A.P. Agencies, Salem: 1989 (2) SCC 163.

She made a particular

reference to paragraph 15 of the said decision which reads as under:“15. In the matter of a contract there may arise causes of
action of various kinds. In a suit for damages for breach of
contract the cause of action consists of the making of the
contract, and of its breach, so that the suit may be filed either
at the place where the contract was made or at the place where
it should have been performed and the breach occurred. The
making of the contract is part of the cause of action. A suit on
a contract, therefore, can be filed at the place where it was
made. The determination of the place where the contract was
made is part of the law of contract. But making of an offer on
a particular place does not form cause of action in a suit for
damages for breach of contract. Ordinarily, acceptance of an
offer and its intimation result in a contract and hence a suit
can be filed in a court within whose jurisdiction the
acceptance was communicated. The performance of a
contract is part of cause of action and a suit in respect of the
breach can always be filed at the place where the contract
should have performed or its performance completed. If the
contract is to be performed at the place where it is made, the
suit on the contract is to be filed there and nowhere else. In
suits for agency actions the cause of action arises at the place
where the contract of agency was made or the place where
actions are to be rendered and payment is to be made by the
agent. Part of cause of action arises where money is expressly
or impliedly payable under a contract. In cases of repudiation
of a contract, the place where repudiation is received is the
place where the suit would lie. If a contract is pleaded as part
of the cause of action giving jurisdiction to the Court where
the suit is filed and that contract is found to be invalid, such
part of cause of the action disappears. The above are some of
the connecting factors.”
(underlining added)
CS(OS) 265/06

Page No. 7 of 13

Reading the aforesaid extract, she submitted that the Supreme Court had
clearly stated that in suits for agency actions the cause of action arises at the
place where the contract of agency was made or the place where actions are
to be rendered and payments are to be made by the agent. She submitted
that the defendant No.2 was the agent acting both on behalf of the plaintiff
as well as the defendant No.1 and because the defendant No.2 resided in
Delhi, this court would have territorial jurisdiction. I am unable to agree
with this contention raised on behalf of the learned counsel counsel for the
plaintiff. The present suit is not a suit on an agency action. It is a suit
seeking injunction against the bank from negotiating the letters of credit and
that is an entirely different kind of suit. The defendant No.2 has no role to
play whatsoever in the present action between the plaintiff and the
defendant No.3 against whom the present suit is directed. Therefore, the
presence of defendant No.2 in Delhi is of no consequence.

9.

The learned counsel for the plaintiff further submitted that Section 20

(c) CPC would be attracted as part of the cause of action has arisen within
the territorial precincts of this court. She submitted that a part of the cause
of action has arisen in Delhi because: (1) the goods were to be delivered at
Delhi as per the letters of credit; (2) freight charges were paid by the
plaintiffs in Delhi which also goes to show that the letters of credit, which
indicated that the goods were to be shipped on CIF basis, were not adhered
to inasmuch as the plaintiffs had to pay freight; (3) the defendant No.2, who

CS(OS) 265/06

Page No. 8 of 13

is the agent between the plaintiff and the defendant No.1, is in Delhi; (4) the
letters of credit have been established at the request of the plaintiff No.1 by
the defendant No.3 on the basis of an Import Indent which had been
allegedly raised by the defendant No.2 from Delhi.

10.

In Tarapore & Company v. V/O Tractoroexport and Anr.: 1969 (1)

SCC 233, the Supreme Court had observed that an irrevocable letter of
credit had a definite implication and that it was independent of, and
unqualified by, the contract of sale or other underlying transactions. The
letter of credit was a mechanism of great importance in international trade
and that any interference with that mechanism was bound to have serious
repercussions. In U.P. Cooperative Federation Ltd.v. Singh Consultants
and Engineers (P) Ltd.: 1988 (1) SCC 174, the Supreme Court quoted with
approval the article of Paul R. Verkuil which set out the salient features of a
letter of credit. The said article indicated that the letter of credit is a
contract.

The issuing party, usually a bank, promises to pay the

'beneficiary', traditionally a seller of goods, on demand if the beneficiary
presents whatever documents may be required by the letter.

They are

normally the only two parties involved in the contract. The bank which
issues a letter of credit acts as a principal, not as an agent for its customers
and engages its own credit.

The letter of credit thus evidences an

irrevocable obligation to honour the draft presented by the beneficiary upon
compliance with the terms of the credit. In U.P. Coop Federation Ltd

CS(OS) 265/06

Page No. 9 of 13

(supra), the Supreme Court further explained the importance of the letter of
credit as a means of doing business where the buyer and seller were
separated by geography. The words used by the Supreme Court are as
under:“45. The letter of credit has been developed over
hundreds of years of international trade. It was most
commonly used in conjunction with the sale of goods
between geographically distant parties. It was intended to
facilitate the transfer of goods between distant and
unfamiliar buyer and seller. It was found difficult for the
seller to rely upon the credit of an unknown customer. It
was also found difficult for a buyer to pay for goods prior
to their delivery. The bank's letter of credit came into
existence to bridge this gap. In such transactions, the seller
(beneficiary) receives payment from issuing bank when he
presents a demand as per terms of the documents. The bank
must pay if the documents are in order and the terms of
credit are satisfied. The bank, however, was not allowed to
determine whether the seller had actually shipped the goods
or whether the goods conformed to the requirements of the
contract. Any dispute between the buyer and the seller must
be settled between themselves. The Courts, however,
carved out an exception to this rule of absolute
independence. The Courts held that if there has been "fraud
in the transaction" the bank could dishonour beneficiary's
demand for payment. The Courts have generally permitted
dishonour only on the fraud of the beneficiary, not the fraud
of somebody else.”
11.

Article 3 of The Uniform Customs & Practices for Documentary

Credits (1983) also makes it clear that credits (Letters of Credit), by their
nature are separate transactions from the sales or other contract(s) on which
they may be based and banks are in no way concerned with or bound by
such contract(s), even if any reference whatsoever to such contract(s) is
included in the Credit (Letter of Credit).

CS(OS) 265/06

It is further provided that

Page No. 10 of 13

consequently, the undertaking of a bank to pay, accept and pay draft(s) or
negotiate and / or to fulfil any other obligations under the Credit, is not
subject to claims or defences by the applicant resulting from his relationship
with the issuing bank or the beneficiary. These circumstances make it
abundantly clear that whether the goods were to be delivered at Delhi,
whether the freight charges were paid by the plaintiff at Delhi and whether
the agent which organised the alleged transaction between the plaintiff and
the defendant No.1 resided at Delhi are of no consequence to the contract
which is evidenced by the letter of credit. The letters of credit in question
are entirely separate contracts which have no connection with anything that
has happened in Delhi. The letters of credit were issued at the instance of
the plaintiff by the defendant No.3 at Jallandhar. Consequently, Issue No.2
is decided against the plaintiff and in favour of defendant No.3. This court
does not have jurisdiction to entertain the present suit which is entirely and
purely for an injunction restraining the defendant No.3 from negotiating and
/ or honouring the letters of credit in question. That being the position, the
provisions of Order 7 Rule 10, which enables the court to return the plaint
to be presented to a court in which the suit should have been instituted,
would come into play.

12.

Before parting with the discussion under the issue concerning

jurisdiction, it would also be relevant to note that though the defendant
No.3's registered office is in Delhi, this court would not have jurisdiction to

CS(OS) 265/06

Page No. 11 of 13

entertain the present suit. This is so because the registered office of the
defendant No.3 is not its sole office. It has subordinate offices at various
places, including Jallandhar. The cause of action has entirely arisen at
Jallandhar and, therefore, in view of the explanation appended to Section 20
CPC, the defendant No.3 shall be deemed to carry on business at Jallandhar
for the purpose of the present suit.

In Patel Roadways (supra), the

explanation to Section 20 CPC was considered in detail. The Supreme
Court was clearly of the view that it was not the intention of the legislature
that a suit against a corporation could be instituted either at the place of its
sole or principal office (whether or not the corporation carried on business
at that place) or at any other place where the cause of action arises. The
Supreme Court observed:“The linking together of the place where the cause of action
arises with the place where a subordinate office is located
clearly shows that the intention of the legislature was that, in
the case of a corporation, for the purposes of Clause (a), the
location of the subordinate office, within the local limits of
which a cause of, action arises, is to be the relevant place for
the filing of a suit and not the principal place of business. If
the intention was that the location of the sole or principal
office as well as the location of the subordinate office (within
the limits of which a cause of action arises) are to be deemed
to be places where the corporation is deemed to be carrying
on business, the disjunctive "or" will not be there. Instead, the
second part of the explanation, would have read ' and, in
respect of any cause of action arising at any place where it has
a subordinate office, also at such place".”
13.

The same view has been expressed by the Supreme Court in a later

decision in the case of New Moga Transport Company, through its
Proprietor Krishanlal Jhanwar v. United India Insurance Co. Ltd. and

CS(OS) 265/06

Page No. 12 of 13

Ors.: 2004 (4) SCC 677. It is, therefore, clear that merely because the
defendant No.3 has its registered office in Delhi would not be sufficient for
clothing this court with jurisdiction to entertain the present suit. Since the
defendant No.3 has a branch office / subordinate office at Jallandhar and
that is the place where the cause of action has arisen, it is the courts at
Jallandhar which would have jurisdiction as the defendant, for the purposes
of this suit, would be deemed to carry on business at Jallandhar. This court
does not have jurisdiction to entertain the present suit.

Issue No.1.
14.

In view of the decision on the question of jurisdiction under Issue

No.2, this court cannot enter into a discussion on the merits and demerits of
this issue.

15.

Consequently, the plaint be returned to the plaintiff for filing before

the appropriate court. All interim orders stand vacated.

February 7, 2008
δυττ

CS(OS) 265/06

( BADAR DURREZ AHMED )
JUDGE

Page No. 13 of 13

