THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on : 03.07.2007

+

WP (C) 13028/2005

ARDESHIR B. CURSETJEE & SONS LTD

...Petitioner

- versus INLAND WATERWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
AND ANOTHER
...Respondents
Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr Rajiv Nayyar Sr Advocate with Mr Rishi
Aggarwal
and Mr B.S. Shukla
For the Respondent 1
Mr Alok Krishan Aggarwal with Ms Nikita
Mehra and Mr Mayank Bighani.
For the UOI
: Ms Monika Garg.
CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

The counsel for the parties have been heard at some length.

WP(C)13028/2005

Page No.1 of 4

2.

The issue involved in the present petition falls within a very

narrow compass. The question pertains to the petitioner's claim under
the

Loan

Interest

Subsidy

Scheme

for

Inland

Water

Travel

Entrepreneurs. Initially, there was a Notification dated 11th January,
1983, which superseded the previous communication on the question of
Loan Interest Subsidy Scheme.

The category of vessels which was

admissible for loan interest subsidy was notified to include “acquisition
of new inland vessels”. Subsequently, by a Notification dated 21.5.1999,
the Government of India revised the Loan Interest Subsidy Scheme. This
Notification was in supersession of the earlier Notification of 11.1.1983.
It provided a different and larger category of vessels eligible for interest
subsidy. Under Clause V (c) of the Notification, acquisition of new
mechanised

vessels

and

modernisation

including

conversion

/modification /jumboisation of mechanised vessels/dumb barges were
included. Under Clause V (e) acquisition of indigenous imported second
hand vessels with functional life of at least ten years, as certified by an
approved classification agency, was also provided.

3.

The petitioner is said to have made its claim for interest

subsidy through ICICI Ltd. This claim was made sometime in the year
2000.

The same was

WP(C)13028/2005

processed by the respondent No.1 (Inland
Page No.2 of 4

Waterways Authority of India). By the impugned letter dated 15/8-22002, the claim was rejected. The reasons given in the impugned letter
are as under:“Please refer to the claims for payment of interest
subsidy on loan granted for above vessels. Authority has
examined the claims as per details furnished alongwith claims
and it is observed that both the vessels `ABC XIX and `ABC
XX' are new Imported vessels, constructed and supplied by a
Mauritius Company.
As per clause V (e) of Revised Loan Interest
Subsidy Scheme regarding category of vessels eligible for
interest subsidy, acquisition of only indigenous/imported
second hand vessel with functional life of at least 10 years as
certified by an approved classification agency, is eligible.
Therefore, both the above vessels are not found eligible for
payment of interest subsidy and competent authority has
decided to reject the claims.”

4.

The learned counsel for the petitioner contended that Clause

V(e) of the revised Loan Interest Subsidy Scheme was not at all
applicable to their case because their vessels were not second hand
vessels but were new vessels. According to him, they were covered
under Clause V(c) of the said Scheme. It appears that the respondent
No.1 has only considered Clause V(e) as the applicable clause and since
the petitioner's case clearly was not within that Clause, it was rejected.
An order has to be supported or rejected on the basis of the reasons
indicated in the order itself.
WP(C)13028/2005

This is a well settled principle of law.
Page No.3 of 4

According to the learned counsel for the respondents, this was not only
the reason for rejection of the claim and that there are other reasons also
for which he requested this Court to examine the background of the
matter. Unfortunately, as already indicated above, the order stands or
falls on the basis of the reasons given therein. This order, in my view, is
inadequate and cannot stand the test of reason or logic. The order has to
go.

5.

Accordingly, the impugned order dated 15/18.2.2002 is set

aside. However, the petitioner is directed to furnish a fresh claim routed
through ICICI Limited to the respondent No.1 (Inland Waterways
Authority of India), who shall then process the claim in accordance with
the applicable Scheme and take an appropriate decision on merits. The
fresh claims would be furnished by the petitioner, as indicated above,
within four weeks from today and the decision shall be taken by the
respondent No.1 within four months thereafter.

6.

This writ petition stands disposed of accordingly. No costs.
BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)

July 03, 2007
J
WP(C)13028/2005

Page No.4 of 4

