THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 14.02.2008

+

WP (Crl.) No. 151/1999

SMT. KAMINI

... Petitioner
- versus -

THE STATE & OTHERS

... Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr Ashok Arora with Mr R. K. Sharma
For the Respondent
: Ms Mukta Gupta with Ms Rajdeepa Behura

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ?

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

This writ petition was heard along with two other writ petitions being

W. P (Crl.) 130/1999 and W. P (Crl.) 152/1999 which had been filed on
behalf of other co-accused. The Hon'ble Judges of the Division Bench (V.
S. Aggarwal and B. A. Khan, JJ.) hearing all the three writ petitions were in
agreement that the Writ Petition (Crl) Nos. 130/1999 and 152/1999 were
entitled to succeed.

Consequently, insofar as the co-accused were

concerned, their writ petitions succeeded and the Magistrate's impugned
summoning order and pending criminal proceedings against them stood
quashed. With regard to the present petitioner (Smt. Kamini), there was a

WP(crl.)151/1999

Page No. 1 of 12

difference of opinion amongst the two Hon'ble Judges. According to V. S.
Aggarwal, J. the petitioner's writ petition was liable to be dismissed whereas
according to B. A. Khan, J. the present writ petition of Smt. Kamini was
also liable to succeed and the proceedings against her were liable to be
quashed. In view of this difference of opinion between the said two Hon'ble
Judges, as indicated in their separate opinions dated 20.02.2002, the
following order of reference to a third Judge was passed by that Bench on
the same date:“We have prepared separate judgments allowing Crl. WP
Nos. 130/99 and 152/99. A difference of opinion has,
however, arisen on Crl. W.P. 151/99 filed by writ
petitioner Kamini which is allowed by Khan, J. in
consideration of totality of circumstances including
inferable complainant's malafides but which is dismissed
by Aggarwal, J. on the ground that complainant's
malafides could be looked into by the trial court only and
it was not for this court to conduct a probe or a meticulous
examination of the allegations of the complaint with a
view to quash it in exercise of its inherent or writ
jurisdiction. This difference has converged on the
following question:(1)

Whether Crl. W. 151/99 filed by Smt.
Kamini was liable to be allowed or dismissed
in the facts and circumstances of the case and
whether this court was barred from
considering the complainant's malafide even
though inferable from the record of the case
for exercising its inherent and writ power
and whether it was trial court alone who
could look into it ?

Registry is directed to place the matter before Lord
Chief Justice for an appropriate reference under Rules and
till its outcome becomes known, criminal proceedings
against writ petitioner Kamini shall stay meanwhile.”

WP(crl.)151/1999

Page No. 2 of 12

2.

The counsel for the parties have been heard at length. The facts are

indicated in the said two opinions of V. S. Aggarwal and B. A. Khan, JJ.
And need not be repeated in detail. However, for the purposes of felicity,
three documents need to be considered and they are the complaint, the
Section 161 Cr. P.C. statement of one Smt. Maya Devi and the Section 161
Cr. P. C. statement of Smt. Inderjeet Sethi. The same read as under:“COMPLAINT
“The Station House Officer
Model Town Police Station
Delhi-9.
Sir,
I am a resident of Flat No.7 & 8 Ground Floor, B-Block,
Bijli Apartment, G.T. Karnal Road, Delhi.
There is one Mrs. Kamini 2nd wife of Sh. Hira Lal
Asrani who is living in Flat No. B-28, above the flat of the
applicant.
On 28th June, 96, in the afternoon she trespassed into my
flat forcibly with about 10 other ladies resident of other flats. I
was alone in the house. They started abusing and beating me.
Mrs. Kamini is a special police officer, press
photographer and reporter's as per her name plate. She lead of
all the ladies. She beat me with her sandles and pressed my
throat to kill me. She is continuing to threaten to kill me.
Her husband Shri Hira Lal Asrani is at present President
of the voluntary society of resident. She claims herself to be
president of the society and a police officer.
Please save me from her and her associated ladies and
gents who are also threatening to kill even my husband.
She has complained against my husband on the basis of
hearsay. My husband Sudhir Kumar was not at home when
they trespassed into my house and attacked me.

WP(crl.)151/1999

Page No. 3 of 12

The name of other ladies accompanying in the trespass
and attack may be checked from her.
One elderly lady from the other flat above my flat on
hearing the commotion came rushing and saved me from their
clutches.
Kindly save me and my husband life from them and
oblige.
Yours faithfully.

Dated – 30.6.96

(SAROJ BAHL W/O Sh. Sudhir
Bahl) Flat No.7 & 8
B Block, Bijli Apartment
G.T. Karnal Road
Delhi-33.”
(underlining added)

STATEMENT OF SMT. MAYA DEVI
“Statement u/s 161 Cr. P.C.
Statement of Smt. Maya w/o Ishwar Singh r/o B/38, Bijli
Apartment, G.T. Karnal Road, Delhi.
Stated that I am residing in the above address and I am
house wife and I am working as a maid servant. On 28.6.96, I
was present in the house of my landlady Smt. Saroj Bahl who
was also present in the house. I know Smt. Kamini from before
and she alongwith some ladies came to the house and started
assaulting my landlady Saroj Bahl and on hearing the noise our
neighbour Mrs. Inderjeet Sethi also came under and with her
help I and Mrs Sethi rescued Saroj Bahl. I do not know other
women except Mrs. Kamini. Legal action be taken against her.
Statement heard and found correct.
Sd/S.J.
PS Model Town
Dt. 14.6.98”
(underlining added)

WP(crl.)151/1999

Page No. 4 of 12

STATEMENT OF SMT. INDERJEET SETHI
“Statement u/s 161 Cr. P.C.
Statement of Smt. Inderjeet Sethi, r/o B/33 & 34, Bijli
Apartments, G.T. Karnal Road, Delhi.
Stated that I am residing in the above address and am a
house wife. On 28.6.96, I was present at my house and on
hearing the noise from the house of Smt. Saroj Bahl who is
residing in my neighbour, I reached there and saw that Smt.
Kamini, who is residing at B-28 to whom I know earlier, was
accompanied with some ladies and was abusing Smt. Bahl and
was beating Smt. Saroj Bahl with chappals whom I and the
maid servant of Smt. Saroj Bahl rescued. I do not know the
other ladies accompanying Mrs. Kamini. Legal action be taken
against her.
Statement heard and found correct.
Sd/PS Model Town
Dt. 14.6.98”
(underlining added)
3.

The co-accused were the “above 10 other ladies” referred to in the

said complaint. The proceedings against the said co-accused, as indicated
above, have been quashed by both the Hon'ble Judges. Though, on different
reasoning. While V. S. Aggarwal, J. was of the view that the co-accused
were not identified or named, B. A. Khan J. was of the view that apart from
the fact that the co-accused were not even named or identified, no
cognizable offence was made out against them and their case fell under
category 1 provided in the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of
State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal: 1992 Suppl. (1) SCC 335. Insofar as the
present petitioner is concerned, V. S. Aggarwal, J. was of the view that her
petition must fail on the basis of the following reasoning:-

WP(crl.)151/1999

Page No. 5 of 12

“30. It is on the basis of the same that the First Information
Report has been recorded. Statement of Mrs. Maya who is
stated to be a maid servant has also been recorded and even
she recites that she only knows Mrs. Kamini, one of the
petitioners and does not name any of the other ladies.
Another statement has been recorded of Inderjeet Sethi. The
name of Mrs. Kamini is taken but not any other lady.
31. At this stage if there are mala fides or not that has to
be looked into by the trial court and no opinion is being
expressed but it is patent that name of Mrs. Kamini, one of
the petitioners is specifically mentioned in unambiguous
terms, a role has been assigned to her in the complaining
statement. Further probing or meticulous examination of
whether the same would succeed or not is not required nor it
would be proper for this court to look into the same. In the
face of the aforesaid it is entirely for the trial court to look
into all the facts and draw an appropriate conclusion in
accordance with law. The petition of Mrs. Kamini must
therefore fail.”
On the other hand, B. A. Khan, J. was of the view that the petition must
succeed and that all criminal proceedings against the petitioner must be
quashed. The reasoning adopted by him was as under:“Writ petitioner Kamini's case, however, does not fall in this
category. It would, therefore, have to be seen whether FIR,
summoning order and criminal proceedings in her case could
be quashed otherwise. This necessitates an overall look at the
circumstances of the case against her and brings us to the
terms of the complaint and attendant surrounding
circumstances. It is a common ground that Kamini's husband
was claiming to be the President of residents welfare society
who according to complainant was indulging in some illegal
activities including organising of plantation of trees in front of
complainant's flat. The complainant also admits in her
complaint that Kamini had also filed a complaint against her
husband on the basis of hear-say. She further alleges that she
was alone in her house when Kamini and 10 other ladies
entered and started abusing her and beating her with chappals
and tried to press her throat. Given regard to terms of
complainant's complaint, it appears curious that police had not
recorded any evidence in the matter for two years after the
alleged occurrence till one Maya Devi claiming to be the maid
WP(crl.)151/1999

Page No. 6 of 12

servant of the complainant and Mrs. Inderjeet Sethi, a
neighbour surfaced to record their supporting statements.
Even these two witnesses could not name the other 10 ladies
(Writ petitioners) who allegedly accompanied Kamini. It is
also surprising that the investigating agency had not subjected
the complainant to any medical examination who had
complained of beating by chappals and her throat being
pressed to kill her. The police had also taken a few more
months to present the report leading to the passing of the
summoning order by the Magistrate overlooking the sequence
of events and the back-drop of the case and without caring to
ascertain and find out whether the allegations made in the
complaint and the available supporting evidence was good
enough to bring the charge home to the accused.
All this leaves no scope for doubt that criminal
proceedings against Kamini were also attended by
complainant's revenge, her oblique purpose to use court
process and to settle scores with the accused and were borne of
an ulterior motive of wreaking vengeance and personal grudge.
This is not to suggest that complainant's malafides constituted
the sole basis for this conclusion or that it amounted to or
determination of reliability or correctness of the allegations or
prejudging the probabilities involved but to underscore an
inevitable inferences that were liable to be drawn in the facts
and circumstances of the case attracting the court's writ power
to set at naught the criminal proceedings which it felt would
not serve the ends of justice.
Regard being had to Kamini's counter complaint having
ended and the housewives inhibiting the Bijli Apartments
including Kamini and complainant Saroj Bahl having spend as
good as four years in this long drawn process and the
Magistrate's summoning order having been passed in a routine
manner, there is no escape from conclusion that continuation
of criminal proceedings against Kamini also would be
vexatious and would serve no purpose, least of all any ends of
justice.
Kamini's writ petition (Crl. W.151/99) is also
consequently allowed and FIR No.408/97 and the summoning
along with pending proceedings quashed against her.”

WP(crl.)151/1999

Page No. 7 of 12

4.

Considering the facts of the present case, there are a few points which

need to be noted. The first is that the complaint was in the handwriting of
the complainant Smt. Saroj Bahl. It was signed by her. It was handed over
to the Station House Officer of Model Town Police Station, Delhi on
30.06.1996, that is, two days after the alleged incident which allegedly took
place in the afternoon of 28.06.1996. The FIR being FIR No. 408/1997 was
itself registered under Section 452/506/323/34 PC after 11 months. The
Section 161 statements of Smt. Maya Devi and Smt. Inderjeet Sethi were
recorded on 14.06.1998, that is, almost two years after the alleged incident.

5.

It is common ground that the principles for quashing of criminal

proceedings have been laid down in State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal
(supra). The said principles, which are not exhaustive, are as under:“(1) Where the allegations made in the first information
report or the complaint, even if they are taken at their face
value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie
constitute any offence or make out a case against the
accused.
(2) Where the allegations in the first information report
and other materials, if any, accompanying the FIR do not
disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an investigation by
police officers under Section 156(1) of the code except
under an order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section
155(2) of the Code.
(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR
or complaint and the evidence collected in support of the
same do not disclose the commission of any offence and
make out a case against the accused.
(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a
cognizable offence but constitute only a non-cognizable
WP(crl.)151/1999

Page No. 8 of 12

offence, no investigation is permitted by a police officer
without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under
Section 155(2) of the Code.
(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint
are so absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of
which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion
that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the
accused.
(6) Where there is an express legal bar engranfted in any
of the provisions of the Code or the concerned Act (under
which a Criminal proceedings is instituted) to the institution
and continuance of the proceedings and / or where there is a
specific provision in the Code or the concerned Act,
providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the
aggrieved party.
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended
with mala fide and / or where the proceeding is maliciously
instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on
the accused and with a view to spite him due to private or
personal grudge.”
In the reference order, the question that has been referred actually comprises
of two parts. The first being whether the present petition was liable to be
allowed or dismissed in the facts and circumstances of the case and the
second part being whether this Court was barred from considering the
complainant's malafides, even though, inferable from the record of the case
for exercising its inherent and writ power and whether it was the trial court
alone who could look into it. Insofar as the second question is concerned,
looking to the illustrative categories given in State of Haryana v. Bhajan
Lal (supra), it is obvious that when a matter for quashing comes before the
High Court, the Court has to look at the First Information Report, the
complaint and other materials, if any, accompanying the same which include
WP(crl.)151/1999

Page No. 9 of 12

the evidence collected in support of the same.

If by looking at these

materials, the Court can reach a conclusion that the criminal proceeding is
manifestly attended with mala fides and / or is maliciously instituted with an
ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a view to
spite him / her due to private or personal grudge, then as per the Supreme
Court decision in State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal (supra), it would be a fit
case for quashing. Therefore, the second part of the question which has
been referred to this Court can easily be answered by stating what is clearly
discernible from the Supreme Court decision in the case of State of
Haryana v. Bhajan Lal (supra) that the Court is not barred from
considering the complainant's malafides, provided the same can be inferred
from the FIR/ Complaint and other materials including the evidence, if any,
collected in support of the same. In this respect, I would agree with the
opinion of Justice B. A. Khan and respectfully disagree with the opinion of
Justice V. S. Aggarwal that the matter has to be left to the trial court. The
key is that to determine the mala fides, only the FIR/Complaint or the
accompanying documents, as indicated above, can be looked into as
provided by the Supreme Court. If the High Court can, by looking at these
documents, discern any mala fides or malicious intent on the part of the
complainant, then the High Court can certainly exercise its powers and
quash the criminal proceedings. It need not wait for determination of this
issue by the trial court after a full-blown trial.

WP(crl.)151/1999

Page No. 10 of 12

6.

This leaves me to discuss the first part of the question that has been

referred to me and that is whether the present petition is liable to be allowed
or dismissed on the basis of the facts and circumstances of the case. Here
again, I find myself to be in agreement with the opinion expressed by
Justice B. A. Khan and I have to respectfully disagree with the opinion of
Justice V. S. Aggarwal. The reasons for my agreeing with the opinion of
Justice B. A. Khan, apart from those he has already given in his opinion, are
that the complaint and the two statements of Smt. Maya Devi and Smt.
Inderjeet Sethi read together, clearly indicate that the case against the
petitioner is ex facie untenable.

In the complaint it is stated that the

complainant was alone in the house. Two years later, the statement of one
Smt. Maya Devi is recorded wherein she states that she is the maidservant
and was present in the house when the alleged incident took place. Apart
from this the complainant has stated that she was saved by one elderly lady
from another flat above her flat. Both Smt. Maya Devi and Smt. Inderjeet
Sethi (the alleged elderly lady from another flat) have stated that in the
presence of each other, they rescued Smt. Saroj Bahl from the alleged
assault by the petitioner and the other co-accused. Thus, it is apparent that
the statements of Smt. Maya Devi and Smt. Inderjeet Sethi, which have been
recorded two years later, while corroborating each other, negate the initial
story indicated in the complaint of the complainant being rescued and saved
by one elderly lady, not two ladies. Justice B. A. Khan in his opinion has
already placed reliance on the illustrations given in category 3 and 7 of the

WP(crl.)151/1999

Page No. 11 of 12

Supreme Court decision in State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal (supra). It must
be noted that the categories set out in the said decision are only by way of
illustration and are not exhaustive. The High Court has power to put an end
to criminal proceedings whenever it feels that such proceedings are
vexatious and would put an accused to undue burden if the accused is
subjected to the full rigours of criminal trial. It must also be noted that in
this case the alleged incident is of 28.06.1996 and now over 12 years have
elapsed. Continuing with the criminal proceedings where even the Section
161 statements themselves, which were recorded two years after the alleged
incident, negate the case of the complainant as set up in the complaint,
would certainly not result in a conviction and to permit the judicial
machinery to be used for the purposes of continuing a personal vendetta
would definitely not be in the interest of justice.
I have rendered my opinion on the question referred to me. The
matter be now placed before Hon'ble the Chief Justice so that he can place
the matter before a Division Bench for a final judgment.

( BADAR DURREZ AHMED )
JUDGE
February 14, 2008
SR

WP(crl.)151/1999

Page No. 12 of 12

