THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Judgment delivered on :13.07.2007
CRL. REV. P. 110/1998
BALESHWAR GEHLOT & ANR

...Petitioners
- versus -

SIRI CHAND & ORS.

...Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr Ashok Aggarwal with Mr Salas M Khan
For the Respondent
: Mr R. D. Rana with Mr Vikas Tanwar

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

YES

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

YES

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

YES

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J
1.

This criminal revision petition has been filed by the complainant

party impugning the judgment and or order passed by the learned Additional
Sessions Judge on 29.08.1997 in Session Case No.42/1993, whereby
respondent Nos. 1-4 who were all accused, have been acquitted by giving
benefit of doubt. The case arises from FIR No.248/1992 registered under
Section 302/307 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860
(hereinafter referred to as “the IPC”) registered at Police Station Tuglak Road.

CRL. REV. P. 695/2002

Page No.1 of 16

2.

On behalf of the petitioners, it was pointed out that a letter dated

26.11.1997 was received by the petitioner No.1 from the Government of NCT
in connection with filing of an appeal against the impugned judgment dated
29.08.1997.

In that letter the petitioner No.1 had been informed that the

Government of NCT of Delhi had decided to file an appeal against the said
judgment and the record of the case had been forwarded to the concerned SDM
for filing the appeal through the government advocate. Despite such a letter, no
appeal had been filed by the Government of NCT and, therefore, the petitioners
were constrained to file this criminal revision petition against the judgment of
acquittal.

3.

The allegations against accused were that Siri Chand and Jai

Parkash were the owners of quarter No.62, NDMC Quarters, Prithivi Raj Road,
New Delhi. They had constructed one jhuggi on their roof and had let out the
same to accused Dharambir @ Birey. Baleshwar (the petitioner No.1) and
Rajinder (deceased) along with their other family members were living in
quarter No.63. It is alleged that there were common latrines and bathrooms for
quarter Nos. 61, 62, 63 and 64 which were being used by the occupants of the
said quarters and by their guests. It was further alleged that accused Siri Chand
and Jai Parkash had put a lock on the common bathroom and latrine. About 15
days prior to 25.10.1992, Baleshwar's grandfather had come to their quarter.
As he was seriously ill, Baleshwar and his family members requested the
CRL. REV. P. 695/2002

Page No.2 of 16

accused Siri Chand and Jai Parkash to open the lock which they had put on the
bathroom and latrine. But, they refused to do so. And, it is alleged that an
altercation between Siri Chand, Jai Parkash and Samir on the one hand and
Baleshwar and his family members on the other hand, took place.

The

allegations go further that thereafter Baleshwar and Rajinder opened the lock
put on the latrine and bathroom. Thereupon accused Siri Chand, Jai Parkash
and Samir threatened Baleshwar and Rajinder by stating that they would take
revenge for the same.

4.

The further case of the prosecution was that on 25.10.1992, on the

day of Diwali, after performing pooja, Rajinder and his wife Usha and their two
year old son along with Baleshwar went to the roof of their quarter No. 63 to
light crackers and other fireworks. It was alleged that Baleshwar stood on the
corner of the roof and at that time, accused Dharambir was sitting on the cot in
front of the jhuggi. After some time, the three accused persons Siri Chand, Jai
Parkash and Samir also came there. It was alleged that accused Jai Parkash and
Dharambir made some objectionable remarks against Usha. On hearing these
remarks, Rajinder rebuked them and thereafter all the four accused persons (Siri
Chand, Jai Parkash, Samir and Dharambir) started beating Rajinder and when
Baleshwar came to his rescue, he was also given a beating by the accused
persons. On seeing this, Usha rushed to the ground floor and informed her
mother and father-in-law that the accused were beating Rajinder and
CRL. REV. P. 695/2002

Page No.3 of 16

Baleshwar. At that point, Siri Parkash (father of Rajinder and Baleshwar) went
upstairs. Brijesh and Chander Pal who were neighbours also accompanied him.
When they reached the roof, they saw that accused Samir brought out a knife
from Dharambir's jhuggi and gave knife blows to Rajinder and Baleshwar. Jai
Parkash had caught hold of Baleshwar and after inflicting injuries all the
accused persons ran away from there. It is alleged that Siri Parkash , Brijesh
and Chander Pal had also seen the accused persons inflicting injuries upon
Rajinder and Baleshwar.

5.

Constable Krishan Kumar on receiving information about the

quarrel reached the spot and both Rajinder and Baleshwar were removed to
Safdarjung Hospital where Rajinder was declared as having been brought dead.
On receipt of information from Constable Krishan Kumar, DD No.46-B was
recorded and a copy thereof was handed over to SI S. K. Meen, who along with
Constable Hanuman Sahai went to the spot from where they came to know that
the injured had already been removed to the hospital. The said SI S. K. Meena
along with Constable Hanuman Sahai went to the hospital after leaving
Constable Krishan Kumar at the spot to safeguard the same.

Upon the

Investigating Officer coming to know that Rajinder had been declared as
having been brought dead, he moved an application for recording the statement
of Baleshwar and the doctor declared him fit for making such a statement. The

CRL. REV. P. 695/2002

Page No.4 of 16

Investigating Officer recorded the statement (Ex.PW6/A) of Baleshwar and got
the case registered through Constable Hanuman Sahai.

6.

As per the prosecution case, the Investigating Officer along with

Baleshwar, Brijesh and Raju, who had met him in the hospital, returned to the
spot of the incident and prepared the site plan on the pointing out of Baleshwar.
The scene of occurrence was photographed and blood samples were seized
from the spot so also the clothes, that is, trouser (Ex.P-1), shirt (Ex.P-2)
belonging to Baleshwar and trouser (Ex.P-3) of the deceased Rajinder, blood
stained shirt (Ex.P-6) of Brijesh and Kurta (Ex.P-4) and pyjama (Ex.P-5) of
Raju. Thereafter, the Investigating Officer completed the inquest proceedings
and sent the dead body for post mortem. Further proceedings were conducted
by the Investigating Officer. Thereafter, the case was committed to the Court
of Sessions and a charge under Section 302 and 307 read with Section 34 IPC
was framed against the accused persons on 09.07.1993. Since all the accused
pleaded not guilty, the matter proceeded for trial. 21 prosecution witnesses
were examined and after review of the evidence, the learned Additional
Sessions Judge, by virtue of the impugned judgment found that the evidence
was insufficient to return a finding of guilt beyond reasonable doubt.
Accordingly, giving benefit of doubt to the accused, the learned Additional
Sessions Judge acquitted them of the charges.

CRL. REV. P. 695/2002

Page No.5 of 16

7.

The learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that accused Siri

Chand and Jai Parkash are brothers. Samir is the son of Siri Chand and
Dharambir @ Birey was the tenant of Siri Chand and Jai Prakash in the said
jhuggi. The two eye witnesses Baleshwar (PW6) and Prakash Gehlot (PW7)
are the injured brother and father of the deceased Rajinder respectively. PW4
Chander Pal and PW5 Brijesh are neighbours, who were supposedly eye
witnesses but later on became hostile. The learned counsel for the petitioners
submitted that the sole object of the Trial Court was to show that key witnesses
were not present and in doing so, the Trial Court completely misdirected itself
as also overlooked vital evidence.

With regard to PW4 Chander Pal, the

learned counsel submitted that although this eye witness had turned hostile his
deposition was relied upon by the Trial Court for holding that PW7 Siri Parkash
(father of the deceased Rajinder) was not an eye witness. He submitted that the
deposition was also relied upon for the purposes of disbelieving the presence of
injured eye witness PW6 Baleshwar. The deposition of PW5 Brijesh Kumar
has also been dealt with by the Trial Court in similar fashion.

8.

As regards the evidence of PW6 Baleshwar, who is the injured

brother of the deceased Rajinder, the learned counsel for the petitioners
submitted that his evidence has been overlooked except for wrongly inferring
from a statement in his deposition that PW7 Siri Parkash was not an eye
witness to the incident. With regard to PW7 Siri Parkash, who was also an
CRL. REV. P. 695/2002

Page No.6 of 16

alleged eye witness of the occurrence, the learned counsel for the petitioner
submitted that his testimony has been wrongly disbelieved.

With regard to

PW8 Usha, he submitted that she testified to the start of the quarrel leading to
the incident and she was also the person who informed PW7 Siri Parkash about
the quarrel, which resulted in his rushing upstairs.

The learned counsel

submitted that the testimony of PW8 Usha has been overlooked, except for
wrongly inferring from a sentence in her deposition that the injured eye witness
PW6 Baleshwar and PW7 were not present at the spot at the time of
occurrence. He submits that PW8A Satpal, who testified that he took the PW6
Baleshwar in an injured condition to the hospital, has not been discussed at all.

9.

With regard to PW9 Raju, the learned counsel submitted that this

witness proved that he and PW5 took the deceased Rajinder to hospital. He
was also a witness to the handing over of the clothes of the deceased Rajinder,
PW6 Baleshwar and PW5 Brijesh. He also apparently proved the seizure of
blood from the site. The learned counsel submitted that this witness's testimony
has also been overlooked by the Trial Court except for the purposes of wrongly
inferring from a sentence in his deposition that the statement of the witness
PW6 Baleshwar was not recorded at the hospital, thereby casting doubts on his
presence in the hospital.

CRL. REV. P. 695/2002

Page No.7 of 16

10.

He also pointed out that there is an anomaly in the judgment of the

Trial Court where the Trial Court says that although the MLC of Baleshwar has
not been proved by the prosecution, it shows that Baleshwar was admitted in
the hospital at about 10.30 pm. It was the contention of the learned counsel for
the petitioners that if the MLC could not be looked into then how could the
Trial Court establish that Baleshwar was admitted in the hospital at 10.30 pm.
He further submitted that the accused ran away and there is no explanation as to
why they ran away.

11.

Before the Trial Court the defence had argued that from the entire

evidence on record led by the prosecution, the presence of PW6 Baleshwar at
the spot at the time of the alleged incident does not stand proved and that the
prosecution has also failed to prove that Baleshwar had received any injury. It
was also argued that the presence of PW7 at the spot at the time of the incident
was also not proved. It was also contended that the prosecution had failed to
prove that there was any common latrine and bathroom and, therefore, the
prosecution failed to prove and /or establish any motive of the accused persons
in committing the murder of the deceased Rajinder or in inflicting any injury
upon PW6 Baleshwar. It was also contended on behalf of the defence that there
were major contradictions and discrepancies in the testimonies of the witnesses
examined on behalf of the prosecution and, therefore, the statements of such
witnesses could not be relied upon to convict the accused. The defence had
CRL. REV. P. 695/2002

Page No.8 of 16

also argued that the prosecution had suppressed material facts and had also
attempted to shift the place of occurrence which in itself suggested that the
prosecution had falsely implicated the accused in this case.

It was lastly

submitted on behalf of the defence that the accused had given a plausible
explanation about the alleged blood stains appearing on their clothes inasmuch
as they had stated that they tried to intervene when the deceased Rajinder and
his companions were quarreling on the roof and during that scuffle their clothes
might have received blood stains.

12.

The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners referred

to the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of State of U. P v. Noorie:
(1996 ) 9 SCC 104. He submitted that in this case, the Supreme Court laid
down the principles that have to be kept in mind while assessing and evaluating
the evidence of eye witnesses. He submitted that the Supreme Court had
pointed out that while doing so, the Court should not enter into the realm of
conjecture and speculation.

Particularly, the Supreme Court observed that

while assessing and evaluating the evidence of eye witnesses the Court must
adhere to two principles, namely, whether in the circumstances of the case it
was possible for the eye witness to be present at the scene and whether there is
anything inherently improbable or unreliable.

The Supreme Court further

observed that credibility of a witness has to be decided by referring to his
evidence and finding out how he has fared in cross-examination and what
CRL. REV. P. 695/2002

Page No.9 of 16

impression is created by his evidence taken in the context of the case and not by
entering into the realm of conjecture and speculation.

13.

The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent Nos. 1-4

(the acquitted persons) straightaway referred to the decision of the Supreme
Court in the case of Bindeshwari Prasad Singh v. State of Bihar: AIR 2002
SC 2907 to explain the scope of a revision petition against an acquittal, by a
private party. The Supreme Court distinguishing between the scope of an
appeal against acquittal under Section 374 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 (hereinafter referred to as “the Cr. P. C”) and a revision petition under
Section 401 Cr. P.C, observed that the jurisdiction of the High Court in the
former is much wider than the jurisdiction in the latter. The Court specifically
observed that all grounds that may be urged in support of the revision petition
may be urged in the appeal, but no vice versa.

14.

In the case before the Supreme Court, it was found that there was

no legal infirmity either in the procedure or in the conduct of the trial and,
therefore, there was no justification for the High Court to interfere in exercise
of its revisional jurisdiction in respect of an order of acquittal. The Supreme
Court observed that it has been repeatedly held that the High Court should not
re-appreciate the evidence to reach a finding different from the Trial Court. It
made it clear that, in the absence of manifest illegality resulting in grave
CRL. REV. P. 695/2002

Page No.10 of 16

miscarriage of justice, exercise of revisional jurisdiction in such cases is not
warranted.

The Court also noted that it may be quite possible that the High

Court on appreciation of the evidence on record may reach a conclusion
different from that of the Trial Court but, that by itself, would be no
justification for exercise of revisional jurisdiction under Section 401 Cr. P. C
against a judgment of acquittal. There must be some defect of procedure or
perversity of grave magnitude resulting in miscarriage of justice.

15.

In the background of the observations made by the Supreme Court

in Bindeshwari Prasad Sin]gh (supra), the learned counsel for the respondent
Nos. 1-4 submitted that the State has not filed any appeal and that the Trial
Court had examined the entire evidence in detail. The Trial Court had also seen
the demeanour of the witnesses. He submitted that the roofs over the specific
quarters of the complainant party and the accused party were well demarcated
and that PW6 himself had distinguished the areas of the roof so also PW8.
With regard to the purported motive for the alleged crime, the learned counsel
submitted that that was also missing. He submitted that the motive was based
on the premise that the occupants of the various quarters had common latrines
and / or bathrooms and that the accused had put their locks on the same. He
submitted that this fact of a common latrine is belied by looking at the crossexamination of PW6 himself where he stated that there were independent

CRL. REV. P. 695/2002

Page No.11 of 16

latrines attached to individual quarters. The exact words used by him in crossexamination are as under:-

“It is correct that a few years before this occurrence an
independent latrine is attached to individual quarter has
been built and that occupant of a quarter used the latrine
attached to their quarter.”
He submitted that PW8 Usha also did not state the names of the persons who
had allegedly stabbed Rajinder inasmuch as in her examination-in-chief she
stated that after her father-in-law reached the roof, she heard hue and cry that
Rajinder had been stabbed with a knife by “somebody”.

With regard to

Baleshwar's claim that he remained in the hospital and was taken to the spot by
the police, the learned counsel for the respondent Nos. 1-4 submitted that his
father PW7 and brother PW9 both denied it. Moreover, neither the clothes of
Baleshwar nor of PW7 were taken into possession and this would cast serious
doubts on the testimony of these witnesses.

PW7 had stated in cross-

examination that he did not show the blood stains on his clothes to the police.
He also stated that he did not request the police to take those clothes into
possession. He further stated that the police did not ask anything about the
blood stains which were on his clothes which he was wearing at that time and
those clothes remained with him. The sum and substance of the contentions of
the learned counsel for the respondent Nos. 1-4 was that there were material
contradictions in the testimonies of the purported eye witnesses. He further
submitted that two of the purported eye witnesses had turned hostile. In this
CRL. REV. P. 695/2002

Page No.12 of 16

background the Trial Court had doubts about the prosecution case and,
therefore, giving the benefit of doubt to the accused, they have been acquitted.
Thus, according to him, no error of such a nature as would be correctable in a
revision petition had been committed by the Trial Court.

16.

In rejoinder, the learned counsel for the petitioners referred to the

decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Gurnam Kaur v. Bakshish
Singh: AIR 1981 SC 631. The said decision was referred to for the purpose
that while discarding the testimony of eye witnesses, the Court should not look
into trivial, unimportant and inconsequential circumstances and magnifying the
same to an extent that they assumed the shape of dark, forbidding storm clouds
instead of the little specks of dust that they were. He submitted that minor
contradictions have been magnified by the Trial Court to signal dark clouds of
doubts and this was not permissible. The learned counsel for the petitioners
also submitted that the revisional court should definitely interfere with an order
of acquittal in the following circumstances:(i)

Where the probative value of the FIR is ignored;

(ii)

Where reliable testimony of eye witnesses is ignored
and material evidence is discarded;

(iii)

Where evidence is misquoted;

(iv)

Canons for appreciating evidence are ignored;

(v)

The entire judgment is full of inconsistencies.

CRL. REV. P. 695/2002

Page No.13 of 16

He submitted that many of these circumstances exist in the present case and,
therefore, even though the Trial Court has returned a judgment of acquittal and
the present petition has been filed by a private party, this Court ought to
interfere and direct retrial. It was also submitted that the testimony of PW6,
PW7 and PW8, though consistent in material particulars, has not been given
due credence. Had that been done, according to the learned counsel, there
would have been no option for the Court but to convict the accused of the
offences for which they were charged.

17.

In a recent decision in the case of Baldev Raj v. Chander Prakash

and Others: Criminal Revision Petition No. 695/2002 decided on 02.07.2007 I
had considered the scope of powers of the High court in a revision petition by a
private party against a judgment of acquittal. Various decisions of the Supreme
Court starting from D. Stephens v. Nosibolla: AIR 1951 SC 196 and including
K. Chinnaswamy Reddy v. State of Andhra pradesh and Another: AIR 1962
SC 1788, Dhirendra Nath Mitra and Anr. v. Mukanda Lal Sen: AIR 1955
SC 584, Mahendra Pratap Singh v. Sarju Singh: (1968) 2 SCR 287, Ramu
v. Jagannath: 1995 SCC (Cri) 181, Vimal Singh v. Khuman Singh and
Another: 1998 SCC (Cri) 1574 and Hydru v. State of Kerala: (2004) 13 SCC
374, were considered and it was observed that powers of the High Court in
exercise of its revisional jurisdiction under Section 401 Cr. P. C in a revision
petition by a private party against a judgment of acquittal are very limited.
CRL. REV. P. 695/2002

Page No.14 of 16

The revisional Court does not function as a court of appeal and cannot
reappraise evidence. It cannot also interfere with an order of acquittal unless it
is an exceptional case of some procedural irregularity or overlooking of
material evidence or misreading of the same, which is manifest and which
results in a flagrant miscarriage of justice.

18.

Insofar as the present case is concerned, I find that none of the

aforesaid circumstances exist so as to enable this Court to direct a retrial. The
Trial court has, as indicated above, considered the evidence in detail.

It has

found itself unable to return a clear finding of guilt, as in the mind of the
learned Additional Sessions Judge, there were grave doubts about the
prosecution case. These doubts had arisen because two of the purported eye
witnesses had turned hostile; presence of the other two eye witnesses at the
scene of alleged crime was also not beyond doubt; there were contradictions in
their testimonies, which may individually be of a minor nature but cumulatively
tend to cast serious doubts on the prosecution case. The Trial Court found itself
unable to return a finding of guilt because of these doubts and I see nothing
wrong in such a conclusion. It must be remembered that this Court does not
exercise the powers of a Court of appeal and cannot re-appreciate evidence.
Thus, even if this Court, on appreciation of the evidence on record were to
reach a conclusion different from that of the Trial Court, that by itself would be
no justification for exercise of the revisional jurisdiction under Section 401 Cr.
CRL. REV. P. 695/2002

Page No.15 of 16

P.C. It cannot be said that the judgment of the Trial court suffers from any
perversity or defect of procedure or manifest illegality of such a nature as
would result in grave miscarriage of justice or would vitiate the trial itself.

19.

In these circumstances, if this Court were to agree with the

contentions of the learned counsel for the petitioners, it would amount to this
Court arriving at a different conclusion merely on the basis of re-appreciation
of evidence. This is not permissible unless the other ingredients for invoking
the revisional jurisdiction are present. And, that is not so. Accordingly this
revision petition is dismissed.
BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
July 13 , 2007
SR

CRL. REV. P. 695/2002

Page No.16 of 16

