THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on:11.07.2007

+

WP(C) No.3273/2007

MS SUDEEPTI CHANDRA

...Petitioner
- versus -

DIRECTOR, SCHOOL OF PLANNING & ARCHITECTURE
AND ANOTHER
...Respondents
Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioners
: Mr Madhu Kapur
For the Respondents
: Mr M. P. Singh

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3. Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ?
BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

The petitioner was pursuing the Bachelor of Planning, four year degree

course from the School of Planning and Architecture, Delhi. She had taken
admission in the year 2001. The four year degree course is conducted on the
basis of a semester system. Under this system, in each year, there are two
semesters.

WPC3273/07

Page No.1 of 9

2.

The petitioner had cleared the 4th Semester. The petitioner sat for the

4th Semester examination in May 2005 and she was promoted to the next
Semester after she re-appeared in Techniques of Planning –II in the
Supplementary Examinations held in July—August 2005.

Normally, she

should have cleared the Fourth Semester by the year 2003. She took an extra
two years to clear the Fourth Semester and that, too, after grace marks were
awarded to her in some of the papers.

3.

In the third year – 5th Semester examination which was conducted in

December, 2005, the petitioner failed in the Utilities and Services Planning
paper and was asked to reappear in the Supplementary Examination which was
to be held in July 2006. But, she did not appear in that examination. In the
third year – 6th Semester examination which was conducted in May 2006, the
petitioner failed in the following subjects:-

“(1)

Urban Design and Conservation ;

(2)

Planning and Management of Informal Sector and Basic Needs;
and

(3)

WPC3273/07

Landscape Planning and Design.”

Page No.2 of 9

She was also detained in the paper for Elements of Settlement Sociology on
account of low attendance. As per Rule 10 of the Examination Rules, the
petitioner was required to repeat the said Semester as a regular student in the
next academic session of 3rd year – 6th Semester. A notification to this effect
was issued in respect of, inter alia, the petitioner on 04.07.2007.

4.

The petitioner, instead of attending the session in 2006-07 as a regular

student, continued to make representations in respect of her being detained in
the paper – Elements of Settlement Sociology on account of low attendance. It
is an admitted position that she did not attend even a single lecture in the entire
year 2006-07.

5.

The petitioner has now filed this writ petition praying that she be

allowed to appear in the examination held in May 2007; that she be permitted
to sit in the 4th year classes (7th Semester) for the Academic Session 2007-08;
and that an inquiry be initiated against the respondents for illegally detaining
her for low attendance in the examination of Elements of Settlement Sociology.

6.

The petitioner's case is entirely based upon a letter issued by Mr Ashish

K. Chatterjee on 10.05.2006 to the Director, School of Planning and
Architecture, New Delhi. The background of the issuance of this letter was that
on 05.05.2006, the School of Planning and Architecture had taken out a list of
WPC3273/07

Page No.3 of 9

candidates who were detained from appearing in various papers on account of
low attendance. The petitioner's name figured in that list in respect of the paper
—Elements of Settlement Sociology.

The examinations were to begin on

11.05.2006. The aforesaid letter was written by Mr Chatterjee on 10.05.2006 in
which he stated as under:“I have committed mistakes in reporting attendance in III year
Planning (Elementary Settlement Sociology).
For this, I
understood, students are going to lose one academic year.
Students should not be penalized for my mistake. Inconvenience
thus caused is deeply regretted.”
7.

It

was

contended

on

behalf

of

the

petitioner

that

despite

acknowledgment of commission of the mistake in reporting of attendance and
the same being brought to the notice of the Director, School Planning and
Architecture dated 10.05.2006 itself, the petitioner was not permitted to take the
examination beginning on 11.05.2006. It is further stated that because of the
trauma caused by this detention, the petitioner was unable to clear three other
papers as already indicated and it is because of this that the petitioner was
unable to move on to the next semester.

8.

It may also be pointed out that on 09.05.2006, a meeting of the Head of

the Faculty of Department of Physical Planning alongwith the Dean of Studies
was held in the Room of the Director. The minutes indicate that the Head of
the Department of Physical Planning informed that after careful scrutiny of

WPC3273/07

Page No.4 of 9

students of all classes of Bachelor's Degree Course in Planning, a notice dated
05.05.2006 for detaining the students for theory examinations was issued. It
was further noted that the said Head of Department informed that from time to
time the students were issued notices for shortage of attendance and even letters
were issued to the parents of the students. It was decided that the note dated
05.05.2006 with regard to the detaining of the students on account of shortage
of attendance would stand and no further action was required.

9.

The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner drew my attention to

another letter from Mr Ashish K. Chatterjee dated 26.06.2006 wherein he
indicated as to how he made mistakes in the reporting of attendance. It is also
stated that he had not put any 'a' s in the attendance sheet. The learned counsel
for the petitioners drew my attention to a copy of the attendance sheet which
had been filed by the respondents to indicate that the same contains 'a' s thereby
indicating that the attendance sheet is not the same as had been submitted by
the said Mr Ashish K. Chatterjee. He also submitted that the attendance sheet
contains certain blanks which have not been filled in and, according to him, the
attendance sheet having lost its sanctity, could not be relied upon to detain a
student from appearing in the examination. He also made certain submissions
with regard to students who had less than 75% attendance, but who were not
detained. In this connection, he submitted that the total number of lectures in
this course were 16, and 75% of the same would translate to 12 lectures. He
WPC3273/07

Page No.5 of 9

indicated that some of the students had attended only 11 lectures and were not
detained, whereas the petitioner who had attended seven lectures was detained.
This point can be immediately taken up inasmuch as the learned counsel for the
respondent submitted that although the requirement was of 75% attendance
and, according to that, the students ought to have attended 12 lectures, the
policy of the School of Planning and Architecture is that if there is a shortfall of
attendance by one lecture, then the student is not penalised, therefore, all those
students who had attended 11 lectures were granted the benefit, whereas all
other students who were falling short by more than 1 lecture were detained.

10.

Assuming for a moment that the petitioner had been wrongfully detained

in the paper—Elements of Settlement Sociology on account of purported low
attendance and that she is now entitled to appear in the Supplementary
Examination, the question that would arise would be that as to whether she is
otherwise entitled to the reliefs claimed in the present petition. Rules 10, 11
and 12 of the Examination Rules deal with promotion,

supplementary

examination and maximum permissible period for completion of academic
course requirements. The same read as under:“10.
(i)

PROMOTION
PROMOTION TO
ACADEMIC YEAR

NEXT

SEMESTER

IN

AN

A student shall be permitted to proceed to the next Semester in
an academic year provided he fulfills the attendance requirement as
detailed in section 5a, and academic performance requirement as

WPC3273/07

Page No.6 of 9

detailed in section 5b. In addition, he should not have failed in any
'Design' subject or more than two subjects in the examination.
(ii)

PROMOTION TO NEXT ACADEMIC YEAR
A student who fails in any of the subject in the Semester
Examination and fails to clear the subject even in the Supplementary
Examination shall not be promoted to the next academic year. He
shall have to repeat the subject in which he has failed in the following
year as a regular student in the corresponding Semester (s).
11.

SUPPLEMENTARY EXAMINATION
There shall be only one Supplementary Examination in the
month of July for students of First to Fourth years. At any
Supplementary Examination, a student may appear in a maximum of
two theory subjects. In all such cases where a student is allowed to
take the Supplementary Examination and has passed the
Supplementary Examination, the minimum pass marks of 40 per cent
will be taken as marks obtained in the subject irrespective of the score
in the Supplementary Examination.
12.

MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE PERIOD FOR COMPLETION
OF ACADEMIC COURSE REQUIREMENTS

(a)
First year students of Bachelor's Degree Programme in
Physical Planning must clear all the subjects within maximum of two
academic years.
(b)
The academic course requirements upto fourth year (VIII
Semester) must be completed within a maximum of seven years from
the date of joining the course.
(c)
Students of the Bachelor's Degree Programme in Physical
Planning Course who fail to pass the prescribed examination within
the limits of chances allowed, shall not be permitted to rejoin the
Course.”

11.

From the aforesaid rules, it is clear that insofar as promotion to the next

academic year is concerned, a student, who fails in any of the subjects in the
Semester examination and also fails even in Supplementary Examination shall
not be promoted to the next academic year and that he shall have to repeat the

WPC3273/07

Page No.7 of 9

subject in which he has failed in the following year as a regular student in the
corresponding Semester. With regard to promotion to the next Semester, it is
clear that a student would be permitted to proceed to the next Semester
provided he fulfills the attendance requirements as detailed in Section 5a. In
addition, he should not have failed in any 'Design' subject or more than two
subjects in an examination. Rule 11 relates to Supplementary Examination and
it specifically provides that in any Supplementary Examination, a student may
appear in a maximum of two theory subjects, whereas the petitioner, even if the
paper of Elements of Settlement Sociology is overlooked, has failed in four
other papers. One paper from the 5th Semester and three papers from the 6th
Semester.

Therefore, she cannot be allowed to take the Supplementary

Examination and the only course of action available to her was to repeat the
third year as a regular student in the academic year 2006-07 which was the
option given by the School of Planning and Architecture to her, as mentioned
above. That option was not taken by her. Instead, she went on representing
against her detention in respect of the Elements of Settlement Sociology paper.

12.

The other difficulty that faces the petitioner is that under Rule 12, the

academic course requirement upto the 4th year (8th Semester) has to be
completed within a maximum of seven years from the date of joining the
course. The petitioner joined the course in the academic session 2001-02 and,
therefore, she was required to complete the 4 years by the academic session
WPC3273/07

Page No.8 of 9

2007-08. Even if the petitioner is now permitted to continue with her 3rd
Semester in the academic session 2007-08, she would not be in a position to
complete the 8th Semester by the end of 2007-08. Therefore, in whichever way
one looks at this case, the rules do not permit the petitioner to continue with the
course.
For all these reasons, the petitioner cannot be given any relief in this writ
petition. The same is dismissed. No costs.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
July 11, 2007
δυττ

WPC3273/07

Page No.9 of 9

