IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+

IA Nos.12258/2006 in CS (OS) No.1463/2005

%

Judgment delivered on: 12.09.2007

BROKERS & BROKERS PVT. LTD.

.... Plaintiff

versus
MR OM PRAKASH BHOLA & ANR.

.... Defendant

Advocates who appeared in this case:For the Plaintiff
: Mr Jagjit Singh
For the Defendant No.1 : Mr Sunil Satyarthi with Mr Raman Gandhi
For the Defendant No.2 : Mr Praveen Rawal

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.
2.

Whether the Reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the judgment ?

YES

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

YES

3.
Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ?
BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

YES

This is an application under Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code of Civil

Procedure, 1908 filed on behalf of the defendant No.1 for rejection of the
plaint on the ground that the suit, from the statements in the plaint itself,
appears to be barred by provisions of Section 14 (1) (c) of the Specific Relief
Act, 1963 (hereinafter referred to as the said Act). The learned counsel for the
defendant No.1 / applicant drew my attention to the averments made in the
plaint which essentially indicate that the plaint relies upon the agreement dated
01.07.2004 by and between the parties. It is an agreement to sell and the

IA 12258/06 in CS(OS)1463/2005

Page No. 1 of 5

relevant clause pointed out by the learned counsel for the defendant No.1 reads
as under:“That in the most unlikely event the vendor
and the confirming party are unable to make the title
of the said property marketable by getting the
encumbrances mentioned herein above cleared due to
genuine and absolutely unavoidable reasons, to the
satisfaction of the vendee, and the vendor and the
vendee mutually decide and agree to cancel this
agreement, the vendor shall refund to the vendee the
advance money in full, i.e. Rs 9,00,000/- (Rs. Nine
Lacs only) without deducting any amount towards
any expenses incurred by the vendor in the process of
incomplete transaction. The vendor shall also not be
liable to pay to the vendee any interest on the said
advance money.”
The learned counsel for the defendant No.1 then referred to the provisions of
Section 14 (1) (c) of the said Act which stipulates that a contract which is in its
nature determinable, cannot be specifically enforced. He consequently
submitted that since the above mentioned clause of the agreement provides for
determination of the agreement to sell, it cannot be specifically enforced and,
therefore, the suit is barred by virtue of the statements made in the plaint itself.
The learned counsel for the defendant No.1 also placed reliance on the decision
of the Supreme Court in the case of Dadarao and Anr. v. Ramrao and
Ors.:(1999) 8 SCC 416 in support of his contention that an agreement, which
was itself determinable could not be specifically enforced.

IA 12258/06 in CS(OS)1463/2005

Page No. 2 of 5

2.

The learned counsel for the plaintiff submitted that the suit is not barred

as sought to be suggested by the learned counsel for the defendant No.1. He
submitted that the clause on which the defendant No.1 relies upon is not an
absolute clause. First of all, it clearly indicates that where a marketable title is
not made out by getting the encumbrances cleared then the sale deed may not
be executed. But this is subject to several conditions. The first condition being
that the inability to make the title marketable would have to be due to genuine
and absolutely unavoidable reasons. Secondly, it must be to the satisfaction of
the vendee, i.e., the plaintiff. Thirdly, the vendor and the vendee must mutually
decide and agree to cancel the agreement.

It is only when all the three

conditions are satisfied that the agreement comes to an end and, in that
eventuality, the vendor is required to refund to the vendee the advance money
in full without deducting any amount towards any expenses incurred by the
vendor in the process of the incomplete transaction. He submits that it is the
plaintiff's case that none of these conditions have been satisfied and, therefore,
without the suit proceeding to evidence, there is no question of the applicability
of Section 14 (1) (c) of the said Act.

3.

I have considered the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the

parties. At the outset, I may state that I am in agreement with those made by
the learned counsel for the plaintiff. The Supreme Court decision cited by the
learned counsel for the defendant No.1 is on an entirely different set of
IA 12258/06 in CS(OS)1463/2005

Page No. 3 of 5

circumstances. In Dadarao (supra), the material part of the clause reads as
under:“In case the sale deed is not made to you or if you
refuse to accept, in addition of earnest money an
amount of Rs 500/- shall be given or taken and no sale
deed will be executed.”
Construing this clause, the Supreme Court observed that the relationship
between the parties has to be regulated by the terms of the agreement between
them. It observed that what is important is that the agreement itself provided as
to what is to happen if either the seller refuses to sell or the purchaser refuses to
buy. The agreement was very categorical in envisaging that a sale deed was to
be executed only if both the parties agreed to do so and in the event of anyone
of them resiling from the same, there was no question of the other party being
compelled to go ahead with the execution of the sale deed. And, in the event of
sale deed not being executed, Rs 500/-, in addition to the return of Rs 1,000/-,
was the only sum payable. In the present case the situation is entirely different.
Here, the agreement by virtue of the said clause could only be cancelled
mutually by the parties. In the case before the Supreme Court even if one party
resiled from the agreement, the agreement could be cancelled. In the present
case, for the agreement to come to an end, there was a requirement of both the
parties mutually deciding and agreeing to cancel the same. That event has not
happened and therefore, the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of
Dadarao (supra) would be of no help to the defendant No.1.

IA 12258/06 in CS(OS)1463/2005

Page No. 4 of 5

4.

It must also be noted that provisions of Section 14 (1) (c) are not, prima

facie, attracted inasmuch as the pre-conditions for the cancellation of the
agreement are not satisfied in view of the averments made in the plaint. It may
eventually be that the defendant No.1 is able to make out a case, after both the
parties have led evidence, that the plaintiff is not entitled to a decree for
specific performance of the said agreement. But, at this stage, it cannot be said
that the plaint is liable to be rejected because it cannot be held that the suit is
barred by law on the basis of averments made in the plaint itself.
In view of the foregoing discussion, this application is dismissed.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
September 12, 2007
SR

IA 12258/06 in CS(OS)1463/2005

Page No. 5 of 5

