THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on:11.05.2007

+

CRL REV. P. No.595/2006

VERGHESE STEPHEN

... Petitioners
- versus -

CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION

... Respondent

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr Aman Lekhi, Sr Advocate with Mr Ajay Kumar Jain.
For the Respondent/CBI
: Mr R.M. Tiwari.

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J
1.

The petitioner is aggrieved by the order dated 27.05.2006 passed by

the learned Additional Sessions Judge whereby his application under Section
216 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (herein referred to as 'the Code')
for alteration of charge was dismissed.

2.

By an order dated 16.04.2005, the Special Judge, Delhi had

directed the framing of charges against the petitioner and the co-accused K.K.
Mishra.

Another co-accused M/s Stejac Video Products (P) Ltd was

CRLREVP 595/06

Page No.1 of 12

discharged. The petitioner was charged on two counts. Firstly, he was charged
under Section 120-B IPC read with Section 420 IPC and Section 13 (2) read
with Section 13 (1) (d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. Secondly,
he was charged under Section 420 IPC.

3.

It is pertinent to note here that no revision petition was filed against

the order on charge. However, an application under Section 216 of the Code
was filed on 29.05.2005 before the learned Special Judge. The prayer made in
the said application was as under:“It is therefore respectfully prayed this Hon'ble Court be
pleased to withdraw charge under Section 420 IPC as also
the charge of conspiracy under Section 120B to commit the
said offence and the offences under the 13(2) read with
Section 13 (1) (d) Corruption Act and alter the charge to one
under Section 417 IPC.”
4.

In the said application, it was indicated in paragraph 3 thereof that

Section 420 IPC was not attracted and the only charge if at all which could be
framed against the petitioner was under Section 417 IPC.

It was further

contended that there was no evidence at all from which a conspiracy to commit
the offence under Section 13 (2) read with Section 13 (1) (d) of the Prevention
of Corruption Act, 1988 could be made out. On these grounds, the aforesaid
prayer was made in the said application under Section 216 of the Code.

CRLREVP 595/06

Page No.2 of 12

5.

The said application was dismissed as being premature.

The

learned Special Judge observed as under while dismissing the said application:“6.
It is well settled that Criminal Court has no
power to review its own order. What cannot be done directly
also cannot be allowed to be done indirectly. The general
principles of interpretation of Statutes is that in construing a
remedial statute the court ought to give to it the “widest
operation which its language will permit”. The words of
such a statute must be so construed as “to give the most
complete remedy which the phraseology will permit”, so as
to secure that the relief contemplated by the statute should
not be denied to the class intended to be relieved”.
Therefore, if the powers of review are not conferred on this
court by a Statute then same cannot be inferred under the
garb of interpretation to the Statute. The interpretation of
Statute is confined to the scope which its language will
permit.
7.
Once, a Criminal Court has framed the charge,
then the order of framing charge cannot be reviewed by the
same court unless and until there is evidence on the record to
support the addition or alteration of charge. The evidence
available on the record at the time of framing the charge on
16.4.2005 have already been considered by the predecessor
court and thereafter no further evidence has been recorded in
this case. If the contention of the counsel for the accused
persons is accepted, then same would amount to review of
order of charge dated 16.4.2005 without any further
evidence.
8.
No doubt, erroneous and improper charge can be
corrected under section 216 of the Cr.P.C. by re-framing it
properly or by adding to it or altering it for an offence
proveable by the evidence. Thus power to add or alter a
charge is comprehensive enough for remedying defects,
whether they arise out of framing of a charge or the non
framing of a charge and whether they are discovered at the
inception of the trial or at subsequent stage of the trial, prior
to pronouncement of Judgment. I am fortified in my view by
Judgments in case of State of Maharashtra Vs. Salman
Salim Khan, 2004 Criminal Law Journal, 920, Rocky
CRLREVP 595/06

Page No.3 of 12

Benedick and others Vs. State of Sikkim, 2003 Criminal
Law Journal, 3309, Vibhuti Narain Chaubey vs. State of
UP, 2003 Criminal Law Journal, 196 and Hariharan
Chakarvarty vs. State of West Bengal, AIR 1954 SC 266.
9.
Thus in the light of the above discussion, I find
no merit in this application at this stage and accordingly the
same is dismissed as premature.”
6.

Elaborate arguments were advanced on behalf of the petitioner by

Mr Lekhi, the learned senior counsel who appeared for him, with regard to the
ambit and scope of the powers of the court under Section 216 of the Code. He
submitted that the learned Special Judge had erred in dismissing the application
under Section 216 without going into the merits of whether the charges framed
required alteration or not. He submitted that under Section 216 of the Code, the
court had ample power to alter or add to any charge at any time before the
judgment was pronounced and it did not matter as to whether, after the initial
framing of charges, any further evidence was brought to light or not. What was
relevant was that if it appeared to the court that a charge required alteration or
any charge required to be added, then the court could do so at any time before
the judgment is pronounced.

This power, according to Mr Lekhi, is not

circumscribed by the requirement of any fresh material or new evidence.
Various references were made to the New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary to
indicate that the word “alter” implied change or modification and, therefore, the
question of review was built in the same expression. Accordingly, it was
contended that the court had power to entertain the application under Section

CRLREVP 595/06

Page No.4 of 12

216 and since it refused to do so, the present revision petition was clearly
maintainable and this court ought to direct that the application be taken up and
disposed of on merits. Mr Lekhi submitted that insofar as remedial provisions
are concerned, the court is obliged to give such provisions the widest operation
of its language so as to advance the remedy. He referred to the decision of the
Bombay High Court in the case of State of Maharashtra v. Ramdas Shankar
Kurlekar and Another: 1999 CRI. L.J. 196 (DB) wherein in paragraph 32, it is
observed:“Even though a Court can alter a charge with the available
material, if a prejudice is caused to the accused by altering the
charges then it is not permissible for the trial Court to change
the charge.”
Reading the above observation of the Bombay High Court, Mr Lekhi submitted
that this is clearly indicative of the power of the court to alter a change on the
basis of available material and not necessarily on new material.

7.

Mr Lekhi also referred to the decision in the case of Queen-

Empress v. Vajiram: 16 Bom. 414, wherein it was held that an application for
alteration of charges by addition of certain offences under Section 423 and 424
of the Indian Penal Code ought to be disposed of at the commencement of the
trial itself and should not be left to be decided at the conclusion of the trial. He
also submitted that the power to remedy the defects by alteration of the charges
would include the case of withdrawal of a charge incorrectly framed. For this
CRLREVP 595/06

Page No.5 of 12

proposition, he placed reliance on the decision of a learned single Judge of the
Allahabad High Court in the case of Dwarka Lal v. Mahadeo Rai and Others:
12 ILR 551 (Allahabad Series).

8.

Mr Tiwari, who appeared on behalf of the CBI, contended that a

joint reading of Sections 216 and 217 of the Code would indicate that before
the court alters or adds any charge, there must be some progress in the trial. Mr
Tiwari contended that the remedy against an order on charge and the framing of
charges lay in filing a revision petition before this court. The petitioner did not
file any revision petition but chose to file an application under Section 216 of
the Code which was not maintainable without any further advancement in the
case. The order on charge was passed on 16.04.2005. Mr Tiwari referred to
the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Maharashtra v.
Salman Salim Khan & Another: 2004 SCC (Cri) 337 (paragraph 4) to submit
that something must happen in the trial to enable the court to take action under
Section 216 of the Code. He also referred to the decision of the Supreme Court
in the case of Hasanbhai Valibhai Qureshi v. State of Gujarat and Others:
2004 SCC (Cri) 1603 (paragraph 10). He also placed reliance on a decision of
the Calcutta High Court in the case of Rajendra Singh v. State and Others:
1989 Cri L.J. 255 (DB) to submit that the power to add or alter a charge cannot
be exercised unless there is evidence on record to support the addition or
alteration of charge. Lastly, he referred to the decision of a learned single
CRLREVP 595/06

Page No.6 of 12

Judge of the Allahabad High Court in the case of Vibhuti Narayan Chaubey
alias Lala Chaubey and Others v. State of U.P.: 2003 CRI. L.J. 196 to submit
that Section 216 of the Code related to alteration of charge and / or an addition
of a charge but, did not permit the deletion of a charge.

9.

I have considered the arguments advanced by the counsel for the

parties and have examined the papers placed before me and I am of the opinion
that this revision petition cannot be allowed. Section 216 of the Code reads as
under:“216. Court may alter charge.
(1)
Any court may alter or add to any charge at any time
before judgment is pronounced.
(2)

Every such alteration or addition shall be read and
explained to the accused.

(3)

If the alteration or addition to a charge is such that
proceeding immediately with the trial is not likely,
in the opinion of the court to prejudice the accused
in his defence or the prosecutor in the conduct of the
case the court may, in its discretion, after such
alteration or addition has been made, proceed with
the trial as if the altered or added charge had been
the original charge.

(4)

If the alteration or addition is such that proceeding
immediately with the trial is likely, in the opinion of
the court to prejudice the accused or the prosecutor
as aforesaid, the court may either direct a new trial
or adjourn the trial for such period as may be
necessary.

(5)

lf the offence stated in the altered or added charge is
one for the prosecution of which previous section is

CRLREVP 595/06

Page No.7 of 12

necessary, the case shall not be proceeded with until
such sanction is obtained, unless sanction had been
already obtained for a prosecution on the same facts
as those on which the altered or added charge is
founded.”
10.

It is abundantly clear that the above provision only speaks of

alteration of or addition to any charge. There is no reference to the deletion of
any charge. In the present case, the petitioner was charged substantively for the
offence under Section 420 IPC and for conspiracy under Section 120-B IPC
read with Section 420 IPC and 13 (2) read with Section 13 (1) (d) of the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. What the petitioner is seeking is that the
charge of conspiracy pertaining to Section 120-B IPC be deleted altogether.
Although the petitioner has styled this prayer as a withdrawal of the charge so
as to include it within the ambit of the decision of the Allahabad High Court in
the case of Dwarka Lal (supra), however, I find myself unable to agree with
the conclusion of the learned Judge in that case. On the contrary, I find that in
a subsequent decision of the Allahabad High Court itself in the case of Vibhuti
Narayan (supra), the said court had clearly held that Section 216 of the Code
did not provide for deletion of a charge and that the word “delete” had
intentionally not been used by the Legislature. I am in agreement with this
conclusion. The petitioner is seeking the deletion of the charge of conspiracy
altogether. That is not permissible under Section 216 of the Code. A charge
once framed must lead to either acquittal or conviction at the conclusion of the

CRLREVP 595/06

Page No.8 of 12

trial. Section 216 of the Code does not permit deletion of the same. If the
petitioner felt aggrieved, he could have filed a revision petition against the
order on charge and the framing of the charge. He, however, chose not to do
so.

11.

There is no doubt that the court exercising powers under Section

216 may alter or add to a charge at any time before the judgment is pronounced.
However, certain safeguards which are provided in the Section itself have to be
kept in mind so as not to cause any prejudice to the accused. Section 217,
which is essentially a corollary to Section 216 of the Code, permits the recalling
of the witnesses when charges are altered. However, the Supreme Court in the
case of the State of Maharashtra v. Salman Salim Khan (supra) has clearly
indicated that the law governing the trial of criminal offences provides for
alteration of charges at any stage of the proceeding depending upon the
evidence adduced in the case. The court also cautioned that the arguments
regarding the framing of proper charges are best left to be decided by the trial
court at an appropriate stage of the trial. Otherwise, the proceedings can get
protracted by the intervention of the Supreme Court.

12.

In Hasanbhai Valibhai Qureshi (supra), the Supreme Court

observed as under:-

CRLREVP 595/06

Page No.9 of 12

“10.
Therefore, if during trial the trial court on a
consideration of broad probabilities of the case based upon
total effect of the evidence and documents produced is
satisfied that any addition or alteration of the charge is
necessary, it is free to do so and there can be no legal bar to
appropriately act as the exigencies of the case warrant or
necessitate.
13.

There is, therefore, some indication that once the charges are

framed, the same can be altered and / or added to provided that there is some
progress in the trial and some material comes before the trial court enabling it
to alter or add to the charge already framed.

14.

The petitioner has contended that Section 420 IPC is not made out

and the petitioner at best could only be charged under Section 417 IPC and,
therefore, this charge also requires to be altered. It must be remembered that
Section 417 IPC is a minor offence compared to the more serious offence of
Section 420 IPC. Situations such as this are covered by the provisions of
Section 222 of the Code which reads as under:“222. When offence proved included in offence charged.
(1) When a person is charged with an offence
consisting of several particulars, a combination
of some only of which constitutes a complete
minor offence, and such combination is proved,
but the remaining particulars are not proved, he
may be convicted of the minor offence, thought
he was not charged with it.
(2)

CRLREVP 595/06

When a person is charged with an offence and
facts are proved which reduce it to a minor
offence, he may be convicted of the minor
Page No.10 of 12

offence, although he is not charged with it.
(3)

When a person is charged with an offence, he
may be convicted of an attempt to commit such
offence although the attempt is not separately
charged.

(4)

Nothing in this section shall be deemed to
authorize a conviction of any minor offence
where the conditions requisite for the initiation
of proceedings in respect of that minor offence
have not been satisfied.

(a)

(b)

15.

Illustrations
A is charged under section 407 of the Indian
Penal Code (45 of 1860) with criminal breach
of trust in respect of property entrusted to him
as a carrier. It appears, that he did commit
criminal breach of trust under section 406 of
that Code in respect of the property, but that it
was not entrusted to him as a carrier. He may
be convicted of criminal breach of trust under
the said section 406.
A is charged under section 325 of the Indian
Penal Code (45 of 1860), with causing grievous
hurt. He proves that he acted on grave and
sudden provocation. He may be convicted
under section 335 of that Code.”

It is, therefore, clear that while the petitioner may be charged under

Section 420 IPC and tried for the same offence, it may eventually turn out that
he is only guilty of an offence under Section 417 IPC. In that eventuality, it
would be lawful for the court to convict the petitioner under Section 417
although he was not charged with it. This is clearly indicated by the provisions
of Section 222 read with illustrations extracted above. Therefore, there is no

CRLREVP 595/06

Page No.11 of 12

necessity of altering the charge from one under Section 420 IPC to one under
Section 417 IPC.

16.

In view of the foregoing, the impugned order does not call for any

interference at this stage. This revision petition is dismissed.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
( JUDGE )
May 11, 2007
δυττ

CRLREVP 595/06

Page No.12 of 12

