THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on :

+

16.04.2007

WP(C) 9834/2005

PUHAZH G.P.

... Petitioner
- versus -

JAWAHARLAL NEHRU UNIVERSITY
REPRESENTED BY THE VICE CHANCELLOR

... Respondent

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr P.V. Dinesh with Mr Joy Scaria and Mr Zulfickar Ali.
For the Respondent
: Mr S.C. Dhanda.

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J( ORAL)
1.

The petitioner is seeking admission to the Ph.D Programme offered

by the respondent / University. He falls short by 0.17 grade points.

2.

What happened was that the petitioner undertook the M.Phil course

in the said university. The said course requires the submission of a dissertation.
This has to be evaluated as per the ordinance relating to the award of the Master
of Philosophy Degree. Clause 11 of the said Ordinance reads as under :-

wpc9834/2005

Page No.1 of 7

“11.

Evaluation

11.1

Subject to confirmation by the Committee, the method
of evaluation in the courses leading to the M.Phil.
degree shall be prescribed and assessment conducted by
the Department/Centre concerned.

11.2

The dissertation shall be examined by two examiners
atleast one of whom shall be a person not on the staff of
the University and or on the Committee of the
Centre/Board of the School concerned to be appointed
by the Executive Council on the recommendations of
the Academic Council, the Board and the Committee
for Advanced Studies and Research of the School
concerned.
Provided that in case of difference of
opinion between the two examiners with regard to the
evaluation of dissertation, the Dean of the School shall
arrange to have placed before the Committee the
evaluation reports of both the examiners for its
consideration.
Provided
further
that
after
due
consideration of the reports, the Committee may
recommend the appointment of a third examiner (not
connected with the University) in the manner laid down
in clause 11.2 above for the evaluation of the
dissertation.
Provided
further
that
if
the
recommendation of the third examiner is in the
negative, the student concerned shall not be awarded
the degree of M.Phil.

11.3.

The courses and dissertation of the student shall be
graded on a ten point scale, that is :
Grade
A+
A
AB+
B

wpc9834/2005

Grade Point
9
8
7
6
5
Page No.2 of 7

BC+
C
CF

4
3
2
1
Fail

There shall be no rounding off of SGPA/CGPA/FGPA.
11.4

The examiner while recommending the approval of the
dissertation for the award of M.Phil. degree shall also
award grade for the dissertation according to the
grading system in clause 11.3 above. The final grade
for the dissertation shall be determined by taking the
average of the grade awarded by two examiners.

11.5

A student in order to be eligible for the award of Master
of Philosophy degree of the University must have a
minimum Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA) of
5.5. (inclusive of dissertation and course work).
Note:
The question whether the viva-voce
examination in respect of an M.Phil. dissertation
submitted by the student be conducted or not, shall be
decided by the respective boards of studies of the
Schools concerned. Where the Board decides to hold
the viva-voce examination, the grade for dissertation
shall be jointly awarded by the two examiners at the
time of the viva-voce examination.
Note :
The above (amended) clause shall apply to
students admitted to the M.Phil. programme from July
1989 onwards.”

3.

The petitioner's dissertation was evaluated by two examiners as

provided in clause 11.2 of the said ordinance. The internal examiner awarded
the petitioner the grade of A- which is equivalent to grade point 7. The external
examiner, however, awarded the grade of C+ equivalent to grade point 3. As a
result of this, the petitioner became entitled to the award of the M.Phil decree.
wpc9834/2005

Page No.3 of 7

The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that since there was a
difference in the grades awarded by the two examiners, it would amount to
“difference of opinion” as appearing in the first proviso to clause 11.2 of the
ordinance. And, therefore, it would be necessary for the Committee to send the
dissertation for evaluation by a third examiner to be appointed in the manner
laid down in clause 11.2. The petitioner is, therefore, seeking a direction that
his dissertation, in view of this alleged difference of opinion, be sent to a third
examiner so that proper grades be awarded to him. He submits that, in case, the
grades are awarded by the third examiner then the average of the best between
the first and second examiners and the third examiner would be taken and that
grade would be awarded to the petitioner. He submits that the petitioner is
confident that he would receive a higher grade than that awarded by the
external examiner and since the margin of difference between the requirement
for the Ph.D. course and what the petitioner has achieved is very small, he
would be able to cover that deficit.

4.

Mr Dhanda, who appears on behalf of the University, submits that

the learned counsel for the petitioner is misreading the provision. He submits
that the proviso to clause 11.2 would come into play only if there is a difference
of opinion between the internal examiner and the external examiner with regard
to the acceptance of the dissertation. He submits that the provision would apply
where one examiner recommends the acceptance and the other examiner
wpc9834/2005

Page No.4 of 7

recommends the rejection of the dissertation. He submits that in the present
case this is not what has happened. Both the examiners have recommended the
acceptance of the dissertation but have awarded different grades. Accordingly,
he submitted that it is not the proviso to clause 11.2 that would apply but the
provisions of clause 11.4 which would be applicable.

5.

I have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for

the parties and I am in agreement with the submissions made by Mr Dhanda. It
is apparent upon a plain reading of the provisions of clause 11 of the ordinance
that difference of opinion that is mentioned in the proviso to clause 11.2 must
be read in the context of clause 11.2 itself. A reading of the other provisos also
indicates that reference in clause 11.2 is with regard to the acceptance or
rejection of the dissertation and does not relate to the difference of opinion with
regard to the grades that are awarded by the examiners when both of them
recommend acceptance of the dissertation. Clause 11.4 is very clear on this
point and it provides that grades are to be given by the examiner while
recommending approval of the dissertation. In other words it has reference
only to grades which are given by the examiner while recommending the
approval and not in a case of rejection of the dissertation. In the present case,
both the examiners recommended approval of the dissertation and gave
different grades. Clause 11.4 clearly indicates that the final grade for the
dissertation shall be determined by taking the average of the grades awarded by
wpc9834/2005

Page No.5 of 7

the two examiners. This provision does not permit any confusion inasmuch as
a plain reading expresses the intention very clearly that where both examiners
recommend approval of the dissertation, the final grade that is to be awarded to
the candidate is to be determined by taking the average of the grades awarded
by each of the two examiners. In the present case one examiner has awarded
A- and the other examiner has awarded C+. Thus, the average of the two has
to be taken. That is precisely what has been done by the university and the
M.Phil has been awarded to the petitioner accordingly.

6.

In case the petitioner is aggrieved by the fact that he is not being

granted admission to the Ph.D programme because of a marginal shortfall in the
requirement, it is always open to the petitioner to make an application before
the Academic Council of the university. The learned counsel for the petitioner
drew my attention to annexure P-5 which is a representation made to the Dean
through proper channel and is dated 19.4.2004. He submitted that this
representation is actually an application made to the Academic Council. He
also submitted that the endorsement at page 22 of the paper book shows that his
case has been strongly recommended and forwarded by Mr Y.K. Tyagi who is
the Chairman of the Centre for Studies In Diplomacy, International Law and
Economics School of International Law, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New
Delhi.

wpc9834/2005

Page No.6 of 7

7.

Mr Dhanda submits that this is not an application to the Academic

Council and if an application is made directly to the Academic Council, the
same shall be considered by the said Council inasmuch as the Council does
have the power to relax any of the provisions of the Academic Ordinance. In
this light, it would be appropriate if the petitioner moves a fresh application
before the

Academic Council seeking such relaxation.

In case such an

application is moved, the Academic Council shall consider it in the light of his
academic record.
This writ petition stands disposed of.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
April 16, 2007
Μ

wpc9834/2005

Page No.7 of 7

