THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%
+

Judgment delivered on: 17.03.2008
CS (OS) 2546/2007

MICROSOFT CORPORATION & ANOTHER

...

Plaintiffs

...

Defendants

- Versus FAIZAL A. & ANOTHER
Advocates who appeared in this case:For the Plaintiffs
: Mr Munish Mehra
For the Defendants
: Mr Neeraj Grover

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
IA No.3336/2008 (U/O 23 Rule 3 Read with Section 151 of CPC)
1.

The plaintiffs had filed this suit against the defendants alleging

infringement of their copyright in the software programme developed by the
plaintiffs and in particular 'Microsoft Windows XP Professional Version
2002' and 'Microsoft Office 2003'. During the pendency of the suit, the
plaintiffs and the defendants have arrived at an amicable settlement. The
defendants have acknowledged the plaintiffs to be the proprietors and
owners of the copyrights in the aforesaid software programmes and have
apologised for the infringement on their part.

CS(OS) 2546/07

The defendants have

Page No. 1 of 3

undertaken that they will not, in future, sell, offer for sale, distribute, issue
to the public, any counterfeit/pirated/unlicenced versions of the plaintiffs'
software or do any other act which would in any other manner amount to
infringement of the plaintiffs' intellectual property rights. The rest of the
terms and conditions which have been agreed upon by the parties are set out
in this application itself. This application has been signed by Mr Anand
Banerjee on behalf of the plaintiffs as their Constituted Attorney. It has also
been signed by Mr Faizal A., who is the defendant No.1 as also on behalf of
the defendant No.2 being the director thereof. The affidavits of the said
persons are also filed alongwith this application. The respective counsel for
the parties have also affixed their signatures on this application.

This

application has been marked as Exhibit C-1.

2.

In consideration of the undertakings given by the defendants, the

plaintiffs have agreed to forgo the prayers contained in paragraph 36 (b),
(c), (d) and (e) of the plaint. The parties have agreed that a decree be passed
in favour of the plaintiffs in terms of prayer 36 (a) of the plaint after
incorporating the terms of settlement indicated in this application.

3.

I have examined the terms of settlement arrived at between the parties

and am satisfied that the same are lawful. The compromise / settlement is
taken on record. The suit is decreed in favour of the plaintiffs and against
the defendants in terms of the prayer contained in paragraph 36 (a) of the

CS(OS) 2546/07

Page No. 2 of 3

plaint as also in terms of the compromise set out in this application. The
prayers contained in paragraph 36 (b), (c), (d) and (e) of the plaint have
been given up by the plaintiffs. The formal decree be drawn up. Exhibit C1 shall form part of the decree.
This application, the suit and all pending applications stand disposed
of.
( BADAR DURREZ AHMED )
JUDGE
March 17, 2008
δυττ

CS(OS) 2546/07

Page No. 3 of 3

