THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment Reserved on : 22.03.2007
Judgment Delivered on : 17.04.2007

+

BAIL APPLN 4426/2006

VISHAL SHARMA

...Petitioner
- versus -

SHRI DEEPAK KUMAR MANGOTRA

...Respondent

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr Harjinder Singh, Sr. Advocate with Mr Yogesh K. Saxena,
Ms Seema Juneja and Ms Shikha Tyagi.
For the Respondent
: Mr Satish Aggarwal.

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

This is a bail application moved on behalf of the accused Vishal Sharma.

The case for the prosecution is that on 09.09.2003, on the basis of intelligence
received by the Department of Revenue Intelligence, one Maruti Zen Car bearing
registration No. DL-6CB-6980 was intercepted near the crossing of Shyam Garments,
Central Market, Lajpat Nagar, New Delhi at about 10.30 am. There were four persons
in the car and they were Gurmeet Singh, who was allegedly the driver, Purshottam Lal,
BAIL APPLN 4426/2006

page no 1 of 6

Vishal Sharma and Som Nath Sharma, who were alleged to be the owners of the car.
As per the prosecution, since the place was not proper for carrying out of the search,
the vehicle as well as the four persons were taken to the DRI office at I.P. Estate. Two
panch witnesses namely, Manwar Singh and Satte Singh were called. It is alleged that
on the search of the vehicle, 4.225 kg of contraband was recovered. The CRCL report
of the sample taken indicated that the substance had a content of 89% of
Diacetylmorphine . In other words, the alleged recovery was of a commercial quantity
of high grade heroin.
2.

Mr Harjinder Singh, the learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the

petitioner, submitted that the panch witnesses Manwar Singh and Satte Singh were
stock witnesses and their evidence with regard to the recovery cannot be relied upon.
He also submitted that the co-accused Gurmeet Singh, who was allegedly driving the
vehicle, has been granted bail by virtue of the order of Special Judge dated 29.08.2006.
He submits that the learned Special Judge, while granting bail to co-accused (Gurmeet
Singh) took note of the decision of this court in the case of Kashmir Singh v Narcotics
Control Bureau : 2006 (3) JCC Narcotics 139 wherein the entire issue of stock
witnesses was considered. Reference was also made to the order of the High Court
dated 31.7.2006 in the very case of Gurmeet Singh whereby the matter was remanded
to the Special Judge for reconsideration. The order of the High Court, passed on
31.7.2006, noted two other cases, namely, DRI v Vinod Kumar and DRI v Brian
Taylor & Others wherein Manwar Singh and Satte Singh were witnesses in the former
case and Manwar Singh alone was the witness in the latter case. It was, therefore,
BAIL APPLN 4426/2006

page no 2 of 6

attempted to be shown by Mr Harjinder Singh that the present recovery witnesses,
namely, Manwar Singh and Satte Singh were stock witnesses who were used time and
again by the DRI for the purposes of showing recoveries. He submitted that this
created a taint on the recovery itself and, therefore, the petitioner ought to be given
benefit thereof. The learned counsel for the petitioner also pleaded for parity with the
case of Gurmeet Singh.
3.

Mr Aggarwal, who appears on behalf of the DRI submitted that there was

no question of treating the present petitioner's case at par with that of Gurmeet Singh.
He submitted that the statements recorded under Section 67 of the NDPS Act were
entirely different. He submits that Gurmeet Singh was merely a driver. On the other
hand the present petitioner has indicated his involvement as a smuggler and dealing in
narcotic substances even prior to the alleged incident. He referred to the statement of
the petitioner recorded under Section 67 of the NDPS Act which indicates the entire
sequence of events which ultimately led to the interception of the vehicle. It was
indicated that on 08.09.2003 one Devi Singh contacted the petitioner at his chemist
shop and informed that he had a consignment of about 4.2 kg of heroin which had to be
delivered at Delhi on 09.09.2003 and that he had asked the petitioner to arrange for the
delivery. The sequence of events relating to the departure of the vehicle from Jammu
and its arrival at Delhi and the other persons involved in the said transaction are
indicated in the said statement. It is also indicated that all the four co-accused stayed in
the same guest house located at Central Market, Lajpat Nagar, New Delhi and after
having breakfast all the four sat in the car and were about to start for Connaught Place
BAIL APPLN 4426/2006

page no 3 of 6

when they were intercepted by some persons who identified themselves as officers of
the DRI. Thereafter, they were asked to accompany them to the office of the DRI
located at I.P. Estate. Mr Aggarwal pointed out that in the said statement, the previous
involvement and history of the petitioner was also given whereas in the statement of
Gurmeet Singh, the situation was different as recorded in the order passed by the
learned Special Judge itself. Therefore, he submitted that there was no question of any
parity between the case of the present accused and that of Gurmeet Singh. He further
submitted that charges have been framed and the trial is in progress.

He also

emphasized that this was a case under the NDPS Act and involved a commercial
quantity of Heroin and, therefore, the rigours of Section 37 of the said Act would be
applicable. He also submitted that a confessional statement made under Section 67 of
the NDPS Act was admissible and could not be brushed aside lightly. He further
submitted that Manwar Singh and Satte Singh were not stock witnesses although they
happened to have been recovery witnesses in other cases of the DRI also.
4.

In rejoinder, Mr Harjinder Singh drew my attention to the statement of

PW6 (S.K. Sharma) recorded in the course of the trial. He drew my attention, in
particular, to the cross examination conducted by him of the said witness which
indicated that the statements allegedly made by the accused in his confessional
statement were not verified by the said witness. The cross examination also reveals
that the said PW6 did not tell the accused Vishal Sharma that he is not bound to give a
statement although he informed him that the statement made by him could be used
against him. The cross examination also reveals that PW6 did not tell the accused that
BAIL APPLN 4426/2006

page no 4 of 6

he had a right to call his advocate before recording the evidence. It is the submission
of Mr Harjinder Singh that these circumstances make the confessional statement very
doubtful. He also relied upon the recent judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of
Francis Stanly @ Stalin v Intelligence Officer, Narcotic Control Bureau : 2007 I AD
(S.C.) I wherein the Supreme Court observed as under:
“15. We are of the opinion that while it is true that a confession made
before an officer of the Department of Revenue Intelligence under
the NDPS Act may not be hit by Section 25 in view of the aforesaid
decisions, yet such a confession must be subject to closer scrutiny
than a confession made to private citizens or officials who do not
have investigating powers under Act. Hence the alleged confession
made by the same appellant must be subjected to closer scrutiny than
would otherwise be required.”
Mr Harjinder Singh further submits that the petitioner's previous alleged involvement
mentioned in the confessional statement cannot be used against the accused in view of
Section 54 of the Evidence Act which reads as under;“54. Previous bad character not relevant, except in reply. - In
criminal proceedings the fact that the accused person has a
bad character is irrelevant, unless evidence has been given
that he has a good character, in which case it becomes
relevant.”
5.

Having given my thoughtful consideration to the arguments advanced by

the counsel for the parties, I am not inclined to allow this application for bail. While it
is true that use of stock witnesses should be deprecated, it is also true that other
evidence could be relied upon by the prosecution to bring home the guilt of the
accused. The petitioner's case is also different from that of co-accused Gurmeet Singh,
as indicated in the order of the learned Special Judge dated 29.8.2006 and as submitted
BAIL APPLN 4426/2006

page no 5 of 6

by Mr Satish Aggarwal. Therefore, the petitioner cannot claim parity with co-accused
Gurmeet Singh and on that basis claim to be released on bail. As regards the crossexamination of PW6 (S.K. Sharma) that is a matter of trial. So also is the question of
consideration of the arguments based on Section 54 of the Evidence Act mentioned
above. At this stage, I find that there is an alleged recovery of a substantial amount
(4.225 Kg.) of high grade heroin. Clearly, the rigours of Section 37 of the NDPS Act
would come into play. Having considered the facts and circumstances of the case, I am
unable to persuade myself, at this stage, that there are reasonable grounds for believing
that the petitioner is not guilty of the offence. That being the case, the limitations
prescribed for the grant of bail under Section 37 of the NDPS Act are not satisfied and,
therefore, the petitioner would not be entitled to bail at this stage.
6.

The bail application is dismissed.

7.

It is made clear that nothing expressed or stated in this order shall affect the

trial.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
April 17, 2007
M&J

BAIL APPLN 4426/2006

page no 6 of 6

