THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on :17.08.2007

+

I.A. 3566/04 IN CS (OS) 146/2004

SUNILA WADHWAN & OTHERS

...Petitioners
- versus -

PERFECT DRUGS LIMITED & ANOTHER

...Respondents.

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Plaintiff
: Mr Anil Kher Sr Advocate with Mr D.R.Bhatia
For the Defendant 2
: Mr Siddharth Yadav.

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

This is an application under Order VII Rule 11 of the Code of Civil

Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter referred to as 'the CPC') filed on behalf of the
defendant No.2 for rejection of the plaint. The ground taken in the application
is that the suit is barred by law. According to the learned counsel for the
defendant No.2 (Mr Arun Sahay), the suit has been filed, inter alia, against the
defendant No.1 (Perfect Drugs Limited) although the defendant No.1 had been
wound up on 22.1.2001 Section 446 of the Companies Act, 1956, according to
him, bars a suit against a company after an order of winding up has been

cs(os)146/2004

Page No.1 of 4

passed. According to the learned counsel for defendant No.2, the plaintiffs
knew about the winding up of the defendant No.1, yet filed this present suit.
He submitted that since the suit is barred by Section 446 of the Companies Act,
1956, the plaint has to be rejected. The learned counsel also referred to a
Division Bench decision of the Bombay High Court in Eastern Steamship
Private Ltd. v. Pucto Private Ltd. And Another: 41 Company Cases 43. The
said decision is points out that permission of the Company Court has to be
taken prior to the filing of a suit against a company which has been wound up.
Since no such permission was taken, it is submitted that the suit is not
maintainable and, therefore, the plaint is liable to be rejected.

2.

The learned counsel for the plaintiffs, however, submitted that the

suit is not barred. He submitted that, initially, the property in question was
leased out under two separate leases to the defendant No.1. The same was
utilised by the defendant No.1 for the purpose of residence of defendant No.2,
who was then the Managing Director of Defendant No.1. After the expiry of
the leases by efflux of time on 14th July, 2001, the defendants were bound to
vacate the premises. It was also pointed out by the learned counsel for the
plaintiffs that the factum of the defendant No.1, having been wound up, was
not known to the plaintiffs earlier. However, this would not alter the course of
the case. He submitted that the defendant No.1, having been wound up, the
defendant No.2 had no authority to continue in possession of the premises in
cs(os)146/2004

Page No.2 of 4

question. Legal notices had been served both upon the defendant No.1 as well
as on the defendant No.2. The defendant No.2 had replied to the said notice by
a letter dated 22nd December, 2003, wherein he set up a case claiming tenancy
on his own right.

3.

Be that as it may, after having considered the arguments advanced

by the learned counsel for the parties and after having examined the averments
made in the plaint as well as the documents accompanying the plaint, I am of
the view that this application under Order VII Rule 11 CPC cannot be allowed.
The first reason is that the suit is not just against the company (defendant No.1)
but also against the defendant No.2. In terms of the averments in the plaint, the
defendant No.2 has been in occupation of the premises owned by the plaintiffs
and this occupation is unauthorised. As per the plaint, no lease deed had been
executed nor had any arrangement been made between the plaintiff and the
defendant No.2 for the defendant No.2 to continue in possession or to be in
possession of the premises in question. Therefore, according to averments
made in the plaint, the defendant No2. is in unauathorised occupation of the
property belonging to the plaintiffs. Even if I assume, for the time being, that
the suit against the defendant No.2 cannot be maintainable, it is well settled that
the plaint cannot be rejected in part. The suit is definitely maintainable against
the defendant No.2. The submission of the learned counsel for the defendant
No.2 is that the defendant No.2 has been sued in his personal capacity. If that
cs(os)146/2004

Page No.3 of 4

be the case then the suit against the defendant No.2 shall survive in any event.
Since the plaint cannot be rejected in part, therefore, in my view, this
application cannot be allowed and the same is rejected.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)

August 17, 2007
J

cs(os)146/2004

Page No.4 of 4

