THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Judgment delivered on :19.07.2007
WP(C) No.7798/2001
DHARMENDER

...Petitioner
- versus -

UNION OF INDIA & OTHERS

...Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr Manjeet Singh with Mr Avtar Singh
For the Respondent No.4
: Mr Saran Suri

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

On 12.03.2007, when this matter had come up before this Court, it

was felt that the presence of the counsel for the respondent No.3 would be
necessary. Since nobody was present on behalf of the respondent No.3, the
matter was directed to be renotified on 11.05.2007. On that day also nobody
appeared on behalf of the respondent No.3. Consequently, this Court directed
issuance of court notice to the counsel for the respondent No.3 to be present on
the next date of hearing and the matter was adjourned to 19.07.2007 (i.e
today). The said notice has been served, yet nobody appears on behalf of the
WP(C)7798.01

Page No.1 of 5

respondent No.3.

Under these circumstances, this Court is left with no

alternative but to proceed with the matter in the absence of the counsel for the
respondent No.3.

2.

The petitioner had applied in 1999 for the four-year certificate

course of Aeronautical Engineering to be conducted by the respondent No.4
( Indian Institute of Aeronautical Engineering, Dehradun). The students who
seek admission to respondent No.4 have to apply to respondent No.3, which
examines the applications and clear students for admission. Thereafter, the
training is imparted by the respondent No.4 in respect of the courses which are
approved by the Government of India as per the prospectus.

3.

As indicated above, the petitioner applied in 1999 and he was

granted admission. Thereafter, the petitioner undertook the course of study at
the respondent No.4 institute and he appeared in the two semesters in 19992000 as well as the third and fourth semester in 2000-2001. Subsequently, by
a letter dated 21.08.2001, the respondent No.3 withheld the result of the
petitioner for the December, 2000 examination and also indicated that his
registration as a student with the respondent No.4 was suspended with
immediate effect. The reason given in the said letter was that the petitioner
has less than 50% marks in Chemistry as per the original mark-sheet produced

WP(C)7798.01

Page No.2 of 5

by him. The advice given in the letter was that the petitioner should clear the
10+2 examination in Chemistry with more than 50% marks and then only his
membership would be revived.

4.

The petitioner is aggrieved by the fact that for two years the

petitioner was taking training at the respondent No.4 institute and one day, out
of blue, the petitioner was told that his registration was suspended with
immediate effect because he had obtained 1% less in his class 12 examination.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the mark-sheet submitted
by the petitioner at the time of seeking admission clearly indicated that he had
obtained 49% marks in Chemistry.

This fact was well known to the

respondent No.3 and despite that the petitioner had been granted admission.
Apart from that, the learned counsel for the petitioner also submitted that the
only condition required and notified to the petitioner was that he should have
passed the class 12 examination. No minimum percentage was prescribed by
the respondent No.3.

5.

The learned counsel for the respondent No.4 submits the institute

only imparts training and it has nothing to do with the grant or refusal of
admission and declaration of results because all those acts are under the
purview and ambit of the respondent No.3. Accordingly, the learned counsel

WP(C)7798.01

Page No.3 of 5

for the respondent No.4 submitted that if the respondent No.3 gives them the
go ahead, they shall be in a position to impart training to the petitioner. On the
other hand, if they withhold the results or suspend a student, then they have no
option but to abide by the directions of the respondent No.3.

6.

Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, I am of the

view that the petitioner had not suppressed any information from the
respondent No.3 when the petitioner sought admission. He submitted his
mark-sheet, which clearly indicated that he had obtained 49% marks in
Chemistry. Knowing this fully well, the respondent No.3 granted admission to
the petitioner. Not only this, the petitioner was allowed to continue with his
training for two years at the respondent No.4 institute without any hindrance
and only after he sat for his fourth semester examination, while he was
pursuing his fifth semester, the petitioner was told that his registration was
suspended because he had 1% less marks in Chemistry in the class 12
examination. I am afraid this is not an appropriate course of conduct on the
part of the respondent No.3. This is apart from the fact that the minimum
marks were not notified to the petitioner when he sought admission. The only
criteria that was known to the petitioner was that he should have passed the
class 12 examination conducted by CBSE. The petitioner having qualified in
the class 12 examination conducted by CBSE, submitted his mark-sheet and on

WP(C)7798.01

Page No.4 of 5

the basis of which he was granted admission and registration. To my mind,
this belated suspension of the registration of the petitioner's admission and
withholding of his December, 2000 result was unwarranted. Requiring the
petitioner to go back to school and to again reappear in his Chemistry paper is
an absolutely unreasonable requirement. For all these reasons, I direct that the
petitioner's result of December, 2000 be declared and the petitioner be
reinstated for pursuing his course of study at the respondent No.4 institute with
immediate effect.
This writ petition stands disposed of.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
July 19, 2007
SR

WP(C)7798.01

Page No.5 of 5

