THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on :_12.02.2007

+

WP (C) No.17625/2006

M/S DEVI DAYAL ALUMINIUM CORPORATION

...PETITIONER

- versus UCO BANK

...RESPONDENT

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioners
: Mr Vijay Jhanji Sr Advocate with Mr Rajesh Jain, Mr S.C.
Ladi and Mr Neeraj Sharma
For the Respondent
: Mr Rajesh Ratan.

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.
By way of this petition a direction is sought from this Court to be
issued to the respondent (UCO Bank, Model Basti Branch, New Delhi) to settle
the account of the petitioner on the basis of the One Time Settlement Scheme of
the Reserve Bank of India as circulated by the UCO Bank on 4.10.2005.
2.

The learned counsel appearing for the respondent bank, at the

outset, submitted that the said Scheme cannot be invoked by the petitioner in
view of the specific provision in the Scheme itself that the guidelines would not
cover cases of willful default, fraud and malfeasance. In response, the learned

WP(C) Nos.17625/06

Page No.1 of 5

counsel for the petitioner pointed out that the case of the petitioner is not one of
willful default, fraud or malfeasance but a case of a failed compromise. In this
context, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner referred to two
documents. One, is the letter written by the respondent on 3.1.2004 to the
petitioner with regard to the compromise proposal which, as the subject
indicates, has been agreed to by the Regional Office of the Bank. This letter
was shown by the learned counsel for the petitioner to indicate that a
compromise had, in fact, been arrived at in 2004. It is, however, to be noted
that paragraph 4 of the terms of the compromise clearly indicated that the Bank
would take necessary steps for withdrawing the criminal complaint against the
petitioner provided an affidavit stating that the property involved in the said
criminal compliant has not been transferred to anybody and it is still a valid
security to the bank was given by the petitioner. The learned counsel for the
respondent submitted that no such affidavit has been given and the compromise
in any event fell through.
3.

The other document which has been relied upon by the learned

counsel for the petitioner is Annexure P-6 which is a note of the proceedings
regarding compromise / settlement of the account. The proceedings indicate
that the petitioner was ready and willing for a compromise settlement under the
Reserve Bank Scheme of 2005. However, the only amount sought to be offered
on the part of the petitioner was Rs 11.39 lakhs. On the other hand, it was
represented on behalf of the Bank that the proposal did not fall under the
WP(C) Nos.17625/06

Page No.2 of 5

Scheme at all as the scheme did not operate in cases of willful default. There is
some discussion in the proceedings with regard to the allegations of willful
default on the part of the petitioner. However, as indicated in the final sentence
of the proceedings, the bank did not agree to the proposal of the party and
consequently, no compromise settlement could be arrived at.
4.

The learned counsel for the respondent vehemently opposed the

contention advanced by the counsel for the petitioner on the solitary point that
the petitioner sought a direction for implementation of the Scheme of 2005
insofar as the petitioner was concerned when, in fact, the petitioner was not
covered under the Scheme.

The reason being that the Scheme was not

applicable in cases of willful default, fraud and malfeasance. In this context,
the learned counsel for the respondent referred to paragraph 3 of his counter
affidavit wherein it is stated that the petitioner is a willful defaulter of the
respondent bank and cannot rely upon the One Time Settlement Scheme
circulated by the bank on 4.10.2005. The counsel for the respondent pointed
out that a criminal complaint was also pending against the petitioner. He
referred to the order passed by the learned Metropolitan Magistrate on 13th
July, 2005 which is an order on charge. The complaint had been filed against
the petitioner under Section 120B/406/418/419/420/423/467/471/34 IPC.
However, the learned Metropolitan Magistrate, after considering the arguments
advanced by counsel for the parties, was of the opinion that, prima facie,
offence punishable under Section 420 read with Section 120B IPC was made
WP(C) Nos.17625/06

Page No.3 of 5

out against the accused and directed that charges be framed thereunder. A
reading of the order on charge reveals that the allegations against the petitioner,
which include the allegation that the petitioner had full knowledge that one of
the partners of the petitioner firm had already entered into the agreement of sale
with two other persons in the year 1981 and despite that they had mortgaged
the property with the bank in order to get the sanction limit for extension of the
credit facility in their favour. There are other allegations which are mentioned
in the order on charge which I need not refer to inasmuch as what is necessary
is that as of now a prima facie case under Section 420 read with Section 120B
IPC has been found to be made out by the learned Metropolitan Magistrate and
the same is pending before the criminal Court. That being the case, it appears
that the petitioner's case would not be covered under the 2005 scheme.

5.

The argument advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioner

that, in any event, the matter should be referred to the Board inasmuch as the
compromise has failed, also does not arise. The reason being that though the
One Time Settlement Scheme of 2005 indicated that existing/failed
compromises may be settled under the OTS at the level of ECMD Board only.
This is, however, subject to the condition that the case otherwise falls under the
One Time Settlement Scheme. And, since the petitioner's case is one of willful
default, fraud and / or malfeasance, it gets excludeds from the scheme and the
question of settlement would not arise.
WP(C) Nos.17625/06

Page No.4 of 5

6.

In view of the discussion above, it would not be open for this Court

in exercise of powers under Section 226 of the Constitution of India to direct
the respondent to consider the case of the petitioner under the One Time
Settlement Scheme of 4.10.2005 when the case of the petitioner does not fall
for consideration thereunder as indicated above. No such direction can be
given by this Court. It is, however, always open to the petitioner and the bank
as in the case of any contracting parties to enter into any kind of settlement
voluntarily. The Court cannot, under the aforesaid circumstances, direct the
respondent to consider the case of the petitioner under the said Scheme.

7.

With these observations, this writ petition is dismissed.

8.

It is made clear that any observations made in this order will not be

taken into consideration in the criminal proceedings referred to above.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
February 12 , 2007
j

WP(C) Nos.17625/06

Page No.5 of 5

