THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on:14.03.2008

+

IA.No.14558/2007 in CS(OS) 61/2006

ANJULIKA VINOD DEWAN

...Plaintiff.
- versus -

SMT VIJAY LAXMI CHAUHAN & ORS

...Defendants

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Plaintiff
: Mr Rajeev K Virmani.
For the Defendant Nos 1 to 5
: Mr Dinesh Agnani.
For the Defendant No.6.
: Mr Amit Siras for Mr Amit Khemka.

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J(ORAL)
1.
This is an application filed on behalf of the plaintiff under
Order 11 Rule 1 & 2 r/w Section 151 CPC for leave to deliver
interrogatories. One of the questions in the suit is with regard to the
property No.11, Court Road, Gate No.1, Civil Lines, Delhi-110 054. It is
the case of the plaintiff that this property was acquired by the plaintiff's

IA.No.14558.07 in CS(OS)61/2006

Page No.1 of 6

father though purchased in the name of the defendant No.1.
Consequently, it is the case of the plaintiff that she has a share in the
property. On this question, the defendants have taken the stand in the
written statement that the plaintiff is not entitled to any share in this
property and that the late Shri Yograj Chauhan (father of the plaintiff and
husband of defendant No.1) did not own any immovable property at the
time of his demise.

2.

The learned counsel for the plaintiff submitted that the

interrogatories can be issued to the defendants so as to elucidate and
clarify the matters in issue. This would also be necessary to cut short the
controversy in the case. He submitted that the list of interrogatories
given in annexure “A” to the application would be necessary and in
support of this submission, the learned counsel for the plaintiff/applicant
placed reliance on two decisions of this court in the cases of Sharda
Dhir v Ashok Kumar Makhija & Ors : 99 (2002) DLT 350 and Tarun
Kumar & Ors v Ajay Kumar : 61(1996) DLT 174. In Sharda Dhir
(supra) the learned Single Judge of this court had observed as under :
“ The application was filed by the plaintiff under Order 11
Rule 1 CPC. This rule allowed the court to grant leave to
any of the party of the suit to deliver Interrogatories in
writing for examination of the opposite party relating to
IA.No.14558.07 in CS(OS)61/2006

Page No.2 of 6

any matter in question in the suit. The object of this rule is
that a party knows the nature of his opponent's case before
hand in order to meet it at the hearing. Indeed, he is not
entitled to know the fact which constitute evidence to
prove the opponent's case. The nature of the case of the
parties is disclosed in their respective pleadings but in a
given case the pleadings may not sufficiently disclose the
nature of the parties' case. In order to make good
deficiency this rule has been enacted. It is now well
settled that administering of Interrogatories is to be
encouraged as it is a means of obtaining admissions of
parties and tends to shorten litigation. As a general rule
the Interrogatory should be allowed, whether the answer
to them would either strengthen the case of the party
administering them or to destroy the case of the adversary.
The court should not be hyper-technical at the stage of the
service of the Interrogatories. This rule is to be used
liberally whenever it could shorten the litigation and serve
the interest of justice. Indeed, it cannot be used as a means
of obtaining information which may be admissible during
the oral cross-examination of a party and his witnesses.
Interrogatories cannot be disallowed merely because the
party interrogating has other means of proving the facts in
question. One of the important purpose of interrogatories
is to obtain admission of material fact of a case. Under
this rule the Interrogatories may be served with the leave
of the court by one party to the other in a suit: (1) to
ascertain the nature of his opponent's case and material
facts constituting it and (2) to support his own case by
obtaining admissions or by impeaching or destroying his
opponent's case. The Interrogatories which do not relate
to any matter in question involved in the suit, indeed,
would be deemed irrelevant even though they might be
admissible in oral cross-examination of the witnesses.
Rule (6) or Order 11 makes it further clear. It provides
that objection to answer an Interrogatory on the ground
that it is scandulous or irrelevant or not exhibited bona
fide for the purpose of the suit, or with the matter inquired
into are not sufficiently material at that stage or on the
ground of privilege, or on any other ground will be taken
IA.No.14558.07 in CS(OS)61/2006

Page No.3 of 6

3.

in the affidavit in answer. Leave to deliver interrogatories
does not imply an order to answer them and any objection
to answer can be taken under the Rule. The court is
required to decide whether the appellant should be
allowed to interrogate the other side, but it is not to
determine what question should the opposite party be
compelled to answer.”
In Tarun Kumar (supra) a similar set of observations have

been made by another learned Single Judge of this court to the following
effect :
“4.

4.

The object of delivering interrogatories is seeking
information from the opposite party about certain facts
which are to be proved in the case. Interrogatories can
be for discovery of documents as well as for discovery
of facts. The main object of interrogatories is to save
expenses by enabling the party to obtain from his
opponent information as to facts material to the
question in dispute between them and to obtain
admission of fact which he has to prove on any issue
which is raised between them. Interrogatories are
generally allowed to be delivered upon the adversary
provided the said interrogatories are necessary for
obtaining information from the adversary either to
maintain the case of the party administering them or
even to destroy the case of the adversary.
Interrogatories cannot be allowed to be delivered in
case they are in the nature of making fishing inquiries
from the adversary. Interrogatories must be confined to
facts which are relevant to be matters in question in the
suit.”
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the defendants

submits that the plaintiff should do her own homework and establish her
case and not require the defendant to furnish all the information which

IA.No.14558.07 in CS(OS)61/2006

Page No.4 of 6

would disclose the evidence of the defendants. He submitted that the
long list of interrogatories that have been set out in annexure “A” itself
indicates that the plaintiff's interrogatories are in the nature of a
fishing/roving inquiry and this cannot be permitted in the guise of
interrogatories.

He submitted that none of the interrogatories are

necessary and the plaintiff ought to establish her own case which the
defendants would defend by leading appropriate evidence.

5.

I have examined the interrogatories which the plaintiff is

seeking to be delivered to the defendants for their answers. I find that
most of the interrogatories relate to elucidating details about certain
pieces of information which would be more in the nature of evidence
rather than answers to clarify the matter between the parties. However, I
find that interrogatory Nos 1 and 2 are the only interrogatories out of the
list of 17 which would be relevant. Apart from this, the learned counsel
for the plaintiff pressed that interrogatory No.15 should also be delivered
to the defendants. That interrogatory refers to immovable properties held
by the HUF of late Shri Yograj Chauhan and Sons during the years 20002001 to 2002-2003.

IA.No.14558.07 in CS(OS)61/2006

Page No.5 of 6

6.

I find that the entire interrogatories as set out in annexure “A”

need not be delivered to the defendants requiring answers from them
inasmuch as most are not relevant or in the nature of requiring the
defendants to disclose their evidence. Consequently, the following three
interrogatories are directed to be delivered to the defendants for their
answers :
1.

What was the consideration paid for purchasing /
acquiring the immovable property No.11, Court Road,
Civil Lines, Delhi-110 054?

2.

Who provided funds for payment of consideration referred
to in Question-1 above?

3.

Whether the HUF of Yograj Chauhan and Sons held any
immovable properties during the years 2000-2001 and
upto 01.01.2003?
The above interrogatories be answered by the defendant Nos

1-5 within four weeks.
This application stands disposed of.

March 14, 2008
M

IA.No.14558.07 in CS(OS)61/2006

(BADAR DURREZ AHMED)
JUDGE

Page No.6 of 6

