THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Judgment delivered on : 10.05.2007
WP(C) No.1295/1984
SHRI BHAJAN SINGH & ORS

...Petitioner

- versus UNION OF INDIA & OTHERS

...Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner

: Harjinder Singh Sr Advocate with Ms Shikha Tyagi
and Ms Seema Juneja
For the Respondent/UOI : Ms Barkha Babbar.
For the Respondent 2. : Ms Avnish Ahlawat with Ms Latika Chaudhary,
Ms Nidhi Gupta and Ms Simran

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

This petition had been filed on behalf of Bhajan Singh and Others,

who are relatives of one Tarlok Singh, who was detained under the
Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act,
1974 (hereinafter referred to as “COFEPOSA”) on 23.2.1998. The petitioners
are aggrieved by a notice issued on 8.3.1984 under Section 6 (1) of Smugglers
and Foreign Exchange Manipulators (Forfeiture of Property) Act, 1976
WP(C)1295/1984

Page No.1 of 8

(hereinafter referred to as “SAFEMA”.

Mr Harjinder Singh submits that

although the detention period is over and in fact the detention order had already
been revoked, the question of validity of the detention order of Tarlok Singh is
in issue because if it is held to be invalid, then no proceedings under SAFEMA
could be taken against the petitioner.

2.

The brief facts are that on 12.5.1977 the said Tarlok Singh was

arrested in view of the recovery of gold from one Ganga Ram. On 1.6.1977 the
said Tarlok Singh was granted bail. Thereafter, on 23.2.1978 the said Tarlok
Singh was detained under the COFEPOSA Act and a detention order was served
upon him. Along with the detention order the grounds of detention was also
given. However, no other documents were given to the detenu (Tarlok Singh).
The said detenu made a representation before the Advisory Board.

But the

same was not accepted and the detention was upheld. The said Tarlok Singh,
being aggrieved by the detention, filed a petition under Article 32 of the
Constitution of India before the Supreme Court on 21.8.1978. Subsequently,
this petition was withdrawn by the said Tarlok Singh on the assurance given by
the respondents that the detention order was being revoked. The detention order
was revoked on 19.9.1978 by the Delhi Administration. Six years later, i.e. on
8.3.1984 a notice under Section 6 (1) of SAFEMA was served upon the
petitioners in respect of the detention of the said Tarlok Singh. The petitioners
filed this writ petition on 6.5.1984. On 17.5.1984, Rule DB was issued limited

WP(C)1295/1984

Page No.2 of 8

to the question of vires of SAFEMA. The petitioners, being aggrieved by the
limited rule being issued, approached the Supreme Court which, by an order
dated 18.1.1993, directed that the petitioner may also challenge the detention
order itself. Thereafter, the matter came up before the Division Bench on
14.3.2005 when it was stated by the learned counsel appearing for the
petitioners that the challenge to the vires of SAFEMA was not being pressed as
the Supreme Court already upheld the validity of SAFEMA. Therefore, the
petition was limited to the question of validity of the detention order. In these
circumstances, the Division Bench directed that the matter be placed before a
Single Bench.

3.

Mr Harjinder Singh, the learned senior counsel appearing on behalf

of the petitioners submits that he challenges the detention order on three points.
The first point taken by him is that the documents relied upon in the grounds of
detention were not supplied with the grounds. The documents which were relied
upon and not supplied, have been referred to in paragraph 5 of the writ petition.
He submits that, in fact, not a single document had been given to the detenu
Tarlok Singh so as to enable him to make an effective representation.

4.

The second point urged by Mr Harjinder Singh was that the show

cause notice issued to Tarlok Singh under the Customs Act, 1962 and the reply
given by the said Tarlok Singh were not placed before the detaining authority

WP(C)1295/1984

Page No.3 of 8

and, therefore, this was also a case of non-application of mind on the part of the
detaining authority. The third point urged by Mr Harjinder Singh was that the
purported confessional statement made by the said Tarlok Singh had been
retracted by him. However, the retraction was not placed before the detaining
authority and, therefore, the detaining authority did not have sufficient material
before it to have made up his mind for detaining Tarlok Singh. He submits that
for all these reasons, the detention order was invalid and was liable to be set
aside.

In support of his contentions Mr Harjinder Singh relied upon

the

judgment of the Supreme Court in S. Gurdip Singh v. Union of India and
Others: AIR 1981 SC 362 (Paragraph 2) and upon a Division Bench decision of
this Court in Ranu Bhandari v. Union of India & Others: 2006 (3) JCC 1501
(Paragraph 39).

5.

Ms Ahlawat appears on behalf of the Government of NCT of Delhi

and submitted that she was unable to locate the detention file but has been able
to examine the file which contains the proceedings leading up to the revocation
order.

She submitted that the revocation order was passed on the basis of

advice of the counsel appearing before the Supreme Court on the ground that
there was delay in issuance of the detention order and that the customs
department, which had initiated the process, had subsequently given a proposal
for withdrawal of the detention.

She also submitted that the revocation order

was passed subsequent to the Lieutenant Governor approving the same.

WP(C)1295/1984

Page No.4 of 8

6.

Ms Barkha Babbar, who appeared on behalf of the respondent Nos.

1 and 3, submitted that the role of the respondent Nos. 1 and 3 would only arise
once the validity of the detention order is determined. In case the detention
order is upheld, the proceedings under SAFEMA would continue and would be
lawful. However, if the detention order is set aside in view of Section 2(2) (b)
(iv) of SAFEMA, the proceedings under the said Act, cannot be continued.

7.

The core question, therefore, is as to whether the detention order

was valid or not. Before I take up that issue, it would be necessary to point out
that the scope of provisions of Section 2(2)(b) of the said Act were considered
by the Supreme Court in the case of Union of India and Others v. Mohanlal
Likumal Punjabi and Others: (2004) 3 SCC 628. In that case also there was a
revocation order passed after a detention order had been issued. The detenu
thereafter had approached the Court for setting aside the proceedings under
SAFEMA on the ground of the revocation order.

The Supreme Court

considered the provisions of Section 2(2) (b) of the said Act in depth and
concluded that although there was a revocation order, since that revocation was
done by the Central Government and was unrelated to the report of the Advisory
Body, it would not fall within the type of revocation orders which are referred to
in the said provision. The Supreme Court, however, considered the fact that
even though the revocation order did not fall within the type of revocation

WP(C)1295/1984

Page No.5 of 8

orders mentioned in 2(2) (b) of the said Act, the order of detention itself could
be challenged in a subsequent writ petition even though an earlier writ petition
had been disposed of as having become infructuous.

In this context, the

Supreme Court held as under:“16.
That brings us to the residual question as
to whether the order of detention could be
challenged subsequent to the disposal of the earlier
writ petition on the ground that it had become
infructuous. According to learned counsel for the
appellants, position has been settled beyond doubt
that it is impermissible in view of what has been
stated in Attorney General Case1. This submission
deserves no serious consideration, being one made in
disregard of the view taken already by this Court.
We find that the effect of the said decision was
considered in the two decisions relied upon by
learned counsel for Respondents 1 and 2. The view
taken in Amritlal Chandmal Jain case2 and
Karimaben K. Bagad case3 does not call for any
further or fresh look or consideration — the same
being not only just and reasonable but quite in
conformity with the basic tenets of rule of law but
commends for our respectful acceptance, as well.
17.
In both these cases, it was held that the
subsequent writ petition is maintainable and it should
rightly be so having regard to the consequential
action taken at any rate under the SAFEMA.
Otherwise it would amount to the Government
concerned being allowed/enabled by their action to
disable and denude the person aggrieved from
questioning the very applicability of the SAFEMA to
him or his properties dehors his other rights to
challenge the same otherwise on merits as well. In
any event, this aspect as to the legality and validity
of the order of detention does not appear to have
been considered and decided on merits by the High
1 (1994) 5 SCC54: 1994 SCC (Cri) 1325
2 (1998) 5 SCC 615 : 1998 SCC (Cri) 1367
3 (1998) 6 SCC 264 : 1998 SCC (Cri) 1445
WP(C)1295/1984

Page No.6 of 8

Court. We, therefore, remit the matter back to the
High Court for fresh adjudication on merits as to the
legality and validity of the orders of detention, for
the purpose of applying the provisions of the
SAFEMA against the respondents or the properties
concerned.”
8.

Apart from the observations of the Supreme Court in the aforesaid

decision, the question of validity of the detention order has been kept open in
view of the orders passed by the Division Bench which had placed the matter for
hearing before a Single Bench on account of the fact that the question of vires
would no longer exist and only the question of validity remained to be
considered. It is in these circumstances that the validity of the detention order is
to be considered.

9.

The main point taken by Mr Harjinder Singh is that the grounds of

detention were not accompanied by the documents on which reliance was placed
and this in itself was sufficient to invalidate the detention order. The Supreme
Court in the case of S. Gurdeep Singh v. Union of India and Others : AIR
1981 SC 362, after referring to earlier decisions in the case of Icchu Devi
Choraria v. Union of India: AIR 1980 SC 1983 and Smt. Shalini Soni v.
Union of India: (1984) 4 SCC 544 made the following observations:“In both these cases, this Court has taken the view that on a
proper construction of Article 22 (5) of the Constitution, the
service of the grounds of detention on the detenu can be
completed only if they are accompanied by the documents or
materials on which the order of detention is based; for then
alone will the detenu be able to make an effective
representation. In other words, if the documents which form the
WP(C)1295/1984

Page No.7 of 8

basis of the orders of detention are not served on the detenu
along with the grounds of detention, in the eye of law there will
be no service of the grounds of detention and that circumstance
would vitiate his detention and make it void ab initio.”
10.

There is no material on record to show that the documents, that

were relied upon, were served on the detenu along with the grounds of detention
and Ms Ahlawat is unable to controvert this fact because the detention file is not
available. This being the case the petitioner's contention would have to be
accepted that the grounds were not accompanied by the documents on which the
detention was based. In view of the aforesaid observations of the Supreme
Court in S. Gurdeep Singh (supra), in such an eventuality, the detention order
would be void ab initio, the reason being that the detenu would not have had a
reasonable opportunity of making a representation against the same. That being
the case, I am of the view that the detention order is bad.

It is set aside as

being void ab initio. In view of the detention order being invalidated, the
proceedings under SAFEMA cannot continue.

Accordingly, the impugned

notice dated 8/9.03.1984 (Annexure E collectively) issued under Section 6(1) of
SAFEMA is also set aside.
This writ petition stands disposed of.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
May 10, 2007
J/SR

WP(C)1295/1984

Page No.8 of 8

