THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Judgment delivered on :19.02.2007
WP(C) No.1101/2007
ALL INDIA CPWD ENGINEERS ASSOCIATION

...Petitioner

- versus UNION OF INDIA & OTHERS

...Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr Rakesh Khanna, Sr. Advocate
with Mr Daleep Kumar Dhayani
For the Respondent/UOI
: Mr Gaurav Duggal

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

YES

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

YES

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

YES

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

The petitioner is the All India C.P.W.D Engineers Association

through its General Secretary, Sh. S. S. Jaiswal.

This petition is directed

against the letter dated 02.02.2007 issued by the Ministry of Urban
Development, Government of India to the petitioner on the subject of reverification of membership of the Association. In the impugned letter, it is
noted that the petitioner association was recognized for an initial period of two
years up to 26.04.2003. It is stated that at the end of the said period the
Association was rendered “unrecognized”. It is further indicated in the letter

WP(C)1101.07

Page No.1 of 7

that the Association, from that date onwards, did not cooperate in a willing and
effective way to provide the necessary credentials to secure recognition under
the Central Civil Services (Recognition of Service Association ) Rules, 1993.
It was, therefore, notified by the said letter that the petitioner Association
remains an independent body and the Government had no further responsibility
to transact with the said body.

2.

The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner submitted

that the question of recognition of service associations is governed by the
Central Civil Services (Recognition of Service Association ) Rules, 1993
(hereinafter referred to as the RSA Rules). It was pointed out that as per Rule
5, the conditions for recognition of service association are prescribed.

The

relevant provision is Rule 5(d)(i), which reads as under:“5.
Conditions
for
recognition
of
Service
Associations. — A Service Association which fulfills the
following conditions may be recognized by the Government,
namely:xxxx

xxxx

xxxx

xxxx

xxxx

(d)(i) The Association represents minimum 35 per cent of
total number of a category of employees provided
that where there is only one Association which
commands more than 35 per cent membership,
another
Association
with
second
highest
membership, although less than 35 per cent may be
recognized if it commands at least 15 per cent
membership;
xxxx
WP(C)1101.07

xxxx

xxxx

xxxx”
Page No.2 of 7

The learned counsel also referred to Rule 6, which deals with conditions subject
to which recognition is continued.

Rule 7 provides for verification of

membership. The said Rule is relevant and, therefore, the same is reproduced
herein below:“7. Verification of Membership. — (1) The Verification of
membership for the purpose of recognition of a Service
Association shall be done by the Check-Off-System in payrolls
at such intervals and in such manner as the Government may by
order prescribe.
(2)
The Government may, at any time, order a special
verification of membership if it is of the opinion, after an
enquiry, that the Service Association does not have the
membership required under sub-clause (i) of Clause (d) of Rule
5.”
Recognition can be withdrawn in terms of the provisions of Rule 8, which reads
as under:
“8. Withdrawal of Recognition. — If, in the opinion of the
Government, a Service Association recognized under these rules
has failed to comply with any of the conditions set out in Rule 5
or Rule 6 or Rule 7, the Government may after giving an
opportunity to the Service Association to present its case,
withdraw the recognition accorded to such Association.”

3.

It was contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that as

per the rules and the instructions issued under the RSA Rules, the question of
verification of membership has to be done by the Ministry/Department
concerned on the basis of information submitted by the concerned Drawing and

WP(C)1101.07

Page No.3 of 7

Disbursement Officer (DDO). For this purpose, he referred to the instructions
dated 02.12.1993, which were issued in terms of the provisions of Rule 7 (1) of
the RSA Rules. Instruction No.2 provides that the details of the consent letter
given by the employees, to be associated with a particular association, are to be
noted in a register maintained by the DDO in the format indicated in AnnexureI thereto.

Instruction No.7 requires the DDO to report to the concerned

authority at such intervals, as may be prescribed by the Ministry/Department,
details with regard to the total number of persons belonging to each of the
service associations. The proforma in which the statement is to be sent is
Annexure-II to the said instructions. The proforma contains the following
columns:Serial No., Category, Total Number of Employees in
that Category, Name of the Association, Membership as
per check-off system and Remarks.
The check-off-system of verification is indicated in the Office Memorandum
dated 10.03.1995. Paragraph 3.3 of the said Memorandum indicates that Rule
7(i) of the RSA Rules require that verification of membership for the purpose
of recognition of a service association through the check-off system shall be
done at such intervals and in such manner as the Government may by order
prescribe. In this connection, it is clarified in paragraph 3.3 of the said Office
Memorandum that the recognition to be granted under the rules through the
check-off system would remain initially valid for two years from the date of

WP(C)1101.07

Page No.4 of 7

grant of such recognition.

4.

By virtue of Office Memorandum dated 11.02.2002 it was further

provided that after the initial two year period of recognition has expired, the
respective Ministries/Departments etc., may draw up a schedule to carry out reverification of membership, wherever necessary. It was further provided that
after such re-verification, the recognition would be for a period of five years
from the date so notified.

5.

After hearing the counsel for the parties, it appears that there was

no difficulty with the recognition granted to the petitioner Association for the
initial period of two years, which expired on 26.04.2003. The next step that
was to be taken, was to be done at the instance of the respondents in terms of
the rules and the Office Memorandum, indicated above. The re-verification of
the membership of the petitioner Association was required to be done by the
respondents on the basis of the material available with them as submitted by the
concerned DDOs in the format prescribed in the said Annexure-II noted above.
The only point of dispute in the present petition is that, according to the learned
counsel for the petitioner, the Association being the second association required
a membership of only 15% and that requirement has been fulfilled inasmuch as,
according to them, the membership is about 22%.

The learned counsel

appearing on behalf of the respondents, however, contended that it was for the
WP(C)1101.07

Page No.5 of 7

petitioner to have submitted the list of members for verification as the
petitioner had done so in the past. Since that had not been fully complied with,
the letter dated 02.02.2007 was issued. According to the learned counsel for
the respondents, they have no difficulty in continuing the recognition of the
petitioner Association in case the requirement of 15% membership, as
stipulated in Rule 5(d)(i) of the RSA Rules, is fulfilled.

6.

From the aforesaid submissions, it appears that the essential issue is

with regard to whose responsibility is it to carry out the verification/reverification. A consideration of the Rules and the Office Memoranda referred
to above, indicate that while it is the responsibility of each member to submit an
application, it is the responsibility of the DDO to take the said application and
deduct subscription fee from such member's salary. Thereafter, the DDO is to
maintain a record of all such applications and deductions and a statement
giving details of each person along with his affiliation

to any particular

association, is to be forwarded by the concerned DDO in the proforma
indicated in the said Annexure-II above. In other words, all the information, as
verified by the DDO, is available with the respondents. In any event, the
information, as per the RSA rules and the Office Memoranda, ought to be
available with the respondent as required under the check-off system. Without
carrying out such re-verification, it was not proper on the part of the
respondents to have issued the impugned letter dated 02.02.2007 and, therefore,
WP(C)1101.07

Page No.6 of 7

the same is liable to be set aside.

7.

In view of the discussion above, this writ petition is disposed of

with the direction that the impugned letter dated 02.02.2007 stands set aside
and that the respondents shall carry out a re-verification under the check-off
system of the membership of the petitioner Association. In case the the reverification reveals that the membership exceeds the minimum stipulated 15%,
then the recognition would be continued as provided under the Rules. In case
the membership is below the stipulated 15%, then the respondents would be
entitled to withdraw the recognition, as provided under the Rules.
This writ petition stands disposed of. No order as to costs.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
February 19, 2007
sr

WP(C)1101.07

Page No.7 of 7

