THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%
+

Judgment delivered on: 12.02.2008
CS (OS) 1706/2007

HERO HONDA MOTORS LIMITED

...

Plaintiff

...

Defendants

- Versus MR ANIL KUMAR GARG & ANOTHER

Advocates who appeared in this case:For the Plaintiff
: Mr Sagar Chandra & Ms Abhilasha Kumbhat
For the Defendants
: Mr Anil Kumar Garg (D-1 in person)
CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
IA No.1858/2008 (U/O 23 Rule 3 Read with Section 151 of CPC)
1.

The plaintiff had filed this suit for alleged infringement of its trade

mark, copyright as well as for passing off and for other reliefs. During the
pendency of the suit, the plaintiff and the defendants have arrived at an
amicable settlement.

The terms of the settlement are set out in this

application. Essentially, the defendants have acknowledged the plaintiffs to
be the proprietors of the trade marks mentioned in paragraph 8 of the plaint
which includes the trade mark 'HERO HONDA' and the HERO HONDA

CS 1706/07

Page No. 1 of 3

stylised logo under class 12 vide Registration No.419115 and 513474
respectively.

2.

The defendants have also acknowledged the plaintiffs to be the

owners of the copyrights in the logo as well as in the packaging of the
HERO HONDA spare parts referred to in paragraph 9 of the plaint. The
defendants have undertaken not to manufacture, sell, advertise, directly or
indirectly deal in any product whatsoever bearing any one or more of the
plaintiff's trade marks as described in paragraph 8 of the plaint as also
utilising any logo or packaging which would be a colourable imitation or
substantial reproduction of the plaintiff's logo and packaging as described in
paragraph 9 of the plaint. The defendants have also undertaken not to do
any other act amounting to passing off the defendants goods as those of the
plaintiffs. The defendants have undertaken to pay a sum of Rs 75,000/- as
part litigation costs incurred by the plaintiff. The said payment has been
made by the defendants, the receipt whereof is acknowledged by the learned
counsel for the plaintiff.

3.

The defendant No.1 is present in person. The defendant No.2 is the

sole proprietorship concern of the defendant No.1. This application has
been signed by Ms Purnima Dogra who is the constituted attorney of the
plaintiff and by Mr Anil Kumar Garg (Defendant No.1) for himself as also
on behalf of his sole proprietorship concern (Defendant No.2).

CS 1706/07

The

Page No. 2 of 3

respective counsel for the parties have also signed this application. The
same be marked as Exhibit C-1. Ms Purnima Dogra and Mr Anil Kumar
Garg have also filed affidavits in support of this application.

4.

I have considered the submissions made by the counsel for the parties

as well as those made by the defendant No.1. The terms of the settlement
arrived at between the parties have also been examined by me and I am
satisfied that the same are lawful. The settlement is taken on record and the
suit is decreed in terms of prayers contained in paragraph 20 (a) (b) and (c)
of the plaint incorporating the terms of the present settlement, as indicated
in this application, as part of the decree. The prayers contained in paragraph
20 (d), (e) and (f) are given up by the plaintiff. The formal decree be drawn
up. Exhibit C-1 shall form part of the said decree.
This application, the suit and all pending applications stand disposed
of.

( BADAR DURREZ AHMED )
JUDGE
February 12, 2008
δυττ

CS 1706/07

Page No. 3 of 3

