THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%
+

Judgment delivered on :19.02.2007
WP (C) 10257/2006

SANJAY KUMAR

…Petitioner
-versus-

ASIA PACIFIC INSTITUTE OF MANAGEMENT & ORS. …Respondents
Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr Sudhanshu Paio with Mr Sandeep Jain
For the Respondent No.1.
: Mr Rakesh Kumar Singh with Mr Dwigesh
Kumar Pandey
For the Respondent No.3/AICTE.
: Mr Jatan Singh

CORAM:HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the judgment ?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J. (ORAL)
1.
This writ petition concerns the cancellation of admission granted to the
petitioner for the PGDBM Programme for the Session 2006-2008 by the
respondent No.1 (Asia Pacific Institute of Management). The petitioner applied
for admission in the said programme and by a letter dated 12.01.2006, he was
informed by the respondent No.1 that, based on his performance in the
admission process of group discussion and personal interview, the Admission
Committee of the respondent No.1 had approved his name for admission to the

WP (C) No10257//2006

Page No.1 of 4

said PGDBM Programme. The petitioner was required to submit a fee of
Rs.70,000/-, including Rs.5,000/- refundable security by 28.01.2006, which the
petitioner did. However, by a letter dated 24.05.2006, the respondent No.1
informed the petitioner that the Admission Committee for the PGDBM
Programme had noticed that the petitioner did not meet the minimum cut off
percentage criteria in graduation of 50% and above. In view of this, it was
indicated that the respondent No.1 was unable to offer the petitioner a seat in the
PGDBM Programme. The amount of Rs.70,000/- was refunded to the petitioner
by a demand draft dated 19.05.2006.

2.

The petitioner's case is that the respondent No.1 nowhere specified the

minimum cut off percentage criteria of 50% as indicated in the letter dated
24.05.2006. And that, in any event, the petitioner had been granted admission
and could not have been denied the seat.

3.

The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent No.1 referred

to the prospectus issued by them for the PGDBM Programme. He indicated that
the eligibility and selection process was clearly spelt out.

Insofar as the

selection process was concerned, a written test was required. A candidate was
also to qualify in the group discussion and the personal interview. It was
provided in the prospectus that the candidates who qualify in the written test
would be called for a group discussion and personal interview.
WP (C) No10257//2006

The final

Page No.2 of 4

selection would be based on the candidate's overall performance in the written
test, group discussion, personal interview and past academic record. It was
contended by the learned counsel for the respondent No.1 that the petitioner's
“past academic record” was not upto the standards insofar as the marks obtained
by him at the stage of graduation were concerned.

4.

In rejoinder, the learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the

expression “past academic record” has not been specified and it is nowhere
indicated in the prospectus that the requirement of 50% marks at the time of
graduation was a minimum stipulation.

Therefore, after having granted

admission, the petitioner's admission could not be cancelled. On a pointed
question being asked to the learned counsel for the petitioner, he informed that
the petitioner is now not interested in pursing the PGDBM Programme for the
next academic year as he is preparing for his Civil Services Examinations. He,
however, says that the petitioner was put to great financial strain and mental
agony and that the respondent No.1 cannot be permitted to grant and / or deny
admission on an arbitrary basis without clearly specifying the minimum
requirement.

5.

With reference to the last submission made by the learned counsel for the

petitioner, the learned counsel for the respondent No.3 [AICTE] submits that it
is the respondent No.3 which is responsible for ensuring that all the technical
WP (C) No10257//2006

Page No.3 of 4

institutions maintain standards which are transparent for admission and fee
norms, etc.

It was submitted by him that if a complaint had reached the

respondent No.3, they would have investigated the same to ascertain as to
whether the stipulations contained in the prospectus were in accordance with the
regulations / directions given by the respondent No.3 from time to time.

6.

In view of the discussion above, I think that it would be appropriate if

this petition is treated as a complaint by the respondent No.3 and the same is
processed immediately and action is taken, if necessary. This exercise should be
concluded within two months from today. A report be submitted to this court on
the conclusion of this exercise with a copy to the petitioner. The learned
counsel for the respondent No.1 also submits that they shall fully comply with
any reasonable direction being given by the respondent No.3 with regard to the
admission procedure for the future. The respondent No.1 shall also pay costs of
Rs.10,000/- to the petitioner.
This writ petition stands disposed of.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
( JUDGE )
February 19, 2007
sd

WP (C) No10257//2006

Page No.4 of 4

