THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Judgment delivered on : 11.05.2007
WP(C) No.11131/2005
M/S ENGINEERING & INDUSTRIAL CORP

...Petitioner

- versus UNION OF INDIA & OTHERS

...Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
:
For the Respondent/UOI :

Mr Vijay Kishan with Mr Vikram Jetly
Mr Sanjay Katyal

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

The petitioner is aggrieved by the demand raised for damages

for unauthorized construction in terms of the letter dated 15.03.2005
issued by the Land and Development Officer. The petitioner had applied
for conversion of property No. 8/29, Industrial Area, Kirti Nagar, New
Delhi from leasehold to freehold under the conversion policy notified by
the Government of India, Ministry of Urban Development and Poverty
Alleviation, Land and Development Office in 2003. The respondent
WP(C)11131/2005

Page No.1 of 10

L&DO is agreeable to convert the property from leasehold to freehold
but on the condition that the petitioner pays damages for unauthorized
construction from 07.08.1982 to 14.07.2005, the total of which amounts
to roughly Rs.88,91,932/-. The said letter dated 15.03.2005 also has
reference to nominal ground rent and 10% interest on the ground rent
from 15.07.1982 till date. The petitioner is agreeable to pay the same
and does not dispute these payments. The only dispute is with regard to
damages for unauthorized construction.

2.

It has been contended on behalf of the petitioner that the

relationship between the petitioner and the respondent is governed by the
lease deed in favour of the petitioner's predecessor-in-interest, which
was made on 19.10.1966.

He submits that the lease deed has been

admitted by the respondent to be a government grant in paragraph 2 of
the counter-affidavit filed on behalf of the respondents. He submits that
the lease being a government grant will have to be considered on its own
tenor irrespective of any other provisions including statutory provisions.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioner there is no provision
in the lease for raising any demand for damages for unauthorized
construction. Therefore, according to him, the demand raised in the

WP(C)11131/2005

Page No.2 of 10

letter dated 15.03.2005 cannot be sustained and this Court ought to strike
it down.

3.

He further submitted that the petitioner's case is covered by

the decision of this Court in the case of Jor Bagh Association (Regd.) &
Others v. Union of India & Others: 112 (2004) DLT 690 wherein this
very issue of damages for unauthorized construction under a government
grant was raised. This Court had observed in the said decision that once
it is recognized that a particular lease is a grant contemplated under the
Government Grants Act, 1895 then, it shall take effect according to its
tenor and any contrary statutory provision or rule of law will have no
effect.

In other words, the entire relationship between the grantor and

the grantee will be governed by the terms of the grant itself. No other
document or statutory provision is required to be looked into. The Court
then examined the provisions of Clause 2(2) of the lease involved in that
case which is pari materia to the clause 1 (1) of the present case. After
examining the said clause, this Court observed that charging of damages
for temporary regularization of alleged unauthorized construction was
not provided for in the lease in question.

The same is the position in

the present case.

WP(C)11131/2005

Page No.3 of 10

4.

The learned counsel for the petitioner also referred to a

decision, in the same light, of an earlier Single Bench of this Court in the
case of Sunil Vasudev etc. v. DDA :1988 Rajdhani Law Reporter 23.
Paragraph 11 of the said decision reads as under:“11.
Let us now revert to clause (vii) which is
reproduced above and a perusal thereof shows that the said
clause does not visualise charging of any fee, levy, cess or
payment in the matter of grant of consent by the DDA and
consequently orders of the DDA to charge fee, levy or
payment cannot be held as valid and are rather bad in law. It
may be that for cogent reasons it is open to the DDA in the
circumstances to refuse to grant its consent, but once it has
decided and agreed to grant the consent it cannot make it
subject o the condition of payment of any levy, charge or tax.
The amount charged in the instant case would partake as levy
or transfer cess for the grant of consent which cannot be held
to be valid in the circumstances and the language of the lease
deed Ex.P.1. Learned counsel for the DDA has urged that the
DDA has evolved a policy of charging such an amount as and
when such consent is granted but such policy cannot alter the
provisions of Section 3 of the Government Grants Act so as
to enable the DDA to charge the amount. The charge in the
instant case partakes as sort of tax of the nature as is
visualised by provisions of Section 45 of the Income-tax Act,
1961 on capital gains which I am afraid the DDA cannot do
except under the authority of law. The learned counsel for the
DDA has not been able to draw my attention to any such
power which is vested in the DDA by law to enable it to
charge the amounts as has been done in the instant case. The
DDA cannot withhold the consent unreasonably and likewise
no unreasonable condition can be imposed while granting the
consent. It has been submitted by the learned counsel for the
plaintiff that it was for this very reason that the DDA has in all
post 1957 leases inserted a specific stipulation for charging of
50 per cent on unearned increase in the event of transfer.”

WP(C)11131/2005

Page No.4 of 10

The learned counsel also referred to a decision of the Division Bench of this
Court in the case of DMA Nursing Home & Medical Establishment Forum
v. Union of India & Others: 2001 V AD (Delhi) 1093 to indicate that any
compulsory exaction of money would amount to taxation and there can be no
taxation except by authority of law as provided in Article 265 of the
Constitution.

He submits that since there is no provision for raising any

demand for damages for unauthorized construction, the demand that is sought
to be raised by the respondent would amount to compulsory exaction which
would be in the nature of a tax for which the respondents have no authority in
law and would be hit by Article 265 of the Constitution. Finally, the learned
counsel for the petitioner submitted that since the matter stood entirely covered
by the decision in the case of Jor Bagh Association (supra), he is not raising
other issues, at this juncture.

5.

The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents made a

clever argument by referring to the conversion brochure.

He referred to

paragraphs 12 and 13 of the brochure which read as under:“12.

WHETHER CONVERSION WILL BE GRANTED
EVEN
IF
THERE
IS
UNAUTHORISED
CONSTRUCTION?
Conversion will be granted to the leasehold properties
even if there is unauthorised construction, subject to
payment of damages charges, whether earlier demanded
or not. However the applicant will be liable for action
under Municipal Bye-Laws. The conversion to freehold

WP(C)11131/2005

Page No.5 of 10

in the presence of misuse/ unauthorised construction does
not act as a waiver of any action which is liable to be
taken under the building bye-laws by the Local Body.
13.

IF
PAST
MISUSE
AND
UNAUTHORISED
CONSTRUCTION WERE TAKEN COGNIZANCE OF
BY THE LESSOR HOW THESE CASES WILL BE
HANDLED?
In respect of these properties where any amount earlier
claimed by the lessor and not paid by the lessees will
have to be paid before the application for conversion can
be considered. In respect of those properties where
misuse and/ or unauthorised construction exists,
conversion may be allowed only after recovering the
misuse charges and/ or damages, irrespective of whether
earlier demanded or not.”

With reference to the above paragraphs, the learned counsel submitted that the
present case was distinguishable from the case of Jor Bagh Association
(supra). He submitted that in the latter case the question of conversion was not
in issue whereas in the present case the issue is of conversion. He submitted
that in paragraph 12 it has been provided that conversion would be granted to
leasehold properties even if there is unauthorized construction subject to
payment of damages / charges whether earlier demanded or not. Therefore,
according to the learned counsel, the petitioner had applied for conversion with
open eyes being aware of the fact that the conversion policy itself required that
damages would have to be paid for unauthorized construction even if not
demanded earlier. According to the learned counsel for the respondents the
case of Jor Bagh Association (supra) applies to situations where demands had
been raised unilaterally whereas in the present case it was a bilateral agreement
WP(C)11131/2005

Page No.6 of 10

between the petitioner and the respondents on the basis of an invitation as
indicated in the brochure. The petitioner accepted the invitation to offer and
made its offer for converting its property from leasehold to freehold and,
therefore, it ought to be governed by all the clauses of conversion brochure
itself.

6.

The learned counsel for the respondents also relied upon a decision

of the Supreme Court in the case of Shangrila Food Products Ltd and
Another v. Life Insurance Corporation of India and Another: (1996) 5 SCC
54 to submit that the question of damages would have to be gone into because
the petitioner had enjoyed the fruits of unauthorized construction and there
must be some penalty suffered by petitioner on that count. He also referred to
paragraph 11 of the said decision which says that those who seek equity must
bow to equity. The learned counsel for the respondent also referred to a
decision of a learned Single Judge of this Court in the case of Bal Kishan
Chhabra and Others v. Union of India: 2006 III AD (DELHI) 182.

He,

particularly, referred to the observation made in paragraph 10 that if there is
any inconsistency between the conversion policy and the lease, the policy
would override the terms of the lease.

7.

I have considered the arguments advanced by the learned counsel

for the parties and at the outset it may be said that I am in agreement with the
WP(C)11131/2005

Page No.7 of 10

submissions made by the learned counsel for the petitioner that this case is
entirely covered by the decision in the case of Jor Bagh Association (supra).
The argument advanced by the learned counsel for the respondent, though
ingenious, cannot be accepted. The reason is that paragraph 12 of the brochure
refers to damages and charges for unauthorized construction “whether earlier
demanded or not”.

This has reference to a period prior to the date of

conversion. In other words, to a period covered entirely by the lease. Any
payments that have to be made would have to fall within the terms of the lease.
The lease itself does not provide for any collection of such damages or charges
for unauthorized construction. Therefore the inclusion of this provision in
paragraph 12 of the brochure relates to the lease and is not an independent
charge levied by the respondents under the conversion policy. It must be noted
that till the property is converted from leasehold to freehold, the relationship
between the petitioner and the respondent is governed by the lease.

The

moment it is converted from leasehold to freehold the lease gets extinguished
and the relationship of lessor and lessee comes to an end. The petitioner
becomes the full owner of the property and the lessor ceases to have any
control or ownership rights over the same. The damages and charges that are
mentioned in paragraph 12 and 13 are entirely referable to the period prior to
the conversion, that is, to the period covered during the subsistence of the
lease and would stand or fall according to the tenor of the lease. Since in the
case of Jor Bagh Association (supra) it has been held that damages for
WP(C)11131/2005

Page No.8 of 10

unauthorized construction which are not permitted by the leases and which are
government grants, cannot be recovered by the respondents, in this case also I
feel that the demand raised by the respondents cannot stand. The decision
referred to by the learned counsel for the respondents have no application to the
facts of the present case. In the case of Shangrila Food Products Ltd. (supra),
the case was one under the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized
Occupants) Act, 1971 and was not a case where the terms of a government
grant were in question. Similarly, in the case of Bal Kishan Chhabra (supra),
the consideration of a government grant was not in issue and the Court did not
advert to any provisions of the Government Grants Act. The observation that
was referred to by the learned counsel for the respondents was not the ratio of
the decision. In any event, the question with regard to government grants has
been settled in the Supreme Court decisions which have been noted in the case
of Jor Bagh Association (supra). For instance, in Hajee S.V.M. Mohamed
Jamaludeen Bros & Co. v. Govt of T.N.: 1997 (3) SCC 466, the Supreme
Court, with reference to Section 3 of the Government Grants Act, 1895
observed as follows:“Section 3 places the terms of such grant beyond the reach of
any restrictive provision contained in any enacted law or
even the equitable principles of justice, equity and good
conscience adumbrated by common law if such principles
are inconsistent with such terms.”
8.

Before parting with this case, it must be noted that the petitioner

had paid the entire amount of purported damages demanded by the
WP(C)11131/2005

Page No.9 of 10

respondents, under protest, sometime in June, 2005. The learned counsel for
the petitioner submitted that the said amount be refunded to the petitioner.

9.

In view of the foregoing discussion, this writ petition is liable to

succeed. The demand for damages for unauthorized construction as raised in
the letter dated 15.03.2005 stands quashed. The petitioner would be liable to
pay the amount for ground rent and 10% interest thereon as charged in the said
letter. The balance amount shall be refunded to the petitioner. The said
amount be refunded within six weeks to the petitioner.
This writ petition stands disposed of. No costs.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
May 11, 2007
SR

WP(C)11131/2005

Page No.10 of 10

