THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on:17.04.2007

+

CRL. REV. P. 276/2006

COGENT SILVER FIBER PTE LTD.

... Petitioner

- versus STATE

... Respondent

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr K.K. Sud, Sr Advocate with Mr Vijay Aggarwal
For the Respondent/State
: Mr V.K. Malik

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ?

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J
1.

The petitioner is aggrieved by the order dated 05.04.2006 passed by

the learned Metropolitan Magistrate. By the impugned order, the petitioner's
application for a direction/ order for investigation under Section 156(3) of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as the “Code”) was
dismissed in the following words:“In my considered opinion, the dispute between the parties
is purely of civil nature and it does not disclose commission
of any offence under the Penal Code for which either
directions under Section 156(3) Cr. P. C. can be passed or
cognizance u/s 190 (1) (a) Cr. P.C. can be taken to proceed
with the complaint under Section 200 Cr. P. C. Further
proceeding in the matter would only lead to wastage of
CRLREVP 276/06

Page No.1 of 11

valuable judicial time. The petition as well as complaint are
dismissed. File be consigned to Record Room.”
2.

The petitioner had made the application under Section 156(3) of the

Code because the complaint filed by the petitioner before the Police Station
Malviya Nagar, was not being registered as an FIR and the police was not
investigating

into

the

purported

offences

under

Section

406/

420/467/468/471/506/120 B IPC. A copy of the said complaint has been placed
on record and the essential features of the complain are as follows:“(a)

It is alleged that a Memorandum of Understanding
(MOU) was entered into between the petitioner
(Cogent Silver Fiber Pte. Ltd.) and Noble Fiber
Technologies Inc. (hereinafter referred to as “Noble
Fiber Technologies”), which is a company
incorporated in U. S. A. The said purported MOU
was signed allegedly by one Mr. N. S. Prasad, who is
alleged to be the country manager in India of Noble
Fiber Technologies.

(b)

It is alleged that under the MOU, the petitioner was
to be appointed as the sole and exclusive agent/
dealer for India in respect of the products of Noble
Fiber Technologies marketed under the brand name
“X-Static”.

(c)

It is also alleged in the complaint that the petitioner,
pursuant to the signing of the said MOU, set up the
entire infrastructure and did whatever was required
of it under the said MOU. In this connection, it is
alleged that the petitioner spent a sum of Rs.2.9
crores.

(d)

It is alleged in the complaint that Noble Fiber
Technologies resiled from / disowned the MOU on
the ground that the same was not signed by an
authorized signatory.

CRLREVP 276/06

Page No.2 of 11

(e)

3.

In this background, the petitioner contends that
Noble Fiber Technologies, its President, Vice
President and other executives including the said Mr
N. S. Prasad were guilty of cheating, breach of trust,
forgery, criminal intimidation etc. apart from breach
of contractual obligations.”
Mr K. K. Sud, the learned senior counsel, who appeared on behalf

of the petitioner submitted that the accused persons need not be made parties
and no notice would be necessary because the case is still at the pre-cognizance
stage. On merits, Mr Sud contended that the learned Metropolitan Magistrate
has erred in holding that the matter was purely of a civil nature. He placed
reliance on two Supreme Court decisions in the case of M/s Medchl Chemicals
& Pharma Pvt. Ltd. v. M/s Biological E. Ltd. & Ors.: 2000 Crl. L.J 1487 and
Rajesh Bajaj v. NCT of Delhi: 1999 Crl. L.J. 1833. He also submitted that at
the stage of taking cognizance, the Magistrate is not required to sift the
evidence and the material on record in great detail and that the Magistrate is
only required to see whether the facts, as stated in the complaint, disclose an
offence or not. If an offence is disclosed, then the Magistrate ought to issue the
direction under Section 156 (3) of the Code.

4.

The learned counsel for the State was also heard. He supported the

impugned order and submitted that the case is entirely of a civil nature and for
which civil proceedings are admittedly underway between the parties, as
indicated in paragraph 18 of the complaint itself. He further submitted that the

CRLREVP 276/06

Page No.3 of 11

complaint does not disclose the commission of any offence even if the
statements made therein are taken at face value.

5.

It is clear that disputes between parties may be either purely civil

disputes or purely criminal in nature There may also be disputes which are of a
mixed or hybrid kind involving both civil disputes and criminal offences.

In

this connection, the Supreme Court in Indian Oil Corporation v. NEPC India
Ltd.: (2006) 6 SCC 736 observed as under:“(v) A given set of facts may make out : (a) purely a civil
wrong; or (b) purely a criminal offence; or (c) a civil wrong
as also a criminal offence. A commercial transaction or a
contractual dispute, apart from furnishing a cause of action
for seeking remedy in civil law, may also involve a criminal
offence. As the nature and scope of a civil proceeding are
different from a criminal proceeding, the mere fact that a
complaint relates to a commercial transaction or breach of
contract, for which a civil remedy is available or has been
availed, is not by itself a ground to quash the criminal
proceedings. The test is whether the allegation in the
complaint disclose a criminal offence or not.”
Thus, it is clear that even a commercial transaction or a contractual dispute may
involve a criminal offence. Merely because a complaint relates to a commercial
transaction or a breach of contract, it cannot be pushed aside by a criminal court
and the test that is to be employed is whether the allegations in the complaint
disclose a criminal offence or not. In the impugned order, I find that the
learned Metropolitan Magistrate has come to the opinion that the dispute
between the parties is purely of a civil nature and it does not disclose the
CRLREVP 276/06

Page No.4 of 11

commission of any offence under the Indian Penal Code. It is not as if the
learned Metropolitan Magistrate had merely, on the basis that a commercial
transaction or a contractual dispute was involved, dismissed the application of
the petitioner. He also came to the conclusion that the complaint did not
disclose the commission of any offence under the Indian Penal Code. It is, of
course, another matter that the learned Metropolitan Magistrate has not gone
into detail or give elaborate reasons for arriving at this conclusion. The present
petition would, perhaps, have been obviated had the learned Metropolitan
Magistrate give his reasons, even briefly.

6.

The offence alleged to have been committed in the present case

could be grouped into four categories.

First is the offence of cheating

punishable under Section 420 IPC. The second being of criminal breach of
trust, for which Section 406 IPC has been invoked.

The third relates to

offences of forgery etc., for which the petitioner has referred to Sections 467,
468 and 471 IPC. The fourth group relates to Section 506 IPC for criminal
intimidation and 120 B for conspiracy.

7.

Insofar as the offence punishable under Section 420 IPC is

concerned, it involves the offence of cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery
of property. Section 420 IPC reads as under:-

CRLREVP 276/06

Page No.5 of 11

“420. Cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of
property
Whoever cheats and thereby dishonestly induces the person
deceived any property to any person, or to make, alter or
destroy the whole or any part of a valuable security, or
anything which is signed or sealed, and which is capable of
being converted into a valuable security, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.”
Section 420 requires not only cheating but also delivery of property or the
making, alteration or destruction of a valuable security or anything which is
signed or sealed and which is capable of being converted into a valuable
security. Therefore, before an offence under Section 420 IPC is made out it
must also be an offence under Section 415 IPC. In G. V. Rao v. L. H. V
Prasad: (2000) 3 SCC 693, the Supreme Court held :“This part speaks of intentional deception which must be
intended not only to induce the person deceived to do or omit to
do something but also to cause damage or harm to that person in
body, mind, reputation or property. The intentional deception
presupposes the existence of a dominant motive of the person
making the inducement. Such inducement should have led the
person deceived or induced to do or omit to do anything which he
would not have done or omitted to do if he were not deceived.
The further requirement is that such act or omission should have
caused damage or harm to body, mind, reputation or property.”
It has to be determined as to whether the alleged breach of contract or breach of
an obligation resembling a contract would amount to cheating in the context of
the present case. The Supreme Court in Hridaya Ranjan Prasad Verma v.
State of Bihar: (2000) 4 SCC 168 held:-

CRLREVP 276/06

Page No.6 of 11

“In determining the question it has to be kept in mind that the
distinction between mere breach of contract and the offence of
cheating is a fine one. It depends upon the intention of the
accused at the time of inducement which may be judged by his
subsequent conduct but for this subsequent conduct is not the
sole test. Mere breach of contract cannot give rise to criminal
prosecution for cheating unless fraudulent or dishonest
intention is shown right at the beginning of the transaction that
is the time when the offence is said to have been committed.
Therefore it is the intention which is the gist of the offence.
To hold a person guilty of cheating it is necessary to show that
he had fraudulent or dishonest intention at the time of making
the promise. From his mere failure to keep up promise
subsequently such a culpable intention right at the beginning,
that is, when he made the promise cannot be presumed.”
8.

It must be noted that in M/s Medchl Chemicals (supra) (a decision

cited by Mr Sud) it is stated that it is anathema to suppose that when a civil
remedy is available a criminal prosecution is completely barred.

There is no

dispute with this proposition and it has already been mentioned above with
reference to the Supreme Court decision in Indian Oil Corporation (supra) that
a civil dispute may also have elements of a criminal offence. But that has to be
examined on the basis of the allegations made in the complaint. In M/s Medchl
Chemicals (supra) itself, the Supreme Court observed with regard to the
offences, inter alia, under Section 420 IPC as under:“In order to attract the provisions of Sections 418 and 420 the
guilty intent, at the time of making the promise is a
requirement and an essential ingredient thereto and subsequent
failure to fulfill the promise by itself would not attract the
provisions of Section 418 or Section 420. Mens rea is one of
the essential ingredients of the offence of cheating under
Section 420. As a matter of fact Illustration (g) to Section 415
makes the position clear enough to indicate that mere failure
CRLREVP 276/06

Page No.7 of 11

to deliver in breach of an agreement would not amount to
cheating but is liable only to a civil action for breach of
contract.”
The observations of the Supreme Court in Rajesh Bajaj (supra), another case
relied upon by Mr Sud, does not detract from the position indicated above. In
that case, the Court held:“The crux of the postulate is the intention of the person who
induces the victim of his representation and not the nature of
the transaction which would become decisive in discerning
whether there was commission of offence or not. The
complainant has stated in the body of the complaint that he
was induced to believe that the respondent would honour
payment on receipt of invoices, and that the complainant
realised later that the intentions of the respondent were not
clear. He also mentioned that the respondent after receiving
the goods had sold them to others and still he did not pay the
money. Such averments would prima facie make out a case for
investigation by the authorities.”
9.

The decisions cited by Mr Sud do not detract from the position that

for an offence under Section 420 IPC, there must not only be an intention to
cheat from the inception but there must also be delivery of property. This has
to be discerned from the substance of the complaint and merely because the
petitioner / complainant uses expressions which include words such as
“deceive” and “cheating” in the complaint would not entail that the commission
of such an offence was made out. In this connection, the Supreme Court in
Anil Mahajan v. Bhor Industries Ltd. : (2005) 10 SCC 228 observed as under:
“The substance of the complaint is to be seen. Mere use of the
expression “cheating” in the complaint is of no consequence.
CRLREVP 276/06

Page No.8 of 11

Except mention of the words “deceive” and “cheat” in the
complaint filed before the Magistrate and “cheating” in the
complaint filed before the police, there is no averment about the
deceit, cheating or fraudulent intention of the accused at the time
of entering into MOU wherefrom it can be inferred that the
accused had the intention to deceive the complainant to pay.”
Considering the substance of the complaint, in the light of the Supreme Court
decisions referred to above, I find that the offence punishable under Section
420 IPC is not made out. The initial intentment of cheating is not discernible.
Moreover, there is no delivery of property alleged.

10.

With regard to the allegation qua criminal breach of trust, it is

pertinent to note that the offence punishable under Section 406 IPC has to
involve a criminal breach of trust which is defined in Section 405 IPC. In
Indian Oil Corporation (supra), the Supreme Court held as under:“22.
A careful reading of the section shows that a
criminal breach of trust involves the following ingredients:
(a) a person should have been entrusted with property, or
entrusted with dominion over property; (b) that person
should dishonestly misappropriate or convert to his own use
that property, or dishonestly use or dispose of that property
or wilfully suffer any other person to do so; (c) that such
misappropriation, conversion, use or disposal should be in
violation of any direction of law prescribing the mode in
which such trust is to be discharged, or of any legal contract
which the person has made, touching the discharge of such
trust.
The following are examples (which include the
illustrations under Section 405) where there is
“entrustment”:
(i)

An “executor” of a will, with reference to the estate of
the deceased bequeathed to legatees.

CRLREVP 276/06

Page No.9 of 11

(ii)

A “guardian” with reference to a property of a minor or
person of unsound mind.

(iii)

A “trustee” holding a property in trust, with reference to
the beneficiary.

(iv)

A “warehouse keeper” with reference to the goods
stored by a depositor.

(v)

A carrier with reference to goods entrusted for transport
belonging to the consignor/ consignee.

(vi)

A servant or agent with reference to the property of the
master or principal.

(vii)

A pledgee with reference to the goods pledged by the
owner / borrower.

(viii) A debtor, with reference to a property held in trust on
behalf of the creditor in whose favour he has executed a
deed of pledge-cum-trust. (Under such a deed, the
owner pledges his movable property, generally vehicle/
machinery to the creditor, thereby delivering possession
of the movable property to the creditor and the creditor
in turn delivers back the pledged movable property to
the debtor, to be held in trust and operated by the
debtor.)”
Thus, it is clear that unless there is entrustment with property or entrustment
with dominion over property, there can be no criminal breach of trust. The
complaint does not disclose any such entrustment of property or entrustment
with dominion over property. Therefore, offence punishable under Section 406
IPC is also not made out.

CRLREVP 276/06

Page No.10 of 11

11.

With regard to the third genre of offences falling under Sections

467, 468 and 471 IPC also, I find that the complaint does not disclose any such
offence. There is no element of forgery. The only averment made in the
complaint is that the said Mr N. S. Prasad had allegedly signed the purported
MOU on behalf of Noble Fiber Technologies, when he was not authorized to
do so.

This, to my mind, does not constitute offences categorized under

Sections 467, 468 and 471 IPC. With regard to criminal intimidation and
conspiracy, there are no averments setting out the ingredients of these offences.

12.

In view of the foregoing discussion, the conclusion arrived at by

the learned Metropolitan Magistrate that the dispute between the parties is
purely of civil nature and the complaint does not disclose the commission of
any offence under the Indian Penal Code, does not warrant any interference.
The revision petition is dismissed.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
( JUDGE )
April 17, 2007
SR

CRLREVP 276/06

Page No.11 of 11

