THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Judgment delivered on :12.03.2007
WP(C) No.4089/2003
SMA CO-OP. INDUSTRIAL ESTATE LTD. & ANOTHER ...Petitioners
- versus GOVERNMENT OF N.C.T. OF DELHI & OTHERS

...Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioners
: Mr Shashi Bhushan
For the Respondent/DJB
: Ms Shobhna Takiar
For the Respondent/DSIDC : Ms Renuka Arora

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

By an order dated 01.08.2003, a direction had been given to carry

out a joint inspection for the purposes of ascertaining the true position with
regard to the contamination of drinking water in the S.M.A. Industrial Estate.
On that date, the learned counsel for the petitioner had placed a letter dated
18.07.2003, which had been issued by the Executive Engineer and which
indicated that the work of laying of the Effluent Treatment Plant (ETP) for the

WP(C)8076-78/2003

Page No.1 of 4

SMA Industrial Estate had been completed and that the water lines damaged
during the execution of the work had been repaired and that the factory owners
were getting clean drinking water. Since this fact was disputed by the learned
counsel for the petitioner, the above joint inspection was directed to be carried
out. Thereafter, various proceedings took place and culminated in the final
report of inspection which was filed alongwith the affidavit of the Chairman of
the Inspecting Committee sometime in September, 2006.

The concluding

portion of the Inspection Report reads as under:“Conclusion & Recommendation
From the above and the record submitted, it is evident
that the water coming in the society's premises was found to be
contaminated. The water supply lines have been laid unerground
and as such during inspection it was not possible to find/judge the
location at which the sewage or industrial waste is finding its way
into the water supply system. A thorough checking of the whole
system is required to be done to ascertain the exact location. The
water supply system of the area was laid way back in 1997 (as
intimated by the society members) and there may be possibility of
leakage through joints also.
The officers of Delhi Jal Board contend that the water
supply system inside the SMA Cooperative Industrial Estate was
neither laid by them nor they have been maintaining the same as
these have not been handed over to them till date. They have only
provided a bulk water connection near KDR Showroom on G.T.
Road and at that point the quality of water is satisfactory and the
same is being checked regularly. Thus the officers of Delhi Jal
Board are of the view that they are not responsible for
contamination of water taking place in the society beyond the bulk
connection.
The matter is however, of grave concern and is
required to be attended to on priority to avoid any untoward
incident. It is, therefore, suggested that the water supply lines of
the SMA Society may be handed over by the society to Delhi Jal
WP(C)8076-78/2003

Page No.2 of 4

Board for maintenance purposes so that it becomes the wholesole
responsibility of Delhi Jal Board to make available the clean water
to the factories / societies.
The report is submitted for kind consideration.
DIRECTOR (DEMS)
Chairman of Inspection Team”
2.

The learned counsel for the petitioner drew my attention to a letter

dated 23.07.2002 written by the SMA Manufacturers' Welfare Association to
the Executive Engineer (Water), Delhi Jal Board. In this letter, it was notified
to the Jal Board for the first time that while laying down the sewer lines in the
SMA Industrial Estate for the purposes of the CET Plant, damage to the water
lines was done as a result of which polluted water was seeping into the drinking
water pipe lines.

The Association requested the Delhi Jal Board to take

immediate action for replacing the lines which were damaged.

3.

In response, the Delhi Jal Board told the SMA Manufacturer's

Welfare Association that the water line opposite C-10, SMA Industrial Estate
was broken and a lot of water was going waste and that the same should be
repaired at the earliest.

4.

The aforesaid facts clearly indicate that while the factory owners in

the SMA Industrial Estate are blaming the Delhi Jal Board for the
contamination of the drinking water, the Delhi Jal Board is pointing fingers at
the members of the Association for the brakage in the water lines. The fact of
WP(C)8076-78/2003

Page No.3 of 4

the matter is that the drinking water is contaminated as indicated in the report
mentioned above. The water is contaminated because there is a leakage in the
water pipe lines as well as there is a leakage in the sewage system and the
effluent treatment system. It is, therefore, clear that both the systems require
immediate attention and repair. The sewage system is under the control of the
Delhi Jal Board. The Delhi Jal Board shall carry out an immediate inspection
and repair of the sewage system. If it finds that there is any fault with the water
pipe lines, which had been laid by the petitioner society, then it shall point out
the exact points where the damage has occurred and repair has to be made. On
the pointing out of the Delhi Jal Board, the petitioner shall carry out the repairs
in the water pipe lines so that the ultimate result of providing clear drinking
water is achieved. Both these activities are to be concluded within eight weeks.
On completion of these works, if any, a joint report shall be submitted to this
Court on behalf of the Delhi Jal Board as well as the petitioners.
This writ petition stands disposed of.
BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
March 12, 2007
δυττ

WP(C)8076-78/2003

Page No.4 of 4

