THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 17.01.2008

+

OMP. No. 385/2007

M/S PARAGON CONSTRUCTIONS(INDIA)Pvt Ltd

...Petitioner.

- versus UNION OF INDIA & ANOTHER

...Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr Sandeep Sharma.
For the Respondent No.1 : Ms Reeta Kaul.

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ? Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J(ORAL)
1.

This is a petition under Section 34 of the Arbitration and

Conciliation Act, 1996 whereby the award made by the sole arbitrator
(Mr K.K. Verma) on 19.05.2007 has been challenged.

The learned

counsel for the petitioner submitted that the petitioner had preferred two
claims as well as the claim for interest in respect thereof. The learned

OMP 385/2007

Page No.1 of 8

arbitrator has denied the claims of the petitioner and has passed a nil
award.

2.

The arbitration was in respect of disputes which had arisen in

respect of the expansion of SGM Hospital Mangolpuri by adding a 150bedded maternity and child block, a 26-bedded emergency ward block
and ancillary facilities. The petitioner was to undertake the building
works and internal services including internal electrical works by virtue
of the agreement No.41/EE/PWD-26/2003-04.

The initial period

contemplated for completion of the work was 24 months. The date of
commencement, as per the agreement, was 19.08.2003. Consequently,
the completion of the work was contemplated by 18.08.2005. The work,
however, was actually completed on 20.04.2006. Claim No.1 was for a
sum of Rs 30,64,000/- on account of escalation attributable to the delay
on the part of the respondent and or its agencies. The finding of the
learned arbitrator was :
“Claimants were able to substantiate their contention that
but for the delay attributable to the other agencies of
respondents, they were well equipped to complete the
work before the stipulated date of completion of
18.08.2005.”

OMP 385/2007

Page No.2 of 8

Despite this finding, the learned arbitrator has not awarded any amount
in respect of the claim by construing the provisions of clause 10CC, as
modified, the relevant portion of which reads as under :
“If the prices of material.............and/or wages of labour
required for execution of the work increase, the
contractor shall be compensated for such increase as per
provisions detailed below and the amount of the contract
shall accordingly be varied subject to the condition that
such compensation for escalation in prices shall be
payable only for the work done during the stipulated
period of contract. No escalation shall be paid for the
extended period even if extension of time is granted
without any action under clause 2 and also no such
compensation shall be payable for a work for which the
stipulated period of completion is 18 months or less.”
(underlining added)
3.

The learned arbitrator felt that since no escalation could be

paid for the extended period even if the extension of time was granted
without any action under clause 2, the petitioner's claim for escalation,
even de hors clause 10CC, could not be permitted. The learned counsel
for the petitioner has drawn my attention to a decision of a learned Single
Judge of this court in the case of Anurodh Constructions v DDA 2005
(Suppl) Arb. LR 258 (Delhi) wherein it was held that :
“The damages are liable to be awarded once it is found that
it is the respondent who is responsible for the delay and
such damages can be awarded under Section 73 of the
Contract Act. Use of clause 10CC, which is utilised in
other contracts by DDA itself, can be said to be a good
OMP 385/2007

Page No.3 of 8

4.

parameter and methodology to calculate such damages and
the same cannot be faulted.”
The learned counsel for the petitioner also referred to the

decision of the Bombay High Court in the case of Union of India v
Shyama Charan Agarwala & Sons : 1997(2) Arb. LR 575. In that case,
the arbitrator had awarded a sum of Rs 20,95,255/- to the claimants by
way of compensation for extra expenses and losses alleged to have been
incurred or suffered by the respondents due to prolongation of the
contract period on account of various breaches of the said contract
alleged to have been committed by the petitioners therein. Clause 11(C)
of the contract between the parties, in the case before the Bombay High
Court, provided that :
“No claim in respect of compensation of or otherwise
howsoever arising, as a result of extension granted
under Conditions A and B above shall be admitted.”

The learned Single Judge of the Bombay High Court construed this
provision to be a bar for the grant of any compensation and, therefore,
allowed the objection of the petitioner therein and set aside the award in
respect of the said sum of Rs 20,95,255/- which had been awarded to the
claimants. The matter was taken up in appeal before a Division Bench of
the Bombay High Court which agreed with the conclusions arrived at by

OMP 385/2007

Page No.4 of 8

the learned Single Judge and dismissed the appeal. The decision of the
Division Bench is reported in M/s Shyama Charan Agarwala & Sons v
Union of India : 1999 (1) Arb. LR 483. The relevant portion of the said
decision is as under :
“5. If this is the position, it cannot be said that extensions
which were granted by the respondents for execution of
the work are not covered by Clauses 11(A) or (B) of the
Agreement. Extensions were granted at the request of
the appellants. As per Clause 11(A), extensions of time
granted are final and binding on the contractor. Further,
he has never raised any dispute for such extensions.
Otherwise matter would have been referred to the
C.W.E. Once the said extensions are covered under
Clauses 11(A) or (B) of the Agreement, under
Clause11(C) neither party to the agreement is entitled to
claim compensation or otherwise howsoever arising as a
result of extensions granted under Conditions (A) and
(B) of Clause 11. Therefore, in our view, the learned
Single Judge rightly set aside the award passed by the
learned Arbitrator by misconstruing the aforesaid
clauses of the agreement.”
5.

Thereafter, the matter was taken to the Supreme Court and the

decision is reported as Shyama Charan Agarwala & Sons v Union of
India : 1999(1) Arb. LR 699. The Supreme Court passed the following
order :
“2.

In view of the decision of this court in K.R.Ravindran
v State of Kerala1, the appeal is allowed and the
impugned judgment and order of the High Court is set
aside. There will be, therefore, a decree also in
respect of Claim No.8 of the Award.”

1 1996(10)SCC 35
OMP 385/2007

Page No.5 of 8

The net result being that the award of Rs 20,95,255/- under claim No.8
was reinstated and a decree was passed also in respect of the said amount
in favour of the claimants. This clearly implies that despite the existence
of a clause such as clause 11(C) as indicated above, the Supreme Court,
placing the reliance on the earlier decision in the case of K.R.
Raveendranathan v State of Kerala : (1996) 10 SCC 35, deemed it fit
and proper to allow the claim of damages.

6.

In view of these decisions, it is clear that the claimant's claim

cannot be blocked out merely upon a reading of the said clause 10CC of
the contract between the parties. As made clear in the award itself, the
petitioner was claiming the amount under claim No.1 not upon an
application of clause 10CC but de hors the same and by way of damages
under Section 73 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872. That being the case, I
am of the view that the award is liable to be set aside in respect of the
conclusion of the learned arbitrator with regard to claim No.1 However,
the petitioner would have to establish, through evidence, the extent of
damages it has suffered. This cannot be gone into by this court at this
stage because no such material is available to this court. Consequently,
the award in respect of the claim No.1 is set aside and the parties are

OMP 385/2007

Page No.6 of 8

directed to go in for arbitration afresh in respect of this claim. It shall be
open to the parties to lead evidence with regard to this claim.

7.

Claim No.2 was with regard to the bonus for allegedly

completing the work ahead of the schedule. The clause pertaining to
bonus reads as under :
“In case, the contractor completes the work ahead of
scheduled completion time a bonus @ 1% (one percent)
of the tendered value per month computed on per day
basis shall be payable to the contractor, subject to a
maximum limit of 5% (five percent) of the tendered
value. The amount of bonus if payable, shall be paid
along with the final bill after the completion of work.”
The learned arbitrator held in favour of the petitioner as under :
“There is enough evidence on record to infer that
claimants could have completed the work ahead of
schedule but the extent of ahead of schedule would
always remain indeterminate.”
Despite such finding, the learned arbitrator has not awarded any sum to
the petitioner by way of bonus because, according to him, the work was
not completed before the stipulated date and, therefore, no bonus was
payable. I am unable to agree with this conclusion because the learned
arbitrator had already held that the delay was attributable to the
respondent. What the arbitrator ought to have done was to compute the

OMP 385/2007

Page No.7 of 8

period of delay that was attributable to the respondent and subtract it
from the total period. If the result was a period less than 24 months then
the petitioner would be entitled to bonus and the exact extent of the
bonus could also be easily calculated.

Unfortunately, the learned

arbitrator has not done this. Consequently, the award is set aside in
respect of the claim No.2 also.

8.

Claim Nos 3 and 4 pertain to interest and costs of proceedings

and conclusion in respect of that would also follow suit. The award is,
therefore, set aside and the parties are directed to go in for arbitration
afresh. For this purpose, in terms of clause 25 of the agreement between
the parties, the Chief Engineer CPWD incharge of the works or if there
be no Chief Engineer, the Administrative head of CPWD shall appoint
another sole arbitrator to adjudicate the disputes between the parties.
The said appointment be made within a period of four weeks.
This petition stands disposed of.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
January 17, 2008
M

OMP 385/2007

Page No.8 of 8

