THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on : 13.07.2007

+

OMP 170/1998

TEHRI HYDRO DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION LTD

...Petitioner

- versus M/S LANCO CONSTRUCTION LTD.

...Respondent

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr Vikas Singh, ASG with Mr A.K.Vali.
For the Respondent

: Mr Rakesh Dwivedi, Sr Advocate with Mr G Ramakrishna Prasad,
Mr B. Suyodhan, Mr Mohd. Warsay Khan and
Mr Venkat Subramanium.

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.
2.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

YES

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

YES

3. Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?
BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J
1.

YES

This is an application under Section 34 of the Arbitration and

Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as the 1996 Act) praying for the
setting aside of the award dated 07.05.1998 published by the respondent No.2
(Mr H.C. Bhardwaj) who was the sole arbitrator.
2.

The applicant, Tehri Hydro Development Corporation (THDC)

called for bids for the work of Coffer Dam, Package B for quarrying,
transporting and placement of shell materials. The bids were received by
THDC on 20.01.1994. Lanco Construction Limited (LCL) (respondent No.1

OMP 170/1998

Page No.1 of 19

herein) was one of the parties who responded to the tender. LCL's bid was
accepted by THDC.

A letter of Intent was issued to LCL by THDC on

10.11.1994. Thereafter, certain other letters were issued. The formal contract
was entered into between the parties on 05.01.1995 for initial amount of Rs
8.38 crores. The schedule of items covered under the contract included item 3
which was as under :“3.

Quarrying from Dobata borrow area, transporting and
spreading shell material in uniform layers of specified
thickness in shell zone including dressing, watering
compacting upto required density with all leads and lifts etc.
complete as per specification.”
Clause 7 of the Informations and Instructions to Tenderers was as under :“7.

The Contractor shall be deemed to have satisfied himself
before tendering as to the correctness and sufficiency of
his tender for the works and of the rates quoted in the
Schedule of Quantities and rates which shall (except as
otherwise provided in the tender) cover all his obligations
under the contract and all matters and things necessary for
the proper execution and completion for the works in
accordance with the provisions of the contract and its
maintenance during construction.”

Clause 24 of the Informations and Instructions to Tenderers is the bone of
contention in this application and it reads as under:“24.

Borrow Area for shell material :
The shell material for dam fill (Zone 2A) shall be
obtained from Dobata borrow area which lies
approximately 5 km. upstream of dam site on the right
bank of Bhagirathi river with existing level at 705M
from MSL. The material for (Shell zone 2A) shall be
obtained from this borrow area by selective borrowing
and would in general require and proceeding except

OMP 170/1998

Page No.2 of 19

stripping top soil and removal of particles larger than
600mm. size in borrow area.”
The following clauses of the General Conditions of Contract which govern the
parties are relevant :“5.0

(ii)
The drawings and technical specifications are
to be considered as explanatory of each other and should
anything appear in the former but is not described in the
later, no advantage shall be taken by the Contractor of any
such omissions. In case of disagreement between technical
provisions and drawings, the technical provisions shall
govern the contract. Should any discrepancies however
appear or should any misunderstandings as to the meaning
and interpretation of the technical provisions or drawings
or dimensions or the quality of the materials for the proper
execution of the work or as to the measurements of
quantity and valuation of the work executed arise under
this contract or in respect of extra item, the same shall be
clarified by Engineer-in-Charge. The decision of the
Engineer-in-Charge regarding the true intent and meaning
of the drawings and specifications shall be final and
binding.”
xxxx

“34.0 (iii)

xxxx

xxxx

Valuation of Variation

If, on certified completion of the whole of the works it
shall be found that a reduction or increase is more than
thirty percent of the contract value as awarded resulting
from :(a)

the aggregate effect of all variation orders and

(b)

all adjustments upon measurement of the estimated
quantities set out in the Bill of Quantities or Schedule of
Items and adjustment of price made under Price
Adjustment clause.

OMP 170/1998

Page No.3 of 19

The value of payment for the work beyond this limit will be
varied by the percentages shown hereinafter for the plus and
minus amount beyond the above limit.
Variation in
contract value of
work done

Increase in
Payment for
minus variation

Decrease in
payment for plus
variation

Upto 30%

Nil

Nil

Above 30% &
upto 35%

6.00%

3.00%

Above 35% &
upto 60%

8.00%

4.00%

Above 60% &
upto 100%

10.00%

5.00%

Provided further that if addition, deviation, or
alteration to the work shall have the effect of increasing the
work beyond 100% of the contract value, then the rates for
the work exceeding 100% of the contract value, will be
settled by agreement between the Contractor and the
Corporation. Pending the finalisation of rates, the Contractor
shall continue to complete all the work demanded and shall
be paid for provisionally at rates mentioned in the provision
herein before as if the variation had not exceeded 100%. If
the rates so finalised, entitle the contractor to receive
amounts over and above those already paid, the Contractor
shall be paid the same upon submission and checking of the
bill therefor and if any amounts are due to Corporation on
that account the same shall be recovered from the
contractor.”
Clause 6.02.04 of the Technical Specification is also relevant. It reads as under
:“6.02.04

Zone 2A Material

It shall comprise of terrace gravelly material from Old
and New Dobata borrow areas, falling within the
OMP 170/1998

Page No.4 of 19

gradation limits shown on the drawings. It shall be hard,
durable and weather resistant and shall meet the
requirements as are normally set for concrete aggregates
in respect of abrasion and water absorption tests.
The silt content for Zone 2A shall not be more than 5%.
The zone 2C material in downstream shell fill was place
upto EI 615.00 m in the working season 1990-91 and it is
no longer required for further fill placement.”
3.

Disputes had arisen between LCL & THDC. The same were

referred to arbitration.

LCL filed the following three claims before the

arbitrator :“16.2 The Claimant preferred the following claims before the
Arbitrator :a)

b)

Claim No.2 for reimbursement of recovery
effected from R A Bill on account of incorrect
application of clause No. (iii) of Contract
Agreement for Rs.2,49,56,700 along with past,
pendente lite & future interest.

c)
4.

Claim No. 1 for Rs.2,15,50,600 on account of
longer lead from shell materials for old borrow
areas along with past, pendente lite & future
interest.

Claim No.3 for cost of reference to Arbitrator Rs.
1,00,000.”

Claim No.1 was preferred by LCL on account of the additional lead

due to non-availability of one of the borrow arrears for shell materials (Zone
2A). According to LCL, the new Dobata area, which was designated as a
borrow area in the contract for the shell material, was not available and they

OMP 170/1998

Page No.5 of 19

had to obtain the shell material from the old Dobata area which involved a
longer lead. It is in this background that the claim No.1 was preferred.

5.

Claim No.2 was made by LCL on account of plea that the variation

in the quantities were within the limits prescribed under clause 34(iii) of the
general conditions of contract referred to above. And, therefore, there could be
no reduction in rates. Since THDC had misapplied clause 34(iii) of the General
Conditions of contract, LCL claimed to be entitled to reimbursement of the
reduced amount. According to LCL, the original contract value was Rs 8.38
crores which was enhanced to Rs 14.63 by an amendment to the contract and
the actual work done came to Rs 16.18 crores. The increase would have to be
judged on the basis of Rs 14.63 crores and not on the basis of Rs 8.38 crores.
Since the variation was less then 30%, no deduction under clause 34(iii) was
permissible. Claim No.3 is not relevant for the purposes of this application as
that had not been brought up by any of the parties.

6.

It must be noted that both claim Nos 1 and 2 were made along with

the claim for past, pendente lite and future interest. With regard to claim No.1,
the arbitrator, after noting the various terms of the contract, including the said
clause 24 of Informations and Instructions to Tenderers, clause 6.02.04 of the
technical specifications, the drawings dated 02.06.1990 and 29.06.1992 and
after noting the fact that in case of disagreement between technical provisions
OMP 170/1998

Page No.6 of 19

and drawings, the technical provisions shall govern the contract as per clause 5
(iii)(a) of the General Conditions of the Contract, held in favour of the
claimant/LCL to the extent of 50%. The arbitrator also noted that THDC had
constituted a committee comprising representatives of THDC and LCL to go
into the claim of additional lead. The Committee recommended acceptance of
50% of the claim of the quantity and some payment was even released on the
basis of the report of this Committee.

7.

The award also indicates that in the technical specifications it was

clearly mentioned in clause 6.02.04 that Zone 2A materials shall comprise of
terrace gravelly material from old and new Dobata borrow areas. The arbitrator
observed that, according to LCL, the entire quantity of materials was available
from the new Dobata area which was nearer to the dam site. He further
observed that since there was no specific limit for the quantity to be lifted from
a particular borrow area, the claimant was entitled to lift the entire material
from the borrow area which was nearer to the dam site. It was further noted in
the award that since the new Dobata area was not available, LCL had to obtain
the entire material from the old Dobata borrow area involving a longer lead.
The arbitrator decided the claim of the LCL using the following logic :“However, I would be inclined to believe that while doing
costing of this item for the tender, the Claimant must have
taken into account that part of the materials would come
from old Dobata areas and balance from new Dobata area. It
would be reasonable to assume that the Claimant would have
OMP 170/1998

Page No.7 of 19

based his bid considering that 50% of the quantity would be
obtained from new Dobata area and the balance from the old
Dobata area. Due to ambiguity in the various contract
provisions and applying the rule of CONTRA
PROFERENTUM, I would award the Claimant additional cost
involved due to longer lead for 50% of the total quantity
executed for this item of work. I therefore award a sum of
Rs.1,56,54,100/- (Rupees one crores fifty six lacs fifty four
thousand one hundred only) to the Claimant on this account as
per calculation given below.”
He also awarded past, pendente lite and future interest on the said amount.
With regard to claim No.2, the arbitrator observed as under :“18.8 Question of applying provision of above clause would
have arisen only if the contract value would have been
8.38 crores as originally awarded. The contract value
was enhanced to Rs 12.88 crores from Rs.8.38 crores
vide amendment No. 2 dated 21.08.95 by mutual
agreement between the parties. The contract value was
further enhanced to Rs.14.63 crores vide amendment
No.3 dated 2.12.95 by mutual agreement between the
parties. Since the total value of work done was within a
deviation limit of 10% of the final contract value of
Rs.14.63 crores as amended on 2.11.95, question of
applying increase or decrease in payment in accordance
with clause 34(iii) does not arise in this case.
In view of the arguments and evidence available and my
order dated 24.12.97, I award Rs.16,18,630.00 (Rupees
sixteen lac eighteen thousand, six hundred thirty only)
against this claim to the Claimants. I also award interest
@ 18% p.a.”
8.

Mr Vikas Singh, the learned Additional Solicitor General, who

appeared on behalf of the THDC, submitted that the award is sought to be
challenged under Section 34 (2) (a)(iv) and Section 34 (2) (b) (ii). He advanced

OMP 170/1998

Page No.8 of 19

submissions on three points. The first with regard to claim No.1, the second
with regard to claim No.2 and the third with regard to the question of interest.
9.

With regard to claim No.1, Mr Vikas Singh submitted that the

contract was for quarrying, transportation of shell material from the Dobata
area which, as per the said clause 24 of the Information and Instructions to
Tenderers was approximately 5 k.m. upstream on the right bank of the
Bhagirathi river. He submitted that the technical specifications, as per clause
6.02.04, specifically provided that the shell material shall comprise of terrace
gravelly material “from old and new Dobata borrow areas falling within the
gradation limits shown on the drawings.” He submitted that LCL, in spite of
such clear instructions, has made a claim that it was forced to lift material only
from old Dobata area and that it was not permitted to lift material from the new
Dobata area and has, therefore, claimed for the extra lead for lifting material
from the farther of the two Dobata areas. Mr Vikas Singh submitted that the
arbitrator did not appreciate the fact that both, the new and old Dobata, areas
were mentioned for the purposes of lifting materials and that both these areas
were within the 5 km. range as indicated above.

There was, therefore,

according to Mr Vikas Singh, no question of making any claim for lifting
material from the old Dobata area as clearly the said area was a specified area
under the contract. He also contended that the arbitrator on his own held that
the contract was ambiguous and using the phrase “contra proferentum” held
that LCL was entitled to claim for the extra lead. He submitted that although
OMP 170/1998

Page No.9 of 19

the award itself noted at one place that according to LCL there was no
ambiguity in the contract yet, he applied the rule of “contra proferentum” and
allowed the claim of LCL to the extent of Rs 1,56,54,100/-. According to Mr
Vikas Singh, the award was contrary to the submissions made to the arbitrator
as well as contrary to the express terms of the contract in relation to this
particular claim and hence was opposed to public policy. Therefore, the award
was liable to be set aside under section 34 (2) (b)(ii) of the 1996 Act.

10.

Mr Rakesh Dwivedi, the learned senior counsel appearing on behalf

of LCL submitted that the Rule of “contra proferentum” had been employed
by the arbitrator not as the main ground for allowing the claim of LCL but only
as supportive reasoning. In any event, he submitted that as the contract does
not say that it would be enough if one of the two areas was available to LCL
for drawing the shell material, reference to the rule of “contra proferentum”
was correct. He submitted that the Committee constituted by THDC also gave
a similar recommendation. He submitted that the simple statement of nonacceptance of this recommendation by THDC does not, in any way, diminish
the value of the report, particularly, as THDC has not given any good reasons to
differ from the said recommendation.

11.

Considering the rival contentions advanced by the counsel for the

parties, it is clear that the controversy with regard to claim No.1 centered
OMP 170/1998

Page No.10 of 19

around two issues. The first issue is with regard to the applicability of the Rule
of “contra proferentum”. The rule is embodied in the maxim “Verba fortius
accipiuntur contra proferentum” which implies that words are to be interpreted
most strongly against the party who uses them. This is, however, subject to the
general principle that the contract under consideration must be construed in
accordance with the expressed intention (see: Sahebzada Mohd Kamgar Shah
v Jagdish Chandra Deo Dhabal Deb : AIR 1960 SC 953 at 957). It must also
be noted that the rule does not come into operation until a doubt arises with
regard to the construction of the contract or agreement [(see: Sahebzada Mohd
Kamgar Shah (supra) and see: Halsbury's Laws of India Volume 9 Para
120.167 ]. It is, therefore, clear that the rule is applicable only in the event of
an ambiguity and cannot be invoked contrary to the intention of the parties as
indicated in the contract.

As I see it, the contract does not contain any

ambiguity on this aspect. The clauses read together clearly indicate that the
material was to be gathered from the old as well as the new Dobata borrow
areas. There was no ambiguity about this. Therefore, reference to the said rule
was not at all necessary.

12.

But this does not mean that the arbitrator misdirected himself to

such an extent as would entitle this court to set aside the award. The scope of
Section 34(2)(b)(ii) of the 1996 Act has been settled by the Supreme Court in

OMP 170/1998

Page No.11 of 19

Oil & Natural Gas Corporation Ltd v Saw Pipes Ltd : (2003) 5 SCC 705 in the
following manner :“31. Therefore, in our view, the phrase “public policy of India” used
in Section 34 in context is required to be given a wider
meaning. It can be stated that the concept of public policy
connotes some matter which concerns public good and the
public interest. What is for public good or in public interest or
what would be injurious or harmful to the public good or public
interest has varied from time to time. However, the award
which is, on the face of it, patently in violation of statutory
provisions cannot be said to be in public interest. Such
award/judgment/decision is likely to adversely affect the
administration of justice. Hence, in our view in addition to
narrower meaning given to the term “public policy” in
Renusager case it is required to be held that the award could be
set aside if it is patently illegal. The result would be – award
could be set aside if it is contrary to :
(a)

fundamental policy of Indian law; or

(b)

the interest of India; or

(c)

justice or morality, or

(d)

in addition, if it is patently illegal.

Illegality must go to the root of the matter and if the illegality is
of trivial nature it cannot be held that award is against the
public policy. Award could also be set aside if it is so unfair
and unreasonable that it shocks the conscience of the court.
Such award is opposed to public policy and is required to be
adjudged void.”
The illegality that is necessary to enable the setting aside of an award must be
such that it goes to the root of the matter. If the illegality is of a trivial nature, it
cannot be held that the award is against the public policy. The award could be
set aside if it is so unfair and unreasonable that it shocks the conscience of the
OMP 170/1998

Page No.12 of 19

court.

Coming back to the facts of the case at hand, has the arbitrator

committed such an illegality or is the award so unfair and unreasonable that it
shocks the conscience of the court ?

13.

The claim of LCL is based on the fact that the new Dobata area

which was closer to the dam was not available to it for the purposes of lifting
the shell material. As a result of which a longer route had to be taken for the
entire shell material which could only be lifted from the old Dobata area. When
the contract term provided that the shell material could be lifted from the
Dobata area which comprised of both the old and new areas, it was up to LCL
to lift the material from whichever area was to its liking. It would have
preferred to lift the shell material from the new Dobata area as that was closer
to the site of placement i.e., the dam site, but, it was prevented from doing so
for reasons beyond its control. The consequence being that LCL was forced to
lift the material entirely from the old Dobata area which was further away and
resulted in a cost increase. The arbitrator took these factors into account and
also observed that while submitting its bid, LCL must have considered lifting
the shell material from both the areas i.e., new Dobata and old Dobata. Instead
of allowing the full claim of LCL, the arbitrator reduced the same by
apportioning the lifting equally between the old Dobata and new Dobata. There
may be arguments both for and against as to why the arbitrator took the figure
of 50% and not some other figure. But it cannot be said that the arbitrator, in
OMP 170/1998

Page No.13 of 19

taking the figure of 50%, was unreasonable. The decision on this claim made
by the arbitrator is not one which is so unfair and unreasonable that it shocks
the conscience of the court. Consequently, this court would not interfere with
the award in respect of claim No.1.

14.

With regard to claim No.2, Mr Vikas singh submitted that under

Clause 34(iii) of the General Conditions of Contract, if there was a reduction or
increase of more than 30% of the contract value as awarded then there would
be an increase in the payment for a negative variation and a decrease in the
payment for a positive variation. He submitted that in the present case, the
contract value had increased by enhancing the work to be done under the terms
of the contract and, therefore, the increase in work entitled the THDC to impose
the decrease in the payment inasmuch as the positive variation was more than
30%. He submitted that this clause has been incorrectly interpreted by the
arbitrator and hence the award in respect of this claim is liable to be set aside as
it is opposed to the public policy of India.

15.

In reply, Mr Dwivedi submitted that in the present case, the initial

contract value was fixed at Rs 8.38 crores. By a letter dated 22.04.95, the
THDC, while giving extra work by the very same document, amended the
contract value by enhancing it to Rs 12.88 crores. He further submitted that by
another letter dated 2.12.95, the contract value was further enhanced to Rs
OMP 170/1998

Page No.14 of 19

14.63 crores. He submitted that this enhanced contract value of Rs 14.63 crores
would have to be taken as the basis for calculating the extent of variations. The
actual work done was about Rs 16.18 crores. Therefore, the difference between
Rs 16.18 crores and Rs 14.63 crores did not amount to a variation of more than
30%. That being the case, no deduction was permissible under clause 34(iii).
It was submitted that once the contract value is enhanced then the original
contract undergoes novation in terms of Section 62 of the Indian Contract Act ,
1872 and it is the novated contract value which has been considered for the
purpose of clause 34(iii) of the General Conditions of Contract.

16.

Considering the submissions made by the counsel for the parties, I

am inclined to agree with those made by Mr Dwivedi. When the contract value
is enhanced, it becomes part of the contract. The enhanced value, therefore,
becomes the value of the contract. The variation that is referred to in clause
34(iii) of the General Conditions of Contract is variation in the extent of work
with reference to the contract value. This means that although the contract
value remains the same, the extent of the work under that contract is different.
The variation, therefore, has to be seen with regard to the contract value which
had been enhanced to Rs 14.63 crores. Accordingly, I see no reason to interfere
with the award in respect of this claim also.

OMP 170/1998

Page No.15 of 19

17.

Lastly, Mr Vikas Singh, submitted that the arbitrator had gone

wrong in holding that LCL was entitled to interest on the payments on account
of claim Nos 1 and 2. He submitted that clause 51 of the General Conditions of
Contract specifically provided that “no claim for interest or damage would be
entertained or be payable by the corporation in respect of any amount .... or in
any other respect whatsoever”. Therefore, there was no question of awarding
interest.

It was contended by Mr Dwivedi that the award has been made

under the 1996 Act. Section 31(7) (a) provides that unless there is agreement to
the contrary, the arbitrator shall have power to award interest at such rates as he
deems reasonable. He submitted, with reference to the Supreme Court decision
in Bhagawati Oxygen Limited v Hindustan Copper Limited : (2005) 6 SCC
462, that the arbitrator has the authority to award interest for all stages. He
also submitted that the Supreme Court in the context of identical provisions in
the contract regarding the non-entitlement of claims of interest held that such
clauses do not take away the authority of the arbitrator to award interest. First
of all, he placed reliance on Board of Trustees v Engineers De-Space Age :
(1996) 1 SCC 516. The clause under consideration in that case was as under :“No claim for interest will be entertained by the
Commissioners with respect to any money or balance
which may be in their hands owing to any dispute
between themselves and the Contractor or with respect
to any delay on the part of the Commissioners in
making interim or final payment or otherwise.”

OMP 170/1998

Page No.16 of 19

Interpreting this clause, the Supreme court observed that it merely prohibits the
Commissioners from entertaining any claim for interest and does not prohibit
the arbitrator from awarding interest. Though, in this case, the Supreme Court
was not dealing with a case with regard to award of interest for the period prior
to the reference, it observed that such a clause must be strictly construed and if
it is so construed, the same merely prohibits the commissioners from paying
interest to the contractor for delayed payment but once the matter goes to
arbitration the discretion of the arbitrator is not in any manner stifled by this
term of the contract and the arbitrator would be entitled to consider the question
of grant of interest pendente lite and award interest if he finds the claim to be
justified.

The supreme Court concluded by observing that under the said

clause, the arbitrator was in no manner prohibited from awarding interest
pendente lite.

18.

The other decision relied upon by Mr Dwivedi was in the case of

State of U.P. v Harish Chandra and Co (1999) : 1 SCC 63 Here also the
clause under consideration was similar. It read as under :
“1.9 No claim for delayed payment due to dispute etc. - No claim
for interest or damages will be entertained by the Government
with respect to any moneys or balances which may be lying
with the Government owing to any dispute, difference, or
misunderstanding between the Engineer-in-Change in
marking periodical or final payments or in any other respect
whatsoever.”

OMP 170/1998

Page No.17 of 19

The question was with regard to award of interest prior to the date of reference
and whether even if the arbitrator had the power and jurisdiction to award such
interest, it was not barred by the above clause 1.9.

The Supreme court

examined the said clause and came to the conclusion that the said clause did not
bar the consideration by the arbitrator of such a claim for interest.

19.

A similar decision of the Supreme Court is in State of Rajasthan &

Another v Nav Bharat Construction Co: (2002) 1 SCC 659 and a division
Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High Court has also taken a similar view
following the decision in the case of Board of Trustees (supra) while
construing the following clause :
“No interest will be payable upon the earned money or the
security deposit or amounts payable to the Contractor under
the contract,but Government Securities deposited in terms of
Sub-Clause (1) of this clause will be repayable interest
accrued thereon.”
In State of Orissa v B.N. Agarwalla : (1997) 2 SCC 469, a decision relied
upon by the applicant, it has been held that there can be no doubt that if the
terms of the contract expressly stipulate that no interest would be payable then,
notwithstanding the provisions of the Interest Act, 1978, an arbitrator would not
get the jurisdiction or right to award interest. However, the position with
regard to clause 51 is an akin to what has been decided by the Supreme court in
the case of Board of Trustees (supra) and other decisions referred to above.

OMP 170/1998

Page No.18 of 19

The prohibition that is contained in the said clause is for the THDC in
entertaining any claim of interest on account of delayed or disputed amount and
/ or in making payments in respect thereof. It does not contain a prohibition
insofar as the arbitrator is concerned. However, the arbitrator's power to grant
interest would be limited to the post reference period. And, therefore, he would
only be entitled to award interest pendente lite and for the future. The arbitrator
has, while allowing claim Nos 1 and 2 of the petitioner, granted past, pendente
lite and future interest. That has to be restricted only to pendente lite and future
interest in view of the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Board of
Trustees (supra).

20.

Accordingly, this application is disposed of with the only

modification in the award that grant of interest for the pre-reference period is
set aside. The rest of the award remains undisturbed.
No order as to costs.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
July 13, 2007
M

OMP 170/1998

Page No.19 of 19

