THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on:16.05.2007

+

WP(C) No.3679/2007

MAGOTTEAUX INTERNATIONAL S.A. & ANOTHER

...Petitioners

- versus ASSISTANT CONTROLLER OF PATENTS &
DESIGNS & OTHERS
Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioners
For the Respondent Nos.1 & 2
For the Respondent No.3

...Respondents

: Mr Ashok Desai, Sr Advocate with
Mr Prem Sewak & Ms Shefali Sewak
: Mr V. Shekhar, Senior Advocate with
Mr S. Ganesh and Mr Zangpo Sherpa
: Mr Rajiv Nayyar, Sr Advocate
with Ms Rajeshwari Hariharan

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

The counsel for the parties have been heard at length. The order

which is impugned before this court is the one passed on 30.03.2007 by the
respondent No.1. Initially, the petitioner had applied for a patent in respect of
its product known as “Composite Wear Component”. The said application
proceeded to the stage of pre-grant opposition. However, during that period
four (4) amendments were sought by virtue of an application dated 02.09.2005

WP(C)3679/07

Page No.1 of 7

moved under Section 78 of the Patents Act, 1970. The pre-grant opposition
period expired.

No opposition had been received from the public by the

respondent No.3. The amendments that were sought by the petitioner were
allowed by an order dated 06.09.2005. The petitioner was also granted a patent
by virtue of an order dated 02.12.2005. The only thing that remained to be
done was the publication of the patent.

Thereafter, on 18.01.2006, the

respondent No.3 filed an application styled as a review application invoking the
provisions of Section 77 (1) (f) as well as Section 78 of the said Act. The
prayer in the review application was in respect of 3 out of 4 amendments that
had earlier been allowed by the order dated 06.09.2005.

This review

application was, as indicated by the prayers contained therein, limited to the
question of allowing of the amendments. Moreover, the challenge was only
restricted to three amendments, out of the four that were granted. The fourth
amendment being the amendment whereby the words “consisting of” were
replaced by the words “comprising of”. There is no objection with regard to
this amendment.

2.

The review application was dismissed subsequently. Thereafter,

various rounds of litigation took place before this court. In the first instance, a
writ petition was filed being WP(C) No.7841-42/2006 which was disposed of
by an order dated 10.05.2006, whereby orders dated 28.02.2006 and 02.05.2006
were set aside. The matter was remanded to the respondent No.1 to consider
WP(C)3679/07

Page No.2 of 7

the review application afresh and status quo as available on 18.01.2006 was
directed to be maintained. On 28.07.2006, the respondent No.1 dismissed the
review application once again but this time on technical grounds.

The

respondent No.3 filed a petition under Section 227 of the Constitution of India
numbered as CM (M) 1152/2006. The same was disposed of by an order dated
20.12.2006 whereby the matter was once again remanded to the respondent
No.1 for adjudication on the review application. In other words, the position
was the same as had obtained after the issuance of the first order of this court.
It is thereafter that the impugned order dated 30.03.2007 has been passed. The
operative portion of the order reads as under:“40.
It is evident, therefore, that grant of patent shall be
made with seal of Patent Office and the date on which the
patent is granted shall be entered in the register. On grant of
patent the Controller shall publish the fact that the Patent has
been granted. Therefore the grant procedure involved four
distinct steps
a.
Grant by Controller on Patent file
b.
According of serial number of Patent
c.
Enntry of grant on register of Patent and issuance
of letter of Patent
d.
Publication of grant u/s 43 (2)
41.
Therefore, the process of grant completes on
completion of all in four ingredients of granting process. In the
instant case the procedure at i) and ii) above was completed on
02-12-2005. The grant was entered in the register of Patent on
03-02-2006. The letter of Patent was issued on 13-02-2006.
The grant of Patent has not yet been published as per the
official records. The public at large get to know about the
grant of Patent after publication in the official Journal and if
any person is interested to file opposition to the grant of Patent
u/s 25(2) of the Indian Patents Act 1970, he gets a period of
one year from the date of such publication.
WP(C)3679/07

Page No.3 of 7

42.
Considering all the oral and written submission by
both the parties present in the hearing and keeping in view the
various provisions of the patent law and the direction of the
honourable High Court of Delhi, it is hereby ordered that all
the “amendments” carried out u/s 78 of the Patent Act, 1970
as evident from the file noting of then Controller on
06.09.2005 are not allowable under the said provisions of the
Act which deals with “corrections of clerical errors” and are
hereby, treated as “not allowed”. The application for patent is
allowed to proceed for further action on the basis of complete
specification as found in order for grant on 09.02.2005 except
for the phrase “comprising of” which will be substituted by
“consisting of” in the complete specification.”
3.

Mr Ashok Desai, the learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of

the petitioners and Mr Rajiv Nayyar, the learned senior counsel appearing on
behalf of the respondent No.3 understand the order to read as if the application
for patent stands allowed with the amendment of the words “consisting of”
being replaced by the words “comprising of”. Their further understanding is
that the impugned order only relates to the 3 amendments which had earlier
been allowed but subsequently disallowed by the impugned order and that in
respect of the disallowance of the amendments, the petitioners are free to move
an appeal under Section 117 A of the said Act.

4.

There is some difficulty with regard to the constitution of the

appellate board because, according to Mr Desai, at the time when the
applications for patent and amendment were being considered, Mr S.
Chandrashekharan was the Controller General. So, he would have dealt with
WP(C)3679/07

Page No.4 of 7

the said application and he is also a technical member of the Appellate Board.
Both counsel agree that the situation can be taken care of by resorting to the
remedy provided in the Supreme Court decision in the case of Election
Commission of India and Another v. Dr Subramaniam Swamy and Another:
1996 (4) SCC 104, wherein the court observed as under:“16.
We must have a clear conception of the doctrine. It
is well settled that the law permits certain things to be done as a
matter of necessity which it would otherwise not countenance on
the touchstone of judicial propriety. Stated differently, the
doctrine of necessity makes it imperative for the authority to
decide and considerations of judicial propriety must yield. It is
often invoked in cases of bias where there is no other authority
or Judge to decide the issue. If the doctrine of necessity is not
allowed full play in certain unavoidable situations, it would
impede the course of justice itself and the defaulting party would
benefit therefrom. Take the case of a certain taxing statute
which taxes certain perquisites allowed to Judges. If the validity
of such a provision is challenged who but the members of the
judiciary must decide it. If all the Judges are disqualified on the
plea that striking down of such a legislation would benefit them,
a stalemate situation may develop. In such cases the doctrine of
necessity comes into play. If the choice is between allowing a
biased person to act or to stifle the action altogether, the choice
must fall in favour of the former as it is the only way to promote
decision-making. In the present case also if the two Election
Commissioners are able to reach a unanimous decision, there is
no need for the Chief Election Commissioner to participate, if
not the doctrine of necessity may have to be invoked.
17.
We think that is the only alternative in such a
situation. We are, therefore, of the opinion that the proper
course to follow is that the Chief Election Commissioner should
call a meeting of the Election Commission to adjudicate on the
issue of disqualification of Ms J. Jayalalitha on the grounds
alleged by Dr Swamy. After calling the meeting he should act as
the Chairman but then he may recuse himself by announcing that
he would not participate in the formation of opinion. If the two
Election Commissioners reach a unanimous opinion, the Chief
WP(C)3679/07

Page No.5 of 7

Election Commissioner will have the opinion communicated to
the Governor. If the two Election Commissioners do not reach a
unanimous decision in the matter of expressing their opinion on
the issue referred to the Election Commission, it would be
necessary for the Chief Election Commissioner to express his
opinion on the doctrine of necessity. We think that in the special
circumstances of this case this course of action would be the
most appropriate one to follow because if the two Election
Commissioners do not agree, we have no doubt that the doctrine
of necessity would compel the Chief Election Commissioner to
express his views so that the majority opinion could be
communicated to the Governor to enable him to take a decision
in accordance therewith as required by Article 192 (1) of the
Constitution.”
5.

In the light of the aforesaid discussion, it is declared that the

impugned order relates only to the three amendments which have been
disallowed. It is open to the petitioner to move an appeal under Section 117A
of the said Act in respect of the disallowance of the three amendments. The
patent granted with the fourth amendment (which is not objected to) is directed
to be published in accordance with the provisions of Section 43. In the light of
the decision of the Supreme Court, in case the appeal in respect of the three
amendments is filed by the petitioners, the same shall be heard by the members
of the Appellate Board which does not include Mr S. Chandrashekharan, the
Technical Member. In other words, the appeal would be heard by the Chairman
and the other Member. This special direction is being issued in this matter
because it has been demonstrated before the court that the said Mr S.
Chandrashekharan had dealt with the matter in his earlier capacity as Controller
General of Patents and, more importantly, because both Mr Desai and Mr
WP(C)3679/07

Page No.6 of 7

Nayyar consent and agree to this course of action so as to prevent a situation of
impasse.
This writ petition stands disposed of.
BADAR DURREZ AHMED
( JUDGE )
May 16, 2007
δυττ

WP(C)3679/07

Page No.7 of 7

