THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Judgment delivered on :16.03.2007
WP(C) No.1542/2007
ANKIT GAUTAM

...Petitioner
- versus -

CENTRAL BOARD OF SECONDARY EDUCATION ...Respondent
Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr Vinod Kumar
For the Respondent
: Mr Atul Kumar
CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

YES

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

YES

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

YES

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
+ WP (C) 1542/2007 & CM No. 2849/2007
*
1.
The petitioner applied for the All India Pre-Medical/Dental
Entrance Examination, to be held in April 2007. His application form was
submitted on 18.01.2006. The application was incomplete inasmuch as the
same had not been attested by the Head of the Institution/ Gazetted Officer. A
letter was issued by the Central Board of Secondary Education on 23.12.2003
to the petitioner indicating that his application form No. 501390 for appearing

WP(C)1542/2007

Page No.1 of 5

in the All India Pre-Medical /Pre-Dental Entrance Examination, 2007, to be
held on 01.04.2007, on scrutiny, was found to be not attested by the Head of the
Institution/ Gazetted Officer. For this reason, the petitioner's application was
rejected and it was also noted that no further correspondence would be
entertained in this matter.

2.

The petitioner submits that the only lacuna in the application was

that, through inadvertence, he did not get the same signed by the Head of the
Institution or by a Gazetted Officer. He submits that the photograph, which
was affixed on the front page of the application form, was undoubtedly attested
by a gazetted officer but the attestation of the Head of the Institution was not
taken on the reverse of the form. He submits that this is a mere technical
omission and the same ought to have been condoned.

3.

The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the CBSE submits that

the attestation by the Head of the Institution is necessary because without this
attestation, there is no verification or confirmation of the particulars of the
student. The attestation itself is in the following words:“This is to attest that the particulars given in this Application
Form including Name, Photograph, Address, Category, Date of
Birth, Year of Qualifying Examination and Signature are, to
the best of my knowledge and belief, correct.”
4.

Unless such attestation is done by the Head of the Institution, the

WP(C)1542/2007

Page No.2 of 5

application form, containing the details filled in by the applicant, remains
unverified and it is because of the importance of this attestation, the
information bulletin for the All India Pre-Medical/ Pre-Dental Entrance
Examination 2007 contained clear and strict instructions on the inside cover
page to the following effect:“1)

Candidate must follow the instructions strictly as given in
the Information Bulletin. Candidates not complying with
the instructions shall be summarily disqualified.

2)

Candidates must retain the Application Form number and
photocopy of their filled in Application Form with them
as reference for further correspondence.

3)

(a)
Please ensure
application form that:
i)
specified
ii)
iii)
iv)

b)
order:

before

mailing

the

the applicant has signed the form at two
places.
the application bears the signature of
Father/Guardian.
the application has been authenticated/signed by
the Head of Institution.
Recent high contract black and white two same
passport size photographs (taken on or after
01.09.2006) duly pasted in the space earmarked
for it, (as shown on page 5)
Please arrange documents in the following

1.
Application Form
2.
Affidavit (applicable only for candidates
from Andhra Pradesh/Jammu & Kashmir State)
c)
Use the enclosed CBSE envelope only for
despatch of Application Form to CBSE.”
(underlining added)

WP(C)1542/2007

Page No.3 of 5

5.

The learned counsel for the petitioner then referred to a notice

issued in the Times of India on 06.03.2007 to the effect that those candidates
who did not receive admit cards by March 15 should contact the CBSE office
for issuance of a duplicate admit card. He referred to this press release to
indicate that even now it is not too late for the CBSE to issue an admit card to
the petitioner. The learned counsel for the respondent replied by stating that
this press notice was in respect of those candidates, who had already been
issued admit cards but for one reason or the other had not received the same
and does not apply to the cases such as the petitioner's case where no admit
card had at all been issued because of an incomplete application form. He
submits that there are about 1,540 cases of a similar nature to that of the
petitioner's case and all those cases have been dealt with similarly by not
accepting their application forms and by non-issuance of admit cards.

6.

Having considered the arguments advanced by the counsel for the

parties, I feel that there are two impediments which come in the way of the
petitioner. The first impediment is that the CBSE had notified the petitioner on
23.12.2006 about the rejection of his application form.

The petitioner, if he

felt aggrieved at that point of time, ought to have immediately approached this
Court by way of writ petition. He waited till the last moment and approached
this Court in March 2007 when he was faced with a situation of a virtual fait
accompli. The second impediment is that the omission on the part of the
WP(C)1542/2007

Page No.4 of 5

petitioner is not a trivial one because it is on the basis of the attestation of the
Head of the Institution that the particulars of the candidate are accepted by the
CBSE as authentic. If that attestation is not there then the particulars remain
unverified/ unauthenticated.

The CBSE cannot act on the basis of such

unauthenticated particulars. It was for this reason that the instructions clearly
stipulated strict compliance and provided a virtual check-list for the applicants
before they submitted their applications.
This writ petition is dismissed.
BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
March 16, 2007
SR

WP(C)1542/2007

Page No.5 of 5

