THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 19.04.2007

+ CRL REV. P. No.871/2006
SUNIL OJHA

...Petitioner
- versus -

THE STATE OF NCT OF DELHI
Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
For the Respondent/State

...Respondent

: Mr V.K. Chaudhary with Mr S.P. Pandey
: Ms Richa Kapur.

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ?

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J
1.

This petition raises the question of whether a juvenile in conflict

with law would be entitled to set-off of the period of detention undergone by
him during inquiry against the period of confinement consequent upon an order
passed under Section 15 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Act, 2000 (hereinafter referred to as 'the said Act') ?

CRL REV. P.871/06

Page No.1 of 9

2.

On 20.12.2006, inter alia, the following order was passed by this

Court:“I have heard the learned counsel for the parties. By an
order dated 12.12.2006 the petitioner's sentence was
directed to be suspended. It was found that the petitioner
even though, he was a juvenile, was in custody in Tihar
Jail. Pursuant to this order the petitioner had been released
on a personal bond in the sum of Rs 5,000/-. Having heard
the arguments at length, I am of the view that the impugned
order requires to be set aside and the petitioner is entitled to
be released forthwith. The arguments advanced were
entirely on the question of sentence. So while the
conviction is being maintained, purely on the issue of
sentence, the petitioner is directed to be released forthwith.
Since the petitioner is on bail his bond stands discharged
and he is set at liberty. A reasoned order with regard to
this particular case shall be passed separately.”

The present order indicates the reasons for the said order dated 20.12.2006.

3.

The admitted facts are that by an order dated 16.05.2006, the

Juvenile Justice Board was satisfied that the petitioner, who is a juvenile in
conflict with law, had committed an offence under Section 302/392/397/34 IPC
in respect of the FIR No.359/1999 registered at P.S. Hazrat Nizamuddin, Delhi.
By its order on sentence passed on 16.05.2006, the Juvenile Justice Board
directed as under:“Release of the juvenile in the society in these facts and
circumstances, would neither be in the interest of society
nor in the interest of juvenile who needs behaviour
modification for a considerable time period. Juvenile needs
CRL REV. P.871/06

Page No.2 of 9

strict supervision in this regard, which is possible only in a
Custodial Institution. He is above 18 years of age now and
so, cannot be kept in the Specified Home. In these facts
and circumstances of the matter, it is thought just and
proper to send the juvenile to the Place of Safety for a
period of two years. Juvenile be provided with the regular
counselling for his behaviour modification during this
period. Juvenile be also involved in vocational training so
that he is able to earn his livelihood when he is released.”

4.

Being aggrieved by the order of conviction as well as the order on

sentence, the petitioner preferred an appeal before the Sessions Court. In the
course of the appeal, the counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner, did not
press arguments in respect of the order of conviction/satisfaction, but only
advanced arguments on the order of sentence. The same is the position with
regard to the present revision petition. In other words, the only question is with
regard to the sentence.

5.

Before the learned Additional Sessions Judge, it was contended on

behalf of the petitioner that the order directing the petitioner to be sent to a
Place of Safety for two years did not take into account the benefit which the
petitioner ought to have been granted in view of the principles embedded in
Section 428 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as
'the Code').

It was contended that the petitioner had already been under

detention as an under trial for more than five years. The date of the occurrence
was 21/22.6.1999. The petitioner was arrested on 24.06.1999. At that point of

CRL REV. P.871/06

Page No.3 of 9

time, he was between 14-15 years of age. It was contended on behalf of the
petitioner before the learned Additional Sessions Judge that the period of
detention of the petitioner from 24.06.1999 to 16.05.2005 ought to have been
set-off against the ultimate sentence of two years of detention in a Place of
Safety. According to this argument, if that was to be done, then the petitioner
was liable to be released forthwith.

6.

The learned Additional Sessions Judge rejected the argument on the

ground that Section 428 of the Code permitted the setting-off of a period of
detention undergone by an accused during investigation / trial against the
ultimate “sentence of imprisonment”. She submitted that the set-off of the
period of detention was permissible only if there was an order of “sentence of
imprisonment”. The learned Additional Sessions Judge was of the view that
the order passed by the Juvenile Justice Board requiring the petitioner to be
kept in a Place of Safety for a period of two years did not amount to a sentence
of imprisonment and, therefore, the provisions of Section 428 of the Code
would not be applicable.

7.

Another important but unfortunate event ought to be noted in this

case. The same being that pursuant to the order dated 16.05.2005 passed by the
Juvenile Justice Board requiring the petitioner to be kept in a Place of Safety
for two years, the petitioner was sent, not to a Place of Safety, but, to Jail No.5,
CRL REV. P.871/06

Page No.4 of 9

Tihar, New Delhi and he was in detention in the said Jail from 16.05.2005 till
12.12.2006, i.e., for a period of about one year and seven months. It is an
admitted position that the petitioner was kept in Tihar Jail from 16.05.2005 till
12.12.2006 when this court by an order passed on that date in this revision
petition had directed the suspension of sentence and had also directed that the
petitioner be released forthwith from Tihar Jail on his furnishing a personal
bond in the sum of Rs.5,000/-.

8.

The question that arises for consideration in the present case is:

whether a juvenile can be denied the benefit of set-off of his period of detention
pending an inquiry under the said Act in respect of the ultimate order that is
passed upon conclusion of the inquiry under Section 15 of the said Act? It is
true that Section 428 of the Code refers to “sentence of imprisonment” and it is
also true that the order passed in the present case directing the petitioner to be
kept in a Place of Safety for two years is, strictly speaking, not a “sentence to
imprisonment”. Therefore, strictly speaking, Section 428 of the Code would
not applicable. However, the principles analogous to those involved in Section
428 of the Code could, in my view, be applied to the present case.

9.

As noted in the case of State of Maharashtra v. Najakat Ali

Mubarak Ali: 2001 (6) SCC 311, the ideology enshrined in Section 428 of the

CRL REV. P.871/06

Page No.5 of 9

Code can be discerned by having a look at the Objects and Reasons for bringing
about the provision. The Objects and Reasons are as under:“The Committee has noted the distressing fact that in many
cases accused persons are kept in prison for very long
period as undertrial prisoners and in some cases the
sentence of imprisonment ultimately awarded is a fraction
of the period spent in jail as undertrial prisoner. Indeed,
there may even be cases where such a person is acquitted.
No doubt, sometimes courts do take into account the period
of detention undergone as undertrial prisoner when passing
sentence and occasionally the sentence of imprisonment is
restricted to the period already undergone. But this is not
always the case so that in many cases the accused person is
made to suffer jail life for a period out of all proportion to
the gravity of the offence or even to the punishment
provided in the statute. The Committee has also noted that
a large number of persons in the overcrowded jails of today
are undertrial prisoners. The new clause seeks to remedy
this unsatisfactory state of affairs. The new clause provides
for the setting-off of the period of detention as an undertrial
prisoner against the sentence of imprisonment imposed on
him. The Committee trusts that the provision contained in
the new clause would go a long way to mitigate the evil.”

Reading the above Statement of Objects and Reasons, it becomes clear that the
salutary provision of Section 428 was introduced by the Legislature into the
statute book to alleviate the problems faced by persons who underwent long
periods as undertrial prisoners. Similarly, where a juvenile in conflict with law
is kept under detention pending an inquiry under the said Act, he should also be
granted the same benefit while passing an order under Section 15 thereof.
Though there is no statutory provision such as Section 428 of the Code which
would be specifically and clearly applicable to the case of juveniles, in my

CRL REV. P.871/06

Page No.6 of 9

view, principles analogous to the same can be invoked by the Juvenile Justice
Board while passing an order under Section 15.

An examination of the

provisions contained in Section 15 (1) of the Act would be necessary:“15.
Order that may be passed regarding juvenile.(1) Where a Board is satisfied on inquiry that a juvenile has
committed an offence, then, notwithstanding anything to the
contrary contained in any other law for the time being in
force, the Board may, if it so thinks fit,(a) allow the juvenile to go home after advice or
admonition following appropriate inquiry against
and counselling to the parent or the guardian and the
juvenile.
(b) direct the juvenile to participate in group counselling
and similar activities;
(c) order the juvenile to perform community service;
(d) order the parent of the juvenile or the juvenile
himself to pay a fine, if he is over fourteen years of
age and earns money;
(e) direct the juvenile to be released on probation of
good conduct and placed under the care of any
parent, guardian or other fit person, on such parent,
guardian or other fit person executing a bond, with
or without surety, as the Board may require, for the
good behaviour and well-being of the juvenile for
any period not exceeding three years;
(f) direct the juvenile to be released on probation of
good conduct and placed under the care of any fit
institution for the good behaviour and well-being of
the juvenile for any period not exceeding three
years;
(g) make an order directing the juvenile to be sent to a
special home for a period of three years:
Provided that the Board may, if it is satisfied that
having regard to the nature of the offence and the
circumstances of the case, it is expedient so to do, for
reasons to be recorded, reduce the period of stay to such
period as it thinks fit.”
“underlining added”

CRL REV. P.871/06

Page No.7 of 9

10.

The Board has ample power, if it is satisfied that having regard to

the nature of the offence and the “circumstances of the case”, it is expedient to
reduce the period of stay in, inter alia, a Place of Safety. In my opinion, the
principles analogous to those of Section 428 of the Code can be read into the
expression “circumstances of the case” to enable the Board to reduce the period
of stay that it may direct upon the completion of inquiry.

11.

I would also like to point out that the scheme of the Act requires

the Board to act as expeditiously as possible, particularly because it deals with
juveniles. A look at Section 14 (1) and its proviso would make this abundantly
clear. The said proviso requires that the inquiry shall be completed within a
period of four months from the date of its commencement unless the period is
extended by the Board having regard to the circumstances of the case and
special cases, after recording the reasons in writing for such extension. This
gives an indication that under normal circumstances, a juvenile, who does not
have the benefit of having been released on bail under Section 12 (1), but is
sent to a Special Home or a Place of Safety under Section 12 (3) during the
pendency of inquiry regarding him, shall not have to remain in such a limbo for
more than four months. The maximum period of sending a person to a Special
Home, now prescribed under the amended Section 15 (1) (g) is three years.
Reference may also be made to the provisions of Section 65 of the Act which
also indicate that the sentence shall not exceed the maximum period provided
CRL REV. P.871/06

Page No.8 of 9

under Section 15 of the Act even in respect of those juveniles who were
undergoing sentence at the time of introduction of the said Act.

12.

In the present case, what has happened is that the inquiry has

dragged on for over five years, when it ought to have been completed within
four months. The petitioner has been under detention throughout the period of
inquiry of about five years and to make the matters worse, when the Juvenile
Justice Board directed the petitioner to be sent to a Place of Safety, he was,
instead, sent to Central Jail No.5, Tihar, New Delhi where he spent one year
and seven months, as indicated above. There are, therefore, more reasons than
one that the petitioner ought to be released forthwith and it is because of this
that I had passed the order dated 20.12.2006. The impugned order dated
12.07.2006 is set aside.
This revision petition is allowed.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
April 19, 2007
δυττ

CRL REV. P.871/06

Page No.9 of 9

