THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 17.07.2007

+

WP (C) 3343/2001

SHRI HARBIR SINGH

...Petitioner
- versus -

LT GOVERNOR OF DELHI AND OTHERS

...Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Ms Sonali Malhotra Sehgal.
For the Respondent Nos.1-3. : Mr Sunil Bagai.

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.
The petitioner is aggrieved by the order dated 09.05.2001 passed by
the Commissioner (Food and Supplies) whereby the petitioner's kerosene oil
depot licence was cancelled.

2.

The facts are that on 1.12.1999 the vacancy for a kerosene oil depot

was notified in Circle 47, Ashok Nagar, Delhi. The last date for making
applications was 15.12.1999.

The petitioner applied on 15.12.1999.

The

respondent Nos. 4 and 5, namely, Rama Devi and Panchal were also co

WP(C) 3343/2001

Page No.1 of 6

applicants. However, on 19.01.2001, the licence was issued to the petitioner
for running his KOD at E-30, Ashok Nagar, (Circle 47) Delhi. Since the
applications of respondent Nos 4 and 5 were rejected and the same was
communicated to them by a letter dated 22.01.2001, they filed appeals under
the provisions of the Delhi Kerosene Oil (Export and Price) Control Order,
1962 (hereinafter referred to as the said “Control Order”). The appeals of the
respondent Nos 4 and 5 were rejected. However, the case of the grant of
licence to the petitioner was also considered by the Commissioner (Food and
Supplies) and by virtue of the said order dated 09.05.2001, the licence granted
to the petitioner was cancelled on the ground that the petitioner was not eligible
for the grant of licence on the date of his application i.e., on 15.12.1999. The
reason given for the cancellation of the petitioner's licence was that on that date
the petitioner had two shutters in his shop when the rule required that there
should have been only one shutter. A supplemental reason was also indicated
in the order and that was that the graduation certificate given by the petitioner
was suspect.

3.

The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the entire case

hinges upon the statement of Smt Sheela Devi who is the land lady of the
subject premises. Apparently, she had stated that on 16.12.1999 an inspection
was carried out on the part of the Food and Supplies Department at 10.55 a.m.
and at that point of time there was only one shutter as the other shutter had been
WP(C) 3343/2001

Page No.2 of 6

closed and only 6 inches gap remained to be covered up. As per the statement,
it appears that the second shutter was closed on 16.12.1999.

However,

according to the learned counsel for the petitioner, since the inspection was
carried out at 10.55 in the morning, it would not be unreasonable to assume that
the work for closing the shutter had commenced on 15.12.1999 itself and
perhaps been completed on that date barring 6 inches which remained to be
closed as noted by Smt Sheela Devi.

4.

The learned counsel for the petitioner also pointed out that Smt

Sheela Devi gave an affidavit on 01.05.2000 indicating that she was not at all
aware of the contents of her statement given to the Food and Supplies officer
and that she merely signed the document without knowing the actual contents
thereof. In this context, the learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that not
much reliance can be placed on the statement of Smt Sheela Devi and that is the
only piece of evidence which the Commissioner of Food and Supplies relied
upon to conclude that the petitioner was ineligible on the ground that on the
date of the application there was two shutters in the shop in question.

5.

The learned counsel for the respondent submitted that in the course

of the appeals filed by the respondent Nos 4 and 5 the question of eligibility of
the petitioner also came into consideration and it was found by the superior
officer of the Food and Supplies Department that the petitioner was ineligible
WP(C) 3343/2001

Page No.3 of 6

on account of the fact that there were two shutters when there should have been
only one and that it was in violation of condition No.1 printed in the application
form itself. Therefore, no fault can be found in the impugned order.

6.

The learned counsel for the respondent Nos 1 to 3 referred to the

said control order and, in particular, to clause 5 thereof which related to the
power to refuse to issue or renew a licence. He also referred to clause 8 which
pertains to the provisions of appeal. In particular he referred to sub-clauses (4)
& (5) of clause 8 which empower the Commissioner (Food and Supplies) to
confirm, vary or set aside the order appealed from or pass such other order as
he may deem fit. The Commissioner (Food and Supplies) was also empowered
to revise any order passed by an Officer subordinate to him or review his own
order either by an application or of his own motion. Therefore, according to the
learned counsel for the respondents, the Commissioner (Food and Supplies)
was within his power in cancelling the licence granted to the petitioner while
hearing the appeals filed by the respondent Nos 4 and 5.

7.

In rejoinder, the learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that

the issuance or rejection of her licence or the renewal or non-renewal of her
licence stood on an entirely different footing from suspension or cancellation of
her licence. She submitted that clause 6 of the Control Order specifically
provided for suspension and / or cancellation of the licence and the same could
WP(C) 3343/2001

Page No.4 of 6

only be done if there was a contravention of any of the terms and conditions of
the licence or of any direction or provision of the control order itself. There
was also a specific procedure prescribed before a licence could be cancelled as
indicated in clause 6 of the Control Order itself. That has not been followed.
According to her, the licence of the petitioner could not be cancelled in the
manner it had been done.

8.

This is the entire scope of the controversy between the petitioner

and the respondents. However, I notice that clause 8 (6) of the Control Order
specifically provides that any person aggrieved by the order of the
Commissioner (Food and Supplies) passed by him either in his capacity as
Commissioner or suo moto revising the order of an officer subordinate to him
may prefer an appeal in writing before the Financial Commissioner, Delhi
Administration, Delhi. The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that
this writ petition was filed before this court because at that point of time there
was no Financial Commissioner and, therefore, left with no alternative, the
present writ petition was filed. The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
respondents submits that there is a Financial Commissioner at present and at
that time the officer who was appointed / to be appointed had not joined or was
on leave.

Although I have set out the arguments and counter arguments

advanced by the counsel in detail, I deem it proper that an appeal be preferred
before the Financial Commissioner inasmuch as certain factual issues are also
WP(C) 3343/2001

Page No.5 of 6

involved in this matter. However, while disposing of the appeal, if filed by the
petitioner, the Financial Commissioner should be mindful of the arguments
advanced before this court, particularly with regard to the distinction between
the order accepting or rejecting an application for grant of licence and an order
of cancellation of a licence after such a licence had been granted. Accordingly,
this writ petition is disposed of with the direction that the petitioner may file an
appeal before the Financial Commissioner within two weeks raising all the
grounds that are available to the petitioner in respect of the cancellation of his
licence by virtue of the order dated 9.5.2001. If such an appeal is filed within
two weeks, the same shall be disposed of by the Financial Commissioner within
eight weeks thereafter by a speaking order after giving an opportunity of
hearing to the petitioner.
Dasti to both the parties.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
July 17, 2007
M

WP(C) 3343/2001

Page No.6 of 6

