THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Judgment delivered on :15.02.2007
WP(C) No.8024/2006
MAYA DEVI

...Petitioner
- versus -

LAND AND DEVELOPMENT OFFICER

...Respondent

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr K. R. Manjani
For the Respondent
: Mr S. K. Puri, Sr. Advocate with Ms Mahjabeen Shamim and
Mr Praveen Kumar Sharma

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

This petition concerns the question of conversion of the one room

tenement at J-IV/6, Old Double Storey, Lajpat Nagar,-IV, New Delhi from lease
hold to free hold. The original owner of this property was one Radha Krishan. It
appears that on 03.10.1985 an agreement to sell was executed between him and the
petitioner (Maya Devi wife of Sh. Ram Chand). A sum of Rs.75,500/- was also
paid by the petitioner to the said Radha Krishan and a power of attorney was
WP(C)8024/2006

Page No.1 of 4

executed by Radha Krishan in favour of Bihari Lal, who is the nephew of Maya
Devi. It appears that a will was also executed by Radha Krishan bequeathing this
property, in the event of his death, in favour of Maya Devi. The possession was
also handed over to Maya Devi. Essentially, this was a sale transaction using usual
documents of agreement to sell, power of attorney, will etc.

2.

As per the policy indicated by the L&DO, conversion of property from

lease hold to free hold has been permitted to the persons possessing such
documents. The present case has been complicated by two facts, one being that
Bihari Lal, in whose favour Radha Krishan had given his power of attorney, has
moved to Germany in connection with his business.

But, while moving to

Germany the said Bihari Lal executed a general power of attorney, which was also
registered, in favour of one Thakur Dass.

It is this person (Thakur Dass) who

applied for conversion of the property from lease hold to free hold on behalf of
Maya Devi on the strength of this power of attorney, which was given to him by
Bihari Lal. The objection raised by the respondent L&DO is that the power of
attorney that was given by Radha Krishan to Bihari Lal did not permit granting of
a further power of attorney in favour of any other person.

Therefore, they would

not be in a position to recognize Thakur Dass as representing Radha Krishan.
However, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the Land and Development

WP(C)8024/2006

Page No.2 of 4

Officer, submits that they would be willing to accept an application signed by
Bihari Lal and any other documentation that may be obtained from Bihari Lal
from Germany provided these documents are authenticated through the Indian
Embassy/ Consulate at Germany.

3.

The other complication that has arisen with respect to the question of

conversion relates to the allegation that the petitioner has encroached upon public
land.

Paragraph 2 of the counter-affidavit filed on behalf of the respondent

indicates that some inspection was carried out in the year 1985 and 1987 and on
the basis of which they found that there were no breaches with respect to the one
room tenement, which was sought to be converted from lease hold to free hold but
they found that there was some encroachment on the public land, which are given
in paragraph 2 of the counter-affidavit. However, the learned counsel for the
petitioner points out that in respect of these double storeyed apartments certain
developments have taken place whereby certain deviations were regularized by the
respondents and there is also a decision of this court to that effect. The learned
counsel for the respondent submitted that this matter could also be sorted out by
carrying out a fresh inspection in view of this new policy, if any, and the applicant
would then be notified if there are any deviations, which need to be corrected.

WP(C)8024/2006

Page No.3 of 4

4.

This writ petition is, therefore, disposed of with the following

directions:(1)

The petitioner shall file all the necessary documents as well as the

application after obtaining signatures and authentication from

Bihari Lal, as

indicated above. The said documents would be submitted within one month from
today.
(2)

Once the said documents are submitted, the respondent L&DO shall

process the same immediately by first carrying out an inspection and notifying the
petitioner of any deviations/ shortcomings, if any, as mentioned above.

This

would be notified within two weeks of receipt of the documents. Thereafter if, the
shortcomings, if any, are removed, the respondent shall carry out the conversion
from lease hold to free hold in favour of the petitioner within four weeks.

This writ petition stands disposed of. No costs.
BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
February 15, 2007
sr

WP(C)8024/2006

Page No.4 of 4

