THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 15.05.2008

CS (OS) 2349/2006

+

XEROX CORPORATION AND ANOTHER

…

Plaintiffs

…

Defendants

—versus—
MR SAILASH PATEL AND OTHERS

Advocates who appeared in this case:For the Plaintiffs
: Mr C.M. Lall with Mr Rajiv Tyagi, Mr Manish Dhir
and Mr Dushyant Mahant
For the Defendants
: Ms Pratibha M. Singh with Mr Sudeep Chatterjee

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

In this suit, the defendants can be categorised into three

categories:i)

Importers ;

ii) Resellers ; and
iii) Jobbers / Photocopying Shops.
Some of the importers also engage in the activity of reselling. The
plaintiffs have not claimed any reliefs against the defendants who are
jobbers / photocopying shops.

CS (OS) 2349/06

Page No.1 of 5

2.

In this suit, the case of the plaintiffs is that the importers are

unlawfully importing second hand office automation equipments which
include photocopiers under the brand name of “Xerox” which are
subsequently refurbished in India and sold to resellers, who, in turn,
sell the machines to jobbers / photocopying shops. On some occasions,
the importers sell directly to the jobbers / photocopying shops. The
plaintiffs alleged that the defendants‟ said activity is unlawful and
amounts to infringement of the plaintiffs‟ trademark “Xerox”. Apart
from this, it was alleged that each of the machines has an inbuilt
software for operating the hardware. When the machines are powered
on, the flash screen displays a distinctive “X” logo in which the
plaintiffs claim copyright in respect of the artistic work involved
therein.

3.

The defendants had denied that the plaintiffs are the

proprietors of the trademark “Xerox”. They have also denied that their
activities are unlawful. The importers claim that they have imported
second hand machines with the brand name “Xerox” and thereafter the
same have been sold to resellers and, in some cases, directly to the
jobbers / photocopying shops. It was the case of the importers that
such equipments are legally and validly imported and sold on “as is
where is basis”. It is contended on the part of the defendants that the
goods imported into India by them and sold in India, either directly or

CS (OS) 2349/06

Page No.2 of 5

through resellers, are genuine goods originating from the plaintiffs‟
company, although they are second hand products. It is stated that at
the time of importation as well as at the time of subsequent sale, it is
clearly represented by the defendants that the goods are not new but
second hand.

4.

On the part of the jobbers / photocopying shops, it was

contended that they have purchased the second hand machines knowing
the same to be so and are using them for the purposes of their small
businesses or providing photocopies to the public at large.

5.

During the pendency of the suit and in the course of

arguments, the parties have agreed to compromise / settle the disputes
in the following manner:1) The defendants, who are importers and resellers, shall affix
the following disclosure on each of the second hand Xerox
machines imported / sold by them:i)

Second hand and used machine not imported directly
from Xerox Corporation or any of its affiliates;

ii) Not serviced or maintained by Xerox Corporation or any
of its affiliates;
iii) This machine has been sold exactly as received by the
importer / reseller. It has not been altered in any way or

CS (OS) 2349/06

Page No.3 of 5

examined for operatibility or completeness by the
importer / reseller. No part or any accessories have been
added or removed by the importer / reseller.
iv) This machine is not covered by any guarantee or
warranty from Xerox Corporation or any of its affiliates.
2) The aforesaid disclosure shall appear prominently on each of
the second hand machines at a prominent place in the front
of the machines where the word Xerox appears on the
machines so that the same can be easily viewed by
customers. The disclosures shall be permanently affixed on
the machines.
3) The same disclosure shall also be incorporated in publicity
materials, manuals, advertising and other communications to
the public by the defendants in respect of the said Xerox
machines.
4) In case, after importation, any changes to the said machines
are made by the defendants, the mark „Xerox‟ shall be
removed from them before further sale / use so as to indicate
to the purchasers / users that the machines are not Xerox
machines.
5) Once the said disclosure has been affixed on the machines by
the importers and / or the resellers, the other defendants

CS (OS) 2349/06

Page No.4 of 5

(jobbers / photocopying shops) shall not remove or obliterate
the same.

6.

The learned counsel for the parties have consented to the

aforesaid terms and have agreed that this suit be disposed of in terms
thereof. It has also been stated by the counsel appearing for all the
parties that they shall abide by the terms of the settlement indicated
above and that they shall file affidavits to this effect within three
weeks.

7.

I have considered the terms of the settlement / compromise

and am satisfied that the same are lawful. The compromise / settlement
is taken on record.

8.

In view of the above, the suit is decreed in terms of the

compromise / settlement arrived at between the parties.

The

undertakings to be filed by way of affidavits, as indicated above, shall
also form part of the decree. The formal decree be drawn up. No costs.
This suit and all pending applications stand disposed of. The
interim orders stand superseded.

May 15, 2008
dutt

CS (OS) 2349/06

( BADAR DURREZ AHMED )
JUDGE

Page No.5 of 5

