THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on :11.05.2007

+

CRL REV. P. No.48/2005

SMARTY MACHRA & ANOTHER

... Petitioners

- versus STATE (GOVT OF NCT OF DELHI)

... Respondent

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioners
: Mr Rajender Kumar
For the Respondent/State
: Mr V.K. Malik

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J
1.

This revision petition is directed against the judgment of the

learned Additional Sessions Judge delivered on 21.12.2004 whereby the
revision petition filed on behalf of the State against the order passed by the
learned Metropolitan Magistrate on 01.05.2004 was allowed, the result being
that the trial court was directed to frame charges under Sections 379/411/34
IPC against both the petitioners and was directed to proceed with the trial in
accordance with law.

CRLREVP 48/05

Page No.1 of 13

2.

The facts of the case, as per the prosecution, are that on 19.06.1998,

the complainant [Shri N.P. Singh] lodged a complaint with the police that on
the intervening night of 18th and 19th June, 1998, his car stereo of make
“PIONEER” was stolen from his car which was parked outside his house at J3/4, Rajouri Garden, Delhi. In the said complaint, it was further mentioned that
one Shri Ashok Kumar resident of C-55, Nangloi Extn. had told the
complainant that his car stereo was also stolen. Mr Ashok Kumar's car number
was given as HR 05 F-0018 and it was allegedly parked near Super Bazar.
Thereafter, an FIR No.419/1998 under Section 379 IPC was registered at police
station Rajouri Garden on the basis of the said complaint by Shri N.P. Singh.
Apparently, during investigation, the petitioners (Smarty Machra and Manish
Gandhi) were arrested on 23.06.1998. A car stereo with remote is alleged to
have been recovered from the possession of the accused Smarty Machra.
Another car stereo is alleged to have been recovered from the possession of the
accused Manish Gandhi.

3.

Separate disclosure statements are alleged to have been made by

both the accused wherein they have allegedly stated that they had been stealing
stereos earlier. Furthermore, it is alleged that pointing out memos of the place
of incident were also prepared at their instance.

After completing the

investigation, a charge-sheet under Section 379/411/34 IPC was filed against
both the accused.
CRLREVP 48/05

Page No.2 of 13

4.

Before the learned Metropolitan Magistrate, the learned counsel

appearing for the accused, had submitted that a single FIR had been registered
by the police for two distinct offences. It was further submitted on behalf of
the accused that the recovery memos in respect of the car stereos allegedly
recovered from them do not bear their signatures.

The alleged disclosure

statements also do not bear the signatures of the accused. It was also submitted
that a single charge-sheet was filed against the accused for two distinct
offences and, according to the learned counsel for the accused, this was not
permissible. Accordingly, a prayer for discharge of the accused persons was
made.

5.

On the other hand, the learned Additional Public Prosecutor

appearing for the State submitted before the learned Metropolitan Magistrate
that there is no bar to registering a single FIR in respect of two offences of a
similar nature committed at the same time in the same locality.

It was

submitted that the FIR was merely a piece of information with regard to the
commission of cognizable offences so as to put the police machinery into
motion.

It was submitted that the accused in their purported disclosure

statements have stated that they had committed a number of offences jointly.
With respect to the absence of signatures of the accused on the recovery

CRLREVP 48/05

Page No.3 of 13

memos, it was submitted that this was a mere omission on the part of the
investigating officer for which the accused were not entitled to any benefit.

6.

After hearing the arguments advanced on behalf of the accused and

the State, the learned Metropolitan Magistrate observed that two car stereos
were stolen from different cars belonging to different persons. The said car
stereos were also allegedly recovered from the separate possession of each of
the accused, i.e., one from each of the accused. It is material to note that the
learned Metropolitan Magistrate had observed that the accused persons had
allegedly disclosed a number of offences committed by both of them, but they
had not admitted or disclosed the commission of the offences in the present
case. In these circumstances, the learned Metropolitan Magistrate came to the
conclusion that the offences were distinct and for which the accused persons
could not be tried together. With regard to the reliance to be placed on the
disclosure statements, the learned Metropolitan Magistrate noted that the
purported disclosure statements were recorded after the alleged recovery had
been effected. It was also noted that even otherwise the purported disclosure
statements had no value as the accused had not disclosed the commission of the
offences in the present case. The learned Metropolitan Magistrate also noted
that there was no material to indicate the ownership of the two car stereos by
Shri N.P. Singh and Shri Ashok Kumar. Even the car stereo was not released
under the Superdari of Mr N.P. Singh and no TIP of the stereo, allegedly
CRLREVP 48/05

Page No.4 of 13

belonging to Mr Ashok Kumar, was done. Finally, the learned Metropolitan
Magistrate, after placing reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court in the
case of Satish Mehra v. Delhi Administration and Others: 1996 (9) SCC 766
came to the following conclusion:“The case in hand keeping in view the facts and
circumstances of the case I am of the considered view that
due to the above said lapses on the part of the prosecution
the accused is likely to get benefit of the same at the final
stage and no useful purpose would be served by framing the
charges against accused in this case. Hence both accused
persons are discharged. Their sureties are also discharged.”
7.

As mentioned above, the State, being aggrieved by this order of

discharge, filed a revision petition before the learned Additional Sessions Judge
who allowed the same by virtue of the impugned judgment dated 21.12.2004.
The learned Additional Sessions Judge agreed with the learned Metropolitan
Magistrate that the present case did not fall under Sections 223(a) or 223 (d) of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Code').
However, the learned Additional Sessions Judge observed that the learned
Metropolitan Magistrate overlooked the fact that both the thefts were
committed on the same night and the two cars from which the stereos were
stolen were parked in “close vicinity” of each other and that as per the
purported disclosure statements, the accused had disclosed that they had been
jointly committing thefts in the past also. Consequently, the learned Additional
Sessions Judge concluded as under:-

CRLREVP 48/05

Page No.5 of 13

“... Thus considering the proximity in time and place of
commission of offences and also the past conduct of the two
accused, there were very strong reasons to suspect that the
two thefts on the night between 18/19-6-98 were jointly
committed by the two accused and, therefore, the joint trial
of the two accused u/s 223 (c) of Cr.P.C. was perfectly in
order.”
8.

With regard to the issue that the purported disclosure statements did

not relate to the offences in question, the learned Additional Sessions Judge
observed that as the same were recorded after recovery was effected, there was
no occasion for the accused persons to make any disclosure about the same.
With regard to the absence of signatures on the recovery memos, the learned
Additional Sessions Judge noted, with reference to a decision of the Supreme
Court in the case of Jackaran Singh v. State of Punjab: AIR 1995 SC 2345,
that though such an absence of signatures or thumb impression of an accused
on the disclosure statement recorded under Section 27 of the Evidence Act
detracts from the authenticity and reliability of the recovery memo / disclosure
statement, it was only a rule of prudence and that the Supreme Court nowhere
directed that a disclosure statement or recovery memo is totally excluded from
consideration simply because it does not bear the signature or thumb impression
of the accused. The learned Additional Sessions Judge concluded that the
absence of the signature or thumb impression of the accused may dilute the
credibility of the document but other evidence could be considered.

The

learned Additional Sessions Judge also observed that the question of ownership

CRLREVP 48/05

Page No.6 of 13

of the car stereos was not material in a case of theft. The learned Additional
Sessions Judge also brushed aside the recording in the site plan which indicated
that the car stereos stolen at points 'A' and 'B' were both of “PIONEER” make,
whereas the recovery memo showed that one stereo was of “SONY” make and
the other was of “PIONEER” make. Point 'A' in the site plan was the place
where the car of Shri N.P. Singh was allegedly parked. Point 'B' is the place
where the car of Shri Ashok Kumar was allegedly parked. The site plan gives
the impression that both the stereos were of the “PIONEER” make.

The

learned Additional Sessions Judge brushed aside this discrepancy between the
site plan and the recovery memos by observing that “if the I.O. made some
error in the marginal notes of the site plan, the prosecution case cannot
collapse for that reason.”

Finally, the learned Additional Sessions Judge

concluded as under:“Considering all the material which was made available to
the trial court, I am of the considered opinion that the two
respondents could be jointly tried u/S 223 (c) of Cr.PC and
charge u/s 379/411/34 IPC should have been framed against
both of them. The revision therefore succeeds. The
impugned order is set aside. TCR be sent back to the trial
court with the direction to frame charge u/s 379/411/34 IPC
against both respondents and proceed with the trial in
accordance with law. TCR should reach the trial court on or
before 24-1-05. Respondents shall appear before the trial
court on or before 24-1-05. Respondents shall appear before
the trial court on 24-1-05. Revision file be consigned to
Record Room.”

CRLREVP 48/05

Page No.7 of 13

9.

The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners

submitted that there should have been two separate FIRs and consequently two
separate challans inasmuch as the alleged thefts were committed in respect of
different cars at different locations belonging to different persons and by
different accused. It was submitted that the site plan indicated that the car
stereos stolen from points 'A' and 'B' were both of “PIONEER” make. It was
submitted by reference to the purported seizure / recovery memo in respect of
the accused Smarty Machra that a stereo of “SONY” make with remote was
recovered from him. The seizure / recovery memo in respect of Manish Gandhi
showed a recovery of a stereo of “PIONEER” make. It was submitted by the
learned counsel that, firstly, the two offences could not be jointly tried and,
secondly, the material on record was such that even if taken at face value, the
same contradicted itself and, therefore, the petitioners were entitled to be
discharged.

Consequently, it was argued that the order of the learned

Metropolitan Magistrate be restored and that of the learned Additional Sessions
Judge be set aside. The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State
advanced arguments in support of the impugned judgment.

10.

The issues that arise for consideration in the present revision

petition are:1)

Whether in the facts and circumstances of the present case, the
provisions of Section 223 (c) of the Code would be attracted ?

CRLREVP 48/05

Page No.8 of 13

2)

Whether the petitioners are otherwise entitled to an order of
discharge ?

11.

Section 223 (c) of the Code permits several persons to be charged

jointly when such persons are accused of more than one offence of the same
kind committed by them jointly within the period of 12 months. To fully
appreciate the meaning and purport of Section 223 (c) of the Code, it would be
appropriate if the same is set out:“223. What persons may be charged jointly.
The following persons may be charged and tried together,
namely.
(a)
(b)
(c)

xxxx
xxxx
xxxx
xxxx
xxxx ;
xxxx
xxxx
xxxx
xxxx
xxxx ;
Persons accused of more than one offence of the
same kind, within the meaning of section 219
committed by them jointly within the period of
twelve months;

(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)

xxxx
xxxx
xxxx
xxxx

xxxx
xxxx
xxxx
xxxx

xxxx
xxxx
xxxx
xxxx

xxxx
xxxx
xxxx
xxxx

xxxx
xxxx
xxxx
xxxx

;
;
;
:

Provided that where a number of persons are charged with
separate offences and such persons do not fall within any of
the categories specified in this section, the Magistrate may, if
such persons by an application in writing, so desire, and, if
he is satisfied that such persons would not be prejudicially
affected thereby, and it is expedient so to do, try all such
persons together.”

CRLREVP 48/05

Page No.9 of 13

12.

The ingredients of the said provision require that the persons

accused must be accused of more than one offence of the same kind within the
period of 12 months. Moreover, the offences must have been committed by
them jointly.

With regard to the expression “offences of the same kind”

reference to Section 219 is necessary as indicated in the provision itself.
Section 219 (2) of the Code reads as under:“219. Three offences of same kind within year may be
charged together.
(1) xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx.
(2)

Offences are of the same kind when they are
punishable with the same amount of punishment under
the same section of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)
or of any special or local laws:
Provided that, for the purposes of this section, an
offence punishable under section 379 of the Indian
Penal Code (45 of 1 860) shall be deemed to be an
offence of the same kind as an offence punishable
under section 380 of the said Code, and that an offence
punishable under any section of the said Code, or of
any special or local law, shall be deemed to be an
offence of the same kind as an attempt to commit such
offence, when such an attempt is an offence.”

13.

Therefore, for the application of Section 223 (c) of the Code, it is

necessary that the persons accused ought to have been accused of jointly
committing other offences of the same kind. In the present case, the petitioners
are accused of jointly having committed the offence of theft insofar as the car
stereo stolen from the complainant N.P. Singh is concerned. The petitioners are
also accused of having jointly committed the theft of the stereo from the car of
CRLREVP 48/05

Page No.10 of 13

Mr Ashok Kumar. Therefore, de hors the question as to whether the petitioners
had jointly committed other similar offences, other than the two involved in the
present case, the provisions of Section 223 (c) of the Code would be attracted.
This is so because both the offences with respect to the theft of the car stereo
from the car of Mr N.P. Singh and the theft of the car stereo from Mr Ashok
Kumar's car fall under Section 379 IPC.

Since they possessed the stolen

articles, therefore, Section 411 has also been included and as they jointly
committed the crime, Section 34 is also invoked. It is another matter that the
petitioners in the course of the trial may be able to establish that: a) the two
offences were separate and distinct in which they are not involved jointly; b)
that they were not involved in the offences at all. However, at this stage, what
is to be seen is whether the persons have been accused of jointly committing
more than two offences of the same kind within the period of 12 months. The
two offences were committed in the intervening night of 18th and 19th June,
1998. Therefore, the stipulation with regard to the 12 month period is clearly
complied with. The offences are of the same kind within the meaning of
Section 219 of the Code and the petitioners have been accused of having
committed the offences jointly. That being the case, I find no infirmity in the
impugned order which directs that the petitioners be charged jointly for the
offences under Section 379/411/34 IPC.

CRLREVP 48/05

Page No.11 of 13

14.

With regard to the arguments on merits, it is well-settled that the

considerations which are relevant at the time of framing of charges and those at
the time of conclusion of the trial are entirely different. While grave suspicion
would entitle a court to frame charges, grave suspicion alone would not entitle
the court to convict a person in respect of the said charges. At the time of
framing of charges all that is necessary to see is that on the basis of the
documents produced by the prosecution whether a grave suspicion arises with
regard to the commission of the crime. The suspicion may be dispelled entirely
in the course of the trial because of lack of evidence or for other reasons, but if
the court has strong reasons to suspect that the crime was committed by the
accused, then it would not be in error if it frames charges accordingly. All the
arguments with regard to non-signing of disclosure statements and the recovery
memos can be and ought to be looked into in the course of the trial and it is
upto the trial court to come to the conclusion of acquittal or conviction as the
case may be upon a consideration of all these factors, including any other
evidence that may be lead. Based on the material available on record, I see no
reason as to why the impugned order requires to be interfered with.

15.

This revision petition is dismissed. It is made clear that nothing

expressed herein shall be utilised to the prejudice of any of the parties in the
course of the trial.

CRLREVP 48/05

Page No.12 of 13

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
( JUDGE )
May 11, 2007
δυττ

CRLREVP 48/05

Page No.13 of 13

