THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 16.07.2007

+

WP(C) No.7756/2005

RAJINDER KUMAR MITTAL

...Petitioner
- versus -

GOVT OF NCT OF DELHI AND ANOTHER
Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
For the Respondents

...Respondents

: Mr Mukesh Anand with Ms S. Tiwari and
Ms Zeba Khan
: Ms Monika Sharma

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

The petitioner seeks a direction to the respondents to deliver

possession of industrial Plot No.287, Sector-3, Pocket-1, measuring 250 sq.
metres in the Bawana Industrial Area, Delhi under the Relocation Scheme. It is
stated that the petitioner had made 100% payment together with the interest as
demanded by the respondent No.2 (DSIDC). The petitioner has also prayed
that the respondents be restrained from allotting the said plot to any other
person and to reserve the same for the petitioner.

WP(C)7756/05

Page No.1 of 7

2.

On the first day, when this matter came up for admission, this court

had directed that there would be a stay against the respondents from cancelling
the allotment of the petitioner with regard to the said plot and also from
allotting the same to any other person. The petitioner's case is that it had
applied for an industrial plot under the Relocation Scheme. The application
was accepted and the petitioner had made arrangements from the Delhi
Financial Corporation for a loan.

The petitioner had also made certain

payments to the DSIDC through the Delhi Financial Corporation. But, since
possession was not being given to the petitioner, the project which was to be
started by the petitioner on the allotted land could not be taken up, as a result of
which the Delhi Financial Corporation recalled the loan and the petitioner was
compelled to request for cancellation of the allotment and refund of the amount
already deposited alongwith interest. The said request had been accepted by
DSIDC and the entire amount which had been deposited by the petitioner upto
30.07.2003 had been refunded. Thereafter, a revival scheme was started by the
Delhi Financial Corporation in respect of revival of loans. The petitioner
applied under that scheme and the Delhi Financial Corporation accepted the
application.

Consequent upon the reinstatement of the loan from Delhi

Financial Corporation, the petitioner once again applied for allotment and
purchase of the very same plot which it had given up earlier. Pursuant thereto,
the petitioner deposited certain sums of money and even the interest on delayed
payment. It is on the basis of this that the petitioner is claiming that the said
WP(C)7756/05

Page No.2 of 7

plot be handed over to the petitioner. On the other hand, the learned counsel
for the respondent No.2/DSIDC submitted that earlier the plot had been allotted
to the petitioner, but the petitioner had voluntarily sought cancellation of the
allotment and refund of the amount. The same had been acceded to by the
respondent No.2/DSIDC and the entire money deposited by the petitioner till
that stage had been refunded. As such, the petitioner had lost its right to claim
allotment.

She further submitted that insofar as the revival scheme is

concerned, that was of the Delhi Financial Corporation. As regards the reallotment scheme of the respondent No.2/DSIDC, the petitioner did not qualify
for the same inasmuch as the petitioner's case was one of voluntary withdrawal
and not of cancellation consequent upon default in payment. It is only the latter
category of cases which were considered for re-allotment.

3.

As noted above, the petitioner had applied for allotment under the

Relocation Scheme. The application was accepted and upto 30.07.2003, the
petitioner had deposited a sum of Rs 6,67,500/-. By a letter dated 27.05.2003,
the Delhi Financial Corporation which had sanctioned a term loan of Rs 7.37
lakhs to the petitioner, issued a notice for recall of the loan on the ground that
the petitioner had failed to initiate action for implementing the project and this,
according to the Delhi Financial Corporation, amounted to a breach of the
terms and conditions of the loan. A copy of this notice for recall of the loan
was also sent to the Chief Manager (DSIDC).
WP(C)7756/05

Page No.3 of 7

4.

On 30.07.2003, the petitioner wrote to the

respondent No.2 /

DSIDC requesting for cancellation of the allotment and refund of Rs 6,67,500/plus interest. It is interesting to note the exact expression used by the petitioner
for seeking cancellation of the allotment and refund:“Due to certain unavoidable circumstances we could not
remit the next installment of the plot to you. Now, we
understand that the allotment of plot has been cancelled by
you due to non-payment.”
This was followed by a further request for refund on 15.09.2003. In this letter,
the petitioner, inter alia, stated as under:“Due to some reason we are not interested for taking
allotment / possession of the Industrial Plot under the relocation scheme. Under circumstances it is requested that
the amount deposited by us may please be refunded with
interest to us.”
5.

It is apparent from the aforesaid two letters that the petitioner was

not interested in taking allotment / possession of the industrial plot under the
Relocation Scheme and it is for this reason that the petitioner requested that the
amount be refunded with interest. The respondent No.2/DSIDC permitted the
voluntary withdrawal on 09.12.2003, as indicated in the original file pertaining
to the petitioner at page No.C-119, which had been produced by the learned
counsel for the respondent No.2/DSIDC. Thereafter, on 22.12.2003, an amount
of Rs 6,91,386/- was refunded which included the interest amount also. The

WP(C)7756/05

Page No.4 of 7

said payment was made to the Delhi Financial Corporation for onward
transmission to the petitioner as per the tripartite arrangement made between
the petitioner, the Delhi Financial Corporation and DSIDC. The matter rested
there.

6.

Seven months later, on or about 16.07.2004, the DSIDC received

payments of Rs 6,82,000/- and 3,68,000/- totalling to Rs 10.5 lakhs from Delhi
Financial Corporation on account of the petitioner. Prior to this receipt, there is
a letter written by Delhi Financial Corporation to DSIDC on 11/8.06.2004 with
regard to this payment. Thereafter, a letter dated 18.08.2004 was written by the
petitioner to DSIDC requesting for possession in view of the fact that full
payment of Rs 10.5 lakhs had been made. This letter also contained a request
for computing the interest on delayed payment. It is pertinent to note that a
letter dated 22.09.2004 was issued by the DSIDC to the petitioner indicating
the amount of interest on delayed payment to be Rs 2,81,723/-. According to
the learned counsel for the respondent No.2, this letter was mistakenly issued
because of the volume of cases that they were to handle and since the deposit
had been received from Delhi Financial Corporation, it was treated as a routine
case. The amount was also credited with the DSIDC on 12.10.2004. This had
been paid earlier by the petitioner by a challan dated 11.10.2004. Thereafter,
the petitioner sent a request for reconsideration on 22.10.2004 and this was
followed by similar requests, none of which were responded to by the
WP(C)7756/05

Page No.5 of 7

respondent No.2/DSIDC. Therefore, the petitioner was constrained to file this
writ petition which was filed on 29.04.2005. As noted above, the first hearing
of this case was on 02.05.2005. That also happens to be the date of the letter
issued by the DSIDC enclosing the refund of the entire amount of Rs
13,31,723/- made by the petitioner, as indicated above. The learned counsel for
the respondent No.2/DSIDC stated that the very fact that the cheque was
prepared on 25.04.2005 and bore the number 014489 indicated that the same
had been done prior to the passing of the order of this court.

7.

The entire issue in this writ petition is whether the petitioner is

entitled to re-allotment of the plot. According to the petitioner, it is covered
under the scheme whereby re-allotment was permitted to those persons whose
earlier allotments could not fructify because of the re-call of their loans.
According to the learned counsel for the respondent No.2/DSIDC, the
petitioner did not fall under this scheme because he had sought voluntary
withdrawal. There is no doubt that the loan amount was recalled by the Delhi
Financial Corporation, as already indicated above. But there is also no doubt of
the fact that the petitioner sought cancellation of the allotment and refund of the
amounts paid by virtue of their two letters dated 30.07.2003 and 15.09.2003. In
the first letter, the expression used by the petitioner was that he was seeking a
cancellation because of “unavoidable circumstances”.

This was further

accentuated by his second letter which is dated 15.09.2003 wherein the
WP(C)7756/05

Page No.6 of 7

petitioner specifically stated that “due to some reason he was not interested for
taking the allotment / possession of the industrial plot under the re-location
scheme”. None of these letters indicated that the petitioner was withdrawing
his allotment because of the recall of the loan by the Delhi Financial
Corporation.

Therefore, while it may be true that the Delhi Financial

Corporation had recalled the loan, it was also equally true that the petitioner
was for other reasons not interested in pursuing the allotment. That being the
case, it becomes very clear that the petitioner voluntarily withdrew the
allotment and, therefore, would not fall within the ambit of the scheme for reallotment, as indicated by the respondent No.2/DSIDC.

8.

In these circumstances, this writ petition is dismissed. The interim

order, granted earlier, stands vacated.

July 16, 2007
δυττ

WP(C)7756/05

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)

Page No.7 of 7

