THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

•

Judgment delivered on: 23.04.2007
WP(C) No.5509/2005

•

INDIAN BEACH KABADDI ASSOCIATION

...Petitioner

- versus UNION OF INDIA & OTHERS

...Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr Vishwander Verma
For the Respondent No.1
: Mr R.V. Sinha
For the Respondent No.2.
: Mr S.K. Dubey
For the Respondent No.3.
: Ms Geetanjali Mohan

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J
1.

The petitioner is aggrieved by the order dated 08.02.2005 issued by

the respondent No.1 (Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, Government of
India). The petitioner claims to be a society registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860 under the name “Indian Beach Kabaddi Association”.
Its registered office is located at E-322, Gali No.5, West Vinod Nagar, Delhi110092. The registration certificate was granted to the petitioner society on
WP(C)5509/05

Page No.1 of 4

07.05.2003 as per Annexure-P-2 to the petition. The petitioner had applied for
recognition on 20.05.2003. The same has been denied by the impugned order
dated 08.02.2005 passed by the respondent No.1 The reasons for denying
recognition are indicated in the impugned order itself. The same reads as
under:“Subject:-Recognition to Indian Beach Kabaddi AssociationReg.
Sir,
I am directed to refer to your correspondence with
this Ministry regarding on the above subject and to say that the
proposal has been considered in this Ministry. After due
consideration, it has been decided to not give recognition to your
Federation as Beach Kabaddi is not popular in India or at
International Level and also not having any International
federation of this game. Besides, as per guidelines for
recognition of NSF clause 3.12 which stipulate “that there would
be only one recognized Federation for each discipline of sport,
irrespective of the fact that the particular sports caters to
youngsters, men, women or veterans. In the present case,
Amateur Kabaddi Federation of India is the recognized National
Sports Federation by this Ministry. Moreover, AKFI recognized
National Sports Federation by this Ministry. Moreover, AKFI
has decided to include Beach and Circle Kabaddi in their regular
championships and events abroad.”
2.

The counsel for the petitioner as well as the counsel for the

respondents were heard.

The respondent No.1 has issued guidelines for

recognition of National Sports Federations. A copy of the same has been
placed as Annexure-P-3. Para 3.3 of the said guidelines reads as under:“3.3
The Federation must have actively existed for more
than three years on the date of application for recognition. Its

WP(C)5509/05

Page No.2 of 4

various business meetings, as required under its Constitution,
should have been duly held.”
It is also necessary to note para 3.12 and para 5 of the said guidelines which
read as under:“3.12.
There would be only one recognised Federation for
each discipline of sport, irrespective of the fact that the particular
sport caters to youngesters, men, women or veterans. However,
this condition shall not apply to Federations already recognised by
the Department.”
xxxx
xxxx
xxxx
xxxx
xxxx
5.
Granting of Recognition:
5.1
Recognition of a federation shall not be a matter of
right and shall be purely at the discretion of the Govt. of India who
may grant recognition subject to such terms and conditions as it
deems fit.”
3.

Reading para 3.3 of the guidelines, it is apparent that the federation

seeking recognition must have actively existed for more than three years on the
date of application for recognition. The petitioner society was registered on
07.05.2003 and made the application shortly thereafter on 20.05.2003. It was
clearly not in existence for more than three years on the date of application for
recognition.

4.

According to para 3.12 of the said guidelines, only one recognised

federation was required for each discipline of sport. The Amateur Kabaddi
Federation of India has already been recognised by the respondent No.1.
According to the Amateur Kabaddi Federation of India, Beach Kabaddi is

WP(C)5509/05

Page No.3 of 4

included in their regular championships and events abroad and, therefore,
another federation could not be recognised. It is also to be noted that para 5 of
the guidelines indicates that recognition of a federation shall not be as a matter
of right and would be purely in the discretion of the Government. Of course,
the discretion has to be exercised in a fair and reasonable manner. I have
examined the impugned order dated 08.02.2005 and find that there is no cause
for any interference with the impugned order on this count.

There is no

material to indicate that the discretion has been exercised unreasonably or
arbitrarily or unfairly.

5.

Apart from this, as already noted above, the petitioner was

ineligible to apply in view of para 3.3 of the said guidelines.
This writ petition is dismissed.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
April 23, 2007
δυττ

WP(C)5509/05

Page No.4 of 4

