THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 22.02.2008

+

RP No.445/2007 IN ARB. P. 101/2005

MR SHIVRAJ GUPTA & ANR

... Petitioners

- versus MR DESHRAJ GUPTA & ORS

... Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr A.S. Chandhiok, Sr Advocate with Mr Vikas Dhawan
and Mr Abhimanyu Mahajan and Ms Vibha Dhawan
For the Respondent
: Mr Jayant Bhushan, Sr Advocate with Mr Girish Kumar
Mishra and Mr Manish

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

YES

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

YES

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ? YES

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J(ORAL)
1.

This petition has been filed by the respondent seeking a

review of the order dated 07.12.2007 which was passed in arbitration
petition No. 101/2005, which in turn had been filed invoking the
provisions of Section 11 (6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
1996 (hereinafter referred to as the 'said Act') for the appointment of an

RP445/07 in Arb. P. 101/2005

Page No.1 of 8

arbitrator. On 07.12.2007 when this matter was heard and disposed of,
counsel for the parties had agreed that a sole arbitrator be appointed.
Consequently, the sole arbitrator was appointed by virtue of the said
order dated 07.12.2007. The respondent has moved this review petition
seeking a review of that order and for the appointment of another person
in place of the one appointed by the order dated 07.12.2007.

2.

A preliminary objection has been taken by the learned counsel

for the petitioner/ non-applicant that a review petition is not
maintainable. It was submitted by Mr Chandhiok, the learned senior
counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner/ non-applicant, that the
appointment of an arbitrator under Section 11(6) of the said Act is done
in terms of the said Act. The Chief Justice or his designate functions
within the four corners of the said Act. An appointment, once made
under Section 11 (6) of the said Act, attains finality as would be clear
from the provisions of Section 11 (7) of the said Act itself. He submits
that no specific provision has been made in the Act for review of an
order passed under Section 11 (6) of the said Act whereby an arbitrator
or arbitral tribunal is appointed.

Since the powers of appointment of an

arbitrator under Section 11(6) are exercised under the said Act, it is only

RP445/07 in Arb. P. 101/2005

Page No.2 of 8

that Act which could have given the powers of review. Since no power
of review has been given in the said Act, the provisions of Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter referred to as the 'CPC') cannot be
introduced into such proceedings. The learned counsel then referred to
provisions of Section 114 CPC to point out that, in any event, none of the
three instances under which a review is permissible, are satisfied. He
submitted that, therefore, the provisions of Order 47 CPC cannot at all be
invoked. He also contended that when the Chief Justice or his designate
exercises his powers under Section 11 (6) of the said Act, he does not
function as a court and, therefore, provisions of the CPC cannot be
invoked to seek a review of an order passed thereunder.

3.

Mr Jayant Bhushan, the learned senior counsel appearing on

behalf of the applicant/ review petitioner, submitted that this Court has
the power to review inasmuch as the order dated 07.12.2007 was a
judicial order and not an administrative one. He submitted that it was a
judicial order passed by a Judge of the High Court, which, in any event,
has inherent power to review its orders. Mr Jayant Bhushan placed
reliance on a decision of a Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court in
the case of Maheshwari Brothers Ltd. v. National Highways Authority

RP445/07 in Arb. P. 101/2005

Page No.3 of 8

of India: 2007 (1) ARB.L.R 64 (Cal) wherein the said Division Bench
was of the view that in Section 9 proceedings under the Act, the Court
functioned as a 'Court' as defined in Section 2 (e) of the said Act and,
therefore, since there was no specific exclusion of the review power of a
civil Court, the said Court would have the power to review its own orders
passed under Section 9 of the said Act.

4.

In rejoinder, Mr Chandhiok placed reliance on the

Constitution Bench decision of the Supreme Court in the case of SBP &
Co. v. Patel Engineering Ltd. & Anr.: (2005) 8 SCC 618 wherein the
powers under Section 11 (6) of the said Act were considered threadbare
and the Supreme Court came to the conclusion that the power was a
judicial power and not an administrative power. In particular, he drew
my attention to paragraph 15 of the said decision, which reads as under:“15. Normally a persona designata cannot delegate his
power to another. Here, the Chef Justice of the High Court
or the Chief Justice of India is given the power to
designate another to exercise the power conferred on him
under Section 11(6) of the Act. If the power is a judicial
power, it is obvious that the power could be conferred
only on a judicial authority and in this case, logically on
another Judge of the High Court or on a Judge of the
Supreme Court. It is logical to consider the conferment of
the power on the Chief Justice of the High Court and on
the Chief Justice of India as presiding Judges of the High
Court and the Supreme Court and the exercise of the
RP445/07 in Arb. P. 101/2005

Page No.4 of 8

power so conferred, is exercise of judicial power/authority
as presiding Judges of the respective courts. Replacing of
the word 'court' in the Model Law with the expression
"Chief Justice" in the Act, appears to be more for
excluding the exercise of power by the District Court and
by the court as an entity leading to obvious consequences
in the matter of the procedure to be followed and the
rights of appeal governing the matter. The departure from
Article 11 of the Model Law and the use of the expression
"Chief Justice" cannot be taken to exclude the theory of
its being an adjudication under Section 11 of the Act by a
judicial authority.”
He submitted that when the Chief Justice or his designate exercises
power under Section 11 (6) of the said Act, the Chief Justice or his
designate does not function as a 'Court' though they act in exercise of
judicial powers. He submitted that the word 'Court' had been defined in
the said Act under Section 2 (1) (e). Therefore, at all places where the
word 'Court' is used in the Act, the meaning given in Section 2 (1) (e) has
to be ascribed to that word wherever it is used.

He submitted that the

word 'Court' is not used in Section 11 (6) and the only expressions used
are “the Chief Justice or any person or institution designated by him”.
Therefore, the meaning of the word 'Court', as defined in Section 2 (1)(e),
cannot be imported into the provisions of Section 11 (6) of the said Act.
He submits that the Calcutta High Court decision, relied upon by Mr
Jayant Bhushan, can be distinguished because in that case the Court was
concerned with the question of review of an order passed in exercise of

RP445/07 in Arb. P. 101/2005

Page No.5 of 8

the powers conferred under Section 9 of the said Act. He submits that
Section 9 of the said Act has a specific reference to 'Court' and, therefore,
the meaning ascribed in Section 2 (1) (e) of the said Act would come into
play. That, according to him, is the distinguishing feature of the decision
in the Calcutta High Court and the case that presents itself before me.

5.

I have considered the arguments advanced by the learned

counsel for the parties and given deep thought to what has been
submitted. It is well settled that the power of review has to be given by
the statute.

Though, the High Courts, being courts of plenary

jurisdiction, have inherent powers of review. But the question that arises
in the present case is whether an order passed under Section 11 (6) of the
said Act would amount to an order passed by the High Court or, for that
matter, a Court. The answer is, in my opinion, provided by paragraph 18
of the Supreme Court decision in the case of SBP & Co. (supra), which
reads as under:“18. It is true that the power under Section 11(6) of the
Act is not conferred on the Supreme Court or on the
High Court, but it is conferred on the Chief Justice of
India or the Chief Justice of the High Court. One
possible reason for specifying the authority as the Chief
Justice, could be that if it were merely the conferment of
the power on the High Court, or the Supreme Court, the
matter would be governed by the normal procedure of
RP445/07 in Arb. P. 101/2005

Page No.6 of 8

that Court, including the right of appeal and the
Parliament obviously wanted to avoid that situation,
since one of the objects was to restrict the interference
by Courts in the arbitral process. Therefore, the power
was conferred on the highest judicial authority in the
country and in the State in their capacities as Chief
Justices. They have been conferred the power or the right
to pass an order contemplated by Section 11 of the Act.
We have already seen that it is not possible to envisage
that the power is conferred on the Chief Justice as
persona designata. Therefore, the fact that the power is
conferred on the Chief Justice, and not on the court
presided over by him is not sufficient to hold that the
power thus conferred is merely an administrative power
and is not a judicial power.”
(underlining added)
After reading the aforesaid portion of the Supreme Court decision, it
immediately becomes clear that the power under Section 11 (6) of the
said Act is not conferred on the High Court but is conferred on the Chief
Justice of the High Court. The Supreme Court has also given one of the
possible reasons for specifying the authority as the Chief Justice and for
not conferring any power on the High Court. The possible reason given
by the Supreme Court is that had the power been conferred on the High
Court, then the matter would be governed by the normal procedure of
that Court, including the right of appeal and Parliament obviously
wanted to avoid that situation, since one of the objects was to restrict the
interference by courts in the arbitral process. It is in this context that the
Supreme Court concluded that the power was conferred on the highest

RP445/07 in Arb. P. 101/2005

Page No.7 of 8

judicial authority in the country and in the State in their capacities as
Chief Justices. It is obvious from a reading of the said observations of
the Supreme Court that the power that is exercised under Section 11 (6)
by the Chief Justice or his designate is not a power which is exercised by
them as a Court and, therefore, would not be governed by the normal
procedure of that court which includes the right of appeal as well as the
power of review, revision etc. In these circumstances, I am of the view
that a review petition would not be maintainable in respect of an order
passed under Section 11 (6) of the said Act.
This petition is dismissed.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
February 22, 2008
SR

RP445/07 in Arb. P. 101/2005

Page No.8 of 8

