THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 20.07.2007

+

CRL REV. P. No.428/1999

BHAGWANT SINGH

... Petitioner
- versus -

SARDAR MANMOHAN SINGH & OTHERS

... Respondent

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Ms Purnima Maheshwari
For the Respondent
: Mr B.B. Sharma

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ?

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J
1.

This criminal revision petition has been filed by the

complainant (Bhagwant Singh) and is directed against the judgment
dated 23.08.1999 delivered by the learned Additional Sessions Judge,
Delhi acquitting the accused Manmohan Singh (respondent No.1), Sushil
Kumar (respondent No.4), Premdev Jaggi (respondent No.2) and
Narender Kaur (respondent No.3) in respect of the offences they were
charged for.

Manmohan Singh, Sushil Kumar, Premdev Jaggi and

CRLREVP 428/99

Page No.1 of 14

Narender Kaur faced trial under Sections 307/34 IPC for allegedly
attempting to commit the murder of Damyanti Kaur who is the wife of
the complainant (Bhagwant Singh). The said accused also faced trial
under Sections 324/34 for allegedly voluntarily causing simple injuries
by throwing acid on Bhagwant Singh and Manjit Kaur (daughter of
Bhagwant Singh).

2.

The case for the prosecution was that Bhagwant Singh was a

tenant of the accused Premdev Jaggi in a portion of House No.7/12, Tilak
Nagar, Delhi. In the tenanted portion, the said Bhagwant Singh resided
alongwith his wife (Damyanti) and daughter (Manjit Kaur) as also his
son.

Apparently, there was discord between Bhagwant Singh and

Premdev Jaggi which was based upon a landlord-tenant dispute in
respect of the said portion of the house under the tenancy of Bhagwant
Singh. It was the case of the prosecution that on 07.07.1986, there was
an altercation between Bhagwant Singh and Premdev Jaggi. The matter
was apparently settled with the intervention of people from the locality.
It was further alleged that on the next day, i.e., on 08.07.1986, at about
10 p.m., the incident in question took place. It was alleged that at that
point of time, Bhagwant Singh, his wife (Damyanti) and daughter

CRLREVP 428/99

Page No.2 of 14

(Manjit Kaur) were in their room. From that place, the entrance of the
house was visible and they saw that a two-wheeler had stopped in front
of the house. The two-wheeler was driven by Manmohan Singh and
another person was the pillion rider. Both these persons got off the twowheeler. The other person had a bottle in his hand which Manmohan
Singh took while entering the house. Immediately thereafter, Premdev
Jaggi and his wife (Narender Kaur) are alleged to have exhorted the said
Manmohan Singh and the other person to teach their tenant a lesson.
Thereupon, it was alleged that Manmohan Singh violently threw the
bottle into the room in which Bhagwant Singh, his wife (Damyanti) and
daughter (Manjit Kaur) were present. The bottle burst on impact with the
floor and and the acid flew in all directions. Bhagwant Singh, Damyanti
and Manjit Kaur all received acid burn injuries.

It is alleged that

immediately thereafter, the accused persons ran away from the scene. As
per the MLCs, Damyanti received 30% acid burns, Bhagwant Singh
received 10% acid burns and Manjit Kaur received 8% acid burns.
Exhibit PW-4/A is the MLC concerning Bhagwant Singh and it indicates
that he received acid burns on the front of his left leg and knee as also on
the front of his right leg and foot. Exhibit PW-4/B is the MLC pertaining
to Damyanti which indicates that the acid burn injuries were of a

CRLREVP 428/99

Page No.3 of 14

grievous nature both on the front and the back and that she remained
hospitalised from 08.07.1986 to 04.08.1986.

Exhibit PW-4/C is the

MLC pertaining to Manjit Kaur and it indicates that she received 2% acid
burns on her left arm and 6% acid burns on the front of both of her legs.

3.

The learned Additional Sessions Judge examined the evidence

in detail and came to the conclusion that the prosecution has not been
able to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt. The learned Additional
Sessions Judge noted that there can be no doubt that on the night of
occurrence, Bhagwant Singh, Damyanti Kaur and Manjit Kaur received
the injuries as indicated in the MLCs. However, he was concerned with
the real question as to how and in what manner the injuries were caused.
He noted that the case of the prosecution was that accused (Manmohan
Singh) threw acid as a result of exhortation made by the landlord and his
wife. He also noted the defence version that Bhagwant Singh lost his
cool on seeing Manmohan Singh and that he brought an acid bottle from
the toilet and while he was advancing towards Manmohan Singh, his
wife tried to prevent him and in the process, the bottle fell on the floor
and burst causing injuries to Bhagwant Singh, his wife (Damyanti) and
his daughter (Manjit Kaur).

CRLREVP 428/99

Page No.4 of 14

4.

The trial court while examining the question of motive behind

the alleged incident as per the prosecution story came to the conclusion
that the motive could not have existed. The trial court noted that when
the altercation took place initially on 07.07.1986 between Bhagwant
Singh and Premdev Jaggi, the matter was compromised. The terms of
compromise were reduced to writing and the same had been exhibited as
Exhibit PW-9/D-A. According to that document, people of the locality
had intervened in the dispute and they had agreed to give their decision
on 11.07.1986 and the parties had agreed to abide by their decision. It is
in this context that the trial court observed that:“Any prudent man in the position of Prem Dev Jaggi
would have preferred to wait till 11.7.86 for the
decision of the arbiters and he would not have done
anything to prejudice their mind before the date of
decision. As long as the people of the locality had
not given their decision as undertaken in Ex. PW9/DA, there was hope for the landlord and he could have
reasonably expected that he would be able to get the
premises vacated without much fuss. He must have
appreciated that by inviting any person to throw acid
on the tenant before the date of decision he would
frustrate the compromise and thereby give a handle to
the tenant to wriggle out. Therefore, I am not
prepared to believe that accused Prem Dev Jaggi and
his wife invited the other accused on 8.7.86 with a
mischief in mind and with the object of causing
injuries to the tenant and his family.”

CRLREVP 428/99

Page No.5 of 14

5.

The trial court then considered the nature of injuries and tried

to match it with the prosecution version. It came to the conclusion that
the injuries were totally incompatible with the posture in which
Damyanti Kaur claimed to be sitting at the time of occurrence and that
this in itself created a doubt about the prosecution story. The learned
Additional Sessions Judge noted that both PW-2 (Damyanti Kaur) and
PW-3 (Bhagwant Singh) stated that when Manmohan Singh threw the
bottle, Damyanti Kaur was sitting with her back against the wall and that
the bottle fell in front of her. The learned Additional Sessions Judge was
of the view that if that was the case, then the injuries ought to have been
on the front portion and there could not have been any injury on her
back. However, the MLC (Exhibit PW-4/B), which pertains to Damyanti
Kaur, revealed that she received injuries both on the front as well as on
the back portion of her two legs as well as her lower back. Thus, he
came to the conclusion that the MLC was totally incompatible with the
posture in which Damyanti Kaur claimed to be sitting at the time of
occurrence.

6.

Doubts also arose in the mind of the learned Additional

Sessions Judge with regard to the prosecution version that all the accused

CRLREVP 428/99

Page No.6 of 14

ran away after the occurrence. It was noted that the evidence on this
aspect was conflicting. While PW-3 (Bhagwant Singh) did say that all
the four accused ran away after the occurrence, PW-2 (Damyanti Kaur)
used the word “both” implying thereby that only two accused ran away.
PW-7 (Charanjit Singh), who is the son of Bhagwant Singh and who was
purportedly standing outside the house, stated that he had seen
Manmohan Singh and Sushil going away on the scooter. This, therefore,
did not explain as to what Premdev Jaggi and his wife (Narender Kaur)
did. Did they also run away or did they remain in the house ?

7.

The learned Additional Sessions Judge was also not

impressed by the fact that when Manmohan Singh was arrested on
09.07.1986, he was still wearing the bush-shirt and banyan which had
acid burns on them. In this context, he was of the opinion that it did not
appeal to common sense that Manmohan Singh would carry the acid
burnt clothes on his person for so long after the occurrence just in order
to invite trouble for himself.

8.

With regard to the acquisition of the acid bottle, the

prosecution had alleged that Manmohan Singh had purchased the same

CRLREVP 428/99

Page No.7 of 14

from the shop of PW-1 (Narayan Dutt). However, Narayan Dutt did not
support the prosecution's version inasmuch as he had stated that he did
not sell any bottle of acid to Manmohan Singh. This also dented the case
of the prosecution, in the view of the learned Additional Sessions Judge.

9.

With regard to accused Sushil Kumar, the learned Additional

Sessions Judge was not even prepared to believe that he had gone to the
house of Bhagwant Singh on the night of the occurrence or that he had
shared a common intention with the other accused. For all these reasons,
the trial court found that the prosecution had not been able to prove its
case beyond reasonable doubts and, therefore, acquitted the accused.

10.

The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the

testimonies of the prosecution witnesses corroborated each other on the
point of injuries as well as the place of injuries. She submitted that the
medical reports were duly proved and the injuries on Damyanti Kaur
were opined to be grievous. She further submitted that the identity of the
accused persons as well as the roles played by them had been stated in
the FIR and were duly proved by the prosecution witnesses. As regards
the fact that Manmohan Singh was wearing acid burnt clothes, it was

CRLREVP 428/99

Page No.8 of 14

submitted that although he was arrested on 09.07.1986, it was only after
a few hours of registration of the FIR and, therefore, it was natural for
him to be wearing those clothes at the time of his arrest. It was also
submitted that the learned Additional Sessions Judge was wrong in
concluding that the accused Sushil Kumar could not have had a common
intention merely because he was holding the acid bottle.

It was

contended by the learned counsel that an acid bottle emits a pungent
smell and it could not be presumed that he was not aware of the contents
thereof.

Therefore, the learned Additional Sessions Judge had

misdirected himself in coming to the conclusion that Sushil Kumar was
unaware of the contents and, therefore, did not share a common intention
with the other accused. It was, therefore, submitted that the order of
acquittal deserves to be set aside and the matter be remanded to the trial
court for retrial.

The learned counsel for the petitioner had placed

reliance on the decision of Ram Briksh Singh and Others v. Ambika
Yadav and Another: 2004 (7) SCC 665 wherein the Supreme Court had
observed that “the revisional court can set aside an order of acquittal
and remit the case for retrial where the trial court overlooked material
evidence in passing the order”.

CRLREVP 428/99

Page No.9 of 14

11.

The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents 1

to 4, submitted that the trial court had properly examined and weighed
the evidence of the prosecution and thoroughly considered the facts and
circumstances of the case as well as the legal aspects. He submitted that
no legal irregularity or impropriety in the conduct of the trial has been
pointed out by the learned counsel for the petitioner. Referring to the
decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Khetra Basi Samal and
Another etc. v. The State of Orissa etc.: 1970 CRI.L.J. 369 =(AIR 1970
SC 272), he submitted that in a revision petition at the instance of a
private complainant, the revisional court cannot re-appreciate the
evidence and upset the findings of fact. He also submitted that there is
no grievance that the trial court had shut out any evidence which the
prosecution wanted to produce or that the trial court had admitted any
inadmissible evidence or overlooked any material evidence.

He

submitted that the trial court, after examining the entire evidence
produced by the prosecution, came to the conclusion on an appreciation
of evidence that the prosecution has not been able to prove its case
beyond reasonable doubt. Having once come to such a conclusion, there
was no option left with the trial court, but to acquit the accused. He,

CRLREVP 428/99

Page No.10 of 14

therefore, submitted that what the petitioner is seeking to do is to ask this
court to re-appreciate the evidence, which is not permissible.

12.

With regard to the powers of revision of the High Court, a

series of decisions have been rendered by the Supreme Court. Those
decisions include:(i)

D. Stephens v. Nosibolla: AIR 1951 SC 196;

(ii)

K. Chinnaswamy Reddy v. State of Andhra pradesh and
Another: AIR 1962 SC 1788;

(iii)

Dhirendra Nath Mitra and Anr. v. Mukanda Lal Sen: AIR 1955
SC 584;

(iv)

Mahendra Pratap Singh v. Sarju Singh: (1968) 2 SCR 287;

(v)

Ramu v. Jagannath: 1995 SCC (Cri) 181;

(vi)

Vimal Singh v. Khuman Singh and Another: 1998 SCC (Cri)
1574;

(vii)

Hydru v. State of Kerala: (2004) 13 SCC 374.

The principles that can be culled out from the aforesaid decisions of the
Supreme Court with regard to the scope and ambit of the powers of the
High Court in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction under Section 401 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 are that the powers are very
limited and that the revisional court does not function as a court of
appeal and, therefore, cannot re-appreciate the evidence.
CRLREVP 428/99

It cannot

Page No.11 of 14

interfere with an order of acquittal unless it is an exceptional case of
procedural irregularity or overlooking of material evidence or misreading
of the same, which is manifest and, which results in a flagrant
miscarriage of justice. As noted in D. Stephens (supra), the revisional
jurisdiction sought to be invoked by a private complainant against an
order of acquittal cannot be so invoked merely because the lower court
had taken a wrong view of the law and misappreciated the evidence on
record. As pointed out in Dhirendra Nath Mitra (supra), it may well be
that a different view of the available evidence could have been taken, but
that would not be enough to justify interference in revision upon an
application by a private party to set aside an order of acquittal. In Hydru
(supra), the Supreme Court observed that if upon re-appreciation of the
evidence, two views are possible, it is not permissible even for the
appellate court in an appeal against acquittal to interfere with the same,
much less in a revision petition where the powers are much narrower.

13.

From the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the

petitioner, it is apparent that what he is requesting this court to do is to
re-appreciate the evidence. The sum and substance of the arguments
advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the trial court

CRLREVP 428/99

Page No.12 of 14

misappreciated the evidence on record and ought to have returned a
finding of guilt, rather than of acquittal. If the contentions of the learned
counsel for the petitioner were to be accepted by this court, then it would
amount to a re-appreciation of the evidence which is not permissible. As
indicated above, the trial court has examined the entire evidence and has
considered the question of motive, the nature of injuries, the
corroboration amongst the prosecution witnesses with regard to various
parts of the incident in question, etc. After doing so, the trial court in its
wisdom has arrived at the conclusion that the prosecution has not been
able to establish its case beyond reasonable doubt.

No procedural

impropriety or irregularity of such a nature as would warrant interference
in a revision petition has been pointed out on behalf of the petitioner.
Therefore, the only way this court could upset the findings arrived at by
the trial court would be by re-appreciating the evidence on record and
arriving at a different conclusion.

As already indicated above, this

course of action is not open to this court in exercise of its revisional
jurisdiction against an order of acquittal.
For these reasons, this revision petition is dismissed.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
( JUDGE )
CRLREVP 428/99

Page No.13 of 14

July 20, 2007
δυττ

CRLREVP 428/99

Page No.14 of 14

