THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Judgment delivered on :21.02.2007
WP(C) No.13751/2006
ADITYA COLLEGE OF PHARMACY & SCIENCE

...Petitioner

- versus GURU GOBIND SINGH I.P. UNIVERSITY & ANR.

...Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr Asim Mehrotra with Ms Shikha Sapra
For the Respondent 1
: Mr G.D. Goyal.
For Respondent No.2
: Mr S.P. Arora.

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

YES

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

YES

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

YES

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

This petition has been filed on behalf of the Aditya College of

Pharmacy and Science. Inter alia the following prayers were made in the writ
petition:“a) Issue an appropriate Writ, direction or Order in the nature
of mandamus commanding the Respondent to send students
to the petitioner's college for the B. Pharmacy 1st year
course academic session 2006-2007;
b)

Issue an appropriate Writ, direction or order in the nature of
certiorari quashing the letter dated 11.8.2006 issued by the
Respondent No.1.”

WP(C)13751.06

Page No.1 of 8

2.

The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the dispute in

the present case pertains to the question of affiliation of the petitioner with the
respondent No.1 (Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University) (hereinafter
referred to as 'the University'). The learned counsel submitted that the All India
Council of Technical Education which is constituted under All India Council of
Technical Education Act, 1987 (hereinafter referred to as the `said Act') is the
authority which grants approval for establishment of new technical
colleges/institutions in view of the powers and functions granted under Section
10(k) of the said Act. He submitted that by virtue of letters dated 28.7.2006
and 11.8.2006 the AICTE had granted approval on the terms and conditions
mentioned therein as also in the letter dated 8.5.2006. He submitted that on the
strength of this approval granted by the AICTE, the University ought to have
granted affiliation. Instead of doing so, the University issued the impugned
letter dated 11.8.2006 which required the petitioner to furnish documents
pertaining to details of permanent land / campus, Land Use Certificate,
Allotment Papers, Ownership Documents, Safety Certificate from the
Competent Authority, Layout Plan of the building duly sanctioned/approved by
Competent Authority, fresh approval of AICTE for conduct of B Pharma
programme for the Session 2007-08, No Objection Certificate of the
Department of Training and Technical Education, Government of NCT of
Delhi for the Academic Session 2007-08, Concurrence of Pharmacy Council of
India and details of academic facilities in terms of lab, library and faculty.
WP(C)13751.06

Page No.2 of 8

These details were being sought for the Academic Session 2007-2008. Insofar
as the Academic of 2006-2007 was concerned, the University, by the said letter
dated 11.8.2006, informed the petitioner that its request for affiliation could not
be acceded to since the admission period for B Pharma Programme was over in
terms of the calendar. The second counseling was over and even the academic
Session had commenced on 1.8.2006.

3.

In view of the said letter of 11.8.2006 and in view of the fact that

the passage of time has rendered it is impossible to grant affiliation for the
Academic Year 2006-2007, the letter dated 11.8.2006 is only relevant for the
purposes of the Academic Year 2007-2008. Since various stipulations had
been made in the letter requiring the petitioner to furnish documents and details
and approvals, the learned counsel for the petitioner has raised the issue that all
these details are not necessary for the purpose of grant of affiliation particularly
when AICTE has already granted approval. However, it must be noted that the
approval that has been granted by the AICTE was for the Academic Year 20062007 and not for the Academic Year 2007-2008. The learned counsel for the
petitioner points out that an application for grant of approval by AICTE for the
Academic Year 2007-2008 has also been made to the AICTE and the same is
under consideration. He is only concerned about the additional requirements
that the University is placing upon the petitioner by virtue of the impugned
letter dated 11.8.2006.
WP(C)13751.06

Page No.3 of 8

4.

The learned counsel for the petitioner referred to the decision of the

Supreme Court in the case of Jaya Gokul Educational Trust v. Commissioner
&

Secretary

to

Government

Higher

Education

Department,

Thiruvanathapuram, Kerala State and Another: (2000) 5 SCC 231.
Paragraph

8 of the said decision sets out the points which arose for

consideration before the Supreme Court which reads as under:“8.

The following points arise for consideration:
(1) Whether in view of the judgment of this Court
in State of T.N. v. Adhiyaman Educational &
Research Institute: (1995) 4 SCC 104 the
provisions of the AICTE Act, 1987 occupied
the field and it was not necessary to obtain the
further approval of the Government or other
authority ? Whether any statute in the State of
Kerala if it required such approval, would be
void ?
(2) Whether the orders of rejection passed by the
State Government were valid on merits and
whether the University should have granted
further orders to continue the affiliation solely
on the basis of AICTE permission ?”

5.

Insofar as point No.1 was concerned, the same was answered by

holding that because Section 10 (k) of the said Act vested the powers of
granting approval in the IACTE, the Tamil Nadu Act of 1976 and the
University Act 1923 (which were the statutes relevant for that case) could not
deal with any question of “approval” for establishment of technical institutions.
WP(C)13751.06

Page No.4 of 8

The Supreme Court concluded that all that was necessary was that under the
Regulations, the AICTE Council had to consult the State and the University. It
further concluded in paragraph 22 and 23 as under:“22.
As held in T.N. case the Central Act of 1987
and in particular Section 10 (k) occupied the field relating
to “grant of approvals” for establishing technical
institutions and the provisions of the Central Act alone
were to be complied with. So far as the provisions of the
Mahatma Gandhi University Act or its statutes were
concerned and in particular Statute 9 (7), they merely
required the University to obtain the “views” of the State
Government. If, indeed, the University statute could be so
interpreted, such a provision requiring approval of the State
Government would be repugnant to the provisions of
Section 10 (k) of the AICTE Act, 1987 and would again be
void. As pointed out in T.N. case there were enough
provisions in the Central Act for consultation by the
Council of AICTE with various agencies, including the
State Government and the universities concerned. The
State-Level Committee and the Central Regional
Committees contained various experts and State
representatives. In case of difference of opinion as between
the various consultees, AICTE would have to go by the
views of the Central Task Force. These were sufficient
safeguards for ascertaining the views of the State
Governments and the universities. No doubt the question
of affiliation was a different matter and was not covered by
the Central Act but in T.N. case it was held that the
University could not impose any conditions inconsistent
with the AICTE Act or its Regulation or the conditions
imposed by AICTE. Therefore, the procedure for obtaining
the affiliation and any conditions which could be imposed
by the University, could not be inconsistent with the
provisions of the Central Act. The University could not,
therefore, in any event have sought for “approval” of the
State Government.
23.
Thus we hold, in the present case that there was
no statutory requirement for obtaining the approval of the
State Government and even
if there was one, it would
WP(C)13751.06

Page No.5 of 8

have been repugnant to the AICTE Act. The University
Statute 9 (7) merely required that the “views” of the State
Government be obtained before granting affiliation and this
did not amount to obtaining “approval”. If the University
statute required “approval”, it would have been repugnant
to the AICTE Act. Point 1 is decided accordingly.”
6.

In respect of point No.2 the Supreme Court observed that the only

requirement, as per the statute concerned therein, was for the University to
obtain “views” of the State Government and that did not amount to obtaining its
approval. The procedure and conditions for affiliation could not be inconsistent
with the provisions of the AICTE and, in particular Section, 10(k) of the Act
and the University could not seek approval of the Government.

The Supreme

Court further pointed out that the University was also one of the agencies
consulted by the council of AICTE under Regulation 8. Once that was over,
and approval was granted by AICTE, if there was any default on the part of the
College in compliance with the conditions of approval, the only remedy for the
University was to bring those facts to the notice of AICTE so that the latter
could take appropriate action. Ultimately, the Supreme Court concluded in the
following words:“30.
Thus, the University ought to have considered
the grant of final or further affiliation without waiting for
any approval from the State Government and should have
acted on the basis of the permission granted by AICTE and
other relevant factors in the University Act or statutes,
which are not inconsistent with the AICTE Act or its
Regulations.”

WP(C)13751.06

Page No.6 of 8

7.

The observations of the Supreme Court in the decision of Jaya

Gokul (supra) in paragraph 30 are definitive for deciding this case.

The

Supreme Court held that the University ought to have considered the grant of
final or further affiliation without waiting for any approval from the State
Government and should have acted on the basis of the permission granted by
AICTE and other relevant factors in the University Act or statutes, which are
not inconsistent with the AICTE Act or its Regulations. This clearly indicates
that, although approval / recognition and affiliation are two separate things, the
University while granting affiliation, cannot insist upon any factor which is
inconsistent with what is provided in the said Act and / or Regulations framed
thereunder. In this context, therefore, this petition can be disposed of with the
direction that the application for the academic session 2007-08 which has
already been filed by the petitioner before AICTE will be processed in terms of
the said Act and Regulations framed thereunder. It is also understood that this
recommendation / approval is granted on a year to year basis and that too, after
inspection being carried out on behalf of AICTE. The AICTE has to consult
the University and other concerned agencies but this does not mean that AICTE
would be bound by their views, as clarified by the Supreme Court, while
granting approval. Once, the AICTE grants approval, the question of affiliation
shall be considered by the University upon the petitioner moving an application
for that purpose with the University, which shall dispose of the said application
without insisting upon factors which are inconsistent with the AICTE Act or its
WP(C)13751.06

Page No.7 of 8

Regulations. The Notification dated 1.11.1999 and Statute 24 of the University
shall be applicable to the case of affiliation of the petitioner only to the extent
they are not inconsistent with the said Act and the Regulations framed
thereunder.

8.

With these directions, this writ petition stands disposed of. No

costs.
BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
February 21, 2007
J

WP(C)13751.06

Page No.8 of 8

