THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on :

+

24.04.2007

BAIL APPLN. 163/2006

VED PRAKASH @ KALU (JC)

... Petitioner
versus -

STATE THROUGH THE NCT (DELHI)

... Respondent

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr N. Hariharan
For the Respondent/State
: Mr S.K.Saxena Spl. P.P. with Ms Manisha Sharma

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J
1.

This bail application has been filed in respect of FIR No. 21/1999

dated 23.1.1999 registered at police station Mandawali concerning the murder
of Shivani Bhatnagar. The petitioner is accused of having being party to the
conspiracy to the murder of the said Shivani Bhatnagar. He is accused of
having committed offences under Section 302, 120B, 411, 403, 404, 201 IPC.
The alleged murder of Shivani Bhatnagar took place on 23.12.1999.

The

petitioner was arrested on 3.10.2002 and he has been in custody since then.

CRLREVP 163/06

Page No.1 of 9

2.

This is the second bail application moved by the petitioner before

this Court.

The first bail application of the petitioner was dismissed as

withdrawn on 10.12.2003 as, at that stage, the prosecution witnesses qua the
present petitioner were yet to be examined.

3.

The prosecution case is based entirely on circumstantial evidence.

Mr Hariharan, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner
submitted that all the witnesses pertaining to the petitioner have now been
examined.

He submitted that the petitioner

has clean antecedents.

He

submitted that an FIR No. 390/2001 in which the petitioner was allegedly
involved, was a false case and a final report has been filed therein.

Mr

Hariharan submitted that the alleged murder took place on 23.12.1999 and it is
almost three years later that the petitioner was arrested on 3.10.2002. On
6.10.2002 the petitioner is alleged to have made a disclosure statement.
However, no recovery was made pursuant to the said statement. On 8.10.2002
a second disclosure statement is said to have been recorded pursuant to which,
it is alleged that a camera was recovered from the petitioner's aunt's house at
Gurgaon. The camera allegedly bore initials “RB” which, according to the
prosecution, stood for Rakesh Bhatnagar, who was the husband of the deceased
Shivani Bhatnagar. Mr Hariharan pointed out that between 30.7.2002 and
28.9.2002 all the other co-accused had been arrested and, therefore, it would
CRLREVP 163/06

Page No.2 of 9

not be an act of prudence on the part of the petitioner to continue to hold the
camera when the co-accused were being arrested. He further referred to the
cross-examination of Rakesh Bhatnagar with regard to the camera and tried to
show that there were discrepancies in the evidence and in the ownership of
camera.

4.

Mr Hariharan further submitted that there were no public witnesses

for the recovery of said camera. He then referred to the deposition of PW188 in
an attempt to show that no effort was made to get the camera identified by
Rakesh Bhatnagar as no TIP was conducted. Reference was also made to the
deposition of PW85, the maid at Rakesh Bhatnagar's house. He submitted that
the said PW.85 had stated that on the said day in the morning, there was no
camera on the fridge, where it was usually kept.
Summoning up his arguments, Mr Hariharan submitted that the only evidence,
if at all with regard to the petitioner, is the alleged recovery of the camera. He
submits that the petitioner is an agriculturist/property dealer now aged about 37
years and has clean antecedence and, therefore, he would be entitled to be
released on bail.

6.

Mr S.K.

Saxena, the Special Public Prosecutor, has strongly

opposed the bail application. He submitted that as per the prosecution case the
murder of Shivani Bhatnagar was committed at the instance of co-accused R.K.
CRLREVP 163/06

Page No.3 of 9

Sharma after a conspiracy was hatched between him and Shri Bhagwan, Sat
Prakash, Ved Prakash (the petitioner herein), Ved Sharma and a killer (Pradeep
Sharma) was arranged for the same. He submitted that this was a case of
criminal conspiracy which had been pieced together by the prosecution after
years of investigation.

It involved numerous prosecution witnesses.

He

submitted that Ved Prakash alias Kalu (the petitioner herein) is co-accused Shri
Bhagwan's sister's son. He also submitted that the alleged killer Pradeep
Sharma is the nephew of co-accused Sat Prakash. The prosecution case is that
this was a case of premeditated murder committed as a part of a conspiracy at
the instance of the accused R.K. Sharma. On 13.1.1999 a few days prior to the
murder, Shivani Bhatnagar, who was known to R.K. Sharma, was called to
Ashoka Hotel and was shown to the co-accused. He also submitted that it was
not that Rakesh Bhatnagar had not mentioned about the camera at all. He refers
to the statement recorded under Section 161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 recorded on 27.1.1999 to indicate that the camera with initials “RB” was
mentioned. He submitted that the camera assumed importance because it may
have contained a film having pictures of co-accused R.K. Sharma. He further
submitted that in the disclosure statement of co-accused Shri Bhagwan, the
petitioner was named. It was also pointed out by him that the petitioner (Ved
Prakash) was known to co-accused R.K. Sharma and

Shri D.P. Singh

(PW.106) because there was some property transactions and Ved Prakash was
not a stranger to R.K. Sharma. He further submitted that there were numerous
CRLREVP 163/06

Page No.4 of 9

landline conversations between R.K. Sharma and Shri Bhagwan, who was the
uncle of the present petitioner. R.K. Sharma had enlisted all these persons and
Shivani Bhatnagar was shown to them for the purpose of identification at
Ashoka Hotel on 13.1.1999. After 13.1.1999 R.K. Sharma is alleged to have
gone to Poona for a course and he did not return to Delhi till after 23.1.1999. It
is, therefore, the prosecution case that whatever instructions were to be given to
the co-conspirators and the killer, were given on 13.1.1999 itself.
7.

Mr S.K. Saxena also submitted that according to the prosecution, it

was the job of Ved Prakash (the petitioner herein) to destroy the film which
was in the camera. He submitted that the petitioner does not deserve bail on
merits as well as on the ground that he was absconding during the course of
investigation till October, 2002.

8.

In rejoinder Mr Hariharan referred to the decision of the Supreme

Court in Jayendra Saraswathi Swamigal v. State of Tamil Nadu: (2005) 2
SCC 13. With reference to the said decision, he submitted that in view of
Section 10 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, if prima facie evidence of the
existence of a conspiracy is given and accepted, the evidence of acts and
statements made by any one of the conspirators in furtherance of the common
object is admissible against all. However, he pointed out that the Supreme
Court observed that before a conspirator's acts or statements can be used
against his co-conspirators, there should first be a prima facie evidence that the
CRLREVP 163/06

Page No.5 of 9

person was a party to the conspiracy.

He submitted that in the present case

there was nothing to show that the petitioner was a party to the conspiracy apart
from the alleged confessional statement themselves. Therefore, he submitted
that it cannot be said that the petitioner was a conspirator or a party to the
conspiracy in the murder of Shivani Bhatnagar. Mr Hariharan then referred to
the decision of the Supreme Court in the State of Karnataka v. Venkatesh and
Others: 1992 SCC (Crl.) 329 to submit that failure of an accused to appear
before the police cannot give rise to any inference of his guilt and, therefore,
the alleged circumstance of abscondence cannot be used against him. He
submitted that no attempts were made by the police to visit the petitioner or to
arrest him and, therefore, there was no question of the petitioner absconding as
has been alleged by the prosecution.

9.

Mr Hariharan then referred to the decision of the Supreme Court in

the case of Gambhir v. State of Maharashtra: 1982 SCC (Crl.)431 to indicate
the tests that have to be applied in cases of circumstantial evidence before a
conviction can be sustained. With reference to the said decision he submitted
that when a case rests upon circumstantial evidence, such evidence must satisfy
three tests: (1) the circumstances from which an inference of guilt is sought to
be drawn, must be cogently and firmly established; (2) those circumstances
should be of a definite tendency unerringly pointing towards guilt of the
accused; (3) the circumstances, taken cumulatively, should form a chain so
CRLREVP 163/06

Page No.6 of 9

complete that there is no escape from the conclusion that within all human
probability the crime was committed by the accused and none else.

The

circumstantial evidence in order to sustain conviction must be complete and
incapable of explanation of any other hypothesis than that of the guilt of the
accused. He further submitted that the circumstantial evidence should not only
be consistent with the guilt of the accused but should be inconsistent with his
innocence.

10.

After having considered the arguments advanced by the counsel for

the parties and the decisions referred to by them, I am of the view that there is
no difficulty with the principles which have been laid down in the decisions
which have been referred to by Mr Hariharan. However, those principles
would be more applicable at the stage of a judgment being passed by the trial
Court upon an appreciation of the entire evidence on record. At present I am
concerned with an application for bail. In a recent decision the Supreme Court
in the case of State of U.P. v. Amarmani Tripathi: (2005) 8 SCC 21 made it
clear that the matters to be considered in an application for bail are: (i) whether
there is any prima facie or reasonable ground to believe that the accused had
committed the offence; (ii) nature and gravity of the charge; (iii) severity of the
punishment in the event of conviction; (iv) danger of the accused absconding or
fleeing, if released on bail; (v) character, behaviour, means, position and
standing of the accused; (vi) likelihood of the offence being repeated; (vii)
CRLREVP 163/06

Page No.7 of 9

reasonable apprehension of the witnesses being tampered with; and (viii)
danger, of course, of justice being thwarted by grant of bail.

11.

Considering these parameters, I find that since all the witnesses qua

the petitioner have been examined, there can be no apprehension of the
witnesses being tampered with. There also does not seem to be any reasonable
likelihood of the offence being repeated. So also the question of danger of the
accused absconding or fleeing, if released on bail. However, I feel that the
factors which weigh against grant of bail are the questions of a strong prima
facie case against the accused. The nature and gravity of the charge and the
severity of the punishment in the event of conviction. Taking a prima facie
view of these factors as also taking note of the fact that the trial is towards its
end, I do not think that it would be appropriate to grant bail to the petitioner at
this stage. This application for bail is rejected with the hope that the trial would
be concluded at an early date. It is made clear that nothing expressed in this
order shall be taken into consideration by the trial Court while delivering its
judgment on the case.
12.

This application is dismissed.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
( JUDGE )
April 24, 2007
J

CRLREVP 163/06

Page No.8 of 9

CRLREVP 163/06

Page No.9 of 9

