IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+

IA No.12135/2007 & CS (OS) No.1564/2006

%

Judgment delivered on: 24.10.2007

SKYPE LIMITED

.... Plaintiff
versus

MR VIKRAMADITYA JAIN & OTHERS

.... Defendants

Advocates who appeared in this case:For the Plaintiff
: Mr Ankush
For the Defendant No.1
: Mr Mukul Baveja

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the judgment ?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ?
BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)

1.

This is an application under Order 23 Rule 3 read with

Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 filed jointly by the
plaintiff and the defendant No.1 for recording the compromise and
decreeing the suit in terms thereof. The defendant No.2 is the “.in”
Registry and is managed and maintained by the National Internet
Exchange of India (NIXI).

The defendant No.3 is the Sponsoring

Registrant, who has registered the domain name “SKYPE.in” on behalf

IA 12135/07 in CS(OS) 1564/06

Page No. 1 of 4

of the defendant No.1.

The suit was filed by the plaintiff (Skype

Limited) aggrieved by the registration of the domain name “SKYPE.in”
by the defendant No.2 in its favour.

2.

Now, the matter has been compromised and settled between the

parties. The defendant No.1 has acknowledged the prior usage rights of
the plaintiff in the trademark “SKYPE”. The defendant No.1 has also
acknowledged that the plaintiff is the rights-holder in the trademark
“SKYPE”. The defendant No.1 has undertaken that it shall not at any
time in future use the word “SKYPE” and/ or any deceptive variant
thereof either as a domain name or in any other manner including as a
suffix or prefix. The defendant No.1 has also undertaken to surrender the
domain name “SKYPE.in” in favour of the plaintiff within seven days of
this order.

For this purpose the defendant No.1

has agreed and

undertaken to take all steps to surrender the domain name in favour of
the plaintiff or its nominee without any charge whatsoever to the
plaintiff. The parties have also agreed and undertaken that the terms of
the present compromise would be kept confidential world wide unless
the same are required to be disclosed pursuant to any statutory
requirements or in the event that the terms of the present compromise

IA 12135/07 in CS(OS) 1564/06

Page No. 2 of 4

need to be enforced. The other terms of the compromise and settlement
are set out in the application itself which has been signed by Mr Vishal
Ahuja as the constituted attorney of the plaintiff and by the defendant
No.1 (Mr Vikramaditya Jain). The application is also signed by the
respective counsel for the parties and is also supported by affidavits of
said Mr Vishal Ahuja and Mr Vikramaditya Jain. As indicated above,
the defendant Nos. 2 and 3 have no active role to play in the present
dispute inasmuch as they are the registering authority and the sponsoring
registrant respectively and they shall merely carry out the directions that
may be passed by this Court. No specific relief is sought against the
defendant Nos. 2 and 3.

3.

In these circumstances, after having gone through the terms of the

compromise and having heard the counsel for the parties, I find that the
settlement arrived at between the parties is a lawful one. That being the
case, the compromise / settlement is taken on record. The suit is decreed
in terms of compromise and the decree shall be in terms of prayers A and
B contained in paragraph 19 of the plaint. This application shall be
marked as Ext. C-1 and shall form part of the decree. The defendant Nos.

IA 12135/07 in CS(OS) 1564/06

Page No. 3 of 4

2 and 3 are directed to carry out the transfer of the domain name
“SKYPE.in” of the defendant No.1 to the plaintiff or its nominee.
This application, the suit and all other pending applications stand
disposed of. The formal decree be drawn up. Dasti.
BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
October 24, 2007
SR

IA 12135/07 in CS(OS) 1564/06

Page No. 4 of 4

