THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 24.08.2007

+

ARB. P. 381/2006

ORIENTAL INSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED ... Petitioner
- versus M/S UNITECH LIMITED & ANOTHER

... Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr Rajiv Tyagi with Ms Chanchal Biswal
For the Respondents
: Mr V.K. Sharma

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

YES

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

YES

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

YES

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J(ORAL)
1.
This is an application filed under Section 11 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as 'the
said Act'). The first prayer in the application is that this court ought to
determine the arbitrability of the dispute and declare that the dispute
with regard to denial of liability pursuant to repudiation of the insurance
policy is outside the purview of the arbitration clause contained in the
Contract of Insurance.
ARB. P. 381/06

The second prayer is that an arbitrator be
Page No.1 of 15

appointed on behalf of the petitioner for determination of the quantum of
loss, if any, suffered by the respondent. The normal residual prayer has
also been made. The question that arises at the outset is whether the
present application is at all maintainable and whether it can be construed
as an application under Section 11 of the said Act ?

2.

The parties had entered into a contract, the details of which

are not necessary for the present. Clause 7 contained the arbitration
clause which reads as under:“7.
If any differences shall arise as to the
quantum to be paid under this Policy (liability
being otherwise admitted) such difference shall
independently of all other questions be referred to
the decision of an arbitrator, to be appointed in
writing by the parties in difference, or if they
cannot agree upon a single arbitrator to the
decision of two disinterested persons as arbitrators
of whom one shall be appointed in writing by each
of the parties within two calendar month after
having been required to do in writing by the other
party in accordance with the provisions of the
Arbitration Act 1940, as amended from time to
time and for the time being in force. In case either
party shall refuse to fail to appoint arbitrator within
two calendar months after receipt of notice in
writing requiring an appointment, the other party
shall be at liberty to appoint sole arbitrator and in
case of disagreement between the arbitrators, the
difference shall be referred to the decision of an
umpire who shall have been appointed by them in
writing before entering on the reference and who
ARB. P. 381/06

Page No.2 of 15

shall sit with the arbitrators and preside at their
meetings.
It is clearly agreed and understood that
no difference or dispute shall be referrable to
arbitration as hereinbefore provided, if the
Company has disputed or not accepted liability
under or in respect of this Policy.
It is hereby expressly stipulated and
declared that it shall be condition precedent to any
right of action or suit upon this Policy that the
award by the arbitrator, arbitrators or umpire of the
amount of the loss or damage shall be first
obtained.
It is also hereby further expressly agreed
and declared, that if the Company shall desclaim
liability to the Insured for any claim hereunder and
such claim shall not, within 3 calendar months
from the date of such disclaimer have been made
the subject matter of a suit in court of law, then the
claim shall for all purposes be deemed to have been
abandoned and shall not thereafter be recoverable
hereunder.”
(underlining added)

The key expression used in the clause is “liability being otherwise
admitted”.

The admitted understanding of the clause is that if the

insurance company admits its liability to pay, but disputes the quantum,
then the said dispute is referable to arbitration.

According to the

petitioner, the liability has nowhere been admitted by the petitioner and,
therefore, the arbitration clause is not attracted at all.
ARB. P. 381/06

Page No.3 of 15

3.

The facts are that on 08.11.2005, the respondent No.1

(Unitech Ltd) issued a notice invoking the arbitration clause. The said
arbitration clause was invoked in the following manner:“8.
Clause – 7 of the policy provides that in
the event of differences arising as to the quantum
to be paid under the policy, such differences shall
be referred to a decision of the arbitrator. In view
of the contents of Clause – 7 of the policy, I on
behalf of my client do hereby proposed the name of
Dr. Arun Gopal Aggarwal, FICWA, SCS, SICA,
FIMA, Ph.D., (Mobile No.:981003204), IIB-76,
Vaishali, Ghaziabad, U.P., who may be appointed
as the Sole Arbitrator to arbitrate upon the disputes
that have arisen between you on one side and my
client on the other. If you shall refuse or fail to
concur in the appointment of Dr. Arun Gopal
Aggarwal within two calendar months after the
receipt of this notice then in that case Dr. Arun
Gopal Aggarwal will become the Sole Arbitrator
and shall act accordingly.
9.
You are, therefore, hereby called upon
to concur in the appointment of Dr. Arun Gopal
Aggarwal so that the matter in dispute can be
referred to him for adjudication according to law.”

Apparently, a reply was sent by the petitioner on 02.12.2005 saying that
the dispute was not arbitrable and, therefore, they refused to appoint and
/ or nominate an arbitrator. According to the learned counsel for the
respondents, this clearly amounted to the petitioner not agreeing to the
ARB. P. 381/06

Page No.4 of 15

appointment of Dr. Arun Gupal Aggarwal as an arbitrator. Therefore, as
per the arbitration clause, the petitioner could nominate an arbitrator on
its behalf within two months. It is submitted that the period of two
months expired and the petitioner did not appoint / nominate any
arbitrator on its behalf. Accordingly, the respondent No.1 sent a letter
dated 31.01.2006 to Dr Arun Gopal Aggarwal, the arbitrator nominated
by it, indicating that in the aforesaid circumstances he had become the
sole arbitrator and he was requested to proceed with the matter in
accordance with the provisions of law. The exact words used in the said
letter are as under:“No response has been received from the Insurance
Company despite the service of the notice above
said upon the Insurance Company on 11th
November, 2005 and thus 60 days or 2 months
from the date of service have expired long back.
Contents of notice dated 08th November, 2005 have
thus been not disputed and are deemed to be
admitted. Thus liability has not been disputed by
the Insurance Company and has rather been
admitted in the facts and circumstances of the case,
and disputes relate to only to the quantum to be
paid by Insurance Company to my clients.
In the facts and circumstances narrated
above, you have become the Sole Arbitrator in the
matter and you are, therefore, requested to proceed
with the matter in accordance with the provisions
of law.”

ARB. P. 381/06

Page No.5 of 15

4.

Thereafter, on 22.04.2006, the first hearing was held before

the said arbitrator. On 05.05.2006, the petitioner moved an application
under Section 16 of the said Act before the learned arbitrator requiring
the arbitrator to rule on his own jurisdiction. The contention of the
petitioner in that application was that there was no arbitrable dispute and,
therefore, the entire proceedings were without jurisdiction. During the
pendency of the said Section 16 application, the petitioner filed the
present petition under Section 11. This petition was filed on 17.08.2006.
During the pendency of this petition, the arbitrator passed an order on
26.12.2006 ruling on his own jurisdiction and indicating that he had
jurisdiction to continue with the arbitration proceedings.

5.

In the context of these facts, it has been argued by the learned

counsel for the petitioner that the arbitration proceedings are without any
jurisdiction and the petitioner is well within its rights to have moved an
application under Section 11 for a decision before this court as to the
arbitrability of the dispute. The learned counsel for the petitioner placed
reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Wellington
Associats Limited v. Kirit Mehta: 2000 (4) SCC 272. He also placed
reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of M/s S.B.P.

ARB. P. 381/06

Page No.6 of 15

& Co. v. M/s Patel Engineering Ltd and Another: AIR 2006 SC 450.
Referring to these decisions, the learned counsel for the petitioner
contended that this court, while acting under Section 11 of the said Act,
could rule on the jurisdiction of the arbitrator as also whether a dispute
was arbitrable or not. He submitted that this court could also rule on the
issue of whether there existed an arbitration agreement between the
parties or not. Specifically, the learned counsel for the petitioner placed
reliance on Section 11 (6) (a) of the said Act.

6.

The learned counsel for the respondents submitted that this

petition was not maintainable because Section 11 can only be invoked
when a party seeks the appointment of an arbitrator. What the petitioner
seeks in the present case is a declaration that there is no arbitrable
dispute and that the arbitrator has no jurisdiction to continue with the
arbitration proceedings. He submitted that this is not permissible under
Section 11 of the Act which relates only to the question of appointment
of the arbitrators.

7.

I have considered the arguments advanced by the counsel for

the parties. The first thing that has to be seen is whether Section 11

ARB. P. 381/06

Page No.7 of 15

provides for a petition of the nature that is in question before this court.
The heading of Section 11 is “Appointment of Arbitrators”. Section 11
(1) provides that any person of any nationality may be appointed as an
arbitrator unless otherwise agreed by the parties. Sub-Section (2) of
Section 11 provides that subject to sub-section (6), the parties are free to
agree on a procedure for appointing the arbitrator or the arbitrators. In
the present case, there is an arbitration clause and the same has already
been referred to. Therefore, the parties have agreed on a procedure for
appointing the arbitrators. Consequently, sub-section (6) of Section 11
would become relevant. The said sub-section reads as under:“(6) Where, under an appointment procedure agreed
upon by the parties,—
(a)
(b)

(c)

ARB. P. 381/06

a party fails to act as required under that
procedure; or
the parties, or the two appointed
arbitrators, fail to reach an agreement
expected of them under that procedure; or
a person, including an institution, fails to
perform any function entrusted to him or it
under that procedure, a party may request
the Chief Justice or any person or
institution designated by him to take the
necessary measure, unless the agreement
on the appointment procedure provides
other
means
for
securing
the
appointment.”

Page No.8 of 15

A plain reading of the aforesaid provision indicates that the same is
directed towards the object of securing the appointment of an arbitrator.
The clear meaning is that where an agreed procedure for appointment of
an arbitrator has not been acted upon by a party, then the Chief Justice
may be requested for taking necessary measures for securing the
appointment of an arbitrator. The entire focus of the the provision is
towards the object of securing the appointment of an arbitrator. Unless
and until that is the object of an application under Section 11, the Chief
Justice or his designate would not have jurisdiction in entertaining any
other ancillary or related issue pertaining to arbitration. Section 5 of the
said Act has also to be kept in mind which categorically provides that
notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being
in force, in matters governed by Part I, no judicial authority shall
intervene except where so provided in the said Part.

8.

The learned counsel for the petitioner placed strong reliance

on the observations of the Supreme Court in the case of Wellington
Associates Limited (supra) where the Supreme Court (in para 15) was of
the view that Section 16 does not take away the jurisdiction of the Chief
Justice of India or his designate, if need be, to decide the question of the

ARB. P. 381/06

Page No.9 of 15

“existence” of the arbitration agreement in case such a question is raised
by the respondent in his reply to a petition filed under Section 11. The
learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that it can, therefore, be
inferred that in a petition filed under Section 11, the question of
existence of an arbitration agreement and the jurisdiction of an arbitrable
tribunal can be gone into. He submits that it is in this context that the
petitioner has filed the petition saying that since there was no admission
of liability on the part of the petitioner, the dispute was not arbitrable.
He submits that this issue can be ruled upon by this court in the present
petition. I am unable to agree with this submission made by the learned
counsel for the petitioner. If one carefully goes through the decision of
the Supreme Court in the case of Wellington Associates Ltd (supra), one
will find that what the Supreme Court has observed and held is that the
existence of Section 16 does not debar the Chief Justice from ruling on
the jurisdiction and / or existence of an arbitration agreement in case a
petition under Section 11 is brought before the Chief Justice for the
appointment of an arbitrator. As pointed out above, the question of
jurisdiction can be gone into by the Chief Justice and adjudicated upon if
the respondent raises the issue of existence of an arbitration agreement.
In the present case, the respondent does not raise the issue of existence of

ARB. P. 381/06

Page No.10 of 15

an arbitration agreement. In fact, the respondent had gone ahead and
invoked the arbitration clause and an arbitrator has been appointed. The
arbitrator has also ruled on his jurisdiction under Section 16 of the said
Act. A reference can also be made to the following observation in para
16 of the Supreme Court decision in the case of Wellington Associates
Ltd (supra) which reads as under:“... Take a case whether the matter has gone to the
arbitrator without the intervention of an application under
Section 11. Obviously, if the question as to the existence
of the arbitration clause is raised before the Arbitral
Tribunal, it has power to decide the question. ..”

In the present case, the matter had gone to the arbitrator without the
intervention of an application under Section 11. In this context, the
arbitrator had jurisdiction and power to decide the question of existence
of an arbitration clause as well as of an arbitrable dispute. The learned
arbitrator, in fact, has already decided that issue. Therefore, this court
even in view of the observations made in Wellington Associates Limited
(supra) would not have jurisdiction in entertaining this issue which is
sought to be raised by the petitioner in this petition where he does not
primarily seek the appointment of an arbitrator.

ARB. P. 381/06

Page No.11 of 15

9.

The learned counsel for the petitioner had also placed strong

reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of S.B.P. &
Company (supra) (as set out in para 38 of the said decision) where the
Supreme Court observed as under:“38.
It is necessary to define what exactly the
Chief Justice, approached with an application
under Section 11 of the Act, is to decide at that
stage. Obviously, he has to decide his own
jurisdiction in the sense, whether the party making
the motion has approached the right High Court.
He has to decide whether there is an arbitration
agreement, as defined in the Act and whether the
person who has made the request before him, is a
party to such an agreement. It is necessary to
indicate that he can also decide the question
whether the claim was a dead one; or a long barred
claim that was sought to be resurrected and
whether the parties have concluded the transaction
by recording satisfaction of their mutual rights and
obligations or by receiving the final payment
without objection. It may not be possible at that
stage, to decide whether a live claim made, is one
which comes within the purview of the arbitration
clause. It will be appropriate to leave that question
to be decided by the arbitral tribunal on taking
evidence, along with the merits of the claims
involved in the arbitration. The Chief Justice has to
decide whether the applicant has satisfied the
conditions for appointing an arbitrator under
Section 11(6) of the Act. For the purpose of taking
a decision on these aspects, the Chief Justice can
either proceed on the basis of affidavits and the
documents produced or take such evidence or get
such evidence recorded, as may be necessary. We
think that adoption of this procedure in the context
of the Act would best serve the purpose sought to
ARB. P. 381/06

Page No.12 of 15

be achieved by the Act of expediting the process of
arbitration, without too many approaches to the
court at various stages of the proceedings before
the Arbitral tribunal.”

The learned counsel for the petitioner also placed reliance on the
summary conclusion given in para 46 (iv) of the said decision which
reads as under:(iv) The Chief Justice or the designated judge will
have the right to decide the preliminary aspects as
indicated in the earlier part of this judgment. These
will be, his own jurisdiction, to entertain the
request, the existence of a valid arbitration
agreement, the existence or otherwise of a live
claim, the existence of the condition for the
exercise of his power and on the qualifications of
the arbitrator or arbitrators. The Chief Justice or the
judge designated would be entitled to seek the
opinion of an institution in the matter of
nominating an arbitrator qualified in terms of
Section 11(8) of the Act if the need arises but the
order appointing the arbitrator could only be that of
the Chief Justice or the judge designate.”

10.

Reading the above observations of the Supreme Court, it is

clear that once a party approaches the Chief Justice with a request for
appointment of an arbitrator or arbitrators, then it would be within the
powers of the Chief Justice or his designate to even examine the
existence of an arbitration agreement, whether the claim is time barred,

ARB. P. 381/06

Page No.13 of 15

whether the claim is a dead one and other related issues. Specifically, it
is pointed out in para 38 extracted above that the Chief Justice has to
decide whether the applicant has satisfied the conditions for appointment
of an arbitrator under Section 11 (6) of the Act. The whole thrust of the
provision as well as of the decision of the Supreme court is directed
towards the appointment of an arbitrator and not the other way round.
The petitioner here does not seek the appointment of an arbitrator, but, in
essence, seeks a declaration from this court that there exists no arbitrable
dispute between the parties. Therefore, what the petitioner is seeking is
that this court should decide and declare that no arbitration is possible
because there is no arbitrable dispute. If that were to be the case, then
there would be no question of appointment of any arbitrator. The whole
thrust of Section 11 is with regard to the appointment of an arbitrator.
What the petitioner is seeking would run counter to the very object of
Section 11 and, therefore, that cannot be permitted.

11.

In view of the aforesaid, this petition is not maintainable. The

same is dismissed.
BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
August 24, 2007
ARB. P. 381/06

Page No.14 of 15

δυττ

ARB. P. 381/06

Page No.15 of 15

