THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Judgment delivered on :21.02.2007
WP(C) No.1314/2007
DURGA PRASAD MISHRA

...Petitioner
- versus -

UNION OF INDIA & OTHERS

...Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr Anoop Kumar Srivastava
For the Respondent/UOI
: Mr Gaurav Duggal

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

The petitioner alleges to have invented a technology for production

of heavy water which will be used in nuclear reactors for the production of
nuclear energy. According to the petitioner the process developed by him is
very cost effective and it would enable the production of heavy water at
virtually no cost at all because the by-product is distilled water, which can be
sold and the proceeds of which would reduce the cost of conversion.

2.
WP(C)1314.07

He had been communicating with the Government of India,
Page No.1 of 4

Ministry of Science and Technology in respect of the alleged technology
developed by him in view of the provisions of Section 20(4) of the Atomic
Energy Act, 1962, which requires that any person, who has made an invention,
which he has reason to believe relates to atomic energy, shall communicate to
the Central Government, the nature and the description of the invention. Apart
from this, the petitioner, after having communicated to the Central
Government, the nature and description of the invention, also sought assistance
under the Technopreneur Promotion Programme of the Central Government
whereby inventors are given certain benefits and financial support. By a letter
dated 11.12.2006 issued by Mr B. N. Sarkar, Scientist-'E', Government of India,
Ministry of Science & Technology, Department of Scientific & Industrial
Research, Technology Bhawan, New Mehrauli Road, New Delhi, the petitioner
was informed that his proposal was discussed during the 77th Technology
Screening Committee held on 14.11.2006 and the said Committee observed that
heavy water is a controlled/regulated item by Government of India for their
exclusive use and that experimentation pertaining to such proposals cannot be
permitted for research/ exploitation by the individuals for its industrial use. In
view of this, the proposal of the petitioner was considered to be beyond the
purview of the Technopreneur Promotion Programme and the Committee
recommended the closure of the present proposal.

3.
WP(C)1314.07

It is the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that it
Page No.2 of 4

was never his intention to put the heavy water produced employing his
technology for private industrial use. He wanted that the same be utilized by
the Government for the benefit of India at large.

He submits that since the

Central Government has not evinced any interest in his technology and has
closed his proposal, he may be permitted to apply for a patent abroad for the
invention.

4.

Mr Gaurav Duggal, who appears on behalf of the respondents, on

advance notice, submits that it is not as if the Central Government had shut out
the petitioner but that he was directed for guidance to the Heavy Water Board,
Mumbai in terms of the letter dated 07.09.2006. But, the petitioner submitted
that he did not need any guidance in this field. Mr Duggal further submitted
that in any event, the provisions of the Act themselves permit any person
intending to apply for a patent abroad, to obtain prior permission from the
Central Government under the provisions of Section 20(5) of the said Act. If
the petitioner so desires to apply for a patent abroad, he may apply for
permission and the same would be disposed of by the Central Government in
accordance with law.

5.

After having heard the counsel for the parties and having examined

the rival submissions, it appears that the only course open to the petitioner at
this stage, in view of the provisions of the said Act, is that, if he so desires, he
WP(C)1314.07

Page No.3 of 4

may apply for permission to have the patent registered abroad. He would,
therefore, have to make an application for such permission from the Central
Government in terms of Section 20(4) of the said Act. If the petitioner makes
such an application, then the Central Government, as provided under the Act
itself, shall consider and deal with the application in accordance with law.
This petition stands disposed of.
BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
February 21, 2007
sr

WP(C)1314.07

Page No.4 of 4

