*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CRL.REV.P. 402/2006

+

Judgment delivered on: 26.03.2007
RAJ KUMAR

.... Petitioner
versus

STATE (NCT OF DELHI)

.... Respondent

Advocates who appeared in this case:For the Petitioner
: Mr. R. P. Lao
For the Respondent
: Mr Pawan Sharma

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment?
YES
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?

YES

3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?

YES

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J
1.

This revision petition has been filed by the petitioner being aggrieved by

the order dated 22.05.2006 passed by the additional Sessions Judge whereby he
confirmed the conviction and sentence awarded by the learned CMM under
Sections 279 and 304-A IPC. The learned CMM sentenced the petitioner to
undergo rigorous imprisonment for six months. Insofar as the offence under
Section 304A IPC was concerned, the learned CMM sentenced the petitioner to
rigorous imprisonment for two years and also imposed a fine of Rs 5000. In
default of the payment of fine, the petitioner was required to undergo simple
CRL.REV.P.402.06

Page No.1 of 9

imprisonment for three months. Both the sentences of imprisonment were
directed to run concurrently. In appeal, the learned additional Sessions Judge
upheld the conviction as well as the sentence. Being aggrieved by the said
judgment dated 22.05.2006 the petitioner has filed this revision petition.

2.

The prosecution case is that on 30.9.93, at around 10:45 pm, the

petitioner was driving a blue line bus in a rash and negligent manner and was
coming from Pahargunj. It is put forward by the petitioner, that at the
intersection, a three-wheeler (Taxi Scooter Rickshaw) (TSR) which was
coming from the opposite direction suddenly took a U-turn. The petitioner in
order to avoid the hitting the TSR, swerved the bus to the left and momentarily
lost control of the bus, thereby injuring one person (Joginder) and causing the
death of two persons (Kitab Singh and Tavinder Nath) who were standing at the
bus stand.

3.

There are two alleged eyewitnesses to the incident namely Joginder and

Jagdish Lal (PW4). The prosecution did not produce Joginder and therefore his
testimony is not on record. It is also important to mention that the prosecution
also did not examine the investigation officer. The case of the prosecution is
based completely on the testimony of Jagdish Lal (PW4), who is the brother of
the deceased Tavinder Nath.

CRL.REV.P.402.06

Page No.2 of 9

4.

An examination of the judgment of the learned ASJ as well as that of the

learned CMM would also indicate that the petitioner has been convicted
primarily on the testimony of PW4, who stated that the petitioner was driving
the bus at a very fast speed due to which he could not control the bus and
caused the accident.

5.

The mechanical inspection of all the vehicles involved in the incident

indicate that they were mechanically “ok”. The reasoning of the learned CMM
is as under:“Every motorist is duty bound to drive the vehicle in controlled
manner so as to avoid impact with any object coming ahead of
it. Had he been driving the vehicle in controlled manner, he
could have saved the accident as after hitting the TSR he hit the
two wheeler scooter as well as the bus stand and the impact of
the accident itself suggest that he was driving the vehicle with a
fast speed and could not control.”
6.

The petitioner, before this court, has preferred this revision on the

following grounds:a. That the investigating officer and the injured witness (Joginder)
have not been examined.
b. That Jagdish Lal (PW4) is a planted witness and was not present
on the spot at the time of the accident and more so Jagdish lal met
the investigating officer only after two hours.
c. That the scene of the incident was a flourishing and busy market
and, hence, there could be no question of rash and negligent
driving.

CRL.REV.P.402.06

Page No.3 of 9

7.

As regards the first plea of the petitioner pertaining to the non-

examination of the Investigating Officer and the alleged injured person
(Joginder),

in Bahadur Naik v. State of Bihar: (2000) 9 SCC 153, the

Supreme Court observed that where the accused has not been able to shake the
credibility of the eyewitness nor could he show as to how prejudice has been
caused to him by non-examination of the investigating officer, the nonexamination of the investigation officer as a witness is of no consequence.
Similarly, the Supreme Court decisions in Krishna Mochi v. State of Bihar:
(2002) 6 SCC 81, Raj Kishore Jha v. State of Bihar: (2003) 11 SCC 519 and
Birendra Rai v. State of Bihar: (2005) 9 SCC 719 also reiterate that nonexamination of the investigating officer does not vitiate the trial unless
prejudice caused to the accused is shown and the testimony of the eyewitness is
unreliable. This is the legal position with regard to the non-examination of the
investigating officer and the injured person (Joginder). As to how it effects the
present case would be examined below.

8.

The next plea of the petitioner is that Jagdish Lal (PW4) is a planted

witness and came to the police station for the recording of his statement after
two hours. Jagdish Lal (PW4) deposed that he is the brother of the deceased
Tavinder Nath and he along with his brother were standing at the bus stand at
the time of the incident. He further deposed that, after the accident, PCR
Officials came to the spot and they rushed the injured to hospital where he was
CRL.REV.P.402.06

Page No.4 of 9

declared “brought dead”. No where does Jagdish Lal (PW4) mention that he
had taken his brother to the hospital. On the contrary, surprisingly, after the
incident, he waited for about 10 to 15 minutes for the PCR officials to come to
the spot and it is they who take his brother to hospital. Moreover, neither the
MLC or any of the documents or witnesses indicate that Jagdish Lal (PW4)
brought the deceased to the hospital. The conduct of Jagdish Lal (PW4) is not
clear. Normally, Jagdish Lal (PW4) would have immediately pressed for taking
his injured brother to hospital and would not have waited for ten to fifteen
minutes. Moreover, he would have accompanied his brother to the hospital.
This is not established by the evidence on record. Thus, there are doubts with
regard to the role of Jagdish Lal (PW4) and, consequently, his presence at the
time of the incident.

These doubts could have been removed by the

examination of the other injured witness (Joginder) and the investigating
officer. In these circumstances, the petitioner has been prejudiced and the nonexamination of Joginder as also the investigating officer is a material
circumstance in favour of the petitioner.

9.

Now, coming to the last plea of the petitioner that, on the fateful day, at

the scene of the incident, there was a busy and flourishing market and that there
was no possibility of driving the vehicle fast, rashly and negligently. This plea
cannot be given much weightage as the occurrence was at night at about 10.45

CRL.REV.P.402.06

Page No.5 of 9

pm at night. It was not during the peak hours of the market. There is also no
evidence as to the extent of traffic on the roads.

10.

As regards the contention of rash and negligent driving, the entire

allegation is based on the testimony of Jagdish Lal (PW4). In his examination
in chief, the said witness has stated:“The bus was at very fast speed due to which the driver
could not control the bus and caused the accident.”
In cross-examination, the same witness stated:“.............. we must have seen the bus about 3/4 minutes
before the occurrence.”
As mentioned above, it is on the basis of the statement of Jagdish Lal (PW4)
that the courts below have convicted the petitioner. The said witness has stated
that the bus was being driven at a “very fast speed”. He further stated that
because it was so being driven, the driver could not control the bus and the
accident was caused. Therefore, the foundation of the allegation against the
petitioner is that he was driving the bus at a “very fast speed”. There is no
evidence as to what this “very fast speed” was.

A similar aspect was

considered by me in the case of Abdul Subhan v. State of NCT: 133 (2006)
DLT 562. The question that was considered was that whether a person could
be convicted merely on the allegation that he was driving a vehicle at a high
speed. A reference to the Supreme Court decision in the case of State of
Karnataka v. Satish: 1998 SCC (CRI) 1508 was made wherein the Supreme
CRL.REV.P.402.06

Page No.6 of 9

Court observed that merely because a vehicle was being driven at a high speed
does not bespeak of either negligence or rashness by itself. In the case before
the Supreme Court, none of the witnesses examined by the prosecution could
give any indication, even approximate, as to what they meant by “high speed”.
The Supreme Court observed that “high speed” is a relative term and that it was
for the prosecution to bring on record material to establish as to what is meant
by “high speed” in the facts and circumstances of the case. The Supreme Court
also cautioned that in a criminal trial, the burden of proving everything essential
to the establishment of the charge against the accused always rests on the
prosecution and that there is a presumption of innocence in favour of the
accused until the contrary is proved.

The Supreme court also observed that in

the absence of any material on record, no presumption of “rashness” or
“negligence” could be drawn by invoking the maxim “res ipsa loquitor”.

11.

In the case of Abdul Subhan (supra), this Court has observed that the

Supreme Court decision made it more than clear that a mere allegation of high
speed would not tantamount to rashness or negligence.

In that case, because

there was absence of material to indicate the speed at which the truck was being
driven, the accused was given the benefit of doubt inasmuch as it could not be
said that the accused therein had been guilty of driving the truck in a rash or
negligent manner.

CRL.REV.P.402.06

Page No.7 of 9

12.

The statement of Jagdish Lal (PW4) that the bus was being driven at a

“very fast speed” is not corroborated by any other evidence. Moreover, his
statement in cross-examination that he must have seen the bus about 3/4
minutes before the occurrence, also appears to controvert the statement that the
bus was being driven at a “very fast speed”. This is so because if the bus was
travelling at 60 kilometers an hour, then the said witness would have seen the
bus at least 3-4 kilometers away, which would not be possible on a plain road
at 10.45 pm at night. Assuming that the bus was being driven at 30 kilometers
an hour, the witness would then have seen the bus, at a distance of 1-1/2 to 2
kilometers, which again does not stand to reason. This clearly indicates that
one of the two statements is not correct and, therefore, it introduces a serious
element of doubt with regard to the speed at which the bus was being driven
and, consequently with regard to the very allegation of rashness and / or
negligence on the part of the accused.

13.

Coupled with the aforesaid observations with regard to the speed at

which the bus was being driven, is the fact that the investigating officer was not
examined nor was the other injured person (Joginder) examined.

Non-

examination of these witnesses has certainly worked out to the prejudice of the
accused and, therefore, the sole testimony of Jagdish Lal (PW4) cannot be
relied upon to convict the petitioner.

Unfortunately, the courts below failed

to consider the case in this light. The petitioner is, therefore, not liable to be
CRL.REV.P.402.06

Page No.8 of 9

convicted under the provisions of Section 279 and 304A IPC. This revision
petition is allowed. The impugned order is set aside and the petitioner is
entitled to an order of acquittal.
BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
March 26, 2006
SR

CRL.REV.P.402.06

Page No.9 of 9

