THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on : 20.03.2007

+

WP (C) 1403/2007

PARIKSHAT KADAN

...Petitioner
- versus -

UNIVERSITY OF DELHI

...Respondent

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
For the Respondent

: Mr Brijender Chacher, Sr. Advocate with Mr Rajat Navet
: Mr M. J. S. Rupal

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

YES

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

YES

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

YES

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

The petitioner appeared for the LLB entrance examination in 2005.

This examination was conducted by the Law Faculty of Delhi University. The
petitioner passed the examination and was given admission as a regular student
of Law Faculty of Law Centre -I of the Delhi University. The petitioner
underwent a regular course of study for the first semester. He also sat in the
examinations for the first semester and passed in all the five papers, in which he
appeared. He obtained an average of 62% marks.

2.

Unfortunately, the petitioner did not have the requisite attendance

in the second semester. According to the petitioner, this was because of his ill
health. According to the University, no valid reasons were shown for nonattendance

and

his name was struck off from the college rolls by the

University. The result being that the petitioner was not permitted to take the
examinations for the second semester. The other consequence that followed
was that the petitioner was required to take the entrance examination again in
the next year.

This, the petitioner did in 2006 and, once again, passed the

entrance test and was 21st in order of merit in the entrance test. However, he
did not pay the admission fee as, according to the petitioner, he was advised
that if he took admission in 2006, he would lose out on all the five papers
which he had cleared in the previous year. He kept on representing with the
University authorities that he may be permitted to continue with his studies in
the third semester inasmuch as the only qualification required for promotion
from the first year to the second year was that the student should have passed in
at least five papers.

He submits that he had passed in five papers and,

therefore, he was entitled to be promoted to the third semester, which fell in the
second year of study. Reliance was placed on the decision of this Court in the
case of Avijit Bhushan v. University of Delhi : 136 DLT 441 wherein a learned
Single Judge of this Court came to the following conclusion:
“22.
Therefore, after considering the Attendance,
Examination and Promotion Rules in detail it is clear that for
promotion to III semester the only condition as provided
under the rules is passing in five courses in the I year (I and
II semester being taken together) which condition has been

fulfilled by the petitioner and that there is nothing in the
rules providing for minimum attendance requirement of 66%
for promotion to III semester nor the rules contemplates that
all the students who are detained in second semester on
account of shortage attendance, their admission shall be
cancelled.
23. The finding of the respondent about gross irregularity
committed by the petitioner is also vitiated as the petitioner
has not been given a reasonable opportunity and the order
has been passed without proper application of mind.
Consequently the order of the respondent striking off the
name of the petitioner from the rolls can not be sustained and
is hereby set aside. Since the petitioner is eligible to be
promoted to the next semester, third semester, he is to be
admitted to the third semester. Since the petitioner now can
not be admitted to the third semester for the session 20062007, he will be entitled for admission to the third semester
of session 2007-2008.

24. Since the striking off the name of the petitioner has been
held to be illegal and contrary to rules, it will be just
appropriate for the respondent to allow the petitioner to
attend the classes of second semester and after completing
attendance in accordance with rules, allow him to appear in
the examination of second semester in the session 20062007.
25. In the facts and circumstances of the case and for the
aforesaid reason the writ petition is allowed and the order
canceling the admission of the petitioner to the LL.B course
on account of alleged gross irregularity is quashed and the
respondent is directed to promote the petitioner to the III
semester and admit him to the third semester during the
session 2007-2008. In the meanwhile the respondent is
directed to allow the petitioner to attend the classes of
second semester and admit him to the said second semester
so that the petitioner may now complete his attendance and
attend 66% of the classes in the courses of second semester
in accordance with the attendance rules so as to be eligible to
appear in the examination of second semester. The
respondent is therefore, directed to admit the petitioner to the
second semester of LL.B course during the session 2006-

2007 forthwith. The writ petition is disposed of in terms
hereof and the parties are left to bear their own costs.”
3.

(underlining added)
The petitioner herein is seeking a similar relief. Having considered

the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioner as well as by
the learned counsel for the University, it appears that this is an unfortunate case
and requires special consideration.

The petitioner undoubtedly is a good

student because he obtained 62% marks in the first semester examinations and
was also placed 21st in order of merit in the entrance examination conducted in
2006. This is indicative of the fact that the petitioner is a good student. It is,
however, unclear as to why the petitioner did not pursue a regular course of
study in the second semester in 2005-2006. There is nothing to substantiate his
claim of having fallen ill,

although some medical certificates have been

submitted. However, the position is that the petitioner ought not to have been
denied a promotion to the third semester in view the reasoning given in Avijit
Bhushan's case. While disposing of the petition in Avijit Bhushan's case, this
Court had set aside the removal of the name of the candidate/ student from the
rolls of the college but, all the same, had required the detention of the student to
undergo the requisite attendance.

4.

In the present case, I find that there is no difficulty with attendance

insofar as the first semester is concerned, and by virtue of the order passed by
this Court on 23.02.2007, the petitioner was directed to attend classes of the
second semester which are being held currently. It is indicated by the learned

counsel for the petitioner that he shall attend all the lectures. Therefore, in
order to save the petitioner from any further anguish and further loss of time it
would be appropriate to direct that he be permitted to continue with the second
semester and to take the examinations, provided he attends all the remaining
lectures.

It is also directed that the petitioner be included in the rolls of the

college as a first year student, undergoing the second semester and his
promotion thereafter would depend on the usual rules.

5.

This writ petition stands disposed of accordingly. No costs.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
March 20, 2007
SR

