THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 22.04.2008

+

IA.No. 14373/07 (u/O 39 R 1 & 2 CPC) in CS(OS) 2454/2007

M/S MOSER BAER INDIA LTD.

... Plaintiff

- versus KONINKLIJKE PHILIPS
ELECTRONICS NV. & ORS.

... Defendants

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Plaintiff

For the Defendants

: Mr Harish N. Salve, Mr A.S. Chandhiok, Mr N.K. Kaul,
Mr Sanjay Jain Sr Advocates with Mr Vijay Sondhi,
Mr Sanjeev Kumar, Mr Ashish Prasad, Mr Abhinav Sanghi,
Mr Amrban Bhattacharya, Ms Sweta Kakkar, Mr Madhukar
Dhingra, Ms Abhiruchi Mengi, Ms Anu Bagai, Ms Enagoli
Sema and Mr Bhuvan Mishra
: Mr Dushyant Dave, Sr Advocate with Mr Praveen Anand,
Mr Ravi Varma, Mr Ameet Dutta, Mr Himanshu Bagai,
Mr Thomas George, Ms Milanka Chaudhary and
Mr Sarojanand Jha

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

YES

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

YES

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ? YES

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J
1.

Through this application under order 39 rules 1 & 2 of the Code

of Civil Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter referred to as “the CPC”), the
plaintiff is seeking, as an interim injunction, essentially the same relief
sought in the suit itself , which is to restrain the defendants from initiating
any fresh proceedings against the plaintiff in a foreign court and from
continuing with the suit - Koninklijke Philips Electronics NV vs Moser
IA No.14373/2007 in CSOS2454/2007

Page No.1 of 19

Baer India Ltd – filed by the defendant no.1 at The Hague, The
Netherlands, as well as from continuing with the third party claim and
counter claim filed by the defendant no.1 against, inter alia, the plaintiff in
the complaint [Civ.A. No. 07-3668 (DWF/AJB)] filed by Imation
Corporation before the Minnesota District Court, USA. Briefly put, the
plaintiff prays for an anti-suit injunction against the defendants (more
particularly against defendant no.1) on the strength of interim orders
passed by this court in the plaintiff’s earlier suit [CS(OS) 2026/2006] and
on the pleas of forum non-conveniens and that the proceeding before the
foreign courts are vexatious and oppressive to the plaintiff. The defendants
have resisted this application on inter alia the plea that this court lacks
territorial jurisdiction and that the conditions precedent for the grant of an
anti-suit injunction as determined by the Supreme Court in Modi
Entertainment Network v. W.S.G. Cricket Pte Ltd: (2003) 4 SCC 341
have not been fulfilled.
2.

The plaintiff manufactures and sells optical and magnetic data

storage media products. The defendant nos. 2 & 3 are alleged to be the
Indian “arms” of the subsidiaries of the defendant no.1, with whom the
plaintiff entered into 6 Disc Patent License Agreements (DPLAs) on
different dates between 01.07.2001 and 10.02.2003 whereby the defendant
no.1 licensed its patents in respect of the following types of discs – CD-R,
CD-RW, DVD+R, DVD-R, DVD-RW and DVD+RW. The DPLAs were
for 10 years from their respective effective dates and contained similar

IA No.14373/2007 in CSOS2454/2007

Page No.2 of 19

terms with some differences with regard to, inter alia, the quantum of
royalty payable by the plaintiff to the defendant no.1 in respect of each type
of disc. Consequently, the plaintiff was liable to pay royalty to the
defendant no.1 in respect of each disc manufactured and sold by it under
the DPLAs. Each of these agreements also contained a jurisdiction clause
which read as:“This Agreement shall be governed by and construed in
accordance with the laws of the Netherlands. Any disputes
between the parties hereto in connection with the Agreement
(including any question regarding its existence, validity or
termination) shall be submitted to the competent courts of the
Hague, the Netherlands, provided always that, in case Philips
is the plaintiff, Philips may at its sole discretion submit any
such dispute either to the competent courts in the venue of
Licensee’s registered office, or to any of the competent courts
in the Territory. Licensee hereby irrevocably waives any
objection to the jurisdiction, process and venue of any such
court and to the effectiveness, execution and enforcement of
any order or judgment (including, but not limited to, a default
judgment) of any such court in relation to this Agreement, to
the maximum extent permitted by the law of any jurisdiction,
the laws of which might be claimed to be applicable regarding
the effectiveness, enforcement or execution of such order or
judgment.”
3.

Earlier, in 1995, the defendant no.1 had entered into a Cross

License Agreement (CLA) with Minnesota Mining & Manufacturing
Company (3M company) of USA. Under the CLA, both, the defendant no.1
and 3M company were granted reciprocal royalty free licenses for each
others patents relating to optical disc technology. Subsequently, 3M
company assigned its rights under the said CLA to Imation Corporation.
The plaintiff manufactured and sold the said products to, inter alia, Imation
Corporation and its subsidiary Global Data Media FZ-LLC (GDM). Since,

IA No.14373/2007 in CSOS2454/2007

Page No.3 of 19

Imation Corporation (including its subsidiary) was a licensee under the
CLA, it was represented by Imation Corporation that no royalty was
payable to defendant no.1 in respect of sales by the plaintiff to it. Such
sales were allegedly reported to the defendant no.1, who, it is alleged, did
not object initially. Subsequently, the defendant no.1 construed it as a
breach of the 6 DPLAs and issued six default notices to the plaintiff on
18.10.2006 threatening cancellation of the DPLAs. Imation Corporation
and the plaintiff were of the view that the defendant no.1 had no right to
request for royalties in respect of sales made by the plaintiff to Imation
Corporation, the latter be a licensee under the CLA.

4.

This led to the filing of two separate actions, one each by the

plaintiff and Imation Corporation. The Plaintiff filed a suit [ CS(OS)
2026/06] in this court seeking a declaration and injunction against the
defendants herein in respect of the said six default notices issued by the
defendant no.1. Imation Corporation filed a declaratory judgment action
[Civ.A. No. 07-3668 (DWF/AJB)] against defendant no.1 before the
Minnesota District Court, USA. The plaintiff was not initially joined as a
party in Imation’s suit. The circumstances under which the plaintiff became
a party in that suit will be indicated shortly. But, first, it would be
appropriate to mention the relevant orders passed in the plaintiff’s suit
[ CS(OS) 2026/06 ]. On 03.11.2006, the court, while issuing notice on the
plaintiff’s application (I.A. No. 11943/06) under order 39 Rules 1&2 CPC,

IA No.14373/2007 in CSOS2454/2007

Page No.4 of 19

recorded the statement of the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
defendants as follows:“…that in the meanwhile defendants shall restore the
plaintiff’s name as authorized licensee of the defendants on
its official website www.licenses.philips.com and shall also
indicate that the default notice of 18th October, 2006 is subjudice before this Court. Learned counsel further states that
the defendants will continue to issue to the plaintiff
Licensed Status Confirmation Documents (LSCD) as per the
procedure, being followed by the parties. It is also stated
that the defendants shall not take any further precipitate
action.”
(underlining added)
This order was subsequently confirmed by the Court on 23.07.2007
“subject to variation if required by either of the parties”. In the meanwhile,
the defendant no.1 filed a counter claim and a third party complaint in
Imation’s suit in the District Court at Minnesota, USA. The plaintiff was
arrayed as party and the defendant no.1 claimed a sum of USD 655 million.
In February, 2007, Imation Corporation and the defendant no.1 entered into
a standstill agreement whereby they agreed to negotiate and resolve the
disputes.

During the pendency of the settlement talks, several

adjournments were taken on this ground in the plaintiff’s suit [ CS(OS)
2026/06 ] and the defendants sought extension of time for filing their
written statements on the plea that “[n]otwithstanding the defendants’
contentions and without prejudice to the stand to be taken by the
defendants on jurisdiction and/or the merits of the matter, the defendants
do not wish to prejudice/colour the settlement talks between the Plaintiff
and defendant No.1 by filing its defence and objections during this period ”

IA No.14373/2007 in CSOS2454/2007

Page No.5 of 19

[para 3, I.A. No. 12720/06 in CS(OS) 2026/06]. Extensions were granted
from time to time.

5.

The settlement talks broke down. Imation Corporation re-filed

its complaint and the defendant no.1 filed the suit in The Hague claiming
royalty from the plaintiff in respect of all sales of Philips patented CD and
DVD discs to Imation Corporation and its subsidiaries including Global
Data Media FZ-LLC. Thereafter, the present suit seeking an anti-suit
injunction was filed by the plaintiff.

6.

The law relating to anti-suit injunction has been spelt out by the

Supreme Court in Modi Entertainment Network (supra), a decision relied
upon by counsel on both sides. After considering Oil and Natural Gas
Commission v. Western Co. of North America: (1987) 1 SCC 496; British
India Steam Navigation Co. Ltd v. Shanmughavilas Cashew Industries:
(1990) 3 SCC 481; SNI Aerospatiale v. Lee Kui Jak: (1987) 3 All ER 510;
Spiliada Maritime Corpn v. Cansulex Ltd: (1986) 3 All ER 843; Airbus
Industrie GIE v. Patel: (1998) 2 All ER 257; British Aerospace Plc v. Dee
Howard Co.: (1993) 1 Lloyd’s Rep 368; Donohue v. Armco Inc.: (2002) 1
All ER 749 (HL); SABAH Shipyard (Pakistan) Ltd v. Islamic Republic of
Pakistan and Karachi Electrics Supply Corpn Ltd: 2002 EWCA Civ 1643
(CA), the Supreme Court held:
“24.
emerge:

From the above discussion the following principles

IA No.14373/2007 in CSOS2454/2007

Page No.6 of 19

(1)
In exercising discretion to grant an anti-suit injunction
the court must be satisfied of the following aspects:
(a) the defendant, against whom injunction is sought, is
amenable to the personal jurisdiction of the court;
(b) if the injunction is declined, the ends of justice will
be defeated and injustice will be perpetuated; and
(c) the principle of comity — respect for the court in
which the commencement or continuance of
action/proceeding is sought to be restrained — must be
borne in mind.
(2)
In a case where more forums than one are available,
the court in exercise of its discretion to grant anti-suit injunction
will examine as to which is the appropriate forum (forum
conveniens) having regard to the convenience of the parties and
may grant anti-suit injunction in regard to proceedings which are
oppressive or vexatious or in a forum non-conveniens.
(3)
Where jurisdiction of a court is invoked on the basis
of jurisdiction clause in a contract, the recitals therein in regard to
exclusive or non-exclusive jurisdiction of the court of choice of
the parties are not determinative but are relevant factors and
when a question arises as to the nature of jurisdiction agreed to
between the parties the court has to decide the same on a true
interpretation of the contract on the facts and in the circumstances
of each case.
(4)
A court of natural jurisdiction will not normally grant
anti-suit injunction against a defendant before it where parties
have agreed to submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of a court
including a foreign court, a forum of their choice in regard to the
commencement or continuance of proceedings in the court of
choice, save in an exceptional case for good and sufficient
reasons, with a view to prevent injustice in circumstances such as
which permit a contracting party to be relieved of the burden of
the contract; or since the date of the contract the circumstances or
subsequent events have made it impossible for the party seeking
injunction to prosecute the case in the court of choice because the
essence of the jurisdiction of the court does not exist or because
of a vis major or force majeure and the like.
(5)
Where parties have agreed, under a non-exclusive
jurisdiction clause, to approach a neutral foreign forum and be
governed by the law applicable to it for the resolution of their
IA No.14373/2007 in CSOS2454/2007

Page No.7 of 19

disputes arising under the contract, ordinarily no anti-suit
injunction will be granted in regard to proceedings in such a
forum conveniens and favoured forum as it shall be presumed
that the parties have thought over their convenience and all other
relevant factors before submitting to the non-exclusive
jurisdiction of the court of their choice which cannot be treated
just as an alternative forum.
(6)
A party to the contract containing jurisdiction clause
cannot normally be prevented from approaching the court of
choice of the parties as it would amount to aiding breach of the
contract; yet when one of the parties to the jurisdiction clause
approaches the court of choice in which exclusive or nonexclusive jurisdiction is created, the proceedings in that court
cannot per se be treated as vexatious or oppressive nor can the
court be said to be forum non-conveniens.
(7)
The burden of establishing that the forum of choice is
a forum non-conveniens or the proceedings therein are oppressive
or vexatious would be on the party so contending to aver and
prove the same.”
7.

The concepts of anti-suit injunction and forum non conveniens

require some examination. An anti-suit injunction is granted by a court
preventing the parties before it from instituting or continuing with
proceedings in another Court. On the other hand, the doctrine of forum
non conveniens is invoked by a court to not entertain a matter presented
before it in view of the fact that there exists a more appropriate court of
competent jurisdiction which would be in a better position to decide the lis
between the parties. So, in a sense the principle on which an anti-suit
injunction is invoked is just the reverse of the principle on which the
doctrine of forum non conveniens is employed. To make it absolutely
clear, an example would be appropriate. Assuming that there are two
courts A and B at different places and both having jurisdiction in a
particular matter, a party may approach court A for an anti-suit injunction
IA No.14373/2007 in CSOS2454/2007

Page No.8 of 19

against the other party preventing them from instituting a suit or other
proceeding in court B. Of course, while considering the grant of an antisuit injunction, court A would take into account as to which of the two
courts is the more convenient forum. However, when a party approaches
court A and the defendants take up the plea that court A is a forum non
conveniens and that the matter ought to be more appropriately dealt with
by court B, then court A, invoking the principles of forum non conveniens,
may refuse to entertain the matter presented to it and direct the parties to
approach court B being the more convenient forum. Thus, it is seen that in
an anti-suit injunction, one court grants an injunction restraining the parties
from approaching another court. Whereas, in the case of the doctrine of
forum non conveniens, the court before whom the matter is presented, itself
refuses to entertain the same and directs the parties to approach the other
court being the more appropriate and convenient forum. It must also be
kept in mind that the court granting an anti-suit injunction must otherwise
have jurisdiction over the matter. Similarly, the court rejecting a matter on
the principle of forum non conveniens, must otherwise also have
jurisdiction to entertain the same. This is so because if the court in either
case does not have jurisdiction then, it cannot deal with the matter and,
consequently, it can neither grant an anti-suit injunction nor pass an order
refusing to hear the matter on the plea of forum non conveniens.

8.

In Jayaswals Neco Limited v. Union of India and Others:

WPC 2103/2007 and other connected matters, in a judgment delivered on
IA No.14373/2007 in CSOS2454/2007

Page No.9 of 19

02.07.2007, I had the opportunity to examine the doctrine of forum non
conveniens. After considering Sim v. Robinow: (1892) 19 K. 665, Tehrani
v. Secy of State for the Home Department: [2006] UKHL 47, Gulf Oil
Corp. v. Gilbert: 330 U.S. 501, I had concluded that the doctrine of forum
non conveniens can only be invoked where the court deciding not to
exercise jurisdiction, has jurisdiction in the strict sense.

9.

The plaintiff's prayer for an anti-suit injunction has to be

examined in the backdrop of the aforesaid legal principles. It has been
contended by the plaintiff that the proceedings at the Hague and before the
District Court of Minnesota, USA are vexatious and oppressive and that the
Court at the Hague and at Minnesota are both forum non conveniens. It has
also been contended that although the plaintiff has presence in 82 countries
and is a world leader in the manufacture of CD-R, the proceedings at the
Hague and Minnesota would entail that the plaintiff has to incur avoidable
financial expenses. It is also contended that most of the witnesses which
are required to depose on behalf of the plaintiff would be from India and
this Court is already seized of the issue relating to the validity of the default
notices issued by the defendant No.1 in respect of the 6 DPLAs. It was also
contended on the part of the plaintiff that the proceedings at the Hague and
at Minnesota are clear examples of oppressive and vexatious actions aimed
at somehow defeating the orders passed by this Court in CS(OS)
2026/2006. It was contended that the plaintiff is entitled to an anti-suit
injunction also on the ground that the order dated 03.11.2006 passed in
IA No.14373/2007 in CSOS2454/2007

Page No.10 of 19

CS(OS) 2026/2006 clearly restrained the defendants from initiating any
further 'precipitate' action against the plaintiff. He submits that this was an
undertaking given by the defendants to this Court and the said order had
been confirmed on 23.07.2007.

The filing of the suit at Hague and

continuing with the proceedings at Minnesota would, according to the
plaintiff, constitute 'precipitate' action and, therefore, would be a clear
violation of the undertaking given to the Court and would amount to gross
contempt of this Court. The defendants, on the other hand, have contended
that they have done nothing to violate the statement or undertaking given
by their counsel before this Court. They maintain that the said statement
recorded on 03.11.2006 was only limited to the cause of action of that suit,
i.e., the default notices and threatened cancellation of the said six DPLAs.
It did not extend to the filing of any other suit or action or continuing with
the proceeding at Minnesota. It was also contended that, in any event, this
Court did not have jurisdiction over the matter in view of the specific
jurisdiction clause contained in the DPLAs.

10.

With regard to the statement that the defendants would not take

any “precipitate” action, there could only be two possible views. Either the
expression covered the filing of the suit at the Hague and continuing with
the proceedings at Minnesota, or it did not. If it were the former then, a
virtual anti-suit injunction has already been granted by the Court in CS(OS)
2026/2006 and no further suit for the same relief can be entertained. If
there has been a violation of such an undertaking or order then, there is
IA No.14373/2007 in CSOS2454/2007

Page No.11 of 19

remedy provided under the CPC as well as under the Contempt of Courts
Act, 1971 to not only seek enforcement but also punishment of the
defendants. That would be a course of action which can be pursued by the
plaintiff either in CS(OS) 2026/2006 itself or by way of a separate
contempt petition. A suit, such as the present, would not lie. On the other
hand, if the expression 'precipitate action' did not include the filing of other
proceedings by the defendants then, in any event, the present suit seeking
anti-suit injunction, cannot be founded on the basis of the undertaking/
statement recorded on 03.11.2006 in CS(OS) 2026/2006. Thus, whichever
way the matter is looked at, the statement / undertaking made by the
counsel for the defendants on 03.11.2006 is irrelevant for the purposes of
considering the present application and suit for anti-suit injunction.

11.

This takes us to the discussion of whether this Court has

jurisdiction in the matter. It has already been noted above that each of the
DPLAs, which govern the relationship between the plaintiff and the
defendants, contains a jurisdiction clause. The first part of the jurisdiction
clause states that the agreements would be governed by and construed in
accordance with the laws of the Netherlands. The second part of the clause
stipulates that the disputes between the parties shall be submitted to the
competent courts of the Hague, the Netherlands. There is a proviso to this
and that is that in case the defendant No.1 is the plaintiff, it may at its sole
discretion, submit such dispute either to the competent courts in the venue
of the plaintiff's registered office or to any of the competent courts in the
IA No.14373/2007 in CSOS2454/2007

Page No.12 of 19

Territory as defined in the agreements which, inter alia, includes India and
such other place, with the approval of the defendant No.1, where the
licensed products are manufactured by the plaintiff. The plaintiff also, by
virtue of the said clauses, waived any objection to the jurisdiction, process
and venue of any such court and to the effectiveness, execution and
enforcement of any order or judgment of any such court in relation to the
said agreements. The learned counsel for the plaintiff had submitted that
this jurisdiction clause did not grant exclusivity to the courts of the Hague,
the Netherlands, because words such as “solely”, “only” and “exclusively”
are absent. Reliance was placed on the Supreme Court decision in the case
of A. B. C Laminart v. A. P. Agencies: (1989) 2 SCC 163 wherein the
Supreme Court considering the scope of an ouster clause observed as
under:“21.
From the foregoing decisions it can be
reasonably deduced that where such an ouster clause
occurs, it is pertinent to see whether there is ouster of
jurisdiction of other courts. When the clause is clear,
unambiguous and specific accepted notions of contract
would bind the parties and unless the absence of ad idem
can be shown, the other courts should avoid exercising
jurisdiction. As regards construction of the ouster clause
when words like “alone”, “only”, “exclusive” and the
like have been used there may be no difficulty. Even
without such words in appropriate cases the maxim
“expressio unius est exclusio alterius” — expression of
one is the exclusion of another — may be applied. What
is an appropriate case shall depend on the facts of the
case. In such a case mention of one thing may imply
exclusion of another. When certain jurisdiction is
specified in a contract an intention to exclude all others
from its operation may in such cases be inferred. It has
therefore to be properly construed.”

IA No.14373/2007 in CSOS2454/2007

Page No.13 of 19

What the Supreme Court decided in A. B. C Laminart (supra) is that in
case an ouster clause contained the words “alone”, “only”, “exclusive” and
the like, there would be difficulty in construing the same as restricting
jurisdiction to one court and excluding jurisdiction with regard to other
courts. But this does not mean that a clause which does not contain the
words like “alone”, “only”, “sole” or “exclusive” would not, under any
circumstance, amount to an ouster clause or grant exclusivity of jurisdiction
to a particular court or courts. In fact, the Supreme Court noted that even
without such words, in appropriate cases, the maxim “expressio unius est
exclusio alterius” — expression of one is the exclusion of another — may
be applied. The jurisdiction clause in the present case clearly stipulates that
the disputes between the parties in connection with the DPLAs 'shall' be
submitted to the competent courts of the Hague, the Netherlands. This is
coupled with the proviso that in case the defendant No.1 (Philips) is the
plaintiff, it may at its sole discretion submit such a dispute either to the
competent courts in the venue of the plaintiff's registered office or to any of
the competent courts in the Territory as defined under the agreements.

12.

Reading the proviso along with the main portion of the clause, it

is apparent that in cases where the licensee (Moser Baer India Limited) is
the plaintiff, the dispute can be submitted only to the courts of the Hague
because while an exception has been carved out in respect of cases where
the defendant No.1 is the plaintiff, no exception has been made from the
general rule that the cases shall be submitted to the competent courts of the
IA No.14373/2007 in CSOS2454/2007

Page No.14 of 19

Hague, in cases where Moser Baer India Limited is the plaintiff. The
present suit has been instituted, not by the defendant No.1, but, by Moser
Baer India Limited as the plaintiff. Consequently, it has to be held that the
institution of the present suit by Moser Baer India Limited as a plaintiff is
contrary to the jurisdiction clause contained in each of the DPLAs. A suit
with respect to a dispute relating to the DPLAs could only have been
instituted, where Moser Baer India Limited is the plaintiff, in the competent
courts of the Hague, the Netherlands.

The argument to the contrary

submitted on behalf of the plaintiff cannot be accepted for the aforesaid
reasons. It is, therefore, clear that this Court would not have jurisdiction to
entertain the present suit. That being the position, there is no question of
granting an anti-suit injunction. It is also reiterated that the argument of
forum non-conveniens can only be raised where the court before whom
such an argument is raised, does otherwise have jurisdiction in the strict
sense. It could, if at all, be raised in the courts at the Hague.

13.

It was contended that this Court would be a Court of natural

jurisdiction inasmuch as the DPLAs were executed in Delhi and part of the
cause of action arose in Delhi. In this regard the principles set out in Modi
Entertainment Network (supra) need to be examined. It was pointed out
by the Supreme Court in paragraph 24 (4) of the said decision that a court
of natural jurisdiction will not normally grant anti-suit injunction against a
defendant before it where parties have agreed to submit to the exclusive
jurisdiction of a court including a foreign court, a forum of their choice in
IA No.14373/2007 in CSOS2454/2007

Page No.15 of 19

regard to the commencement or continuance of proceedings in the court of
choice, save in an exceptional case for good and sufficient reasons, with a
view to prevent injustice in circumstances such as which permit a
contracting party to be relieved of the burden of the contract; or since the
date of the contract the circumstances or subsequent events have made it
impossible for the party seeking injunction to prosecute the case in the
court of choice because the essence of the jurisdiction of the court does not
exist or because of a vis major or force majeure and the like. Examining
the said observations of the Supreme Court in the light of the facts and
circumstances of the present case, I do not find any such exceptional case
made out by the plaintiff for the grant of an anti-suit injunction. The nongrant of an anti-suit injunction would not relieve the defendants of the
burden of the contract.

Moreover, there is nothing to show that it is

impossible for the plaintiff to prosecute its case in the court of choice
because of the reason that essence of the jurisdiction of the Court of choice
does not exist any more. No case of vis major or force majeure and the like
has been pleaded by the plaintiff.

On the contrary, it is an admitted

position, as noted above, that the plaintiff has presence in 82 countries and
also has a full-fledged office in the Netherlands. In paragraph 24 (6) of the
Supreme Court decision in Modi Entertainment Network (supra) it is
observed that a party to the contract containing a jurisdiction clause cannot
normally be prevented from approaching the court of choice of the parties
as it would amount to aiding breach of the contract. It is further observed
that when one of the parties to the jurisdiction clause approaches the court
IA No.14373/2007 in CSOS2454/2007

Page No.16 of 19

of choice in which exclusive or non-exclusive jurisdiction is created, the
proceedings in that court cannot per se be treated as vexatious or
oppressive nor can the court be said to be forum non-conveniens. Clearly,
insofar as suits filed by the plaintiff are concerned under the DPLAs, the
competent courts of the Hague, the Netherlands, would be the courts of
choice and in such a situation the defendant No.1 cannot be prevented,
normally, from approaching the courts in the Hague as it would amount to
aiding breach of the contract. Moreover, the fact that the defendant No.1
has filed a suit in the Hague, the proceedings in that court cannot per se be
treated as vexatious or oppressive nor can the court be said to be forum
non-conveniens. As pointed out further in the Supreme Court decision in
Modi Entertainment Network (supra), the burden of establishing that the
forum of choice is a forum non-conveniens or the proceedings therein are
oppressive or vexatious would be on the party so contending to aver and
prove the same. The plaintiff has been unable to show in the facts and
circumstances of the present case and has not discharged this burden of
establishing, even prima facie, that the courts at the Hague, the
Netherlands, is a forum non-conveniens or that the proceedings therein are
oppressive or vexatious.

Consequently, on the principles laid down in

Modi Entertainment Network (supra) for the grant of an anti-suit
injunction, the plaintiff is not entitled to the order that it seeks. As regards
the action in the District Court of Minnesota also no anti-suit injunction
can be granted. First of all, as noted above, this court does not have
jurisdiction in the matter. Secondly, the action was brought by Imation
IA No.14373/2007 in CSOS2454/2007

Page No.17 of 19

Corporation against the defendant No.1.

It is primarily not an action

brought by the defendant No.1. But, an action instituted by a third party
(Imation Corporation) in which the plaintiff herein was, initially, not even a
party.

14.

While considering the question of jurisdiction and a jurisdiction

clause it would also be important to note that, as observed in Modi
Entertainment Network (supra), it is a well settled principle that by
agreement parties cannot confer jurisdiction, where none exists, on a Court
to which CPC applies, but this principle does not apply when the parties
agree to submit to the exclusive or non-exclusive jurisdiction of a foreign
court. In such international contracts, the parties may agree to have their
disputes resolved by a foreign court which may be a neutral court or a court
of choice creating exclusive or non-exclusive jurisdiction in it although
such court may not otherwise have jurisdiction.

This settled position

eliminates any argument that may be advanced claiming that the courts of
the Hague, the Netherlands, do not have jurisdiction and the parties could
not by agreement confer jurisdiction on it.

15.

Before concluding, I must also deal with the arguments

advanced on behalf of the plaintiff that the defendants and, particularly,
defendant No.1 cannot be permitted to raise the issue of jurisdiction
when

it

had submitted to the jurisdiction of this court in CS(OS)

2026/2006. It has been mentioned above that on account of the settlement
IA No.14373/2007 in CSOS2454/2007

Page No.18 of 19

talks following the standstill agreement between Imation Corporation and
the defendant No.1, the latter moved an application for extension of time to
file a written statement.

In that application, it was indicated that the

defendants proposed to, inter alia, take the plea of jurisdiction but were not
doing so because it may have an impact on the settlement talks. The
learned counsel for the defendants also submitted that they had not given
up the plea of jurisdiction in CS(OS) 2026/2006.

It is true that the

defendant No.1 could waive the requirement under the jurisdiction clause
that the suit be filed by Moser Baer India Ltd only at the Hague. Waiver
being contractual could alter the jurisdiction clause contained in the
DPLAs. But, waiver would have to be established. And, that is an issue
which may require resolution in CS(OS) 2026/2006. In the present suit,
there is no waiver of the jurisdiction clause, the defendants having objected
to the territorial jurisdiction of this court at the very outset.

16.

For all the above reasons, this application is liable to be

dismissed. It is ordered accordingly.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
April 22, 2008
SR

IA No.14373/2007 in CSOS2454/2007

Page No.19 of 19

