THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on :29.10.2007

+

IA. No. 8352/2007 in CS(OS) 1094/2004

VIJAI KUMAR SAWHNEY

... Plaintiff
- versus -

INDER DEV SAWHNEY & OTHERS

... Defendants.

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Plaintiff
: Ms Sunita Bansal with Ms Priya Bansal.
For the Defendants
: None.

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

The issue involved in this application is with regard to the

question of stamp duty on the compromise decree dated 09.01.2006.
This suit was filed for partition of joint property and pursuant to a
compromise and /or settlement between the parties, an application under
Order 23 Rule 3 being IA. No. 254/2006 was filed in respect of the suit
property bearing No. C-153 Defence Colony, New Delhi – 110024. The

IA.No.8352/2007 in CS(OS) 1094/2004

Page No.1 of 7

parties had entered into a Memorandum of Understanding on 18.01.2005
wherein it was specifically stated that as per the desire of Mr Vijai
Kumar Sawhney and his son to sever their rights and ties with the HUF
and with a view to settle all the disputes raised in the suit, the parties had
arrived at an amicable settlement and that they were signing and
executing the said Memorandum of Understanding individually,
collectively as well as in their capacity as coparceners of the HUF to
record the terms of settlement already agreed upon, in writing to avoid
any future dispute. Clause 5 of the Memorandum of Understanding also
indicated that the second party (Vijai Kumar Sawhney) agrees and
undertakes to execute all the requisite documents in respect of the
immovable properties, particularly, with regard to the relinquishment
deeds in respect of the said property and to get the documents registered
before the appropriate authorities to effectuate the settlement agreed
upon between the parties.

2.

On the basis of the Memorandum of Understanding, the

application under Order 23 Rule 3 was jointly filed by the parties.
Paragraph 2 of the said application also indicated that during the
pendency of the suit, the parties had amicably settled their disputes and

IA.No.8352/2007 in CS(OS) 1094/2004

Page No.2 of 7

had recorded the terms of the said settlement already agreed upon in the
Memorandum of Understanding dated 18.01.2005. Paragraph 4 of the
application stated that the plaintiff has voluntarily and willingly desired
to irrevocably and for ever absolutely and unconditionally, inter alia,
relinquish all his rights, title and interest in the HUF in question and in
all its movable and immovable assets including the said property at
Defence Colony in favour of the remaining coparceners on payment of
Rs 46 lacs, receipt of which was acknowledged by the plaintiff.

3.

After the passing of the decree, the question was raised by the

Registry with regard to the stamping of the same. As per the registry, the
plaintiff has relinquished his share in the suit property after recovering an
amount of Rs 46 lacs from the defendants and, therefore, the decree is
liable to be stamped in accordance with Article 45 of the Indian Stamp
Act, 1899 read with Article 15 thereof. According to the registry, the
stamp duty on the separated share @ 2% is payable on the decree and
that the amount of stamp duty would come to Rs 92,000/-.

4.

The learned counsel for the plaintiff submitted that no stamp

duty whatsoever would be payable on the decree inasmuch as the decree

IA.No.8352/2007 in CS(OS) 1094/2004

Page No.3 of 7

merely records an oral partition which had been entered into between the
parties. To support this contention, she placed reliance on two decisions
of this court. The first decision was of a learned Single Judge of this
Court in the case of Rajinder Kumar v Iqbal Singh and Others : AIR
2003 Delhi 441 and the second decision was of the Division Bench of
this court in the case of Nitin Jain v Anuj Jain & Ors (FAO (OS)
37/2007) decided on 19.04.2007. In Rajinder Kumar (supra), a learned
Single Judge of this court was examining the question of stamp duty on a
partition decree. In that case an oral partition had taken place prior to the
passing of the decree and in that context, the learned Judge observed as
under :
“7. The partition or division of the properties, movable as
well as immovable, having already taken place by way
of an oral partition on Ist of April, 2000, the Family
settlement (Annexure P1) or Disclaimer Agreement
could not be taken as instrument of partition as
contemplated under Section 2(15) of the Act. The
Partition Decree that was passed in the suit simply
took note of an existing fact of partition in pursuance
of compromise between the parties and it did not by
itself effect the partition of the properties to make it
fall within the definition of instrument of partition.
5.

In Nitin Jain (supra), a similar question came up for

consideration before the Division Bench wherein the Division Bench
observed as under :
IA.No.8352/2007 in CS(OS) 1094/2004

Page No.4 of 7

“9. In view of the legal position explained above, it follows
that a decree of partition is an instrument of partition and
therefore is required to be stamped under Schedule 1 of
Article 45 r/w Section 2(15) of the Stamp Act. However,
an oral family settlement dividing or partitioning the
property is not required to be stamped. Similarly, a
memorandum recording an oral family settlement which
has already taken place is not an instrument dividing or
agreeing to divide property and is therefore not required
to be stamped.
10. Relevant paragraphs of the application for compromise
and the orders passed by the Court have been quoted
above. In the application it is specifically stated that the
parties had entered into an oral family settlement and had
distributed movable and immovable properties. In fact it
is further stated that the parties had already been put in
possession of the respective portions and the possession
had been taken over. The compromise application merely
records the oral family settlement to avoid any ambiguity.
Therefore, in this case the Court was not required to pass
any decree of partition but only declare the existing
factual position on the date when the compromise
application was filed, that the parties had entered into an
oral family settlement and had partitioned and separated
the properties amongst themselves. It was a decree of
declaration that there exists an oral family settlement that
was passed and no decree that amounts to an instrument
of partition under Section 2(15) of the Stamp Act was
passed. Thus, the objection raised by the Registry that the
appellant and other co-owners must furnish valuation
report and pay stamp duty is not correct and legally
tenable. However, it is clarified that in case the appellant
or any of the co-sharers want to have a decree of partition
prepared by the Registry, they shall have to file valuation
report and also pay stamp duty.”

6.

The two decisions referred to by the learned counsel for the

IA.No.8352/2007 in CS(OS) 1094/2004

Page No.5 of 7

defendant No.1 would not be of any assistance to her. This is because
the facts of the two cases are entirely different from the facts of the
present case.

In those cases, the oral family settlement dividing or

partitioning the property had already been taken place and the decree
merely declared the existing factual position on the date when the
compromise application was filed. In the present case, the oral partition
has not taken place prior to the passing of the decree and the partition
would take effect on the date on which the decree is passed. In another
words, in the two cases cited by the learned counsel, the partition had
already been taken place prior to the decree whereas in the present case
the partition took place upon the passing of the decree. That is the
distinction which had to be borne in mind. Accordingly, the stamp duty
would be payable under Article 45 read with Section 2(15) as well as
Article 15 of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 as applicable to Delhi.

7.

It was further contended by the learned counsel that the rate at

which the registry calculated the stamp duty is also not in accordance
with Article 15. According to her, the rate ought to be 1/2 % and not 2%
as indicated by the registry. The learned counsel is not correct in her
submission. This is so because the rates as applicable in Delhi have to be

IA.No.8352/2007 in CS(OS) 1094/2004

Page No.6 of 7

seen. By virtue of the Indian Stamp (Delhi Amendment) Act, 2001 new
Schedule 1-A has been substituted in the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 as in
force in the National Capital Territory of Delhi. In terms of Article 45
thereof the proper stamp duty in respect of an instrument of partition has
been specified as the same duty as a Bond No.15, for the amount of the
value of the separated share or shares of the property.

Article 15

specifies the proper stamp duty as “2% and 0.5% on bond issued by the
local authority”. The decree in question is certainly not a “bond issued
by the local authority”. Therefore, the applicable rate would be 2%.

8.

It is made clear that the decree passed in this case is a decree

of partition and by itself constitutes an instrument of partition as
indicated in Section 2(15) of the Stamp Act. No further document is
necessary for bringing about the partition.

With these directions, this application stands disposed of.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
( JUDGE )
October 29, 2007
Μ

IA.No.8352/2007 in CS(OS) 1094/2004

Page No.7 of 7

