THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 25.09.2007

+

OMP No.130/2004

M/S ERA CONSTRUCTIONS (INDIA) LIMITED ...Petitioner
- versus MR. D.K. SHARMA, PROP. KESHAV
SECURITY SERVICES (REGD.)

...Respondent

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr Manoj K. Singh with Ms Gunita Pahwa
For the Respondent
: Mr Sunil Ahuja

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ? Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J
1.
This is a petition under Section 34 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as 'the said Act') whereby
the petitioner has sought the setting aside of the impugned award dated
08.01.2004 passed by the learned sole Arbitrator [Justice Mohd. Shamim
(retired)]. The petitioner herein [Era Constructions (I) Ltd] was the
respondent in the arbitration proceedings. The respondent [D.K. Sharma,

OMP No.130/04

Page No.1 of 19

Proprietor of Keshav Security Services (Regd.)] was the claimant before
the arbitrator.

2.

The impugned award has been assailed before this court on

three grounds. The first ground is that certain materials disclosed to the
learned Arbitrator during conciliation have been used by the learned
Arbitrator in the course of the award and therefore the requirement of
confidentiality under Section 75 read with Section 30 of the said Act has
been breached. The second ground taken by the learned counsel for the
petitioner is that the arbitration was invoked by a letter dated 05.06.2000
and, therefore, only the claims limited to three years prior to this date
ought to have been considered by the learned Arbitrator.

It was

contended that since the Arbitrator calculated dues from 1995 onwards,
part of the claim was clearly time barred. The third ground canvassed by
the learned counsel for the petitioner was that for the period after
01.01.1999, there was evidence only in respect of four persons employed
as security guards at the petitioner's installations.

But the learned

Arbitrator has made an award in favour of the respondent in respect of 35
persons only on the basis of the evidence with regard to 4 persons. It
was contended that merely because there was evidence that 4 persons

OMP No.130/04

Page No.2 of 19

were engaged, the same could not be extrapolated to infer that 35 persons
were engaged.

2.

Briefly stated the facts are that the respondent, who was the

claimant before the learned Arbitrator, filed a claim of Rs 20,56,833/against the petitioner herein.

The respondent (D.K. Sharma) is the

proprietor of Keshav Security Services and he is involved in the business
of providing security services to industrial / business houses through his
security guards who are ex-servicemen and / or retired personnel from
paramilitary forces.

The petitioner carries on the business of

construction and development works at different places.

It required

security arrangements for all its sites and, therefore, approached the
respondent for providing security services in respect of its different sites
located in different States.

An agreement had been entered into on

23.08.1995 between the parties for providing such security arrangements.
As per the claimant (the respondent herein), during the course of the
agreement, a running account was maintained between the parties. The
respondent used to raise bills on the petitioner and the petitioner on the
other hand used to make payments. A detailed statement of account for
the entire period from 01.09.1995 till 31.03.1999 was placed before the

OMP No.130/04

Page No.3 of 19

learned Arbitrator and has been annexed with the award as Annexure C3. Since it would be material to consider this account, it may be relevant
to point out that the statement of account reveals that bills have been
raised from time to time by the respondent on the petitioner. The same
were reflected in the statement of account. As against this, the petitioner
was paying amounts to the respondent from time to time which did not
exactly correspond to the bill amounts. This also stands reflected in the
said statement of accounts. The statement of account maintained by the
respondent in respect of the petitioner indicates that the bills were shown
on the debit side and the amounts received from time to time from the
petitioner were shown on the credit side. The first bill shown in the
statement of account is of 01.09.1995. The last bill is of 31.03.1999.
The first payment made by the petitioner is of 13.09.1995 and the last
payment is of 03.04.1999. As per the statement, a balance amount of Rs
10,61,990.71 was due from and payable by the petitioner as on
03.04.1999.

3.

Taking up the first ground raised by the learned counsel for

the petitioner, one finds that Section 75 of the said Act provides that
notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being

OMP No.130/04

Page No.4 of 19

in force, the conciliator and the parties shall keep confidential all matters
relating to the conciliation proceedings.

It is also provided that

confidentiality shall extend also to the settlement agreement, except
where its disclosure is necessary for the purposes of implementation and
enforcement. Section 75 falls within Part III of the said Act which
pertains to conciliation and has no reference to Part I of the Act which
deals with arbitration. Faced with this situation, the learned counsel for
the petitioner sought to invoke the provisions of Section 30 of the said
Act which falls within Part I and relates to settlement.

Section 30

stipulates that it is not incompatible with an arbitration agreement for an
arbitral tribunal to encourage settlement of the dispute and, with the
agreement of the parties, the arbitral tribunal may use mediation,
conciliation or other procedures at any time during the arbitral
proceedings to encourage settlement. It was submitted that some sort of
conciliation and / or settlement was conducted before the learned
Arbitrator and the petitioner had disclosed certain confidential matter
which was used by the learned Arbitrator against the petitioner. First of
all, it must be stated that the learned counsel for the petitioner was
unable to point out any material which the learned Arbitrator had used
and which did not already form part of the record. Secondly, Section 30

OMP No.130/04

Page No.5 of 19

relates to an arbitral award resulting, on agreed terms, in the course of
settlement. The present award is not an award on agreed terms but is an
award made by the learned Arbitrator on contest by the parties.
Therefore, invoking the provisions of Section 30 would not be
appropriate. In any event, this argument with regard to confidentiality is
without any factual basis as nothing has been pointed out which would
enable this court to come to the conclusion that the Arbitrator based his
award on confidential material provided by the petitioner during the
course of arbitration / conciliation.

4.

The next point of limitation was also taken up before the

learned Arbitrator. It was urged that the notice for payment was issued
by the respondent on 05.06.2000 and thus the claim could, if at all, be
made for the period 06.06.1997 onwards, which, according to the
petitioner, would be limited to a sum of Rs 4,44,392/- and would not
extend to the amount of Rs 10,61,990/- as shown in the statement of
account. The learned Arbitrator rejected this contention of the petitioner
primarily on the ground that a running account was being maintained
between the parties as indicated by Annexure C-3 mentioned above. The
learned Arbitrator noted that the last payment was made by the petitioner

OMP No.130/04

Page No.6 of 19

to the respondent on 03.04.1999 for a sum of Rs 9,975/- and thus the
period of limitation would start running from that date. The learned
Arbitrator held that if the period was so computed, then the claim made
by the respondent (claimant) was very much within time inasmuch as the
notice invoking arbitration was issued on 05.06.2000 which was within
three years of 03.04.1999.

5.

Blacks Law Dictionary, 6th Edition, defines a running account

in the following manner:“Running account.

An open unsettled account, as
distinguished from a stated and liquidated account.
Running accounts mean mutual accounts and reciprocal
demands between the parties, which accounts and
demands remain open and unsettled.”

In other words, a running account is one which is unsettled and is open.
It is distinct and different from a stated and / or liquidated account where
the amount stands crystalised. In this context, it would be fruitful to
refer to Article 1 and Article 26 of the Schedule to the Limitation Act,
1963. Article 1 relates to suits in respect of balance due on a mutual
open and current account, where there have been reciprocal demands
between the parties. The period of limitation prescribed is three years
from the close of the year in which the last item admitted or proved is
OMP No.130/04

Page No.7 of 19

entered in the account and such year is to be computed as in the account.
If the statement of account between the parties is to be regarded as a
mutual open and current account, then the period of limitation of three
years would begin from the close of the year in which the last item
admitted or proved is entered in the account. It was contended on behalf
of the claimant that the last admitted item in the account between the
parties was the payment made by the petitioner to the respondent on
03.04.1999 and, therefore, the start of the period would be the close of
the year in which this payment was made.

He submitted that the

financial year ending of 31st March was taken as the accounting year and,
therefore, in point of fact, the period of limitation would begin not from
03.04.1999, but from 31.03.2000 which is the close of the year in which
the last payment (i.e., on 03.04.1999) was made. This would be the
position if Article 1 of the Schedule to the Limitation Act, 1963 were to
apply.

6.

Article 26 of the said Schedule refers to suits for money

payable to the plaintiff for money found to be due from the defendant to
the plaintiff on accounts stated between them. The period of limitation
that is prescribed under this Article is of three years and the time from

OMP No.130/04

Page No.8 of 19

which it begins to run is when the accounts are stated in writing signed
by the defendant or his agent duly authorised in this behalf, unless where
the debt is, by a simultaneous agreement in writing signed as aforesaid,
made payable at a future time, when that time arrives. This is certainly
not the case here.

7.

Therefore, it needs to be determined as to whether Article 1 of

the Schedule to the Limitation Act, 1963 would be applicable in the
present case. As already indicated above, the accounts maintained by the
petitioner and the respondent were not settled and there were debit and
credit entries throughout the period of transactions and ending with the
last transaction of 03.04.1999 which was a payment made by the
petitioner to the respondent. As already indicated above there is no
evidence whatsoever that the accounts had been stated between the
parties and much less in the form required under Article 26 of the
Limitation Act, 1963. That being the position, I am of the view that the
learned Arbitrator was correct in holding that the parties maintained a
running account.

But, merely because there was a running, open or

current account in respect of transactions between the parties does not

OMP No.130/04

Page No.9 of 19

mean that Article 1 of the Limitation Act, 1963 would apply. This is
where the learned Arbitrator has gone wrong. He observed as under:“Furthermore it was a running account vide annexure C-3
whenever the payments fell due from the respondent they
made the payment to the claimant on the basis of the bills
which were submitted to them. The last payment was
made by the respondent to the claimant on 03.04.1999 in
the sum of Rs 9,975/-. Thus the period of limitation would
start running from the said date. If the period is so
computed then the claim of the claimant is very much
within time. The notice of the reference of the present
dispute to arbitration was issued to the respondent on
05.06.2000 and was duly served upon them hence the
present claim is very much within time if the period of
limitation is computed from the said date.”
What the learned Arbitrator failed to consider was that for Article 1 of
the Schedule to the Limitation Act, 1963 to apply, it was necessary to
establish that the account was not only open and current but also mutual
where there have been reciprocal demands between the parties. This
aspect of the matter has clearly escaped the attention of the learned
Arbitrator. Article 1 of the Schedule to the Limitation Act, 1963 falls in
Part-I which pertains to suits relating to accounts. The said Article reads
as under:-

Description of suit

OMP No.130/04

Period of
limitation

Time from which period
begins to run

Page No.10 of 19

For the balance due on
a mutual, open and
current account where
there
have
been
reciprocal
demands
between the parties.

8.

Three years

The close of the year in
which the last item
admitted or proved is
entered in the account;
such
year
to
be
computed as in the
account.

As already pointed out above, there is no difficulty in

concluding that the account between the parties in the present case was
open and current and had not been settled or stated. The only question
that needs to be considered is whether the account could be construed as
a mutual account where there have been reciprocal demands between the
parties. As observed by the Supreme Court in the case of Kesharichand
Jaisukhlal v. Shillong Banking Corpn. Ltd: AIR 1965 SC 1711, the
leading case on mutual accounts is that of Hirada Basappa v. Gadigi
Muddappa: (1871) VI Madras High Court Reports 142, 144 wherein it
was observed as under:"To be mutual there must be transactions on each side
creating independent obligations on the other, and not
merely transactions which create obligations on the one
side, those on the other being merely complete or
partial discharges of such obligations."
In The Hindustan Forest Company v. Lal Chand & Ors.: AIR 1959 SC
1349, the Supreme Court observed that the question of what is a mutual
account had been considered by the courts frequently and the test to
OMP No.130/04

Page No.11 of 19

determine the same was well settled. In this context, the Supreme Court
referred to the case of Tea Financing Syndicate Ltd. v. Chandrakamal
Bezbaruah: (1930) ILR 58 Calcutta 649. In the said Calcutta decision
the following test had been laid down:“There can, I think, be no doubt that the requirement of
reciprocal demands involves, as all the Indian cases have
decided following Halloway, A.C.J., transactions on each
side creating independent obligations on the other and
not merely transactions which create obligations on one
side, those on the other being merely complete or partial
discharges of such obligations. It is further clear that
goods as well as money may be sent by way of payment.
We have therefore to see whether under the deed the tea,
sent by the defendant to the plaintiff for sale, was sent
merely by way of discharge of the defendant's debt or
whether it was sent in the course of dealings designed to
create a credit to the defendant as the owner of the tea
sold, which credit when brought into the account would
operate by way of set-off to reduce the defendant's
liability.”
The Supreme Court after quoting the aforesaid observations made in the
Calcutta decision, noted that the same has never been dissented from and
that it lays down the law correctly. In Kesharichand Jaisukhlal (supra),
a decision which follows the earlier decision in the case of

The

Hindustan Forest Company (supra), the Supreme Court while
considering the transactions in the case before it held as under:“In the instant case, there were mutual dealings
between the parties. The respondent Bank gave loans
on overdrafts, and the appellant made deposits. The
loans by the respondent created obligations on the
OMP No.130/04

Page No.12 of 19

appellant to repay them. The respondent was under
independent obligations to repay the amount of the
cash deposits and to account for the cheques, hundis
and drafts deposited for collection. There were thus
transactions on each side creating independent
obligations on the other, and both sets of transactions
were entered in the same account. The deposits made
by the appellant were not merely complete or partial
discharges of its obligations to the respondent. There
were shifting balances; on many occasions the balance
was in favour of the appellant and on many other
occasions, the balance was in favour of the
respondent. There were reciprocal demands between
the parties, and the account was mutual. This mutual
account was fairly active up to June 25, 1947. It is not
shown that the account ceased to be mutual thereafter.
The parties contemplated the possibility of mutual
dealings in future. The mutual account continued until
December 29, 1950 when the last entry in the account
was made. It is conceded on behalf of the appellant
that if the account was mutual and continued to be so
until December 29, 1950, the suit is not barred by
limitation, having regard to Section 45(O) of the
Banking Companies Act. The Courts below, therefore,
rightly answered issue No. 1 in the negative.”
A Division Bench of this Court in the case of Manish Garg v. M/s. East
India Udyog Ltd.: 2001 III AD (Delhi) 493, after examining the
aforesaid two decisions of the Supreme Court, held as under:“8.
Thus for an account properly to be called
Mutual Account there must be mutual dealing in the sense
that both the parties come under liability under each
other. In this case, this ingredient is not satisfied. It was
simply a case of debtor and creditor only and not a case of
mutual obligations which will in the ordinary way result
in enforceable liabilities on each side. Mutual Account is
OMP No.130/04

Page No.13 of 19

when each has a demand or right of action against the
other.”
9.

On an examination of the well settled law on the subject, it is

clear that for an account to be not nominated as mutual, there must be
transactions on each side creating independent obligations. The nature
of such an account has been aptly demonstrated in the case of
Kesharichand Jaisukhlal (supra) where the deposits made by one party
were not merely complete or partial discharges of such obligations
towards the other party but there were shifting balances.

On many

occasions the balance was in favour of one party and on many other
occasions, the balance was in favour of other party.

There were

reciprocal demands between the parties and, therefore, the account was
held to be mutual. In the present case, as has been pointed out above, the
statement of account reveals that the bills had been raised from time to
time by the respondent on the petitioner. As against these bills, the
petitioner had been making payments to the respondent from time to
time.

Though there was no one-to-one correspondence between the

payments made and the bills raised, the amounts that represented
payments have been shown on the debit side of the account and the
amounts received from the petitioner were shown on the credit side. The

OMP No.130/04

Page No.14 of 19

said statement of account demonstrates that the payments made by the
petitioner to the respondent were merely in discharge of its obligation to
the respondent. There were no reciprocal demands between the parties.
It was only that bills continued to be raised by the respondent from time
to time and the petitioner continued to make payments in discharge of its
obligation to pay the amounts reflected in the bills. The account that was
maintained between the parties cannot, therefore, be construed to be a
mutual account.

Consequently, Article 1 of the Schedule to the

Limitation Act, 1963 would not apply and, therefore, the benefit of that
provision cannot be availed of by the respondent (claimant) for saving
part of the claim from being barred by limitation.

In the Award itself it

is noted that the contract between the parties was essentially one for
payment of wages in respect of the security personnel provided by the
respondent to the petitioner. The specific period of limitation provided
in respect of such contracts is indicated in Article 7 of the Limitation
Act, 1963 and it is three years from when the wages accrue due. This
being the position, the claim would have to be limited to the period
06.06.1997 onwards. Consequently, the amount awarded would have to
be limited to Rs 4,44,392/- and not to the amount of Rs 10,61,990/- as
awarded by the learned Arbitrator.

OMP No.130/04

The learned counsel for the

Page No.15 of 19

respondent had sought to invoke the provisions of Section 19 of the
Limitation Act, 1963 in order to save part of the claim being barred by
limitation. But, in my view that provision has no application in the facts
of the present case.

11.

This brings me to the third and last point urged on behalf of

the counsel for the petitioner which relates to the period 01.01.1999 to
31.03.1999. Before the learned Arbitrator, the petitioner had set up a
counter-claim for an amount of Rs 88,400/-. This counter-claim was
based on the condition that the respondent had withdrawn the security
guards w.e.f. 31.12.1998, unilaterally and all of a sudden, which,
according to the petitioner was in violation of the agreement. It was
urged that the agreement provided that the same could be terminated by
either party giving notice of 30 days or payment in lieu of the notice. It
was, therefore, urged that since no notice as provided under the terms of
the agreement was ever given to the petitioner, the petitioner was entitled
to a sum of Rs 88,400/- in lieu of the said notice. In response to this
condition of the petitioner, the respondent had stated that it was wrong
and incorrect that the petitioner had withdrawn the security guards w.e.f.
31.12.1998. According to the respondents, the withdrawal of the guards

OMP No.130/04

Page No.16 of 19

took place on 31.03.1999. It was contended that the respondent had
given three months time to the petitioner to make its own arrangements
of security guards in place of the security guards provided by the
respondents.

A letter dated 08.02.1999 (Annexure C-2 before the

learned Arbitrator) was referred to by the respondent.

The learned

Arbitrator, after considering the said letter, was of the opinion that it
reveals that the security guards were working with the respondent till the
said date, i.e., in the month of February, 1999. To further examine the
veracity of this opinion, I have examined Annexure C-2 and I find that
the same is a letter written by the petitioner to the respondent asking the
respondent to withdraw the security guards at any time from the
petitioner's various sites.

The petitioner, in fact, disclaimed its

responsibility and liability for the salaries of the security guards. Apart
from this, the learned Arbitrator also examined receipts alongwith the
affidavit of one Mr T.S. Sastry who was working with the petitioner
which went on to establish that the guards were working even in the
months of January, February and March, 1999. It was contended before
this court by the learned counsel for the petitioner that acknowledgment
of payments in respect of only four guards have been made by the
petitioner but the learned Arbitrator has extrapolated this circumstance to

OMP No.130/04

Page No.17 of 19

arrive at the conclusion that all the 35 guards were working till March,
1999. In fact, on an examination of the award, it does not appear to be
so. What the learned Arbitrator was examining was the counter-claim
raised by the petitioner claiming an amount of Rs 88,400/- in lieu of the
notice period of 30 days. The learned Arbitrator looked at the evidence
on record as also the letter dated 08.02.1999 and found that the security
guards were working at the various sites of the petitioner even in
February, 1999 much beyond the 30 day period after the purported notice
terminating the arrangement was given on 31.12.1998.

This clearly

meant that the petitioner could not be entitled to any amount in lieu of
the notice period. The Arbitrator was not concerned with the question as
to whether four guards were working or 35 guards were working. The
Arbitrator only examined the question as to whether the petitioner would
be entitled to a sum of Rs 88,400/- in lieu of the said notice period. He
found that due notice had been given and that, in fact, the guards were
found working even beyond 30 days
subsequent to the alleged date of termination of 31.12.1998. It is in this
context that the learned Arbitrator came to the conclusion:“Thus they are in the nature of admission which go to
show that the security guards were very much
continuing with the respondents even in the month of
January, February and March, 1999. Thus the
OMP No.130/04

Page No.18 of 19

respondent cannot wriggle out of the same. Hence
they are not entitled to the above claim.”
Consequently, this contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner
also cannot be accepted.

12.

In view of the foregoing discussion, the amount of

Rs10,51,940/- awarded by the Arbitrator in terms of paragraph 45 of the
Award would stand reduced to Rs 4,44,392/-. The rest of the Award
remains undisturbed. This petition is disposed of accordingly.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
September 25, 2007
δυττ/SR

OMP No.130/04

Page No.19 of 19

