THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%
+

Judgment delivered on: 22.01.2008
TRP (C) No. 2/2008

HONDA GIKEN KOGYO KABUSHIKI KAISHA

... Petitioner

- versus RIAZ AHMED KHAN & ANOTHER

... Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr Manmohan Singh
For the Respondents : None

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ?

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J
1.

This is a petition under Section 24 of the Code of Civil Procedure,

1908 (hereinafter referred to as the 'CPC') seeking transfer of Suit
No.336/2003 (Honda Giken Kogyo Kabushiki Kaisha vs. Riaz Ahmed Khan
& Others) which is allegedly pending before the Additional District Judge,
Delhi. As would be apparent from the facts of this case narrated below, the
key question is whether there is any suit pending before the Additional

TRP (C)No. 2/08

Page No. 1 of 8

District Judge, Delhi ? It is obvious that if there is no pending suit, the
question of transfer / withdrawal of the same to this court cannot arise.

2.

The facts are that the petitioner herein had instituted a suit for

permanent injunction, infringement of trade mark / trade name, copyrights,
passing off, etc. before this court.

The suit was numbered as CS(OS)

1934/2001 and was valued at Rs 5,00,600/-. The suit came up before the
court for the first time on 17.09.2001 when this court granted an ex parte ad
interim injunction against the defendants restraining them from using the
trade mark HONDA on vests, briefs, panties, pyjamas, etc. or any other
allied and cognate goods.

3.

Subsequently, the pecuniary jurisdiction of the district court was

enhanced to more than Rs 5 lakhs and, therefore, the suit became triable by
the District Court. On 17.09.2003, the suit was transferred to the District
Court and was renumbered as Suit No.336/2003.

By an order dated

14.05.2004, the defendants were directed to be proceeded against ex parte.
On 01.10.2004, the petitioner's amendment application under Order 6 Rule
17 was allowed. The amendment was with regard to enhancement of value
of the suit by approximately Rs 25 lakhs. The result being that the suit was
now valued at Rs 30,00,600/-. On 27.10.2004, the amended plaint was filed
before the Additional District Judge, Delhi and so too the additional court
fee. When the matter came up before the Additional District Judge on

TRP (C)No. 2/08

Page No. 2 of 8

25.11.2004, a request was made by the petitioner / plaintiff that the case be
transferred from the District Court to the High Court through the learned
District Judge. The matter was heard by the learned Additional District
Judge on 25.11.2004 itself. The question for consideration, as noted in the
order-sheet of 25.11.2004, was whether the plaint should be returned on
account of amendment to the plaint which took the suit beyond the
pecuniary jurisdiction of the District Court or should it go to the High Court
through the learned District Judge by way of transfer as requested on behalf
of the plaintiff ? After considering the submissions made by the learned
counsel for the petitioner and considering the decisions cited at the bar, the
learned Additional District Judge was of the view that the powers of transfer
exercised by the District Judge under Section 24 of the CPC were confined
to transfer of cases from one court to another court within the jurisdiction of
the district concerned and did not extend to the transfer of cases from the
District Court to the High Court, which power was within the exclusive
domain of the High Court. Consequently, the learned Additional District
Judge passed the following order:“In view of the above, the plaintiff to move appropriate
application under Order 7 Rule 10A CPC, if it so desires
and in case the application is not made by the next date, the
plaint shall be returned without any further order from the
court under Rule 10 of Order 7 CPC against Receipt then
the plaint to be presented before the competent Court /
Hon'ble High Court by virtue of amendment in the plaint
dated 1.10.2004 as the suit has become beyond pecuniary
jurisdiction of this court.
Put up on 6.12.2004 for further proceedings.”

TRP (C)No. 2/08

Page No. 3 of 8

4.

On 06.12.2004, when the matter came up again before the Additional

District Judge, Delhi, a request for adjournment was made on behalf of the
plaintiff for filing an application under Order 7 Rule 10A CPC. The learned
Additional District Judge granted a last opportunity for the said purpose and
directed that the matter be put up on 14.12.2004.

On that date, i.e.,

14.12.2004, the plaintiff had filed an application under Section 151 read
with Order 7 Rule 10A CPC. The request for transfer of the case to the
High Court through the learned District Judge had already been declined by
virtue of the order dated 25.11.2004. The learned counsel for the plaintiff
had made submissions with regard to the continuance of the interim order
till the plaint is refiled before the High Court. In these circumstances, the
learned Additional District Judge disposed of the matter in the following
manner:“Heard. Since the interim order was passed by Hon'ble High
Court, which has jurisdiction to entertain the amended plaint
also the interim order shall be deemed to continue till the
refiling of plaint before Hon'ble High Court. The plaint and
original documents be returned to plaintiff against receipt
and on filing copy of the same. As the defendants are exparte in the suit, so there is no need for compliance of Order
7 Rule 10A CPC. But the plaintiff to refile plaint before
Hon'ble High Court promptly.
File be consigned to Record Room.”
5.

Despite the direction that the plaintiff should refile the plaint before

the High Court promptly, the plaint has not been taken back by the plaintiff
even till date. The question of refiling the plaint before the High Court,
therefore, did not arise.

TRP (C)No. 2/08

The order returning the plaint was passed on

Page No. 4 of 8

14.12.2004. The present transfer petition has been filed on 05.12.2007
seeking transfer of the Suit No.336/2003 allegedly pending before the
learned Additional District Judge, Delhi. It has been contended by the
learned counsel for the petitioner that till the plaint is taken back by the
plaintiff, the suit continues to be pending before the court which had
directed the return of the plaint. He also submitted that the present petition
was maintainable under Section 24 CPC and in support thereof he placed
reliance on the following decisions:1)
2)

M.K. Modi v. K.K. Modi: 2004 (115) DLT 616 ;

3)

Ziff-Davis Inc v. Dr. J.K. Jain & Others: 2006 (32) PTC 86
(Del.) ;

(4)

Hawkins Cookers Limited v. Citizen Metal Industries (India):
2006 (33) PTC 387 (Del);

(5)

6.

Pushpa Kapil v. Shiv Kumar: 1988 (35) DLT 187 ;

Aviat Chemicals Pvt. Ltd. and Another
Laboratories (Gujarat) : 2006 (127) DLT 300.

v.

Magna

I have examined each of these cases and am of the view that the same

are distinguishable from the case at hand and would, therefore, not be of any
assistance to the petitioner. In Ramesh Chand Bhardwaja v. Ram Prakash
Sharma: 44 (1991) DLT 528, a learned single Judge of this court had
observed that the power of transfer and withdrawal of a suit under Section
24 of CPC has been conferred upon the High Court and the District Judge
only in respect of the proceedings pending in any court subordinate to it. In
Ramesh Chand Bhardwaja (supra), the trial court had already returned the

TRP (C)No. 2/08

Page No. 5 of 8

plaint for presentation before the court of competent jurisdiction and,
therefore, it was held that there were no proceedings pending in any court
subordinate to the High Court. The learned single Judge observed that as
the plaint had been returned under the orders of the trial court and there was
no plaint or suit pending in the court subordinate to the High Court, the case
could not be transferred under Section 24 of CPC. This decision squarely
covers the case at hand.

7.

The argument raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the

suit continues to be pending before the learned Additional District Judge
because the plaint has not been taken back by the petitioner / plaintiff is
untenable. In Smt. Latadevi v. Ramnath and Others: AIR 1987 Bombay
364, it has been observed, and in my view rightly so, that the proceedings
terminate effectively only when the plaint is ready for handing over to the
plaintiff for presentation to the proper court. In that case, the question arose
as to whether the proceedings terminated on the date of passing of the order
of return of the plaint or on the date on which the plaint was ready for
handing over to the plaintiff. It was decided that the date on which the
plaint was ready for handing over to the plaintiff for presentation to the
proper court would be the date on which the proceedings could be held to
have terminated effectively. In the present case, I find that not only had the
order returning the plaint been made on 25.11.2004 as well as on
14.12.2004, but the plaintiff himself had moved an application under Order

TRP (C)No. 2/08

Page No. 6 of 8

7 Rule 10A of CPC. Even the interim order passed earlier was directed to
be continued till refiling before the High Court. The order dated 14.12.2004
had specifically directed the plaintiff / petitioner to refile the plaint before
the High Court promptly. This order was passed over three years back and
the petitioner / plaintiff has not yet bothered to take back the plaint. It is not
when the plaintiff takes back the plaint that is material, but when the plaint
is ready for handing over to the plaintiff. It cannot be assumed by any
stretch of imagination that for over three years the plaint was not ready for
handing over to the plaintiff. In fact, no such complaint has been made by
the petitioner. On the other hand, it is the petitioner who is guilty of laxity.
This laxity is perhaps explained by the fact that the petitioner was given the
benefit of continuing the interim order till the date of refiling before the
High Court. The petitioner / plaintiff was under a total misconception that it
could delay the taking back and refiling of the plaint at its whim and fancy
and could continue to enjoy the interim order at its pleasure.

8.

In Ram Ujarey v. Union of India: AIR 1999 SC 309, the Supreme

Court was concerned about the period of limitation in a case where a plaint
was directed to be returned to be filed before the appropriate forum. The
Supreme Court was of the view that the limitation would not run from the
date of the order, but would run from the date on which the plaint was
returned and made available to the appellant, if the appellant was not at
fault. The decisions of the Bombay High Court as well as that of the

TRP (C)No. 2/08

Page No. 7 of 8

Supreme Court make it abundantly clear that the material date is when the
plaint is made available to the plaintiff after the order of return of the plaint.
This is subject to the condition that the plaintiff is not at fault. In the
present case, I find that the plaintiff has been grossly negligent, to say the
least, in not taking back the plaint and in not refiling the same before this
court as directed by the learned Additional District Judge on 14.12.2004.

9.

Consequently, I am of the view that there are no proceedings pending

before the learned Additional District Judge as of today the same having
terminated long back. The present transfer petition would, therefore, not be
maintainable and the same is dismissed.

( BADAR DURREZ AHMED )
JUDGE
January 22, 2008
δυττ

TRP (C)No. 2/08

Page No. 8 of 8

