THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%
+

Judgment delivered on: 26.03.2008
CS(OS) 1555/2007

M/S G4S SECURITY SERVICES (INDIA) PVT LTD

... Plaintiff

- versus M/S GROUP 4 SECURICOR MAZDOOR UNION
(AFFL. CITU) & OTHERS

... Defendants

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Plaintiff
: Mr Sanjiv Bahl
For the Defendant
: Ex parte.

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

The plaintiff is a private limited company incorporated under the

Companies Act, 1956. In the plaint, it is alleged that the plaintiff is one of
the largest security service companies and its regional office is at Plot No. 1
& 2, C-9, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi. It has 9 other branches in Delhi and is
engaged in the business of providing security and other services at various
offices / premises of its clients.

The plaintiff has a large number of

employees who are posted in Delhi.
CS(OS) 1555/2007

The employees have grouped
Page No. 1 of 5

themselves together into various unions from time to time. The defendant
No.1 ( Group 4 Securicor Mazdoor Union), Defendant No.2 (Group 4
Securicor Union), Defendant No.3 (Group 4 Falck Employees Union) and
Defendant No.4 ( Group 4 Kamgar Union) are four such unions.

The

defendant No.5 is an All India Trade Union which allegedly acts as the
umbrella body for the defendant Nos 1 to 4 and other unions which claim
affiliation to it.

2.

The plaintiff filed the suit for, inter alia, restraining the defendants

and their office bearers and members etc from shouting slogans, holding
dharnas, demonstrations, creating nuisance etc within a radius of 100 meters
from the gates/boundary wall of the various offices of the plaintiff as
indicated in prayer “A”. The plaintiff also sought a decree restraining the
said defendants, their office bearers, members etc from shouting slogans,
holding dharnas, demonstrations, meeting etc at Jantar Mantar or at any
other place in Delhi wearing the uniform of the plaintiff company which
contains the trademark as well as the artistic work and the logo of “Group 4
Securicor”. On 24.08.2007 this court directed the issuance of summons in
the suit, returnable on 15.01.2008. An interim order was also passed on the
same date in the plaintiff's application under Order 39 Rule 1 & 2 CPC
(IA.No.9608/2007). The defendants had been served with the summons.
Since nobody appeared on behalf of the defendants on 15.01.2008, this court
had directed that the defendants be proceeded against ex parte. The plaintiff
was directed to lead its ex parte evidence by way of filing affidavits. The
CS(OS) 1555/2007

Page No. 2 of 5

plaintiff has filed the affidavit of Shri Sanjeev Kumar Taku who is the
Senior Manager of the plaintiff company.

The said affidavit has been

marked as Exhibit PW1/A. The affidavit fortifies the allegations / averments
made in the plaint. It is stated in the affidavit that various labour unions in
order to put pressure on the plaintiff to fulfill their illegitimate demands have
been pressurizing the employees to join them as well as to indulge in the
activities detrimental to the interest of the plaintiff. It is further stated that
certain employees in connivance with the trade unions have been stopping
the ingress and egress of other employees as well as have started threatening
to demonstrate in front of the offices/residences of the management of the
plaintiff company. It is further alleged that the defendant unions are not
recognised by the plaintiff but in the interest of organisation and the other
employees,

the plaintiff has been negotiating with them for peaceful

solutions. However, with the increase in the number of unions, they have
started interfering in the affairs of the company in order to show their
strength and presence.

The defendant unions have failed to stop their

activities of demonstrating in an illegal manner inspite of several requests
made by the plaintiff.

The defendants had given a demand notice on

20.08.2007 to the plaintiff raising various demands. The plaintiff had asked
the defendants not to interfere in this manner and to sit across the table but
the defendants were bent upon creating unrest amongst the workers. The
defendant No.1 has issued a letter dated 22.08.2007 to the plaintiff wherein
they had threatened to hold a protest rally at Jantar Mantar on 27.08.2007
and further threatened to intensify the agitation. A copy of the letter dated
CS(OS) 1555/2007

Page No. 3 of 5

22.08.2007 is marked as Exhibit PW1/6. It is alleged that the defendants
have threatened the plaintiff with dire consequences of life and property if
the plaintiff does not accept all the demands of the defendants. It is also
alleged that the defendants have earlier also held violent demonstrations,
used abusive language, blocked the ingress and egress, manhandled the
officers and the staff of the plaintiff and created such a situation that no
work could be carried out. It has been stated that the atmosphere in the
offices of the plaintiff, as a result of the conduct of the defendants unions, is
very surcharged and there is imminent danger to the life and property of the
plaintiff's officers as well as other employees.

3.

Apart from the evidence of the plaintiff, there is nothing on the part of

the defendants to controvert the said allegations. Consequently, it has to be
accepted that the defendants have been indulging in illegal activities of
raising slogans, using abusive language and at times being violent in
demonstrating for their demands. It has also come in evidence that the
defendants have threatened to hold demonstrations / meetings at places other
than premises of the plaintiff including at Jantar Mantar. It is obvious that if
the members of the said defendants demonstrate at other places, wearing the
uniforms of the plaintiff, the same would create a bad name for the plaintiff.
While it is true that the employees and unions have a right to demonstrate
for the purposes of achieving their legitimate demands, it is also true that the
employees and the unions do not have any right to use abusive language or
violence or prevent ingress and egress of other persons / employees from
CS(OS) 1555/2007

Page No. 4 of 5

their work places. The members of the unions can use legitimate means to
achieve their legitimate demands. They cannot use illegal or illegitimate
means to achieve any of their demands whether legitimate or illegitimate.
Consequently, I am of the view that the plaintiff is entitled to a certain
degree of protection and that would be provided by preventing the
defendants and / or their members from demonstrating / shouting slogans etc
within 100 meters of the boundary wall of the offices / work places of the
plaintiff and residences of the plaintiff's officers.

The plaintiff is also

entitled to a decree restraining the employees from agitating / demonstrating
at other places in Delhi wearing the uniforms of the plaintiff. The wearing
of the uniforms of the plaintiff is subject to rules framed by the plaintiff and
such demonstrations do not fall within the rules.

4.

Consequently, the suit is decreed as prayed for in terms of prayers A

and B of the plaint. The formal decree be drawn up. The suit stands
disposed of.

( BADAR DURREZ AHMED )
JUDGE
March 26, 2008
Μ

CS(OS) 1555/2007

Page No. 5 of 5

