THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 27.08.2007

+

ARB. P. 60/2007

M/S BIRD INFORMATION SYSTEMS PVT LTD ... Petitioner
- versus M/S GO AIRLINES (INDIA) PVT LTD

... Respondent

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr Anoop Bagai with Ms Pratibha Sharma
For the Respondent
: Mr Nishant Joshi with Mr V.P. Singh

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ? Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.
This is a petition under Section 11 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as 'the said Act') for the
appointment of an arbitrator. According to the petitioner, the arbitration
clause is contained in the Memorandum of Understanding entered into
between the petitioner on the one hand and the respondent on the other
on 01.08.2005. The arbitration clause reads as under:-

ARB. P. 60/07

Page No.1 of 8

“This memorandum of understanding and the
Agreement shall be governed by and construed in
accordance with the laws of India.
All disputes and differences which may arise between
the parties with respect to the performance,
interpretation or execution of this memorandum of
understanding and the Agreement shall be referred to
arbitration before a sole arbitrator in accordance with
the provisions of the Indian Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 as amended. Such arbitration
shall be conducted in the English language and the
seat of such proceeding shall be at New Delhi.”
2.

The learned counsel for the petitioner referred to the notice

dated 11.10.2006 invoking the arbitration clause. The said notice has
been received by the respondent as is evident from the reply dated
06.11.2006. The respondent, instead of agreeing on arbitration, raised
the issue that no agreement has been entered into between the parties
and, therefore, there can be no cause for calling any party thereto to
arbitration. The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent
has amplified on that stand and submitted that the Memorandum of
Understanding does not constitute a binding agreement. He referred to
Section 29 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 which relates to agreements
void for uncertainty.

He submitted that the Memorandum of

Understanding, as indicated by the third recital therein, was actually an
arrangement whereby the parties had agreed to explore the possibilities
ARB. P. 60/07

Page No.2 of 8

of the petitioner licencing the use of its software referred to as AIRS to
the respondent w.e.f. 01.08.2005.

Referring to the same recital, he

submitted that the parties had in good faith agreed to negotiate and enter
into a definitive licencing agreement for this purpose. However, the
agreement was never entered into. He also referred to clause 'F' of the
Memorandum of Understanding which reads as under:“F.

TERMS OF THE AGREEMENT TO
BE EXECUTED

The Agreement shall initially remain in effect for a
minimum term of two (2) years from the date of
execution of the Agreement.
Thereafter the
Agreement to be executed shall automatically be
extended for Subsequent Term of Five (05) years
each on the same terms and conditions (except for
charges which may be revised as per provisions
mentioned above) without any further documentation,
unless a party serves written notice of 120 days to the
other party of its decision to terminate the
Agreement.”
3.

Reading the aforesaid clause, he said that the terms of the

agreement, which was to be executed, were inconclusive and, therefore,
there was uncertainty and as such the Memorandum of Understanding
was void on account of uncertainty and that being the case, the
arbitration clause which found place in the Memorandum of
Understanding was also void. The learned counsel for the respondent

ARB. P. 60/07

Page No.3 of 8

also submitted that from the tenor of the Memorandum of Understanding
one can discern the intention of the parties that they were not wanting to
bind themselves until and unless the definitive licencing agreement was
executed. He submitted that it is also not so stated anywhere in the
agreement.

4.

I have heard the counsel for the parties and I do not agree with

the submissions made by the learned counsel for the respondent. The
Memorandum of Understanding was entered into between the parties and
the same had been admittedly executed by them. There is also no doubt
that clause 'H' of the Memorandum of Understanding contains the
arbitration clause which clearly stipulates that all the disputes and
differences which may arise between the parties with respect to the
performance, interpretation or execution of “this Memorandum of
Understanding” and the agreement shall be referred to arbitration before
a sole Arbitrator. Therefore, the clause clearly stipulates that if there are
disputes or differences which may arise between the parties with respect
to the performance, interpretation or execution of, inter alia, the
memorandum of understanding, then those disputes and differences
would be referable to arbitration. The factum of the non-execution of the

ARB. P. 60/07

Page No.4 of 8

definitive licencing agreement would not come in the way of referring
the disputes to arbitration if the disputes arise between the parties with
respect to what is stated and agreed upon in the Memorandum of
Understanding.

5.

The learned counsel for the respondent is also not correct in

saying that the Memorandum of Understanding is void on the count of
uncertainty. While it is true that the definitive licencing agreement has
not been executed, it is also true that certain terms for the operation of
the arrangement between the parties prior to the execution of the
definitive licencing agreement had been agreed upon and, indeed, had
even been acted upon. As an illustration, one can examine clause 'B'
which talks about setup of AIRS. Clause B.2 of the said MoU clearly
indicates that the commercial components / resources which are required
for the one time setup of AIRS would be borne and paid for by the
respondents. The commercial components included Internet bandwidth
costs, network components, running network costs, telecom links setup
and running costs, etc. Clause 'C' of the MoU is also quite definitive in
the sense that it says that the airline (the respondent herein) shall pay BIS
(the petitioner herein) the charges net of taxes. The charges include

ARB. P. 60/07

Page No.5 of 8

segment booking fee. Clause C.1 of the MoU clearly stipulates that the
segment booking fee shall be payable monthly for total number of net
bookings made. Net booking for this purpose would mean bookings
made during one calendar month, minus bookings cancelled during the
same calendar month. There are other clauses in the MoU which clearly
stipulate the mode and manner of payment and the extent of payment for
the services rendered by the petitioner to the respondent. Consequently,
I do not agree with the learned counsel for the respondent that the MoU
is in the nature of an uncertain agreement and is, therefore, void for
uncertainty.

6.

It may also be pointed out that the claim made by the

petitioner includes a claim which has reference to segment booking fee
as would be clear from paragraph 7 of the notice dated 11.10.2006. Subpara (a) of paragraph 7 clearly mentions the charges in respect of clause
C(1.1) of the MoU. The extent of claim is Rs 25 lakhs in respect of this
clause.

7.

In any event, there is no uncertainty with regard to the

arbitration agreement contained in clause H of the Memorandum of

ARB. P. 60/07

Page No.6 of 8

Understanding. Clause H constitutes an arbitration agreement as defined
in Section 7 of the said Act.

Even though the definitive licencing

Agreement may not have been executed by and between the parties,
differences and disputes having a reference to the Memorandum of
Understanding are also, by virtue of the said clause, arbitrable. Section 7
(1) of the said Act speaks of disputes in respect of “a defined legal
relationship, whether contractual or not”. The relationship between the
parties under the Memorandum of Understanding is certainly a defined
legal relationship. This is irrespective of the respondent's argument that
the Memorandum of Understanding does not constitute a binding
agreement (i.e., a contract).

8.

The consequence of this discussion is that there is an

arbitration agreement as defined in the said Act and that the petitioner is
a party to the agreement. It is also true that the petitioner invoked the
arbitration clause and sought the appointment of the sole arbitrator. The
respondent failed to act as required under the arbitration clause. These
circumstances fully justify the invocation of the powers under Section 11
of the said Act for the appointment of an arbitrator and, as a result, this
petition is liable to be allowed. Justice S.S. Chadha, a former Judge of

ARB. P. 60/07

Page No.7 of 8

this court, is hereby appointed as the sole Arbitrator to arbitrate on the
disputes arising between the parties. He shall fix his own fee which
shall, in the first instance, be borne by both the parties in equal measure.
A copy of this order be sent to the learned Arbitrator so that
he may take up proceedings in arbitration.
BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
August 27, 2007
δυττ

ARB. P. 60/07

Page No.8 of 8

