THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on : 29.03.2007
+

WP (C) 2076/2007

COSMOS FLIGHT LTD. & ORS

...Petitioners

- versus THE BANK OF RAJASTHAN LTD. & ORS.

...Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
For the Respondent No.1

: Mr Prag Chawla
: Mr Rajiv Shakhder, Sr. Advocate with Mr Nabik Syam
and Mr Amit Mishra

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.
This writ petition is directed against the order passed by the Debts
Recovery Tribunal on 15.02.2007 whereby the interim order dated 15.10.2004,
which was subsequently confirmed on 13.01.2005, was vacated.

2.

The impugned order has been passed because an application had

been moved by the respondent /bank for vacation of the said interim order. The
application had been moved by the respondent/ bank in view of the recent
decision of the Supreme Court in the case of M/s. Transcore v. Union of India
& Another: 2006 (12) Scale 585, wherein the Supreme Court held that
WP(C)2076/07

Page No.1of 4

proceedings under the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets
and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 as well as under the Recovery
of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 could be initiated
and continued simultaneously.

In the present case the bank had already

initiated proceedings under the 1993 Act and during the pendency of these
proceedings before the Debts Recovery Tribunal, notice under Section 13(2) of
the 2002 Act was issued. The petitioner herein had approached the Debts
Recovery Tribunal for staying the operation of the said notice. And at that
point of time, the position in law was unclear as to whether proceedings under
both the acts could be taken by the banks simultaneously.

It is in these

circumstances that the interim orders were passed by the Debts Recovery
Tribunal.

3.

The Supreme Court having clarified the position in the case of

Transcore (supra) that both the proceedings could continue simultaneously, the
bank moved an application for vacation of the stay granted by the Debts
Recovery Tribunal. One of the submissions made by the learned counsel for
the petitioner was that the petitioner was not heard while the Debts Recovery
Tribunal passed the impugned order.

4.

Initially, I was also impressed by this argument when I issued

notice on 22.03.2007. However, Mr Shakhder, who appears on behalf of the
WP(C)2076/07

Page No.2of 4

respondent/ bank has been able to demonstrate that notices were, in fact, served
on the petitioner and even summons were issued to the petitioner on the basis
of the application moved by the bank.

It is in this context that the impugned

order records the following:“Nobody appeared on behalf of the defendants nor filed
any objection.”
This obviously indicates that the petitioner chose not to appear. In any event,
de hors the issue of notice to the petitioner, the situation now is amply clear
because of the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Transcore (supra)
that both proceedings can continue simultaneously. The stay was granted when
this position was unclear and it was contended on behalf of the petitioner that
the proceedings under the two acts could not be maintained simultaneously.
That legal impediment sought to be raised is now no longer in existence and,
therefore, there is nothing wrong in the Debts Recovery Tribunal vacating the
earlier stay after the matter has been clarified by the decision of the Supreme
Court.

5.

Lastly, it was contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner

that once a stay had been confirmed, there was no matter pending before the
Debts Recovery Tribunal, as a result of which the impugned order vacating the
stay could not have been passed. The answer to this is that the stay was granted
in relation to the pending application moved by the bank under the 1993 Act.

WP(C)2076/07

Page No.3of 4

The argument advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioner at the time of
obtaining the stay order was that proceedings under the 1993 Act had already
been taken by the bank and, therefore, they be restrained from taking similar
proceedings under the 2002 Act. Being impressed by this argument, the stay
was granted. Now, that the Supreme Court has clarified the position, it was
open to the Debts Recovery Tribunal to vacate the stay in view of the fact that
the original application filed on behalf of the bank under the 1993 Act was still
pending before the Debts Recovery Tribunal. It may be also noted that in the
impugned order the case filed by the bank under the 1993 Act is also listed for
final arguments on 03.04.2007 and it is hoped that the same would be disposed
of expeditiously. The remedy available to the petitioner under the 2002 Act is,
as indicated by the Supreme Court, by way of an application under Section 17
thereof. This is also indicated in the impugned order.

6.

Accordingly, I find no reason to interfere with the impugned order.

This writ petition is dismissed.
BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
March 29, 2007
SR

WP(C)2076/07

Page No.4of 4

