THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 29.08.2007

+

CS (OS) 1192/2005

PFIZER PRODUCTS, INC.

...Plaintiff
- versus -

MR ALTAMASH KHAN & ANOTHER

...Defendants

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Plaintiff
Defendants

: Mr Ankush Mahajan with Ms Anshia
: Ex parte

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

The prayers made in the present suit are as under:“A. An order and decree of permanent injunction
restraining the defendant No.1, his agents,
representatives and all those acting on his
behalf from, in any manner, using the website
'www.viagra.in'/ domain name, 'viagra.in', or
any deceptive variant(s) thereof, so as to
amount to passing off of the aforesaid website
and domain name as having a connection /
affiliation/ association with the plaintiff
company;
B.

CS(OS)1192/2005

An order and decree of mandatory injunction
directing the defendant No.2 to cancel the
domain name 'viagra.in' and in the alternative,
Page No 1 of 5

direct that the plaintiff be registered by the
defendant No.2 as the registrant of the domain
name 'viagra.in', of which the defendant No.1
is presently the Registrant;
C.

An order for rendition of accounts of profits as
prayed for by the plaintiff and a decree for the
amount so ascertained;

D.

An order and decree for damages in the sum
prayed for by the plaintiff.

E.

Costs of the suit be awarded to the plaintiff.”

The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the plaintiff submits that he is not
pressing prayers C and D.

Insofar as the defendants are concerned, the

defendant No.1 had initially appeared in the proceedings and had also filed a
written statement but had subsequently stopped appearing. By an order dated
02.04.2007, it was directed that the suit shall proceed exparte in respect of the
defendant No.1.

As regards defendant No.2 no specific relief has been

claimed and only a direction has been sought in respect of prayer B so that the
defendant No.2 may register the domain name “viagra.in” in the name of the
plaintiff in place of the defendant No.1.

2.

The plaintiff had filed an application being IA No. 6678/2005

under Order XXXIX Rules 1 and 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
(hereinafter referred to as the CPC). At the first hearing, an exparte ad interim
order was passed restraining the defendant No.1, its partners, officers,
CS(OS)1192/2005

Page No 2 of 5

servants, agents, representatives and all other acting for and on his behalf from
using the plaintiff's trademark “VIAGRA” or deceptive variants thereof as part
of domain name / or URL registered/ maintained by him which may amount to
the passing off of the business and goods of the defendant No.1 as that of the
plaintiff. The defendant No.1 was also restrained from selling/ alienating/
transferring to any other third party the domain name “viagra.in” and the URL
“www.viagra.in” and the defendant No.2 was restrained from accepting such
sale/ transfer alienation.

This order was confirmed by the order dated

19.12.2005 which also disposed of

IA No. 9942/2005, which was an

application filed by the plaintiff praying for the relief that the defendant No.2
be directed to transfer the domain name “viagra.in” to the plaintiff during the
pendency of the suit subject to the condition that in the event the suit is
decided against the plaintiff and in favour of the defendant No.1, the plaintiff
would forthwith take all steps to re-transfer the domain name “viagra.in” to
the defendant No.1. Both the applications IA No. 6678/2005 and IA No.
9942/2005 were disposed of by the order dated 19.12.2005, which was an
order passed after hearing both the plaintiff and the defendant No.1. While the
initial exparte ad interim order was confirmed, the order dated 19.12.2005 also
disposed of the said application IA No. 9942/2005 holding that the plaintiff
was entitled to an order directing the defendant No.2 to transfer the domain
name “viagra.in” to the plaintiff subject to the final decision in the suit and

CS(OS)1192/2005

Page No 3 of 5

upon the condition that in case the suit is decided against the plaintiff and in
favour of the defendant No.1, the domain name “viagra.in” shall be retransferred to the defendant No.1 and the plaintiff would be liable to the
defendant No.1 for the use of the said domain name and shall suitably
compensate the defendant No.1 as may be determined by the Court.

3.

Thereafter, the defendant No.2 has transferred the domain name

“viagra.in” to the plaintiff and the plaintiff has been using the same. Since the
defendant No.1 was proceeded with exparte, the plaintiff was directed to lead
its exparte evidence. The plaintiff has filed an affidavit of Ms Anamika
Gupta, who is the constituted attorney of the plaintiff by way of evidence.
She has essentially stated on affidavit what have been averred in the plaint. At
the time when the suit had been filed the plaintiff had indicated that an
application for the trademark “VIAGRA” had been filed in India.

It is,

however, stated in the affidavit by way of evidence that the registration of the
trademark has subsequently been done. Paragraph 16 of the affidavit clearly
indicates that the plaintiff is now the registered proprietor of the trademark
“VIAGRA” in India and its registration number is 710135 in Class 5 relating
to pharmaceutical compounds for treating erectile dysfunction. The date of
registration is given as 01.06.1996 (as registration dates back to the application
date). The plaintiff has been able to establish that the plaintiff is the owner of

CS(OS)1192/2005

Page No 4 of 5

the registered trademark “VIAGRA”. The plaintiff as registered owner by the
trade mark VIAGRA in 147 countries as well as in India and as registered
owner of the .com domain name (www.viagra.com) does have a legitimate
interest in protecting its brand. The defendant No.1 does not have any interest
in the domain name “viagra.in” apart from putting it up for sale.

The

defendant No.1 does not have any right to the product VIAGRA. Thus,
defendant No.1 has no legitimate interest in using the domain name
“viagra.in”. The domain name “viagra.in” is confusingly similar to the trade
mark VIAGRA and the domain name “viagra.com” which belong to the
plaintiff. The plaintiff has also been able to establish that it has a right to the
domain name “viagra.in”.
4.

In these circumstances, the suit is decreed in terms of prayer A.

Insofar as prayer B is concerned, the defendant No.2 is directed to confirm the
registration of the plaintiff for the domain name “viagra.in” and to cancel the
registration of the said domain name in respect of the defendant No.1.

The

suit is accordingly decreed with costs which are quantified at Rs 1 lac.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
August 29, 2007
SR

CS(OS)1192/2005

Page No 5 of 5

