THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 28.09.2007

+

ARB. P. 135/2007

HARISH KUMAR SIKKA

... Petitioner
- versus -

UNION GOVT OF INDIA

... Respondent

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Ms Deepika Jain
For the Respondent
: Mr Ambar Qamaruddin

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ? Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J(ORAL)
1.
This is an application under Section 11 (6) of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as 'the said Act') for
appointment of an arbitrator. The learned counsel for the respondent, at
the outset, submitted that the claims submitted by the petitioner are not
arbitrable and, therefore, there is no question of appointment of an
arbitrator. He straightway referred to para 7 (vi) of the petition where
the losses / claims are mentioned. The losses / claims read as under:ARB. P. 135/07

Page No.1 of 5

“(A)

Claim of work done and not paid

=Rs.89823=00

(B)

Loss due to increased work done
(beyond the prescribed limit of variation)

=Rs.82500=00

(C)

Interest charges on delayed and unpaid
payments

=Rs.72067=00

(D)

Profitability loss

=Rs.13473=00

(E)

Relief / Compensation for mental agony
& harassment

=Rs.100000=00

(F)

Litigation charges

=Rs.25000=00
Total: = Rs.3,85,363=00”

2.

The learned counsel for the respondent submitted that insofar

as Claim (A) is concerned, the same was the subject matter of an
arbitration and an award has also been made to the extent of Rs39,123/in favour of the petitioner and the respondent has also paid the said
amount. Insofar as Claims (B) to (F) are concerned, he submitted that
these are not within the scope of arbitration in terms of the general
conditions of the contract read with the special conditions of the contract
between the parties. The learned counsel for the petitioner, however,
submitted that these claims were arbitrable and, therefore, an arbitrator
ought to be appointed.

3.

Claim (B) relates to losses due to increased work done

beyond the prescribed limit of variation. The learned counsel for the

ARB. P. 135/07

Page No.2 of 5

petitioner placed reliance on clause 42 (2) (i) of the General Conditions
of Contract which reads as under:“42 (1)

xxxxx

xxxxx

xxxxx

xxxxx

(2) (i) Unless otherwise specified in the special
conditions of the contract, the accepted
variation in quantity of each individual item
of the contract would be upto 25% of the
quantity originally contracted, except in case
of foundation work. The contractor shall be
bound to carry out the work at the agreed
rates and shall not be entitled to any claim or
any compensation whatsoever upto the limit
of 25% variation in quantity of individual
item of works.”
4.

According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, if the

variation was beyond 25% for individual items, then the petitioner was
entitled to make a claim in respect thereof.

The aforesaid clause,

according to her, only prevented the petitioner from making a claim if
the variation for an individual item was less than 25%. However, while
construing the said clause, it must be noted that the opening words are
“Unless otherwise specified in the special conditions of the contract...”.
The relevant clause of the Special Conditions of the Contract are as
under:“5.

ARB. P. 135/07

The contract value given above are approx. &
subject to variation according to actual
requirement to Rlys. No claim on this account
will be entertained by Rly. Admn.
Page No.3 of 5

6.

5.

I/we clearly understand that I/we are not entitled
to compensation on account of any variation to
the value of contract and also agree to complete
all such works allotted to me / us within the
stipulated period.”

Clearly, the Special Conditions of Contract would override

the General Conditions of Contract. The Special Conditions provide
that no claim on account of variation would be entertained by the
Railway Administration.

The Special Conditions of Contract also

indicate that the petitioner clearly understood that they were not entitled
to compensation on account of any variation in the value of the contract.
This means that the petitioner is not entitled to any amount in respect of
variation whether it is within 25% or beyond 25% and, therefore, there
can be no arbitration with regard to this.

6.

Insofar as claim (C) is concerned, it relates to interest charges

on delayed and unpaid payments.

The learned counsel for the

respondent referred to clause 16 (3) of the General Conditions of the
Contract which reads as under:“16 (3)
No interest will be payable upon the
Earnest Money and Security Deposit or amounts
payable to the Contractor under the Contract, but
Government Securities deposited in terms of Sub-

ARB. P. 135/07

Page No.4 of 5

clause (1) of this clause will be payable with interest
accrued thereon.”
A plain reading of the said clause indicates that no interest is payable on,
inter alia, the amounts payable to the contractor under the contract.
Therefore, this claim is also beyond the scope of arbitration. Insofar as
claims (D), (E) and (F) are concerned, they all flow from claims (A), (B)
and (C). As regards claim (A), that has already gone through arbitration
and an award in favour of the petitioner has been made. As indicated
above, Claims (B) and (C) are not arbitrable. Therefore, the question of
referring the disputes pertaining to claims (D), (E) and (F) to arbitration
does not arise. Consequently, no occasion arises for the appointment of
an arbitrator.

7.

In these circumstances, this petition is dismissed.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
September 28, 2007
δυττ

ARB. P. 135/07

Page No.5 of 5

