THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 28.03.2008

+

ARB. A. 1/2008

M/S I.T.I. LIMITED

... Petitioner/Appellant
- versus -

M/S HIMACHAL FUTURISTIC COMMUNICATIONS
LIMITED
... Respondent
Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr Dayan Krishnan with Mr Gautam Narayan and
Mr Samrat Singh
For the Respondent
: Mr Rakesh Tiku with Mr Vivek Singh

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment ?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

This appeal has been filed under Section 37 (2) of the Arbitration

and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as ‘the said Act’). The
appellant is aggrieved by the order dated 17.12.2007 passed by the arbitral
tribunal whereby the appellant’s application under Sections 16 and 17 of the
said Act was dismissed.

2.

The learned counsel for the respondent has raised a preliminary

issue with regard to the maintainability of this appeal. He submitted that the
order appealed against is actually an order passed under Section 16 (2) of
ARB. A. 1/08

Page No.1 of 6

the said Act and not under Section 17 thereof. That being the case, he
submitted, the present appeal would not be maintainable in view of the
provisions of Section 16 (6) read with Section 37 (2) (a) of the said Act.

3.

On the other hand, the learned counsel for the appellant

submitted that the application made by the appellant before the arbitral
tribunal was a hybrid application invoking both Section 16 (2) and Section
17 of the said Act. He further submitted that the order passed by the arbitral
tribunal is also a hybrid order concerning both Section 16 (2) and Section
17. He submitted that in view of this, an appeal under Section 37 (2) (b) of
the Act would be maintainable because an appeal lies to a court against an
order of the arbitral tribunal granting or refusing to grant an interim measure
under Section 17 of the Act. His contention was that the appellant is a sick
company under the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act,
1985 (hereinafter referred to as ‘SICA’) and in respect of which a
rehabilitation scheme is pending consideration before the BIFR.
Consequently, in view of the provisions of Section 22 of SICA, the arbitral
proceedings could not be continued because, according to the learned
counsel for the appellant, the expression ‘suit’ as appearing in the said
Section 22 would also cover arbitral proceedings.

4.

The arbitral tribunal passed the impugned order dated

17.12.2007 and took the view that the expression ‘suit’ appearing in Section
22 of SICA would not cover the arbitration proceedings. It was further held

ARB. A. 1/08

Page No.2 of 6

that once the award is made, the appellant could take recourse to Section 22
of SICA inasmuch as the award could not then be executed in view of the
said provisions during the pendency of a rehabilitation scheme before the
BIFR.

5.

In the context of these rival contentions and the decision of the

arbitral tribunal, I have to consider the question of maintainability of this
appeal. It is apparent upon examining the provisions of the said Act that
Section 16 (2) provides that a plea that the arbitral tribunal does not have
jurisdiction is required to be raised not later than the submission of the
statement of defence thereof.

However, a party is not precluded from

raising such a plea merely because he had appointed or participated in the
appointment of an arbitral tribunal.

The prayer that was made in the

application filed by the appellant before the arbitral tribunal required the
arbitral tribunal to direct that the arbitration proceedings did not lie and be
not proceeded further without the express consent of the BIFR or as the case
may be, the AIFR.

It is clear that the prayer that was made in that

application concerned a jurisdictional issue. It was the contention of the
appellant before the arbitral tribunal that the arbitral tribunal could not
proceed with the arbitration without express consent being given to the
respondent / claimant by the BIFR in terms of Section 22 (1) of SICA.

6.

In my view, the provisions of Section 17 do not come into play at

all unless and until the arbitral tribunal has jurisdiction in the matter.

ARB. A. 1/08

Page No.3 of 6

Insofar as the argument qua jurisdiction is concerned, the arbitral tribunal,
rightly or wrongly, has rejected the contention of the appellant and has
refused to agree with the appellant that it had no jurisdiction to continue
with the arbitration proceedings unless and until an express consent was
obtained from the BIFR. In such a situation, the only remedy available to
the appellant would be that which is provided by Section 16 (6) of the said
Act and that is to await the making of the arbitral award and thereafter to
make an application for setting aside the said award on this ground in
accordance with the provisions of Section 34 of the said Act. It is also clear
that an appeal can lie from an order passed under Section 16 (2) only if the
plea that the arbitral tribunal does not have jurisdiction is accepted. This is
apparent from the provisions of Section 37 (2) (a) of the said Act. Since the
plea of jurisdiction raised by the appellant has been rejected, the provisions
of Section 37 (2) (a) of the said Act would not be available to the appellant.

7.

The learned counsel for the appellant contended, as pointed out

earlier, that the application was a hybrid application under Section 16 and
Section 17 and, surely, any order passed under Section 17 by the arbitral
tribunal could form the subject matter of an appeal particularly in view of
the provisions of Section 37 (2) (b) which permitted the filing of an appeal
against an order of the arbitral tribunal granting or refusing to grant an
interim measure under that Section (i.e., Section 17).

Although this

argument is attractive, I am of the view that Section 17 would only apply
where the arbitral tribunal has jurisdiction and, secondly, the interim

ARB. A. 1/08

Page No.4 of 6

measures that are referred to in Section 17 are passed during the pendency
of the arbitration proceedings and not when they are stultified. Moreover,
the interim measures that are sought are with the object of seeking
protection of the subject matter of the dispute and the interim measures that
are granted are by way of the tribunal ordering a party to take such measure
or protection.

8.

In the present case, what the appellant is seeking is that the

arbitration proceedings should be stalled and not be proceeded with until
and unless the respondent / claimant obtains a consent from the BIFR. This,
in my view, would not fall within the ambit of interim measures as provided
under Section 17 of the said Act. While it may be true that in the facts of
the present case, as presented by the appellant, Sections 16 and 17 have
been inter-twined, it is also true that the interim measures under Section 17
that are sought by the appellant would only arise when the pre-condition of
Section 16 is fulfilled and that is that the arbitral tribunal has jurisdiction.
What the appellant requires this court to hold is that the arbitral tribunal
does not have jurisdiction and that such an order stating that it does not
have jurisdiction would amount to an interim measure under Section 17 of
the said Act. Unfortunately, in the scheme of the Act and the provisions
contained therein, such an order cannot be passed.

9.

Consequently, I am of the view that the appeal is not

maintainable. It is, accordingly, dismissed. It is made clear that the passing

ARB. A. 1/08

Page No.5 of 6

of this order does not, in any way, impinge upon the appellant’s rights under
Section 16 (6) of the said Act.

March 28, 2008
δυττ

ARB. A. 1/08

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)

Page No.6 of 6

