THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 27.09.2007

+

OMP 414/2005

M/S ENGINEERING DEVELOPMENT
CORPORATION.
....
- versus -

PETITIONER

MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF DELHI.

RESPONDENT

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Ms Anusuya Salwan
For the Respondents
: Ms Smita Shankar
CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

By way of this petition objections have been filed under

Section 34 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 to the Award
dated 27.10.2005. According to the petitioner the award needs to be set
aside in respect of claim Nos. 2, 4 and part of claim No. 6.

It is

contended that the award in respect of these claims is in conflict with the
public policy of India.

OMP 414/2005

Page No.1 of 11

2.

The petitioner was required to construct Community Toilets

under the Yamuna Action Plan at different dates in Shakurpur, Delhi. An
agreement No EE (Br-IV)/TC/2001-2002/266 was entered into between
the petitioner and the respondent for the said project.

As per the

agreement, the work was to commence on 6.10.2001 and was to be
completed by 5.4.2002. By virtue of a corrigendum dated 4.7.2001 by
the respondent, it was provided that 1% bonus would be allowed if the
work is completed one month in advance and ½% bonus if the work is
completed two weeks before the stipulated period. According to the
petitioner, the work was completed on 4.3.2002 which was more than
one month prior to the stipulated completion date of 5.4.2002.
Consequently, it is the petitioner's case that the petitioner became entitled
to the 1% bonus indicated in the above-mentioned corrigendum. Claim
No. 2 is in respect of payment on account of this incentive bonus for
early completion of the work and is to the extent of Rs 1,44,669/-. Claim
No. 4, which is also the subject matter of the present petition, is to the
extent of Rs 9.04 lakhs and is on account of the watch and ward staff
which the petitioner had to maintain during the period 4.3.2002 till
30.10.2002. It is the claim of the petitioner that although the work had

OMP 414/2005

Page No.2 of 11

been completed on 4.3.2002, the respondent was not taking over the sites
and as a result of which the petitioner had to engage watch and ward staff
right upto 30.10.2002, when the said sites were ultimately taken over by
the respondent. Claim No. 6 pertains to the claim of interest. The
present petition is limited to the question of interest which was not
granted by the learned arbitrator. In respect of pendent lite and future
interest, the learned arbitrator has awarded interest at the rate of 10% per
annum, with which the petitioner has no grievance.

3.

The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the claim

for incentive has been disallowed to the petitioner by ignoring admitted
documents, namely Exts. P-6, P-7 and P-8 which were letters written by
the petitioner to the respondent wherein it is clearly stated that the work
had been completed on 4.3.2002. The learned counsel for the petitioner
also submitted that the fourth/final bill was submitted on 4.3.2002 and no
further bill for any further work had been submitted by the petitioner. In
fact, she submits that there has been no work done on the project after
4.3.2002 and there is no evidence to show that any work at all was done
after 4.3.2002. According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, the
arbitrator in rejecting the claim No. 2, has committed a patent illegality

OMP 414/2005

Page No.3 of 11

and, therefore, his award is opposed to public policy. She submitted that
if important documents are ignored then it would amount to legal
misconduct on the part of the arbitrator which would definitely be
opposed to public policy. She placed reliance on two decisions of the
Supreme Court in K.P. Poulose v. State of Kerala and another: AIR
1975 SC 1259 and Union of India v. Pundarikakshudu and Sons and
Another: (2003) 8 SCC 168, which go to show that where documents are
ignored by an arbitrator, it could be held that he was guilty of legal
misconduct. Of course, these decisions are rendered in respect of the
Arbitration Act, 1940.

However, the principles would be equally

applicable.

4.

As regards Claim No. 4, the learned counsel again referred to

Ext. P-6, P-7 and P-8 to indicate that the petitioner was repeatedly asking
the respondent to take charge of the sites and that the petitioner be
released of the burden of maintaining the watch and ward staff at the
earliest. Despite such repeated reminders, the respondent was not taking
charge of the sites and, therefore, this resulted in the petitioner's
incurring a huge amount on account of maintaining watch and ward sites
staff at the sites.

OMP 414/2005

This claim has also been rejected by the learned

Page No.4 of 11

arbitrator. According to the learned counsel for the petitioner the learned
arbitrator has completely ignored the said Exts. P-6, P-7 and P-8 and has
completely misconstrued the provisions of the agreement between the
petitioner and the respondent.
5.

As regards the claim of pre-suit interest, the learned counsel

for the petitioner referred to the award and submitted that the learned
arbitrator held that the claimant had, at no occasion, issued any written
notice to the respondent about claiming interest on their due amount and,
therefore,

no

pre-suit

interest

was

found

admissible

to

the

petitioner/claimant. He submitted with reference to Ext. P-6, which is a
letter written on 18.6.2002, that there is a clear reference in that letter
that interest would be charged @ 24% compounded quarterly for all
delayed payments and damages.

The learned counsel, therefore,

submitted that the award is contrary to the records and the rejection by
the learned arbitrator of the claim for pre-suit interest is also liable to be
set aside.

6.

The learned counsel for the respondent, on the other hand,

submitted that the arbitrator has examined all the documents and has
considered the submissions made by the parties and after hearing the

OMP 414/2005

Page No.5 of 11

counsel for the parties, come to definite conclusions and findings. One
of the findings was that the fourth/final bill prepared by the EE/MCD
showed that the work was in progress. This, according to the learned
counsel for the respondent, was a definite finding and should not be
interfered with by this Court while considering a petition under Section
34 of the said Act. She submitted that the Court, while considering such
a petition, does not sit as a Court of appeal and cannot re-appreciate
finding of fact nor can it substitute its own views in place of the
arbitrator's. The learned counsel then referred to the decision of the
Supreme Court in the case of Oil & Natural Gas Corporation Ltd. v.
Saw Pipes Ltd: 2003 (5) SCC 705.

She referred to the following

passage:“31. Therefore, in our view, the phrase “public policy of
India” used in Section 34 in context is required to be given
a wider meaning. It can be stated that the concept of
public policy connotes some matter which concerns public
good and the public interest. What is for public good or in
public interest has varied from time to time. However, the
award which is, on the face of it, patently in violation of
statutory provisions cannot be said to be in public interest.
Such award/judgment/decision is likely to adversely affect
the administration of justice. Hence, in our view in
addition to narrower meaning given to the term “public
policy” in Renusagar1 case it is required to be held that the
award could be set aside if it is patently illegal. The result
would be - award could be set aside if it is contrary to:
(a) fundamental policy of Indian law; or
1 1994 Supp (1) SCC 644
OMP 414/2005

Page No.6 of 11

(b) the interest of India; or
(c) justice or morality, or
(d) in addition, if it is patently illegal.
Illegality must go to the root of the matter and if the
illegality is of trivial nature it cannot be held that award is
against the public policy. Award could also be set aside if
it is so unfair and unreasonable that it shocks the
conscience of the court. Such award is opposed to public
policy and is required to be adjudged void.”

Reading the above passage from the said decision of the Supreme Court
she submitted that it is only in the case of patent illegality which went to
the root of the matters that the Court could interfere under Section 34 of
the said Act. If the illegality was of a trivial nature then the award could
not be held to be opposed to public policy and no interference would be
called for. She also submitted that the award could also be set aside if it
was so unfair and unreasonable that it shocked the conscience of the
Court. Going through the award she submitted that this was not an
award which would shock the conscience of the Court and would be so
unreasonable or unfair so as to raise such a presumption. Accordingly,
she submitted that the award does not call for any interference.

7.

I have considered the arguments advanced by the learned

counsel for the parties. Insofar as claim No.2 is concerned, the key
OMP 414/2005

Page No.7 of 11

question is whether the work was completed on 4.3.2002 or not?
Unfortunately, the arbitrator has not returned any finding as to when the
work was completed. This, he ought to have done inasmuch as he was of
the view that the work was not completed on 4.3.2002 as claimed by the
petitioner. It is an admitted position that the documents marked as Ext.
P-6, P-7 and P-8 were received by the respondent. It is important to note
that Ext. P-6 is a letter dated 18.6.2002 issued by the petitioner to the
respondent. In that letter it has been stated more than once that the work
had been completed to the satisfaction of the respondent one month
ahead of schedule. The letter also states that despite the completion of
the work, the incentive bonus of 1% was not being paid nor was the final
bill being cleared.

Since this letter is very important, it would be

instructive to reproduce the contents thereof. The same reads as under:“The above mentioned work was awarded to us
and the date of start as per the Agreement the date of start
was 27.9.2001 and the stipulated date of completion was
4.6.2002. We completed the work to the entire satisfaction
one month ahead of schedule. Under the agreement the
contractor was entitled to an incentive of 1% of the
contract in case the work is completed one month ahead of
schedule. It is regretted that despite the fact that the work
has been completed neither our final bill nor the payment
towards the incentive has been made to us. Please note
that we will charge interest @ 24% compounded quarterly
for all our delayed payments and damages.
You were requested to take over the toilet block
OMP 414/2005

Page No.8 of 11

so that our watch and ward can be removed. We are
incurring huge amount towards the watch and ward and
other liabilities and we request you to kindly take over the
toilet block.
Though our work has been completed on
4.3.2002, but till date you are not taking over the watch
and ward. By means of this letter we call upon you to take
over the watch and ward, failing which we will not be
responsible any theft, pilferage etc.”
This letter clearly brings out the following:(1) The petitioner had notified the respondent that the work
had been completed on 4.3.2002;
(2) The petitioner claimed incentive of 1% for completing the
work one month ahead of schedule;
(3) The petitioner claimed payment of the final bill;
(4) The petitioner also claimed interest @ 24% compounded
quarterly in respect of delayed payments;
(5) The petitioner was incurring huge amount towards the
watch and ward staff and other liabilities;
(6) The petitioner requested the respondent to take over the
sites so that the petitioner's responsibility of maintaining a
watch and ward staff is brought to an end.

8.

This letter was followed by the letter dated 2.8.2002 wherein

it was reiterated that the work had been completed on 4.3.2002, but the
respondent had not taken over the watch and ward. A similar letter (Ext.
P-8) was written on 15.10.2002. By the last letter the petitioner had
OMP 414/2005

Page No.9 of 11

given notice to the respondent that the petitioner would be removing the
watch and ward staff on 30.10.2002. These letters do indicate that the
petitioner had informed the respondent that the work had been completed
on 4.3.2002. The respondent also admitted the receipt of these letters
and there is nothing on record to show that there was any response from
the respondent denying the fact that the work had been completed on
4.3.2002. These letters, unfortunately, have been ignored by the learned
arbitrator and have not been given due weightage. Therefore, the award
of the learned arbitrator in respect of claim No.2 cannot be sustained. It
would definitely be against public policy of India inasmuch as the
findings have been arrived at by ignoring material documents.

9.

Insofar as claim No. 4 is concerned, the award in respect of

this is also required to be set aside because of the reasons given for claim
No.2.

The very same letters, i.e. Exts P-6, P-7 and P-8 have been

ignored. Similarly, the award in respect of claim No. 6 to the extent of
pre-suit interest also deserves to be set aside because the arbitrator has
not considered Ext. P-6 where a claim of interest had clearly been made.
The arbitrator, as pointed out above, has mentioned that the claimant had,
at no occasion, given any written notice to the respondent about claiming

OMP 414/2005

Page No.10 of 11

interest on the due amount. This conclusion of the arbitrator is clearly
contrary to the record and is a patently erroneous finding which does go
to the root of the matter. Accordingly, the award in respect of claim No.6
with respect to rejection of the claim for pre-suit interest is also set aside.

9.

The conclusion, therefore, is that the award in respect of claim

No.2, claim No. 4 and claim No. 6 to the extent of the rejection of the
pre-suit interest is set aside. The same is referred for arbitration afresh to
be conducted by Mr S.P. Rai, R/o A-2/12, Sector-5, Rohini, Delhi-85.
The parties shall appear before the said arbitrator on 30.10.2007 at 4.30
p.m. The rest of the award stands satisfied.

10.

The records of the arbitrator be made available to the newly

appointed arbitrator. This petition stands allowed to the extent indicated
above.
BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
September 27, 2007
J

OMP 414/2005

Page No.11 of 11

