THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 21.05.2007

+

WP(C) 2979/2003

AIR INDIA LIMITED

...Petitioner
- versus -

THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER FOR
PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES & ANR

...Respondent

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
For the Respondent No.1

: Mr Sandeep Sethi, Sr Advocate with Mr Lakshay Sawhney,
Mr V.K. Kini and Ms Divya Jain
: Mr Sumeher Bajaj.

For the Respondent No.2.

: Mr M Dutta.

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

The petitioner (Air India) is aggrieved by the order dated

11.04.2002 passed by the Chief Commissioner for Persons with Disabilities in
purported exercise of powers under the persons with Disabilities (Equal
Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995
(hereinafter referred to as the “said Act”).

WP(C)2979/2003

Page No 1 of 9

2.

The first point urged by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that

under Section 32 of the said Act, posts are to be identified for the purposes of
giving employment to persons with disabilities by the appropriate Government.
In this case, the appropriate Government is the Central Government and the
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment has issued a notification dated
31.05.2001 based upon the reports submitted by an Expert Committee on
03.03.2001 identifying the list of jobs / posts for the purposes of Section 32 of
the said Act.

It was submitted by Mr Sethi, the learned Senior Counsel

appearing on behalf of the petitioner, that the posts advertised by virtue of the
advertisement dated 08.07.1997, which is the advertisement in issue in the
present petition, related only to Senior Management Professionals and to
placement as Deputy General / General Manager / Director in the General
Executive Cadre. He submitted that in the list annexed to the said notification,
none of these posts find mention. Mr Sethi, submitted that the notification
came into force in 2001 and the list of identified posts was annexed to the said
notification whereas the advertisement was taken out in 1997 for which purpose
the identified posts were as per the list given in annexure P-7 at page 33 of the
paper book. As per that list the posts advertised were not identified for the
purposes of Section 32 of the said Act.

3.

The next point urged by Mr Sethi is that, in any event, nobody has

been appointed pursuant to the said advertisement because of various reasons
WP(C)2979/2003

Page No 2 of 9

including over staffing in Air India. So, according to him, it is not a case of a
person being appointed pursuant to the said advertisement who was not a
handicapped person and, therefore, there was no question of construing the
same as a situation where a person with disabilities had not been granted an
equal opportunity.

4.

The third point urged by Mr Sethi is that the Chief Commissioner

did not have the power to issue the direction that he did. The directions issued
by the Chief Commissioner are as under:
“11.

5.

In the light of overall circumstances and upon taking
due consideration of the material available on record
and submissions made by the parties, the respondent
is directed to revive the recruitment exercise for
filling up of the identified post(s) for Physically
Handicapped persons and to intimate the name and
complete mailing address of the Physically
Handicapped person(s) appointed against the
identified post(s).”
Mr Sethi referred to the provisions of Sections 58, 59 and 63 of the

said Act to indicate that the Chief Commissioner did not have powers to issue
the direction of the nature which is impugned herein. The Chief Commissioner,
according to Mr Sethi, under Section 59 of the said Act, had the power to look
into the complaints and to take up the matter with the appropriate authorities.
According to him, the order that has been passed by the Chief Commissioner is
beyond the scope of the provisions of Sections 58 and 59 of the said Act. In

WP(C)2979/2003

Page No 3 of 9

support, he referred to the decision in the case of Bhupinder Singh v Delhi
Commission for Women & Ors : 2007 III AD (DELHI) 134 wherein this
court, according to Mr Sethi, under similar circumstances held that the
Commission for Women did not have the power to direct interim maintenance
under the provisions of the Delhi Commission for Women Act, 1994 which,
according to Mr Sethi, were similar to the provisions of the present Act.

6.

Lastly, Mr Sethi submitted that taking the powers of the

Commissioner to the highest possible within the confines of the provisions of
the said Act, the Commissioner could have asked or required the petitioner to
reserve the requisite number of seats for persons with disability in terms of
Section 33 of the said Act, in case, the petitioner was filling up posts but, he
definitely did not have the power to direct the petitioner to fill up such posts.
He placed reliance on a Constitution Bench decision of the Supreme Court in
the case of Shankarsan Dash v Union of India :(1991) 3 SCC 47.

7.

Mr Dutta, who appears for the respondent No.2 referred to the

factual matrix of the case and submitted that the post was, in fact, an identified
post. He referred to pages 123, 127 and 162 of the paper book to indicate that
the post had been identified and that Mr Sethi was not correct in saying that the
post in question was not identified within the meaning of Section 32 of the said
Act. Mr Dutta submitted that the identification of posts had been done even
WP(C)2979/2003

Page No 4 of 9

prior to 1997 when the advertisement was taken out. For this purpose, he
referred to the list which finds mention at page 162 of the paper book which
was annexed to a Memorandum of 25.11.1986. Mr Dutta submitted that the
Commissioner had the power to issue the direction that he did. Under the
scheme of the Act, the Chief Commissioner was duty bound to act in the
manner he did so as to safeguard the interests of persons with disabilities.

8.

Mr Sumeher Bajaj, who appears on behalf of the respondent No.1,

made submissions in detail with regard to the scope of powers of the Chief
Commissioner. He referred to several decisions of the Supreme Court and of
the High Courts. He referred to the following decisions :
1.
2.

Kunal Singh v Union of India & Another : (2003) 4
SCC 524

3.

The Secretary State of Karnataka v Nagveni M.C.
WP No.25190/2005 (Karnataka High Court)

4.

Dilbagh Singh v DTC : 2005 (84) DRJ, 208

5.

9.

Javed Abidi v Union of India : (1999) 1 SCC 467

Govt of NCT of Delhi and Others v All India
Confederation of Blind : 128 (2006) DLT 695
(DB).

The first two decisions relate to the spirit and scope of the said Act

although they do not deal directly with the powers of the Commissioner. They
indicate broadly the necessity to act for the benefit of disabled persons so that
WP(C)2979/2003

Page No 5 of 9

they are not denied equality of opportunity in employment. The third decision
is of the Karnataka High Court and it deals in detail with the specific powers of
the Commissioner under the said Act. The learned counsel for the Respondent
No.1 relied upon and referred to this decision in great detail. The fourth
decision, that is the case of Dilbagh Singh (supra), is of a learned Single Judge
of this court in which it has been held that the Chief Commissioner's power are
not purely recommendatory but also adjudicatory of the entitlements of persons
with disabilities. The decision goes to the extent of indicating that the Chief
Commissioner's role is virtually the same as that of a quasi judicial authority
inasmuch as hearings are contemplated. The fifth decision was cited by Mr
Bajaj to indicate that where two views are possible, the one beneficial to the
disabled, should be adopted.

10.

As noted above, essentially four points were urged. The first point

was with regard to the fact that the post advertised as per the advertisement
dated 08.07.1997 was not an identified post in terms of Section 32 of the said
Act. There is controversy with regard to this. The learned counsel appearing
for the respondent No.1 submitted that the said post was included in the list
appended to the memo of 25.11.2986 and, therefore, it could be included as an
identified post. The next point that Mr Sethi urged was that the issue does not
survive inasmuch as nobody has been appointed pursuant to the said
advertisement and has categorically stated that nobody would be appointed
WP(C)2979/2003

Page No 6 of 9

pursuant to the said advertisement. The reasons for no further appointment that
have been given are, inter alia, over-staffing and no requirement for the said
post. The issue raised in respect of this aspect of the matter both by Mr Dutta
and by Mr Bajaj, who appeared on behalf of the respondents 2 and 1
respectively, was that Air India had flouted the requirement of 3% quota for the
handicapped, as indicated under the Act. According to Mr Dutta, numerous
appointments had been made by Air India without taking into consideration the
requirement of reserving 3% of such appointments for handicapped persons.
Therefore, according to him, the direction given by the Chief Commissioner
that the recruitment exercise ought to be revived is in order. This was the third
point that was urged by Mr Sethi that no such direction could have been given
and for that he submitted that, if at all a direction could be given by the
Commissioner, he could have asked or required the petitioner to reserve the
requisite number of seats in case the petitioner was deciding to fill up the posts
in future.

11.

The sum and substance of the controversy in the present case is

with regard to the fact that the advertisement that was issued by the petitioner is
no longer being pursued by the petitioner and nobody has been appointed to the
post advertised and nobody would be appointed pursuant to the said
advertisement. It is made clear that the petitioner does not require the filling up
of such a post. The initial grievance of the respondent No.2 was that he was
WP(C)2979/2003

Page No 7 of 9

not considered for this post and that a direction be given that this post be filled
up and the petitioner be considered for the same. Such a direction, in my view,
as has been given by the Commissioner and as has been set out in para 4 above,
could not have been given. It is open to the petitioner to recruit persons for a
specific purpose. The petitioner has to take a business decision as to whether
those posts are necessary for the organisation or not.

The Commissioner

exceeded his jurisdiction in directing that the petitioner must appoint persons.
However, it is another matter that where the petitioner decides to revive the
recruitment exercise, then the direction given by the Commissioner would
come into play inasmuch as the requirements of the Act of providing
appointment for a minimum of 3% for physically handicapped persons would
be applicable. Therefore, with regard to the submissions made above and the
observations made by me, it would be appropriate to dispose of this writ
petition by directing the petitioner to treat the direction given by the
Commissioner as a general direction for filling up future posts so as to ensure
that the minimum 3% quota reserved for physically handicapped persons is
achieved by the petitioner.

However, insofar as the respondent No.2's

grievance with regard to the particular post advertised is concerned, that no
longer survives. This is so because the petitioner is not filling up that post.

WP(C)2979/2003

Page No 8 of 9

12.

It is made clear that apart from the above observations and the

directions, no other aspect of the matter has been conclusively determined by
this court.
With these directions this writ petition stands disposed of.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
May 21, 2007
M/δυττ

WP(C)2979/2003

Page No 9 of 9

