THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Judgment delivered on :23.07.2007
WP(C) No.4144/1998
SARUP SINGH & OTHERS

...Petitioners
- versus -

LT. GOVERNOR OF DELHI & ORS.

...Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr C. B. Varma with Mr Raghuvinder Varma
For the Respondent No.1
: Mr V. Shankara
For the Intervenor
: Mr L. C. Chechi

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

Mr Varma, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, drew

my attention to the order passed by this Court on 24.04.2000 wherein it was
recorded that the learned counsel for the respondents were unable to explain as
to why the consolidation proceedings had started all over again in 1996 if the
consolidation had been completed in the year 1988 and the petitioners had been
put in possession as per the case of the petitioners. To enable the respondents
to present their case, the matter was adjourned and the relevant records
including the record regarding the consolidation proceedings in the year 1988
WP(C)4144/1998

Page No.1 of 6

was directed to be brought on record.

2.

Mr Varma then referred to the order dated 30.01.2002 which, inter

alia, reads as under:“It is pointed out by learned counsel appearing for
the petitioners that in an earlier writ petition being CWP
No.1500/1988, a statement was made by the learned counsel
for the state that the consolidation proceedings, which are
also the subject matter of the instant writ petition, had been
completed. Learned counsel for the petitioners points out that
since the consolidation proceedings stand completed, there
can be no scope for amendment of the scheme of
consolidation. In support of his submission, he has relied
upon the decision of this Court in Suraj Mal and Anr. Vs.
Manohar Lal ILR (1973)1 Delhi 1016. The Division Bench of
this Court held as follows:
"...The language of Section 36 cannot be so
construed as to vest in the authority confirming
the scheme a residue of power to amend or end
the scheme after any length of time and even
recurrently. The phrase thus cannot be extended
to a period after the Settlement Officer has
ceased to function. The power under the section
cannot be exercised after the new record of
rights comes into force...."
As is apparent from the aforesaid judgment, the power under
Section 36 of the East Punjab Holdings (Consolidation &
Prevention of Fragmentations) Act, 1948 cannot be exercised
after the record of rights comes into force. Keeping the
aforesaid judgment in view, we enquired from the learned
counsel for the State as to whether record of rights was
prepared on the completion of the scheme. Learned counsel
states that some part of the record of rights was prepared. We
fail to appreciate the statement of learned counsel for the
state. Let the record of rights be produced on the next date.
The office shall send the file of CWP
WP(C)4144/1998

Page No.2 of 6

No.1500/1988 to this Court on the next date.
To come up on 18th March, 2002.”
The next order referred to by Mr Varma was the one passed on 18.03.2002,
which also has a material bearing on this case and is accordingly reproduced
herein below:
“O R D E R
----------18.03.2002
Learned counsel for the State Mr. V. Shankra
states that while it is correct that factum of delivery of
possession to the land owners governed by the Scheme for
Consolidation of Holdings of 1970 stands recorded in the
record of rights, some of the entries have not been correctly
made as possession was not actually handed over. To say the
least, the State is taking a peculiar stand. Though it has been
stated before us that entries were wrongly made, the State
has not taken any action against the persons who were
responsible for making the alleged wrong entries. The
consolidation proceedings were started in the year 1970 and
the same were completed on 22nd July, 1988. The entries
relating to handing over of the possession of concerned land
were recorded in the record of rights on 15th June, 1988.
After a lapse of several years, the State wants to amend or
add to the consolidation scheme by taking a strange plea that
the entries in the record of rights were not correctly made.”
3.

The position that obtains today is that the record of rights has not

been produced before this Court despite several opportunities.

CWP

1500/1988, which was mentioned in the orders referred to above, was disposed
of on the ground that the consolidation proceedings had come to an end in 1988
and the possession had been handed over as per the scheme itself.

WP(C)4144/1998

Page No.3 of 6

4.

Mr Verma referred to the provisions of Section 24 of the East

Punjab Holdings (Consolidation and Prevention of Fragmentation ) Act, 1948,
which reads as under:“24.
Coming into force of scheme- (1) As soon as
the persons entitled to possession of holdings under this Act
have entered into possession of the holdings, respectively
allotted to them the scheme shall be deemed to have come
into force and the possession of the allottees affected by the
scheme of consolidation or, as the case may be, by
repartition, shall remain undisturbed until a fresh scheme is
brought into force or a change is ordered in pursuance of
provisions of sub-section (2), (3), (4) of Section 21 or an
order passed under Section 36 or 42 of this Act.
(2)
A Consolidation Officer shall be
competent to exercise all or any of the powers of a Revenue
Officer under the Delhi Land Revenue Act 1954, or the U.P.
Land Revenue Act, 1901, as in force in the Union Territory of
Delhi, as the case may be, for purposes of compliance with
the provisions of sub-section (1).”
He submitted that after the scheme is prepared and the persons entitled to
possession of holdings enter into possession, the scheme is deemed to have
come into force. By virtue of the said provision, the possession of the allottees
is to remain undisturbed until a fresh scheme is brought into force or a change
is ordered pursuant to provisions of Section 21 or an order is passed under
Section 36 or Section 42 of the said Act. In the present case, the respondents
have sought the invocation of Section 36 to bring about an amendment to the
scheme. The entire case of the respondents rests upon the interpretation of
Section 36 of the said Act. Section 36 reads as under:“36.
WP(C)4144/1998

Power to vary or revoke scheme- A scheme
Page No.4 of 6

for the consolidation of holdings confirmed under this Act
may, at any time, be varied or revoked by the authority
which confirms it subject to any order of the Chief
Commissioner that may be made in relation thereto and a
subsequent scheme may be prepared, published and
confirmed in accordance with the provisions of this Act.”
The key expression used in the said Section is — “at any time”.

This

expression has been interpreted by a Division Bench of this Court in the case of
Suraj Mal and Another v Manohar Lal: ILR 1973 1 Delhi 1016 wherein,
referring to a full Bench decision of Punjab High Court in Bhikan and Others
v The Punjab State and Others: 1963 PLR 368, the Division Bench observed
as under:“That the phrase "at any time" does not mean at any time
unlimited in point of duration, unregulated in point of
intermittency or unguided in point of frequency. The power
of the Chief Commissioner or any authority under the Act
to revoke a scheme or vary an order must be read to mean
during the consolidation proceedings. In other words, this
power cannot be exercised once the scheme is deemed to
have come into force and the possession to the allottees
covered by the scheme of consolidation or, as the case may
be, by repartition, has been given subject, of course, to any
change that may be ordered in pursuance of the provisions
of Sub-section (2), (3) and (4) of Section 21 or an order
passed under Section 36 or Section 42 of the Act, provided
the order under Section 36 is passed during the
consolidation proceedings.”
The position, therefore, is very clear that once the Settlement Officer ceases to
function or, in other words, becomes functus officio, the power under Section
36 of the said Act cannot be invoked to vary or amend any scheme. The
Settlement Officer becomes functus officio when the scheme comes into force

WP(C)4144/1998

Page No.5 of 6

as indicated in Section 24 of the said Act, that is, upon possession being handed
over consequent upon the consolidation scheme. Admittedly, that point of time
has already elapsed and, therefore, Section 36 could not have been invoked by
the respondents in view of the clear decision of the Division Bench of this
Court as well as of the full Bench of the Punjab High Court.

5.

Accordingly, the order dated 18.10.1996 in respect of consolidation

proceedings for village Mundela Khurd is quashed. The possession of the
petitioner cannot be disturbed unless and until a fresh scheme is formulated
consequent upon following the procedure laid down under the Act. It shall be
open to the respondents to carry out consolidation proceedings afresh in terms
of the Act by issuing an appropriate notification.
This writ petition stands allowed to the extent indicated above.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
July 23, 2007
SR

WP(C)4144/1998

Page No.6 of 6

