THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Judgment delivered on :20.06.2007
WP(C) No.498/2006
PRAVEEN SHARMA

...Petitioner
- versus -

U. P. S. C

...Respondent

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr J. P. Sengh
For the Respondent
: Ms Jyoti Singh

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ?

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J
1.

The petitioner is aggrieved by the decision of the Union Public

Service Commission (UPSC) communicated to him by the letter dated
19.12.2005, whereby the petitioner was informed that his request contained in
his letter dated 21.11.2005 addressed to the Chairman, UPSC for granting
another chance to appear in the Civil Services Examination, could not be
acceded to because the rules of the examination did not permit it. In the letter
dated 21.11.2005, addressed by the petitioner to the Chairman, UPSC, a
request, as aforesaid, had been made for another opportunity/ chance to appear
WP(C)498.06

Page No.1 of 18

in the Civil Services Examination. This request was made in view of the
special circumstances of the case.

2.

It was stated in the said letter dated 21.11.2005 that on 21.10.2005,

when the petitioner was returning after appearing in the General Studies Paper-I
& II of the Civil Services (Main) Examination, 2005 from the examination
centre at St. Lawrence Convent School, Geeta Colony, Delhi, while crossing
the road, he was hit from behind by a scooter. His right leg had been fractured.
He was admitted to a nearby hospital (Hedgewar Arogya Sansthan) at
Karkardooma, Delhi. The petitioner was suffering from acute pain due to the
severe injury and was consequently operated upon at Orthonova Hospital, New
Delhi on 26.10.2005. On account of the said injury, the petitioner could not
appear in the remaining papers, which were held on 22.10.2005, 23.10.2005,
30.10.2005 and 06.11.2005.

3.

It is further stated in the letter dated 21.11.2005 that the petitioner

was fully confident and determined to succeed and to get a higher position/
rank in that examination.

However, the accident prevented him from

completing the examination. Since that was his last (fourth) chance to clear the
examination, the accident, which was entirely beyond his control had,
according to the petitioner, snatched away an opportunity for no fault on his

WP(C)498.06

Page No.2 of 18

part. It is on account of these circumstances that the petitioner made the
following request in the said letter:“Keeping in view of the reasons as stated above and for
equity and justice, I humbly request you to consider
sympathetically my prayer and give me another
opportunity/ chance to appear in the Civil Services
Examination next year. I undertake to submit fresh
application for appearing in the examination within the
prescribed time and would sit in the examination next
year, if permitted.”
This request was denied by the letter dated 19.12.2005, as indicated above.

4.

The bone of contention in this petition is Rule 4 of the Civil

Services Examination for 2005 which was conducted by the UPSC for the
purpose of filling vacancies in, inter alia, The Indian Administrative Service,
The Indian Foreign Service and The Indian Police Service. The said rules are
hereinafter referred to as “the CSE Rules 2005”.

Rule 4 of the CSE Rules

2005 reads as under:“4.
Every candidate appearing at the examination who is
otherwise eligible, shall be permitted four attempts at the
examination:
Provided that this restriction on the number of
attempts will not apply in the case of Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes candidates who are otherwise eligible:
Provided further that the number of attempts
permissible to candidates belonging to Other Backward
Classes, who are otherwise eligible, shall be seven. The
relaxation will be available to the candidates who are eligible
to avail of reservation applicable to such candidates.
Note:—
WP(C)498.06

Page No.3 of 18

(I)

An attempt at a Preliminary Examination shall be
deemed to be an attempt at the Examination.

(II)

If a candidate actually appears in any one paper in
the preliminary Examination, he/she shall be
deemed to have made an attempt at the
Examination.

(III)

5.

Notwithstanding the disqualification/ cancellation
of candidature, the fact of appearance of the
candidate at the examination will count as an
attempt.”
The CSE Rules 2005 were notified by virtue of a notification dated

04.12.2004. In the petition, as filed, it is prayed that Rule 4 of this notification
(CSE Rules 2005), which has been issued by the Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions (Department of Personnel and Training), Government
of India, New Delhi be declared to be unconstitutional and violative of Articles
14, 16 and 21 of the Constitution of India.

It was also prayed that a writ be

issued directing the respondent to permit the petitioner another chance for
sitting in the Civil Services Examination.

However, during the course of

arguments, Mr J. P. Sengh, the learned counsel for the petitioner, submitted that
the challenge in the petition be modified to the extent that instead of requiring
the same to be declared unconstitutional, it be read down so as to exclude the
examination of 2005 as an “attempt” insofar as the petitioner was concerned
within the meaning ascribed to the word in the said Rule. He submits that if
that is done, then the petitioner can sit for another examination, which he has
done by virtue of Court orders.

WP(C)498.06

Page No.4 of 18

6.

Before the arguments and counter-arguments are taken up for

consideration, it would be appropriate to notice certain essential facts. It is an
admitted position that prior to the 2005 examination, the petitioner had
exhausted three attempts. It is also an admitted position that the petitioner was
prevented from completing his examination in 2005 because of the accident on
21.10.2005.

After the petitioner was prevented from completing his

examination, he sent the said letter dated 21.11.2005 indicating clearly that the
examination of 2005 was his last chance. While his request for giving him
another opportunity was pending, on 11.12.2005 the petitioner filled in the
application form for the Civil Services Examination to be conducted in 2006.
However, as pointed out by Ms Jyoti Singh, who appeared on behalf of the
respondent UPSC, this application form was not “correctly” filled in by the
petitioner. With regard to the number of attempts already made, the petitioner
filled in— “03”, meaning thereby that the petitioner did not include the attempt
of 2005 because the petitioner, admittedly, had appeared in the examinations of
2001, 2003, 2004 in which he was unsuccessful. He had also appeared in the
2005 examinations but the same was aborted because of the accident. It must
also be noted that, as submitted by Ms Jyoti Singh, had the petitioner indicated
four attempts by filling in “04” instead of “03”, the petitioner's application
would have been rejected at the threshold because the computer was

WP(C)498.06

Page No.5 of 18

programmed not to accept any application in which four attempts had already
been made.

7.

It must be remembered that the said application was made during

the pendency of the petitioner's request of 21.11.2005. It is only after the
application was submitted that the respondent issued the letter dated 19.12.2005
communicating to the petitioner that his request could not be acceded to as the
same was not permissible under the examination rules. And, being aggrieved
by this letter, the petitioner filed the present writ petition on 12.01.2006. The
writ petition came up for admission on the very next day (i.e., 13.01.2006)
when, my learned predecessor passed an order which, inter alia, read as under:“The case of the Petitioner is that he met with an
accident after appearing in the Main Paper of the Civil
Services Examination. He suffered multiple fractures and,
therefore, was not in a position to appear in the remaining
papers. The Respondent, however, has treated it as his last
attempt. There is sufficient evidence on the record to show
that the Petitioner did suffer multiple fractures. Prima facie
keeping the circumstances in view the Respondents ought not
to treat this case as an attempt.
Issue notice to Respondents to show cause as to why
rule nisi be not issued, returnable on 4th April, 2006.
I am informed that the Petitioner has already applied. If
that is so, his application shall not be rejected on the ground
that he has exhausted four attempts.”
Pursuant to the said interim order passed by this Court, the petitioner was
issued the admit card in March and again in May, 2006.

WP(C)498.06

He sat in the

Page No.6 of 18

preliminary examination and cleared the same.

He applied for the main

examinations on 21.08.2006 and cleared the same. He was also called for an
interview, which was held on 03.04.2007. The results have been tabulated but
as the learned counsel for the respondent was under some reservation as to
whether it ought to be declared without this writ petition being decided, the
same has been placed in a sealed cover with this Court. That sealed cover has
not been opened.

8.

The case for the petitioner is simply this that his appearance in the

examinations of 2005, till he met with the said accident on 21.10.2005, should
not be construed as an attempt at all. The reason for making this submission is
that the accident was completely beyond the control of the petitioner.
According to Mr J. P. Sengh, an attempt, as contemplated under Rule 4 of the
CSE Rules 2005 has to be construed in the backdrop of voluntary action or
voluntary inaction and would not bring in within its sweep such acts which are
completely beyond the control of a candidate.

He submitted that such an

interpretation would be particularly necessary where the attempt would qualify
as the final chance because thereafter the candidate would be barred from
appearing in the examinations for all times. It was submitted that if a strict
interpretation of the rules were to be adopted as contemplated by the UPSC, the
same would be visited with extreme harshness and would amount to be
unreasonable and arbitrary.
WP(C)498.06

Page No.7 of 18

9.

Mr Sengh further contended that the intention of the rules was to

prevent a candidate from taking repeated attempts at the examination ad
infinitum. But, the intention of the rules cannot be to include instances where
candidates having qualified in the preliminary examination, are prevented from
completing their main examinations due to circumstances beyond their control.

10.

On behalf of the respondent UPSC, three-fold submissions were

made by Ms Jyoti Singh. Firstly, she submitted that the petition was not
maintainable before this Court. Her second submission was that the petitioner
was seeking equity and it is well known that a person who seeks equity must
come to Court with clean hands.

She submitted that the conduct of the

petitioner dis-entitled him to any equitable relief. Thirdly, she submitted that
on merits, on a plain reading of Rule 4 of the CSE Rules 2005, four attempts
had been made by the petitioner and that the UPSC had no power to violate the
same or to deviate from the same.

11.

With regard to the issue of maintainability, she submitted that

essentially the examinations are a part of the recruitment process and would
therefore qualify as a service matter. She referred to the decision of a learned
Single Judge of this Court in the case of Pranay Kumar Soni v. The
Chairman, UPSC and Another: CWP No.5259/2002 decided on 21.03.2003.
WP(C)498.06

Page No.8 of 18

In that petition re-assessment / re-valuation of the answer-sheet in the Civil
Services Main Examination, 2001 had been sought. The question which arose
for consideration before the learned Single Judge was whether or not the
subject matter was covered in the category of service matters. This question
was considered in the context of the Administrative Tribunal Act, 1985 and in
particular Section 14 thereof. The learned Single Judge took note of a full
Bench decision of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in the case of K. Naga Raja
and Others v. Superintending Engineering, Irrigation Department and
Another: AIR 1987 A. P. 230. After considering the provisions of the said Act
and several other decisions of Courts, the learned Single Judge concluded that
the question before it (viz. re-assessment/ re-valuation of the answer-sheet of
the Civil Services Main Examination, 2001) was covered under the category of
“Service Matters”.

The Court concluded that the same could only be

entertained by the Administrative Tribunal.

12.

Ms Jyoti Singh also referred to the decision of another learned

Single Judge of this Court in the case of Neeraj Kansal and Others v. Union
Public Service Commission: WP(C) Nos. 7824-32/2006 decided on
05.10.2006. In that case the petitioners had claimed production of the answer
books and for re-evaluation of the same. The answer books pertained to the
Civil Services (Main) Examination, 2005. The learned Single Judge, after
referring to the decision in Pranay Kumar Soni (supra) and other decisions,
WP(C)498.06

Page No.9 of 18

concluded that no cogent reasons had been given by the petitioner to differ with
the ratio of the said judgments. It was, therefore, concluded that there were no
grounds to hold that the Central Administrative Tribunal did not have
jurisdiction to try and adjudicate disputes raised by the petitioners. The writ
petition was accordingly dismissed.

13.

With regard to the objection that the petitioner did not approach

this Court with clean hands, it was contended that in the application form, as
mentioned above, the number of attempts indicated were “03” and not “04”. It
was also indicated in the application for the main examination that the
petitioner had appeared in the examinations of 2001, 2003 and 2004. The
petitioner had not disclosed that he had also appeared in 2005. According to
the learned counsel for the respondent these were conscious efforts on the part
of the petitioner at deception. Therefore, this Court ought not to entertain this
petition on this ground alone.

14.

The learned counsel for the respondent also made submissions with

regard to the merits of the matter and stated that the UPSC had no power to
deviate from Rule 4, which was clear and categorical. She also referred to the
Supreme Court decisions reported in (2005) 12 SCC 688 (para 10) and 1992
Supp (1) SCC 594.

WP(C)498.06

Page No.10 of 18

15.

Taking up the objection raised by Ms Jyoti Singh that the petitioner

did not approach this Court with clean hands, it would be pertinent to note the
circumstances under which the present petition was filed. As indicated above,
the petitioner met with an accident on 21.10.2005. He was operated upon on
26.10.2005. As a direct consequence of the accident and the operation, the
petitioner could not appear in the remaining papers held on 22.10.2005,
23.10.2005, 30.10.2005 and 06.11.2005. The petitioner knowing that it was his
fourth attempt, which had been aborted due to reasons beyond his control,
wrote the letter dated 21.11.2005 requesting the Chairman, UPSC that he be
given another opportunity to appear in the Civil Services Examination to be
held the next year (i.e. in 2006). In the letter of 21.11.2005, the petitioner had
disclosed that he had appeared on three prior occasions and that his appearance
in the 2005 examinations was his fourth and last chance. But he could not
complete the examinations because of the accident, which was entirely beyond
his control.

In the said letter he had also undertaken to submit a fresh

application for appearing in the examination within the prescribed time and that
he would sit in the examination next year, if permitted. During the pendency of
his request, the time for filling in the application had arrived and being left with
no alternative he filled in the application on 11.12.2005. He was aware that in
case he filled in four attempts, the application would be rejected. Hopeful of
the fact that his appearance in the 2005 examinations would not be construed as
an attempt, the petitioner, instead of filling in “04”, filled in “03” in answer to
WP(C)498.06

Page No.11 of 18

the query with regard to number of attempts. By the impugned letter dated
19.12.2005, after the petitioner had filled in the application form, the UPSC
informed the petitioner that his request of 21.11.2005 could not be entertained
because the rules did not permit such a request. Thereafter, the petitioner
approached this Court by way of this writ petition and, as indicated above, he
was permitted to appear in the preliminary examination as well as the main
examination pursuant to permission granted by this Court. Therefore, I do not
think that it would be right to hold that the petitioner did not approach this
Court with clean hands. The petitioner had disclosed all facts before this Court
as well as to the respondent UPSC in his letter dated 21.11.2005.
Consequently, I do not agree with the submission of Ms Jyoti Singh that the
petition is liable to be dismissed on this ground.

16.

I now come to the objection raised by Ms Jyoti Singh that the

present writ petition is not maintainable before this Court and that if the
petitioner has any grievance, he should agitate the same before the Central
Administrative Tribunal in view of the provisions of Sections 14 and 28 of the
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985. In L. Chandrakumar v. Union of India:
(1997) 3 SCC 261, a seven judge Bench of the Supreme Court held as under:-

“99.
In view of the reasoning adopted by us, we hold
that Clause 2(d) of Article 323A and Clause 3(d) of Article
323B, to the extent they exclude the jurisdiction of the High
Courts and the Supreme Court under Articles 226/227 and
WP(C)498.06

Page No.12 of 18

32 of the Constitution, are unconstitutional. Section 28 of
the Act and the "exclusion of jurisdiction" clauses in all
other legislations enacted under the aegis of Articles 323A
and 323B would, to the same extent, be unconstitutional.
The jurisdiction conferred upon the High Courts under
Articles 226/227 and upon the Supreme Court under Article
32 of the Constitution is part of the inviolable basic
structure of our Constitution. While this jurisdiction cannot
be ousted, other courts and Tribunals may perform a
supplemental role in discharging the powers conferred by
Articles 226/227 and 32 of the Constitution. The Tribunals
created under Article 323-A and Article 323-B of the
Constitution are possessed of the competence to test the
constitutional validity of statutory provisions and rules. All
decisions of these Tribunals will, however, be subject to
scrutiny before a Division Bench of the High Court within
whose jurisdiction the concerned Tribunal falls. The
Tribunals will, nevertheless, continue to act like Courts of
first instance in respect of the areas of law for which they
have been constituted. It will not, therefore, be open for
litigants to directly approach the High Courts even in cases
where they question the vires of statutory legislations
(except where the legislation which creates the particular
Tribunal is challenged) by overlooking the jurisdiction of
the concerned Tribunal. Section 5(6) of the Act is valid and
constitutional and is to be interpreted in the manner we
have indicated.”
17.

It is apparent that the Supreme Court, while keeping the powers

conferred on the High Courts under Article 226/227 intact inasmuch as it was
part of the inviolable basic structure of the Constitution, observed that the
Tribunals may perform a supplemental role in discharging the powers conferred
by the aforesaid Articles.

The Supreme Court also observed that the decisions

of such Tribunals would, however, be subject to scrutiny before a Division
Bench of the High Court within whose jurisdiction the Tribunal concerned

WP(C)498.06

Page No.13 of 18

falls. The Tribunals would, nevertheless, continue to act like Courts of first
instance in respect of the areas of law for which they have been constituted and
that it would not be open for litigants to directly approach the High Courts even
in cases where they question the vires of statutory legislations (except where
the legislation which creates the particular Tribunal is challenged) by
overlooking the jurisdiction of the Tribunal concerned.

In this context it

becomes necessary to examine the provisions of Section 14 of the
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 which indicates the areas of law for which
the Tribunal has been constituted. The relevant portion of Section 14 of the
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 reads as under:-

“14. Jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Central
Administrative Tribunal—
(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the Central
Administrative Tribunal shall exercise, on and from the appointed
day, all the jurisdiction, powers and authority exercisable
immediately before that day by all courts (except the Supreme
Court * * *) in relation to (a) recruitment and matters concerning recruitment, to any AllIndia Service or to any civil service of the Union or a civil post
under the Union or to a post connected with defence services,
being, in either case, a post filled by a civilian ;
(b) all service matters concerning (i) a member of any All-India Service; or
(ii) a person [not being a member of an All-India Service or a
person referred to in Clause (c)] appointed to any civil service of
the Union or any civil post under the Union ; or
WP(C)498.06

Page No.14 of 18

(iii) a civilian [not being a member of an All-India Service or a
person referred to in Clause (c)] appointed to any defence
services or a post connected with defence,
and pertaining to the service of such member, person or civilian,
in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State or of
any local or other authority within the territory of India or under
the control of the Government of India or of any corporation [or
society] owned or controlled by the Government;
(c) all service matters pertaining to service in connection with the
affairs of the Union concerning a person appointed to any service
or post referred to in Sub-clause (ii) or Sub-clause (iii) or Clause
(b), being a person-whose services have been placed by a State
Government or any local or other authority or any corporation [or
society] or other body, at the disposal of the Central Government
for such appointment.
[Explanation :- For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared
that references to "Union" in this sub-section shall be construed
as including references also to a Union territory.]
(2)

xxxxxxxx

(3)

xxxxxxxx”

The expression that is relevant in the present case is “recruitment, and matters
concerning recruitment”.

In S. Tripathi v. Union of India & Another: 1988

(2) SLR 688 a Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court (Lucknow Bench)
held that the examination conducted by the UPSC for the purposes of the All
India Services including the Indian Administrative Service, was part of the
recruitment process. The Court held as under:-

“7.
It is not disputed that holding of competitive
examination is a condition precedent for appointment to an
WP(C)498.06

Page No.15 of 18

All India Service for which the petitioner had applied and
appeared and was ultimately declared not to have
succeeded. It is also not disputed that appointment to All
India Services, at least, to the Indian Administrative Service
as indicated in the petition, is made on the basis of the result
of the competitive examination held by the Union Public
Service Commission. The examination, therefore, is a part
of the process of recruitment.
8.
In view of the provisions contained in Section
14, since the dispute raised in the present petition directly
concerns the recruitment to All India Service, we are of the
opinion that the petition can be entertained only by the
Administrative Tribunal.”
This finding of the Allahabad High Court has been approved by successive
learned Single Judges of this Court in Pranay Kumar Soni (supra) and Neeraj
Kansal (supra). It is, therefore, clear that the UPSC examination is part of the
recruitment process.

18.

The question that arises in the present case is whether the issues

involved herein can be regarded as relating to the examination conducted by the
UPSC. This question emerges in the context that there is no challenge to the
examination conducted in 2006.

Insofar as the 2005 examinations are

concerned, that is over. And, the petitioner does not stake any claim in respect
thereof because

he could not complete that examination as a result of

circumstances beyond his control. By way of this petition, the petitioner is
seeking a direction from this Court declaring his appearance in the 2005
examination to be disregarded as an attempt. The issue here is not so much
WP(C)498.06

Page No.16 of 18

with regard to the conduct of the examinations but with regard to the
petitioner's eligibility to sit in the examination. Had it been a matter where the
examination itself was in question, it would clearly fall within the ratio of the
decisions in Pranay Kumar Soni (supra) and Neeraj Kansal (supra), which in
turn followed S. Tripathi (supra). Here the issue is with regard to eligibility.
In my view, the expression used in Section 14 of the Administrative Tribunals
Act, 1985 is not just “recruitment” but “recruitment, and matters concerning
recruitment”.

Had the expression only been “recruitment”, there could have

been some debate as to whether a condition of eligibility was a part of
recruitment. But the expression used in Section 14 is of much wider amplitude
inasmuch as it also refers to “matters concerning recruitment”. An eligibility
condition would definitely, in my view, fall within the scope of this expression.
The question in the present writ petition is whether the petitioner was eligible
or not to sit for the 2006 examinations. That is certainly a matter concerning
recruitment. Accordingly, the Central Administrative Tribunal would, in view
of the Supreme Court decision in L. Chandra Kumar (supra), have to function
like the court of the first instance with regard to the question of eligibility raised
in the present case because this is the precise area of law for which the Tribunal
has been constituted, as indicated by Section 14 (1) (a) of the Administrative
Tribunals Act, 1985.

It would, therefore, not be open to the petitioner to

directly approach this Court and, therefore, it would be appropriate if the
petitioner is directed to first approach the Central Administrative Tribunal
WP(C)498.06

Page No.17 of 18

which, indeed, has jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the issue of eligibility raised
by the petitioner herein.

19.

This petition is, therefore, disposed of with the direction that it

would be open to the petitioner to approach the Central Administrative Tribunal
for a determination of his grievance on merits. The precise question being as to
whether his appearance in the examinations in 2005 could be regarded as an
attempt or not within the meaning of Rule 4 of the CSE Rules, 2005. Since the
petitioner has appeared in the Civil Services Examinations held in 2006 and the
results have been tabulated but have been placed in a sealed cover with this
Court, it would be appropriate to direct that the results, which include the
results of other examinees, be declared. In case the petitioner has failed to
qualify in the examinations, then the matters ends there. However, if the
petitioner has qualified, assuming that he was eligible, his result shall be
operative only and shall be subject to the final decision taken by the Central
Administrative Tribunal, in case the petitioner approaches the said Tribunal.
With these directions, this writ petition is disposed of.

No costs.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
June 20, 2007
SR

WP(C)498.06

Page No.18 of 18

