THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Judgment delivered on :22.05.2007
WP(C) No.3475/2007
KIRLOSKAR OIL ENGINE LTD & ANR.

...Petitioners

- versus UCO BANK AND OTHERS

...Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr Mr Sudhanshu Chaudhary with Ms Rajshree Dubey
For the Respondents

Mr Gaurav Duggal.
Mr Rajesh Ratan for the UCO Bank.

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

The petitioner is aggrieved by the proceedings before the Estate

Officer. The main grievance of the petitioner is that the General Manager of
UCO Bank, which is the respondent No.1 herein, has been appointed as the
Estate Officer. According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, this would
amount to a violation of the doctrine that “no man can be judge in his own
cause”. I am afraid that I am unable to agree with this contention of the learned
counsel for the petitioner. As pointed out by the Supreme Court in Crawford

WP(C)3475/07

Page No.1 of 3

Bayley & Co. vs. UOI: 2006 6 SCC 25, the said doctrine can be applied only to
cases where the person concerned has a personal interest or has himself already
done some act or taken a decision in the matter concerned. For that doctrine to
come into play it must be shown that the officer concerned has a personal bias
or connection or a personal interest or has personally acted in the matter
concerned and/or has already taken a decision one way or the other which he
may be interested in supporting.

Paragraph 18 of the said decision reads as

under:
“18.
In this connection, a reference was made to Delhi
Financial Corpn. V Rajiv Anand with regard to personal bias i.e.
An officer of the statutory authority has been appointed as an
Estate Officer, therefore, they will carry their personal bias.
However, this Court in the aforesaid case held that the doctrine “no
man can be a judge in his own cause” can be applied only to cases
where the person concerned has a personal interest or has himself
already done some act or taken a decision in the matter concerned.
Merely because an officer of a corporation is named to be the
authority does not by itself bring into operation the doctrine, “no
man can be a judge in his own cause”. For that doctrine to come
into play it must be shown that the officer concerned has a personal
bias or connection or a personal interest or has personally acted in
the matter concerned and/or has already taken a decision one way
or the other which he may be interested in supporting.”
2.

The Supreme Court in paragraph 23 of the said decision further

clarified that the Estate Officer appointed by the administrative department
concerned cannot be said to be a judge in his own cause. To invoke the said
doctrine of “no man can be a judge in his own cause” certain other conditions
stipulated by the Supreme Court have to be satisfied. None of those conditions
is satisfied in
WP(C)3475/07

the present case.

Accordingly, there is no fault with the
Page No.2 of 3

appointment of the General Manager of UCO Bank as the Estate Officer
This writ petition is dismissed.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
May 22, 2007
J

WP(C)3475/07

Page No.3 of 3

