THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 23.10.2007

+

WP (C) 6290-94/2006

SETH BENI PERSHAD JAIPURIA
CHARITABLE TRUST (REGD) & ORS.

...Petitioner

- versus GOVERNMENT OF NCT OF DELHI & ANR

...Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr Neeraj Kaul, Sr. Advocate with Mr Sanjiv Sachdeva
For the Respondent Nos.1 & 2 : Ms Avnish Ahlawat
For the Respondent Nos. 3-15 : Mr Ashok Aggarwal with Mr Anuj Aggarwal

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

YES

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

YES

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

YES

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J

1.

An interesting but difficult question arises in the present case.

Can a school, which has been receiving aid from the government, be
permitted to stop taking aid?

The petitioners, which are Seth Beni

Pershad Jaipuria Charitable Trust (Regd) and its trustees, are running a
recognized and aided school under the name of “Beni Pershad Jaipuria
Girls Senior Secondary School” (hereinafter referred to as the said
School).

The petitioners do not want to receive any aid from the

WP(C)6290-94/06

Page No.1of 21

government and thereby want to change the status of the said school
from an aided to an unaided school.

2.

In this connection the petitioner No.1 (the trust) sent a letter

dated 28.12.2005 to the Deputy Director of Education, Government of
NCT of Delhi. It was stated in the letter that the trust was running the
said school and was availing grant-in-aid from the Director of
Education. It was further stated that the trust had decided not to avail of
any grant-in-aid in future and to run the said school as an unaided
school.

Necessary directions were sought from the Department of

Education. In response to this letter, the Director of Education issued a
letter dated 06.02.2006 whereby the proposal for converting the said
school from an aided to an unaided school was rejected in the following
manner:“In this regard, attention of the Trustee is drawn to the
fact that the school was established as an aided school
in the best interests of education of neighbourhood and
for better organization and development of the school
education in Delhi. The attitude of the Trustee of the
school management evinces its intention to close down
the aided school, which has been catering to the needs
of poor children and run a public school in its place. It
only goes to show that the MC of the school does not
have any commitment towards the interest of education
of poor children as its priority, rather its focus is on
gradually converting it into a Public School to attract
WP(C)6290-94/06

Page No.2of 21

children of affluent classes. The Department, which is
entrusted with responsibility towards education of poor
children, cannot allow such a proposal, and it is
therefore, rejected.”
Thereafter the petitioner trust sent a letter dated 11.04.2006 to the
Lieutenant Governor of Delhi, who is the Administrator under the Delhi
School Education Act, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as the DSE Act). In
that letter it was pointed out that the trust runs the said school (Beni
Pershad Jaipuria Girls Senior Secondary School) which is an aided
school and that it also runs an unaided school under the name and style
of “Rukmani Devi Jaipuria Public School” on an adjacent plot. It was
further stated in the said letter that the trust was the owner of freehold
plots of land bearing No.23-25, Rajpur Road, Delhi having received the
same by way of donation from the trustees. No grant or concession of
any sort was availed of by the trust for acquisition of the said lands.
The said school was started in the year 1961 on plot No. 25, Rajpur
Road, Delhi and was recognized by the competent authority in the same
year. It was also granted aid by the government. The other school
( Rukmani Devi Jaipuria Public School) on the adjoining plot (23,
Rajpur Road, Delhi) was started in the year 1975 and was given
recognition under the DSE Act in 1979. That school is being run as an
unaided public school.

WP(C)6290-94/06

Page No.3of 21

3.

Earlier, as indicated in the said letter, there was a proposal to

merge the two schools and also to forgo the grants-in-aid being received
from the government in respect of the said school. By a letter dated
20.12.2004 the Deputy Director of Education refused to grant
permission for the proposal on the ground that there was no provision
for amalgamation of an aided school with a recognized unaided school
run by the same trust. In clarification, it was pointed out in the said
letter that the trust had not intended to merge an aided school with a
private school but the intention was to forgo the aid from the
government and run both the schools as unaided schools. There is then
reference of the letter dated 28.12.2005 and the rejection by the Director
or Education on 06.02.2006. It was stated in the letter that the trust
cannot be forced to accept grants-in-aid and it cannot be compelled to
run an aided school in perpetuity. It was further stated that the intention
of the trust is to provide education to children but the trust is not obliged
under any law to continue to receive aid from the government against its
wishes. It was also stated that the trust was ready and willing to bear all
the fees of the existing students of the said school till they pass out or
leave the school of their own accord. In this background, the Lieutenant

WP(C)6290-94/06

Page No.4of 21

Governor, being the Administrator under the DSE Act, was requested to
issue necessary directions to the appropriate authorities to stop the
grants-in-aid to the said school and to permit the trust to run the said
school as an unaided school.

It was also requested that till the

application of the trust was disposed of, the Director of Education be
directed not to take any coercive steps against the trust and the said
school.

4.
letter.

There was no response from the Lieutenant Governor to this
On the other hand, the said school was the recipient of a

memorandum dated 22.04.2006 issued by the office of the Deputy
Director of Education whereby the head of the school was directed not
to refuse admission to any of the students, till the enrollment is reached
to its maximum limit in all the classes, failing which appropriate action
under the DSE Act and the Delhi School Education Rules 1973
(hereinafter referred to as the DSE Rules) would be initiated against the
said school. This was followed by an order dated 24.04.2006 issued by
the Deputy Director of Education, District North, Delhi issued in
purported exercise of powers under Section 16 of the DSE Act read with
Rule 131 of the DSE Rules whereby a committee was constituted to

WP(C)6290-94/06

Page No.5of 21

regulate admission to the said school with immediate effect. At this
juncture, it would be relevant to note that students had been admitted for
the 2006-07 session as well as for the current session, i.e., 2007-08. By
way of this writ petition the petitioners also seeks the quashing of the
said letter dated 06.02.2006, memorandum dated 22.04.2006 and the
order dated 24.04.2006.

The key issue, however, is whether the

respondents (Government of NCT of Delhi and the Director of
Education) can refuse the proposal of the petitioners to stop taking aid in
respect of the said school and insist that the said school continues to
receive aid from the government?

5.

Mr Neeraj Kishan Kaul, Senior Advocate, appeared on behalf

of the petitioners and submitted that there is a difference between
recognition and aid. He submitted that recognition to a school is granted
under the DSE Act under Section 4 whereas aid is granted to a
recognized school under Section 6 of the DSE Act. He submitted that
grant of recognition and the grant of aid are two separate issues. While
aid cannot be granted unless and until a school is recognized under the
DSE Act, a recognized school has the option of asking or not asking for
aid. Therefore, there are two categories of recognized schools—aided

WP(C)6290-94/06

Page No.6of 21

and unaided. He submitted that it is nowhere provided in the Act or in
the Rules that once a school is aided, it must retain that status in
perpetuity.

He submits that just as an unaided school may at a

subsequent point of time become an aided school, there is no bar for an
aided school changing its status to an unaided school. It is not at all
necessary for a recognised school to receive aid. Though, before aid is
granted by the government, recognition of the school is a prerequisite.
He further submitted that the petitioners are not asking for the closure of
a school. It is only asking for permission to stop receiving aid. He made
a clear statement that all the children who are students of the said school
at present would continue their education in the said school and the
expenses for which would be borne entirely by the petitioners.
Therefore, the said children would not suffer any disruption in their
education. He also submitted that the teachers and staff of the said
school have the option of either continuing in the same school or being
absorbed in some other school run by the Delhi Government.

He

submitted that in case they opted to continue with the said school their
salaries would not be less than the salaries of similar staff in the other
school ( Rukmani Devi Jaipuria Public School) and that their seniority
would also be protected.

WP(C)6290-94/06

Page No.7of 21

6.

Ms Avnish Ahlawat, who appeared

on behalf of the

respondents 1 and 2 (Government of NCT of Delhi and Director of
Education) submitted that since the very inception, that is, from 1961,
the said school has been run as a recognized and aided school. This
implies that 95% of the funds which go towards teachers' salaries,
library etc. have been provided by the government and only 5% by the
trust. She submitted that withdrawal of aid to the said school would
imply closure of the school. She also referred to the earlier proposal of
amalgamation of the two schools and to the rejection of the said
proposal.

Relying upon Rules 46 and 47 of the DSE Rules, she

submitted that before a school or any class in a school could be closed
down, prior approval of the Director of Education was necessary. Ms
Ahlawat submitted that altering the status of the school from an aided to
an unaided school would mean, inter alia, that the said school would
now be in a position to charge admission fees and tuition fees at a level
much higher than what it was permitted to an aided school. This would,
according to her, necessarily mean that poorer children would not be
able to seek admission in the said school and the same would only be
available for children from richer families. So, although the school itself

WP(C)6290-94/06

Page No.8of 21

would appear to continue, in effect it would amount to closure of a
school insofar as the poor children of the locality are concerned. She
submitted that before a school could be closed an elaborate procedure
had to be followed and prior approval of the Director is required. The
Director has already rejected the proposal and, therefore, this Court
ought not to interfere with the same.

7.

Mr Ashok Aggarwal, who was permitted to intervene on

behalf of the parents of the children who were admitted to various
classes in the said school on 25.04.2006 and thereafter in the current
academic year, submitted that the petitioners want to either close or
merge the said school with the other school. He submitted that the said
school was an aided school and the intention behind refusing aid is of
closing down an aided school. He submitted that the interest of poor
children would be prejudiced and it is for this reason that the proposal
was rejected by the impugned letter dated 06.02.2006. Mr Aggarwal
referred to Section 3 of the DSE Act and submitted that the
Administrator has been empowered to regulate education in all the
schools in Delhi in accordance with the provisions of the DSE Act and
the DSE Rules. He submitted that after the commencement of the said

WP(C)6290-94/06

Page No.9of 21

Act and Rules, the establishment of a new school or closing down of an
existing school is subject to the provisions of the Act and the Rules. He
also referred to Rule 43 of the DSE Rules to indicate that the
Administrator may, if he is of the opinion that in the interest of school
education in Delhi it is necessary so to do, issue such instructions in
relation to any matter, not covered by the rules, as he may deem fit. Mr
Aggarwal referred to this provision to indicate that the Administrator
had residuary powers to issue instructions in respect of matters which
were not otherwise provided for in the DSE Rules. Such instructions
could be issued if it were in the interest of school education in Delhi. He
then referred to Rule 44 (3) of the DSE Rules to submit that permission
to open a new school is to be granted by the Administrator only if it is in
public interest.

He submitted that the rejection of aid from the

government would translate into the said school altering its status from
an aided to an unaided school. Consequently, the said school would be
free to charge admission fee and tuition fees at a much higher level,
which would mean that the said school would no longer be an avenue for
poor children seeking education. The new school would be for paying
students coming from richer families and this, in his opinion, amounted
to the establishment of a new school which, according to him, must only

WP(C)6290-94/06

Page No.10of 21

be in public interest. The respondents 1 and 2 have already indicated by
virtue of the impugned letter dated 06.02.2006 that it would not be in
public interest and, therefore, the proposal of the petitioners of not
receiving any further grant-in-aid was rightly rejected.

8.

It must also be pointed out at this juncture that several

members of the staff of the said school had also attended the hearings in
Court and they had also vented their grievances with regard to the said
proposal.

The staff members who were aggrieved by the proposal

comprised of four teachers, two lab assistants, 2 clerks, 1 safai
karamchari and two other part time employees. In the context of these
staff members, Mr Aggarwal submitted that Rule 47 which pertains to
absorption of surplus employees could not be availed of by them
inasmuch as they did not fall under the three classes mentioned in Rule
47. The classes being, (1) closure of an aided school, (2) withdrawal of
recognition from an aided school and (3) withdrawal of aid from an
aided school.

In response Mr Kaul submitted that

Rule 47 only

provides for what is to be done and how are the surplus employees to be
absorbed in the aforesaid three eventualities.

There is no bar to

absorption in other cases. He submitted that it is public knowledge that

WP(C)6290-94/06

Page No.11of 21

there are thousands of vacancies in government schools yet they are not
willing to absorb these employees and there is no basis or justification
for the same. He further submitted that all the employees apart from the
part time employees, had completed 20 years of service and they could
take voluntary retirement and avail of all the gratuity and pensionary
benefits and at the same time opt for continuing in their present positions
in the said school and the salaries that would be paid to them would be
not less than the salaries paid in the other school (Rukmani Devi Jaipuria
Public School) and that their seniority would also be protected.
Therefore, according to Mr Kaul, the said staff would in no way be
prejudiced by the proposal.

9.

Section 3 of the DSE Act empowers the Administrator (i.e.,

the Lieutenant Governor) to regulate education in all schools in Delhi in
accordance with the provisions of the DSE Act and the DSE Rules.
Recognition to a school is granted under Section 4 of the Act. There are
various conditions prescribed for recognition of a school such as
adequacy of funds, financial stability, duly approved scheme of
management, suitable or adequate accommodation, approved courses of
study and efficient instruction, teachers with prescribed qualifications

WP(C)6290-94/06

Page No.12of 21

and facilities for physical education, library service, laboratory work,
workshop practice or co-curricular activities.

There is an elaborate

scheme provided for application for recognition, grant or refusal of
recognition and appeal in case of refusal. Sub- Section (6) of Section 4
of the DSE Act provides that every existing school shall be deemed to
have been recognized under the Section and shall be subject to the
provisions of the Act and the Rules. The proviso to this sub-Section
stipulates that where any such school does not satisfy any of the
conditions specified in the proviso to sub-Section (1), the prescribed
authority may require the school to satisfy such conditions and such
other conditions as may be prescribed, within a specified period and if
such condition is not satisfied recognition may be withdrawn from such
school. The said school was an existing school inasmuch as it was
established in 1961.

Therefore, recognition was automatic under

Section 4 (6) of the DSE Act, 1973. However, its continued recognition
is subject to the provisions of Section 4(6). The question of recognition
of schools, therefore, is dealt with entirely by Section 4 of the DSE Act
and by Chapter IV of the DSE Rules which contains Rules 49 to 58. On
the other hand, the issue of aid to recognized schools is governed by the
provisions of Section 6 of the DSE Act. Aid can, however, only be

WP(C)6290-94/06

Page No.13of 21

granted to recognized schools. Sub-Section (2) of Section 6 of the DSE
Act stipulates that the authority competent to grant aid may stop, reduce
or suspend aid for violation of any of the conditions prescribed in this
behalf. Sub-Section (3) provides that aid may cover such part of the
expenditure of the school as may be prescribed and in sub-Section (6) it
is stipulated that no unrecognized school shall be eligible to receive any
aid or any benefit made available to private schools by the Administrator
or any agency of the Administrator.

Apart from Section 6, the

procedural aspects of grant-in-aid are dealt with under Chapter VI of the
DSE Rules which contains rules 60-92. Section 17 of the DSE Act deals
with fees and other charges. Sub-Section (1) clearly stipulates that no
aided school shall levy fee or collect any other charge or receive any
other payment except those specified by the Director. Chapter XIII of
the DSE Rules deals with fees and other charges in aided schools. Rule
146 pertains to admission fees and it clearly stipulates that no admission
fees shall be charged or collected by an aided school for admission to
any class up to class VIII.

Rule 147 pertains to tuition fees and it

provides that subject to alterations in the fees as may be made by the
Director from time to time, the rate of tuition fees for all classes in aided
schools shall be as indicated in the table given in the said Rule. A

WP(C)6290-94/06

Page No.14of 21

perusal of the table clearly indicates that insofar as classes I to VIII are
concerned, the tuition fees is nil. As regards other classes also, i.e.,
classes IX to XII, the tuition fees prescribed is nominal. It is also
stipulated that no tuition fee shall be charged for any class from any
student who belongs to the Scheduled Caste or the Scheduled Tribe.

10.

A brief survey of the above mentioned provisions indicates

that recognition and aid are two separate and distinct concepts. While it
is necessary that before a school is granted aid, it must be a recognized
school, it is not at all necessary that a recognized school must
necessarily receive aid. It has also been noticed that the power to grant
aid also includes the power to stop, reduce or suspend aid in case of any
violation of the conditions prescribed in respect of the said grant of aid.
There is no provision in the Act or the Rules which speaks of a situation
where a school which was hitherto aided, proposes not to receive any
further aid. This, obviously means that there is no specific provision
under the Act or the Rules whereby the competent authority has the
power to reject such a proposal.

WP(C)6290-94/06

Page No.15of 21

11.

In this context, it would be instructive to examine the

categories of aid. Rule 73 of the DSE Rules recognizes two categories,
namely:- (a) maintenance grant; and (b) building grant. Maintenance
grant is also of two kinds, namely:- (a) recurring maintenance grant; and
(b) non-recurring maintenance grant.

Rule 73 (3) of the DSE Rules

specifies as to what is meant by recurring maintenance grants. They
are:- (a) staff grant; (b) provident fund grant; (c) pension and retirement
benefit grant; (d) medical benefit grant; (e) benefits specified in Chapter
X; (f) grants for the purposes of books and journals which are essential
for the library; and (g) grants for the acquisition of essential equipments
of the school. Rule 74 prescribes that recurring maintenance grant shall
be given to aided schools at the rate of ninety-five percent, of the
difference between the approved expenditure on the items in relation to
which recurring maintenance grant may be made and the income from
fees and such other items as may be specified by the Director. It is
obvious that the balance 5% has to be funded by the aided school itself.
In the present case the said school has been receiving recurring
maintenance grant in the shape of salaries of teachers and other staff and
library expenses to the extent of 95% from the government. The balance
5% is provided by the petitioner trust. The aid, therefore, that is being

WP(C)6290-94/06

Page No.16of 21

received by the said school, is of a recurring nature. It is quite distinct
from a building grant or a non-recurring maintenance grant which would
be of an enduring and/ or permanent nature. This distinction is material
because if the government had given grant-in-aid in respect of the
building of the school, then the school would not be in a position to
suddenly turn back and say it is not an aided school merely by stopping
to receive any recurring maintenance grant. This is so because the
building is of an enduring nature and the government having aided in the
setting up and construction of the building, would always have a stake in
the same. The element of aid would be built into the building itself and,
therefore, although the school may stop receiving recurring maintenance
grants, it could still be styled as an aided school. The facts of the
present case are somewhat different. The land and buildings have been
provided by the petitioner trust. It has only been receiving recurring
maintenance grant from the government. Therefore, if such recurring
maintenance grant is stopped, then the nature of the school would
immediately change from being an aided school to an unaided school.

12.

This discussion makes it clear that there is nothing in the Act

or the Rules which prevents the said school from refusing to accept

WP(C)6290-94/06

Page No.17of 21

further aid from the government. There is also nothing in the Act or the
Rules which permits the authorities therein to compel the school to
receive aid against its wishes. Therefore, I am of the view that the
impugned letter dated 06.02.2006 is without the authority of law and is
liable to be quashed. As a consequence the school would be permitted
to alter its status from being an aided school to an unaided school and,
therefore, the memorandum dated 22.04.2006 and the order dated
24.04.2006 would also have no further operation. The petitioners have
already undertaken, and they are bound by it, that all the students, who
are presently studying in the said school, would continue their education
entirely at the cost of the petitioners and in the same manner as if the
said school had continued to be an aided school. It would also be open to
the teachers and the other staff of the said school to opt for continuing
with the said school in terms of the offer made by the petitioners. The
respondents 1 and 2 are also directed to consider absorbing the said staff
members in their schools provided there are vacancies, in case the said
staff members do not opt to continue with the said school.

13.

I have pointed out above that there is a distinction between

the question of recognition and the issue of grant-in-aid. Consequently,

WP(C)6290-94/06

Page No.18of 21

the fact that the petitioners are permitted not to receive aid does not
mean that the petitioners can ignore stipulations with regard to
recognition.

For example, Rule 50 of the DSE Rules specifically

provides the conditions for recognition. One of the conditions is that the
school must serve a real need of the locality. This is provided in Rule 50
(ii). Another condition, which ought to be kept in mind, is prescribed in
Rule 50(iv) that the school is not run for profit to any individual, group
of association of individuals or any other persons. Another important
condition is given in Rule 50(v) and that is that admission to the school
is open to all without any discrimination based on religion, caste, race,
place of birth or any of them.

It would be necessary for the sake of

completeness to also refer to Rule 56 of the DSE Rules which makes
provision for suspension or withdrawal of recognition. If a school, inter
alia, ceases to fulfill any requirement of the Act or any of the conditions
specified in Rule 50, the appropriate authority is empowered, after
giving to the school a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against
the proposed action, to withdraw for reasons to be recorded in writing,
recognition from the school. These factors have been pointed out by me
specifically so as to make the petitioners as well as the respondents
aware, in case they weren't, that stoppage of aid and the consequent

WP(C)6290-94/06

Page No.19of 21

alteration in the status of the said school from aided to an unaided one,
does not absolve the said school of its responsibilities under the said Act
and the said Rules and that in case it wants to retain its recognition, the
conditions for such recognition have to be complied with at all points of
time. In case of any non-compliance, it shall be open to the respondents
to take action under Rule 56 of the said Rules.

14.

In view of the foregoing discussion, the petitioners are

permitted to stop receiving aid from the respondents 1 and 2 and the
respondents 1 and 2 are directed not to provide any further aid to the
said school. The status of the said school would change from being an
aided school to an unaided school. The letter dated 06.02.2006 stands
quashed and the memorandum dated 22.04.2006 and the order dated
24.04.2006 have no further effect. The petitioners shall not disturb any
of the students who are presently enrolled in the said school and their
entire education shall be completed in the said school, if the students so
wish, as if the said school had continued to be an aided school. The
members of the staff referred to above, shall be given the options
indicated above.

WP(C)6290-94/06

Page No.20of 21

This writ petition and all pending applications being CM
Nos. 5161/2006, 8983/2006 and 5856/2007 stand disposed of. There
shall be no order as to costs.
BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
October 23, 2007
SR

WP(C)6290-94/06

Page No.21of 21

