THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 24.01.2008

+

CS (OS) 2104/1993

OCEANIC DEHYDRATES PVT. LTD.

...Petitioner/Objector

- versus UNION OF INDIA & ANR.

...Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr Shiv Khorana with Ms Manpreet Bhalla
For the Respondents
: Ms Preeti Dalal

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ? Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J(ORAL)
1.

These are objections against the Award dated 29.07.1993

made by the sole arbitrator in respect of the disputes which had arisen in
connection with A/T No. J-13071/2/283/80-PUR.V dated 10.11.1980.

2.

Briefly stated the facts are that a tender was notified for the

supply of dehydrated onions by the Army Purchase Organization. The
objector had responded to the tender which culminated in the aforesaid
CS(OS) 2104/1993

Page No.1 of 12

contract dated 10.11.1980. As per the contract between the parties, the
objector was required to supply dehydrated onions as per the
Specification No. 142 which was issued on 11.03.1983.

The said

specification clearly indicated the quality, packing, marking, warranty,
hygiene and inspection methods. The dehydrated onions were required
to be packed in hermetically sealed tins conforming to the specifications
given in paragraph 5 of the said Specification No. 142. Paragraph 13 of
the said specification clearly indicated that the dehydrated onions were
required to conform to the specifications of moisture content, total ash
content, acid insoluble ash content and thickness of reconstituted slices
as indicated therein.

Insofar as the quality was concerned, it was

specifically prescribed under the said Specification No. 142 that the
dehydrated onions shall be the product prepared from clean, sound bulbs
of suitable varieties of onions free from blemish and disease, by proper
peeling, washing, cutting into slices of fairly even thickness and
dehydrating in a manner which ensures effective preservation of colour,
flavour, texture and food value.

It was further prescribed that the

dehydrated onions shall have the characteristic colour and marked
pungent flavour of fresh onions and shall be free from discolouration and
from musty, scorched or other objectionable flavour or odour. It was

CS(OS) 2104/1993

Page No.2 of 12

also stipulated that the dehydrated onions, when cooked according to the
method given in Appendix 'A' to the Specification, shall yield a product
having the appearance of cooked fresh onions. The cooking time shall
not be more than 15 minutes and the rehydration ratio, that is, ratio of
increase in weight after cooking and draining off excess liquid to its
weight before cooking, was required to be not less than 5.0 : 1.0. The
further details of the method of analysis was provided in Appendix 'A' to
the Specification. Appendix 'A' reads as under:“The cooking time and rehydration ratio shall be estimated
as follows:(a)

Take 10g of the dehydrated onions in a
suitable beaker. Add 100 ml of 1.0% sodium
chloride solution and heat. Note the time
when the boiling commences.
Allow to
simmer till the vegetable is cooked i.e attains a
uniformly soft texture, free from toughness or
mushiness having the characteristic taste and
flavour of cooked fresh onions. The time
taken for cooking from the time of boiling
shall be taken as the cooking time.

(b)

After the material is completely cooked, allow
the excess water to drain off for 5 minutes by
covering the beaker with a suitable watch
glass (with convex surface inwards) and
inverting the whole. Weigh the cooked
material. Calculate the Rehydration Ratio as
WR/WD, where WR is the weight of the
dehydrated onions after cooking and draining
off the water and WD is the weight of the
dehydrated onions before cooking.”

CS(OS) 2104/1993

Page No.3 of 12

3.

The objector, while finalizing the contract, had given its

warranty under the standard warranty clause, the relevant portion of
which reads as under:“2.
In the event of the supplies or a part thereof
having been declared during the period of warranty as
being unsound, unwholesome or unfit for human
consumption as.............. by the Director of Supplies &
Transport, QMG's Branch, Army Headquarters, New
Delhi or any officer acting on his behalf (whose opinion
as to whether or not the particular consignment is sound,
wholesome, or fit for human consumption as ...............,
will be final), the purchaser will have the right to dispose
off the condemned stock in any way he considers
necessary after giving due notice to the contractor and
also, at his discretion, either to allow the contractor to
replace the condemned stock within a specified period or
to recover from the contractor the contract price thereof
together with sales tax and excise duty, if any paid
thereon by the purchaser along with all incidental and
freight charges incurred from the place of delivery to the
place where the supplies were ultimately condemned.
The opinion of the Chief Director of Purchase or an
officer acting on his behalf in regard to these charges
will be final.”
4.

It is pertinent to note that the warranty was for a period of

nine months.

The Union of India (APO) filed a claim before the

arbitrator initially for an amount of Rs 2,29,248.91 but subsequently it
was restricted to Rs 1,93,363.90 on account of cost of condemned stock
(Rs 1,76,079.36) and freight and incidental charges (Rs 17,284.57). This
CS(OS) 2104/1993

Page No.4 of 12

claim was made on the ground that the dehydrated onions supplied by the
objector to the Union of India did not conform to the specifications
stipulated under the contract. It was contended that the same were tested
and as per the test results the goods were rejected under the warranty
clause. Since disputes had arisen between the parties with regard to the
rejection of the stores and the claim made by the Union of India, the
same constituted the subject matter of the Award, which is impugned
herein.

The main ground taken by the objector is that the learned

arbitrator has misconducted himself by relying upon certain documents
and forming an opinion on the basis of those documents without
disclosing the same to the objector. He read the Award and particularly
the following portion:“........During the course of arguments, the claimants
U.O.I had shown me the original documents showing
the test results on the basis of which the stores supplied
by the respondents were condemned/ rejected under the
Warranty Clause. After that the respondents have filed
an application dated 22.03.1993. They have stated in
this application that the claimants destroyed the goods
in 1991 without disposal of their application dated
11.09.1987 before the Arbitrator. I have considered the
aforesaid documents in the light of the letter
27.11.1981 of the claimants to the respondents and find
that the defects (a), (b) and (c) in paragraph 1 of the
aforesaid letter are a reproduction of the defects which
were specified in the test results, a copy of which has
not been given to the respondents due to departmental

CS(OS) 2104/1993

Page No.5 of 12

restrictions but the same has been shown to me during
the course of arguments.
In the light of the above, it is proved that
6.533.557 Tonnes of the stores supplied by the
respondents had gone bad within the warranty period
and were tested for the same in terms of the
contract........ ”
After having read the aforesaid extract from the Award, Mr Khorana,
who appeared on behalf of the objector, submitted that it is apparent that
the original documents showing the test results on the basis of which the
stores supplied by the respondent were condemned / rejected under the
warranty clause, were shown to the learned arbitrator. It has also been
specifically recorded that the said test results had not been given to the
objector “due to departmental restrictions”, although the same had been
shown to the learned arbitrator in the course of the arguments.

He

submits that it is on the basis of the said documents that the learned
arbitrator has come to the conclusion, as noted in the extract above, that
the stores supplied by the objector had gone bad within the warranty
period and were tested for the same in terms of the contract. Mr Khorana
submitted that this course of conduct adopted by the learned arbitrator
clearly amounted to misconduct inasmuch as the arbitrator has decided
an issue against the objector based upon his personal knowledge which

CS(OS) 2104/1993

Page No.6 of 12

he has derived from the documents which have not been disclosed to the
objector. For this proposition, he has placed reliance on the following
decisions:1) Dewan Singh v. Champat Singh & Ors: AIR 1970 SC 967;
2) President of India v. Kesar Singh: AIR 1966 J & K 113;
3) Wazir Chand Karan Chand v. Union of India: AIR 1989 Delhi 175;
4) G. L. Textiles Co. v. Union of India: 2004 (3) R.A.J. 685 (Delhi)

5.

The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the Union of India

submitted that there was nothing wrong in the Award and that the learned
arbitrator had not misconducted himself in any manner. She submitted
that the goods supplied by the objector were not found to be in
accordance with the specifications as provided under the contract
between the parties. The said goods were tested as required under the
contract and were thereafter condemned and rejected under the warranty
clause.

She further submitted that the goods, after having been so

rejected, were offered to the objector to be returned to it by virtue of the
letter dated 27.11.1981 which finds mention in the Award.

She

submitted that there were subsequent letters written by the Union of
India to the objector to take back the defective / rejected goods but since

CS(OS) 2104/1993

Page No.7 of 12

the objector was not doing so, they were constrained to destroy the same.
The destruction of the goods was also done in terms of the warranty
clause. She submitted that non-production of the test results before the
objector would not vitiate the Award inasmuch as all that the learned
arbitrator has recorded is that the letter dated 27.11.1981 conforms to the
test results which have been shown to him. She, therefore, contended
that the objections be dismissed and the Award be made a rule of the
Court.

6.

I have examined the submissions made by the learned counsel

for the parties and I have also examined the decisions cited at the Bar. In
Dewan Singh (supra), the Supreme Court was clearly of the view that
unless there was an agreement between the parties empowering the
arbitrator or arbitrators to decide the disputes based on the personal
knowledge of the arbitrator or arbitrators, an Award based merely on the
personal knowledge of the arbitrator/ arbitrators, would be vitiated. The
Supreme Court observed:“The proceedings before the arbitrators are quasi-judicial
proceedings. They must be conducted in accordance
with the principles of natural justice. The parties to the
submission may be in the dark as regards the personal
knowledge of the arbitrators.
There may be
misconceptions or wrong assumptions in the mind of the
CS(OS) 2104/1993

Page No.8 of 12

arbitrators. If the parties are not given opportunity to
correct those misconceptions or wrong assumptions,
grave injustice may result.”
In President of India v. Kesar Singh (supra), the learned Single Judge
of the Jammu & Kashmir High Court was of the view that the arbitration
proceedings were improper because one party was not permitted to see
the evidence of the other party without there being any finding that the
said information was privileged.

7.

In Wazir Chand Karan Chand (supra), a learned Single

Judge of this Court had observed that although an arbitrator is not bound
by technical rules or procedure, he cannot ignore rules of natural justice.
It was observed:“Thread of natural justice should run through the entire
arbitration proceedings and the principles of natural
justice require that the person who is to be prejudiced by
the evidence ought to be present to hear it taken to
suggest cross-examination or himself to cross-examine
and to be able to find evidence, if he can, that shall meet
and answer it, in short to deal with in an ordinary course
of legal proceedings.”
In that case one party was heard in the absence of the other and the Court
observed that this was not permissible and under ordinary circumstances
would amount to misconduct on the part of the arbitrator. In G. L.
Textiles Company (supra) another Single Judge of this Court was faced
CS(OS) 2104/1993

Page No.9 of 12

with the submission of the objector that the learned arbitrator had derived
personal knowledge by seeing the purchase file after closure of the case
in a secret manner in the absence of the petitioner and without notice to
the petitioner and had, therefore, violated the principles of natural justice
and consequently the Award was liable to be set aside on this ground.
The learned Single Judge answered the question by holding that the
arbitrator ought not to have considered the said material at least without
a notice to the petitioner/ objector. Consequently, the Award in that case
was held to be liable to be set aside on the sole ground that the arbitrator
had looked into material which was not before it during the course of
arbitral proceedings and that too after conclusion of the proceedings.
Although this is not the exact fact situation in the present case, what is
material is the principle that the arbitrator cannot look into material
produced by one side and come to a conclusion against the other without
the latter having had an occasion to examine the said material.

8.

Considering the various decisions referred to above and the

facts of the present case, I find that the learned arbitrator has considered
the test results to form an opinion against the objector. I do not agree
with the learned counsel for the Union of India that the test results were

CS(OS) 2104/1993

Page No.10 of 12

only seen for the purposes of ascertaining whether the statements
contained in the letter dated 27.11.1981 were true and correct. A reading
of the entire portion of the Award extracted earlier in this order makes it
clear that the documents were considered in detail, which included the
test results. It can be easily inferred that the test results did play a
significant part in the arbitrator coming to the conclusion that it has been
proved that the stores supplied by the objector had gone bad within the
warranty period and that they were tested in terms of the contract. Mr
Khorana is right in contending that the test results ought to have been
disclosed to the objector. Had such a disclosure been made, then the
objector could have verified as to whether the sampling and testing of the
goods supplied had been done in terms of the contract particularly in
terms of Appendix 'A' to Specification No. 142 referred to above because
it is only then that it could be concluded that the testing was done in
terms of the contract. The learned arbitrator has seen the test results and
formed a personal opinion derived from the test results and other
ancillary documents without disclosing the same to the objector and
without affording it an opportunity to place its point of view before the
learned arbitrator.

CS(OS) 2104/1993

Page No.11 of 12

9.

In these circumstances, the inescapable conclusion is that the

learned arbitrator has committed legal misconduct and the Award is
liable to be set aside. However, the only extent to which the Award is set
aside is with regard to the finding that the stores had gone bad and that
they had been tested in terms of the contract. The portion of the Award,
which records that the goods had been destroyed in terms of the contract,
remains unaltered. To the aforesaid extent the Award is set aside and is
remanded to the sole arbitrator to be appointed in terms of the arbitration
clause between the parties. The limited scope of the remand is that the
test results would be disclosed to the objector and it would be entitled to
make its submissions with regard thereto and, if necessary, to lead further
evidence. The Union of India shall also have the opportunity of leading
additional evidence.
This suit stands disposed of.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
January 24, 2008
SR

CS(OS) 2104/1993

Page No.12 of 12

