THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 24.07.2007
WP (C) 11294/2004

SHRI DHARAM DEV

....Petitioner
-versus-

THE SECRETARY GOVT. OF INDIA & ANR.

...Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr A.K. Mishra
For the Respondents : Mr Suresh Kait,
CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

This is a petition seeking a direction to the respondents to grant

freedom fighters Pension to the petitioner under the Swatantrata Sainik
Samman Pension Scheme, 1980. The claim of the petitioner is that he had
gone underground for about nine months from 10.9.1942 to 13.9.1943. He
had moved an application under the said Scheme which was rejected. The
WP(C),112943/04,

Page No.1 of 6

ground for rejection was that the petitioner had not provided ample
evidence as required under the Scheme.
2.

As per the said Scheme when a person claims pension for

having gone underground on account of his participation in the freedom
struggle, he has to establish that he went underground for a period of more
than six months.

He has also to establish that he was a proclaimed

offender or one on whom an award for arrest was announced or one for
whose detention, an order was issued but not served. Under the Scheme,
in the first instance, documentary evidence by way of orders of a Court or
Government's orders proclaiming the applicant as an absconder,
announcing an award on his head or for his arrest or ordering his detention
is required to be produced. The Scheme further provides that in case
records of the relevant period are not available, secondary evidence in the
form of a Personal Knowledge Certificate (PKC) from a prominent
freedom fighter, who has proven jail suffering of a minimum two years and
who happened to be from the same administrative unit could be
considered. Of course, the proviso is that the State Government/Union
Territory concerned, after due verification of the claim and its genuineness,
certifies that documentary evidence in the form of official records in
support of the claimed sufferings were not available.

WP(C),112943/04,

Page No.2 of 6

3.

According to the respondent, the State Government/Union

Territory has not certified that the documentary evidence is not available.
It has also been pointed out by the learned counsel for the respondent that
the Delhi Government has also rejected the claim of the petitioner for the
grant of pension under the Delhi Union Territory Freedom Fighter Pension
Scheme. However, that was not granted because it was observed that
“underground sufferings” were not covered under the Scheme. Under the
Swatantra Sainik Samman Pension Scheme, 1980, the category of freedom
fighters having gone underground is specifically covered and, therefore,
the non-grant of the pension under the Delhi Scheme would not come in
the way of the petitioner's eligibility to pension under the Central Scheme.
4.

The learned counsel for the petitioner pointed out that the

petitioner had also filed a copy of a letter dated 3.3.1938 written by the
Superintendent of Police, CID, Delhi to the General Manager of Delhi
Cloth Mills, Bara Hindu Rao Delhi (where the petitioner was then
working) wherein, it was clearly pointed out that the petitioner was being
investigated as having association with some terrorist groups which were
directly linked with the Indian National Congress (INC). It was also noted
in the said letter that the petitioner's activities were being closely watched
and that he was involved in anti-regime activities by propagating the
workers of the mill, which was undesirable. The learned counsel has
WP(C),112943/04,

Page No.3 of 6

drawn my attention to a document at Annexure “C” which is a letter
written by the petitioner's son to the SHO, P.S. Karol Bagh with respect to
the old record pertaining to his father. On the said letter there is an
endorsement from the Police Station that no such record was available
after 55 years.
5.

Since no records were available or forthcoming the petitioner

submitted two Personal Knowledge Certificates from prominent freedom
fighters who had proven jail suffering of a minimum of two years. The
first certificate was of Mr Lajja Ram Chaudhary, who had suffered actual
imprisonment for more than five years during the freedom struggle. He
certified that the petitioner remained underground for more than six
months as he was one for whose detention orders were issued but had
evaded arrest.

This certificate was issued on 31.7.1998.

Another

certificate was issued by Mr Data Ram, who was also a freedom fighter
who had undergone actual imprisonment for more than five years. This
certificate is also to the same effect and it was issued in Delhi on
16.9.1998.
6.

Having considered the facts and circumstances of the case, I

observe that there are two acknowledged freedom fighters, who had both
undergone actual imprisonment for more than five years, who had certified
that the petitioner had gone underground during and in connection with the
WP(C),112943/04,

Page No.4 of 6

freedom struggle. This should be accepted by the respondent, particularly
when the original documents and the official records are not available and
are not forthcoming.

The rejection by the Delhi Government of the

petitioner's application under the Delhi Scheme would not come in the way
of grant of pension in the present Scheme because that rejection was based
upon the fact that there was no category for grant of pension for people
who had gone underground. Under the present Scheme, there is a specific
provision made for this and the petitioner has complied with all the
requirements except fulfilling the technicality of getting the certificate
from the State Government that documentary evidence and official records
are not available. The petitioner is already over 95 years of age and it
would not be fair on the part of this Court to further delay the proceedings
in this regard and insist upon the technicality of the production of the
certificate when the official records are not available. This is particularly
so because the petitioner has been able to demonstrate that he did take part
in the freedom struggle and that two freedom fighters have certified the
fact that the petitioner had gone underground for more than six months for
and in the course of the struggle for independence.
7.

Accordingly, I dispose of this writ petition by directing the

respondent to grant pension to the petitioner under the Scheme.

WP(C),112943/04,

Page No.5 of 6

8.

This writ petition is, accordingly, allowed with costs of Rs

10,000/-. The direction be implemented forthwith, not later than three
weeks from today.
Dasti.
BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
July 24, 2007
J

WP(C),112943/04,

Page No.6 of 6

