THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Judgment delivered on :24.07.2007
WP(C) No.17115-16/2004
BHAGEERATHA ENGINEERING LIMITED

...Petitioner

- versus THE NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA

...Respondent

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr Pratap Venugopal with Ms Surekha Raman.
For the Respondent
: Mr Sandeep Sethi, Sr Advocate with Mr K.K. Sharma
and Mr T.S. Sidhu.

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

The petition is directed against the order dated 05.07.2004 whereby

the petitioner has been informed that the petitioner would be considered as a
non-performing contractor until his performance

shows improvement and

meets the performance bench mark during subsequent periodic review of
ongoing contract packages of NHAI (National Highways Authority of India).
This order is impugned primarily on two grounds. The first ground being that
the petitioner has been virtually blacklisted for future contracts of the NHAI
based on the allegations of non-performance. The very same allegations are the

WP(C)17115-16/2004

Page No.1 of 7

subject matter of arbitrations which are pending between the parties. It is the
petitioner's case that until the award is made in the arbitration proceedings, it
cannot be determined as to who was in default. Whether it was the petitioner or
it was the respondent (NHAI)? The second ground urged on behalf of the
petitioner was that the impugned order dated 05.07.2004 does not contain any
reasons and that by itself makes it bad. The learned counsel for the petitioner
placed reliance on a decision of this court in the case of SPS Engineering Ltd v
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd : 2004(2) CTLJ 57 (Delhi). This was confirmed
in appeal by a Division Bench in Indian Oil Corporation v SPS Engineering
Ltd : 2006 IV AD (Delhi) 115

3.

I have heard the counsel for the parties and I find that the decisions

cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner entirely cover the issues at hand.
The first issue with regard to the virtual blacklisting of the petitioner while an
arbitration is pending, was dealt with in SPS Engineering (supra) in the
following terms:
“9.
The other aspect that is of material importance is
that the entire basis for placing the petitioner in the “Holiday
List” is founded upon the allegations qua the performance or
non-performance with regard to the contracts which were
awarded to the petitioner. Therefore, it is not proper or correct
on the part of IOCL even to suggest that placement in the
“Holiday List” is entirely a non-contractual matter unrelated
with the contracts awarded to the petitioner. I fail to see how
the very allegations, on the basis of which the petitioner has
been placed on the “Holiday List”, will not figure in the
deliberations before the arbitrator, who would be considering
WP(C)17115-16/2004

Page No.2 of 7

the disputes between the parties in their entirety as directed by
a learned Single Judge of this Court in his order dated
17.03.2003. Furthermore, the Committee that was constituted
comprised entirely of officers of IOCL.
In these
circumstances, it would have been proper and appropriate for
IOCL to have held its hands and waited for an adjudication by
the arbitrator on the entire question of commission of breaches,
etc., including the termination of the contracts.
The
determination by the arbitrator would have settled all these
issues. As pointed out above, if the arbitrator held against the
petitioner, and found it to be in default, then IOCL would be
entitled to place the petitioner in the “Holiday List”. In such
an eventuality, IOCL could not be faulted. I am in agreement
with the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner
that the subject matter of arbitration and the question of
placement in the Holiday List are intertwined and cannot be
put into separate compartments. The records of the case itself
reveal that the placement of the petitioner in the holiday List is
not on account of reasons outside the contractual obligations of
the parties.”
4.

This facet was confirmed by the Division Bench in Indian Oil

Corporation (supra) as under :
“16.
The learned Single Judge in the impugned
judgment held that when the entire matter was pending before
the Arbitrator there was no need to have proceeded with the
issue of placing the petitioner on the holiday list with the
undue haste. We agree with this reasoning. When the matter
was subject matter of arbitration, the respondent should have
awaited the decision of the Arbitrator before taking such a
decision in a hurry.”
5.

As regards the second issue of hearing and the necessity of reasons

being given, in SPS Engineering (supra), this court observed as under:“7.

Therefore, while it may be argued that a
personal hearing is not at all necessary and that if the
petitioner has been given an opportunity to reply to the
allegations against it, the principle of the audi alteram
WP(C)17115-16/2004

Page No.3 of 7

partem has been fairly complied with, still, one must
examine the question of opportunity of hearing in the
perspective of the facts of each case.
In
Shrikrishnadas Tikara v. State Govt. of M.P.: (1977)
2 SCC 741 (at page 745), the Supreme Court observed:“It is well-established that the principles of
natural justice cannot be petrified or fitted into
rigid moulds. They are flexible and turn on the
facts and circumstances of each case. Has there
been any unfair deal by the authority? Has the
party affected been hit below the belt? Has he
had a just opportunity to state his plea?..”
Therefore, the issue really is as to whether the
denial of opportunity of personal hearing entails that
the petitioner has been dealt with unfairly. Here, it is
seen that the very allegations which were being made
the subject matter of the show cause notices have
merely been rephrased to read as conclusions of the
said Committee. I have examined the report of the
Committee dated 09.04.2003 and it does strike me as if
the Committee merely converted the allegations into
conclusions and made no serious attempt at discussing
or analysing the replies given by the petitioner
(SPSEL). The report does not reveal tangible reasons
from which it could be discerned that there was a
proper application of mind on the replies given by the
petitioner. “Reasons are the link between the order
and the mind of its maker”[see: M. J. Sivani v. State of
Karnataka: (1995) 6 SCC 289 (para 32)]. And, this link
is missing. Perhaps, if the petitioner had been given a
personal hearing, there might have been a proper
discussion of the replies given by the petitioner.
Perhaps the petitioner's replies may have been accepted
and perhaps, not. All that is in the realm of what might
have happened. What has, in fact happened is that the
petitioner was not personally heard and its written
replies have not been adequately dealt with. It does
appear to me that the petitioner has been dealt with
“8.

WP(C)17115-16/2004

Page No.4 of 7

unfairly. It must be made clear that I am not examining
the question on merits but only whether principles of
natural justice have been complied with. I dare say,
they have not. It is an altogether different issue that
even if the opportunity of personal hearing had been
given, the respondents might have come to the same
conclusion.”
6.

The Division Bench has confirmed these views as would be

apparent from the following observations contained therein :“20. All that has been said in the order dated 10.4.2003 is that
after considering the allegations in the show-cause
notice and the petitioner's reply it has been decided to
place the petitioner on holiday list and debar him from
contracts with the appellant for three years.”
xxxx

xxxx

xxxx

xxxx

xxxx

“21. It is well settled that natural justice requires reasons to
be given vide S.N. Mukherjee Vs Union of India, AIR
1990 SC 1984; Union of India Vs M.L. Capoor and
ors. AIR 1974 SC 87 and; Veekay Connectors (P) Ltd
Vs National Small Industries Corpn. Ltd; AIR 2005
All 57.”
xxxx

xxxx

xxxx

xxxx

xxxx

“24. However, in view of the fact that the order impugned in
the writ petition does not disclose any reason in our
opinion it is bad in law.”
xxxx

xxxx

xxxx

xxxx

xxxx

“32. It is well settled that the impugned order cannot be
supplemented by additional material either in the form
of an affidavit or otherwise vide Mohinder Singh v
Chief Election Commissioner, AIR 1978 SC 851; State
Govt. Houseless Harijan Employees Association v.
State of Karnataka, (2001) 1 SCC 610 (Para 49): (AIR
2001 SC 437, Para 48); Pavanendra Naraian Verma v.
SGPGI of Medical Science, (2002) 1 SCC 520 : (AIR
WP(C)17115-16/2004

Page No.5 of 7

2002 SC 23) (Para 34): Union of India v. GTC
Industries (2003) 5 SCC 106 (Para 13): (AIR 2003 SC
1383), etc. In our opinion, reasons must be contained in
the order under challenge, and mere existence of
reasons in the show-cause notice, or any material
referred to in the show-cause notice, is not sufficient. In
our opinion, the authority concerned must, at least in
brief, deal in the impugned order with the explanation
given in the reply to the show-cause notice. This in our
opinion is even more necessary where a personal
hearing is not being given. The authority concerned
must discuss the explanation given in the reply, and
give its reasons for holding that the explanation is not
satisfactory. In the present case all that has not been
done.”
7.

Insofar as the first issue is concerned, that is, the pendency of the

arbitration proceedings, Mr Sethi, the learned senior counsel appearing on
behalf of the NHAI, submitted that the entire controversy does not form the
subject matter of the arbitration proceedings. However, the learned counsel for
the petitioner submits that the contract referred to in the show cause notice is
entirely the subject matter of the arbitration proceedings. Be that as it may, on
the second issue of no reasons having been given in the impugned order, the
same is liable to be set aside in view of the discussion above.

8.

Accordingly, the impugned order dated 05.07.2004 is set aside. It

shall be open to the petitioner to file an additional reply to the show cause
notice which is already on record. The said reply be filed within two weeks.
The respondent shall pass a speaking order giving reasons after due

WP(C)17115-16/2004

Page No.6 of 7

consideration of the reply submitted by the petitioner. The petitioner shall be at
liberty to take recourse to any remedy that may be available to him in case the
order is against him. No costs.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
July 24, 2007
M

WP(C)17115-16/2004

Page No.7 of 7

