THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Judgment delivered on : 24.10.2007
IA 8979/2006 in CS(OS) 1643/2005
M/S MOUNTAIN MIST AGRO INDIA
(PVT) LTD & ANR.

.......Plaintiffs

- versus MR S. SUBRAMANIYAM

........Defendant

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Plaintiffs
For the Defendant

: Mr Sudhir K. Makkar
: Mr C. A. Sundaram, Sr. Advocate with Mr Sandeep
Mahapatra with Ms Rohini

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

YES

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

YES

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

YES

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J
1.
This is an application for leave to defend. The suit has been
filed by the plaintiffs under Order 37 of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 (hereinafter referred to as the 'CPC') for recovery of a sum of Rs
1,25,55,000/- along with pendente lite and future interest. The suit is
founded upon a cheque bearing No. 262653 dated 11.09.2002 issued by
the defendant in favour of the plaintiff No.1 for a sum of Rs 93 lacs. The

CS(OS) 1643/2005

Page No.1 of 26

cheque was drawn on Oriental Bank of Commerce, Ootacamund, Tamil
Nadu. The said cheque has been dishonoured with the remarks of the
drawee bank— “payment stopped by drawer”.

2.

The first issue raised by the defendant in this leave to defend

application is that this Court does not have territorial jurisdiction to
entertain the suit. In paragraph 18 of the plaint, it is stated that the cause
of action in the present suit partly arose at New Delhi as the cheque
issued by the defendant was presented for clearance by plaintiff No.1
through its bankers at New Delhi and the same was returned dishonoured
at New Delhi.

It was also stated that the plaintiff No.1 has its

administrative office at New Delhi and accordingly, maintains a bank
account at New Delhi through which the said cheque was presented for
clearance. On the basis of these statements, it is submitted, on behalf of
the plaintiffs, that this Court has jurisdiction to try and entertain the
present suit.

On the other hand, it is contended on behalf of the

defendant that the plaintiff as well as the defendant reside at
Ootacamund. The contract between the parties, that is, between the
plaintiff No.1 and the defendant was signed at

Ootacamund.

The

contract relates to properties at Ootacamund. The cheque in question

CS(OS) 1643/2005

Page No.2 of 26

was drawn on Oriental Bank of Commerce, Ootacamund and the cheque
had been handed over by the defendant to the plaintiffs at Ootacamund.
Therefore, the entire cause of action has arisen at Ootacamund and
nothing has happened in Delhi. It was also pointed out by the learned
counsel for the defendant that the plaintiff No.1 is a private limited
company having its registered office at Coonoor, Nilgiris (not in New
Delhi). The plaintiff No.2, who is one of the Directors of the plaintiff
company, also resides at Ootacamund and his address has mischievously
been given as New Delhi. It was contended that an examination of the
cause title and the memo of parties would indicate that the plaintiff
No.2's address of New Delhi is a “care of address”. In point of fact, in
the course of arguments, it was revealed that the Delhi's address of the
plaintiff No.2 is that of the plaintiff No.2's father. In any event, for the
purposes of question of territorial jurisdiction, the place of residence of
the plaintiffs is irrelevant. Question that arises for consideration in the
present case is:Whether presentation of a cheque ipso facto confers
jurisdiction on the courts at the place where such
presentment for collection is done?

CS(OS) 1643/2005

Page No.3 of 26

3.

The admitted facts are that the cheque in question was handed

over by the defendant to the plaintiffs at Ootacamund. The cheque was
accepted unconditionally by the plaintiffs at Ootacamund. The cheque
was drawn on the defendant's bank— Oriental Bank of Commerce — at
Ootacamund, Tamil Nadu. The plaintiffs carried the cheque to Delhi and
deposited the same in the plaintiff no.1's bank— ICICI Bank, Green Park
Branch, H-2, Green Park Extension, New Delhi— for collection. The
ICICI Bank did not have a branch at Ootacamund and, therefore,
requested the Indian Bank at Chennai to arrange for the collection. The
Indian Bank, in turn, forwarded the cheque to the Oriental Bank of
Commerce, Ootacamund for payment. However, the Oriental Bank of
Commerce returned the cheque to the said Indian Bank unpaid for the
reason— “payment stopped by the drawer”. The Indian Bank forwarded
the returned cheque to ICICI Bank, New Delhi, having been unable to
obtain payment for the reason indicated above. ICICI Bank, Green Park
Branch, New Delhi then notified the plaintiff No.1 that its outstation
cheque No. 262653 for Rs 93,00,000/- had been dishonoured by Oriental
Bank of Commerce and that the cheque had been returned for the reason
“payment stopped by the drawer”.

CS(OS) 1643/2005

Page No.4 of 26

4.

The plaintiffs submit that the fact that the cheque was

deposited in its bank (ICICI Bank) in New Delhi and that the said bank
ultimately informed the plaintiff of the dishonour of the cheque, meant
that a part of the cause of action arose in New Delhi and, therefore, this
Court would have territorial jurisdiction over the subject matter of the
present suit.

5.

The learned counsel for the plaintiffs placed reliance on the

following decisions:(i)

I. T. Commr. v. M/s. Ogale glass Works Ltd :AIR
1954 SC 429;

(ii)

Gouri Shankar v. Ram Banka :AIR 1963 Patna
398;

(iii)

K. Bhaskaran v. Sankaran Vaidhyan Balan &
Anr: JT 1999 (7) SC 558;

(iv)

M. Vittal Rao v. M. H. Ranganath: 2000 AIHC
1973 ( Karnataka High Court);

(v)

A. B. C. Laminart Pvt. Ltd. v. A. P. Agencies
Salem: 1989 (2) SCC 341; and

(vi)

Navinchandra

N.

Majithia

v.

State

of

Maharashtra: AIR 2000 SC 2966.

CS(OS) 1643/2005

Page No.5 of 26

6.

On the other hand, the learned counsel for the defendant

placed reliance on:(i)

Shri Ishar Alloy Steels Ltd. v. Jayaswals Neco
Ltd:(2001) 3 SCC 609;

(ii)

Escorts Limited v. G. K. Automobile: 127(2006)
DLT 559; and

(iii) Gujrat Insecticides Ltd. v. Jainsons Minerals:
140 (2007) DLT 465.
7.

In Ogale Glass Works (supra), a decision on which the

learned counsel for the plaintiffs had placed great reliance, the question
of liability to income tax in respect of payments made through cheques
arose for consideration. The assessee (Ogale Glass Works Ltd.) was
incorporated and carried on business in the erstwhile princely State of
Aundh, which was outside British India. The Income Tax Act, 1922
operated throughout British India but not in princely India.

The

question arose as to where the income was received by Ogale Glass
Works Ltd. The said company was supplying goods manufactured by it
to the Government of India. Under contractual terms between the said
company and the Government of India, payments for the delivery of
goods were to be made on submission of bills by cheques on a branch of
the Reserve Bank of India or Imperial Bank of India transacting

CS(OS) 1643/2005

Page No.6 of 26

government business.

It is of significance to note that the assessee

(Ogale Glass Works Ltd.) submitted bills in the prescribed form and on
the form itself it used to instruct the Government of India to “Kindly
remit the amount by a cheque in our favour on any bank in Bombay”.
All payments for the goods supplied were made by cheques drawn by the
government department at Delhi on the Reserve Bank of India, Bombay
branch. The cheques were received by such company at its office in
Aundh State by post and were honoured in due course by the Reserve
Bank at Bombay. The question arose as to where the payment was
received. Was it received at Delhi, where the cheques were issued and
posted? Was it received at Aundh where the cheques were received by
the company? Or was it received at Bombay, where the cheques were
made payable and honoured in due course? In this context, the Supreme
Court observed that when it is said that the payment by a negotiable
instrument is a conditional payment, what is meant is that such payment
is subject to a condition subsequent that if the negotiable instrument is
dishonoured on presentation the creditor may consider it as waste paper
and resort to his original demand. The Supreme Court quoted with
approval, Benjamin on Sale, 8th Edition, page 788 to the following
effect:-

CS(OS) 1643/2005

Page No.7 of 26

"The payment takes effect from the delivery of the bill, but is
defeated by the happening of the condition, i.e., non-payment
at maturity."
The Supreme Court also observed that in Byles on Bills, 20th Edition,
page 23, the position is summarised pithily as under:"A cheque, unless dishonoured, is payment."
In the said decision, since none of the cheques in question had been
dishonoured, it was construed by the Court that the payment took effect
at the time of delivery. The Supreme Court ultimately held that the
posting of the cheques at Delhi, in law, amounted to payment in Delhi
and, therefore, the income, profits and gains in respect of the sales made
to the Government of India was received in Delhi, which was part of
British India and was, therefore, taxable. The Supreme Court did not
examine the question of dishonour of cheques. There is nothing in this
decision of the Supreme Court which in any way advances the case of
the plaintiffs. The said decision pertains to a situation where the cheques
had been honoured and it was concluded that in such cases, the question
of payment by cheques sent by post would depend upon the agreement
between the parties and the course of conduct of the parties. In Ogale
Glass Works (supra), the Supreme Court observed that:“There can be no doubt that as between the sender
and the addressee it is the request of the addressee

CS(OS) 1643/2005

Page No.8 of 26

that the cheque be sent by post that makes the postoffice the agent of the addressee”.
So, as Ogale Glass Works Ltd. had expressly requested the Government
of India to remit the amounts of the bills by cheque, the Supreme Court
observed that this clearly amounted, in effect, to an express request by
the said company to send the cheques by post and, therefore, the posting
of the cheques in Delhi, in law, amounted to payment in Delhi. The
situation in the present case is different and much the worse for the
plaintiffs.

Here the cheque was not required to be posted but was

accepted by the plaintiffs from the defendant at Ootacamund without the
agency of the postal department. And, the cheque was accepted by the
plaintiffs unconditionally.

8.

The next decision relied upon by the learned counsel for the

plaintiffs was that of a learned Single Judge of the Patna High court in
the case of Gouri Shankar (supra) wherein it was observed:“Thus, the cause of action in respect of payment by
cheque would arise partly at the place where the cheque
is issued or delivered and partly at the place where the
cheque is honoured or dishonoured by the bank.”
Relying on the above observation, the learned counsel for the plaintiffs
submitted that since the cheque was issued and delivered at
Ootacamund, part of the cause of action would definitely arise at

CS(OS) 1643/2005

Page No.9 of 26

Ootacamund.

However, since the cheque was dishonoured in New

Delhi, part of the cause of action also arose in New Delhi.
Unfortunately, I am unable to subscribe to this view. In any event, the
said decision in Gouri Shankar (supra) does not lead to such a
conclusion. This would be clear if the facts involved in Gouri Shankar
(supra) were to be noted. In that case all the cheques were drawn at
Giridih (Bihar) by the respondent on a Bombay Bank and they were
cashed by the appellant through the Giridih branch of United
Commercial Bank who got the cheques cashed from the Bombay Bank.
A suit had been filed in respect of the cheques at the Bombay Civil
Court. One of the issues which arose before the Patna High court was
whether the Court at Bombay had any jurisdiction in the matter and as to
whether the decree passed by the Bombay Court was without
jurisdiction. It was observed that insofar as the cash payments were
concerned, the cause of action wholly arose at Giridih. But, the three
cheques which were in question, though issued at Giridih, were drawn on
a Bombay Bank. After placing reliance on the Supreme Court decision
in the case of Ogale Glass Works (supra), the learned Judge observed
that a payment by a negotiable instrument is a conditional payment in the
sense that such payment is subject to a condition subsequent that if the

CS(OS) 1643/2005

Page No.10 of 26

negotiable instrument is dishonoured on presentation the creditor may
consider it as waste paper and resort to his original demand.

The

payment takes effect from the delivery of the instrument, but it is
defeated by happening of the condition, that is, non-payment on
maturity. It was further observed that a cheque, unless dishonoured, is
payment, subject to the condition that it should be duly honoured at the
proper date, in other words, the cheque should operate as payment unless
defeated by dishonour. The Court ultimately observed that:“In the instance case, therefore, the cause of action arose
partly at Giridih where the cheques were delivered and
partly at Bombay where the cheques were honoured by
the Bank ; and it must be held that the Bombay Court
had jurisdiction to entertain the suit.”
Although the above observation, on a first look, appears to support the
contentions of the plaintiffs in the present case, that is not the position.
The Patna High Court had observed that the cause of action would arise
partly where the cheque is issued and partly where it is honoured or
dishonoured. The question that would arise is where is a cheque said to
be honoured or dishonoured? Does it refer to the place of the drawee
bank or does it refer to the place of the collecting bank? As noted above,
all the cheques, in Gouri Shankar (supra), were drawn at Giridih on a
Bombay Bank. They were deposited for collection at the Giridih branch
of United Commercial Bank which, in turn, got the cheques encashed
CS(OS) 1643/2005

Page No.11 of 26

from the Bombay Bank. In this background, the Patna High Court only
considered the question of as to where the cheques were honoured. It
found that the cheques were honoured at Bombay and, therefore, the
Court at Bombay also had jurisdiction. The Patna High court was not
required to consider the question as to whether the location of the
collecting bank at Giridih would also confer jurisdiction on the courts at
Giridih merely because the cheques were deposited at such bank at
Giridih. This decision, therefore, also, does not advance the case of the
plaintiffs.

9.

The learned counsel for the plaintiffs placed strong reliance

on the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of K. Bhaskaran
(supra). The following paragraphs were referred to with particular
emphasis:“14.
The offence under Section 138 of the Act
can be completed only with the concatenation of a
number of acts. Following are the acts which are
components of the said offence : (1) Drawing of the
cheque, (2) Presentation of the cheque to the bank,
(3) Returning the cheque unpaid by the drawee
bank, (4) Giving notice in writing to the drawer of
the cheque demanding payment of the cheque
amount, (5) failure of the drawer to make payment
within 15 days of the receipt of the notice.

CS(OS) 1643/2005

Page No.12 of 26

15.
It is not necessary that all the above five
acts should have been perpetrated at the same
locality. It is possible that each of those five acts
could be done at 5 different localities. But
concatenation of all the above five is a sine qua non
for the completion of the offence under Section 138
of the Code. In this context a reference to Section
178(d) of the Code is useful. It is extracted below:
“Where the offence consists of several acts
done in different local areas, it may be
inquired into or tried by a Court having
jurisdiction over any of such local areas.”
16. Thus it is clear, if the five different acts were
done in five different localities any one of the courts
exercising jurisdiction in one of the five local areas
can become the place of trial for the offence under
Section 138 of the Act. In other words, the
complainant can choose any one of those courts
having jurisdiction over any one of the local areas
within the territorial limits of which any one of
those five acts was done. As the amplitude stands so
widened and so expansive it is an idle exercise to
raise jurisdictional question regarding the offence
under Section 138 of the Act.”

However, the learned counsel for the defendant submitted straightaway,
and in my opinion, rightly so, that the decision would be limited to the
question of dishonour of cheques under Section 138 of the Negotiable
Instruments Act, 1881 read with the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
The entire emphasis of cause of action in a civil suit is different from the
question of jurisdiction of a criminal court in respect of an offence. The
Supreme Court in K. Bhaskaran (supra) considered the offence under
CS(OS) 1643/2005

Page No.13 of 26

Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 and regarded it to
be a concatenation of a number of acts such as drawing of the cheque,
presentation of the cheque to the bank, returning the cheque unpaid by
the drawee bank, giving notice in writing to the drawer of the cheque
demanding payment of the cheque amount and failure of the drawer to
make payment within 15 days of the receipt of the notice. Referring to
these five components of the offence under Section 138 and to the
provisions of Section 178 (d) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
which by itself provides that where the offence consists of several acts
done in different local areas, it may be inquired into or tried by a Court
having jurisdiction over any of such local areas, the Supreme Court
concluded that the five different acts if done in five different localities
would clothe any of the courts exercising jurisdiction in any one of the
five local areas with jurisdiction to try the offence under Section 138 of
the Act. It is apparent that these observations relate to and are limited to
the offence of dishonour of a cheque under Section 138 of the Negotiable
Instruments Act, 1881. It does not have any bearing on what constitutes
a cause of action in respect of a dishonoured cheque in a summary suit,
which has to be considered under the provisions of the CPC read with
the law of contracts and civil actions in respect of negotiable

CS(OS) 1643/2005

Page No.14 of 26

instruments.

10.

The learned counsel for the plaintiffs placed particular stress

on the fact that presentation of the cheque to “the bank” was a vital
component of the offence under Section 138. He contended that in the
present case the cheque was presented to ICICI Bank at New Delhi and,
therefore, the plaintiff could choose and, indeed, file the suit in the Court
at Delhi in view of the fact that presentation of the cheque to the bank
constituted a component of the offence under Section 138. There are two
answers to this submission. The first has already been indicated above
and, that is, that the case before me is not one of an offence under
Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 but is a civil action
brought to this Court by way of a summary suit. The other answer is one
which was relied upon by the learned counsel for the defendant by
referring to the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Shri Ishar
Alloy Steels Ltd (supra). In that case one of the main issues was what is
meant by “the bank” as mentioned in Clause (a) of the proviso to Section
138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881. Did such bank mean the
bank of the drawer of the cheque or did it cover within its ambit any
bank including the collecting bank of the payee of the cheque. To which

CS(OS) 1643/2005

Page No.15 of 26

bank is the cheque to be presented for the purposes of attracting the
penal provisions of Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act,
1881? In

Shri Ishar Alloy Steels Ltd (supra), the Supreme Court held

that “the bank” referred to in Clause (a) of the proviso to said Section
138 had reference to the drawee bank on which the cheque is drawn and
not all banks where the cheque is presented for collection including the
bank of the payee in whose favour the cheque is issued.

The learned

counsel for the plaintiffs had raised an objection with regard to placing
reliance on the Supreme Court decision in the case of Shri Ishar Alloy
Steels Ltd (supra) on the ground that it only related to the question of
limitation. While it is true that the issue was with regard to presentment
of the cheque within the stipulated period of six months, the specific
questions, as noted above, were raised before the Supreme Court and
were specifically answered by it in the following manner:“9. The use of the words "a bank" and "the bank" in the
Section is indicator of the intention of the Legislature.
The former is indirect article and the latter is pre-fixed
by direct article. If the Legislature intended to have the
same meanings for "a bank" and "the bank", there was
no cause or occasion for mentioning it distinctly and
differently by using two different articles. It is worth
noticing that the word "banker" in Section 3 of the Act
is pre-fixed by the indefinite article "a" and the word
"bank" where the cheque is intended to be presented
under Section 138 is pre-fixed by the definite article
"the". The same Section permits a person to issue a
CS(OS) 1643/2005

Page No.16 of 26

cheque on an account maintained by him with "a bank"
and makes him liable for criminal prosecution if it is
returned by "the bank" unpaid. The payment of the
cheque is contemplated by "the bank" meaning thereby
where the person issuing the cheque has an account.
"The" is the word used before nouns, with a specifying
of particularising effect opposed to the indefinite or
generalising force of "a" or "an". It determines what
particular thing is meant; that is, what particular thing
we are to assume to be meant. "The" is always
mentioned to denote particular thing or a person. "The"
would, therefore, refer implicitly to a specified bank
and not any bank. "The bank" referred to in clause (a)
to the proviso to Section 138 of the Act would mean
the drawee-bank on which the cheque is drawn and not
all banks where the cheque is presented for collection
including the bank of the payee, in whose favour the
cheque is issued.
10. It, however, does not mean that the cheque is
always to be presented to the drawer's bank on which
the cheque is issued. The payee of the cheque has the
option to present the cheque in any bank including the
collecting bank where he has his account but to attract
the criminal liability of the drawer of the cheque such
collecting bank is obliged to present the cheque in the
drawee or payee bank on which the cheque is drawn
within the period of six months from the date on which
it is shown to have been issued. In other words a
cheque issued by (A) in favour of (B) drawn in a bank
named (C) where the drawer has an account can be
presented by the payee to the bank upon which it is
drawn i.e. (C) bank within a period of six months or
present it to any other bank for collection of the cheque
amount provided such other bank including the
collecting bank presents the cheque for collection to
the (C) bank. The non presentation of the cheque to the
drawee-bank within the period specified in the Section
would absolve the person issuing the cheque of his
criminal liability under Section 138 of the Act, who
CS(OS) 1643/2005

Page No.17 of 26

shall otherwise may be liable to pay the cheque amount
to the payee in a civil action initiated under the law. A
combined reading of Sections 2, 72 and 138 of the Act
would leave no doubt in our mind that the law
mandates the cheque to be presented at the bank on
which it is drawn if the drawer is to be held criminally
liable. Such presentation is necessarily to be made
within six months at the bank on which the cheque is
drawn, whether presented personally or through
another bank, namely, the collecting bank of the
payee.”
Consequently, even if the plaintiffs submission based upon K.
Bhaskaran (supra) that presentment of the cheque to “the bank”
constituted a vital component, was to be accepted for the purpose of the
present civil action, it is clear that the expression “the bank” has
reference only to the drawee bank. The drawee bank in the present case
is the Oriental Bank of Commerce at Ootacamund, Tamil Nadu.
Therefore, presentation of the cheque to the Oriental Bank of Commerce,
Ootacamund, Tamil Nadu constitutes the component which the plaintiffs
is referring to.

Consequently, this Court would not have territorial

jurisdiction in respect of such presentation of the cheque even if it is
assumed that the decision in K. Bhaskaran (supra) was to apply to civil
actions.

CS(OS) 1643/2005

Page No.18 of 26

11.

Reliance was also placed by the learned counsel for the

plaintiffs on the Karnataka High Court decision in the case of M. Vittal
Rao (supra). That was a case which involved a promissory note. The
said promissory note was executed in Davangere city where the
defendants were also residing. However, a demand notice was got issued
to the defendants from Bangalore through the plaintiff’s advocate. The
plaintiff contended that since the demand notice was issued to the
defendant from Bangalore, part of the cause of action had also arisen at
Bangalore and was not limited to Davangere city where the promissory
note was executed. On behalf of the defendant it was contended that the
Court at Bangalore had no jurisdiction to entertain and try the suit
inasmuch as the promissory note has been executed at Davangere city
and the defendants also resided there. The Karnataka High court, in M.
Vittal Rao (supra) concluded that since the original demand notice was
issued to the defendant from Bangalore by the plaintiff through his
advocate, part of the cause of action also arose at Bangalore.

The

learned counsel for the plaintiffs placed reliance on this conclusion of the
Karnataka High Court to submit that since the cheque was deposited with
ICICI Bank at Delhi for collection, it amounted to a demand for payment
under the cheque and, therefore, part of the cause of action also arose in

CS(OS) 1643/2005

Page No.19 of 26

New Delhi. I am unable to agree with this submission of the learned
counsel for the plaintiffs. Such a conclusion, as is sought to be arrived at
by him, cannot be discerned from the decision in M. Vittal Rao (supra).
The facts of that case clearly indicate that the promissory note
incorporated a specific clause with a stipulation that the demand for
repayment of debt under the said note could be made by the plaintiff at
any time and at any place and that the defendants were agreeable to meet
the demand at whichever place it was made by the plaintiff. It is in the
background of this specific stipulation that the Karnataka High Court
concluded as under:“11.
Therefore, in the case on hand also the
demand for payment having been made by the plaintiff
in Bangalore through Ex. P 3 demand notice in exercise
of the right reserved for him under Ex. P1 pro-note the
cause of action for the suit based thereon had arisen in
part in Bangalore and within the jurisdiction of the
Court below in the light of sub-section (c) of Section 20
of the CPC”
But, the factual position in the present case is entirely different. First of
all, this is a case of a cheque and not a promissory note. Secondly, there
is no such stipulation and thirdly, the cheque is, in any event, honoured
or dishonoured only upon presentment at the drawee bank.

CS(OS) 1643/2005

Page No.20 of 26

12.

The learned counsel for the plaintiffs had also referred to the

Supreme Court decision in the case of A. B. C. Laminart Pvt. Ltd.
(supra) to point out as to what constitutes cause of action. He also
referred to paragraph 12, which reads as under:“12. A cause of action means every fact, which, if
traversed, it would be necessary for the plaintiff to
prove in order to support his right to a judgment of the
Court. In other words, it is a bundle of facts which
taken with the law applicable to them gives the plaintiff
a right to relief against the defendant. It must include
some act done by the defendant since in the absence of
such an act no cause of action can possibly accrue. It is
not limited to the actual infringement of the right sued
on but includes all the material facts on which it is
founded It does not comprise evidence necessary to
prove such facts, but every fact necessary for the
plaintiff to prove to enable him to obtain a decree.
Everything which if not proved would give the
defendant a right to immediate judgment must be part
of the cause of action. But it has no relation whatever to
the defence which may be set up by the defendant nor
does it depend upon the character of the relief prayed
for by the plaintiff.”
He also referred to the following portion of paragraph 15:“Part of cause of action arises where money is
expressly or impliedly payable under a contract. In
cases of repudiation of a contract, the place where
repudiation is received is the place where the suit
would lie. If a contract is pleaded as part of the cause
of action giving jurisdiction to the Court where the suit
is filed and that contract is found to be invalid, such
part of cause of the action disappears. The above are
some of the connecting factors.”

CS(OS) 1643/2005

Page No.21 of 26

There can be no dispute with the general proposition as to what
constitutes cause of action. It must be remembered that the present case
is based entirely upon the dishonour of a cheque. As indicated in A. B.
C. Laminart Pvt. Ltd. (supra), part of cause of action arises where
money is expressly or impliedly payable under a contract. In the case of
a cheque, the money is payable at the drawee bank. The drawee bank in
this case is the Oriental Bank of Commerce at Ootacamund and,
therefore, the cause of action with regard to non-payment or dishonour of
the cheque would arise only at Ootacamund and not at Delhi.

13.

Lastly, the learned counsel for the plaintiffs had placed

reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of
Navinchandra N. Majithia (supra) which also has reference to what
constitutes cause of action. As already indicated above, there can be no
exception to the general principles enunciated by the Supreme Court
with regard to what constitutes cause of action. The difficulty arises in
considering particular cases. Cause of action refers to every fact, which,
it would be necessary for the plaintiff to prove, if traversed, in order to
support its right to a judgment of the Court. The essential and key fact
which had to be proved by the plaintiffs in the present case is that the

CS(OS) 1643/2005

Page No.22 of 26

drawee bank refused to honour the cheque drawn on it by the defendant.
The fact, therefore, pertains to the dishonour of the cheque by the drawee
bank.

The drawee bank is the Oriental Bank of Commerce at

Ootacamund and its refusal to honour the cheque on the ground that the
payment had been stopped by the drawer is the cause of action for filing
the present suit. That cause of action has arisen entirely at Ootacamund.
The depositing of the cheque at ICICI Bank, New Delhi, its transmission
to Indian Bank, Chennai and its return in the same route but in the
reverse order does not constitute part of the cause of action. The cause of
action is and remains to be the refusal by the Oriental Bank of Commerce
at Ootacamund to honour the cheque because the drawer had stopped
payment. Therefore, applying the general principles with regard to cause
of action, as enunciated in A. B. C. Laminart Pvt. Ltd. (supra) and
Navinchandra N. Majithia (supra) to the facts of the present case, it is
apparent that no part of the cause of action arose in Delhi.

14.

Two more decisions need to be referred to as they were placed

by the learned counsel for the defendant. The first decision is that of
Escorts Limited (supra) wherein it was observed in paragraph 28 that
non-payment is essentially non-performance. It was further observed

CS(OS) 1643/2005

Page No.23 of 26

that the only thing that has to be seen is where the payments were
normally required to be made. That would be the place of performance.
The place of performance as well as the place of non-performance is the
same. In the light of these observations, it is clear that the cheque was to
be honoured at Ootacamund. There is no doubt that the cheque was
accepted by the plaintiffs at Ootacamund. There is also no doubt that in
the light of the law discussed above, the payment would have been
complete, had the cheque been honoured, at the place of acceptance and,
that is, at Ootacamund. However, since the cheque was dishonoured, the
place of non-payment or non-performance would have to be identified.
That place would be the place where the payments were normally
required to be made. In this case the payment was required to be made at
Ootacamund as it was to be honoured by the bank at Ootacamund.
Moreover, in Gujrat Insecticides Ltd. (supra), a learned Single Judge of
this Court observed:“Merely because cheques given to the plaintiff are
deposited by the plaintiff in Delhi would not be of an
indicator that part of action has arisen in Delhi.”

15.

Section 64(1) of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881,

insofar as it relates to cheques, stipulates that the cheques must be
presented for payment to the drawee by or on behalf of the holder and
CS(OS) 1643/2005

Page No.24 of 26

that in default of such presentment, the other parties thereto are not liable
thereon to such holder. This provision specifically indicates that unless
there is proper presentment of the cheque, the drawer cannot be held
liable in respect of the same. Proper presentment of the cheque requires
that the same must be presented for payment to the drawee. In this case
the drawee is the Oriental Bank of Commerce at Ootacamund.
Therefore, in the facts of the present case, the presentment for payment
of the amount represented by the cheque had to be made to the drawee,
i.e, the Oriental Bank of Commerce at Ootacamund. The deposit of the
cheque by the plaintiffs at their bankers (ICICI Bank, New Delhi) for
collection is of no consequence. What is of importance is only the fact of
presentment for payment and that has to be to the drawee which is the
Oriental Bank of Commerce at Ootacamund.

16.

In these circumstances, I find that the defendant's objection

with regard to territorial jurisdiction

deserves to be upheld.

Consequently, this application is allowed to the extent that this Court
does not have territorial jurisdiction to entertain the present suit. The
consequence of which would be that the suit itself stands dismissed for
want of territorial jurisdiction. It is made clear that this Court has not

CS(OS) 1643/2005

Page No.25 of 26

expressed any opinion on the merits of the matter. This application as
well as the suit and other pending applications stand disposed of.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
October 24, 2007
SR

CS(OS) 1643/2005

Page No.26 of 26

