THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on : 24.04.2007

+

CRL.REV.P.275/2006

MR SUKHDEV YADAV @ PHALWAN

... Petitioner

- versus THE STATE OF U.P.

... Respondent

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
Respondent/State

: Mr Sushil Bajaj with Mr Vijayender Kumar and Mr Vijay Arora.
: Ms Mukta Gupta.

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest? Yes

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J
1.
This revision petition is directed against the order on charge
and the charge framed on 13.4.2006 by the learned Additional District &
Sessions Judge, Patiala House, New Delhi against inter alia, the
petitioner.

The charge framed against the petitioner (Sukhdev @

Pahlwan) reads as under:“Firstly, that you alongwith co-accused Vikas
Yadav and Vishal Yadav kidnapped/abducted Nitish Katara
from Diamond Palace, Shastri Nagar within the jurisdiction of
PS Kavi Nagar, Ghaziabad on the night of 16th & 17th Feb.,
CRL.REV.P.275/2006

Page No.1 of 10

2002 at about 12:30 (midnight) with the intention to murder
him and thereby you committed offence punishable U/s 364
r/w Sec. 34 IPC and within my cognizance.
Secondly, that you alongwith co-accused Vikas
Yadav and Vishal Yadav after kidnapping Nitish Katara,
killed him, with intention to kill him on 17/2/02 at a place
around or near Khurja, Bulandshahar or Khurja Pahasu Road,
UP and thereby you both committed offence punishable U/s
302 r/w Sec. 34 IPC and within my cognizance.
Thirdly, that after murdering Nitish Katara, you
alongwith co-accused Vikash Yadav and Vishal Yadav
removed all signs of identification including clothes from his
body and poured inflammable material on his body and burnt
his body on the abovesaid Khurja – Pahasu Road and caused
evidence of murder disappear with the intention of screening
yourself and your co-accused from legal punishable and
thereby committed an offence U/s 201 IPCV and within my
cognizance.
I hereby direct that you be tried by this court for the
above mentioned offence.”
2.

The case arises out of FIR No. 192/2002 registered under

Sections 364, 302, 201 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code,
1860 (hereinafter referred to as the IPC) at Police Station Kavi Nagar,
Ghaziabad, U.P. Though, the FIR was registered in U.P., the trial of the
case is being conducted at New Delhi.
3.

The facts, as noted in the impugned order on charge, are that

the deceased Nitish Katara and Bharti Yadav (sister of accused Vikas
Yadav) studied together at IMT, Ghaziabad and had fallen love with each
CRL.REV.P.275/2006

Page No.2 of 10

other. Apparently, this affair was not to the liking of Bharti Yadav's
brother Vikas Yadav and her cousin Vishal Yadav. On 16.2.2002 one
Shivani Gaur, who was a friend of both Nitish Katara and Bharti Yadav,
was to get married at Diamond Palace, Shastri Nagar, Ghaziabad. Both,
Nitish Katara and Bharti Yadav, along with other friends and family
members of Bharti Yadav were invited for the said wedding. According
to the prosecution, the petitioner (Sukhdev Yadav) also attended the said
wedding along with the other co-accused – Vikas Yadav and Vishal
Yadav. The investigation revealed that the petitioner (Sukhdev Yadav)
was a resident of Dewaria and was an employee of the Yadav family.
Investigations

further

revealed

that

while

Nitish

Katara

was

accompanying his friends at the wedding party, he was called away by
the petitioner and other co-accused and was taken away by them.
According to the prosecution, there are witnesses

who saw all the

accused persons leaving along with Nitish Katara in a Tata Safari around
12:15 a.m. Thereafter, Nitish Katara was not traceable. After about 2/3
days Nitish Katara's dead body was recovered in a burnt condition on the
Khurja Phahasu Road. The co-accused Vikas Yadav and Vishal Yadav
were arrested by the Madhya Pradesh Police at Dabara Gwalior in an
Arms Act case and, thereafter, they were arrested in the present case by

CRL.REV.P.275/2006

Page No.3 of 10

the U.P. Police. The petitioner (Sukhdev Yadav) absconded till he was
arrested on 23.2.2005.
4.

The learned Additional Sessions Judge, in the impugned order

on charge, noted that there is no eye witness to the alleged murder of
Nitish Katara and that the entire case is based on circumstantial evidence
and particularly on last seen evidence. The prosecution places reliance
on the statement of witness Ajay Kumar who, in his Section 161 Cr.P.C.
Statement, is reported to have stated that on the intervening night 1617.2.2002, he was traveling on his two wheeler (Scooter) from 47th
Battalion, PAC Quarters towards Delhi when, around 12:30 a.m. at the
Hapur Toll Tax Crossing his scooter broken down. Shortly thereafter, a
Tata Safari driven by the accused Vikas Yadav came from behind from
the direction of Police Station Kavi Nagar, Ghaziabad and the said Vikas
Yadav asked him to remove his scooter immediately. It is stated that the
said Ajay Kumar saw one person who had a round face and a fair
complexion and was wearing a red Kurta and who had covered his
shoulder with a white shawl sitting next to Vikas Yadav in the Tata
Safari. The said witness (Ajay Kumar) has also reported to have seen
Vishal Yadav and the petitioner on the back seat. According to the
prosecution, the said Ajay Kumar subsequently identified the said person

CRL.REV.P.275/2006

Page No.4 of 10

with a round face and fair complexion as Nitish Katara on seeing the
photograph of the deceased (Nitish Katara) being flashed again and again
in the newspapers and on the T.V. It is, inter alia, on the basis of the last
seen evidence of this witness (Ajay Kumar) that the present petitioner is
bring implicated in the present case.
5.

It appears that a statement of one Kamal Kishore, who was the

Security Guard at the house of D.P. Yadav (Vikas Yadav's father) was
also recorded by the police. As per the said statement of Kamal Kishore,
it appears that he had seen the deceased Nitish Katara in the company of
accused Vikas Yadav and his driver Anil at the house of accused Vikas
Yadav between 1-1:30 a.m. on 17.2.2002.
6.

It is contended by Mr Sushil Bajaj, the learned counsel for the

petitioner that the statement of Kamal Kishore makes it clear that the
deceased Nitish Katara was last seen alive by Kamal Kshore and he saw
him in the company of Vikas Yadav and his driver Anil. The witness
Ajay Kumar who alleges to have seen the deceased Nitish Katara cannot
be regarded, in the presence of the statement of Kamal Kishore, to be the
witness who had last seen the Nitish Katara as alive.

The alleged

sighting by Kamal Kishore is later in point of time to that of Ajay Kumar.
According to Mr Bajaj, this in itself is sufficient for the discharge of the

CRL.REV.P.275/2006

Page No.5 of 10

petitioner, at least, insofar as the charge under Section 302/34 is
concerned. According to him, when Kamal Kishore allegedly saw the
deceased Nitish Katara in the company of co-accused Vikas Yadav at
around 1-1:30 a.m. the petitioner was not with them. Therefore, it can be
safely assumed that the deceased Nitish Katara was last seen alive in the
company of Vikas Yadav alone as shortly after Vikas Yadav arrived at
his house along with his driver and Nitish Katara, Vikas Yadav left with
the deceased Nitish Katara leaving behind the driver Anil who went to
his quarters to sleep.
7.

Mr Bajaja submitted that since the prosecution has taken the

statement of both Ajay Kumar and Kamal Kishore and since the
statement of Kamal Kishore is with regard to an incident which is
subsequent in time, it is Kamal Kishore's statement alone which would
be taken as the last seen evidence. That being the case, according to Mr
Bajaj, the petitioner cannot be charged of the evidence under Section
302/34.

8.

Ms Mukta Gupta, who appeared on behalf of the State

submitted that two views are possible in this case depending on whether
the statement of Kamal Kishore or the statement of Ajay Kumar is to be

CRL.REV.P.275/2006

Page No.6 of 10

relied upon. She submitted that where two views are possible and there
is a grave suspicion, then a charge can certainly be framed. It is not the
case of a judgment after a full fledged trial where, if two views are
possible, the benefit goes to the accused. She also submitted that the
Mobile phone records of Nitish Katara show his presence at Ghaziabad
and makes the statement of Kamal Kishore who is an employee at Vikas
Yadav's father's house, doubtful. The possibility of the said witness
attempting to deflect the case cannot be ruled out at this stage. Ms
Mukta Gupta further submitted that there are other witnesses including
two police constables as well as Bharti Yadav who saw the deceased
Nitish Katara being taken away from Diamond Palace, Ghaziabad by the
accused including the petitioner. Mr Bajaj had submitted that when
Nitish Katara left Diamond Palace, Ghaziabad even as per the
prosecution case there did not appear to be any indication of inducement
having been applied and, therefore, the case was not even covered under
Section 364 IPC. Ms Gupta submitted that it is not at all necessary that
there there must be visible indications of threat or force. She submitted
that force or coercion has to be inferred from the circumstances. The
deceased was in the wedding party. He was called out and taken away
and when his friends tried to contact him, he did not speak to them.

CRL.REV.P.275/2006

Page No.7 of 10

9.

The learned counsel for the intervener (the mother of

deceased Nitish Katara) was also heard. His submission was that Kamal
Kishore's statement was allegedly recorded on 18.2.2002. Yet another
statement was recorded on 18.2.2002 itself which was identical to the
earlier statement but in question and answer format.
statement was signed by Kamal Kishore.

The second

He submitted that under

Section 162 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, there is a
prohibition from signing statements made before police officers in the
course of the investigation. Yet the signatures of the said Kamal Kishore
was taken. According to the learned counsel for the intervener, this was
done to pressurize the said witness and to compel him to stick to the
statement made therein.
10.

I have given my thoughtful consideration to the facts and

circumstances and the submissions made by the learned counsel for the
parties. Various decisions were also referred to by counsel on both sides.
However, I feel that it would not be necessary to refer to them. While at
first blush it does appear that the petitioner was not last seen in the
company of the deceased Nitish Katara, this does not appear to be the
full story. As to how Kamal Kishore's statement and/or evidence stands
up in the course of a trial is not known. It is quite possible that Kamal

CRL.REV.P.275/2006

Page No.8 of 10

Kishore may not stand by the statement made before the police. If that
happens and if Ajay Kumar's statement stands in the course of the trial
then there is every likelihood that the petitioner may be convicted. At
the stage of framing of a charge all that is necessary is that the material
on record taken at face value must point in the direction of the petitioner
being involved in the commission of the crime. Even if the Court has a
grave suspicion that an accused is so involved then a charge may be
framed. I have considered this matter from all angles and have been
unable to rid myself

of the lurking and grave suspicion that the

petitioner is involved in the commission of the alleged crime. It is an
entirely different matter that the suspicion may be proved wrong on the
basis of evidence on record in the course of the trial, but, at this stage, it
cannot be said that the petitioner ought to be discharged.
11.

In view of the foregoing discussion, I feel that no interference

is called for with the order on charge or the charge framed on 13.4.2006
by the learned Additional Sessions Judge.

This revision petition is

dismissed. It is made clear that all observations made in this order are
only for the purpose of considering the question of charge and shall have
no bearing in the trial of the case.

CRL.REV.P.275/2006

Page No.9 of 10

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
( JUDGE )
April 24, 2007
J

CRL.REV.P.275/2006

Page No.10 of 10

