THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Judgment delivered on :26.02.2007
WP(C) No.693-94/05 & CM 540/2005
DELHI PRESS PATRA PRAKASHAN PTE LVT. & ORS. ...Petitioners
- versus UNION OF INDIA & OTHERS

...Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr R.S. Kela.
For the Respondent/UOI
: Mr Dalip Mehra.

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

The counsel for the parties have been heard.

2.

This writ petition relates to the magazine “Sarita” which is covered

under the definition of “newspaper” under the Indian Post Office Act, 1898.
The issue involved in this petition pertains to the question of granting
concessional rate of postage to the said newspaper. According to the Postal
Authorities, the said magazine for its first Edition of July, 2002 included a
supplement which was separate to the magazine and was not part of the
magazine and, therefore, this amounted to “irregularly” inserting pages which
WP(C)693-94/05 & CM 540/05

Page No.1 of 3

did not form part of the “newspaper”. The learned counsel for the petitioner
submitted that there was no irregularity inasmuch as in the front cover itself, the
chart, showing various means of administering first aid, has been mentioned
and the chart itself carried a print line indicating that it was a part of “Sarita”,
First Edition of July, 2002. The chart was given page numbers 227 to 242
which runs consecutively from the last page given in the magazine itself. It is,
of course, true that the page numbering was not given separately but
cumulatively for the entire chart with each folded side representing each page.

3.

A similar issue with regard to the insertion of a chart/calendar had

come up for consideration before this Court in the case of Competition Success
Review vs. Union of India and Another: 106 (2003) DLT 46. The entire law
on the subject has been discussed in that judgment and, in conclusion, it has
been held that the only requirement is that the supplemental pages must be
accounted for. The petitioner has made an alternative prayer in this case that
the matter may be referred for adjudication by the Director General of Posts in
accordance with the provisions of Rule 144 (4) (X) of the Post Office Rules,
1933 and pending the disposal, the impugned demand made by the respondents
be stayed and the respondents be restrained from withdrawing and or refusing
to accept the bookings of matter printed, published and distributed by the
petitioner and dispatched by post as a registered newspaper.

WP(C)693-94/05 & CM 540/05

Page No.2 of 3

4.

After having heard preliminary arguments advanced by the counsel

for the parties, I am of the view that there is no need for this Court to go into
the legal issues arising in this case inasmuch as the law has been conclusively
dealt with in Competition Success Review's case (supra).

Therefore, the

alternative prayer made by the petitioner is allowed and the petitioner is
directed to approach the Director General of Posts in accordance with the
provisions of Rule 144 (4) (X) of the said Rules for a decision in this matter in
accordance with the principles laid down by this Court in Competition Success
Review's case (supra). Till such decision is rendered the respondents shall
keep the demand in abeyance and the respondents shall not refuse to accept
bookings by post printed, published and distributed by the petitioner as long as
the petitioner's registration as a newspaper is otherwise valid. The parties are
free to raise issues within the parameters of the legal position explained in
Competition Success Review's case (supra).

5.

This writ petition is disposed of.
BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)

February 26, 2007
J

WP(C)693-94/05 & CM 540/05

Page No.3 of 3

