THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%
+

Judgment delivered on: 20.02.2008
CS (OS) No.363/2007

P.V. BEVERAGES PVT. LTD.

... Plaintiff
- versus -

GLOBAL BEVERAGES AG AND OTHERS

... Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Plaintiff
: Mr Valmiki Mehta, Sr Advocate with Mr N.L. Ganapathi
For the Defendant No.1
: Mr S.K. Chachra
For the Defendant No.2
: Mr P.S. Shetty
For the Defendant No.3
: Mr S.C. Gulati

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ?

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
IA NO.2236/2007 (U/O 39 Rules 1 & 2 CPC)
1.

The entire controversy in this case centres around the letter of credit

dated 07.07.2006 bearing No.FLC / RFC 654563 for US $ 38,134.00 which
had been opened at the instance of the plaintiff by the defendant No.2 in
favour of the defendant No.1. According to the plaintiff, the defendant
No.2 is liable to be restrained from making payment to the defendant No.1
under the said letter of credit in view of the fact that the defendant No.1 is

IA No.2236/07 in CS(OS) 363/07

Page No. 1 of 18

an unscrupulous seller and that, if such an injunction were not granted,
irretrievable injustice would be caused to the plaintiff inasmuch as the
plaintiff would have no means to recover the same from the defendant No.1
since the defendant No.1 does not have any assets in India.

2.

The brief facts are that the plaintiff and the defendant No.1, which is

an Austrian company, entered into a distribution agreement on 09.12.2005.
By virtue of the said agreement, the plaintiff was appointed as the
distributor of the defendant No.1's product “Phantom Energy Drink” in
respect of the entire territory of India. The agreement, which is an admitted
document, was for a definite duration of five years and it was also provided
that if the minimum turnover is achieved, then there would be an option for
extending the same for the next 10 years. As per clause II (2), both the
parties had agreed that the plaintiff (distributor) shall sell the following
minimum quantities of the said product throughout the duration of the
agreement:“i)

First year

=

36 Containers (each container
comprises of 86,400, 250 ml)

ii)

Second year

=

36... containers

iii) Third year

=

42... containers

iv) Fourth year

=

48... containers

v)

=

48... containers”

Fifth year

The price for the said products was also agreed upon as mentioned in the
Schedule annexed to the agreement. The payment terms were to be ensured

IA No.2236/07 in CS(OS) 363/07

Page No. 2 of 18

by presenting an abstract bank guarantee of an Indian bank or by
establishing an irrevocable confirmed letter of credit of an Indian bank. It
was also provided in clause IX (1) (d) that after termination of the
agreement, for whatever reason, the plaintiff (distributor) would be bound
to irrevocably offer to the defendant No.1 for repurchase of the contracted
products in its possession on termination thereof at their actual market value
at the time they are handed over to the defendant No.1, but not more than
the price paid to the defendant No.1. It was also provided that this offer
may be accepted by the defendant No.1 within one month of receipt of a
detailed list of contract products present. If the defendant No.1 did not
accept such an offer, the plaintiff would have the right to sell the said
products at the contracted territory, i.e., India.

3.

In paragraph 5 of the plaint, it is alleged that though the aforesaid

distribution agreement was executed in December 2005, the first shipment
of the Phantom Energy Drink to be delivered to the plaintiff was made in
November, 2005 itself. The plaintiff had opened a letter of credit for an
amount of US$ 1,05,535 in respect of the shipment of 1,72,800 cans of the
said Phantom Energy Drink of 250 ml each. The said consignment was
received by the plaintiff and the payment was made under the said letter of
credit. It is alleged in the plaint that there was a delay in the supply of the
first shipment as a result of which the plaintiff had to incur certain losses on
account of having organised an impressive launch of the Phantom Energy

IA No.2236/07 in CS(OS) 363/07

Page No. 3 of 18

Drink in Delhi for the North and East Zones. It is alleged in paragraph 13
of the plaint that the plaintiff had to spend about Rs 25.6 lakhs towards man
power for the month of December, 2005 which went waste due to the delays
on the part of the defendant No.1. It was alleged that though the letter of
credit for the first shipment was opened on 03.11.2005, the goods were
actually shipped by the defendant No.1 much later and were received by the
plaintiff in India only on 03.02.2006 after a delay of more than two months
over the agreed transit time of 18-21 days port-to-port. It is alleged that
because of this delay in the supply of the Phantom Energy Drink by the
defendant No.1, the plaintiff was put to losses and resulted in an adverse
impact on the plaintiff's business. It is further alleged in the plaint that
because of these losses on account of delays, the defendant No.1 had agreed
to supply one container of Phantom Energy Drink worth US$ 51,000 free of
cost with the third shipment.

4.

In the meanwhile, the plaintiff had opened the letter of credit for the

second shipment on 16.12.2005 for US$ 88,255. The plaintiff had taken the
delivery of both the first and second shipments and the payment had also
been made after the documents had been retired under the letters of credit.
At that point of time, according to the plaintiff, no defect, particularly any
leakage, was visible. It is alleged that after the cans had been sent to the
market by the plaintiff through its distribution channels from April 2006
onwards, the plaintiff started getting complaints from various retail stores

IA No.2236/07 in CS(OS) 363/07

Page No. 4 of 18

all over India that the Phantom Energy Drink cans had started leaking.
According to the plaintiff, this fact was promptly brought to the notice of
the defendant No.1 and the defendant No.1 had acknowledged that this was
a serious issue and had assured the plaintiff that a solution would be worked
out. It is alleged in paragraph 20 of the plaint that because of the leakage
problem, various retail outlets had refused to take further stocks and had
also started asking the plaintiff to take back the unsold stock and clear off
their respective warehouses. It is further alleged that on account of this, the
plaintiff suffered not only heavy monetary losses, but had also to pay claims
against such leakages to their Consignment Sales Agents / Distributors. It is
stated that the plaintiff had been discussing the leakage issue with the
defendant No.1 and requested the defendant No.1 to guarantee that its future
supply would be free from defects. It is specifically contended that as the
defendant No.1 appeared to have a positive attitude in resolving the
problem, the plaintiff, in good faith, had opened the third letter of credit
bearing No.FLC/RFC/654563 dated 07.07.2006 through the defendant No.2
for the third shipment for an amount of US$ 38,134 in favour of the
defendant No.1 in respect of 72,548 Cans of Phantom Energy Drink of 250
ml each. The said letter of credit is the one with which the present suit is
concerned. It is alleged that till the time the third shipment reached the port
of delivery, i.e., at the Inland Container Depot (ICD)-Patparganj, the
defendant No.1 had made absolutely no commitment or guarantee that the
leakage problem will not recur and the plaintiff would not be made to suffer

IA No.2236/07 in CS(OS) 363/07

Page No. 5 of 18

any losses due to such problem. This, according to the plaintiff, had shaken
the confidence of the plaintiff and the plaintiff did not take delivery of the
said shipment and advised the defendant No.1 to recall the third shipment.
This advice was sent by the plaintiff purportedly through their e-mail dated
13.11.2006.

It may be relevant to point out that the third shipment

comprised of two 40 feet containers, one of which was provided by the
defendant No.1 on free of cost basis in order to assuage whatever grievances
the plaintiff had with regard to the delayed delivery in respect of the first
shipment.

5.

The plaintiff has placed its entire reliance on an e-mail of the

defendant No.1 of 13.11.2006 whereby, according to the plaintiff, the
defendant No.1 had unequivocally agreed to take back the entire stock of
the plaintiff. It is, therefore, contended that since the defendant No.1 had
agreed to take back the entire stock, there was no question of the payment
being made under the letter of credit and, if such a payment was permitted,
it would amount to serious injustice and the same would be totally
inequitable insofar as the plaintiff is concerned.

This is so because,

according to the plaintiff, the plaintiff would be liable to make payment for
something which it has not accepted. It is in these circumstances that the
present suit was filed inasmuch as the due date of the payment under the
letter of credit was fast approaching. The due date being 27.02.2007.

IA No.2236/07 in CS(OS) 363/07

Page No. 6 of 18

6.

On 27.02.2007, when the suit came up for admission and the present

application was taken up for hearing for the first time, my learned
predecessor granted an ex parte ad interim injunction in favour of the
plaintiff and restrained the defendant No.2 from making payment to the
defendant No.1 under the said letter of credit dated 07.07.2006. The said
order dated 27.02.2007 clearly recorded that the attention of the court had
been invited to the controversy about the quality of the goods insofar as the
third consignment (which was in issue) was concerned.

There was a

reference to the e-mail dated 18.10.2006 of defendant No.1 where the
defendant No.1 purportedly stated that they would try to buy back the
containers as soon as possible. A reference was also made to the e-mail
dated 13.11.2006 of the plaintiff wherein the plaintiff is said to have
expressed its decision not to accept the stock and to advise its bankers to
return the documents in view of the past problems.

The e-mail of

13.11.2006 of the defendant No.1 stating that it was planning to buy the
stock sent to the plaintiff was also considered. The communication dated
31.01.2007 of the defendant No.1 indicating that the proposal made by the
defendant No.1 as per the e-mails dated 18.10.2006 and 13.11.2006 were
still valid was also considered. Finally, the court considered the submission
of the learned counsel for the plaintiff that if the amount under the letter of
credit was remitted to the defendant No.1, the plaintiff would have no
means to recover the same since there are no assets of the defendant No.1
within the country. It is in these circumstances that the ex parte ad interim

IA No.2236/07 in CS(OS) 363/07

Page No. 7 of 18

injunction was granted in favour of the plaintiff as indicated above.

7.

The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the defendant No.1

submitted that it is an admitted position that the relationship between the
plaintiff and the defendant No.1 is governed by the Distribution Agreement
dated 09.12.2005. Under the said agreement, the plaintiff was required to
attain certain minimum quantities of sales in India. There was a dispute
between the parties with regard to the quantity of sales and this can be
easily discerned from the admitted correspondence which is on record. The
learned counsel referred to a letter dated 02.01.2007 which had been
addressed by the defendant No.1 to the plaintiff wherein, it was asked of the
plaintiff as to how it would salvage its position and how it planned to fulfil
its obligations towards the defendant No.1 in the year 2007 which required
it to achieve the target of 36 containers. It was stated in the said letter that
as against the minimum sale of 36 containers, the plaintiff had only ordered
6 containers and one container had been sent free of cost additionally.

8.

The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the defendant No.1 then

drew my attention to the letter dated 20.01.2007 (Exhibit P-32) wherein
various issues were addressed. The plaintiff had sought to give the reason
for the non-attainment of the minimum quantity of 36 containers by
attributing the same to the delay caused by the defendant No.1. This would
be apparent from the following extract:-

IA No.2236/07 in CS(OS) 363/07

Page No. 8 of 18

“The above facts would establish the genuine efforts of PVB,
the huge amounts invested by PVB, and PVB's ability to
distribute the Phantom products throughout India through its
distribution chain to achieve the targets in terms of the
Distribution Agreement. Yet, if the Phantom product was not
moving off the retail shelf at the expected pace, it was due to
lack of GB's support and for reasons beyond PVB's control.
GB was fully aware of the real reasons and has expressly
acknowledged the precarious position in which PVB was
placed. GB's contributions to such position are:
Right from day one GB's supply chain management failed
miserably resulting in long delayed arrival of GB Supplied
Goods. L/C for PVB's first order was opened on 03.11.2005
and the goods shipped by GB was received by PVB here on
03.02.2006 after a delay of more than 2 months from the
agreed transit time of 18-21 days port to port. This delayed
supply of Phantom product by GB had a serious adverse
impact on PVB. For instance, PVB lost the advantage of the
spade work it had done to kick start the launch, but also
prejudiced PVB's goodwill creating efforts. Due to the delay
PVB suffered heavy losses due to expenses incurred towards
idle Sales man-power and also towards Man hours with its
media partner, Dentsu. GB had in acknowledgement of its
faults expressly agreed to compensate PVB for the loss of
Rs.25.6 lakhs. It was in this context that GB offered to send
one container of Phantom product on FOC basis as partial
compensation. GB did not do any favour to PVB by offering
this free container, as has been projected in the GB letter.
The second order was placed and L/C opened by PVB in
December, 2005. Just as in the case of the first shipment, the
second shipment was also delayed by more than one months
despite the GB obligation of 18-21 days port-to-port
shipment. It is also relevant to point out that in respect of
both the shipments, GB also acted in breach of its obligations
provided in the GB Minutes and the LC terms by resorting to
transshipment.
All these delays in the arrival of GB supplies of the Phantom
product have had a very adverse effect on the market and the
trade as PVB could not meet the supply dates promised to its
distribution channel partners.”

IA No.2236/07 in CS(OS) 363/07

Page No. 9 of 18

9.

A reading of the aforesaid extract of the said letter, prima facie, leads

to the conclusion that the container which was supplied free of cost was,
even as per the understanding of the plaintiff, by way of partial
compensation for the delays that were caused by the defendant No.1. They
were not connected with the alleged leakage problem with the cans supplied
by the defendant No.1. It is pertinent to note that this letter clearly discloses
that even after the leakage problem had been discovered, the plaintiff had
opened the letter of credit in question and sought for the third shipment of
the Phantom Energy Drinks. By way of this letter, the plaintiff indicated
that the defendant had not given any explanation regarding the cause of the
quality problem and how it proposed to counter such problem till date.
Consequently, the defendant No.1 was requested to take back the third
shipment lying at Delhi as allegedly promised in its e-mail dated
13.11.2006.

10.

The learned counsel for the defendant No.1 thereafter referred to

various other communications between the parties to indicate that the main
cause for concern between the parties was initially the alleged delay on the
part of the defendant No.1. The question of leakage was also an issue
which required to be addressed, but that could be easily addressed within
the terms of the distribution agreement.

The learned counsel for the

defendant No.1 submitted that in case the plaintiff was able to establish the
exact extent of the cans which had the leakage problem, then the defendant

IA No.2236/07 in CS(OS) 363/07

Page No. 10 of 18

No.1 would be in a position to take appropriate action in that regard. But
that was a decision which was entirely within the terms of the distribution
agreement between the parties and had nothing to do with the letter of
credit.

The learned counsel for the defendant No.1 submitted that the

proposals given by the defendant No.1 on 18.10.2006 and 13.11.2006 which
were regarded as valid as indicated in the e-mail dated 31.01.2007 have to
be viewed in the correct perspective. He submitted that by the e-mail dated
18.10.2006, the defendant No.1 had offered to buy the first container for the
price indicated therein, but the said e-mail also carried the following
sentence:“We also have to cancel the contract, I guess by October 31st.”

11.

He submitted that the plaintiff never agreed to the cancellation of the

contract and, therefore, this offer was never accepted. With regard to the email dated 13.11.2006 (Exhibit P-28), the learned counsel for the defendant
No.1 submitted that the only sentence that is being relied upon by the
plaintiff reads as under:“We know how serious this problem is, we are planning to buy
your stock !!”
With regard to this sentence, the learned counsel for the defendant No.1
submitted that this was in continuation of what was stated in the e-mail of
18.10.2006 and in the context of cancellation / termination of the
distribution agreement which itself, as indicated in clause IX (1) (d),

IA No.2236/07 in CS(OS) 363/07

Page No. 11 of 18

provided for the option of the defendant No.1 to buy back the stocks
available with the plaintiff.

According to the learned counsel for the

defendant No.1, this sentence in no way amounted to an admission on their
part that the goods were defective or that they were in any way liable as
indicated by the plaintiff in the averments made in the plaint. There are
certain other letters referred to by the learned counsel for the defendant
No.1 which need not be set out at this stage. However, the last letter that
was written on behalf of the defendant No.1 prior to the filing of the suit
was 24.02.2007 wherein Mr Udo Wagner of the defendant No.1 had clearly
stated that the statement made in the plaintiff's e-mail of 22.02.2007 that the
latter had indicated that he would be recalling the “dox” (documents)
pertaining to the L/C of the third shipment was an untrue statement and he
condemned the same strongly. It is further stated in the said e-mail of
24.02.2007 on behalf of the defendant No.1 that once the plaintiff had
established the letter of credit in terms of the contract, there was no reason,
logic or purpose in instructing their bank against enforcing payment due to
the defendant no.1, particularly when the goods had arrived in India long
back. The letter further stated:“I am writing this to make point straight and plain.”

13.

The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the defendant No.1

submitted that whatever disputes were there between the plaintiff and the
defendant No.1, they were disputes under the distribution agreement and

IA No.2236/07 in CS(OS) 363/07

Page No. 12 of 18

had nothing to do whatsoever with the letter of credit. He submitted that no
injunction of the letter of credit could have been granted as no special
equities arose, there was no allegation of fraud and no irretrievable injustice
would be caused to the plaintiff if the injunction was not granted. He
submitted that it is well-settled that a bank guarantee or a letter of credit
cannot be restrained except under a clear case of established fraud and
irretrievable injustice. In the present case, there was no fraud whatsoever.
The irretrievable injustice that has been pleaded by the plaintiff is that it
would be difficult for them to recover the amount of letter of credit since the
defendant No.1 does not have assets within India. He submitted that this is
not a case of irretrievable injustice.

Referring to the decision of the

Supreme Court in the case of U.P. State Sugar Corporation v. M/s. Sumac
International Ltd.: AIR 1997 SC 1644, he submitted that mere
apprehension that the other party will not be able to pay, is not enough. At
page 1648 of the said report, this is exactly what the Supreme Court has
held. The Supreme Court was clearly of the view that such an apprehension
would not be enough to injunct a letter of credit or a bank guarantee. It
must be certain that the plaintiff would be unable to get the payment from
the defendant in case he succeeds.

14.

The learned counsel for the defendant No.2, which is the issuing bank

of the letter of credit, supported the contentions advanced on behalf of the
learned counsel for the defendant No.1 and submitted that the letter of credit

IA No.2236/07 in CS(OS) 363/07

Page No. 13 of 18

is an independent and separate contract from the distribution agreement.
Whatever disputes the parties may have under the distribution agreement
cannot be transferred to the contract between the defendant No.2 and the
defendant No.1 under the letter of credit. He further submitted that when
the letter of credit was opened on 07.07.2006, the plaintiff had already
received the first and second consignments and the plaintiff had admittedly
been aware of the problem of leakages, yet it went ahead and opened the
letter of credit which was an irrevocable and unconditional letter of credit.
He submitted that as per banking practices recognised internationally, an
unconditional letter of credit cannot be injuncted unless there is a case of an
established fraud and irretrievable injustice. Neither of these situations
arise in the present case and, therefore, the injunction ought not to have
been granted and the same ought to be vacated.

15.

In rejoinder, the learned counsel for the plaintiff submitted with

reference to the e-mails dated 18.10.2006 and 13.11.2006 that the defendant
No.1 had agreed to buy back the stock.

This being the position, the

payment under the letter of credit would amount to enriching the defendant
No.1 unjustly. He submitted that the position of the defendant No.1 was
that of an unscrupulous seller and the courts could clearly interfere to
prevent such an unscrupulous seller from enriching itself at the cost of the
plaintiff. For this proposition, he placed reliance on the decision of the
Bombay High Court in the case of Dai-ichi Karkaria Private Ltd., Bombay

IA No.2236/07 in CS(OS) 363/07

Page No. 14 of 18

v. Oil & Natural Gas Commission, Bombay and Another: AIR 1992
Bombay 309.

16.

I have considered the arguments advanced by the counsel for the

parties. In a recent decision in the case of M/s Fair Deal Agencies &
Another v. M/s Inner Mongolia Muwang Animal By-Product Company
Limited & Others, delivered on 07.02.2008, I had occasion to consider the
nature of a letter of credit. It would be fruitful to refer to certain portions of
the said decision. They read as under:“10. In Tarapore & Company v. V/O Tractoroexport and
Anr.: 1969 (1) SCC 233, the Supreme Court had observed
that an irrevocable letter of credit had a definite implication
and that it was independent of, and unqualified by, the
contract of sale or other underlying transactions. The letter of
credit was a mechanism of great importance in international
trade and that any interference with that mechanism was
bound to have serious repercussions. In U.P. Cooperative
Federation Ltd.v. Singh Consultants and Engineers (P)
Ltd.: 1988 (1) SCC 174, the Supreme Court quoted with
approval the article of Paul R. Verkuil which set out the
salient features of a letter of credit. The said article indicated
that the letter of credit is a contract. The issuing party,
usually a bank, promises to pay the 'beneficiary', traditionally
a seller of goods, on demand if the beneficiary presents
whatever documents may be required by the letter. They are
normally the only two parties involved in the contract. The
bank which issues a letter of credit acts as a principal, not as
an agent for its customers and engages its own credit. The
letter of credit thus evidences an irrevocable obligation to
honour the draft presented by the beneficiary upon
compliance with the terms of the credit. In U.P. Coop
Federation Ltd (supra), the Supreme Court further explained
the importance of the letter of credit as a means of doing
business where the buyer and seller were separated by
geography. The words used by the Supreme Court are as
under:-

IA No.2236/07 in CS(OS) 363/07

Page No. 15 of 18

'45. The letter of credit has been developed over
hundreds of years of international trade. It was most
commonly used in conjunction with the sale of goods
between geographically distant parties. It was intended
to facilitate the transfer of goods between distant and
unfamiliar buyer and seller. It was found difficult for
the seller to rely upon the credit of an unknown
customer. It was also found difficult for a buyer to pay
for goods prior to their delivery. The bank's letter of
credit came into existence to bridge this gap. In such
transactions, the seller (beneficiary) receives payment
from issuing bank when he presents a demand as per
terms of the documents. The bank must pay if the
documents are in order and the terms of credit are
satisfied. The bank, however, was not allowed to
determine whether the seller had actually shipped the
goods or whether the goods conformed to the
requirements of the contract. Any dispute between the
buyer and the seller must be settled between
themselves. The Courts, however, carved out an
exception to this rule of absolute independence. The
Courts held that if there has been "fraud in the
transaction" the bank could dishonour beneficiary's
demand for payment. The Courts have generally
permitted dishonour only on the fraud of the
beneficiary, not the fraud of somebody else.'
11. Article 3 of The Uniform Customs & Practices for
Documentary Credits (1983) also makes it clear that credits
(Letters of Credit), by their nature are separate transactions
from the sales or other contract(s) on which they may be
based and banks are in no way concerned with or bound by
such contract(s), even if any reference whatsoever to such
contract(s) is included in the Credit (Letter of Credit). It is
further provided that consequently, the undertaking of a bank
to pay, accept and pay draft(s) or negotiate and / or to fulfil
any other obligations under the Credit, is not subject to claims
or defences by the applicant resulting from his relationship
with the issuing bank or the beneficiary. These circumstances
make it abundantly clear that whether the goods were to be
delivered at Delhi, whether the freight charges were paid by
the plaintiff at Delhi and whether the agent which organised
the alleged transaction between the plaintiff and the defendant
No.1 resided at Delhi are of no consequence to the contract
which is evidenced by the letter of credit. The letters of credit

IA No.2236/07 in CS(OS) 363/07

Page No. 16 of 18

in question are entirely separate contracts which have no
connection with anything that has happened in Delhi. ...”
17.

From the above, it is abundantly clear that the letter of credit is a

separate and independent contract and has nothing to do with the underlying
contract between the plaintiff and the defendant No.1. The dispute in the
present case arises entirely under the underlying contact, i.e., the
distribution agreement between the plaintiff and the defendant No.1.
According to the defendants, they do not admit that the goods are defective
and that the offer of buying back the stock was made in view of the express
condition contained in the distribution agreement itself which would flow
upon termination of the contract. It is further clear that no fraud has been
alleged by the plaintiff. It may be pointed out that the learned counsel for
the plaintiff did refer to paragraph 28 of the plaint which does contain the
word “fraud”, but that is the only place where the word “fraud” appears in
the entire plaint. A reading of the said paragraph would also indicate that
the word “fraud” has been used incidentally. In any event, the averments
made in the plaint, to my mind, do not constitute fraud on the part of the
defendant No.1. There is a dispute with regard to the delayed shipment on
the part of the defendant No.1; there is a dispute with regard to the quality
of goods. None of these can be termed as fraud and, that too, fraud of an
egregious nature which is the requirement for carrying out an exception to
the usual practice of not injuncting any bank guarantees or letters of credit.

IA No.2236/07 in CS(OS) 363/07

Page No. 17 of 18

18.

Insofar as the question of irretrievable injustice is concerned, the

position has been made clear by the Supreme Court that mere apprehension
that the plaintiff would not be able to recover the money from the defendant
No.1 would not be sufficient for invoking this exception. The plaintiff must
establish and must show that the plaintiff would certainly not be able to
recover the amount of the letter of credit. The defendant No.1 is located in
Austria which is not a war-torn country as was the case in Itek Corporation
v. The First National Bank of Boston: 566 Fed Supp 1210 which has been
referred to in U.P. State Sugar Corporation (supra).

19.

Consequently, in my view, the plaintiff has not been able to bring its

case within the exception of “fraud and irretrievable injustice” and,
therefore, the plaintiff would not be entitled to the injunction that it has
sought. The result being that the ex parte ad interim injunction which had
been granted on 27.02.2007 stands vacated.
This application is dismissed.

February 20, 2008
δυττ

IA No.2236/07 in CS(OS) 363/07

( BADAR DURREZ AHMED )
JUDGE

Page No. 18 of 18

