THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 20.02.2007

+

WP(C) No.16760-61/2007

M/S BRIJ TEXTILE

...Petitioner
- versus -

THE SECRETARY, MINISTRY OF COMMERCE
& INDUSTRY AND OTHERS

...Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr Anil Gaur
For the Respondents
: Mr Y.P. Narula, Sr Advocate with Mr Manoj Ohri

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

The present petition has been filed by the petitioner being

aggrieved by the order dated 03.09.2002 passed by the Joint Secretary and
Chief Vigilance Officer, Department of Commerce, Ministry of Commerce and
Industries (Supplies Division), Government of India. This order was passed on
the ground that the petitioner had made supplies to hospitals and in particular
to Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi which were found to be substandard. As a
result of this order, a ban on commercial dealings / business dealings has been

WP(C)16760-61/07

Page No.1 of 4

imposed on the firm in connection with supplies to the Government. The ban
has been imposed w.e.f. 03.09.2002 for a period of 10 years.

2.

The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner submitted

that on the basis of the alleged material collected during a surprise check, an
FIR was also registered against the petitioner and three others under Sections
120-B/420 IPC and 13 (2) read with 13 (1) (d) of the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988. This FIR was registered on 05.02.1998.

3.

The learned counsel for the petitioner further submitted that

pursuant to the said FIR, investigation was carried out which resulted in the
filing of the charge-sheet against one Sandeep Gupta, who is a partner in the
petitioner firm (M/s Brij Textiles) and one Mr Sudarshan Malik, who is the
Deputy Secretary of the Association of Corporations and Apex Societies of
Handlooms (ACASH). The counsel further submitted that after the filing of
the charge-sheet, at the stage of consideration of framing of charges, the
learned Special Judge, New Delhi by an order dated 24.03.2005 was pleased to
discharge both the accused [Sandeep Gupta and Sudarshan Malik]. The sum
and substance of the submissions made by the learned counsel for the petitioner
is that the criminal proceedings which had been launched on the basis of the
very same surprise check and on the basis of the allegations that substandard
material had been supplied by the petitioner had culminated in the order of

WP(C)16760-61/07

Page No.2 of 4

discharge of the petitioner as well as the co-accused. Therefore, according to
the learned counsel for the petitioner, there was no substance and / or material
available against the petitioner and the ban order ought not to have been
passed.

4.

Mr Narula, the learned senior counsel who appeared on behalf of

the respondents 1 & 2, submitted that criminal proceedings are different from
civil proceedings and the degree of proof required in the two proceedings are
different. Whereas under criminal proceedings, the case has to be established
beyond reasonable doubt, in the case of the civil proceedings, preponderance of
probabilities would be sufficient for sustaining an order.

Mr Narula also

submitted that the ban order had been passed on 03.09.2002 and the petitioner
had accepted the same. It is only after the order on charge was passed by the
Special Judge on 24.03.2005 in the criminal proceedings that the petitioner has
filed the present petition in November, 2006. Therefore, according to Mr
Narula, this petition ought to be dismissed.

5.

Considering the submissions made by the learned counsel for the

parties, I am of the view that the finding with regard to supply of substandard
materials by the petitioner and the consequent ban imposed by the order dated
03.09.2002 ought not to be interfered with. However, there is some scope for a
reconsideration of the extent of ban. The period of ban imposed is 10 years and

WP(C)16760-61/07

Page No.3 of 4

the learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that since the petitioners
have been discharged in the criminal case, this issue ought to be reconsidered.

6.

Accordingly, this writ petition is disposed of with the direction that

if the petitioner feels appropriate, he may move a representation before the
Chief Vigilance Officer, Department of Commerce (Supplies Division),
Ministry of Commerce and Industry within two weeks from today limited to the
question of the period of ban. The said Chief Vigilance Officer shall, on
receipt of such a representation, consider the case and take a decision within
six weeks thereafter. It is made clear that the only scope of the representation
that may be made to the Chief Vigilance Officer will be with regard to the
period of ban.
This writ petition stands disposed of. No costs.
BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
February 20, 2007
sd

WP(C)16760-61/07

Page No.4 of 4

