THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on : 24.04.2007

+

CRL.REV.P.311/2005

PANKAJ MALHOTRA

... Petitioner
- versus -

THE STATE OF NCT OF DELHI
& ANOTHER.

... Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
For the Respondent/State
For the Complainant

: Mr R.N. Mittal Sr Advocate with Mr Puneet Mittal and Mr
Dharmendra Arya .
: Mr V.K.Malik.
: Mr K.K.Sharma

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest? Yes

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J
1.
This Revision Petition is directed against the order of charge
dated 21.3.2005 and charge framed on that date itself by the learned
Additional Sessions Judge, New Delhi.
2.

The charges framed against the petitioner are as under:“1.

That during the period 4.4.2002 till 31.3.2003, at
L-78—B, Janta Flats, Saket, New Delhi, you
committed rape upon Indu D/O Lt. Shri N.L.

CRL.REV.P.311/2005

Page No.1 of 15

Pasrija, to wit you had had sexual intercourse with
Indu without her consent or with her consent
obtained on misconception of fact that you were her
legally wedded husband and you, thereby
committed an offence u/s 376 IPC and within my
cognizance.
2.

Secondly, that during the period 4.4.2002 till
31.3.2003, at L-78 B, Janta Flats, Saket, New Delhi,
you above named accused, deceitfully caused a
woman named Indu D/o Lt. Shri N.L. Pasrija, who
you accused Pankaj Malhotra had divorced, to
believe that she was married to you accused and in
that belief to cohabit with you accused Pankaj
Malhora or have sexual intercourse with you
accused Pankaj Malhotra and that you thereby
committed an offence punishable under section 493
IPC and within my cognizance.

3.

And I hereby direct you to be tried by this court of
Session of the said charge.”

3.

The prosecution case is that the petitioner married the

complainant (Indu) on 4.10.1997 and they lived together till March,
2001. It is alleged that in March, 2001, the complainant Indu made a
complaint against the petitioner in the Crime against Women Cell.
Subsequently, they started living together till 31.3.2003. It is further
alleged that the petitioner continued to stay with the complainant except
whenever he used to go out for the purpose of his business and the
complainant claimed that she continued to cohabit with the petitioner till
31.3.2003.

It is alleged that in the morning of 31.3.2003, the

CRL.REV.P.311/2005

Page No.2 of 15

complainant (Indu) was shocked when 9-10 persons knocked at the door
with a lady named Pooja who claimed that the petitioner had been
illegally living with the complainant (Indu) because, according to them,
on 9.12.2002 the said Pooja got married with the petitioner and that the
petitioner had already divorced the complainant (Indu). Apparently, an
ex parte divorce order had been obtained by the petitioner on 4.4.2002 in
respect of the marriage with Indu. It is alleged that the complainant
(Indu) was unaware of the ex parte proceedings and did not know of the
alleged divorce. It is further alleged that the petitioner had sexual
intercourse with the complainant (Indu) and she consented to the same
being under the impression that she was lawfully married to the
petitioner and that their marriage subsisted.

It is the case of the

prosecution that the petitioner obtained the ex parte divorce by
subterfuge; he did not inform the complainant (Indu) of this divorce
proceedings or the ex parte order passed on 4.4.2002 but continued to
have sexual intercourse with her as she was under the misconception that
their marriage subsisted. It is, therefore, alleged by the prosecution that
the petitioner has committed rape. The second allegation is of having
committed an offence under Section 493 IPC.

CRL.REV.P.311/2005

Page No.3 of 15

3.

After the registration of the FIR No 363/2003 under Section

376/493 IPC at Police Station Malviya Nagar on 5.5.2003 on the basis of
the statement made by the complainant (Indu), the petitioner was arrested
by the police on that date itself. Subsequently, after about two months
i.e. on 5.7.2003, the petitioner was ordered to be released on bail by the
learned Additional Sessions Judge. After completion of investigation the
Investigating Agency submitted the charge sheet. Thereafter, by the
impugned order dated 21.3.2005 the learned Additional Sessions Judge
framed the charges mentioned above.

4.

It was submitted by Mr R.N. Mittal, the learned senior

counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner that the complainant was
aware of the divorce proceedings and the process server had affected
service of summons on her. Mr Mittal referred to the provisions of
Section 375 and 376 IPC. He then submitted that Chapter XX of the
Indian Penal Code refers to offences relating to marriage. Section 493
IPC falls under that Chapter and pertains to the offence of cohabitation
caused by a man deceitfully inducing a belief of lawful marriage. He
also referred to Section 198 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
(hereinafter referred to as “the Code”) to indicate that no Court can take

CRL.REV.P.311/2005

Page No.4 of 15

cognizance of an offence punishable under Chapter XX of the Indian
Penal Code, 1860 except upon a complaint made by some

persons

aggrieved by the offence. He submitted that at best the petitioner could
be charged with an offence under Section 493 IPC and the cognizance of
the same can only be taken upon a complaint made by a person aggrieved
and not on the basis of an FIR. Mr Mittal also referred to the provisions
of Section 90 IPC to explain the concept of consent given under
misconception. With reference to this provision, he submitted that a
consent is not such a consent as is intended by any Section of the IPC, if
the consent is given by a person, inter alia, under a misconception of fact
and if the person doing the act knows, or has reason to believe, that the
consent was given in consonance of such misconception. Mr Mittal
submitted that the divorce proceedings were well known to the
complainant (Indu) and, therefore, there was no misconception of fact on
her part and, therefore, the case would not fall within the parameters of
rape as indicated in Section 375 IPC and particularly, in the second
description therein.

5.

Mr Mittal then referred to the bail order passed by the learned

Additional Sessions Judge on 5.7.2003. This order was referred to by

CRL.REV.P.311/2005

Page No.5 of 15

him to attempt to demonstrate that the summons in the divorce petition
filed by the petitioner in the family court in Jaipur against the
complainant (Indu) had been duly served upon her and that she had
notice of the divorce petition but did not choose to appear before the said
Court. In the said bail order, it is recorded that the process server, in his
statement recorded before the Court had specifically stated that he
personally went to the complainant (Indu) and delivered a copy of the
summons to her. It is also noted that it was specifically mentioned in the
summons itself that a copy of the divorce petition was enclosed with the
summons. Based on this, the learned Additional Sessions Judge came to
the conclusion that the prima facie inference that can be drawn is that the
complainant had notice of the divorce petition filed against her at Jaipur.
The learned Additional Sessions Judge noted that the divorce petition
was filed on 25.9.2001 and the decree had been granted on 4.4.2002.
The complainant had allegedly gone in for abortion on 31.12.2001 and
that therefore, prima facie, at the time of the alleged pregnancy and
termination thereof, the marriage between the petitioner and the
complainant had not been dissolved. The learned Additional Sessions
Judge considered the evidence of the process server that he had
personally served the summons on the complainant as a vital

CRL.REV.P.311/2005

Page No.6 of 15

circumstance to indicate that the complainant had notice of the divorce
proceedings but she did not choose to contest the same. It is also noted
in the said bail order that no application for setting aside the ex parte
decree had also been filed till date. Considering these circumstances,
amongst others, bail was granted to the petitioner on 5.7.2003.

6.

Mr Mittal also referred to the record of the proceedings made

by the ACP at the Crime against Women Cell wherein it is indicated that
the complainant was well aware of the decree of divorce given by the
Jaipur Curt but she had the hope that her husband would return to her.
However, on 31.3.2003 when the fact was disclosed to her that the
petitioner had already married another lady all her hopes disappeared.

7.

Mr Mittal referred to a copy of the purported statement of the

complainant recorded under Section 161 where, she, on being confronted
with a notice for appearance in the divorce case which had been
purportedly received by her and signed by her, has apparently admitted
that the signatures and writing are hers. However, she concluded the
statement by stating that she did not remember as to whether she ever
received such a notice and that it is possible that the petitioner took her

CRL.REV.P.311/2005

Page No.7 of 15

in good faith and by showing her some other papers took her signatures
and that, that is why she had not gone to the Court at Jaipur.

8.

In this matter arguments were heard on 28.2.2006 and it had

been listed for orders on 28.8.2006. In the meanwhile, however, the
complainant filed an application being Crl. M.A. 8848/2006 for taking
on record certain additional documents. On 28.8.2006 this Court noted
that although the application had been filed after arguments have been
heard and orders have been reserved, in the interest of justice, so that no
papers which are necessary are overlooked, the application was
entertained and, therefore, the matter was listed for further arguments
thereafter.

9.

According to Mr Mittal, the documents filed by the

complainant, in fact, support his case. He referred to Annexure “B”
which is a copy of the notice purportedly served on the complainant. The
notice, according to Mr Mittal, showed that the same was received by
Indu Malhotra. Her signatures are indicated on the said notice as also the
date of 05-11-2001. So also the address “L-78B DDA Flat, Saket, ND”.
Mr Mittal then referred to Annexure “K” (copy of Inquiry Report by the

CRL.REV.P.311/2005

Page No.8 of 15

Civil Judge Delhi) wherein the following was noted as under:“11.

Charged Official has been unable to explain how
this word Saket has been inserted or has found it is
place on summons when it is neither on the plaint
nor at any other place in the proceedings before Ld
HMA Court the address with word “Saket” is not
included in decree, hence, the possibility of word
“Saket having been added in court at Jaipur is also
ruled out. It is not the case of the charged official
that summons have been issued with address
containing the word Saket from Jaipur Court. The
charged official has been unable toi establish that
he went to serve the summons on the given address
and served it to the Mrs. Indu Malhotra, as claimed
by him. He has claimed that there was a lady and a
child but subsequently said that there was no child
and he also could not recognize the lady. He has
also admitted that he does not know who has
marked the summons to him. It is clear from
evidence of Mr. S.K. Jha Naib Nazir, that the
summons were not marked as per rule to the
charged official by any Nazir. In view of the
evidence in the case it can be safely inferred that the
charged official has marked the summons in his
own name and has manipulated the service of
summons received from the Jaipur Court with
incomplete address and has prepared a false report.
In view of above discussion and in view of facts and
circumstances, it is clear that charges against the
charged official are proved by preponderance of
probability. Let report be sent to Ld. District &
Sessions Judge, Delhi, for appropriate action.”

Referring to the above paragraph Mr Mittal submitted that although the
process server who had allegedly served the summons on the
complainant, had been found guilty of the charge of having interpolated
CRL.REV.P.311/2005

Page No.9 of 15

the word “Saket” on the address portion of the summons, this did not
detract from the position that the summons were actually served on the
complainant (Indu). He submitted that the issue here is not so much with
regard to the irregularity of the process server’s conduct but the question
of receipt of the summons. The summons itself shows the signatures of
the complainant as well as the address given as “Saket”.

10.

Mr Mittal also referred to the ex parte order and decree dated

4.4.2002 passed by the Family Court in Jaipur. He pointed out the
portion of the order where it is recorded that despite service the
complainant was not present and, therefore, the matter was heard ex
parte. He submitted that this is a finding recorded by a competent Court
and it had not been challenged. Therefore, it is clear that the complainant
had knowledge about the divorce proceedings as also of the ex parte
decree.

11.

The Complainant’s counsel was also heard. He submitted that

the petitioner’s deceitful conduct is apparent from the fact that he did not
want the complainant to know that the divorce petition had been filed in
the Family Court at Jaipur. According to him, this would be clear from

CRL.REV.P.311/2005

Page No.10 of 15

examining the Cause Title and Memo of Parties of the application made
before that Court. Annexure “A” of the documents is a copy of the said
application and it is pointed out by the learned counsel for the
complainant that the word “Saket” is not mentioned in the address given
in the Cause Title.

12.

The counsel for the complainant further submitted that on

25.9.2001 the petitioner filed a divorce petition but he did not disclose
this fact to the complainant.

The very next day on 26.9.2001 the

petitioner and the complainant applied for admission of their son in
School. Two days latter, on 28.9.2001 the petitioner applied for a ration
card indicating his family as himself, his wife (Indu Malhotra) and the
son and giving the Saket address as his address. In the divorce petition
the petitioner had submitted that he lived with the complainant for six
months in Jaipur whereas according to the learned counsel for the
complainant, she could not have lived in Jaipur for six months as she was
a Government Servant and there was no record of leave during that
period. Annexure “I” to the said application purports to be a copy of the
leave record of the complainant which does not indicate that she was on
leave for six months.

CRL.REV.P.311/2005

Page No.11 of 15

13.

The learned counsel for the complainant also submits that

before the Family Court at Jaipur, the petitioner had stated that he had no
physical relations with the complainant after the birth of their child. The
son was born in 1998 and, therefore, according to the petitioner, he did
not have any physical relations with the wife (Indu Malhotra) after 1998.
The learned counsel for the complainant submits that this statement is a
blatant lie because admittedly, the complainant (Indu Malhotra)
underwent an abortion in the year 2001. The abortion was consented to
by the petitioner by signing on the consent form, a copy whereof is also
on record. It is to be noted that the address given by the petitioner is L78B, Saket. The medical termination of pregnancy of the complainant
was done on 31.12.2001.

According to the learned counsel for the

petitioner, this consent by the petitioner, as the husband of the
complainant, was given after the alleged service of summons on
5.11.2001. All these circumstances, according to the counsel for the
complainant, go to show that the petitioner never wanted the complainant
to know about the divorce proceedings. The petitioner even went to the
extent of correcting the address on the divorce proceedings from “LIC”
to “LIG” but consciously did not mention “Saket”.

CRL.REV.P.311/2005

Page No.12 of 15

14.

Mr Malik the learned counsel who appeared on behalf of the

State supported the order on Charge entirely. He submitted that the
petitioner came to know of the deceit of the petitioner only when the
other lady, Puja informed her on 31.3.2003. He submitted that it would
be interesting to note that the petitioner married Puja on 9.12.2002 and
just two days latter, on 11.12.2002 Puja was also left by the petitioner.
She, thereafter, informed the complainant of her marriage with the
petitioner on 31.3.2003 and immediately, thereafter, the complaint was
lodged by the complainant on 1.4.2003 and the FIR was registered on
4.4.2003. With regard to the question as to why the divorce decree had
not been challenged, the counsel for the complainant as well as the
counsel for the State submitted that it was not challenged because the
complainant did not want to live with the petitioner at all because of his
conduct. But the non-challenge of the divorce decree does not mean that
the petitioner should go scot-free even though he committed the crime.

15.

I have given my thoughtful consideration to the submissions

made by the counsel for the parties. It was vehemently argued by Mr
Mittal on behalf of the petitioner that the offence of rape under Section

CRL.REV.P.311/2005

Page No.13 of 15

375 IPC was not made out at all. However, to my mind, the entire issue
hinges upon the question as to whether the complainant had knowledge
of the divorce proceedings. That is a hotly contested issue. If it can be
established that the complainant had knowledge of the divorce
proceedings then, perhaps the defence would be in a position to
demonstrate that the complainant had consented.

However, if it is

established that the complainant did not have any knowledge of the
divorce proceedings and the divorce decree and that she continued to
have relations with the petitioner in the belief that she was married to
him, then, the prosecution may be in a position to show that her consent
amounted to a consent under a misconception of fact and was, therefore,
no consent at all.

16.

I do not want to dwell any further on this issue as that may

have a bearing on the trial of the case. At this stage, this Court is only
concerned with the question of the charge that has been framed. It is
apparent that evidence would be necessary to establish as to whether the
complainant had or did not have the knowledge of the divorce
proceedings and the divorce decree prior to 31.3.2003. In the absence of
evidence and a finding which can only be returned in the course of the

CRL.REV.P.311/2005

Page No.14 of 15

trial, it would not be possible for this Court to discharge the petitioner
from the charge of having committed an offence punishable under
Section 376 IPC. As regards the second charge under Section 493 IPC, I
am of the view that the same also does not call for any interference, in
view of the provisions of Section 221 of the Code.

17.

Accordingly, this revision petition is dismissed.

All

observations made in this order are only for the purpose of considering
the question of charge and shall not be used to the prejudice of any party
at the time of trial of the case.

April 24, 2007
J

CRL.REV.P.311/2005

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
( JUDGE )

Page No.15 of 15

