THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 28.02.2008

+

CS (OS) No.1660/1998

M/S SIEMENS LTD.

... Plaintiff
- versus -

M/S NOVA IRON & STEEL LTD.

... Defendant

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Plaintiffs
: Mr R. S. Prabhu
For the Defendant
: Mr Sanjay Jain

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ?

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

By virtue of the order dated 11.12.2007, the following issue was

directed to be treated as the preliminary issue:"(1) Whether this Court has no territorial jurisdiction to try
and determine the suit? (OPD)"
2.

The counsel for the parties were heard on this preliminary issue. The

plaintiff has instituted this suit against the defendant on the ground that the
defendant had placed purchase orders on the plaintiff for supply of electrical
equipments which had to be delivered to the defendant at its factory at
village and P.O. Dagori, Tehsil Belha, District Bilaspur, M. P. (now
CS(OS) 1660/2008

Page No. 1 of 11

Chhattisgarh). The plaint alleges that the defendant had initially issued
letters of intent, which contained the terms of the supply to be made by the
plaintiff to the defendant and the price and delivery conditions etc. The
letters of intent were confirmed by purchase orders, which were placed by
the defendant on the plaintiff. Details of the purchase orders have been set
out in paragraph 6 of the plaint. It is the case of the plaintiff that as against
the said purchase orders, which were accepted by the plaintiff, supplies had
been made to the defendant. The defendant had taken delivery of the said
supplies and had made part payments in respect thereof but not the entire
sums.

The plaintiff has further alleged that the defendant had

acknowledged that out of all these transactions a sum of Rs 24,35,837.10
was admittedly outstanding and due from the defendant to the plaintiff.
According to the plaintiff this acknowledgment and admission is contained
in the minutes of the meeting held between the representatives of the
plaintiff and the defendant at Dagori, Bilaspur on 12.08.1995. It was also
contended that apart from the said sum of Rs 24,35,837.10, a further sum of
Rs 5.20 lacs was also due from the defendant on account of the supply of
VCBs subsequent to the meeting of 12.08.1995.

3.

The defendant, on the other hand, has resisted this suit on the ground

that nothing was due and payable by the defendant to the plaintiff. While
the defendant has not denied that purchase orders were placed by the
defendant on the plaintiff for supply of materials, it was contended that the

CS(OS) 1660/2008

Page No. 2 of 11

material was required to be supplied as per stringent specifications and that
it was also the essence of the purchase orders that the material should be
supplied within a specific period so as to enable the defendant to use it at an
appropriate time during the installation and commissioning of its plant at
Bilaspur.

It is contended by the defendant that the material that was

supplied by the plaintiff to the defendant was not of the desired
specification and it was also not supplied as per schedule. It was also stated
in paragraph 6 of the written statement that the material that was delivered
beyond schedule was not received by the defendant and, in fact, the carrier
was not permitted to unload the material which was late delivered at the site.
It is also alleged that the defendant suffered losses as a result of the conduct
of the plaintiff, which the defendant had quantified at Rs 10 crores and the
defendant sought to reserve its right to file a suit for damages and
compensation against the plaintiff for the same. Of course, till date no such
suit has been filed. The defendant, therefore, contended that it is not liable
to pay any money as claimed by the plaintiff or at all.

4.

This is the sum and substance of the dispute between the parties.

However, the limited question that has to be considered at this stage is with
regard to this Court's jurisdiction over the matter. In paragraph 15 of the
plaint it is alleged that the defendant has an office in Delhi and also carries
on its business at Delhi. It is further alleged that the defendant placed
purchase orders at Delhi, which were sent to the plaintiff at Delhi. The

CS(OS) 1660/2008

Page No. 3 of 11

payments were to be made at Delhi and, in fact, part payments were made at
Delhi. The defendant, in paragraph 15 of the written statement, has denied
that the purchase orders were placed by the defendant on the plaintiff at
Delhi. It is also stated that the suit, as it appears from the averments made
in the plaint, is based essentially on the purchase orders placed by the
defendant on the plaintiff, for supply of material as also on the alleged
minutes of the meeting held between the parties wherein the plaintiff has
alleged that the defendant acknowledged its liability. It was contended on
behalf of the defendant that each of the purchase orders, placed by the
plaintiff on record, clearly specifies that the material was to be consigned to
the defendant at its plant at village Dagori, District Bilaspur, M.P (now
Chhattisgarh).

Consequently, it was stated that the defendant did not

acquiesce to the jurisdiction of this Court for the purposes of the present
dispute.

5.

In this background, it was contended by the learned counsel for the

defendant that all deliveries under each of the purchase orders were to be
made at Bilaspur. He submitted that, in fact, all deliveries were made at
Bilaspur and such of the deliveries, as were accepted by the defendant,
were accepted at Bilaspur. He further submitted that all the payments that
were made by the defendant in respect of the supplies made by the plaintiff
were made at Bilaspur to the representatives of the plaintiff, who had come
to Bilaspur. The said payments were made by cheques. He submitted that

CS(OS) 1660/2008

Page No. 4 of 11

the contract was clearly to be performed at Bilaspur and, therefore, when the
plaintiff alleges non-performance, the place of non-performance would also
be Bilaspur. Since the plaintiff has instituted this suit on account of alleged
non-performance of the contracts, evidenced by the purchase orders, the
only place where the cause of action has arisen is village Dagori, Bilaspur,
Chhattisgarh. Consequently, he submitted, no part of the cause of action
has arisen within the territorial limits of this Court and, therefore, the plaint
ought to be returned. The learned counsel for the defendant made a further
submission that, in any event, the tenor of the plaint indicates that the case
of the plaintiff is founded upon the alleged acknowledgment / admission of
liability as contained in the minutes of the meeting of 12.08.1995. That
meeting, admittedly, was held at the defendant's plant at village Dagori,
Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh. He further submitted that, therefore, even the cause
of action founded on the basis of that meeting did not arise within the limits
of this Court.

6.

The learned counsel for the plaintiff submitted that this Court has

jurisdiction inasmuch as, apart from the place of performance of the contract
as also the place of making payments, the situs of the contract has also to be
considered for the purposes of considering the question of cause of action.
He submits that the contract between the parties emerged by the defendant
issuing letters of intent to the plaintiff, which carried the terms of payment,
the price, the delivery schedule, packing instruction etc. This was followed

CS(OS) 1660/2008

Page No. 5 of 11

by confirmatory purchase orders. He submitted that in each of the cases, the
confirmatory purchase order had been sent by the defendant to the plaintiff.
On receipt of the purchase order and acceptance of the same, the plaintiff
made supplies of the goods under each of the purchase orders. In this
background, he submitted that the place at which the contract was made
would be of material significance. He referred to page 1 of the documents
file, which is a letter of intent dated 15.05.1993, which had been issued by
the defendant to the plaintiff. The said letter of intent contains a statement
at the end of the letter to the following effect:-

7.

“This letter of intent is subject to detailed work outs by M.
N. Dastur & Company Limited and will be confirmed to you
in the form of a detailed confirmatory purchase order, which
shall be issued to you shortly.”
By a letter dated 22.12.1993, which is at page 26 of the documents

file, the defendant wrote to the plaintiff requesting it to treat the letter of
intent dated 15.05.1993 as their purchase order with certain under-noted
amendments.

The other purchase orders are also set out at page 28

(22.12.1993), page 30 (22.12.1993) and page 32 (04.02.1994). Each of the
purchase orders has been issued by the defendant from its corporate office at
Amba Deep, 12th Floor, 14, Kasturba Gandhi Marg, New Delhi to the
plaintiff at 4A, Ring Road, I. P. Estate, New Delhi. Each of the purchase
orders contains the following instruction towards the end:“Please acknowledge receipt of this letter of intent and return
the duplicate copy duly signed and stamped as token of
acceptance of the same.”

CS(OS) 1660/2008

Page No. 6 of 11

8.

The learned counsel for the plaintiff submitted that since the purchase

orders were placed by the defendant on the plaintiff at Delhi and the same
were also accepted by the defendant at Delhi, the contract between the
parties was struck at Delhi and, therefore, this Court would have jurisdiction
to entertain the present suit.

9.

I have considered the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for

the parties and have given deep thought to the matter. The Supreme Court
in A. B. C Laminart Pvt. Ltd. v. A. P. Agencies: (1989) 2 SCC 163 referred
to erstwhile Explanation III to

Section 20 (c) of the Code of Civil

Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter referred to as the 'CPC'). The said Explanation
III had stipulated that in suits arising out of contract the cause of action
arises within the meaning of the section at any of the following places,
namely:“(1) the place where the contract was made;
(2)

the place where the contract was to be performed or
performance thereof completed;

(3) The place where in performance of the contract any
money to which the suit relates was expressly or impliedly
payable.”
After noting the said erstwhile Explanation III, the Supreme Court observed
in paragraph 14 of the said decision that the said explanation has now been
omitted “but nevertheless it may serve as a guide”. In this context, the
Supreme Court in paragraph 15 of the said report held:“15. In the matter of a contract there may arise causes of action
of various kinds. In a suit for damages for breach of contract
CS(OS) 1660/2008

Page No. 7 of 11

the cause of action consists of the making of the contract, and
of its breach, so that the suit may be filed either at the place
where the contract was made or at the place where it should
have been performed and the breach occurred. The making of
the contract is part of the cause of action. A suit on a contract,
therefore, can be filed at the place where it was made. The
determination of the place where the contract was made is part
of the law of contract. But making of an offer on a particular
place does not form cause of action in a suit for damages for
breach of contract. Ordinarily, acceptance of an offer and its
intimation result in a contract and hence a suit can be filed in a
court within whose jurisdiction the acceptance was
communicated. The performance of a contract is part of cause
of action and a suit in respect of the breach can always be filed
at the place where the contract should have performed or its
performance completed. If the contract is to be performed at the
place where it is made, the suit on the contract is to be filed
there and nowhere else. In suits for agency actions the cause of
action arises at the place where the contract of agency was
made or the place where actions are to be rendered and
payment is to be made by the agent. Part of cause of action
arises where money is expressly or impliedly payable under a
contract. In cases of repudiation of a contract, the place where
repudiation is received is the place where the suit would lie. If
a contract is pleaded as part of the cause of action giving
jurisdiction to the Court where the suit is filed and that contract
is found to be invalid, such part of cause of the action
disappears. The above are some of the connecting factors.”
(underlining added)
Construing the above observations made by the Supreme Court, it is
apparent that part of the cause of action would arise where the contract is to
be performed. Part of the cause of action would also arise where any money
is expressly or impliedly payable under the contract. And, part of the cause
of action would definitely arise where the contract was made. Insofar as the
performance of the contract is concerned, it is abundantly clearly from the
facts and circumstances available on record that it was to be performed at
village Dagori, Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh. It is also abundantly clear that the
money was, if not expressly, impliedly payable, under the contract between
CS(OS) 1660/2008

Page No. 8 of 11

the parties, at the point of delivery, which was again at village Dagori,
Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh. Therefore, there can be no quarrel with the fact that
part of the cause of action, both on account of performance/ nonperformance and payment of money, arose at village Dagori, Bilaspur,
Chhattisgarh.

10.

The question, therefore, that remains to be considered is — where

was the contract made? It is apparent that the purchase orders placed by the
defendant were in the nature of proposals as understood under Section 2 (a)
of the Indian Contract Act, 1872. For a proposal to result in a contract, it
requires the acceptance on the part of the person to whom the proposal is
made, in this case, the plaintiff. Each of the purchase orders carried the
statement that the plaintiff was to acknowledge receipt of the purchase order
and return a duplicate copy duly signed and stamped as token of its
acceptance of the same. Unfortunately, neither of the parties have placed on
record any such acknowledgment on the part of the plaintiff. However, the
fact remains that both the parties recognized that the contracts had been
concluded between them. Therefore, this Court is left to infer from the
circumstances as to where the acceptance of the offer/ proposal was made
by the plaintiff. Some assistance can be taken of the provisions of Section 7
(2) of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 which, inter alia, stipulates:“If the proposal prescribes a manner in which it is to be
accepted, and the acceptance is not made in such a manner,
the proposer may, within a reasonable time after the
acceptance is communicated to him, insist that his proposal
CS(OS) 1660/2008

Page No. 9 of 11

11.

shall be accepted in the prescribed manner, and not
otherwise; but, if he fails to do so, he accepts the
acceptance.”
It is, therefore, clear that where the proposal prescribes the manner in

which it is to be accepted, and the acceptance is not made in such manner,
the proposer has the option to insist on the acceptance being made in the
desired manner and not otherwise. However, if the proposer fails to indicate
that the acceptance must be made in the manner indicated, then he is
deemed to have accepted the acceptance or in other words, the proposer
cannot raise any objection subsequently that the proposal had not been
accepted in the manner indicated. In the present case, there is no averment
made by the defendant in his written statement and, in fact, there is nothing
on record to show that the defendant raised any objection with regard to the
manner in which the proposals of the defendant, in the form of purchase
orders, were accepted by the plaintiff. The inference that can be drawn from
this is that the purchase orders were accepted by the plaintiff in the manner
stipulated in the purchase orders themselves. This is a presumption which
the court can draw in terms of Section 114 of the Indian Evidence Act,
1872.

This being the position, the inescapable conclusion is that the

proposal and the acceptance were both done at Delhi. This is so because the
purchase orders were issued by the defendant from its corporate office at
Delhi and were sent to the plaintiff at its office at Delhi. It has already been
inferred that the plaintiff accepted the said proposal / purchase order by
sending an acknowledgment thereof to the defendant. Since the purchase
order was issued by the corporate office at Delhi, it is obvious that the
CS(OS) 1660/2008

Page No. 10 of 11

acknowledgment of the same would also have been sent to the corporate
office of the defendant at Delhi. In other words, the contract was made at
Delhi. Consequently, in view of the clear position of law stated in A. B. C
Laminart Pvt. Ltd. (supra), since the contract was made in Delhi, a part of
the cause of action would also have arisen at Delhi and this Court would
have jurisdiction to entertain this suit. This preliminary issue is decided
accordingly in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendant.

12.

The result being that the suit has to be proceeded with in respect of

the other issues. The parties are directed to file the list of witnesses within
two weeks. The evidence shall be by way of affidavits in the first instance.
Cross-examination shall be conducted before the Joint Registrar.

The

plaintiff shall file its evidence affidavits within four weeks of the filing of
the list of witnesses.
List before the Joint Registrar on 24.04.2008 for fixing further dates
of trial.

( BADAR DURREZ AHMED )
JUDGE
February 28, 2008
SR

CS(OS) 1660/2008

Page No. 11 of 11

