THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 21.01.2008

+

IA.No.1411/2006 (u/O 10 R/w Section 151 of CPC)
in CS(OS) 1338/2004

SHRI DEVINDER KHANNA

...Petitioner.
- versus -

MEHTA CAD CAM SYSTEMS PVT LTD

...Respondent

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Plaintiff
: Mr S Paul.
For the Defendant
: Mr Alok Lakhanpal.

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ? Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J(ORAL)
1.

This is an application filed on behalf of the defendant for stay

of the present suit on the ground that the issues involved in the present
suit are substantially in issue before the previously instituted suit by the
defendant in Ahmedabad.
IA.No.1411.06 in CS(OS)1338/04

The suit in Ahmedabad is numbered as
Page No.1 of 5

2377/2004. It was instituted on 27.08.2004, whereas the present suit was
instituted on 05.10.2004. The parties are also the same. The admitted
position, therefore, is that the suit filed in Ahmedabad is prior in time to
the present suit and the parties in both the suits are the same. The
question, therefore, is as to whether the issues involved in the present
suit are substantially the same or not.

2.

The brief facts are that the defendant has alleged that it

supplied a printing machine to the plaintiff at an agreed price of Rs
16,64,000/- . It is further alleged by the defendant that as against the said
price, only a sum of Rs 9 lacs was paid by the plaintiff to the defendant
in two instalments of Rs 7 lacs and Rs 2 lacs. The balance payment had
not been made by the plaintiff to the defendant. It is the plaintiff's case
that the machine supplied by the defendant was defective and was not at
all functional.

3.

The suit filed at Ahmedabad was initially filed as a summary

suit under Order 37 CPC. Subsequently, since unconditional leave to
defend was granted to the plaintiff herein (the defendant before the court
at Ahmedabad), the suit stood converted into an ordinary suit. That suit

IA.No.1411.06 in CS(OS)1338/04

Page No.2 of 5

is proceeding before the court at Ahmedabad. The learned counsel for
the defendant submits that the issues that arise before the court at
Ahmedabad and the issues that arise in the present suit are substantially
the same, if not identical. He submits that the only question that has to
be decided is whether the machine supplied by the defendant to the
plaintiff was defective or not. In case, it was not defective then the
defendant's suit at Ahmedabad is liable to succeed. On the other hand, if
the machine was defective then the plaintiff would be entitled to
damages. In response, the learned counsel for the plaintiff submitted that
the issues are different and, therefore, the present suit ought not to be
stayed. He submitted that in an Order 37 suit which is of a summary
nature, the defendant cannot raise a counter claim as has been held by the
learned Single Judge of this court in the case of Punjab & Sind Bank v
S.K. Tulshan : 1990 Rajdhani Law Reporter 556. Consequently, since
the defendant had filed the summary suit in Ahmedabad, the plaintiff had
no option but to file the present suit at Delhi for recovery of damages.
He also submits that the court at Ahmedabad does not have the territorial
jurisdiction over the matter and, therefore, the suit at Ahmedabad is
liable to be dismissed on this ground.

IA.No.1411.06 in CS(OS)1338/04

Page No.3 of 5

4.

Having considered the arguments advanced by the counsel for

the parties, I am of the view that the issues which arise for consideration
in the present suit are substantially the same as the issues which would
arise for consideration before the court at Ahmedabad. The defendant
has filed the suit at Ahmedabad for recovery of money on account of
non-payment of the full price of the machine supplied by it to the
plaintiff. The plaintiff is defending that suit on the ground that the
machine was defective as also on the ground that the court at
Ahmedabad does not have the territorial jurisdiction. It was also
contended by the learned counsel for the plaintiff that the present suit is
for damages whereas the suit at Ahmedabad is for recovery. In my view,
it is not the style and form of the suit which would decide the issue of
similarity between the suits. On the contrary, the decision would rest on
what is the bone of contention between the parties. The main issue that
has to be decided by the Ahmedabad Court is whether the machine
supplied by the defendant to the plaintiff was defective. In case it is
found that it was defective then the suit at Ahmedabad would have to be
dismissed.

However, if the finding was that the machine was not

defective then the suit at Ahmedabad would succeed and the present suit
would have no legs to stand on inasmuch as the finding returned by the

IA.No.1411.06 in CS(OS)1338/04

Page No.4 of 5

court at Ahmedabad would operate as res judicata in the present suit.

5.

Therefore, considering the aforesaid circumstances, this

application is liable to the allowed. The suit is stayed with liberty to the
parties to revive the present suit after the outcome of the suit at
Ahmedabad.
This application stands disposed of.

January 21, 2008
M

IA.No.1411.06 in CS(OS)1338/04

(BADAR DURREZ AHMED)
JUDGE

Page No.5 of 5

