THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Judgment delivered on :31.01.2007
WP(C) No.8076-78/2003
M/S. WHALE STATIONERY PRODUCTS LTD. & ORS

...Petitioners

- versus UNION OF INDIA & ANOTHER

...Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr Jayant K. Mehta
For the Respondent/UOI
: Mr Sanjay Katyal

CORAM:-

HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

YES

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

YES

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

YES

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

The petitioners in this writ petition are aggrieved by two orders dated

15.01.2003 and 17.01.2003 whereby they have been blacklisted for a period of 10
years. The orders dated 15.01.2003 and 17.01.2003 are purportedly based on an
earlier order dated 30.12.2002 whereby the government had imposed a ban on
commercial business/dealings by all Departments/Ministries/Offices of the
Government of India with Delhi Paper Products Company Private Limited and its
“subsidiaries” for 10 years with effect from 30.12.2002. The impugned orders have
WP(C)8076-78/2003

Page No.1 of 5

been passed on the basis that one of the directors of Delhi Paper Products Company
Private Limited was also working as a director in the petitioner companies and,
therefore, the petitioner companies were subsidiaries of Delhi Paper Products
Company Private Limited and consequently they would also be covered by the ban
imposed by the order dated 30.12.2002.

2.

The learned counsel for the petitioners, firstly, contended that the

petitioner companies are not subsidiaries of Delhi Paper Products Company Private
Limited within the meaning ascribed to the word “subsidiary” as appearing in
Section 4 of the Companies Act, 1956. The said Section reads as under:“4. Meaning of “holding company” and “subsidiary”.- (1) For
the purposes of this Act, a company shall, subject to the provisions
of sub-section (3), be deemed to be a subsidiary of another if, but
only if, (a) that other controls the composition of its Board of directors; or
(b) that other(i)
where the first-mentioned company is an existing
company in respect of which the holders of preference
shares issued before the commencement of this Act have
the same voting rights in all respects as the holders of
equity shares, exercises or controls more than half of the
total voting power of such company;
(ii) where the first-mentioned company is any other
company, holds more than half in nominal value of its
equity share capital; or
(iii) the first-mentioned company is a subsidiary of any
WP(C)8076-78/2003

Page No.2 of 5

company which is that other's subsidiary.”
There is no question of application of Clauses (b) or (c) as there is no allegation that
Delhi Paper Products Company Private Limited holds any shares in the petitioner
companies. Insofar as the applicability of Clause (a) is concerned, that has to be
established on the basis of material on record. What needs to be established is that
Delhi Paper Products Company Private Limited has control over the Board of
Directors of the petitioner company. This can only be determined after the factual
position is examined with regard to the relationship between the companies.
Merely because one of the directors was allegedly common to Delhi Paper Products
Company Private Limited does not make the petitioner companies subsidiaries of
Delhi Paper Products Company Private Limited. It has to be examined as to
whether the Board of Directors of Delhi Paper Products Company Private Limited
exercises authority and control over the boards of the petitioner companies so as to
control and determine their composition.

3.

It was further contended by the learned counsel for the petitioners that

the orders dated 15.01.2003 and 17.01.2003 were passed without issuing any notice
to the petitioners and obviously no hearing was granted to the petitioners either.
Therefore, they had no occasion to point out that the petitioners would not fall
within the expression “subsidiaries” of Delhi Paper Products Company Private
WP(C)8076-78/2003

Page No.3 of 5

Limited. He submits that had an opportunity been granted, the petitioners would
have been in a position to demonstrate that the order dated 30.12.2002, which is
limited to Delhi Paper Products Company Private Limited and its subsidiaries,
would have no application to the petitioner companies.

4.

The learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the orders have

been passed because it is apparent that all these companies are family concerns and
as mentioned in the orders themselves, one of the directors was common.
Accordingly, he submitted that the petitioner companies were also covered by the
order dated 30.12.2002, which was made with respect to Delhi Paper Products
Company Private Limited and its subsidiaries.

5.

In my view the question as to whether the petitioners are subsidiaries of

Delhi Paper Products Company Private Limited, cannot be decided merely on the
basis of one of the directors being allegedly common to the said companies. The
exercise for determining as to whether the petitioner companies were subsidiaries
of Delhi Paper Products Company Private Limited or not, has to be undertaken in
the context of the provisions of Section 4 of the Companies Act, 1956. For that
purpose, it would be necessary to obtain the submissions and statements of the

WP(C)8076-78/2003

Page No.4 of 5

petitioner companies. Clearly this was not done as no notice whatsoever was issued
to the petitioner companies. The question of blacklisting is a serious one and it is
well settled that before any person or company is blacklisted in respect of dealings
with the government, that person or company must be provided an opportunity of
hearing.

That can only be done if a notice is issued and the party is heard.

Unfortunately this was not done in the present case. Accordingly, the impugned
orders dated 15.01.2003 and 17.01.2003 are set aside for want of following the
principles of natural justice.

It is open to the respondents to issue a show cause

notice to the petitioners. Such a show cause notice, if issued, shall be replied to by
the petitioner companies within two weeks and if such a reply is made, they shall be
granted an opportunity of personal hearing within two weeks thereafter and orders
would be passed in accordance with law within four weeks thereafter. It is made
clear that the issue before the authorities is as to whether the petitioner companies
were subsidiaries of Delhi Paper Products Company Private Limited on 30.12.2002
and continue to be so till date. This writ petition stands disposed of.
Dasti.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
January 31, 2007
sr

WP(C)8076-78/2003

Page No.5 of 5

