THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on: 30.04.2008

+

OMP. No. 12/2008

M/S S.K. CONTRACTOR & ENGINEERS

...Petitioner.

- versus -

HINDUSTAN PETROLEUM CORPORATION
LIMITED

...Respondent

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Ms Anusuya Salwan.
For the Respondent No.1 : Mr Anil Kumar Mishra.

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest ?

Yes

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J(ORAL)
1.

An objection with regard to the territorial jurisdiction of this

Court to entertain the present petition filed under Section 34 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as the
“said Act”) was raised at the outset by the learned counsel appearing on
behalf of the respondent. This order shall dispose of the said objection.

OMP 12/2008

Page No.1 of 8

2.

The petition is directed against the award dated 20.9.2007

made by the sole arbitrator. It is the contention of the learned counsel for
the respondent that no part of the cause of action arose in Delhi and,
apart from this, Clause 14.10 of the Contract governing the parties
clearly stipulated that:“The parties hereby submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of
the Courts situated at Mumbai for all purposes. The
Arbitration shall be held at Mumbai and conducted in
English language.”
On the strength of the aforesaid clause, the learned counsel for the
respondent submitted that even if it was to be assumed that part of the
cause of action had arisen at Delhi, exclusive jurisdiction was vested in
the Courts at Mumbai by agreement between the parties. Referring to the
decision in the case of Apparel Export Promotion Council v. Shri
Prabhati Patni: 2005 VIII AD (Delhi) 889, the learned counsel for the
respondent submitted that parties could by agreement restrict jurisdiction
to the Courts at Mumbai provided the Courts at Mumbai otherwise had
jurisdiction with regard to the subject matter of the contract. It was also
submitted that though a contract to oust the jurisdiction of the Courts
absolutely would be void, being against public policy, restricting
jurisdiction to any one of the many courts which would otherwise have
jurisdiction would not be opposed to public policy as held in the said
decision in Apparel Export Promotion Council (supra).
OMP 12/2008

Page No.2 of 8

3.

The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner

submitted that this Court had jurisdiction because the letter of intent
dated 12.2.2004 had been faxed by the respondents to the petitioner from
Mumbai to the petitioner's fax machine installed at Delhi. She submitted
that since the letter of intent was received by fax at Delhi, the contract
was completed at Delhi and, therefore, part of the cause of action arose
within the territorial limits of this Court.

She placed reliance on a

decision of this Court in the case of Triveni Oil Field Services Ltd v. Oil
& Natural Gas Commission: 2006 III AD (Delhi) 19. She also stated
that this Court would have jurisdiction to entertain the present petition
under Section 34 of the said Act in view of the provisions of Section 42
of the said Act. This is because earlier the petitioner had filed OMP No.
388/2006 before this very Court under Section 12 and 13 of the said Act
seeking the removal of the arbitrator. She submitted that the said OMP
No. 388/2006 was disposed of by a detailed judgment on 23.1.2007
rejecting the petitioner's case on merits. She submitted that at that point
of time the respondents had not raised any objection with regard to
jurisdiction and this clearly implied that they have waived the condition
stipulated in Clause 14.10 of the contract between the parties whereby
the Courts at Mumbai had been given exclusive jurisdiction.

OMP 12/2008

Page No.3 of 8

Consequently, according to the learned counsel for the plaintiff, because
of the provisions of Section 42 of the said Act, this Court would have
jurisdiction in entertaining the present petition.

4.

In Triveni Oil Field Services Limited (supra), the issue of

territorial jurisdiction in the backdrop of instantaneous communications
had been considered threadbare. In that case everything had happened at
Dehradun and the only point to be considered was the issuance of letter
of intent which also had been issued from Dehradun but in the form of a
telex message addressed to the petitioner at New Delhi. The said telex
message indicating the acceptance of the respondent had been received
by the petitioner at its telex machine at New Delhi. After considering the
Supreme Court decisions in the case of Bhagwandas Goverdhandas
Kedia v. M/s Girdharilal Parshottamdas and Co. AIR 1966 SC 543 and
A.B.C. Laminart Pvt. Ltd and Another v. A.P. Agencies, Salem: (1989)
2 SCC 163, this Court observed that the normal rule applicable to postal
communications would not be applicable to communications which are
instantaneous as in the case of a telephone conversation or a telex
message.

It further observed that the normal rule for postal

communications, as observed by the Supreme Court, is that the contract
is completed the moment the acceptor posts his acceptance of the offer.

OMP 12/2008

Page No.4 of 8

It was further observed that had the communication been by post and
had a letter been posted at Dehradun, under the normal rule, the contract
could have been said to have been completed and concluded at Dehradun
and no part of cause of action would have arisen at Delhi. However as
the communication of the acceptance was by way of a telex message, the
principles which would apply would be different. It was held that since
the telex message was received at New Delhi, the contract was concluded
at New Delhi, that is, the place where the acceptance was received. In
the case before me, the letter of intent had admittedly been issued by the
respondents from Mumbai by fax and the same had been received by the
petitioner on its fax machine in Delhi. It is, therefore, clear that, this
being a case of instantaneous communication, the normal rule as
applicable to postal communications would not apply and the contract
would be deemed to have been concluded at the place where the
acceptance was received, that is, New Delhi. Clearly, therefore, part of
the cause of action did arise within the territorial limits of this Court.

5.

This takes me to the discussion of the jurisdiction clause

contained in Clause 14.10 of the contact between the parties. As noted in
A.B.C. Laminart (supra) as well as in the other two decisions cited by
the learned counsel for the parties, there can be a clause whereby

OMP 12/2008

Page No.5 of 8

jurisdiction is restricted to any one or more of the Courts which
otherwise have jurisdiction in the matter. It is well settled that parties by
agreement cannot confer jurisdiction on a court which otherwise does not
have jurisdiction with regard to the subject matter. In the present case,
there is no dispute that the courts at Mumbai do have jurisdiction with
regard to the subject matter inasmuch as a substantial part of the cause of
action had arisen at Mumbai. It is also clear that Clause 14.10 would be
a clause whereby jurisdiction of courts other than the courts at Mumbai
has been ousted. This is amply demonstrated by the use of the word
“exclusive”. In ABC Laminart Pvt. Ltd (supra), it has been observed:“.......As regards construction of the ouster clause when
words like `alone', `only', `exclusive' and the like have been
used there may be no difficulty.”
This clearly shows that the intention of the parties was to exclude
jurisdiction of other courts and restrict the same to the Courts situated at
Mumbai.

The said clause 14.10, therefore, clearly restricted the

jurisdiction to the courts at Mumbai. However, this was by agreement
between the parties. The case of the petitioner is that it is by agreement
between the parties that this clause has been waived.

This can be

discerned from the fact that when the petitioner filed the earlier OMP No.
388/2006 under Section 12 and 13 of the said Act, the respondents raised
no objection with regard to jurisdiction and, in fact, submitted

OMP 12/2008

Page No.6 of 8

arguments

on merits.

It is another matter that the said OMP No.

388/2006 was dismissed by this Court but, it was not dismissed on the
question of jurisdiction. I am in agreement with the learned counsel for
the petitioner that by virtue of the fact that the respondent did not raise
any objection with regard to jurisdiction when the earlier petition under
the said Act had been filed before this Court, the respondent would be
deemed to have waived the condition with regard to exclusivity of
jurisdiction of the Courts situated at Mumbai. As much as clause 14.10
is contractual, so is waiver (See: Dawsons Bank Ltd v. Nippon Menkwa
Kabushiki Kaish (Japan Cotton Trading Co. Ltd: AIR 1935 Privy
Council 79; Mademsetty Satyanarayana v. G. Yelloji Rao and others:
AIR 1965 SC 1405; Supdt. Of Taxes, Dhubri and Others v.M/s
Onkarmal Nathmal Trust: (1976) 1 SCC 766; Krishna Bahadur v.
Purna Theatre and Others:

(2004) 8 SCC 229). That being the case,

the provisions of Section 42 of the said Act would come into play. Since
the first application had been filed before this Court, all subsequent
applications under the said Act falling within the ambit of Section 42
would also have to be filed before this Court.

6.

Consequently, I hold that this Court has jurisdiction to

entertain the present petition.

OMP 12/2008

This petition has to be disposed of on

Page No.7 of 8

merits. The learned counsel for the respondent shall file his reply within
four weeks.

The rejoinder, if necessary, be filed within two weeks

thereafter.

List the matter for disposal on 22nd October, 2008.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
April 30, 2008
J

OMP 12/2008

Page No.8 of 8

