THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on :31.01.2007

+

WP (C) 9305/2006

SH AJAY GARG, PROPRIETOR OF
M/S RATTAN KOD

...Petitioner

- versus LT. GOVERNOR OF DELHI & ORS

...Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr Sunil Malhotra.
For the Respondents
: Mr Ramesh K Sharma.

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

YES

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

YES

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

YES

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the
petitioner's father late Shri Rattan Lal was the holder of the KOD licence
No.3082/87 and was running his kerosene oil depot under the name and style
of M/s Rattan KOD at JB-3/64, Welcome, Seelampur, Delhi. He further
submitted that the said Shri Rattan Lal had been running the said depot since
1987 and no complaints were received from any party with regard to the
conduct of the business during his life time. The said Shri Rattan Lal passed
away on 29.01.2004. Three months thereafter some complaints surfaced with

WP(C)9305/2006

Page No.1 of 4

regard to the alleged irregularities committed during the month of June, 2003,
that is, ten months prior to the date of the complaint and seven months prior to
the death of the said Shri Rattan Lal.
2.

The learned counsel for the petitioner also pointed out that on the

death of Late Shri Rattan Lal, the KOD licence was substituted, though after
some litigation, in favour of the present petitioner who is the son of Shri
Rattan Lal. He submitted that the grievance of the petitioner in this petition is
against the order dated 9.11.2005 whereby his appeal against the cancellation
of the licence was rejected. The main ground taken by the learned counsel for
the petitioner is that two show cause notices dated 7.4.2004 and 8.7.2004
issued to the petitioner pertained to alleged irregularities committed during the
life time of the petitioner's father late Shri Rattan Lal. He submits that, as per
the records, there was no short supply. He further submitted that all the card
holders, subsequent to the alleged complaints, have filed affidavits stating that
no short supply was made to them. He further submits that the show cause
notices were issued to the petitioner when he was not involved in irregularities
allegedly committed during the period he was not conducting the affairs of the
depot. Therefore, in any event, even if it is assumed that the card holders
supported the stand taken in the complaint, it would not be possible for the
petitioner to have shown cause as was required of him. This is so because the
petitioner, apart from the records available with him which he was in
possession of after the demise of his father, had no personal knowledge with
WP(C)9305/2006

Page No.2 of 4

regard to the alleged irregularities. Therefore, according to the learned counsel
for the petitioner it was clearly unjust and unfair on the part of the authorities
to have cancelled the licence merely on the complaint of an NGO by the name
of Parivartan which had made allegations with regard to the short supply to the
said card holders.

And, particularly so because five card holders had

submitted affidavits stating that no short supplies were made to them.
3.

The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents

submitted arguments in support of the initial order of cancellation as well as
the order passed in appeal which is impugned herein. He submitted that the
irregularities were committed and, therefore, the licence was rightly cancelled.
4.

Having considered the arguments advanced by the counsel for the

parties, I am inclined to agree with the submissions made by the learned
counsel for the petitioner. This is primarily because of two reasons. The first
reason being that the card holders, who were allegedly supplied with quantities
of kerosene lesser than the amounts recorded, have stated on affidavits that no
short supply was made to them. The second reason is that the petitioner would
not be in a position to answer the show cause notices in an effective way
inasmuch as the allegations pertained to the period when his father was alive
and he alone was conducting the affairs of the kerosene oil depot. Another
aspect which requires consideration is that after the alleged irregularities were
committed, the said late Shri Rattan Lal was alive for 7 months but no
complaints were made during that period. It is only after his death and that too
WP(C)9305/2006

Page No.3 of 4

after three months that the said NGO made the said complaint. This also
indicates that the complaint was not sustainable. In these circumstances, the
writ petition is allowed. The impugned order cancelling the petitioner's said
licence is set aside.
BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
January 31, 2007
M

WP(C)9305/2006

Page No.4 of 4

