THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on : 31.07.2007

+

WP (C) 3472/2007

SHYAMLI BANERJEE

...Petitioner
- versus -

UNION OF INDIA & ORS

...Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr Deepak Prakash with Mr Gireesh Kumar, Mr Alok Joseph
and Mr Sajith P Warrier.
For the Respondents
: Mr Suresh Kait.

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

YES

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

YES

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

YES

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.

This writ petition has been filed seeking a direction to the

respondents to consider and examine the letter dated 04.09.2006 before
announcing the 53rd National Film Awards. A prayer has also made for calling
of the documents pertaining to the 53rd National Film Awards and to examine
the correctness of the procedure followed by the respondent. The third prayer
is that the respondent be directed to frame transparent regulations to restrict the
alleged illegal interference of officials of the Directorate of Film Festivals or
any other departments in the decision making process for arriving at the
WP(C)3472/2007

Page No.1 of 7

National Film Awards to be given each year.

2.

When this matter came up before my learned predecessor on

09.05.2007, it was directed that the petitioner's representations dated
13.08.2006 and 04.09.2006 be examined and considered by the respondent
Ministry, if not already considered, within a period of four weeks and a
reasoned order be passed. It was further directed that the 53rd National Film
Awards

pertaining

to

“Black”,

“Parineeta”,

“Parzania”,

“Anniyen”,

“Nishijapon”, Apaharan” be not declared till the decision on the representations
of the petitioner is taken. The respondent was further directed to place the
decision before the court on the next date of hearing.

3.

Mr Kait, who appears on behalf of the respondent, submitted that

pursuant to the said directions, the representations of the petitioner dated
13.08.2006 and 04.09.2006 were considered and a reply was sent to the
petitioner on 11.06.2007 giving details of the reasons as to why it was thought
that the petitioner's representations had no merit and were accordingly rejected.
The reply dated 11.06.2007 also indicates that it was issued with the approval
of Minister of Information and Broadcasting. A copy of the reply has been
placed on record as annexure R-III along with the counter affidavit filed on
behalf of the respondents.

WP(C)3472/2007

Page No.2 of 7

4.

The representation of the petitioner of 13.08.2006 raised two

specific issues. The petitioner registered her strong opposition to the decision
taken by the other members of the Jury regarding two categories :- Best
Direction and Indira Gandhi Award for Best First Film. According to the
petitioner that decision was not taken unanimously and some other members
also wished to opt for a reconsideration of the same.

According to the

petitioner, the decision for the Best Direction had gone to “Parzania” which, in
her view, was a wrong choice as the film was nothing but a mere reportage.
With regard to the Indira Gandhi Award for Best Film, the petitioner was of the
view that the award being given to “Parineeta” under this category was also not
appropriate inasmuch as the said film was an outright commercial film and this
runs counter to the object of the National Film Award. In this connection, by
the representation dated 13.08.2006, the petitioner requested the Minister for
Information and Broadcasting to intervene in the process and reconsider the
options for the above two categories.

5.

From the aforesaid description of the representation dated

13.08.2006, it is clear that the petitioner's first reaction, after the meeting of the
Jury, was confined to only two categories i.e., Best Direction and the Indira
Gandhi Award for the best first film. The other representation filed by the
petitioner was of 04.09.2006. This representation was in furtherance of the so
called “dissent letter” dated 13.08.2006 regarding the 53rd National Film
WP(C)3472/2007

Page No.3 of 7

Awards. In the letter of 04.09.2006, the amplitude of controversy has been
widened by the petitioner by bringing in other categories. In fact, there were
six categories of films and / or awards which had been made the subject matter
of dissent in the letter of 04.09.2006.

6.

These representations have now been considered and the letter

dated 11.06.2007 has been issued to the petitioner giving the reasons for
rejecting the said representations.

7.

The National Film Awards are governed by the Regulations which

are known as the National Film Awards Regulations.

The procedure for

selection is given in clauses 19 to 26 of the said Regulations. Under clause
19(a), the awards are to be decided by two Juries, one for feature films and
other for non-feature films, duly constituted by the Directorate with the
approval of the Government of India. The present case pertains to feature
films. The Jury for feature films, as provided in clause 19(b), is to comprise of
a Chairperson and not more than 16 members distinguished in the filed of
cinema, other allied arts and humanities. The present Jury for feature films
comprised of the Chairperson and 12 others including the petitioner. However,
at the deliberations one member of the Jury was absent. Thus, the entire
deliberations for the 53rd National Film Awards for feature films was conducted
in the presence of the Chairman and 11 other Jury members. Under clause
WP(C)3472/2007

Page No.4 of 7

20(a) of the Regulations, the Juries are required to determine their own work
procedure. Obviously, it goes without saying that where there is difference of
opinion then the majority view prevails. Under clause 20 (b), the Chairperson
of the Feature Film Jury, is permitted to constitute a maximum of four panels
from amongst the members of the Jury. Each panel, under clause 20(d) is
required to recommend not more than 33% of the films viewed by it for
combined viewing of the full jury. Importantly, clause 20(e) of the Regulations
provides that the Jury shall have the right to recall not more than such
percentage of total number of entries received as has been decided by the jury
before the screening of the films for the panels starts.

Clause 26 of the

Regulations provides that the Director of the Directorate and / or his / her
nominee may be present at the time of the deliberations of the juries only in
order to provide information /clarifications, if any, required by the juries and
not to participate in the deliberations. It is also interesting to note that clause
27, which falls under the heading “General”, stipulates that the decision of the
Government of India in respect of matters covered by these Regulations and of
the interpretation of these Regulations shall be final.

8.

It is not denied that 11 members of the Jury and the Chairperson

considered all the entires for the purposes of looking into the 53 rd National Film
Awards granted under the Feature Films Category. The only person who has
objected to some of the categories is the petitioner. No other Jury Member has
WP(C)3472/2007

Page No.5 of 7

come forward with any objection or in support of the contentions made by the
petitioner. In such a situation, even if it may be regarded as a decision which
was not unanimous then the dissent would only be of the petitioner and not of
the majority of the members. In any event, Mr Kait points out that immediately
on the conclusion of deliberations, the petitioner also signed the list of awards
to be given. According to the petitioner, she was forced to sign the said list.
Assuming for a moment that she was forced to sign the said list, this would not
make any difference to the decision with regard to the awards in question
because the rest of the members of the Jury have not objected or come forward
with any objection with regard to the decisions taken. The petitioner may have
her likes or dis-likes with regard to the awards that have been selected but her
sole decision will not override the decision of the majority of the members of
the Jury. Thus, insofar as her prayer with regard to the consideration of her
representation is concerned that seems to be adequately addressed. The 53rd
National Film Awards, accordingly, be announced by the respondent as per the
decision taken by the Jury.

With regard to the directions for framing of

regulations, I feel that there is no necessity for issuing any such direction. This
is so because the Regulations are already in place.

9.

The only thing remaining is that the petitioner may give suggestions

to improve the performance and to make the process of selection of awards
better in future. Such suggestions, according to Mr Kait, who appears on
WP(C)3472/2007

Page No.6 of 7

behalf of the respondent, are, in any event, invited each year from the Jury
Members. Accordingly, the petitioner may, if she so feels, submits a list of
suggestions that she may have.

The same may be sent to the Secretary,

Ministry of Information and Broadcasting within two weeks and all the
suggestions shall be looked into by the competent authority, and if found
feasible, be incorporated in their future selection process.
With these directions, the writ petition stands disposed of.
Dasti.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
July 31, 2007
M

WP(C)3472/2007

Page No.7 of 7

