THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Judgment delivered on :31.01.2007

+

WP (C) 10455/2006 & CM No.10293/2006

SHRI ASHOK KUMAR DHAR

...Petitioner
- versus -

GOVERNMENT OF NCT OF DELHI & ANR

...Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner
: Mr A.B. Dial, Sr Advocate with Mr Ajay Gaind
For the Respondents
: Mr Anoop Bagai

CORAM:HON'BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

YES

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

YES

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

YES

BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J (ORAL)
1.
Rule.
2.

With the consent of the parties, this petition is taken up for

disposal.
3.

The contention of the petitioner is that the petitioner was allotted an

industrial plot under the 1982 policy for allotment of plots in Functional
Industrial Estate for Electronics at Okhla, New Delhi. Although the plot was
alloted to the petitioner, possession could not be handed over inasmuch as it
was illegally occupied by some third parties. Subsequently, another plot was
allotted to the petitioner. Unfortunately, the possession of this plot was also not
WP(C)10455/06&CM10293/06

Page No.1 of 5

handed over to the petitioner nor was any conveyance deed executed by the
respondents on the ground that the petitioner and his relatives have other
industrial plots.

4.

It is contended on behalf of the petitioner that the 1982 Scheme did

not contain any condition that a person would not be allotted a plot if he or his
relatives had alternative industrial plots. Reliance was placed on two decisions
of this court in Civil Writ Petition No.2852/1997 (Arun Jain v. Government of
National Capital Territory of Delhi, decided on 23.05.2003) and Civil Writ
Petition No.953/1997: M/s J.P. Minda and Partners and Another v.
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi, decided on 10.11.2004).

5.

The learned counsel for the respondents submitted that when the

subsequent plot was alloted to the petitioner, the policy had changed and there
was a requirement of the petitioner filing an affidavit to indicate that neither he
nor his relatives had been allotted any industrial plot. He submitted that an
affidavit had been filed by the petitioner to this effect. However, subsequently,
it was found that a family members of the petitioner had industrial plots. It is
for this reason that the allotment was cancelled.

6.

In rejoinder, the learned counsel for the petitioner made a two-fold

submission. The first submission is that the 1982 Scheme did not contain any
WP(C)10455/06&CM10293/06

Page No.2 of 5

requirement of the petitioner and also his family members not having been
allotted any industrial plot. Secondly, he contended that no allotments were, in
fact, made in favour of the petitioner nor any of his family members. Some of
the family members of the petitioner had acquired plots on purchase from the
market and it was not a case of allotment by the respondents. In any event, he
submits that the question of the family members owning industrial plots is not
relevant inasmuch as the 1982 Scheme contained no such stipulation.

In

support of this contention, the learned counsel for the petitioner relied on the
following observations and findings in the decision of this court in J.P. Minda
(supra) to the following effect:“The aforesaid controversy has been resolved by
this Court in a similar petition being Civil Writ No.2852 of
1997 (Arun Jain Vs. Government of National Capital
Territory of Delhi, decided on 23.5.2003) wherein in similar
circumstances, it was held that after the entire exercise having
been done by the respondents on the basis of which the
petitioner was found successful for allotment of the plot, at
later stage he could not be denied the allotment on the ground
that there was a change in the policy after the scheme was
circulated. In that case, the respondents were directed to allot
the plot to the petitioner. However, learned counsel for the
respondents contends that the aforesaid decision is
distinguishable. The contention is without merit.
In 1982, when the respondents advertised the
scheme for allotment of industrial plots, the respondents did
not ask for any information as to whether any of the family
members of the applicant has been allotted an industrial plot.
Though the wife of the petitioner No.2 was a partner of M/s.
P.C. Minda to whom the allotment of plot No.A-67/2, G.T.
Karnal Road was made, the partnership was dissolved in the
year 1988. Thereafter, the wife of the petitioner No.2 had
also executed a relinquishment deed relinquishing her interest
WP(C)10455/06&CM10293/06

Page No.3 of 5

in the aforesaid plot. Thus, it cannot be said that there was
any concealment of information at the time of making
application for allotment of plot in 1982.
The only
information to be given was whether the applicant had
already been allotted a plot/shed/flatted factory in any of the
approved industrial area/estate by the DDA/Directorate of
Industries/DSIDC
or
any
other
Government/Semi
Government agency. the petitioner had admittedly given such
information by mentioning that no such plot/shed/flatted
factory has been allotted to the applicant. There is no
provision in the application or 1982 Scheme that if applicant
has been allotted such a plot already, he would not be eligible.
This significant omission would rather convey that no such
ineligibility was attached or there was no stipulation or policy
that if a person or his family members has already been
allotted a plot, in an approved industrial area, then he would
not be entitled to apply.”

7.

Considering the arguments advanced by the counsel for the parties,

I find that the decision in J.P. Minda's case (supra) covers the present case
entirely. Under the 1982 Scheme, the petitioner was entitled to the allotment of
a plot. The same could not be handed over to the petitioner because it was in
the unauthorised occupation of some third party. This was, therefore, not on
account of any fault on the part of the petitioner. As held in the decision of
J.P. Minda (supra), the subsequent change in policy would not disentitle the
petitioner from seeking allotment of the plot.

8.

Accordingly, the respondents are directed to deliver vacant

possession of the plot No.67 in Block-A to the petitioner and to execute the

WP(C)10455/06&CM10293/06

Page No.4 of 5

lease deed. The same has to be done on the petitioner clearing all the dues, if
any.
This writ petition stands disposed of. No costs.

BADAR DURREZ AHMED
(JUDGE)
January 31, 2007
sd

WP(C)10455/06&CM10293/06

Page No.5 of 5

