*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CRL.A. NO.699/2005

%

Date of Decision :

#
!

VAHID ALI @ DEVA

6th of August, 2007

.....Appellant
Through : Mr. V.K. Raina, Advocate
versus

$
^

STATE

.....Respondent
Through : Ms. Richa Kapoor, APP for
State

*

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE R.S. SODHI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE B.N. CHATURVEDI
1.
2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.
:

Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

R.S. SODHI, J. (Oral)
1.
This is an appeal arising out of judgment and order
of Additional Sessions Judge, Delhi in Sessions Case No.
119/2001 whereby the learned Judge by an order dated 17th
December 2003 has held appellant guilty for the offence
punishable under Section 302 IPC for the murder of Laxmi
Crl.A. No.699/2005

Page 1 of 8

and further by his order order 22nd December 2003 has
sentenced the appellant to undergo life imprisonment and to
pay a fine of Rs.5,000/- and in default simple imprisonment
for one year.

2.

The facts of the case as noticed by the learned trial
Court are as follows:“Brief facts leading to the prosecution
case are that on 18019-97, Vahid Ali and
Laxmi were admitted in JPN Hospital in
burnt condition. SI Gernail Singh, ASI
M.H. KHan and HC Dev Karan and
constable Sunil went to the hospital and
collected the MLCs of Vahid Ali and
Laxmi. Both the injured were declared fit
to make statement by the doctor.
Statement of Laxmi was recorded who
stated that she was working as a Kabadi
alongwith her father Mahabir. She had
one house in Bihari Basti wherein Vahid
Ali alias Deva was a tenant in one room
for the last about four years. On that day,
at about 7 P.M., she alongwith her father
went to Bihari Basti to collect the rent
from Vahid Ali. When she demanded rent
from Vahid Ali, he replied that what she
would do with rent, let she marry him.
She became furious and told him that she
was already married.
Whey she was
using this language for her but again, he
stated that he wanted to marry her and if
she would not be his, he would not let her
be anybody's else. On this, when she
scolded him, he picked up a kerosene
stove and poured kerosene oil on her.
She raised alarm. By the time, her father
reached there.
Vahid Ali burnt a

Crl.A. No.699/2005

Page 2 of 8

matchstick and threw it on her. She
grappled Vahid Ali to save herself. He
father took her to the hospital.
She
further stated that Vahid Ali poured
kerosene on her and put her on fire with
intend to kill her because he intended
that if she would not marry her, he would
kill her. On this statement, FIR U/s. 307
IPC was got recorded. Rukka was sent to
the police station through HC Dev Karan.
Place of occurrence was got photographed
and one stove and burnt cloth pieces as
well as matchstick was taken into
possession by the police. On 20-10-97,
accused was arrested.
On 23-10-97,
Laxmi expired in JPN Hospital. Inquest
proceedings were conducted.
After
conducting post mortem, dead body was
handed over to the father of the deceased.
As per post mortem report, the death in
this case was due to Septicaemia
consequent upon infected burn injuries
on about 70% of total body surface area.
After completing investigation, challan
was filed in the court.”
3.

The prosecution in order to establish its case
examined twenty one witnesses. PW-6 Mahabir is the father
of the deceased who is the eye witness of the occurrence.
The learned trial Court on the basis of the relevant material
before it and on a careful analysis of the evidence adduced
came to the conclusion that PW-6 was a reliable witness and
was an eye witness of the occurrence.

This statement is

corroborated by the deceased in the MLC as also in the
rukka which is the statement of the deceased recorded by

Crl.A. No.699/2005

Page 3 of 8

the IO on being declared fit to make statement. The Court
after careful examination held that the prosecution had
been able to establish its case beyond shadow of doubt.

4.

In appeal counsel for the petitioner states that PW-6
is not a reliable witness since his presence has not been
noticed by the PW-2 and PW-3.

He also contends that

statement of the deceased to the Doctor cannot be read into
evidence since the Doctor who recorded the statement was
not examined.

5.

With the aid of learned counsel we have reassessed
the material on record and have carefully gone through the
statement of PW-6. We find that PW-6 has stated that:“Laxmi deceased was my daughter and
she was married with Sagir Ahmad. My
daughter had another house in Bihari
Basti, Yamuna Pushta.
It is a two
storeyed house. Accd. Vahid Ali present
in court was residing in a room situated
on the first floor of that house as a tenant
for the last about 2/3 years. As such, he
was known to me. On 18.10.97, myself
and Laxmi went to the house where the
accd. was living for demanding rent from
him. We went there at about 7 pm. My
daughter Laxmi went upstairs to collect
the rent and I remained standing
downstairs at a nearby tea stall. I heard
a noise from the upstairs and I went

Crl.A. No.699/2005

Page 4 of 8

upstairs and heard that accd. was saying
to Laxmi that she should marry him,
otherwise he would not leave her to live
with someone else. One stove was there
and the lid of the same found open and a
smell of kerosene oil was there. When I
asked the accd. as to what he was doing.
In the meantime, the accd. burnt a match
stick and put fire on Laxmi. Laxmi told
me that accd. had poured kerosene oil on
her. Laxmi caught hold of the accd. as a
result of which the accd. also received
burn injuries on his arms. I raised the
noise. In the meantime, my son-in-law
Sagir, Satbir and Sher Singh came there.
We tore the clothes of the deceased and I
removed her to JPN Hospital in a TSR and
got her admitted there. Police came in
the hospital and recorded the statement
of Laxmi. The doctors have also taken the
statement of Laxmi. She stated that she
had been burnt by the accd. after pouring
kerosene oil on her. After the statement
of the deceased, I accompanied the police
to the spot. The photographs were taken
of the spot, the site plan was prepared.
The stove, the lid of stove, the burnt
clothes of the deceased, match box and
half burnt match stick which was lying
there was also lifted and sealed. The half
burnt pillow was also sealed. All these
articles were seized vide memo Ex. PW6/A
which is thumb marked by me at point A.
From the spot, the accd. had run towards
the house of his sister. The accd. was
also brought to the hospital by his sister
when I had reached there with the
deceased.
The accd. was arrested on
20.10.97 from the hospital and his
personal search memo Ex. PW6/B was
prepared which is thumb marked by me
at point A. The stove is Ex.P.1, the half
burnt pillow is Ex.P.2, match box is
Ex.P.3 and the burnt clothes are Ex.P.4
Crl.A. No.699/2005

Page 5 of 8

and P.5, two bangles of Laxmi are Ex.P.6
and P.7 are the same. Laxmi died in the
hospital on 23.10.97 and I identified the
deadbody vide my statement Ex.PW6/C
and the deadbody was received by me
vide memo Ex.PW6/D. Laxmi was having
burn injury and her right hand thumb
was burnt and bandaged and as such,
she put her left hand thumb impression
on her statement in my presence at point
A on Ex.PW5/A. Vahid Ali is also known
by the name Deva.”
6.

There is no meaningful cross-examination of this
witness and defence taken by the accused that he sustained
burn injuries while saving the deceased has not been
substantiated. On the other hand, besides PW-6 giving the
cause of injury sustained by the accused, we have the
statement of Laxmi recorded by the Investigating Officer
which became the FIR in this case to the effect that while
she was burning she caught hold of the accused.

7.

From the evidence on record primarily PW-6 as also
PW-5/A it stands proved that the accused was a tenant of
Laxmi at the ground floor of the house in question. On
18.10.97 Laxmi alongwith her father went to collect rent.
The accused did not pay rent, but instead got into
altercation with Laxmi.

PW-6 heard the altercation and

went upstairs. There he saw Laxmi drenched in oil. On his
Crl.A. No.699/2005

Page 6 of 8

questioning the accused, the accused struck a matchstick
and set ablaze Laxmi. Laxmi, in panic, clung to the accused
in which process, the accused sustained burns. Laxmi was
taken to the hospital by PW-6 where she narrated the
incident to the doctor as also to the police man, who
recorded the same in the form of Rukka, sent it to the Police
Station wherein FIR Ex. PW 5/A was recorded.

It is in

evidence that the narration of incident given to the doctor by
Laxmi was when she was declared fit to make a statement.
It is also in evidence that Laxmi's statement was recorded in
the Rukka after she was declared fit to make a statement.
With this evidence on record, we have no doubt that the
prosecution has been able to bring home the charge as
framed against the accused.
8.

Having reappraised the material on record, we have
come to the conclusion that the judgment of the trial Court
under challenge suffers from no infirmity.

We uphold the

same and dismiss the appeal.

(R.S. SODHI)
JUDGE

Crl.A. No.699/2005

Page 7 of 8

August 06, 2007
ag

Crl.A. No.699/2005

( B.N.CHATURVEDI)
JUDGE

Page 8 of 8

