*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CRL.A. NO.792/2005

%

Date of Decision :

#
!

DINESH SHARMA

7th of August, 2007

......... Appellant
Through : Mr. Bhupesh Narula,
Advocate
versus

$
^

STATE

.....Respondent
Through : Ms. Richa Kapoor, APP for
State

*

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE R.S. SODHI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE B.N. CHATURVEDI
1.
2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.
:

Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

R.S. SODHI, J. (Oral)
Crl.M.A. No. 7927/2007
Heard.

Allowed.

For the reasons stated in the

application, order dated 10th July 2007 dismissing the appeal
in default is recalled and the appeal is restored to its original
Crl.A. No.792/2005

Page 1 of 9

number and file.

CRL.A. 792/2005
1.

This is an appeal arising out of judgment and order
of Additional Sessions Judge, New Delhi in Sessions Case
No. 13/1999 FIR No. 93/1999 Police Station Vasant Kunj,
whereby the learned Judge by his judgment dated 17th
August 2005 held appellant guilty for the offence under
Sections 364/377/302 IPC and further by an order dated 6th
September 2005 imposed the following sentences:“Hence the convict Dinesh Chand Sharma is
sentenced to undergo life imprisonment and to
pay a fine of Rs.1000/- for the offence u/s 302
IPC and in default of payment of fine to
undergo simple imprisonment for a period of
one month, he is further sentenced to undergo
a fine of Rs.500/- for the offence u/s 364 IPC
and in default of payment of fine to further
undergo simple imprisonment for a period of
fifteen days, he is further sentenced to
undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of
five years and to pay a fine of Rs.500/- for the
offence u/s 377 IPC and in default of payment
of fine to undergo simple imprisonment for a
period of fifteen days.
However, all the
sentences shall run concurrently. The benefit
as provided u/s 428 Cr.P.C. shall also be
given to the convict.”

2.

The facts of the case as stated in the judgment of the
trial Court are:-

Crl.A. No.792/2005

Page 2 of 9

“That on 21.2.99 SI Madhav Krishan received
DD No.16A vide which information was
received that Shiv Shanker gave information
on telephone that his son Anil aged about
8/10 years had gone with other boy on cycle,
his cycle has been recovered but there is no
information about his son and crowd gathered
there.
On receipt of this information, SI
Madhav Krishan alongwith Ct. Ajad Singh
reached Bhagwan Singh Camp where Ram
Kumar Dubey met them and gave his
statement to the effect that his son Anil
Kumar Dubey aged about 10 years had gone
to Lal Khet at about 8 a.m to distribute
newspapers and at about 10 a.m, his cycle has
been recovered but he is missing and he could
not locate his son.
His statement was
recorded in DD No. 22A, PCR people were
informed and wireless message was also sent,
DD No. 16A was kept pending and when Anil
Kumar Dubey could not be located despite
best efforts, thereafter, a case under Section
365 IPC was registered. During investigation,
the IO inspected the spot, site plan was
prepared from where the cycle was recovered,
the cycle was taken into police possession,
statement
of
witnesses
was
recorded.
Thereafter, investigation was marked to
Inspector and during the investigation, on
22.2.99, Dinesh Sharma who was coming from
Lal Khet side, he was stopped and was
interrogated for Anil Kumar Dubey. Initially,
Dinesh Sharma did not disclose anything but
when he was interrogated thoroughly, then he
disclosed that he had kidnapped Anil Kumar
Dubey with the intention to kill him. He was
taken to some other place and thereafter, he
did carnal intercourse with him and killed him
by strangulating him with the help of his
muffler and after killing him, the dead body
was thrown in the bushes of Sarkanda and to
mi-lead the police, the cycle was thrown at
some other place. His disclosure statement
was recorded in which he disclosed all facts
Crl.A. No.792/2005

Page 3 of 9

about this case that he kidnapped Anil Kumar,
committed carnal intercourse with him,
cleaned blood from his private part with the
help of his underwear and threw that
underwear in bushes and thereafter, he killed
him by strangulating him with the help of
muffler. He further disclosed that after killing
Anil Kumar Dubey, he washed his hands with
water from the nearby Khan and piece of
muffler was also kept in one side and then, he
came back to his jhuggi and at his jhuggi, he
changed his clothes as there were blood stains
on his pant and shirt and thereafter, he left
his jhuggi. On the pointing out of accused,
dead body of Anil Kumar Dubey was
recovered, he also got recovered the
underwear and muffler. In the meantime, the
Crime team was called and spot was got
inspected by the Crime team, scene of
occurrence was also got photographed. The
dead body was sent to the mortuary of Safdur
Jung Hospital. The chappal of the deceased
were also seized from the spot, the blood
sample was collected from the body of
deceased and was kept in plastic bottles and
was sealed and taken into police possession.
After completion of investigation, the challan
was filed in the Court.
The case was
committed to court of Sessions.”
3.

The prosecution in order to establish its case
examined as many as thirteen witnesses. Of them, the star
witness appears to be PW-7, who had allegedly seen the
deceased alongwith the accused at about 8:30 AM on 21st
February 1999.

He is also the witness of arrest of the

accused as also the disclosure statement and the recovery of
the dead body and other articles at the instance of the

Crl.A. No.792/2005

Page 4 of 9

accused. The trial Court relying heavily on the testimony of
PW-7 and the other material on record arrived at a
conclusion that the prosecution has firmly established its
case beyond shadow of doubt.

4.

Counsel for the appellant states before us that the
trial Court has gone wrong in evaluating the material on
record in as much as

the first information given to the

police by PW-6, which was recorded in DD Ex. PW3/A states
that the deceased left the house on a bicycle alongwith
another boy in the morning. Another information passed to
the police, is recorded in DD 22-A Ex. PW 11/A to the effect
that the child is missing since 8:30 AM and that the bicycle
of the child has been recovered.

He contends that the

prosecution has not investigated as to who was the person
who left alongwith the child in the morning from the house
and where the deceased part company.

He contends that

PW-7 is not a reliable witness and has been introduced at
the instance of the investigation only to bolster the case.
For this purpose, counsel submits that PW-7's statement
that he has seen the child/deceased in the company of
accused in the morning soon after 8:30 AM at the mines

Crl.A. No.792/2005

Page 5 of 9

cannot be believed and is contrary to the report recorded in
DD 22-A.

He also contends that according to PW-6 he

received information that the body of his child was lying at
the mines and that he may identify the same.

This

information was received by PW-6 at 2 O'Clock while the
arrest memo shows that the accused was arrested at 3
O'Clock on 22nd February 1999. He contends that the body
having been discovered prior to the arrest cannot be said to
be at the instance of the accused and the statement of PW-7
to the contrary cannot be relied upon. Counsel also takes
benefit of the medical evidence which shows that the child
has been sodomized but there are no corresponding injuries
on the accused.

Further the scientific evidence does not

reveal that the semen found on the clothing of the deceased
matches that of the accused.

Under these circumstances

counsel submits that the accused cannot be held guilty of
the offences charged.
5.

Counsel for the State, on the other hand, contends
that PW-7 is a reliable witness and has got no cause to
depose against accused.

She also contends that the

material on record taken, together with oral testimonies
leads to the only conclusion than the accused is guilty of the

Crl.A. No.792/2005

Page 6 of 9

offence.

Counsel also states that the trial Court as given

cogent reasons on the basis of material available to hold the
appellant guilty of the charge and those reasons cannot be
faulted with.

6.

We have heard learned counsels at great length and
with their assistance have carefully gone through the
material on record. We find that the first information given
to the police in DD 16-A and 22-A indicated that the child
left the house alongwith another boy on a bicycle on 21st
February 1999 at around 8:30 A.M. The bicycle was later
recovered at about 10:00 A.M. but there was no trace of the
child. It is only in the evening that PW-7 surfaces, to state
that he had seen the child at 8:30 AM in the mines near
Bhagwan Singh Camp area. PW-7 also states that while he
was giving information to the police on 22nd February 1999
the accused was taken into custody.

The arrest memo

shows the time of arrest at 3:00 P.M. He also states that the
accused made a disclosure statement leading to the
discovery of the dead body at the mines.

However, PW-6

states that he had already received information about the
discovery of the body of the child at the mines at 2:00 PM

Crl.A. No.792/2005

Page 7 of 9

and that he was asked to go and identify the body. In which
event it was not possible for PW-7 to have witnessed the
recovery of the dead body at the instance of the accused at
3:30 PM nor can it be said that the discovery of the dead
body has been made at the instance of the accused since it
had already been discovered at 2 O'Clock prior to the arrest
of accused. Coupled with this, we have material on record
by way of MLC of the accused that there were no signs on
the accused having sodomized the deceased who was ten
year old boy. From the scientific evidence we find that the
semen found on the clothing of the deceased does not match
with that of the accused nor the blood found on the articles
of the deceased and the accused match with that of the
deceased.

7.

In these circumstances it would be difficult to
deduce that the deceased had been sodomized by the
accused and thereafter strangulated.

Even the last seen

account does not appear to be accurate. In this view of the
matter, we find that the prosecution has not been able to
connect the accused with the crime and that the trial Court
was

wrong

in

Crl.A. No.792/2005

relying

on

the

testimony

of

Page 8 of 9

PW-7.

Consequently we set aside the judgment of conviction and
sentence and acquit the appellant of the charges framed.
Crl.M.A. No. 5497/2007 and Crl.M.(B) No. 722/2007
stand disposed of accordingly.

(R.S. SODHI)
JUDGE

August 07, 2007
ag

Crl.A. No.792/2005

( B.N.CHATURVEDI)
JUDGE

Page 9 of 9

