*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+
%
#

W.P. (Crl.) No. 930/2007
DATE OF DECISION: 14th August 2007
COURT ON ITS OWN MOTION

!

versus

$
^

STATE & ANR.
Through:

..... Respondent
Mr. Rajat Katyal, Proxy counsel
for Ms. Mukta Gupta, Advocate for the
State.
Ms. Meenakshi Arora, Advocate for NHRC.
Ms. Barkha Gupta, M.M. Rohini in person

*

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE R.S. SODHI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE B.N.CHATURVEDI

1.
Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
Yes
2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.
Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
Yes
:

R.S. SODHI, J. (Oral)
W.P. (Crl.) No. 930/2007 was initiated on a complaint received by

this Court, which was forwarded to this bench.

The communication

revealed instance of insensitivity on the part of various authorities
while dealing the case of a child subjected to sexual abuse. On the
previous date we had requested the Human Rights Commission as also
the Metropolitan Magistrate dealing with concerned case to assist this
Court to enable it to lay down some guidelines which would facilitate
the concerned authorities to take appropriate measures.

Today, the

National Human Rights Commission and Ms. Mukta Gupta, for the State
as also Ms. Barkha Gupta, learned Metropolitan Magistrate have filed
suggestions.
We have carefully gone through the suggested guidelines and
heard Ms. Meenakshi Arora as also learned Metropolitan Magistrate Ms.

Yes

Barkha Gupta.
The children by reason of their physical and mental status need
special safeguards and care. Child victims of sexual abuse are to be
treated with compassion and dignity.

All concerned associated with

Criminal Justice System need to be sensitized about their protective
role to prevent further victimisation of child victims. To secure this end
it is rendered imperative to lay down certain guidelines, which we do
and direct as follows :-

POLICE
1. On a complaint of a congnizable offence involving a child victim
being made, concerned police officer shall record the complaint
promptly and accurately.
2. The investigation of the case shall be referred to an officer not below
the rank of Sub-Inspector, preferably a lady officer, sensitized by
imparting appropriate training to deal with child victims of sexual
crime.
3. The statement of the victim shall be recorded verbatim.
4. The officer recording the statement of the child victim should not be
in police uniform.
5. The statement of the child victim shall be recorded at the residence
of the victim or at any other place where the victim can make a
statement freely without fear.
6. The statement should be recorded promptly without any loss of time.
7. The parents of the child or any other person in whom the child
reposes trust and confidence will be allowed to remain present.
8. The Investigating Officer to ensure that at no point should the child
victim come in contact with the accused.

9. The child victim shall not be kept in the police station overnight on
any pretext, whatsoever, including medical examination.
10.The Investigating Officer recording the statement of the child victim
shall ensure that the victim is made comfortable before proceeding
to record the statement and that the statement carries accurate
narration of the incident covering all relevant aspects of the case.
11.In the event the Investigating Officer should so feel the necessity,
he may take the assistance of a psychiatrist.
12.The Investigating Officer shall ensure that the child victim is
medically examined at the earliest preferably within twenty four
hours (in accordance with Section 164-A Cr.P.C) at the nearest
government hospital or hospital recognized by the government.
13.The Investigating Officer shall ensure that the investigating team
visits the site of the crime at the earliest to secure and collect all
incriminating evidence available.
14.The

Investigating

Officer

shall

promptly

refer

for

forensic

examination clothings and articles necessary to be examined, to the
forensic laboratory which shall deal with such cases on priority basis
to make its report available at an early date.
15.The investigation of the cases involving sexually abused child may
be investigated on a priority basis and completed preferably within
ninety days of the registration of the case. The investigation shall be
periodically supervised by senior officer/s.
16.The Investigating Officer shall ensure that the identity of the child
victim is protected from publicity.

MEDICAL EXAMINATION
1. In case of a girl child victim the medical examination shall be

conducted preferably by a female doctor.
2. In so far as it may be practical, psychiatrist help be made available
to the child victim before medical examination at the hospital itself.
3. The report should be prepared expeditiously and signed by the
doctor conducting the examination and a copy of medical report be
provided to the parents/guardian of the child victim.
4. In the event results of examination are likely to be delayed, the
same should be clearly mentioned in the medical report.
5. The parents/guardian/person in whom child have trust should be
allowed to be present during the medical examination.
6. Emergency medical treatment wherever necessary should be
provided to the child victim.
7. The child victim shall be afforded prophylactic medical treatment
against STDs.
8. In the event the child victim is brought to a private/nursing home,
the child shall be afforded immediate medical attention and the
matter be reported to the nearest police station.

RECORDING OF STATEMENT BEFORE MAGISTRATE
1. The statement of the child victim shall be recorded promptly and at
the earliest by the concerned Magistrate and any adjournment shall
be avoided and in case the same is unavoidable, reasons to be
recorded in writing.
2. In the event of the child victim being in the hospital, the concerned
Magistrate shall record the statement of the victim in the hospital.
3. To create a child friendly environment separate rooms be provided
within the Court precincts where the statement of the child victim
can be recorded.

4. The

child

victim

shall

not

be

separated

from

his/her

parents/guardians nor taken out from his/her environment on the
ground of “Ascertaining voluntary nature of statement” unless the
parents/guardian is reported to be abusive or the Magistrate thinks it
appropriate in the interest of justice.
5. Wherever possible, the IO shall ensure that the statement of the
child victim is also video recorded.
6. No Court shall detain a child in an institution meant for adults.

TRIAL COURT
1. It shall be endeavor of the Court to create a child friendly
atmosphere while conducting its proceedings in respect of a sexually
abused child.
2. Proceedings shall be conducted in camera and appropriate measures
taken to ensure that the child victim is not confronted with the
accused and the directions in this regard given by the Supreme
Court in 2004 (5) SCC 518 'Sakshi vs. Union of India' are
enforced.
3. Wherever possible the Court may resort to the recording of
statement through video conferencing.
4. The Court may, if it so thinks fit, direct that the questions to be put
by the accused in cross-examination to the child victim be given in
writing to the Presiding Officer of the Court, who may in turn put the
same to the victim in a language which is neither embarrassing nor
confusing.
5. The Committal Court shall commit such cases to the Court of
Sessions preferably within fifteen days after the filing of the
chargesheet.

6. The concerned authorities are directed to inform themselves of the
guidelines laid down by the Supreme Court in 1995 (1) SCC 14
'Delhi Domestic Working Women's Forum vs. Union of India &
Ors.', 1996 (2) SCC 384 'State of Punjab vs. Gurmit Singh &
Ors.' as also 2004 (5) SCC 518 'Sakshi vs. Union of India &
Ors'.
The above directions be promptly circulated to all concerned and
put into practice to ensure that justice to the child victim does not
suffer.
The petition is accordingly disposed of.

R.S. SODHI, J.

B.N.CHATURVEDI, J.
AUGUST 14, 2007
ag

