IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1448/2001
Da te of decision: March 2, 2007
DR. VIBHA JAIN
... Petitioner
through Mr. Ravi Prakash, Advocate
VERSUS
THE DIR.NATIONAL BOARD OF EXA.
....
Respondent
through Mr. Vinay Kishan Jetly,Adv.
with Mr. Vikram Jetly, Adv. for resp.
no. 1
Mr. Maninder Singh, Adv. with
Mr. Kirtiman Singh and
Mr. Girish Mishra, Adv. for resp./MCI
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

The efficacy of an oral interview test for assessing and

evaluating the capacity and calibre of candidates came up before
the Apex Court in the celebrated pronouncement reported (1981)
1 SCC 722 Ajay Hasia & Ors. vs Khalid Mujib Sehravardi
& Ors. While noticing that an oral interview test is undoubtedly

W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 1 of 63

not a very satisfactory test for assessing and evaluating the
capacity and calibre of candidates, it was held that in the absence
of any better test for measuring personal characteristics and traits,
the oral interview test, must, at the present stage, be regarded as
not irrational or irrelevant.
2.

It is such a criterion which has been challenged by the

petitioner in the present writ petition wherein the following
prayers have been made by the petitioner:(a) issue any appropriate writ or direction
quashing provision contained in sub-clause
(d) of clause 6.7 and clause 6.16 of Bulletin of
Information and
Application Form for
Diplomate
of
National
Board
Final
Examination for the year July/October, 2000
published by the National Board of
Examinations (Respondent No. 1) as ultravires violating articles 14 and 19 (1) (a) of the
Constitution of India; and/or
(b) issue any appropriate writ or direction
quashing provision contained in sub-clause (c)
of clause 6.7 of Bulletin of Information and
Application Form for Diplomate of National
Board Final Examination
for the year
July/October, 2000 published by the National
Board of Examinations (Respondent No. 1) as
ultra-vires violating article 14 of the
Constitution of India; and/or
(c) issue any appropriate writ or direction
declaring the petitioner successful in the
examination held by the National Board of
Examination for the year July/October, 2000
on the basis of marks obtained in the theory
examination; and/or
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 2 of 63

3.

(d) issue any appropriate writ or direction
declaring the petitioner successful in the
examination held by the National Board of
Examination for the year July/October, 2000
on the basis of combined marks obtained in
the theory and practical examination; and/or
(e) issue any appropriate writ or direction
commanding the respondent no. 1 namely the
National Board of Examination to disclose the
marks obtained by the petitioner in both
theory, thesis and practical examinations for
the academic year April, 1999, June, 1999,
December, 1999, April, 2000, July, 2000,
November, 2000 in which she has appeared.”
The petitioner has contended that prior to the year 1975, the

proficiency and standard of medical education at the postgraduate level was laid down by the Medical Council of India.
However since the examinations used to be conducted by different
universities and institutions, therefore the standard of evaluation
used to vary from university to university. Accordingly, it is with a
view to improve the quality of higher medical education uniformly
throughout the country that the respondent no. 1 was established.
4.

The respondents have pointed out that the National Board of

Examinations was established by the Government of India in the
year 1975. The main objective of the Board was to establish an
examining body at the national level which could conduct postgraduate and post doctral examination of uniform and high
standards. This Board became an independent and autonomous
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 3 of 63

body in the year 1982. It confers a post-graduate degree which is
known as the “Diplomate of National Board”.
5.

It appears that thereby a dual system of awarding post-

graduate degrees was created, one being the post-graduate degree
granted by various universities duly recognised by the Medical
Council of India and the second one being the degree at the postgraduate level titled the 'Diplomate of the National Board'(DNB for
short) granted by the respondent no. 1. In exercise of the power
conferred by Section 32 of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956,
Notification No. 5.11015/75/83 - ME(Policy) was issued by the
Government of India through the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare whereby the DNB degree in 25 specialties and 11 superspecialties and 3 specialties under the direct five year course were
incorporated in the First Schedule of the Indian Medical Council
Act.
6.

Before this court, while the respondent no. 1 has claimed that

the post-graduate degree awarded by the Board is equivalent to the
M.D./M.S. degree, this submission is vehemently disputed by Mr.
Maninder Singh, learned counsel appearing for the Medical
Council of India – respondent no. 2 who has contended that the
scheme of the two courses, the method of admission, the nature of
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 4 of 63

examination and the training imparted to the students who
undertook the M.D./M.S. courses is totally different from the
scheme of the examination conducted by the respondent no. 1 and
consequently, no equivalence can be drawn between the two
degrees in any manner. It has been vehemently submitted by Mr.
Singh, learned counsel that the candidates who undergo the
M.D./M.S. course not only undergo regular teaching but also get
hands on experience on patients and undergo vigorous training
during the three year course which according to him is not
undergone by the candidates who undergo the DNB tests.
Inasmuch as no such issue has been raised by the petitioner
in this petition, this question is not being considered or answered
in the present judgment and is left open for consideration in
appropriate proceedings.
7.

The respondent no. 1 conducts examination in different

specialities which consists of written examination and practical
examinations in various centres notified in its Bulletin of
Information.
The scheme of the examination is to be found in clauses 2.2,
2.5, 6.6, 6.7 of the Bulletin which read thus :“2.2 A Candidate for the Examinations in
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 5 of 63

Broad specialities is required to pass two
separate examinations viz. Primary and Final.
2.5 A candidate must pass the final theory
examination within a period of eight years after
passing the primary examination failing which
the candidate will be required to reappear for
this primary examination. Candidates passing
the final theory examination will be governed by
clause 6.7b, page 20 for appearing in the
practical examination.
6.6 All Candidate (Whether they have passed
Diploma or Degree or Primary examination) are
required to appear in four papers including one
paper in Basic Sciences as applied to particular
speciality.
6.7. Practical
Examination
(Broad
Specialities)
(a) Only those candidates who obtain a
minimum of 50% marks in aggregate of theory
papers shall be declared successful in theory
examination.
(b) Only a candidate who is declared
successful in final theory examination will be
allowed to appear for the practical examination
immediately following the theory examination.
If he fails or does not appear in the
examination, he will be allowed two more
chances of practical examination within two
years of passing the theory examinations, but
after paying full examination fee. Thereafter
such a candidate will be required to take full
examination (theory and practical) as a fresh
candidate.
(c) Candidate who obtain 50% in the
aggregate of theory and practical combined and
not less than 50% in practical, shall be declared
successful in the speciality examination.
(d) NBE will not provide details of
marks/grading in the examination.
8.

It is mandated that a candidate must pass the final theory

W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 6 of 63

examination within a period of eight years after passing the
primary examination failing which the candidate will be required
to reappear for the primary examination. Candidates passing the
final theory examination will be governed by clause 6.7(b), for
appearing in the practical examination.
9.

The candidate after passing the primary examination

conducted by the Board, has to go for training for three years as
per clause 6.2 A (i), to any of the hospital or institution recognised
by the Medical Council of India(respondent no. 2 herein)/
University as suitable for post graduate training maintaining a
ratio of 1:1 of student to teacher. However, in case a candidate had
completed a one year house job successfully in an institution
recognised by the MCI, then such one year would be counted
towards the three year training under this programme.
students

undergoing

training

in

the

All

boards/accredited

institution/medical colleges are required to intimate the Board
regarding their admission in the proforma available from its office,
immediately after the admission through the head of the
institutions/medical colleges. During the duration of the training,
the candidate is required to join a hospital as any other resident
under employment therein however without any remuneration.
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 7 of 63

10.

A candidate is allowed to appear in the final theory

examination only after undergoing the training successfully and
upon certification by the hospital. This final examination consists
of four papers including one paper in basic sciences as applied to a
super specialty. He/she is required to secure a minimum of 50%
marks to pass this examination which is conducted at a centre set
up by the respondent no. 1. Thereafter a candidate is allowed to
appear for a practical examination in terms of clause 6.7 as noticed
above.
11.

The petitioner has submitted that she secured a good first

division in her school leaving examination and was granted
admission to the MBBS course after passing the entrance
examination in her first attempt. She also claims to have
successfully completed a one year house job to the satisfaction of
senior doctors and thereafter cleared the primary examination of
the DNB course in the first attempt. As she had already done
house job for one year, after her admission, the petitioner was
required to undergo training for only two years more which she
completed from the Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Hospital from Delhi in
the year 1999. Her performance record of internal assessment was
maintained in the log book which recorded satisfaction of the
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 8 of 63

senior doctors and the head of the department with her work.
Such training consisted of successful conduct and participation in
hundreds of cases of deliveries and other related cases in her
subject of specialisation which, she has submitted, that she
competently handled individually.
12.

The petitioner submits that she completed all the four papers

in the final theory examination held in February, 1999 as part of
the DNB degree and also submitted the requisite thesis and
dissertation. This thesis was also approved in a single attempt
entitling the petitioner to appear for the practical examination in
terms of clause 6.7 noticed above.
13.

On 3rd June, 1999, the petitioner appeared in the practical

examination held at the KG Medical College, Lucknow which,
according to the petitioner, was a mere formality and an interview
of barely a few minutes without any test of either personality or
professional ability was conducted.
The petitioner has submitted that she believes that she had
knowledgeably and correctly answered all the questions. Yet to
her dismay she has received a single word result simply informing
her that she had failed.
14.

The petitioner appeared in the viva voce thereafter on two

W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 9 of 63

occasions, firstly on 29th December, 1999 and thereafter again on
28th April, 2000.

On both occasions she was again merely

informed that she had failed. Suspecting foul play, vide a letter
dated 6th June, 2000 the petitioner demanded details of marks
obtained in all the theory papers, the thesis and the practical
examinations but she received no reply from the respondents.
Thereupon she had sent a further letter to the respondent no. 1 on
30th June, 2000.
15.

As per Clause 6.7(d), a candidate who has failed to clear the

practical examination in three attempts, is required to repeat the
theory examination. Accordingly the petitioner again appeared in
the DNB theory examination in the month of July, 2000 and
passed the same once again in the first attempt.

This time the

petitioner demanded her marks as well as the marks obtained in
all previous examinations vide a letter dated 24th September,
2000. No reply has been given to her.
16.

On the 17th of November, 2000, the petitioner again

appeared in the practical examination held by the respondent no.
1. However, again she has been informed that she has failed in the
practical examination taken by her on 17th November, 2000
without disclosure of the marks secured by her. Thus aggrieved by
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 10 of 63

this action of the respondents the petitioner has filed the present
petition. The present petitioner also makes a challenge to the
refusal of the respondent no. 1 to disclose the marks attained by a
candidate in the examination including the oral examination
conducted by it claiming the same to be a constitutionally
guaranteed fundamental right of the petitioner under Article 19 of
the Constitution of India.
17.

Appearing for the respondent no. 1, Mr. Vijay Kishan,

Advocate has urged that the petitioner having unsuccessfully
participated in, and having failed repeatedly, cannot challenge the
conditions for the examination. On merits it has been contended
that the oral examinations were conducted by four different
experts each of whom has assessed the abilities of the petitioner
objectively and in great detail and have awarded the marks
secured by her. Therefore the petitioner's challenge to the result
secured by her is misconceived and also devoid of any factual or
material basis.
18.

The respondent no. 1 further contends that having regard to

the requirements of the field of medical science, the viva voce
system has been so designed so as to enable a fair assessment of a
candidate's diagnostic and treatment abilities on a long case, short
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 11 of 63

case and a detailed viva voce as part of the practical examination in
the clinical specialty. The submission is that the assessment by the
experts is done objectively. The distribution of the marks between
the written examination and the viva voce examinations is also
effected by the experts in the field. Learned counsel have sought
to draw a distinction

between the interviews held for a

competitive entrance examination to arrive at a relative merit
between the candidates seeking admission to the

educational

institutions as against the practical examinations for grant of
award of post-graduate medical qualifications.
19.

Defending the refusal to disclose the results, it has been

asserted that the reason thereof is in larger public interest as the
Board does not want the candidates to come to know the marks
which have been awarded by different examiners. According to
respondent no. 1 the same is necessary and is a reasonable rule
which is intended to ensure that no harm is caused to any
examiner at the instance of a failed candidate. It is submitted that
this stipulation is also a reasonable one as it intends to achieve a
laudable purpose and hence does not impinge on the rights of the
petitioner under Article 19 (1) (a) of the Constitution.

The

respondent no. 1 places reliance on the fact that the rule has been
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 12 of 63

applicable and has been in existence for a long period of over two
decades without any complaint.
Submitting that the respondent no. 1 has no objection to
disclosing the marks secured by a candidate to any court, the
original record relating to the petitioner has been placed before
this court for perusal.
20.

Before examining the position in law, it would be useful to

set out the break up of marks of the practicals/clinical
examinations including the viva voice examination in the
examination pattern followed by the respondent no.1. The method
of examination and its break up into five categories has been set
out by the respondent no. 1 in para 9(B)(e) of its counter affidavit
which reads as hereunder:“9(B) (e) The final examination is aimed at
testing
the
candidate's
professional
competence to practice as a specialist (Junior
Specialist). It consists of four papers of three
hours duration each consisting of short
answer/essay type questions.
The board has developed and
introduced various reforms in the conduct of
postgraduate and postdoctoral examinations
keeping in view the purpose and process of
evaluation.
The present method of
examination can be divided into five main
categories :1.
Written examination:
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 13 of 63

21.

a.
Essay Examination
b.
Objective Examination (MCQ)
2.
Oral Examination
3.
Practical Examinations
4.
Observational reports on student's
performances.
5.
Thesis and research projects”
The respondent has explained that the written test permits

the examinee to give in writing and in his own words a relatively
free and extended response and thereby reveals information
regarding a student's mental process. It measures achievements
objectively in the cognitive domain and enables assessment of a
candidate's ability to recollect, interpret, apply, analyse and
synthesise and development of his/her judgment skills.
22.

It is further explained that the oral examination permits the

candidate to orally display his knowledge, understanding

and

ability in the subject of study, as also his/her thinking and problem
solving ability through answers to the questions.
23.

So far as the practical examination is concerned, it is

intended to enable a candidate to display his/her ability to do a
particular thing as distinct from oral or written submissions.
24.

According to the respondent no. 1, guidelines have been laid

as a structure for the clinical examinations in the various
specialties by the respondent no. 1. As part of this process the

W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 14 of 63

examiners are required to meet a day prior to the clinical
examination to unanimously decide clinical problems on which the
candidates are to decide and to arrive at the common accepted
answers. The respondent no. 1 has also introduced objectively
structured clinical examinations in certain subjects which are
structured to provide objective assessment of clinical skills.
Guidelines have been laid by the respondent no. 1 for competency
based training programmes.
25.

So far as the distribution of marks is concerned, claiming its

expertise in deciding marks allocation, the respondents have
submitted that 400 marks are for theory papers and 300 marks
are for practical/clinical etc. including viva-voce examination and
the break-up of these 300 marks is as under :Total Marks for clinical/viva examination
Distribution

Group : C

(a)

Long case/cases

100 marks

(b)

3 short cases
(40 marks each)

120 marks

(c) (i)Pathology & x-ray
40 marks
(ii)
Surgery and Instruments
40 marks
300 marks
This distribution is the subject of challenge before this court
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 15 of 63

in the present writ petition.
26.

On behalf of the respondent Mr. Vijay Kishan, learned

counsel has submitted that apart from the

foregoing, the

examination which is conducted by the respondent no. 1 is not a
competitive exam and is intended to assess the expertise of the
candidate in his/her chosen field and hence no parity can be
drawn between the viva voce conducted by respondent no. 1 and
an interview, either for admission to an academic course or for
employment. In addition to the above, the challenge to the writ
petition is opposed on several additional grounds. It is asserted
that a candidate knowing the rules fully and having appeared in
the examination cannot challenge the criterion of success or merit
laid down by the rules. In this behalf, reliance is placed on JT
1995 2 SC 291 Madan Lal & Ors. Vs State of J&K; JT 1998
1 SC 295 Union of India vs N. Chandrashekharan; JT
2003 5 SC 241 Vijay Sayal vs State of Punjab; 2002 5 AD
Delhi 789 Continental Construction Limited vs Tihri
Hydro Development Corporation Ltd. & Anr.
27.

It is noteworthy that there are two stages of every

examination. One is the actual examination and second is the
result thereof. In all the judgments relied upon by the respondent
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 16 of 63

no. 1, challenge was laid to the failure of the respondents to select
the petitioners either for appointment or for promotion or for an
award of contract in the second stage.
In the instant case, a challenge has been laid not only to the
petitioner's result but also to the very examination process. The
petitioner has further pointed out that as per the scheme of the
respondent no. 1, she is required to take the examination afresh
just as if she was a fresh candidate. In the light of the several
judgments cited by the respondent no. 1, while a candidate may be
precluded from challenging her own result after participating in
the examination, it cannot possibly be urged as an absolute
prohibition that the candidate is precluded from laying a challenge
to the principles on which the examination is conducted when the
candidate is required to apply and take the examination afresh as
in the instant case.
28.

This court is not concerned with any examination conducted

for the purposes of appointment, selection, promotion or for
award of a contract but is concerned with an examination
conducted by a board for the purposes of award of a certificate and
a diploma. The field in which this examination is to be conducted
is also not in the nature of a course of general application but is a
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 17 of 63

highly specialised area of professional specialisation in different
specialities in medicine. The number of marks which have to be
assigned to the viva voce will depend on the level of the
examination and the nature of the specialisation.
29.

It now becomes essential to examine the landmark judgment

of the Supreme Court reported in 1981 1 SCC 722 Ajay Hasia
& Ors. Vs Khalid Mujib Sehravardi & Ors. which is relied
upon heavily by the petitioner in support of her case. The validity
of a viva

voce examination as a permissible test had been

principally challenged on the ground that the viva voce
examination does not afford a proper criterion for assessment of
the suitability of the candidates for admission and it is a highly
subjective and impressionastic test where the result is likely to be
influenced by many uncertain and imponderable factors such as
predelictions and prejudices of the interviewer, his attitudes and
approaches, his preconceived notions and idiosyncrasies. It has
also been urged that it is capable of abuse because it leaves scope
for discrimination, manipulation and nepotism which can remain
undetected under the cover of an interview.

It had been urged

that it is not possible to assess the capacity and calibre of a
candidate in the course of an interview lasting only for a few
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 18 of 63

minutes and, therefore, examination results made on the basis of
an oral interview must be regarded as arbitrary and hence violative
of Article 14.
Despite all its criticism, the Apex court had recognised that
the oral interview method continued to be very much in vogue as a
supplementary test for assessing the suitability of candidates
wherever test of personal traits is considered essential.

Its

relevance as a test for determining suitability based on personal
characteristics has been recognised in a number of decisions of the
Supreme Court inter alia in R. Chitralekha v. State of
Mysore AIR 1964 SC 1823.
30.

As back as in (1971) 1 SCC 38 A. Peeriakaruppan vs

State of Tamilnadu, the court held that in the matter of
admission to a college or even in the matter of promotion, the oral
interview test as presently held should not be relied upon as an
exclusive test, but it may be resorted to only as an additional or
supplementary test and, moreover, great care should be taken to
see that persons who are appointed to conduct the interview test
are men of high integrity, calibre and qualification. It was further
observed that the oral interview test was undoubtedly not a very
satisfactory test for assessing and evaluating the capacity and
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 19 of 63

calibre of candidate, but in the absence of a better test for
measuring personal characteristics and traits, the oral interview
test must, at the present stage, be regarded as not irrational or
irrelevant though it is subjective and based on first impression, its
result is influenced by many uncertain factors and it is capable of
abuse.
31.

In Ajay Hasia's case the Constitution Bench dealt with such

an issue. In this case, the court found that a large number of
successful candidates succeeded in obtaining admission by virtue
of getting very high marks in the viva voce which tilted the balance
in their favour though the marks secured by them at the qualifying
examination were much less than those obtained by the petitioner
and even in the written test they had faired worse than the
petitioner.
The court was called upon to consider the issue as to the
legality of 50 marks for the viva voce examination as against 100
marks for the written test. The court observed that in view of the
fact that the time as spent on each candidate was not more than
four minutes and in these circumstances, reserving 50 marks for
the interview out of the total of 150 does seem excessive. The same
amounted to allotment of 33 1/3% of the total marks for the oral
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 20 of 63

interview. In these circumstances the allocation was held to be
plainly arbitrary and unreasonable which vitiated the selection of
the candidate.
However, no absolute proposition of law was laid down.
32.

This judgment of the Constitution Bench was relied before

the Supreme Court in the case of Javed Rasul Bhatt & Ors vs
State of Jammu & Kashmir & Ors. (1984) 2 SCC 631. The
Supreme Court explained the earlier judgment thus :“8. It would be noticed that most of the
observations were made with a view to enable the
Government to devise a selection procedure
which would be above reproach. It was never
intended to lay down any hard and fast rules. In
the very nature of things it would not be within
the province or even the competence of the Court
and the Court would not venture into such
exclusive thickets to discover ways out, when the
matters ares more appropriately left to the wise
expertise of medical academicians interested in
the quality and integrity of medical education and
public administrators conversant with various
administrative and socio-economic problems,
needs and requirements. The Court's duty lies in
preventing arbitrariness and denial of equal
opportunity. The question as to the subjects in
which an entrance test may be held is hardly a
matter for the Court, unless, of course, the
subjects are so arbitrarily chosen as to have not
the slightest connection with the object of the
examination. Such a situation is not likely to
arise as the authorities may be expected to act
reasonably. Again it is not for the court to lay
down whether an interview test should be held at
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 21 of 63

all or how many marks should be allotted for the
interview test. Of course, the marks must be
minimal so as to avoid charges of arbitrariness
but not necessarily always. There may be posts
and appointments where the only proper method
of selection may be by an interview test. Even in
the case of admission to higher degree courses, it
may sometimes be necessary to allot a fairly high
percentage of marks for the interview test. For
admission to a Ph.D. Course, for example,
candidates may have to be consummately
interviewed, each of them for a few hours,
perhaps, before any decision can be taken as to
who may be admitted. That is why we say rigid
rules cannot be laid in these matters, and not by
courts. The expert bodies are generally the best
judges. All that we may say is that allocation of a
high percentage of marks for admission to
undergraduate courses should be avoided as
there is a risk of a certain amount of arbitrariness
which may lead to frustration of the very object of
the selection and disrepute of the system. Courts
interfere when the risk of arbitrariness is so high
that arbitrariness is inevitable. Again the court
is not the best judge of what questions may be
asked at the interview. As mentioned by us
earlier, all that is necessary is that the questions
should not be a mere pretence.
9.
All that we have said above is only to
supplement wht has been said in Ajay Hasia's
case and in the case of Lila Dhar v. State of
Rajasthan. In the latter case after referring to
the Kothari committee's report on Recruitment
Policy and Selection Methods, we said : (SCC p.
163, para 5)
It is now well recognised that while a
written examination assesses a candidate's
knowledge and intellectual ability, an interviewtest is available to assess a candidate's overall
intellectual and personal qualities. While a
written examination has certain distinct
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 22 of 63

advantages over the interview-test there are yet
no written tests which can evaluate a candidate's
initiative,
alertness,
resourcefulness,
dependableness, cooperativeness, capacity for
clear and logical presentation, effectiveness, in
discussion, judgment, ability to make decision,
ability to lead, intellectual and moral integrity.
Some of these qualities may be evaluated,
perhaps with some degree of error, by an
interview-test, much depending on the
constitution of the interview Board.
We then referred to Glenn Stahl on Public
Personnel Administration and the United
Nations Handbook on Civil Service Law and
Practice. We further said : (SCC p. 164, para 6)
“Thus, the written examination
assesses the man's intellect and the interview test
the man himself and “the twain shall meet” for a
proper selection. If both written examination
and interview test arise as to the weight to be
attached respectively to them. In the case of
admission to a college, for instance, where the
candidate's personality is eye to develop and it is
too early to identify the personal qualities for
which greater importance may have to be
attached in later life, greater weight has per force
to be given to performance in the written
examination. The importance to be attached to
the interview-test must be minimal. That was
what was decided by this Court in
Peeriakaruppan v. State of Tamil Nadu, Ajay
Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi and other
cases. On the other hand, in the case of services
to which recruitment has necessarily to be made
from persons of mature personality, interview
test may be the only way, subject to basic and
essential
academic
and
professional
requirements being satisfied. To subject such
persons to a written examination may yield
unfruitful and negative results, apart from its
being an act of cruelty to those persons. There
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 23 of 63

are, of course, many services to which
recruitment is made from younger candidates
whose personalities are on the threshold of
development and who show signs of great
promise, and the discerning may in an interviewtest, catch a glimpse of the future personality. In
the case of such services, where sound selection
must combine academic ability with personality
promise, some weight has to be given, though not
much too great a weight, to the interview-test.
There cannot be any rule of thumb regarding the
precise weight to be given. It must vary from
service to service according to the requirements
of the service, the minimum qualifications
prescribed, the age group from which the
selection is to be made, the body to which the
task of holding the interview-test is proposed to
be entrusted and a host of other factors. It is a
matter for determination by experts. It is a
matter for research. It is not for courts to
pronounce upon it unless exaggerated weight has
been given with proven or obvious oblique
motives. The Kothari Committee also suggested
that in view of the obvious importance of the
subject, it may be examined in detail by the
Research Unit of the Union Public Service
Commission.”
33.

The Supreme Court has relied upon the observations of Ol

Glenn Stahl in his book on Public Personnel Administration. The
author had pointed out that there are three disadvantages from
which the oral test method suffers which were (i) the difficulty of
developing valid and reliable oral tests; (ii) the difficulty of
securing a reviewable record on an oral test and (iii) public
suspicion of the oral test as a channel for the exertion of political
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 24 of 63

influence.

Highly criticising the oral examinations, the author

further observed thus :
“The oral examination has failed in the past
in direct proportion to the extent of its misuse. It
is a delicate instrument and, in inexpert hands, a
dangerous one. The first condition of its successful
use is the full recognition of its limitations. One of
the most prolific sources of error in the oral test
has been the failure on the part of examiners to
understand the nature of evidence and to
discriminate between that which was relevant,
material and reliable and that which was not. It
also must be remembered that the best oral
interview provides opportunity for analysis of only
a very small part of a person's total behaviour.
Generalisations from a single interview regarding
an individual's total personality pattern have been
proved repeatedly to be wrong.”
The Supreme Court added other influences as corrupt,
nepotistic or extraneous considerations to the above.
34.

The principles laid down by the Apex Court in the

aforenoticed pronouncements certainly bind this court. However
there is a fundamental difference between the issue raised in these
cases and that which has arisen before this court.

The

aforenoticed cases before the Apex Court relate to admission to
different courses and the selection process which was provided in
respect thereof.
35.

It is necessary to bear in mind the scheme of medical

W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 25 of 63

education.

Undoubtedly theory is important inasmuch as the

intricacies and the functioning of the human body requires an in
depth study of all that goes on in order to make it up. While
theoretical knowledge and medical terms guide a medical student
as to the structure of the human body, digestive processes, the
neurological system etc however no amount of study material can
teach a student as to the real functioning of the different organs
and processes in the body. While a medical text may enable a
student to learn the probability of a disease from which a patient
may be suffering if he discloses certain symptoms, however the
assessment of such symptoms can be made only by an actual
examination of the patient. Physical examination may be required
to be combined with the results of pathological or radiological
tests. Therefore in order to have a complete assessment of the
knowledge and skills imbibed by a doctor, the scheme of medical
education requires that a student actually works on the patient and
participates in clinical duties and assignments. Para clinical
specialities as pathology, microbiology and such like subjects
would require laboratory and research work. At the same time,
clinical

subjects

as

medicine,

opthalmology,

gynaecology,

neurology etc require extensive work in clinical departments. In
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 26 of 63

these circumstances, no hard and fast rule can be laid down for
testing a student undergoing specilisation in medical specialities
or efficacy of a system which would be considered fair while
meeting the guidelines laid down in judicial pronouncements. So
far as clinical specialisations are concerned, a candidate has to
work on patients.

He is required to extract information from

patients, observe and assess changes in the physical appearance to
diagnose correctly.

Such ability has to be assessed while the

student is working on the patient itself. While assessing the skills
developed by a candidate, distinction is drawn between a patient
and disease which requires long study and examination and
another which may be instantly diagnosable. At the same time, an
evaluation has to be made of the candidates ability to diagnose
quickly and urgently and treat as per the needs of the patient.
Further more, having undergone the undergraduate course, where
the candidate applies himself to a large extent to the academic
study curriculum, such course requires clinical application at the
stage of specialisation and the ability of the candidate, at this level,
has to be assessed primarily in terms of his ability to apply
theoretical knowledge to diagnosis and treatment of patients.
This important facet and element of assessment is missing in
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 27 of 63

the various testing methods adopted in the several judicial
pronouncements cited before this court. Examination of patients,
recognition of technical medical and surgical instruments, ability
to apply academic knowledge to features displayed by the patient
to arrive at a correct assessment of the disease etc cannot be
evaluated by a written test. An evaluation of these skills requires a
'hands-on' practical test which would entail “interviewing” the
candidate on the patient or on the pathology slides or the surgical
instruments. The duties and skills required of a doctor have no
comparison with a student joining a course or a post in an office.
36.

In the instant case, as per the scheme of the examination, the

candidates undergo a theory examination and a practical
examination. The practical examination has several components
as detailed in the counter affidavit which includes a long
case/cases; short cases; pathology and x-ray; anatomy; operative
surgery and instruments. Certainly such a scheme of examination
cannot be equated to the interview conducted in the confines of an
office room or a board room where only oral questions and
answers are asked.

The objectivity is to be found in the

composition of the practical examination.
37.

For the same reason, the test conducted by the respondent

W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 28 of 63

no. 1, is at the stage when a candidate has completed his basic
medical course and claims to have undergone practical training.
Such a test cannot be compared in any manner to an examination
which is conducted for entrance and selection for admission to an
educational course or an examination which is conducted for the
purposes of appointment and selection to any test or for the
purposes of promotion in the hierarchy of posts. A viva voce test is
not only an essential part of assessment of a candidate's ability in
the field of medicine but is a necessary tool for measuring essential
personal characteristics as the power of observation, initiative,
ingenuity, ability, amongst other, to get response from patients,
ability to observe and assimilate, ability to diagnose the medical
problems, inspire confidence in a patient and to implement
effective treatment.
38.

To my mind, no parity can be drawn between such testing

and the conventional interview conducted in an office room from
behind a desk. In these circumstances, I have no manner of doubt
that the quantum of marks, their distribution between different
subjects, the distribution in the different examinations conducted
and for the several components of the oral examinations itself has
to be left to the respondent no. 1 who would be guided by the
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 29 of 63

experts in the field.
39.

Having regard to the scheme of the examination and the

manner in which examinations have been conducted from the
record produced before me, I find that the assessment of the
candidate is not done by a single expert but is effected by three or
four experts in the field who are drawn from institutions of repute
in different places. The scheme of the examination also shows that
the viva voce examination is not restricted to an interview of a few
minutes as is so in the case of interviews held for entrance and
selection proposed or for the purposes of making admissions,
appointments and promotions.

A candidate is compelled to

undergo the rigours of a prolonged examination when he/she has
to present a long case or cases, three short cases, show skills of
diagnosis based on ability of examination as well as aptitude in
surgery and knowledge of instruments in the field of gynaecology
and obstetrics.
40.

Another facet of the examination conducted by the

respondent no. 1 is that it is not a competitive examination but is
an examination where the ability of an individual candidate is
assessed not against ability or skills of another student. There is
no element of competition with other candidates. A candidate has
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 30 of 63

to satisfy the examiners with regard to his/her own ability and
skills in his/her chosen area of specialisation. The possibility of
bias and subjectivity is eliminated inasmuch as the examiners are
concerned with the development of the skills of the individual
without a comparison with those of another. The award of marks
is based on the examiner's assessment of the candidate's skills in
the area of his/her specialisation.
41.

The view I have taken stand fortified by the judicial

pronouncement the Bombay High Court in AIR 1991 Bombay
240 Dr. (Miss.) Suraina Subhash Rane vs University of
Bombay & Ors.
42.

In this case, a challenge was laid to the admission process to

the MD Pathology course where marks allocated to viva voce test
exceeded 25% of the total marks. Negativing the challenge, the
court observed thus :“A specialist in pathology may require to devote
more time to laboratory and research work.
That however does not mean that his mental
alertness and agility do not require to be tested.
Pathology and the Pathologists are an important
feature of modern medicine. Pre-surgical tests
require the expertise of the Pathologist. Even
when a surgery is in progress problems may
come up where the Surgeon and the
Anaesthesist require a snap decision by an
expert in the filed of Pathology. The Pathologist
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 31 of 63

in attendance has thus to be mentally alert.
Viva voce test is useful tool for measuring such
personnel characteristics as initiative, ingenuity
and ability to elicit cooperation..... When
properly employed, the oral test today deserves
a place in the battery used by the technical
examiner (these observationsa re made by
Glenn Steh in his book on Public Personal
Administration quoted with approval in Ashok
Kumar Yadav's case (AIR 1987 SC 454) (supra).
What marks should be awarded to a head and
whether a particular feature of the examination
should constitute an independent head or subhead is a subject better left to the academic
experts. It is argued that the orals which have
met with the approval of the Courts have to be
fool-proof such as those in Kaushal Kumar
Gupta (AIR 1984 SC 1056) (supra) and not like
the one figuring in this case. Not it is true that
no record of questions and answers asked and
given at the M.D. examination is maintained.
Also true it is that the questions and answers are
not tape-recorded. For that matter the time
taken by the candidates in an oral examination
is far less than that in the theory and practical
examinations. But the purpose of the orals is as
vital as that of the testing of the candidate by his
performance at the theory and practicals.”
43.

My attention has been drawn to an unreported judgment of

the Divison Bench of this court which was rendered on 30th May,
2003 in LPA No. 214/2003 Pawan Kumar vs JNU & Ors., this
court was examining a challenge laid by a candidate who was
seeking admission to the M. Phil course conducted by the
Jawaharlal Nehru University. As per the scheme of examination,

W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 32 of 63

30 marks were allotted to the viva voce and 70 marks to the
written test.

It was urged that fixation of 30% marks for the

interview was contrary to the mandate of the judgment of the Apex
Court in Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi & Ors.
The Division Bench was of the view that the caution of fixing
minimal marks for the interview was restricted to admission to
undergraduate courses and selections and promotions where there
would be great possibility of arbitrary selection influenced by the
predelictions of the interviewer. However in matters relating to
admission to higher courses as M. Phil and Ph.D., the matter
wasbest

left to the wisdom of the academicians.

In these

circumstances, as the admission was sought to the course of M.
Phil and for admission to a course of this level, fixation of 30%
marks for the interview may not be arbitrary.
44.

The distinction which has to be drawn between interview

held for competitive examinations or admissions to educational
institutions; interviews forming part of the examination for
selection and appointment to posts; interviews which are
conducted as part of the selection scheme for promotion to higher
post as against interviews and viva voce which are conducted as
part of testing the knowledge and ability of a candidate in a
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 33 of 63

speciality or a super speciality in a professional field as medicine
has been recognised by the Apex Court in JT (1998) 1 SC 295
Union of India & Anr. vs N. Chandrashekharana & Ors.
The Apex Court has noticed that such a distinction has to be
considered and the importance given to an interview cannot be
termed as arbitrary or violative of Article 14 or 16 of the
Constitution in every case. In this behalf in JT 1998 (1) SC 295
Union of India & Anr. v. N. Chandrasekharan & Ors., the
court noticed the submissions made on behalf of the appellant
thus :“9. Mr. Mahajan, learned Senior Counsel
for the appellants, submitted that the Tribunal has
wrongly applied the law laid down in Ashok
Kumar Yadav's case which related to interview
held for competitive examination for recruitment
to posts in the Haryana Civil Service and was not a
case of selection for higher posts. Therefore, the
Tribunal was not right in applying the ratio laid
down in Ashok Kumar Yadav's case. He also
submitted that this Court had made a clear
distinction between interview held for competitive
examination or admission in educational
institutions and selection for higher posts. In this
connection, he relied on two judgments of this
Court in Mehmood Alam Tariq and Others v.
State of Rajasthan & Others JT 1988 (2) SC 417 =
(1988 (3) SCC 241) and C.P. Kalra v. Air India
Through its Managing Director, Bombay and
Others (1994 Supp. (1) SCC 454). He also
emphasised the need for giving importance to
interview marks in this case by bringing to our
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 34 of 63

notice the averments in the reply statement which
reads as follows :“Usually, a written test may
aim at ascertaining the theoretical
knowledge. There is no scope in a written
test to raise further questions on answers
written down nor to ascertain additional
information as to how one would react in
different practical situations such as the
Vendor
rating
scenario,
space
qualification requirement of components,
sub-systems to be procured; skill
required or the strategies to be adopted
during contract negotiations and during
different tendering stages; up-to-date
knowledge on the national and
international market situations which are
much relevant to Indian Space Research
Organisation/DOS;
capability
for
personal presentation of the cases to the
satisfaction of the customs authorities to
obtain waiver for physical examination or
cases; intricacies relating to the Laws
such as Insurance Act etc. and above all
the understanding of the requirements of
the space programmes which involve
technological uncertainties, repetitive
ground testing of systems, sub-systems,
failure
analysis
procedures,
and
reworking
on
components/subsystems/systems which have already
been procured or fabricated.
The
capability to handle these and
many similar practical aspects
required to effectively discharge
the duties and responsibilities of an
Assistant Purchase Officer in
Indian
Space
Research
Organisation/DOS can normally be
assessed only through a personal
interview.”
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 35 of 63

After a consideration of the earlier judicial pronouncements,
the observations of the court in Union of India v. N.
Chandrasekharan (supra) which are both topical and instructive
observed thus :“15. The reliance placed by the Tribunal on the
ratio laid down by this Court in Ashok Kumar
Yadav's case is totally misconceived as that was
not a case of promotion to a higher post. This
Court in Kalra case (supra) had occasion to
consider similar situation and observed as
follows :“7. It was next submitted that the
promotion policy was unconstitutional as
the marks assigned for the interview test
were far in excess of the permissible norm
or limit.
The 40% prescription for
interview is based on Rule 2.6 of the
promotion policy. This 40 per cent is
divided under different heads or factors as
stated hereinabove. The submission of the
learned counsel for the petitioner was
based on the observations of this Court in
Ashok Kumar Yadav wherein this Court
observed that 33.3 per cent marks
reserved for oral test were excessive and
would suffer from the vice of arbitrariness.
The High Court has dealt with this
submission and has pointed out that no
had and fast rule can be evolved in this
behalf because much would depend on the
requirement for each post and the level of
the post. A whole line of decisions
were
brought
to
our
notice
beginning from Ajay Hasia case but
it would be sufficient for us to refer
to the latest decision in the case
Indian Airlines Corpn. v. Capt. K.C.
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 36 of 63

Shukla. In that case this Court after
referring to the decisions in Ajay
Hasia, Lila Dhar, Ashok Kumar
Yadav and Rafiquddin observed that
a distinction appears to have been
drawn in interviews held for
competitive
examination
or
admission
in
educational
institutions and selection for higher
posts. Efforts have been made to
limit the scope of arbitrariness in
the former by narrowing down the
proportion as various factors are
likely to creep in, but the same
standard cannot be applied for
higher selections and this is clearly
brought out in Lila Dhar case. It is,
therefore, clear that this Court was also of
the view that no hard and fast rule can be
laid down in these matters because much
would depend on the level of the post and
the nature of the performance expected
from the incumbent. In that case, the
method of evaluation was based 50 per
cent on the ACRs and 50 per cent on
interviews and this Court upheld the said
method notwithstanding the fact that the
weightage for interview performance was
as high as 50 per cent. We are, therefore,
of the view that the contention that
because in the instant case the weightage
for the viva voce test is 40 per cent, it is
per se excessive and hence arbitrary,
cannot be accepted.”
45.

In AIR 1987 SC 454 Ashok Kumar Yadav v. State of

Haryana & Ors., it is noteworthy that in para 23 of this report,
the court held that there may be posts and appointments where

W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 37 of 63

only the proper method of selection was a viva voce test. In this
behalf, it would be instructive to recall the following opinion of the
Apex Court in AIR 1987 SC 454 Ashok Kumar Yadav vs
State of Haryana & Ors. :“23. This Court speaking through Chinnappa
Reddy. J. pointed out in Liladhar v. State of
Rajasthan. (1982) 1 SCR 320 : (AIR 1981 SC 1777)
that the object of any process of selection for
entry into public service is to secure the best and
the most suitable person for the job, avoiding
patronage and favouritism. Selection based on
merit, tested impartially and objectively, is the
essential foundation of any useful and efficient
public service. So, open competitive examination
has come to be accepted almost universally as the
gateway to public services. But the question is
how should the competitive examination be
devised? The competitive examination may be
based exclusively on written examination or it
may be based exclusively on oral interview or it
may be a mixture of both. It is entirely for the
Government to decide what kind of competitive
examination would be appropriate in a given
case. To quote the words of Chinnappa Reddy,J.
“In the very nature of things it would not be
within the province or even the competence of
the court and the Court would not ventrue into
such exclusive thickets to discover ways out,
when the matters are more appropriately left: to
the wisdom of the experts. Is is not for the Court
to lay down whether interview test should be held
at all or how many marks should be allowed for
the interview test. Of course the marks must be
minimal so as to avoid charges of arbitrariness,
but not necessarily always. There may be posts
and appointments where the only proper method
of selection may be by a viva voce test. Even in
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 38 of 63

the case of admission to higher degree courses, it
may sometimes be necessary to allow a fairly high
percentage of marks for the viva voce test. That is
why rigid rules cannot be laid down in these
matters and not by courts. The expert bodies are
generally the best judges. The Government aided
by experts in the field may appropriately decide
to have a written examination followed by a viva
voce test.
24. It is now admitted on all hands that while a
written examination assesses the candidate's
knowledge and intellectual ability, a viva voce test
seeks to assess a candidate's overall intellectual
and personal qualities.
While a written
examination has certain distinct advantages over
the viva voce test, there are yet no written tests
which can evaluate a candidate's initiative,
alertness, resource-fulness, dependableness, cooperativeness, capacity for clear and logical
presentation,
effectiveness
in
discussion,
effectiveness in meeting and dealing with others,
adaptability, judgment, ability to make decision,
ability to lead, intellectual and moral integrity.
Some of these qualities can be evaluated perhaps
with some degree of error, by a viva voce test,
much depending on the constitution of the
interview Board.”
46.

The aforestated observations were cited with approval in JT

(2003) 5 SC 241 (at 253) Vijay Sayal & Anr. vs State of
Punjab.
47.

In any case the respondent no. 1 has submitted that out of

700 marks for the examination, only 80 marks are devoted to the
viva voce which forms barely 11.8% of the total marks.

It is

submitted that the viva voce is conducted on the pathology, x-rays
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 39 of 63

and instruments to each of which are devoted 40 marks bringing
the same to a total of 80 marks. The examination of a candidate
on the long case and the short case cannot be termed as interview
or a mere oral test inasmuch as a there is no other method of
testing a doctor's diagnostic and treatment skills.

In the instant

case a candidate is required to secure 50% of the total marks i.e. in
the written examination as well as the interview and viva voce and
not less than 50% in practical.
48.

It is well settled that in matters of policy, courts will

normally restrain their hands. It has been repeatedly held that no
orders ought to be made which would have the effect of slackening
the standard and would amount to a judicial fiat to control the
mode of education and the examining system. Such directions
would necessarily prove detrimental to the efficient management
of the education (Re:

AIR

1992

SC

1926

State

of

Maharashtra vs Vikas Sahebrao Roundale & Ors.).
49.

In these circumstances, it is not possible to hold that the

distribution of the marks or the test criterion laid down by the
respondents is either arbitrary or irrational.
50.

For all the foregoing reasons, I find that the petitioner has

been unable to show that the extent of marks which have been
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 40 of 63

devoted to the viva voce and oral examination and the marks
allotted to the theory examination by the respondent no. 1 is
arbitrary or vitiated for such reason.
51.

At this stage it becomes necessary to point out that the

petitioner was unfortunately never able to secure 50% or more
marks in the practical/clinical examination including the viva voce
examination in all the four practical examinations undertaken by
her.

Each time the practical examination was conducted by

different experts in the speciality who were drawn from different
institutions in India.

The original record relating to the

examination of the petitioner has been placed before this court
and has been carefully perused. The examiners in three of the
practical examinations taken by the petitioner included the
following :“Examination held on 8th, 28th, 29th and 30th December, 1999
at the Jaipur Centre: The examiners were (i) Dr. Mathur (ii) Dr. P.
Nagpal (iii) Dr. Neetu Sarin and (iv) Dr. Pandiyan (not completely
legible).
Examination held from 26th April, 2000 to 29th April, 2000
at the Chandigarh Centre: The examiners were (i) Dr. Indu Gupta;
(ii) Dr. P.R. Vaidya; (iii) Dr. Kamla Ganesh and (iv) Dr. A. Dhar.
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 41 of 63

Examination held from 17th November, 2000 to 20th
November, 2000 at the Chandigarh Centre: The examiners were
(i) Dr. Kamla Ganesh; (ii) Dr. A. Dhar; (iii) Dr. P.R. Vaidya (iv)
Illegible.”
It cannot possibly be contended that these experts from
different institutions in the field did not fairly assess the
petitioner.

Apart from the petitioner, several other candidates

were also examined as per the result sheet produced before this
court by the same examiners who also failed to secure the requisite
pass percentage and were hence failed in the examination. There
is no allegation of bias or malafide against any of the examiners.
52.

The present petitioner is of the view that she having been a

good student and on her own assessment had faired extremely
well. She has urged that consequently she could not have been
failed in the viva voce conducted by the respondent no.1.

The

Apex Court in JT 1995 2 SC 291 Madan Lal & Ors. Vs State
of J&K & Ors., has noticed a similar submission by the petitioner
in the case before it and held that such a submission is based on a
subjective assessment of her own performance in the examination.
Such an assessment cannot normally be objective or dispassionate
and would be coloured by the candidates assessment of her own
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 42 of 63

ability. For the same reason, reliance placed on the past academic
record may also not be a good guide for ascertaining by itself, a
candidate's ability and performance. Therefore, for this reason the
petitioner's submission that she, having been a good student
throughout her academic career and hence could not have failed
the examination in question also cannot possibly be sustained.
53.

I find force in the contentions raised by the learned counsel

for the respondent no. 1 to the effect that the petitioner was fully
aware of the examination scheme of the respondent no. 1. The
same was duly notified in the Bulletin of Information which was
admittedly within the knowledge of the petitioner. Having been
fully aware of the position thereof, the petitioner has participated
and taken the examination on all occasions noticed hereinabove.
For this reason, the petitioner cannot be permitted to raise a
challenge to the result thereof only on the ground that the scheme
of the examination postulated unwarrantedly high percentage of
marks to be awarded to the candidate's in the viva voce and the
interview or that she was a good student with a good academic
record and therefore it was not possible that she did not pass the
examination.
54.

In view of the above discussion, so far as prayers (c) and (d)

W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 43 of 63

are concerned, for the reasons set out hereinabove cannot be
granted in any case and are hereby rejected.
55.

The last issue which remains for consideration is the

petitioner's grievance that the National Board of Examinations
does not provide details of the marks/grading in the examinations.
In this behalf, the stipulation is containing such prohibition is to
be found in clause 6.7 (d) of the Bulletin of Information and
Application Form for the Diplomate of Board Examination issued
by the respondent. The same reads as follows :“6.7(d). NBE will not provide details of marks/grading in the
examinations”
The petitioner has submitted that the right to information
has been universally recognised and in India is recognised under
Article 19 (1) (a) of the Constitution of India besides international
conventions and charters to which a country is a party. Placing
reliance on Article 19 (2) of the Constitution, it is urged that the
constitutional provision mandates that everyone shall have the
right to freedom of expression which right includes the right to
seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds
regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing, or in print, through
any medium of his choice. It is contended that the denial of the
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 44 of 63

information with regard to the marks obtained by a candidate is a
denial of the right of a citizen to know the circumstances in which
he or she has failed the examination. In this behalf reliance is
placed on the Constitution Bench pronouncement of the Apex
Court in State of U.P. Vs Raj Narayan AIR 1975 SC 685 and
the pronouncement of the Seven Judge Bench of the Supreme
Court in S.P. Gautam vs Union of India AIR 1982 SC 149.
Based on this submission, the petitioner has sought a prayer
seeking quashing of the provisions in clause 6.7 (d) and clause
6.1(vi) of the Bulletin of Information and Application Form for the
Diplomate of National Board Final examination being ultravires
and violative of Article 14 and 19 (1) (a) of the Constitution of
India.
56.

The respondents have opposed the submissions made by the

petitioner

and

have

rendered

incorporation of this clause.

an

explanation

that

the

It has also been vehemently

submitted that the provisions of the Bulletin were fully known to
the petitioner at the time she submitted her application form and
that the same have been incorporated in larger public interest, the
respondent has explained that the National Board of Examinations
does not want that the candidate to know as to which of the
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 45 of 63

examiners has awarded or given how many marks to the
candidate. On the other hand, it is the Boards submission, that
where the candidate has failed in theory or in practical, it would
hardly make any difference to the result of the candidate if he is
not informed as to whether he has failed by a large or a low
margin. The Board contends that it is in public interest to have
this rule, which is reasonable which ensures that no harm is
caused to any examiner, at the instance of a failed candidate. In
the counter affidavit filed the respondent no. 1 has stated that this
court is required to take judicial notice of the fact that “these days,
lecturers and professors, even in recognised universities, are
harassed, bullied and maltreated by the students who are found by
them to be short in attendance or are failed by them in their
examinations.

The said rule is a reasonable restriction and

achieves a laudable purpose and is not ultravires of Article 19 (1)
(a) of the Constitution.”
It is further stated that the rule has been followed and
observed for over two decades without any complaint or grievance
and that, “in any case this sub-clause(d) is like a privilege claimed
by the examining body and if the Board wants to keep the marks
and or grades confidential for which the Board/Academic board
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 46 of 63

have some reason not to disclose to the candidate but the Board is
always, willing and ready in case anything is challenged by the
candidate, as in this case, to produce the entire relevant
examination record including marks and grades for appraisal of
this court, as it is the court's which is to be satisfied and not that of
the candidate.”
57.

Reliance is placed on certain judgments and orders passed

by this court in matters where candidates had sought disclosure of
their marks which relief was not granted. I find that the orders
relied on relate to entrance exams and consequently cannot govern
the adjudication in the present case.
As noticed above, the instant case does not relate to a case
where a candidate is seeking admission to a course. Award of the
certificate by the respondent no. 1 is a serious matter.

The

candidate who is taking a detailed examination is a qualified
doctor who has the basic medical degree in hand. The candidate is
looking to secure a better qualification and for this reason strives
to take, first, the primary examination, then the theory
examination and lastly, the practical exam. Such an examination
entails a difficult course of study and can by no means, in my view,
be equated to the entrance examination undertaken by candidates
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 47 of 63

for securing admission either to the graduate, undergraduate
course, MBBS or BDS courses or even an entrance examination for
selection to an admission to a post-graduate degree course or a
super-speciality course.
58.

When a candidate appears for an examination, he does so

after a rigorous training schedule and after following a study
curriculum as well as reasonable preparation. Having done so, she
takes an examination in the reasonable hope that he/she shall
qualify the same successfully.

Every candidate has his own

method of study and self assessment. Perfection in medicine is not
attained, and, does not stop at acquisition of a degree alone. Every
patient dealt with, touched or attended to and every additional
page read, adds to the knowledge and ability of the doctor. It is for
this reason, that this system has to be treated differently than the
other courses of study and specialisation. A candidate, taking an
examination in medicine may appear to be competing with a
colleague.

But in the real sense, is competing with himself.

He/she is developing skills of communication, ability to assess and
diagnose, honing his skills on medical procedures including
intricacies of equipment and the human body, perfecting surgical
skills and abilities, inculcating patience, improving his powers of
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 48 of 63

observation and several other such qualities.
59.

Examination of the ability of such a candidate is not

comparable to an examination of any other kind.
60.

In support of the contention that respondent no. 1 has the

absolute right to make the provisions and provide the conditions
for the conduct of examinations and that clause 6.7(d) which has
been challenged by the petitioner has been validly incorporated
and is binding, Mr Vijay Kishan Jetly, learned counsel for the
respondent no.1 has placed reliance on AIR 1984 SC 1543
Maharashtra State Board of Secondary & Higher
Secondary Education & Anr. v. Paritosh Bhupesh
Kumarsheth etc; JT 2004 (6) SC 380 Pramod Kumar
Srivastava

v.

Chairman,

Bihar

Public

Service

Commission, Patna & Ors.
61.

In AIR 1984 SC 1543 Maharashtra State Board of

Secondary & Higher Secondary Education & Anr. v.
Paritosh Bhupesh Kumarsheth etc., the court was concerned
with a regualtion 1043 of the Maharashtra Secondary & Higher
Secondary Education Boards Act, 1965. Challenge was laid to the
validity of the regulation on the ground that the same was violative
of the rules of natural justice and was unconstitutional.
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 49 of 63

By

regulation 104, the Board had provided the method of verification
of marks obtained by a candidate in a subject. Sub-regulation 3
stipulated that no candidate shall claim or be entitled to
revaluation of his answers or disclosure or inspection of the
answer books or other documents as these were treated by the
Divisional Board as most confidential.

It was held by the Apex

Court that the constitutionality of the regulation has to be
adjudged only by a three fold test namely : (i) whether the
provisions of such regulation fall within the scope and ambit of the
power conferred by the statute on the delegate (ii) whether the
rules/regulations framed by the delegate are to any extent in
consistent with the provisions of the parent enactment and lastly
(iii) whether they infringe any of the fundamental rights or the
other restrictions or limitations imposed by the constitution.
Upon consideration of the matter, it was held that principles
of natural justice were not attracted or not applicable.

The

regulation was not in the nature of a bye-law and is not ultravires
on the ground of its being an unreasonable provision.

It was

further held that it was not within the legitimate domain of the
court to determine whether the purpose of statute can be served
better by adopting any policy different from the policy of the
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 50 of 63

legislature or its delegates. It was held that what constitutes fair
play depends on the facts and circumstances relating to a
particular given situation.

In this case, it was held that the

procedure evolved by the Board for ensuring fairness and accuracy
in evaluation of the answer books has made the system as
foolproof as can be possible and it could not be said that the denial
of the right to demand a revaluation constitutes a denial of fair
play and is unreasonable. The court also observed that it is in
public interest that the results of public examination when
published should have some finality attached to them.

If

inspection, verification in the presence of the candidates and
revaluation are to be allowed as of right, it may lead to gross and
indefinite uncertainly, particularly in regard to the relative
rankings etc of the candidates besides leading to utter confusion
on account of the enormity of the labour and the time involved in
the process.
62.

In JT 2004 (6) SC 380 Pramod Kumar Srivastava v.

Chairman, Bihar Public Service Commission, Patna &
Ors., the court was concerned with the Judicial Services
(Competitive) Examination, 1999 conducted by the respondents
and a prayer was made in the writ petition filed by the petitioner
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 51 of 63

for a direction to the commission to revaluate his general science
paper on the ground that the petitioner had scored good marks in
all papers and had answered the general science paper correctly
and consequently he should be awarded higher marks. The court
relied on the principles laid down in Maharashtra State Board of
Secondary & Higher Secondary Education & Anr. v. Paritosh
Bhupesh Kumarsheth etc.(supra) and held thus :“8.
Adopting such a course as was
done by the learned single judge will give rise
to practical problems. Many candidates may
like to take a chance and pray for re-evaluation
of their answer-books. Naturally, the court
will pass orders on different dates as and when
writ petitions are filed. the Commission will
have to then send the copies of individual
candidates to examiners for re-evaluation
which is bound to take time. The examination
conducted by the Commission being a
competitive examination,t he declaration of
final result will thus be unduly delayed and the
vacancies will remain unfilled for a long time.
What will happen if a candidate secures lesser
marks in re-evaluation?
He may come
forward with a plea that the marks as
originally awarded to him may be taken into
consideration. The absence of clear rules on
the subject may throw many problems and in
the larger interest, they must be avoided.
9.
Even otherwise, the manner in which
the learned single judge had the answer-book
of the appellant in General Science paper reevaluated cannot be justified. The answer
book was not sent directly by the court either
to the Registrar of the Patna university or to
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 52 of 63

the Principal of the Science College.
A
photocopy of the answer-book was handedover to the standing counsel for the Patna
university who returned the same to the court
after some time and a statement was made to
the effect that the same had been examined by
two teachers of Patna Science College. The
names of the teachers were not even disclosed
to the court. The examination in question is a
competitive
examination
where
the
comparative merit of a candidate has to be
judged. It is, therefore, absolutely necessary
that a uniform standard is applied in
examining the answer-books
of all the
candidates. It is the specific case of the
commission that in order to achieve such an
objective, a centralized system of evaluation of
answer-books is adopted wherein different
examiners examined the answer-books on the
basis of model answers prepared by the head
examiner with the assistance of other
examiners. It was pleaded in the letters patent
appeal preferred by the Commission and
which fact has not been disputed that the
model answer was not supplied to the two
teachers of the Patna Science College. There
can be a variation of standard in awarding
marks by different examiners. The manner in
which the answer-books were got evaluated,
the marks awarded therein cannot be treated
as sacrosanct and consequently the direction
issued by the learned single judge tot he
Commission to treat the marks of the
appellant in general science paper as 63
cannot be justified.”
63.

The respondents have framed clause 6.7(d) whereby it is

stated that National Board of Education will not provide details of
marking/grading in the examinations. As per the scheme of the
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 53 of 63

examination, the score achieved by a candidate is not based on a
competitive assessment but is based on an evaluation of his/her
skills alone. It is not the respondent's contention that several
thousands or lakhs take this examination or that there is any
procedural or practical difficulty involved with the disclosure of
the result. The candidate's desire to know his or her marks is also
not based on any exalted aspirations and hopes but the desire is
confined, rooted and based in the spirit of effecting selfimprovement and a legitimate expectation of knowing the rating
which her/his skills would have received at the hands of experts in
the field. Such an aspiration cannot be considered unreasonable
or unwarranted bearing in mind the scheme of the examination.
There is no legal nor other prohibition from a candidate appearing
in the examination gaining knowledge of the score secured by him.
The petitioner has urged that such information would enable him
to address those areas of his knowledge skills where she was
assessed as lacking by the examiners.
64.

At this stage, it becomes necessary to advert to the reasons

disclosed by the respondents for their refusal to disclose the
marks. According to the respondents, there is a threat perception
that lecturers and professors would be harassed, bullied and
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 54 of 63

maltreated by students who are failed in the examination. The
respondent has failed to point out even a single instance in this
behalf has been pointed out other than an apprehension that an
examiner would be harmed at the instance of a failed candidate.
65.

No material has been placed before this court which would

evidence any legitimate basis for such an apprehension.

No

instance has been cited on which such apprehension could be held
to be justified.

In these circumstances, the respondents have

certainly failed to disclose any rationale or sound reasoning based
whereon it could possibly refuse to disclose the marks which have
been secured by a candidate other than the ipsi dixit of the
respondent as an examining body.
No practical difficulty which would persuade this court to
hold that the quantum of work entailed because of the number of
students was such that the work involved was so much as to justify
the stand of the respondents to refuse to inform the marks as has
been urged.
66.

As noticed above, the entire explanation for the inclusion of

the prohibition in clause 6.7(d) is given in one sentence by the
respondent no. 1. Undoubtedly, the courts have increasingly held
that the respondents should be at liberty to evolve the examination
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 55 of 63

process upon consideration of all pros and cons and safeguards
and that courts are not equipped and should not substitute its own
views as to what may be considered wise, prudent and proper in
relation to academic matters in preference to those formulated by
professional

men

possessing

technical

expertise

and

rich

experience of only day to day working of educational institutions
and the departments controlling them.
However, there is no dispute that the regulations in the
instant case are non-statutory. The respondents are possessed of
the power to impose such prohibitions as are necessary for
effective conduct of the examination and in public interest.
However it is well settled that all measures, substantive as well as
procedural as are incorporated in the regulations are done so for
the efficacious achievement of the object and purpose sought to be
achieved by the prohibition.
67.

So far as a delegated legislation in the nature of bye-laws is

concerned, it is well settled that only if it can be said that a bye law
is manifestly unjust, capricious, inequitable or partial in its
operation, that it can be invalidated by the court on the ground of
unreasonableness.

(Re : Para 21 of AIR 1984 SC 1543).

Unreasonableness relates to partiality and inequality in operation
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 56 of 63

as between different classes.

The bye-laws would also be

invalidated if they disclose bad faith; if they involved such
oppressive or gratuitous interference with the rights of those
subjected to them as could find no justification in the minds of
reasonable men. It is equally well settled that a bye-law or a
regulation

would

not

be

rendered

unreasonable

on

the

predilection of the court.
68.

Even though the prohibition in the instant case is not

contained in any legislation or delegated legislation, however, the
same impacts the rights of the student to know his or her result.
In view of the challenge which has been laid in my view, this
prohibition would required to be examined in the light of the
principles which have been laid down by the courts so far as
challenges to delegated legislations are concerned. Examined in
the light of these principles, I have no hesitation in holding that
the prohibition contained in clause 6.7(d) in the instant case does
not have any rationale and is arbitrary and unreasonable in the
light of the stated reasons for its inclusion as set out in the counter
affidavit.
69.

There is yet another reason for so holding in the instant case.

The citizens of India have a fundamental right to impart and
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 57 of 63

receive information under the freedom of speech and expression
guaranteed by Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India. The
Apex Court in AIR 1989 SC 190 R.P. Limited vs Indian
Express Newspapers read into Article 21 of the Constitution of
India, the right to know of the citizen of India.
information

has

received

statutory

recognition

This right to
in several

enactments. In Mr. X vs Hospital Z reported at 1998 8 SCC
296, the Supreme Court held that it was open to the hospital
authorities or the doctor concerned to reveal such information to
the persons related to a girl whom the appellant intended to marry
and she had a right to know about the HIV+ status of the
appellant. Further observations in this regard were made in JT
(2002) 10 SC 214 entitled Mr. X v. Hospital Z.
70.

It is necessary to notice the submission on behalf of the

respondents claiming privilege over the disclosure of the marks of
the candidate. It is trite that privilege cannot be claimed in any
situation at the whim of the authority concerned. The courts are
increasingly leaning in favour of disclosure of information to
further transparency in systems which were hitherto regarded as
bastions of closed working. The statutory provisions contending
claiming of privilege are to be found in Sections 125 and 126 of the
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 58 of 63

Indian Evidence Act, 1872 which read thus :“125. Information as to commission of
offences – No Magistrate or Police officer shall
be completed to say whence he got any
information as to the commission of any
offence, and no Revenue officer shall be
compelled to say whence he got any information
as to the commission of any offence against the
public revenue.
126. Professional communications – No
barrister, attorney, pleader or vakil shall at any
time be permitted, unless with his client's
express consent, to dislcose any communication
made to him in the course and for the purpose
of his employment as such barrister, pleader,
attorney or vakil,by or on behalf of his client, or
to state the contents or condition of any
document with which he has become,
acquainted in the course and for the purpose of
his professional employment, or to disclose any
advice given by him to his client in the course
and for the purpose of such employment :
Provided that nothing in this section shall
protect from disclosure (1) Any such communication made in
furtherance of any [illegal] purpose;
(2) Any fact observed by any barrister,
pleader, attorney or vakil, in the course of his
employment as such, showing that any crime or
fraud has been committed since the
commencement of his employment.
It is immaterial whether the attention of
such barrister, [pleader], attorney or vakil was
or was not directed to such fact by or on behalf
of lhis client.”
Certainly, the present case does not fall within any of the
contingencies in which the respondents could have claimed

W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 59 of 63

privilege over the disclosure of the information.
71.

In recognition of the entitlement of a citizen to secure excess

to information under control of public authorities which is
consistent with public interests, the parliament has also enacted
the Right of Information Act, 2005. This enactment is a statutory
recognition of the requirement to promote openness, transparency
and accountability in administration and in relation to matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto. In accordance with the
requirement of Article 19 of the Constitution of India as well as
Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948, an
obligation is cast on several public authorities to provide
information and maintain all records consistent with its
operational requirements, dual catalogued, index and published at
regular prescribed intervene.

Needless to say this right to

information is not an absolute right, but is subject to statutory and
constitutional restrictions. Thus under Section 8 of the legislation,
the authorities are exempted from disclosing such information
where the sovereignty and integrity of India may be prejudicially
effected by such disclosure or where public safety and order would
be effected by said disclosure of a protection of trade or
commercial secret etc. The application of this statute amongst
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 60 of 63

others is excluded to intelligence and security organisations as
specified in the Schedule.
72.

Certainly, no such reasons have been put forth by the

respondents for the incorporation of clause 6.7(d).
73.

There are several examinations relating to specialisations

wherein the marks of the candidate are not disclosed. The scheme
of medical education also postulates several courses where the
candidate is only informed as to whether he has passed or failed in
the examinations. The purpose for testing the doctors in these
examinations is to assess their skills and abilities in order to
evaluate as to whether they deserve to be awarded the degree or
the certificate in question. No such reason or material even for
forming the basis for the refusal to disclose the marks or as to why
clause 6.7(d) was included in the brochure has been advanced by
the respondent no. 1.
74.

In this background, the stand of the respondent that it has a

right to withhold the information with regard to the marks secured
by a candidate when a request for information about the marks
has been actually made, cannot be held to be legally permissible.
75.

The respondents have placed reliance on several orders

passed by the courts where candidates were seeking either
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 61 of 63

revaluation of their marks where no such rule existed or were
seeking information of marks secured in entrance exams. The
considerations which weighed the court in rejecting these requests
were based on the practical difficulty in notifying results resulting
to lakhs of candidates who participated in such entrance
examinations and also the rules which existed prescribing a retotalling of the marks. These considerations certainly have no
bearing in the instant case. Again, no such stand has been taken
by the respondents in the counter affidavit or in the explanation
which has been rendered.
In the light of this discussion, Clause 6.7(d) therefore is
clearly without any rationale or legal basis.

The same also is

devoid of any statutory force and has been carved out by the
respondents for no good reason.
76.

I find that the petitioner has made a prayer that sub-clause

(c) of Clause 6.7 of the Bulletin of Information and application
form for Diplomate of National Board Final Examination for the
year July/October, 2000 only be declared as ultravires and that
she be declared successful in the examination held by the
respondent no. 1 for the year July/October, 2000 on the basis of
marks obtained in the theory examination. The petitioner applied
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 62 of 63

for the examination based on the information given to her in the
Bulletin of Information and application form for Diplomate of
National Board Final Examination for the year July/October,
2000.

In case she had any grievance against any provision

contained in this Bulletin, the petitioner ought to have vented the
same prior to applying for the examination and undertaking the
test. In any case, issuing such a direction so far as examination
already conducted is concerned would serve no fruitful purpose. It
is well settled that this court cannot be called upon to issue a futile
writ.

(Re: (1980) 4 SCC 379 Shri S.L. Kapoor v. Shri

Jagmohan)
Accordingly, the prayer made by the petitioner in prayers (a)
and (b) are also rejected.
However in the light of the aforegoing discussion, the writ
petition is allowed to the extent of prayer (e). The respondent no.
1 is directed to disclose the marks obtained by the petitioner in the
theory, thesis and practical examinations taken by her.
This writ petition is disposed of in the above terms.
GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
March 2, 2007.
kr
W.P.(C) No. 1448/2001

page 63 of 63

