IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 3473/2003
Judgment reserved on : 26th April, 2005
Date of decision : May 2nd,2005
Smt. Ram Rati Devi
... Petitioner
through Mr. A. Maitri, Advocate
VERSUS
Union of India and others
... Respondents
through Mr. Sidharth Mridul, Advocate
Mr. M.M. Kalra, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.
This writ petition has been filed by the petitioner claiming
to be the wife of freedom fighter seeking the following prayers:“(i)
quashing
the
impugned
letter
no.P.28014/13/2001-Mkt. Dated 21.2.2003 issued
by Ministry of Petroleum and Natural
1:

WP(C) 3473/2003

Gas/respondent no.1;
(ii)directing the respondents to issue Letter of
Intent to the petitioner at the earliest in respect
of LPG Distributorship at Purkaji, District
Muzaffarnagar, Uttar Pradesh; and/or

2.

(iii) Pass such other/further order(s) as this
Hon'ble Court may deem fit and proper in the facts
and circumstances of the case to meet the ends of
justice.”
The facts giving rise to the present petition briefly stated

are stated hereafter.
It has been contended that the petitioner's husband late
Shri Dhoom Singh served as a Gunner in the Hong Kong-Singapore
Royal Artillery during 1942-46. During this period Netaji Subhash
Chandra Bose constituted the Indian National Army (INA) and
called upon the countrymen to join the said Army to fight the British
Imperial rule over India.

Shri Dhoom Singh is stated to have

responded to Netaji's call, thereby sacrificing his

career in the

British Army and joined the Indian National Army. He fought with
the Indian National Army against the British and suffered for his
sacrifice. The petitioner's husband Shri Dhoom Singh served as a
Gunner in the IInd Unit of HKSRA and fought against the Japanese

2:

WP(C) 3473/2003

during the Second World War. He was arrested by the Japanese on
15th February, 1932 and remained in jail for nine months. Shri
Dhom Singh also fought the war against the British at the Arakon
front from 1943-45 and was arrested by the British Army in the year
1945 when he remained in jail for 10 months in Barasath District
Jail, West Bengal. He was also prosecuted at the Lal Quila Jail
alongwith other freedom fighters and attained liberty only when
India achieved freedom in 1947.
3.

As per the decision of the Government Shri Dhoom Singh

was not allowed to serve the Indian Army on account of his
membership of the Indian National Army. It was only after 1972
that the services of the members of the Indian National Army were
recognised. The petitioner's husband was issued a certificate dated
5th June, 1972 of having been a political sufferer and was held
entitled to all concessions allowed to such persons. The petitioner's
husband late Shri Dhoom Singh was awarded the coveted
“Tamrapatra” on 15th August, 1972.
The petitioner's husband was entitled to and was enjoying
the benefits of the Freedom Fighter Pension, Rail Pass, Bus Pass,
3:

WP(C) 3473/2003

one BSNL telephone etc.
Unfortunately Shri Dhoom Singh expired on 28th July,
1987. Thereafter the petitioner has been enjoying all benefits and
receiving the pension as his widow.
4.

The petitioner submits that on 31st August, 2000 the

Indian Oil Corporation Ltd./respondents 2 & 3 herein issued an
advertisement which was published in the Dainik Jagran of such date
inviting applications for allotment of MS/HSD retail outlet
dealership of Petrol Pump/Distributorship of Kerosene Oil/LPG.
According to the petitioner the advertisement required that the
applicant should have been issued the Tamrapatra by the Ministry of
Home Affairs of the Government of India or possessed a certificate
of pension under the Freedom Fighter Pension Scheme of this
Ministry. It is further contended that an applicant was only required
to produce such Tamrapatra or copy of the Pension Pay Order.
Consequently, the petitioner claims, that she has applied for grant of
LPG Distributorship at Purkaji, District Muzaffarnagar, Uttar
Pradesh under the “Freedom Fighter(Women)” category.
Mr.

Maitri,

learned
4:

counsel

submitted

that

WP(C) 3473/2003

after

undergoing an interview before the Dealer Selection Board-II, at
Bareilly , Uttar Pradesh on 12th February, 2001 she was declared
successful for allotment of the LPG Distributorship.

The

respondents are stated to have been fully satisfied about the
eligibility of the petitioner and also that she was drawing pension
under the Freedom Fighter Pension Scheme and hence was covered
under the category under which she has applied.
5.

It has been contended that the petitioner was empanelled

at no.1. However pursuant to a Field Inspection Report made by
Shri L.C.Khurana, Assistant Manager(LPG Sales) Meerut, on the
orders of respondent no.3 on 3rd March, 2001 the petitioner was
asked to submit certain further documents including copy of the
Pension Pay Order which was also submitted. On 1st June, 2001 the
petitioner was asked to submit copy of the Tamrapatra again
alongwith the receipt of the pension.
Despite assurances and satisfaction of every requirement
by the petitioner, the Letter of Intent was not issued to her on the
basis that the same would be issued in due course.
6.

This writ petition has been necessitated as, according to
5:

WP(C) 3473/2003

the petitioner, on 9th August, 2002, the Government of India issued
an

order

cancelling

all

Petrol

Pumps/LPG

and

Kerosene

Distributorships made under recommendations of Dealer Selection
Boards since 1.1.2000 except in cases of allotments made under
“Operation Vijay”scheme. The petitioner is effected by this order as
her selection was also cancelled thereby.
The

petitioner

submits

that

despite

repeated

representations, nothing was done granting the letter of intent.
Finally on 19th March, 2003 the petitioner was informed by the
respondent that the panel selected by the Dealer Selection Board on
the basis of the interview held on 12th February, 2001 has been
cancelled. As the petitioner was not served with the copy of the
letter dated 21st February, 2003 alleged to have been issued by the
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, the petitioner through
counsel requested for copy of the letter. The decision cancelling the
selection of the petitioner has been impugned on the basis that there
is no consideration of the issues raised by the petitioner and is nonspeaking. It is also contended that the cancellation has been effected
without issuance of a notice.
6:

WP(C) 3473/2003

7.

The respondents have filed their counter affidavit.

Reliance has been placed on the advertisement dated 31st August,
2000 to contend that the petitioner was not an eligible candidate and
that the scheme and policy of the respondents for grant of LPG
Distributorship did not envisage or provide for any application by
the widow of a freedom fighter. It is stated that her application was
not competent.

It was for this reason that the order dated 21st

February, 2003 was issued by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural
Gas of the Government of India striking down the panel set up by
the Selection Board as it did not contain eligible persons.
8.

The respondent no.2 has further pointed out that the

application made by the petitioner was received by post and on
scrutiny on 25th January, 2000 she was considered ineligible due to
non-submission of the requisite certificates. Despite this fact the
Selection Board DSB Bareilly-II issued the interview letter dated
11th January, 2001 and interviewed her on 12th February, 2001. Even
in this letter the petitioner was required to produce the original
Tamrapatra which she did not do so.
9.

It is contended that mere empanelment by the Board is of
7:

WP(C) 3473/2003

no consequence inasmuch as no letter was issued in favour of the
petitioner. On the contrary the office of the Indian Oil Corporation ,
UPSO, Lucknow asked the Area Office Agra to carry out a field
investigation and present a report.

It was on the basis of the

recommendations of the Field Investigation Report of the Field
Officer Shri L.C.Khurana that the then Assistant Manager, LPG
Meerut carried out the Field Investigation Report for the Purkaji
Area. No certificate of eligibility was submitted by the petitioner
even in the field investigation. The note dated 21st March, 2001 of
the Field Officer specifically noticed that the certificate of eligibility
of category was not attached or submitted by this candidate and
required that the mater should be looked into.
It is submitted that no Letter of Intent was issued to the
petitioner as she was not a freedom fighter.
10.

Respondent no.2 has submitted that there were no eligible

candidates for grant of dealership, comments of the Chairman,
Dealer Selection Board Bareilly-II were called for. Upon receipt,
vide letter dated 26th February, 2002 they were forwarded to the
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas of the Government of India
8:

WP(C) 3473/2003

vide letter dated 24-30th December, 2002 for taking decision in the
matter.
The Dealer Selection Board Bareilly-II had also informed
the petitioner vide letter dated 9th May, 2001 that the allotment of the
LPG Dealership had been withheld and would be allotted only after
receipt of documents of eligibility failing which it would stand
cancelled.
The decision was finally taken by the Government of
India on 21st February, 2003 deciding that the panel drawn up by the
Dealer Selection Board did not contain eligible persons and may be
struck down. The petitioner was therefore duly informed as such.
11.

Learned counsel appearing for respondent no.1 has

contended that the petitioner being ineligible and not covered under
the scheme of allotment, could not have filed an application. It has
further been contended that there was no allocation or valid selection
of the petitioner and there was no grant of the LPG dealership in
favour of the petitioner and as such the writ petition was wholly
misconceived.
12.

I have given my considered thought to the matters in issue
9:

WP(C) 3473/2003

and have been taken through the record of the present case. It is
admitted position that late Shri Dhoom Singh was a freedom fighter
and was a member of the Indian National Army. There is no dispute
that he was awarded the Tamrapatra and was issued the certificate of
having been a political sufferer. Late Shri Dhoom Singh was also the
recipient of pension as a freedom fighter.

Unfortunately this

freedom fighter expired on 28th July, 1987. At the time of his death
there was no scheme whatsoever for grant of dealerships of any kind
by the respondent no.2 to the freedom fighters.
It is only on 31st October, 2000 that the respondents took
out public notices in national dailies calling for applications from
eligible persons who could be given LPG Distributorship.
13.

The

respondents

had

provided

several

categories

including persons belonging to Scheduled Cast/Scheduled Tribe
categories, physically handicapped category, defence personnel
category and freedom fighter category So far as the freedom fighters
were concerned no upper age limit for the applicant was provided.
In order to appreciate the spirit, purpose and intendment
of the scheme, it is necessary to notice the specific categories
10:

WP(C) 3473/2003

provided in this advertisement:“Defence Personnel Category(DEF):
Candidate belonging to this category should
be sponsored by Director General of
Resettlement, Ministry of Defence, Govt. of
India, as per the following inter-se priority.
Certificate of Eligibility issued for one
particular dealership/distributorship is not
valid for another dealership/distributorship.
(a) Widows/dependants
gallantry award winner.

of

posthumous

(b) War Widows/dependants of those who
died in war.
(c) War disabled/disabled on duty.
(d) Widows/dependants of those who died in
hamess due to attributable causes.
(e) Disabled in peace due to attributable
causes.
Paramilitary/Police/Government
Personnel Category (PMP)
The following persons will be eligible:
The personnel of Paramilitary/Police
Personnel including persons having served
in BSF, CRPF, CISF, ITBP, Railway
Protection Force, Special Reserved Police,
Special Armed Police, cost Guards, Assam
Rifles etc. as designated by Central
Government and Police Forces of the States,
11:

WP(C) 3473/2003

Customs and Central Excise Department,
Narcotics Control Bureau, Enforcement
Directorate, Economic Intelligence Bureau,
Directorate General of Anti-Evasion and
Directorate of Revenue Intelligence and
those serving indifference Departments of
Central/State
Governments
who
are
incapacitated OR disabled while performing
their duties.
In case of death, while
performing duties their widows/dependants
are also eligible.
Inter-se priority for PMP category:
(a) Widows/dependants
gallantry award winner.

of

posthumous

(b) Widows/dependants of persons having
died in action.
(c) Persons disabled on duty.
(d) Widows/dependants of persons who died
while in service.
(e) Disabled in peace due to attributable
causes.
Freedom Fighter(FF):
Persons belong to this category should
produce a Certificate or Tamprapatra from
the ministry of Home Affairs, Govt. of India
or an attested copy of the pension order
issued by the Accountant General in
pursuance of the sanction letter from the
Ministry of Home Affairs.”
12:

WP(C) 3473/2003

14.

The advertisement also stated that the application form

and enclosures be complete in all respect. The respondent no.1 has
placed on record the guidelines for selection of retail outlet
dealers/LPG/SKO-LDO dealer dated 9th October, 2000 on record.
These guidelines were issued in supersession of all earlier
communications. The expression “Freedom Fighter” is defined in
these guidelines as follows:“ix.
Freedom Fighter means the person
who is a holder of Tamrapatra and receiving
pension sanctioned by the Ministry of Home
Affairs, Government of India.”
It is, therefore, evident that as per the scheme of allotment,
the respondents had made specific provision for widows/dependants
of persons who could be considered for allotment. These include
widows of defence personnel, para-military police and Government
personnel. There was no such provision in the freedom fighter
category.
15.

In this view of the matter, I am unable to agree with the

learned counsel for the petitioner on his submission that the
petitioner would deserve to be treated para-materia as widows in
13:

WP(C) 3473/2003

other categories. The definition given by the respondents is clear
and unambiguous. The petitioner being the widow of a deceased
freedom fighter was not eligble to make an application for the
dealership on a bare perusal of the eligibility conditions.
16.

So far as the claim of the deceased freedom fighter Sh.

Dhoom Singh is concerned, the admitted position is that he had
expired as back as on 28th July, 1987 when there was no such
scheme for allotment of dealerships in force.

The respondents

formulated the policy and called for applications for grant of
dealership in the year 2000.

It cannot, therefore, possibly be

contended that there was any right in favour of the deceased husband
of the petitioner for award of LPG dealership based on a policy
which was not even in existence during his life time.
17.

With regard to the contention on behalf of the petitioner to

the effect that she had a vested right inasmuch as she was considered
and empanelled on a list by the respondents is concerned, it is to be
noticed that the list was prepared by the Dealer Selection Board and
the applications had not been finally disposed of by the competent
authorities. In fact a direction had been made for undertaking a full
14:

WP(C) 3473/2003

investigation on the list which was forwarded by the Selection
Board.
There is no dispute from the side of the petitioner to the
effect that she was ever granted a Tamrapatra or submitted such
certificate with her application at any time thereafter. Even the
pension order relied upon by her was made in favour of the
petitioner's husband who was a freedom fighter and the petitioner
was getting pension merely as his widow. Therefore, admittedly the
application of the petitioner was not complete and was not in
compliance with the advertisement.
18.

On scrutiny of the application of the petitioner a check list

had been drawn up as back as on 25th November, 2000 wherein it
was clearly stated that the petitioner was not eligible and that the
certificate of eligibility was not submitted. The check list framed by
the officer scrutinising the application has been placed on record
which has been confirmed by the Area Manager as well. Thereafter
the Field Investigation Officer had submitted a report clearly
recording that no eligibility certificate was forthcoming nor was
produced during the proceedings conducted by him. A note dated
15:

WP(C) 3473/2003

21st march, 2001 recorded by the Field Officer requesting the
authorities to examine this aspect of the matter has also been placed
on record.
19.

I find that a letter dated 9th May, 2001 was issued by the

Dealer Selection Board to the petitioner, which has been placed on
record by her, which reads as under:“DEALER SELECTION BOARDS
BAREILLY-II,
“KISHAN KUTIR”
35/A-2, IST FLOOR
OPP. LIC DIVISIONAL OFFICE
RAMPUR GARDEN
BAREILLY - 243 001
Smt. Ram Rati Devi,
W/o Late Shri Dhoom Singh
Fighter),
Village & P.O. Bhumma,
Distt. Muzafarnagar (U.P.)
Reg;

(Freedom

Interview dated 12.02.2001 for LPG
Distributorship at Purkaji.

Madam,
Please refer your interview held on
12.02.2001 regarding LPG Distributorship at
Purkaji. During the Interview, you were advised
to submit to the Non-Member Secretary, the
photo copies of the documents pertaining to
Pension which you had presented before the
Board. You have not submitted the photo copy
16:

WP(C) 3473/2003

to the Non-Member Secretary.
You are, therefore, requested that you
may appear before this office on 01.06.2001
along with photo copy and original copy of the
documents pertaining to pension. You bring
along certificate of Political Sufferer and
Tamrapatra given by the Government of India.
The allotment of LPG is withheld and
shall be allotted to you after receipt of
documents, the same can be cancelled in case
you do not appear.
Thanking you,
Yours faithfully,
Sd/S.N. Saxena
President
Dealers Selection Board-II.”
It is, therefore, apparent that the petitioner was advised to
submit the original and the photo copies of the documents even by
the Dealer Selection Board which she failed to do so.

No

Tamrapatra was produced despite intimation as back as on 9 th May,
2001.
The petitioner was informed in this communication itself
that the allotment of the LPG dealership had been withheld.
20.

In this view of the matter the petitioner was admittedly not

17:

WP(C) 3473/2003

eligible and could not have been considered for award of the LPG
dealership. I also find that there was allotment of dealership in her
favour.
21.

The respondent no.2 has carefully considered the entire

matter since it related to award of LPG dealership and placed the
entire material before the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
after complete scrutiny - vide its letter dated 24 th - 30th December,
2002, the respondent no. 2 requested the examination of the entire
matter by the respondent no.1, upon finding that there was no
eligible candidate for grant of dealership.
22.

The respondent no.1 has examined this matter and as the

panel drawn up by the Dealer Selection Board did not contain any
eligible persons, vide communication dated 21st February, 2003
directed that the same be struck down.
23.

In the instant case there was no award of dealership in

favour of the petitioner. The matter was only at the stage of drawing
up the tentative empanelment list by a Selection Board without
communication of any formal order in favour of the petitioner or any
other candidates empanelled.
18:

WP(C) 3473/2003

24.

The petitioner was informed as back as on 9th May, 2001

by the Selection Board itself that there will be no allotment of her
for want of the certificates.

Despite these communications, the

petitioner still failed to place any certificates before the respondents
in support of her application. In this view of the matter, no rights
whatsoever were created in favour of the petitioner and the order
dated 21st February, 2003 cannot be faulted on any legally tenable
grounds.
I find no merit in the writ petition which is hereby
dismissed.

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
May 2nd,2005
JK

19:

WP(C) 3473/2003

