IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 3667/2001
Judgment reserved on : May 24, 2006
Da te of decision : June 02, 2006
D.T.C.

... Petitioner
through Mr. Ataul Haque, Advocate
VERSUS

ISHWAR SINGH

.... Respondents
through Mr. Anil Mittal, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1.Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2.To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3.Whether the judgment should be reported in
the Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL , J.
1.
By this order the DTC assails an award dated 11th
October, 1999 passed by the industrial adjudicator answering an
industrial reference in favour of the workman. It appears that the
respondent was appointed as a conducted with the DTC on 1st
November, 1969. On allegations that the workman entered into
some dispute with other employees of the DTC, he was charge
sheeted by a charge sheet dated 31st October, 1996 and a
disciplinary inquiry was conducted against him.

Based on an

inquiry report dated 28th April, 1987, the disciplinary authority
W.P.(C) 3667/2001

Page No.1 of 25

issued a notice to show cause to the workman to show cause as to
why he should not be removed from service. Finally, by an order
dated 23rd July, 1987, the respondent was removed from service
with effect from 14th July, 1987.

The workman assailed the

disciplinary proceedings taken against him as well as the order
imposing the punishment in a statement of claim made before the
conciliation officer.

The appropriate government by an order

dated 2rd March, 1989 referred the issue relating to the legality
and justification of the dismissal of the respondent to the
industrial adjudicator and also the relief which he would be
entitled to.
2.

On the issue of fairness and propriety of the disciplinary

proceedings conducted by the management, by an order dated 21st
July, 1998 the industrial adjudicator held that the inquiry which
was conducted was not fair or proper and granted an opportunity
to the management to prove the misconduct attributed against the
workman.
3.

It is noteworthy that the order dated 21st July, 1998

vitiating the inquiry has not been impugned by the DTC either in
the present writ petition or in any proceedings prior hitherto and
has therefore did not attain finality. It is noteworthy that the DTC
W.P.(C) 3667/2001

Page No.2 of 25

has not even bothered to place this order before the court. It is the
workman who has placed reliance on the order and has filed the
same on record alongwith his counter affidavit.
4.

So far as the issue relating to misconduct is concerned,

the DTC examined only one witness in support of its contentions.
This witness namely Shri Satya Dev who was Regional
Manager(North) with the DTC stated that he did not remember
anything about the case on the ground that it was old.

The

industrial adjudicator has held that the witness was not a reliable
witness and that he did not state anything against the workman in
respect of the allegations of misconduct. It has been noted by the
industrial adjudicator that the management failed to prove the
allegations of misconduct despite repeated opportunities to do so.
5.

Before this court as well, the petitioner has not been able

to point out any material which was placed before the industrial
adjudicator which could have in any manner supported the
allegations of misconduct against the workman and which has
been overlooked. In this view of the matter, the award dated 11th
October, 1999 returning such finding cannot be assailed on any
legally tenable grounds.
6.

The jurisdiction of this court under Article 226 of the

W.P.(C) 3667/2001

Page No.3 of 25

Constitution of India to examine detailed questions of fact on
which a challenge is laid to an industrial award are narrow. The
principles in this behalf are well settled and the parameters within
which this court would exercise discretion while entertaining a
petition calling upon a judicial review of an adjudication by the
industrial adjudicator are well settled. In this behalf reference can
be appropriately made to AIR 2000 SC 1508 entitled Indian
Overseas Bank Vs. I.O.B. Staff Canteen Workers' Union
& Another in which it was held thus:“The learned single Judge seems to have
undertaken an exercise, impermissible for him
in exercising writ jurisdiction, by liberally
reappreciating the evidence and drawing
conclusions of his own on pure questions of fact,
unmindful, though aware fully, that he is not
exercising any appellate jurisdiction over the
awards passed by a Tribunal, presided over by a
Judicial Officer. The findings of fact recorded
by a fact-finding authority duly constituted for
the purpose and which ordinarily should be
considered to have become final, cannot be
disturbed for the mere reason of having been
based on materials or evidence not sufficient or
credible in the opinion of the writ Court to
warrant those findings at any rate, as long as
they are based upon some material which are
relevant for the purpose or even on the ground
that there is yet another view which can b
reasonably and possibly one taken.
The
Division Bench was not only justified but well
merited in its criticism of the order of the
learned single Judge and in ordering restoration
W.P.(C) 3667/2001

Page No.4 of 25

7.

of the Award of the Tribunal. On being taken
through the findings of the Industrial Tribunal
as well as the order of the learned single Judge
and the judgment of the Division Bench, we are
of the view that the Industrial Tribunal had
overwhelming materials which constituted
ample and sufficient basis for recording its
findings, as it did, and the manner of
consideration undertaken, the objectivity of
approach adopted and reasonableness of
findings recorded seem to be unexceptionable.
The only course, therefore, open to the writ
Judge was the relevant criteria laid down by this
Court, before sustaining the claim of the canteen
workmen, on the facts found and recorded by
the fact-finding authority and not embark upon
an exercise of re-assessing the evidence and
arriving at findings of ones own, altogether
giving a complete go-bye even to the facts
specifically found by the Tribunal below.”
In this context the law laid down by the Apex Court in

Sadhu Ram vs. Delhi Transport Corporation, AIR 1984 SC
1967 observed :
“Para 5.... nor do we think that it was right for the
High Court to interfere with the Award of the Industrial Tribunal
under Article 226 on a mere technicality. Article 226 is a device
to secure and advance justice and not otherwise. In the result, we
allow the appeal, set-aside the judgment of the High Court and
restore the Award of the Presiding Officer.”
8.

In Harbans Lal vs. Jag Mohan, (1985) 4 SCC 333

the court ruled :
“P ara 5 .... The limitations on the jurisdiction of the
High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution are well settled.
The Writ Petition before the High Court prayed for a Writ in the
W.P.(C) 3667/2001

Page No.5 of 25

nature of certiorari, and it is well known that a Writ in the
nature of certiorari may be issued only if the order of the inferior
tribunal of subordinate court suffers from an error of
jurisdiction, or from a breach of the principles of natural justice
or is vitiated by a manifest or apparent error of law. There is no
sanction enabling the High Court to reappraise the evidence
without sufficient reason in law and reach finding of fact
contrary to those rendered by an inferior court or subordinate
court. When a High Court proceeds to do so, it acts plainly in
excess of its power.”
9.

In Calcutta Port Shramik Union vs Calcutta

River Transport Association & Ors. 1988 (Supp.) SCC 768,
the court further observed that :
“Para 10. The object of enacting the enacting the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and of making provision therein to
refer disputes to Tribunals for settlement is to bring about
industrial peace.
Whenever a reference is made by the
Government to the Industrial Tribunal, it has to be presumed
ordinarily that there is a genuine industrial dispute between the
parties which requires to be resolved by adjudication. In all such
cases, an attempt should be made by Courts exercising powers of
judicial review to sustain as far as possible the Awards made by
the Industrial Tribunal instead of picking holes here and there in
the Awards on rival points and ultimately frustrating the entire
adjudication process before the Tribunals by striking down the
Awards in hyper technical grounds. Unfortunately, the orders of
the Single Judge and of the Division Bench have resulted in such
frustration and have made the Award fruitless on an untenable
basis.”
10.

In Sudhoo vs M/s Haji Lal Mohd. Biri Works &

Ors. 1990 Lab.I.C. 1538 it was held that the High Court should
not have interfered with the findings of the fact reached by the
prescribed authority on appreciation of evidence.
W.P.(C) 3667/2001

Page No.6 of 25

11.
Ltd.

The Supreme Court in the case of ABL International
and

another

Vs.

Export

Credit

Guarantee

Corporation of India Ltd. and Others (2004) 3 SCC 553, held
as under :“It is clear that when an instrumentality of the State acts
contrary to public good and public interest, unfairly, unjustly and
unreasonably, in its contractual, constitutional or statutory
obligations, it really acts contrary to the constitutional guarantee
found in Article 14 of the Constitution. Therefore, once the State
or an instrumentality of the State is a party, it has an obligation in
law to act fairly, justly and reasonably to a contract which is the
requirement of Article 14 of the Constitution.”
“Unless the action challenged in the writ petition
pertains to the discharge of a public function or public duty by an
authority, the courts will not entertain a writ petition which does
not involve the performance of the said public function or public
duty.”
12.

State actions causing loss are actionable under public

law and this is as a result of innovation and addition of a new tool
with the courts, which are protectors of civil liberties of the citizens
and would ensure protection against sometimes devastating
results of State Action. The principles of public accountability and
transparency in State action, which essentially must not lack
bonafide was enforced by the Supreme Court even in cases of
appointments in the case of Centre for public interest litigation
and another Vs. Union of India and another (2005) 8 SCC 202.

W.P.(C) 3667/2001

Page No.7 of 25

13.

After detailed consideration of the entire evidence laid

before it, the industrial adjudicator by an award dated 11th October,
1999 was pleased to held that the respondent had not committed
any misconduct and directed his reinstatement into service with
full back wages.
14.

Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has

submitted that an alternative challenge to the industrial award on
the ground that the industrial adjudicator was not justified in
directing reinstatement into the job with continuity of service and
grant of full back wages to the workman. Reliance is placed on the
pronouncement of the Apex Court in 1996 (4) SLR 30 State of
Punjab & Ors. v. Dr. Harbhajan Singh Greasy; AIR 1996 SC 2474
State of Tamil Nadu v. Thiru K.V. Perumal & Ors.; AIR 1972 SC 32
Channabasappa Basappa Happali v. The State of Mysore to submit
that even when the inquiry conducted against the workman is
faulty, reinstatement into service would not be directed.
I find that the judgments relied upon by the petitioner
have been rendered in service jurisprudence and did not relate to
industrial adjudication. So far as the industrial adjudication is
concerned, it has been consistently held that in case an order of
termination of service of the workman is held to be illegal, the
W.P.(C) 3667/2001

Page No.8 of 25

same is rendered nonest and it is to be presumed that it never
intervened in the services of the workman. In such circumstances,
there would be no cessation of the service and consequently the
workman would be entitled to an order directing reinstatement
into service with consequential reliefs.
15.

So far as the pronouncement of the Apex Court in AIR

1972 SC 32 Channabasappa Basappa Happali v. The
State of Mysore and DCLR 2005 (II) DELHI-161 A.P.
Kapur v. UOI & Ors. relied upon by the petitioner is concerned,
the same relates to a continuing challenge to the legality and
validity of the inquiry proceedings. The Supreme Court has held
that the scope of judicial review in respect of the decision of the
disciplinary authority is in a narrow compass and that the court
would not exercise appellate jurisdiction while examining such
petition. It is only upon the court arriving at a conclusion that the
punishment

was

shockingly

disproportionate

or

that

the

conclusion arrived at by the disciplinary authority could not have
been possibly been arrived at which would thereby render it so
perverse that the courts should abjure from interference.
16.

In the instant case, the disciplinary proceedings were

vitiated by a detailed order passed as back as on 21st July, 1998. It
W.P.(C) 3667/2001

Page No.9 of 25

is an admitted position that this order was not assailed by any
proceedings thereafter. This order has not been challenged even
in the present proceedings.

In this view of the matter, the

principles laid down in these judicial pronouncements would have
no application.
17.

There can also be no dispute that the proposed

statement was made before the inquiry officer would not be relied
upon before the court and that it is only a statement which is made
before the court which could be relied upon. In the instant case,
this is not so. The industrial adjudicator has clearly noticed that
the witness of the petitioner has not supported the allegations
made against the respondent. The petitioner is unable to show
anything to the contrary. The instant case therefore is clearly a
case of no evidence.
18.

So far as it is in these circumstances that the industrial

adjudicator has held that the termination of the service of the
workman was illegal and justified in the award dated 11th October,
1999. Having so held, a challenge made by the petitioner to the
grant of relief of reinstatement with continuity of service and back
wages has been assailed before this court. In this behalf, it has
been repeatedly held that the order of termination having been
W.P.(C) 3667/2001

Page No.10 of 25

held to be nonest, the workman would ordinarily be entitled to an
order directing reinstatement into service with continuity and full
back wages. Denial of back wages or a portion thereof would
result only if the employer was able to establish circumstances
justifying such a result. The principles in this behalf were laid
down by the Apex Court in

AIR 1979 SC 75 entitled

Hindustan Tin Works(P) Ltd. Vs The Employees Of The
Hindustan Tin Works in the following terms :
“9. It is no more open to debate that in the
field of industrial jurisprudence a
declaration can be given that the
termination of service is bad and the
workman continues to be in service The
spectre of common law doctrine that
contract of personal service cannot be
specifically enforced or the doctrine of
mitigation of damages does not haunt in
this this branch of law. The relief of
reinstatement with continuity of service can
be granted where termination of service to
found to be invalid. It would mean that the
employer has taken away illegally the right
to work of the workman contrary to the
relevant law or in breach of contract and
simultaneously deprived the workman of
his earnings. If thus the employer is found
to be in the wrong as a result of which the
workman is directed to be reinstated, the
employer could not shirk his responsibility
of paying the wages which the workman has
been deprived of by the illegal or invalid
action of the employer.
Speaking
realistically, where termination of service is
W.P.(C) 3667/2001

Page No.11 of 25

questioned as invalid or illegal and the
workman has to go through the gamut of
litigation, his capacity to sustain himself
throughout the protracted litigation is itself
such an awesome factor that he may not
survive to see the day when relief is granted.
More so in our system where the law's
proverbial delay has become stupefying. If
after such a protracted time and energy
consuming litigation during which period
the workman just sustains himself,
ultimately he is to be told that though he
will be reinstated, he will be denied the back
wages which would be due to him, the
workman would be subjected to a sort of
penalty for no fault of his and it is wholly
undeserved.
Ordinarily,
therefore,
workman whose service has been illegally
terminated would be entitled to full back
wages except to the extent he was gainfully
employed during the enforced idleness.
That is the normal rule. Any other view
would be premium on the unwarranted
litigative activity of the employer. If the
employer terminate the service illegally and
the termination is motivated as in this case,
viz. To resist the workman's demand for
revision of wages, the termination may well
amount to unfair labour practice. In such
circumstances reinstatement being the
normal rule, it should be followed with full
back wages.
..............................On top of it they were
forced to litigation upto the apex court and
now they are being told that something less
than full back wages should be awarded to
them. If the services were not terminated
the workmen ordinarily would have
continued to work and would have earned
their wages. When it was held that the
termination of services was neither proper
W.P.(C) 3667/2001

Page No.12 of 25

nor justified, it would not only show that the
workmen were always willing to serve but if
they
rendered
service
they
would
legitimately be entitled to the wages for the
same. If the workmen were always ready to
work but they were kept away therefrom on
account of invalid act of the employer, there
is no justification for not awarding them full
back wages which were very legitimately
due to them. A division Bench of the
Gujarat High Court in Dhari Gram
Panchayat vs. Safai Kamdar Mandal [197-I
LLI 508], and a division Bench of the
Allahabad High Court in Postal Seals
Industrial Co-operative Society Ltd. vs.
Labour Court II, Lucknow and others [1971I LLJ 327], have taken this view and we are
of the opinion that the view taken therein is
correct.”
19.

In AIR 1984 SC 500 Gammon India vs Niranjan

Das, the court held that the order of termination of service being
in violation of the provisions of Section 25F would render the same
void abinitio.
20.

In the instant case, the industrial adjudicator has noted

that the management would be gainful employment of the
workman during any period after the termination of his service. In
AIR 1991 SC 2010 entitled UOI v. Janakiraman, the Supreme
Court held that the normal rule of “no

work, no pay” is not

applicable to such cases where the employee although is willing to

W.P.(C) 3667/2001

Page No.13 of 25

work, is kept away from work by the authorities for no fault of his.
21.

In AIR 1980 SC 1896 Gujarat Steel Tubes Ltd. v.

Gujarat Steel Tubes Mazdoor Sabha & Ors. the Supreme
Court held thus :“143.
Dealing with the complex of
considerations bearing on payment of back
wages the new perspective emerging from Art.
43A cannot be missed, as explained in
Hindustan Tin Works. Labour is no more a
mere factor in production but a partner in
Industry, conceptually speaking and less than
full back wages is a sacrifice by those who can
best (least?) afford and cannot be demanded
by those, who least sacrifice their large 'wages'
though can best afford, if financial constraint
is the ground urged by the latter
(Management) as inability to pay full back pay
to the former. The morality of law and the
constitutional mutation implied in Article 43A
bring about a new equation in industrial
relations. Anyway, in the Hindustan Tin
Works' case, 75 per cent of the past wages was
directed to be paid. Travelling over the same
ground by going through every precedent is
supererogatory and we hold the rule is simple
that the discretion to deny reinstatement or
pare down the quantum of back wages is
absent save for exceptional reasons.
144.
It must be added however that
particular circumstances of each case may
induce the court to modify the direction in
regard to the quantum of back wages payable
as happened in the India General Navigation
and Railway Co. Ltd. v. their Workmen (AIR
1960 SC 219) (supra). We may, therefore,
have to consider when finally moulding the
relief, what, in this case, we should do
W.P.(C) 3667/2001

Page No.14 of 25

regarding reinstatement and back wages.
148.
This perspective informs our
decision.
What did the High Court do
regarding reinstatement and should we modify
and way?
If the discharge is bad,
reinstatement is the rule. In India General
Navigation, AIR 1960 SC 219, Punjab National
Bank, AIR 1960 SC 160 and Swadeshi
Industries, AIR 1960 SC 1258, et al,
restoration, despite large numbers, was
directed. But most rules have exceptions
wrought by the pressure of life and Oriental
was relied on to contend that reinstatement
must be denied. There is force in the High
Court's reasoning to distinguish Oriental, as
we hinted earlier and we quote :
“There were only 22 workmen
involved in that case. The management had
made genuine and persistent efforts to
persuade the concerned workmen to call off
the strike and join work. Those efforts were
made at three different stages, namely, (1)
immediately after the workers went on the
lightning strike and before charge-sheets were
issued (2) after the charges were dropped and
individual notices were sent to the workmen
asking them to resume work by specified dates
and (3) after the orders of termination were
served and conciliation proceedings were
commenced pursuant to the demand notice.
But this is not all. Even the Labour Officer and
Labour Inspector had tried to persuade the
concerned workmen to join duty before the
charge-sheets came to be issued. As against
these repeated bona fide attempts on the part
of the management and an outside agency to
persuade the erring workmen, they not only
did not resume work but also failed to
acknowledge or send a reply tot he individual
notices served upon them requesting them to
resume work and they appear to have made it
W.P.(C) 3667/2001

Page No.15 of 25

a condition precedent to their joining duty that
the suspended workmen should also be taken
back. Even under such circumstances, the
management did not straightway terminate
their services but gave individual notices
requiring the concerned workmen to show
cause why their names should not be struck off
and asked them to submit their reply by a
certain date. Even those notices were not
replied. It is only thereafter that the services
of the concerned workmen came to be
terminated. It is against this background that
the Supreme Court held that there was a
persistent and obdurate refusal by the
workmen to join duty” notwithstanding the
fact that “the management has done
everything possible to persuade them and give
them opportunities to come back to work” and
that they had without any sufficient cause
refused to do so which constituted
“misconduct” so as to “justify the termination
of their services”.
“....... If the workmen had been approached
individually, not only those amongst them who
were unwilling to join strike but were
prevented from joining work would have taken
courage to resume duty but even those
amongst them who were undecided could also
have been won over. That apart, those notices,
as their contents disclose, were hardly
persuasive efforts. They were a mixture of
ultimatums,
threats,
complaints
and
indictment of the workmen and the Sabha.
Was it, therefore, a genuine effort on the part
of a keenly desirous employer to offer an olive
branch? In Oriental, orders of termination
were passed only after giving individual
notices to the concerned workmen to show
cause why their names should not be struck
off. Besides, those notices were given after
charges formally served upon each workman
W.P.(C) 3667/2001

Page No.16 of 25

earlier were dropped and persuasive efforts
made in the meantime had failed. None of
those steps was taken herein.
All that
happened was that in one of the notices meant
for mass consumption and circulation, such
intimation was given.”
150.
Another facet of the relief turns on
the demand for full back wages. Certainly, the
normal rule, on reinstatement, is full back
wages sine the order of termination is non est.
Lad's case (1979) 1 SCC 590 : (AIR 1979 SC
582) and Panitole Tea Estate's case (1971) 3
SCR 174 : (AIR 1971 SC 2171). Even so, the
industrial court may well slice off a part if the
workmen are not wholly nameless or the strike
is illegal and unjustified. To what extent
wages for the long interregnum should be paid
is, therefore, a variable dependant on a
complex of circumstances. (See for e.g. (1967)
15 Fac. L.R. 395 Paras 3 and 4) (SC).”
22.

In AIR 1980 SC 1253 Mohan Lal v. The

Management of M/s Bharat Electronics Ltd. the Supreme
Court held thus :“16.
Appellant has thus satisfied both
the eligibility qualifications prescribed in
Section 25F for claiming retrenchment
compensation.
He has satisfactorily
established that his case is not covered by
any of the excepted or excluded categories
and he has rendered continuous service for
one year. Therefore, termination of his
service would constitute retrenchment. As
precondition for a valid retrenchment has
not been satisfied the termination of service
is ab initio void, invalid and inoperative. He
must, therefore,
be deemed to be in
W.P.(C) 3667/2001

Page No.17 of 25

continuous service.
17.
The last submission was that
looking to the record of the appellant this
Court should not grant reinstatement but
award compensation. If the termination of
service is ab initio void and inoperative,
there
is no question of granting
reinstatement because there is no cessation
of service and a mere declaration follows that
the continues to be in service with all
consequential benefits.
Undoubtedly, in
some decisions of this Court such as Ruby
General Insurance Co. Ltd. v. P.P. Chopra
(1970 1 lb. LJ 63 and Hindustan Steel Ltd.
Rourkela v. A. K. Roy (1970) 3 SCR 343 :
(AIR 1970 SC 1401) it was held that the Court
before granting reinstatement must weigh all
the facts and exercise discretion properly
whether to grant reinstatement or to award
compensation. But there is a catena of
decisions which rule that where the
termination is illegal especially where there
is an ineffective order of retrenchment, there
is neither termination nor cessation of
service and a declaration follows that the
workman concerned continues to be in
service with all consequential benefits. No
case is made out for departure from this
normally accepted approach of the Courts in
the field of social justice and we do not
propose to depart in this case.”
23.

In a recent case before the Apex Court it was urged that

existence of several industries in the area where the management
was located showed the possibility for the workman to obtain
gainful employment.

A prayer for grant of back wages was

opposed on this ground. In its judgment reported at 2004(VIII)
W.P.(C) 3667/2001

Page No.18 of 25

AD SC 444 M/s Nicks(India)Tools Vs. Ram Surat and
another the Apex Court held thus:“18. This leaves us to consider the next limb of
the argument of Shri U.U.Lalit, learned senior
counsel who contended that the Labour Court
having come to the conclusion that in Ludhiana
where the appellant's factory is situated, there are
large number of other industries hence it was
always possible for the respondent workman to
have obtained a gainful employment on that
basis, was justified in confining the back wages to
only 25% of the full back wages, and the High
Court in this regard erred in reversing that
finding by not taking into consideration the
additional material produced by the management
in regard to this aspect of the case, i.e. of the
respondent being gainfully employed during the
relevant period. He also relied on two judgments
of this Court in the case of PGI of Medical
Education and Research, Chandigarh vs. Raj
Kumar 2001(2)SCC 54 and MP State Electricity
Board vs, Harina Bee (SMT) 2003(6) SCC 141.”
“20. Reliance placed by the learned counsel for
the appellant in the case of PGIU of Medical
Education and Research, Chandigarh(supra), in
our opinion, does not take the case of the
appellant any further. In that case, this Court
held that the Labour Court being the final court
of facts the superior courts do not normally
interfere with such finding of facts unless the
said finding of fact is perverse or erroneous or
not in accordance with law. In the instant case,
we have already noticed the basis ground on
which the Labour Court reduced the back wages
was based on a judgment of the High Court of
Punjab & Haryana which, as further noticed by
us, was overruled by a subsequent judgment of a
Division Bench. Therefore, the very foundation
W.P.(C) 3667/2001

Page No.19 of 25

of the conclusion of the Labour Court having
been destroyed, the appellant could not derive
any support from the above cited judgments of
that Court. Similarly, in the case of M.P.State
Electricity Board(supra), this Court only said
that it is not an inevitable conclusion that every
time a reinstatement is ordered, full back wages
was the only consequence. This Court, in our
opinion, did not preclude that even in cases
where full back wages are legally due, the
superior courts are precluded from doing so
merely because the Labour Court has on an
erroneous ground has reduced such back wages.
In the instant case, we have noticed that the trial
court apart from generally observing that in
Ludhiana, there must have been job
opportunities available, on facts it did not rely
upon any particular material to hold either such
job was in fact available to the respondent and
he refused to accept the same or he was
otherwise gainfully employed during the period
he was kept out of work. On the contrary, it is
for the first time before the writ court the
appellant tried to produce additional evidence
which was rightly not considered by the High
Court because the same was not brought on
record in a manner known to law. Be that as it
may, in the instant case we are satisfied that the
High Court was justified in coming to the
conclusion that the appellant is entitled to full
back wages.”
24.

The issue as to grant of an appropriate relief after

holding that the termination of service was held to be illegal, fell
for consideration before the Division Bench of this Court in its
pronouncement reported at 1982(1) SLJ 255 Management of
Delhi Transport Corporation vs. Shri Ram Kumar &
W.P.(C) 3667/2001

Page No.20 of 25

Another. The court held as follows:“13. Mr. Malhotra then sought to urge that even
though reinstatement may be ordered the
workman is not entitled to full back wages. We
cannot agree. 'Ordinarily, therefore, a workman
whose service has been illegally terminated would
be entitled to full back wages except to the extent
he was gainfully employed during the enforced
idleness. That is the normal rule. Any other view
would be a premium on the unwarranted
litigative activity of the employer'. 'If after such a
protracted time and energy consuming litigation
during which period the workman just sustains
himself, ultimately he is to be told that though he
will be reinstated, he will be denied the back
wages which would be due to him, the workman
would be subjected to a sort of penalty for no fault
of his and it is wholly undeserved' Hindustan Tin
case(supra). Mr.Malhotra then contends that full
back wages cannot be paid because it cannot be
expected that the workman must have been out of
employment for all this period. Now the evidence
of workman is clear wherein he has stated that
ever since dismissal he had been unemployed.
Mr. Malhotra seeks to catch on to the further part
of his evidence where he stated that he did not
make any efforts to get a job and says that this
shows an attitude of slackness on the part of the
employee which should deprive him of
entitlement to full back wages. We feel that Mr.
Malhotra misappreciates the principles on which
full back wages are paid. The principle is that
when an employee after protracted litigation with
the employer succeeds in showing that the
termination of his services was unjustified he
would normally be entitled to reinstatement with
full back wages excepting of course if it could be
shown that he had been gainfully employed in the
meanwhile. Thus full back wages would be
normal rate and the party objecting to it must
W.P.(C) 3667/2001

Page No.21 of 25

establish
the
circumstances
necessitating
departure. See Gujarat Steel Tubes Ltd. vs. Its
Mazdoor Sabha. Thus if the employer wishes to
show that workman was gainfully employed he
must establish and prove that fact no
presumption of being gainfully employed can be
raised. It is not disputed that no evidence has
been led or even shown on the record by the
appellant which shows that the workman was at
any time in between employed elsewhere. In that
view there would be no justification for denying
him full back wages. The mere fact of long time
having elapsed is certainly not a reason to deny
him his normal relief of reinstatement, because as
said in Panitole Tea Estate case(P.240) “if his
dismissal was wrongful then merely because
proceedings for adjudication of the industrial
disputes have taken a long time is by itself no
reason for not directing his reinstatement if it is
otherwise justified being in accordance with
normal rule”.
25.

In a Single Bench decision of this Court reported at

114(2004)DLT

358

Management

of

Asiatic

Air

conditioning and Refrigeration(P) Ltd. vs. POALC-X &
Another, this Court has considered the judicial pronouncements
on the subject. After a detailed consideration of the law on the
subject, several factors which are required to be taken into
consideration in awarding back wages have been noticed. Inter
alia, relevant factors which would weigh with the court in awarding
back wages would include the time involved in the litigation and
causes of the delay; the status of the management as a public body
W.P.(C) 3667/2001

Page No.22 of 25

meant for public benefit; possibility of the worker being gainfully
employed; nature of the alleged misconduct; ensuing financial
burden; delay in raising an industrial dispute; duration of the
employment and the nature of the employment.
26.

In the instant case, the workman has been prevented

from working on account of the order of termination of service of
the workman which has been held to be illegal by the industrial
adjudicator.
27.

In this view of the matter, in view of the authoritative

principles laid down by the apex court which are binding on this
court, there being no evidence of gainful employment of the
workman or any other circumstances justifying denial of the back
wages, the award of the industrial adjudicator holding that the
workman was entitled to reinstatement with continuity of service
and full back wages cannot be faulted in any manner.
I find no merit in this writ petition which is dismissed
with costs which are quantified at Rs.10,000/28.

The petitioner shall pass appropriate orders in terms of

the award dated 11th October, 1999 within a period of four weeks
and communicate the same to the workman. The DTC shall effect
payment in terms of the award and the orders passed today within
W.P.(C) 3667/2001

Page No.23 of 25

a further period of four weeks thereafter. The DTC will be entitled
to adjust all amounts which have been paid to the workman on any
account for any reason including towards subsistence allowance or
in compliance of orders under Section 17B made by this court as
well as any amount which may have been recovered by the
workman in implementation proceedings which were filed on the
basis of the award dated 11th October, 1999.
29.

It is pointed out that by an order dated 7th September,

2001, this court had directed the petitioner to deposit 50% amount
of the same award towards the back wages. By a subsequent order
dated 15th May, 2002, this amount was directed to be kept in a
fixed deposit receipt. It is directed that the full amount of the fixed
deposit

receipt

shall

be

released

in

favour

of

the

respondent/workman. The DTC shall be entitled to also adjust an
amount equivalent to only the principal amount of the fixed
deposit receipt which it had deposited in this court towards the
arrears which shall be paid to the workman in terms of the present
judgment. The petitioner has been deprived of the wages and
therefore, in the facts and circumstances, the interest on the fixed
deposit shall be paid to the respondent.

W.P.(C) 3667/2001

Page No.24 of 25

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
June 02, 2006
kr

W.P.(C) 3667/2001

Page No.25 of 25

