IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 4918/2003
Judgm ent reserved on : May 23, 2006
Dat e of decision: June 02, 2006
MCD

... Petitioner
through: Ms. Amita Gupta,

Advocate
VERSUS
MAMAN CHAND

Respondents
through: Mr. Sanjoy Ghose,
Ms. Pragnya and Mr. Suhail Sehgal,
Advocates

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in
the Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

The present writ petition exhibits an unwarranted zeal

on the part of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi to punish an
employee for alleged misdemeanors which are not even provided
under its rules. There is no dispute to the factual matrix and to the
extent necessary is noticed hereafter.
2.

Shri Maman Chand, respondent herein was appointed

as a safai karamchari in the pay scale of 196-232 with allowances

W.P.(C) No. 4918/2003

page 1 of 22

vide an appointment letter dated 3rd October, 1970. He was a
permanent employee of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi. After
he had put in 17 years of unblemished and uninterrupted service,
he was served with a chargesheet dated 6th August, 1983 wherein
the following charge was levelled against him :“That the said Sh. Maman Chand while
working as Safai Karamchari in the Hindu
Rao Hospital during the year 1970
committed an act of grave mis-conduct and
failed to maintain devotion to duty and
absolute integrity inasmuch as he, did not
inform his superiors of his conviction at the
time he joined Municipal services on regular
basis in the year 1970 as per details given in
the statement of allegations.”
3.

The respondent rebutted the charges levelled against

him. The petitioner conducted a disciplinary inquiry against the
respondent. The inquiry officer in his report dated 28th August,
1985 held that the charge against the respondent stood proved.
Punishment of dismissal of service was imposed by the
disciplinary authority. On an appeal preferred by the respondent,
the Commissioner by the order dated 23rd October, 1987 and 28th
October, 1987 converted the punishment of dismissal into
stoppage of four increments with future effect and also ordered
that the period from the date of dismissal to the date of
W.P.(C) No. 4918/2003

page 2 of 22

reinstatement would be treated as dies non.

The respondent

assailed the punishment imposed on him by a demand notice
dated 18th June, 1990. As the same did not result in any positive
action, the workman filed a statemesnt of claim before the
conciliation officer on 5th July, 1990. On failure of the conciliation,
the appropriate government referred the matter for adjudication
to the industrial adjudicator by an order of reference dated 2nd
May, 1991 whereby the following dispute was referred for
adjudication :-

4.

“Whether the punishment of stoppage of 4
increments with future effect to Sh. Maman
Chand is illegal and or unjustified and if so, to
what relief is he entitled and what directions are
necessary in this respect?”
It appears that the workman had also challenged the

validity of the inquiry proceedings inter alia on the ground that the
departmental inquiry was conducted by a fully trained law
graduate while the workman, who was illiterate, was not allowed
to be represented by any person. The issue relating to the fairness
and propriety of the inquiry was treated as a preliminary issue.
The industrial adjudicator answered this issue against the
petitioner and held that the inquiry was vitiated and that the
charge sheet was not tenable. Thereafter, the matter proceeded to

W.P.(C) No. 4918/2003

page 3 of 22

adjudication on the validity of the punishment awarded to the
respondent.
By an award dated 2nd August, 2001, the industrial
adjudicator held that the punishment of stoppage of four
increments imposed upon the respondent was disproportionate to
the charge and also improper being in violation of the government
instructions and rules. The order dated 20th October, 1987 passed
by the Deputy Director of inquiry was set aside and the petitioner
was directed to treat the workman as if no such punishment was
imposed and the workman was entitled to his increments as and
when they were due and payment of arrears, if any. Aggrieved by
the industrial award dated 2nd August, 2001, the petitioner has
filed the present writ petition.
5.

I have heard learned counsel for the parties. It has been

vehemently urged on behalf of the petitioner that the respondent
was guilty of misconduct and suppression of a material facts at the
time of his recruitment. It has been urged that it is for the MCD to
opt as to who it wants to employ and that a prospective employee
is required to disclose full facts of the antecedents of a prospective
employee.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has vehemently

urged that the respondent had furnished a character certificate of
W.P.(C) No. 4918/2003

page 4 of 22

the Village Pardhan and the local authorities wherein also his prior
conviction in a criminal trial had not been disclosed. For these
reasons, Ms. Amita Gupta, learned counsel for the petitioner,
contends that the punishment awarded to the respondent is clearly
justified.
6.

It is to be noted that there is no submission that the

workman was facing a trial at the time that he was recruited. He
was arraigned as an accused to stand trial in a criminal trial for
which he was punished long before his recruitment in the
Municipal Corporation of Delhi. This is evident from the charge
sheet which was served on the respondent itself. It is also not
disputed that the respondent was duly punished for this offence.
The MCD has also not disputed before this court that there is no
prohibition on employment of a person with the record of a past
conviction. However, it is contended that the recruiting authority
may consider such conduct while evaluating relative merit of
candidate.
7.

On the other side, learned counsel for the respondent

has vehemently urged that there was no column in the application
which the respondent was required to submit which required him
to state as to whether he had been implicated in any criminal
W.P.(C) No. 4918/2003

page 5 of 22

offence or that he had been convicted or punished in respect
thereof. I find force in the submission on behalf of the respondent
that the workman cannot be punished for not doing something
which he was never required to do.
8.

In (2005) 2 SCC 746 Secretary, Department of

Home Secretary, A.P. & Ors. v. B. Chinnam Naidu, relied
upon by the respondent, the court held thus :“7.
In Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan
case the factual position can be ascertained
from paras 8 and 9 which read as follows :
(SCC p. 443)
“8.
the attestation form dated
26-6-1998 duly filled in by the
respondent and attestation show that
the respondent has taken BA degree
from St. Aloysius College, JBP and
BEd and Med degrees from R.
Durgavati Vishwavidyalaya,
JBP.
Columns 12 and 13 as filled up read
thus :
'12.
Have you ever
been prosecuted/kept under detention
or bound down/fined, convicted by a
court of law of any offence?-No.
13.
Is
any
case
pending against you in any court of
law at the time of filing up this
attestation form?-No.'
9.
The respondent has also
certified the information given in the
said attestation form as under :
'I certify that the foregoing
information is correct and complete to
the best of my knowledge and belief. I
W.P.(C) No. 4918/2003

page 6 of 22

am not aware of any circumstances
which might impair my fitness for
employment under Government.'”
As is noted in Kendriya Vidyalaya
Sangathan case
the object of requiring
information in various columns like column 12
of the attestation form and declaration
thereafter by the candidate is to ascertain and
verify the character and antecedents to judge
his suitability to enter into or continue in
service.
When a candidate suppresses
material information and/or gives false
information, he cannot claim any right for
appointment or continuance in service. There
can be no dispute to this position in law. But
on the facts of the case it cannot be said that
the respondent had made false declaration or
had suppressed material information.
8.
xxxx
9.
A bare perusal of the extracted
portions shows that the candidate is required
to indicate as to whether he has ever been
convicted by a court of law or detained under
any State/Central preventive detention laws
for any offences whether such conviction is
sustained or set aside by the appellate court, if
appealed against.
The candidate is not
required to indicate as to whether he had been
arrested in any case or as to whether any case
was pending.
Conviction by a court or
detention under any State/Central preventive
detention laws is different from arrest in any
case or pendency of a case. By answering that
the respondent had not been convicted or
detained under preventive detention laws it
cannot be said that he had suppressed any
material fact or had furnished any false
information or suppressed any information in
the attestation form to incur disqualification.
The State Government and the Tribunal
appeared to have proceeded on the basis that
W.P.(C) No. 4918/2003

page 7 of 22

the respondent ought to have indicated the
fact of arrest or pendency of the case, though
column 12 of the attestation form did not
require such information being furnished. The
learned counsel for the appellants submitted
that such a requirement has to be read into an
attestation form. We find no reason to accept
such contention.
There was no specific
requirement to mention as to whether any case
is pending or whether the applicant had been
arrested. In view of the specific language so
far as column 12 is concerned the respondent
cannot be found guilty of any suppression.
10.
In Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan
case the position was the reverse. There the
candidate took the stand that as there was no
conviction, his negative answers to columns 12
and 13 were not wrong. This Court did not
accept the stand that requirement was
conviction and not prosecution in view of the
information required under columns 12 and 13
as quoted above.
The requirement was
“prosecution” and not “conviction”. The logic
has application here. The requirement in the
present case is “conviction” and not
“prosecution”.
9.

Thus, it is apparent

that the issue relating to

suppression of fact or a mis-declaration has to be decided on the
basis of what was required to be informed by the employee. In the
instant case, it is an admitted position that the form did not
contain any column requiring a person to disclose prior
implication, prosecution or conviction. Consequently, it cannot at
all be held that the respondent can be faulted for not giving such

W.P.(C) No. 4918/2003

page 8 of 22

information, which was not sought, with regard to a conviction
prior to his joining service.
10.

The charge sheet dated 6th August, 1983 contains an

inherent contradiction inasmuch as the charge sheet states that
the workman was working as a safai karmachari. During the year
1970 he committed an act of grave misconduct and failed to
maintain devotion to duty and absolute integrity, at the same time,
the charge sheet levels the allegation that he committed such
misconduct because he did not inform his superiors of his
conviction at the time he joined Municipal service on a regular
basis in the year 1970. From this it is apparent, that the allegation
on which the misconduct is based, relates to something the
petitioner did not do prior to his recruitment.
11.

The workman has rendered 17 years of blemishless

service with the Municipal Corporation of Delhi. There is no
complaint whatsoever against him. The inquiry held against the
workman was vitiated by the industrial adjudicator. The order
vitiating the inquiry has not been challenged or assailed by the
MCD in any proceedings. The same is not the subject matter of
challenge even in the present writ petition. The charge sheet was
issued to the workman as back as on 6th August, 1983 and despite
W.P.(C) No. 4918/2003

page 9 of 22

the passage of 23 years, he is still in court.
12.

It is well settled that unexplained delay and laches would

defeat the remedy available to a litigant under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India. The award in favour of the workman was
passed as back as on 2nd August, 2001. It was published on 1st
March, 2002. Therefore, in accordance with the provisions of
Section 17 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, the award became
enforceable with effect from 31st March, 2002.
The respondent/workman has stated on record that
after waiting for a reasonable time, he served a demand notice
dated 8th June, 2002 to the workman for implementation of the
award. Even this did not move the MCD and the workman filed an
application under Section 33C(i) of the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947 claiming the differential of salary. On 9th April, 2002, the
workman had recovered a sum of Rs.69, 160/- for the period from
1st October, 1988 to 30th June, 2003. Thereafter on 14th October,
2003, recovery of Rs.14, 306/- for the period between 1st July,
2002 to 31st May, 2003 was effected.
The present writ petition has been filed by the Municipal
Corporation of Delhi only on 30th May, 2003.

The Municipal

Corporation of Delhi did not care to even inform the recovery
W.P.(C) No. 4918/2003

page 10 of 22

officer or the respondent/workman of the orders of stay dated 5th
August, 2003 passed in the present matter. This writ petition has
been filed only as late on 30th May, 2003. There is no explanation
for the delay in impugning the award dated 2nd August, 2001. The
writ petition suffers from unexplained delay and laches.
13.

In the instant case, no issue of law was involved. The

industrial adjudicator has relied on Government orders based on
the CCS Rules. The award dated 2nd August, 2001 has not been
assailed on any legally tenable grounds before this court.
14.

The jurisdiction of this court under Article 226 of the

Constitution of India to examine detailed questions of fact on
which a challenge is laid to an industrial award are narrow. The
principles in this behalf are well settled and the parameters within
which this court would exercise discretion while entertaining a
petition calling upon a judicial review of an adjudication by the
industrial adjudicator are well settled. In this behalf reference can
be appropriately made to AIR 2000 SC 1508 entitled Indian
Overseas Bank Vs. I.O.B. Staff Canteen Workers' Union
& Another in which it was held thus:“The learned single Judge seems to have
undertaken an exercise, impermissible for him
in exercising writ jurisdiction, by liberally
W.P.(C) No. 4918/2003

page 11 of 22

reappreciating the evidence and drawing
conclusions of his own on pure questions of fact,
unmindful, though aware fully, that he is not
exercising any appellate jurisdiction over the
awards passed by a Tribunal, presided over by a
Judicial Officer. The findings of fact recorded
by a fact-finding authority duly constituted for
the purpose and which ordinarily should be
considered to have become final, cannot be
disturbed for the mere reason of having been
based on materials or evidence not sufficient or
credible in the opinion of the writ Court to
warrant those findings at any rate, as long as
they are based upon some material which are
relevant for the purpose or even on the ground
that there is yet another view which can b
reasonably and possibly one taken.
The
Division Bench was not only justified but well
merited in its criticism of the order of the
learned single Judge and in ordering restoration
of the Award of the Tribunal. On being taken
through the findings of the Industrial Tribunal
as well as the order of the learned single Judge
and the judgment of the Division Bench, we are
of the view that the Industrial Tribunal had
overwhelming materials which constituted
ample and sufficient basis for recording its
findings, as it did, and the manner of
consideration undertaken, the objectivity of
approach adopted and reasonableness of
findings recorded seem to be unexceptionable.
The only course, therefore, open to the writ
Judge was the relevant criteria laid down by this
Court, before sustaining the claim of the canteen
workmen, on the facts found and recorded by
the fact-finding authority and not embark upon
an exercise of re-assessing the evidence and
arriving at findings of ones own, altogether
giving a complete go-bye even to the facts
specifically found by the Tribunal below.”

W.P.(C) No. 4918/2003

page 12 of 22

15.

In this context the law laid down by the Apex Court in

Sadhu Ram vs. Delhi Transport Corporation, AIR 1984
SC 1967 observed :
“Para 5.... nor do we think that it was right for the
High Court to interfere with the Award of the Industrial Tribunal
under Article 226 on a mere technicality. Article 226 is a device
to secure and advance justice and not otherwise. In the result, we
allow the appeal, set-aside the judgment of the High Court and
restore the Award of the Presiding Officer.”
16.

In Harbans Lal vs. Jag Mohan, (1985) 4 SCC 333

the court ruled :
“P ara 5 .... The limitations on the jurisdiction of the
High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution are well settled.
The Writ Petition before the High Court prayed for a Writ in the
nature of certiorari, and it is well known that a Writ in the
nature of certiorari may be issued only if the order of the inferior
tribunal of subordinate court suffers from an error of
jurisdiction, or from a breach of the principles of natural justice
or is vitiated by a manifest or apparent error of law. There is no
sanction enabling the High Court to reappraise the evidence
without sufficient reason in law and reach finding of fact
contrary to those rendered by an inferior court or subordinate
court. When a High Court proceeds to do so, it acts plainly in
excess of its power.”
17.

In Calcutta Port Shramik Union vs Calcutta

River Transport Association & Ors. 1988 (Supp.) SCC
768, the court further observed that :
“Para 10. The object of enacting the enacting the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and of making provision therein to
W.P.(C) No. 4918/2003

page 13 of 22

refer disputes to Tribunals for settlement is to bring about
industrial peace.
Whenever a reference is made by the
Government to the Industrial Tribunal, it has to be presumed
ordinarily that there is a genuine industrial dispute between the
parties which requires to be resolved by adjudication. In all such
cases, an attempt should be made by Courts exercising powers of
judicial review to sustain as far as possible the Awards made by
the Industrial Tribunal instead of picking holes here and there in
the Awards on rival points and ultimately frustrating the entire
adjudication process before the Tribunals by striking down the
Awards in hyper technical grounds. Unfortunately, the orders of
the Single Judge and of the Division Bench have resulted in such
frustration and have made the Award fruitless on an untenable
basis.”
18.

In Sudhoo vs M/s Haji Lal Mohd. Biri Works &

Ors. 1990 Lab.I.C. 1538 it was held that the High Court should
not have interfered with the findings of the fact reached by the
prescribed authority on appreciation of evidence.
19.

The instant case is squarely covered by the observations

of the Apex Court in the aforenoticed pronouncements. The
challenge in the instant case is on pure question of facts which
have no basis on the record maintained by the Municipal
Corporation of Delhi. Such challenge in view of the parameters
laid down in the binding legal precedents is clearly impermissible.
20.

So far as filing of cases at the instance of public

authorities is concerned, the courts have repeatedly expressed
their ire as to the manner in which casual decisions are taken to

W.P.(C) No. 4918/2003

page 14 of 22

initiate litigation which results in jeopardising rights of private
persons.
21.

It is well settled that if there is a right under the law

there must be a remedy for its violation as law commands nothing
in vain. Statutory duty imposes a negative obligation on the states
not to encroach upont he rights of the individual or to frustrate
what is granted under the law to a citizen. Declaration of rights
would be meaningless unless there is an effective machinery for
enforcement of the rights. Thus the remedy provided would really
be the essence of the right which becomes effective and
meaningful only when

its enforceability is accepted by the

procedure of law.
22.

Another facet of the effectiveness of a legal remedy is

sourced in timely and informed action in administrative
functioning.

Unreasonable delay in questioning correctness of

adjudication

or

petitions

seeking

judicial

review

of

the

adjudication despite legal correctness thereof, would tilt equity in
favour of the other party.

The ensuing delay would only

exacerbate the injustice worked on such party which is thereby
deprived of the fruits of a long drawn adjudication.
23.

Concept of public accountability has been applied to the

W.P.(C) No. 4918/2003

page 15 of 22

decision making process in the government by the courts for a
considerable time. This concept takes in its ambit imposition of
costs and its recovery from the officer concerned for their
negligence or acts of prolonged, unexplained delays running into
years. In the case of State of Andhra Pradesh vs. Food
Corporation of India 2004 (13) Supreme Court Cases 53,
the Court directed as under:-

“We are shocked as to the manner in which the
State Government is filing petitions in this Court
resulting not only in wasting the time of this
Court and all others concerned but in total waste
of public money.
The impugned orders have
been challenged after more than eight years with
almost no explanation, as is evident from the
paragraph reproduced above.
In this view, while dismissing the applications
seeking condonation of delay, we direct that
enquiry be made forthwith by the State
Government as to the person responsible for this
state of affairs, recover from such person the
costs involved in filing these petitions and
submit the report to this Court within a period of
four weeks.”
24.

Administrative or executive actions are subject matter of

judicial review.

Noticing the significance of scope of judicial

review in this regard and bureaucracy accountability, the Supreme
Court in the case of State of Bihar vs. Subhash Singh AIR
W.P.(C) No. 4918/2003

page 16 of 22

1997 Supreme Court 1390 held as under:-

“In our democracy governed by the rule of law,
the judiciary has expressly been entrusted with
the power of judicial review as sentinal in qui vive.
Basically judicial review of administrative actions
as also of legislation is exercised against the
actions of the State. Since the State or public
authorities act in exercise of their executive or
legislative power, they are amenable to the
judicial review......
...The normal principle that the permanent
bureaucracy
is accountable to the political
executive is subject to judicial review.
The
doctrine of “full faith and credit” applied to the
acts done by the officers and presumptive
evidence of regularity of official acts done or
performed, is apposite in faithful discharge of
duties to elongate public purpose and to be in
accordance with the procedure prescribed. It is
now settled legal position that the bureaucracy is
also accountable for the acts done in accordance
with the rules when judicial review is called to be
exercised by the Courts.
The hierarchical
responsibility for the decision is their in-built
discipline.
But
the
Head
of
the
Department/designated officer is ultimately
responsible and accountable to the Court for the
result of the action done or decision taken.
Despite this, if there is any special circumstance
absolving him of the accountability or if someone
else is responsible for the action, he needs to
bring them to the notice of the Court so that
appropriate procedure is adopted and action
taken. The controlling officer holds each of them
responsible at the pain of disciplinary action. The
object thereby is to ensure compliance of the rule
of law.....
W.P.(C) No. 4918/2003

page 17 of 22

....A member of the permanent executive, is
enjoined to comply with the orders of the Court
passed in exercise of the judicial review. When a
Court issues certain directions to the executive
authorities it is expected that the authorities
would discharge their duties expeditiously as
enjoined under the rules and as per the
directions. If they do not discharge the duty,
necessarily, they are required to give explanation
to the Court as to the circumstances in which they
could not comply with the direction issued by the
Court or if there was any unavoidable delay, they
should seek further time for compliance. When,
neither of the steps have been taken by the officer
in that regard the Court can impose the costs
personally against him for non-compliance of the
order....
.....It is known fact that in transaction of the
Government business, none would own personal
responsibility and decisions are leisurely taken at
various levels. It is not uncommon that delay
would be deliberately caused in filing appeal or
revision by Government to confer advantage to
the opposite litigant; more so when stakes
involved are high or persons are well
connected/influential or due to obvious
considerations. The Courts, therefore, do not
adopt strict standard of proof of every day's delay.
The imposition of costs on officers for filing
appeals causes public injustice and gives the
manipulators an opportunity to compound the
camouflage. Secondly, the imposition of costs
personally against the officers would desist to
pursue genuine cases of public benefit or
importance or of far-reaching effect on public
administration or exchequer deflecting course of
justice.”
25.

Despite adjudication and decisions being based on

W.P.(C) No. 4918/2003

page 18 of 22

binding and well settled judicial principles and in clear consonance
with the applicable law, delayed decisions are taken to assail the
same in higher courts and forum, generating thereby clearly
avoidable litigation on which public money and precious court
time is expended.
26.

Therefore, in the case of ABL International Ltd.

and another Vs. Export Credit Guarantee Corporation of
India Ltd. and Others (2004) 3 SCC 553, the Supreme Court
held as under :“It is clear that when an instrumentality of the State acts
contrary to public good and public interest, unfairly, unjustly and
unreasonably, in its contractual, constitutional or statutory
obligations, it really acts contrary to the constitutional guarantee
found in Article 14 of the Constitution. Therefore, once the State
or an instrumentality of the State is a party, it has an obligation in
law to act fairly, justly and reasonably to a contract which is the
requirement of Article 14 of the Constitution.”
“Unless the action challenged in the writ petition
pertains to the discharge of a public function or public duty by an
authority, the courts will not entertain a writ petition which does
not involve the performance of the said public function or public
duty.”
27.

State actions causing loss are actionable under public

law and this is as a result of innovation of a new tool with the
courts, which are the protectors of civil liberty of the citizens and
which would ensure protection against devastating results of State

W.P.(C) No. 4918/2003

page 19 of 22

Action. The principles of public accountability and transparency in
State action, which essentially must not lack bonafide was
enforced by the Supreme Court even in cases of appointment in
the case of Centre for public interest litigation and
another Vs. Union of India and another (2005) 8 SCC
202.
28.

The aforenoticed principles were recognised and

elaborated by a decision of the Division Bench of this court in its
judgment dated 11th of May, 2006 in W.P.(C) No. 22895/2005
Sukhbir Singh Tyagi & Other v. Lt. Governor & Other.
29.

These principles unfortunately do not guide decision

making by the authorities. While burdening courts with wholly
unnecessary litigation, the rights of the public are impinged upon.
There appears to be a reluctance to take responsibility
and to take a decision against the employer by the persons at the
helm of decision making on the ground that the same may be a
hard decision or may require concurrence with an adjudication in
favour of the workman and against the employer. For this, judicial
review is advised or recommended in routine without any
consideration of binding judicial precedent and well settled legal
principles.

Thereby responsibility for decision making is

W.P.(C) No. 4918/2003

page 20 of 22

abdicated to judicial adjudication and judicial review. It is well
settled that even an erroneous administrative decision taken
bonafide and honestly is not a dishonest decision. Therefore, a
serious effort should be made in following settled legal principles
and applying judicial precedents before advising filing of writ
petitions and appeals in a routine manner. Thereby the cause of
public interest would be furthered and wastage of public time and
money prevented.
30.

In these circumstances, I find no merit in the writ

petition which is hereby dismissed.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, the Municipal
Corporation of Delhi should be required to pay punitive costs to
the respondent who has been harassed for a long period of 23
years

without

any

justification.

Accordingly,

Municipal

Corporation of Delhi shall be liable to pay punitive costs to the
respondent which are quantified at Rs.25,000/The costs awarded to the respondent shall be paid
within a period of four weeks from today.
31.

Appropriate orders with regard to computation of the

differential of the salary payable to the respondent/workman in
terms of the award dated 2nd August, 2001 shall be passed within a
W.P.(C) No. 4918/2003

page 21 of 22

period of four weeks from today. The petitioner shall furnish a
copy of the computation to the respondent.
The petitioner shall also make payment of the arrears, if
any, which may be payable to the respondent after adjustment of
amounts which may have been recovered after the passing of the
award dated 2nd August, 2001 within a further period of four weeks
thereafter.

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
June 02, 2006
kr

W.P.(C) No. 4918/2003

page 22 of 22

