REPORTABLE
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI

+

Writ Petition (C) No. 6466 of 2002

%

Date of decision : 2nd December, 2004.

Nb. Sub. Ramesh Kumar

....... Petitioner.
represented by Mr.V.P. Sharma, Advocate

versus

Union of India and others
....... Respondents.
represented by Mr.Amiet Andley, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE JUSTICE DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA.
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1.Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the Judgment?
2.To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3.Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest? Yes
Dr. Mukundakam Sharma, J :
1.

By filing present writ petition, the petitioner has prayed for quashing of

the orders dated 14th July, 2001 and 21st July, 2000 giving promotion to the petitioner
to the rank of Nb. Subedar only with effect from 1st January, 2000 with seniority from
1st of August, 1997 but not granting any benefits of promotion from 1st August, 1997
as payment of salary and other emoluments from the said date in the post of Nb.
Subedar.
2.The petitioner was enrolled in the Army on 19th March, 1983 as Sepoy. The
petitioner was promoted to the rank of Havaldar on 1st August, 1989. While working

in the aforesaid capacity, a Summary Court Martial was initiated against the petitioner
for an offence under Sections 41(i), 39(a) and 63 of the Army Act. After completion
of the said Court Martial, the petitioner was imposed with the punishment of
reduction of the ranks, rigorous imprisonment for one year in civil prison and also
dismissal from the service.
3.Aggrieved by the finding and sentence of the Summary Court Martial, the petitioner
filed a statutory complaint under Section 164 of the Army Act. The said complaint
was considered and disposed of by the order dated 17th August, 1994 by the Central
Government by commuting the punishment and sentence of the Summary Court
Martial of reduction to ranks and one year rigorous imprisonment to severe reprimand
and also remitted the sentence of dismissal with a further direction that the individual
would be reinstated in service. It was also observed in the said order that the period
between the date of dismissal and date of reinstatement in service will not be treated
as duty and he would not be paid pay and allowances due to him for the said period.
4.Consequent to the said order passed by the Government of India the petitioner was
reinstated in service with effect from 29th October, 1994 in terms of the said order
passed by the Government of India. It further transpires from the records that the
petitioner was again tried summarily on 18th February, 1995 for an offence under
Army Act Section 54(b) and was awarded severe reprimand.
5.The case of the petitioner came up for promotion to the rank of Nb. Subedar with
effect from 1st August, 1997 and the case of the petitioner was considered by the
Departmental Promotion Committee held on 17th May, 1997. He was, however,
found not fit for promotion and was superceded as he could not meet the criteria
having incurred two red ink entries during last five years. It is provided in para 3(a) of
promotion policy issued vide Army Headquarters letter dated 10th October, 1997 that

the concerned person should not have incurred more than one red ink entry during the
last five years.
6.It is the case of the respondents that though the petitioner was awarded punishment
by Summary Court Martial on 3rd June, 1992 but the punishment period of the last
five years was counted with effect from 17th August, 1994, the date
commutation/remission was granted by the Government.
7.As the Government order dated 17th August, 1994 did not specifically spell the date
from which the commutation of punishment is deemed to take effect, therefore, in
absence of any specific date, it was held that the government order would be deemed
to have taken effect from the date of original sentence i.e. from 3rd June, 1992 and not
17th August, 1994.

Therefore, a fresh DPC proceeding was ordered.

Departmental Promotion Committee considered

The

the case of the petitioner for

promotion to the rank of Nb. Subedar on 15th March 2000 and duly recommended for
promotion with effect from 1st January, 2000 with ante dated seniority along with his
batch mates with effect from 1st August, 1997.
8.The petitioner had consequently assumed the rank of Nb. Subedar on 13th
November, 2000. It is stated that there was no direction for payment of any pay and
allowances to the petitioner in the higher rank as he is entitled to the same from the
date he actually assumed the charge of the said rank and not from ante dated seniority
which is granted for further promotion.

Since the respondents refused to give

promotion to the petitioner by giving him pay and allowances in the rank of Nb.
Subedar with effect from 1st August, 1997, therefore, the present writ petition was
filed in this Court seeking for the aforesaid relief.
9.It was submitted by the counsel for the petitioner that since the petitioner has been
given ante dated seniority along with his batch mates with effect from 1st August,

1997, therefore, there was no scope for recommending for promotion only with effect
from 1st January, 2000 and not from 1st August, 1997 thereby depriving the petitioner
from getting the pay and allowances and other benefits from 1st August, 1997.
10.The petitioner was tried by Summary Court Martial and was awarded punishment
on 3rd June, 1992 which, however, later on came to be commuted to severe reprimand
with remission of the sentence of dismissal. However, a clear direction was also
issued that the period between the date of dismissal and date of reinstatement in
service would not be treated as duty and he would not be paid pay and allowances due
to him for the said period. The said order was passed on 29th October, 1994. The
petitioner even thereafter was tried summarily on 18th February, 1995 and was again
awarded a punishment of severe reprimand. On 17th May, 1997 when the case of the
petitioner was considered for promotion to the rank of Nb. Subedar with effect from
1st August, 1997, he was not found fit for promotion as he had incurred two red ink
entries during the last five years. The first sentence was imposed on the petitioner on
3rd June, 1992 and the second sentence was imposed on 18th February, 1995.
According to the extant consideration of the respondents, an individual, who is
considered for promotion to the rank of Nb. Subedar, should not have more than three
red ink entries during the entire service and more than one red ink entry in the last five
years. The case of the petitioner for promotion to the rank of Nb. Subedar with effect
from 1st August, 1997 came up for consideration but on the date of consideration, the
petitioner did not satisfy the criteria for promotion as he had two red ink entries in his
service career. However, subsequently a fresh DPC was held after the orders passed
by the government and it was held that petitioner could be promoted with effect from
1st January, 2000, the date when the first available vacancy had arisen with a further
direction that he should be given ante dated seniority with his batch mates with effect

from 1st August, 1997. Since petitioner has also been given seniority from 1st
August, 1997, therefore, for further promotion, the petitioner would have to be
considered along with his batch mates and, therefore, from the point of view of
seniority there could be no grievance of the petitioner. The only grievance that
survives now for consideration is whether the petitioner would also be held to be
entitled to receive pay and allowances with effect from 1st of August, 1997. The
respondents have denied the said benefit on the ground that the commutation of the
sentence of the dismissal from service and the rigorous imprisonment came to be
passed by the Central Government on 17th August, 1994 and, therefore, the said order
would be effective from the said date. It was also stated in the said order that the
period between the date of dismissal and date of reinstatement in service would not be
treated as duty. Therefore, for all practical purposes the order passed by the Central
Government had been given effect from the date the said order was passed i.e. on 17th
August, 1994 and since the petitioner had two red ink entries on 17th August, 1997, it
cannot be held that he should be given pay and allowances in the post of Nb. Subedar
from 1st August, 1997.
11.Counsel for the petitioner relied upon the decisions of the Supreme Court in
Vasant Rao Roman v. The Union of India (Civil Appeal No.709/1993 decided on
4.3.1993) reported in Vol. 9 Supreme Court Service Rulings 213; Union of India v.
K.V. Jankiraman reported in AIR 1991 SC 2010; State of Andhra Pradesh v.
K.V.L.Narasimha Rao & Ors. reported in JT 1999 (3) SC 205.
12.We have considered the ratio of the aforesaid decisions. In Vasant Rao Roman
(supra), the Supreme Court directed for payment of all arrears of emoluments from a
retrospective date in view of the fact that the employee was neither put under
suspension nor any disciplinary proceeding was pending against him and that on the

contrary he was made to suffer on account of administrative reasons for which the
employee was not responsible. In the said case the employee, who was literate, was
deputed for table work and therefore, for administrative reasons he could not complete
requisite number of firing kilometers and, therefore, it was held that there was no fault
on his part for which his juniors had been promoted as Shunters and Drivers and his
claim was ignored on account of not having completed requisite number of firing
kilometers.
13.In State of Andhra Pradesh (supra), it was held by the Supreme Court that in
normal circumstances when the retrospective promotions are effected, all benefits
flowing therefrom, including monetary benefits, must be extended to an officer who
has been denied promotion earlier. In the said case the Supreme Court also held that
there could be cases where grant of notional promotion should not legitimately give
rise to a valid claim for payment of arrears of salary either on the ground that the
officer did not actually hold the post at the relevant time or otherwise. It was,
however, held in the facts of the said case by the Supreme Court that the said
principles should not be applied to the facts of the said case as a wrong was
committed in unduly delaying the finalisation of seniority and giving promotions
thereto and hence denial of monetary benefits to them would be arbitrary in violation
of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
14.In Union of India v. K.V. Jankiraman (supra), the Supreme Court was dealing with
sealed cover procedure and in the context thereof it was held that the normal rule of
"no work no pay" is not applicable to such cases where the employee although he is
willing to work is kept away from work by the authorities for no fault of his. A
direction was issued to pay the arrears salary on the ground that the said case was not
a case where the employee remained away from work for his own reasons, although

the work was offered to him.
15.In our considered opinion, none of the ratio laid down in the said decisions is
applicable to the facts of the present case. The petitioner had two red ink entries. By
order dated 3rd June, 1992, he was dismissed from service but by the subsequent
order passed on 17th August, 1994, his sentence was commuted and he was given a
sentence of severe reprimand but clear instructions were given that the period between
the date of dismissal and date of reinstatement in service would not be treated as duty.
The said order was, therefore, held to be operative from the said date i.e. 17th August,
1994. The petitioner, therefore, was rightly not given the pay and allowances from 1st
August, 1997, which benefit has been given to him only with effect from 13th
November, 2000 when he actually joined the said rank of Nb. Subedar but
maintaining his seniority from 1st August, 1997 when his batch mates were promoted.
Therefore, the interest of the petitioner for further promotion has been protected. In
the facts of the present case, we are of the considered opinion, that the petitioner has
no legitimate and valid claim for payment of salary and allowances from a
retrospective date i.e. from 1st August, 1997 as the principle of 'no work no pay' is
applicable in the facts of the case and also as he did not actually hold the said post. It
is also not a case of administrative lapse or fault which could entitle the petitioner for
such benefit.
16.We find no infirmity in the impugned orders passed by the respondents. We find
no merit in this petition and the same is dismissed.

(Dr.Mukundakam Sharma)
Judge

( Gita Mittal )
Judge
2nd December, 2004.
nm

