1

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
RFA No.416 of 2004
Date of decision : 02nd August, 2004
Shri D.N.Sondhi

... Appellant
through Sunit Dutt Dixit, Advocate
VERSUS

The Phosphate Company Ltd. & Ors.
through NEMO

.... Respondents

CORAM:
HON'BLE JUSTICE DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, J (ORAL)
1.

This appeal is filed by the appellant as against the judgment

and order dated 17th April, 2004, passed by the Additional District Judge,
Delhi in suit no.101/01/97. It is contended that such records as are
necessary for adjudication of the present appeal have been placed before
us. Accordingly we have proposed to hear the matter.

2

2.

The appellant herein had earlier filed a suit being suit

no.56/96 praying inter-alia for the following reliefs:“(a) A decree of declaration that the plaintiff is still in
service and the order of termination of his service
dated 29.1.1996 is illegal, void, ab initio and
inoperative.
(b) Mesne profits Rs.7,000/- per month towards salary,
or in the alternative Rs.10,000/- per month by way of
damages for using the private residence of the plaintiff
as the business establishment by defendant no.1 till the
disposal of this suit, and
© A direction to the defendant no.1 to pay all the funds
such as C.P.Fund, Gratuity etc. and reimbursement of
Miscellaneous expenses of Rs.25,000/- plus
Rs.70,000/- for the use of personal motor car to the
plaintiff forthwith; and
(d) In the alternative a lump sum compensation
package in lieu of pension package on par with the
industrial establishment having more than 100
employees as per the provisions of Industrial Law.
(e) Interests pendente lite.
(f) Costs of litigation.
3.

(g) Any other relief deemed just and proper.”
Perusal of the above shows that the appellant was aware of its

claim and had inter alia sought recovery of amount, injunction as well as
a declaration in its favour declaring that the decision of respondent nos.
1,2 & 3 herein being null and void in respect of the termination of the
services of the plaintiff dated 29.1.1996.

3

4.

The appellant/plaintiff had prayed inter alia for a decree of

declaration that he continued in service and that the order of termination
dated 29th January, 1996 was illegal, void, ab initio and inoperative. The
appellant had sought recovery of money towards his salary and damages
as well as a direction to the defendant no.1 to pay all his funds as
Provident Fund, Gratuity etc. as well as

re-imbursement of

miscellaneous expenses of Rs.25,000/- + Rs.70,000/-. Again the plaintiff
had incorporated an alternative prayer for maximum compensation
package in lieu of pension package.
5.

During the pendency of the said suit, the plaintiff filed yet

another suit being suit no.101/2001 for declaration, mandatory and
permanent injunction and recovery of money seeking the following
prayers:(A) It is, therefore, prayed that the Hon'ble Court may
kindly pass a decree of declaration in favour of the
plaintiff and against the defendants thereby declaring
the decision of defendants no.1, 2 & 3 as null and void
in respect of the termination of the service of the
plaintiff dated 29.1.1996 and declaring the plaintiff as
continuing in service of the defendant no.1.
(B) It is also prayed that the Hon'ble Court may kindly
pass a decree in favour of the plaintiff and against the
defendants thereby directing the defendants no.1 and 2
to pay Rs.4,72,000/- to the plaintiff on account of
salary dues, gratuity, provident fund amount etc. or in
the alternative as damages.

4

© It is also prayed that the Hon'ble Court may kindly
pass a permanent injunction in favour of the plaintiff
and against the defendants thereby restraining the
defendants their agents, servants and legal
representants from taking the charge of the service
from the plaintiff forcibly and without due process of
law and from interfere intio the peaceful possession
and service of the plaintiff and his property/residence
bearing No.A-58, DDA Flats, Garhi, East of Kailash,
New Delhi-110 065.

6.

Any other relief which Hon'ble Court may
deem fit and proper in the circumstances of the case be
also passed in favour of the plaintiff and against the
respondents.”
The following issues were framed by the trial court:“1. Whether the suit is bad for misjoinder of the
parties as defendant no.2 to 4 are neither necessary
nor proper parties? OPD
2. Whether the present suit is barred by principle of
res judicata in view of the earlier suit no.56/96 which
was dismissed on 3.9.1997? OPD
3. Whether the suit is not maintainable in view of the
provisions of Order 23 Rule 1(4) of the CPC r/w
Order 2 Rule 2 CPC? OPD
4. Whether this court has no pecuniary jurisdiction as
alleged by the defendant no.2 in para no.4 of P.O?
OPD
5. Whether this court has territorial jurisdiction to
entertain the present suit? OPD
6. Whether the suit barred by limitation? OPD
7. Whether the plaintiff is entitled a decree of the

5

declaration as claimed? OPP
8. Whether the plaintiff is entitled a decree of
mandatory and permanent injunction as claimed?
OPP
9. Relief.”
7.

This matter proceeded to evidence. The plaintiff examined

himself and one Shri S.L.Sehgal who was a retired Government servant
in support of his case. The defendant had produced defendant no.4 as a
witness in support of its case. The matter proceeded to judgment and vide
its judgment and decree dated 17th April, 2004 the trial court dismissed
the suit of the plaintiff.
8.

It appears that during the pendency of the second suit and in

view of the objections raised by the defendants, the plaintiff made an
application under Order 23 of the Code of Civil Procedure in S.56/96
seeking leave to withdraw the said suit. The application of the plaintiff
was taken up on 3rd September, 1997 when the statement of the plaintiff
was recorded on oath. The plaintiff made a statement that he wanted to
withdraw the suit. No right was reserved by the plaintiff to bring a fresh
suit or to maintain the second suit which he had filed. The counsel for
the defendant had stated that he had no objection for unconditional
withdrawal of the suit. The statement made by the plaintiff has been

6

placed before us as part of the record in the instant Appeal. Perusal
thereof lends support to the fact that the appellant did not seek any kind
of reservation or liberty and the statement was made with prejudice. In
view of the statement made by the plaintiff the suit no. 56/96 was
dismissed as withdrawn by the learned trial court on the basis of the
statement made on behalf of the appellant vide order passed on 3rd
September, 1997.
9.

The stand now taken before us is that in view of the fact that

the second suit being suit no.101/2001 already stood filed and was
pending, therefore, the plaintiff did not need to reserve any right or take
any kind of permission from the Court for perusing the same.
10.

It is established from the records of the case that at the time of

withdrawal of the prior suit, the appellant/plaintiff did not

urge

reservation of liberty to file a fresh suit nor such a liberty was granted by
the Court while dismissing the suit as withdrawn.

Although it is

submitted by the counsel appearing for the appellant that such a liberty
was sought for in the application filed by the appellant under Order 23
Rule 1 CPC, the said statement could not be verified as the said
application is not placed on record. Even assuming that the statement of
the counsel for the appellant/plaintiff is correct, we are of the considered

7

opinion that such liberty, which was prayed for in the application, was
not pressed when the statement of the appellant/plaintiff was recorded.
The Court while dismissing the said application also did not grant any
liberty to the appellant/plaintiff. The appellant was also satisfied with
the aforesaid disposal of the suit and did not challenge the same in any
other forum and, therefore, he cannot challenge the aforesaid order in the
suit subsequently filed by the appellant.
11.

It is noteworthy that the plaintiff has also added parties in the

second suit to create a distinction between the two suits and has also
claimed an injunction which is contended to not have been prayed
earlier. Perusal of the record laid before us makes it abundantly clear that
the plaintiff had no claim or grievance against the defendants 2 to 4 and
had led no evidence against them whatsoever. There is nothing in the
oral testimony or the documents on behalf of the plaintiff to support the
relief sought against them. In our considered opinion the trial court has
rightly held that the plaintiff had no cause of action against the
defendants 2,3 & 4 and has correctly answered the issue of misjoinder of
parties against the plaintiff.
12.

In case the plaintiff had any claim or cause of action which

had arisen subsequent to the filing of the first suit, the proper course for

8

the plaintiff was to have either filed a proper application withdrawing the
first suit with liberty to bring a fresh suit on the same cause of action.
Upon such liberty having been granted, the plaintiff could very well have
included the relief based on the additional cause of action in the second
suit.
13.

In the alternative, the appellant could have filed a second suit

only in respect of such cause of action as had arisen after the filing of the
first suit. In such circumstance the plaintiff could have contained with
his first suit as well.

The second suit could however, have been

continued only against such defendants against whom the cause of action
had arisen after the filing of the first suit.
14.

We have been taken through the records of the case and have

given our considered thought to the material urged before us.

The

plaintiff was aware of its money claim and had already sought a decree in
respect thereof in S.54/96. The plaintiff has also sought a declaration
that his termination was bad in law. The plaintiff could have claimed the
reliefs sought by it in suit no.101/01 in suit no.54/96. It is necessary to
advert to the provisions of Order 2 Rule 2

of the Code of Civil

Procedure which reads as under:“2. Suit to include the whole claim-(1) Every suit
shall include the whole of the claim which the plaintiff

9

is entitled to make in respect of the cause of action; but
a plaintiff may relinquish any portion of his claim in
order to bring the suit within the jurisdiction of any
Court.
(2) Relinquishment of part of claim- Where a
plaintiff omits to sue in respect of or intentionally
relinquishes, any portion of his claim, he shall not
afterwards sue in respect of the portion so omitted or
relinquished.

15.

(3) Omission to sue for one of several reliefs- A
person entitled to more than one relief in respect of the
same cause of action may sue for all or any of such
reliefs; but if he omits, except with the leave of the
court, to sue for all such reliefs,he shall not afterwards
sue for any relief so omitted.”
The only contention urged is that the second suit was pending

on the date he had withdrawn the prior suit and consequently the learned
trial court had fallen into error in dismissing the second suit vide the
impugned judgment.
16.

Comparison of the reliefs sought in the two plaints can leave

no manner of doubt that the reliefs sought for in the second suit are
identical to the reliefs sought in the earlier suit. The plaintiff has merely
attempted to couch the reliefs in different wordings in order to create a
semblance of distinction between reliefs sought in the two plaints in
order to support his plea for maintainability of the second suit. There is
no dispute that the reliefs in respect of service pension as well as the
money claim and the other claims had been raised in suit 54/96 as well.

10

The differences set up are not of substance, only of language and deserve
to be ignored. Another material fact which lends support to the view
taken by us is that the second suit was filed during the pendency of the
first suit. This suit for the same reliefs was barred under the provisions
of Order 2 Rule 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure on the date of its
institution. The plaintiff was apparently precluded from bringing a suit
for such reliefs as could have been sought in the prior suit or which had
been sought in the prior suit. The claim made in s.101/01 was clearly
barred under the provisions of Order 2 Rule 2 of the Code of Civil
Procedure.
18.

The issue no.3 was framed in this behalf reads as herein:“3. Whether the suit is not maintainable in view of the
provisions of Order 23 Rule 1(4) of the CPC read with
Order 2 Rule 2 CPC?”
The finding recorded by the learned trial court on issue no.3

aforesaid records that the plaintiff was materially seeking the same relief
and has based his claim in the second suit on the same cause of action
which is barred by the provisions of the CPC. Such a bar, as has been
recorded by the learned trial court, is to be found under Order 2 Rule 2 of
the CPC. The reasoning given by the learned trial court appears to have
proceeded on this basis but has erroneously recorded the prohibition to
be contained in Order 23 of the CPC.

11

19.In our view, the subsequent suit was clearly barred under the
provisions of Order 2 Rule 2 of the CPC on the date of its filing.
Withdrawal of the second suit could not remove this bar. As such the
suit filed by the appellant as well as the present Appeal must fail. The
finding of the learned trial court to the effect that the suit was barred
by provisions of Order 23 Rule 1(4) of the CPC is modified to the
extent that the suit would be barred under the provisions of Order 2
Rule 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure and issue no.3 is as such
decided against the plaintiff and in favour of the defendants.
20.
20.

No other ground was urged before us.

21.

The findings on issue no.3 go to the root of the matter and the

suit necessarily fails in view of the discussion above.
22.

We find no merit in the appeal and the same is hereby

dismissed.
DR.MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA
JUDGE

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
August 02, 2004
JK

