IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 15651/2004
Judgment reserved on : 24th March, 2005
Date of decision: May 2nd, 2005
VINEETA SHARMA
... Petitioner
through : Mr. S.K. Rungta, Advocate with
Ms. Ruma Upadhyaya, Advocate
VERSUS
SATYAWATI CO-ED. COLLEGE & ORS.
.... Respondents
through : Ms. Priya Kumar, Adv. For
respondents no. 1 and 2
Mr. S.K. Luthra, Adv. For
respondent no. 3
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

This writ petition has been filed by the petitioner

aggrieved by the communication dated 31st August, 2004 sent by the
Principal of Satyawati College (arrayed as respondent no. 2 herein)
communicating a decision taken by the Department of Economics of
Satyawati College not to allow migration of course and institution to
W.P.(C) No. 15651/2004

page 1 of 18

the petitioner.

Challenge has been made to the decision

communicated by the respondent no. 2 interalia on grounds of
arbitrariness.

It is contended that there was no decision by the

competent authority namely by the Principal and no application of
mind by such authority. It is further contended that the respondent
no. 2 is not following any uniform policy and that the policy followed
for permitting migration varies from department to department of
the College. The petitioner is stated to have sought migration on the
ground that Ramjas College, where to she had succeeded in getting
admission, was academically a better institution and that the
petitioner ought to have been permitted to migrate.
2.

It would be useful to consider the statutory provisions

governing consideration of request for migration from one institution
to another in the University of Delhi. The same are contained in
Ordinance IV of the University Calender which reads as under :“Ordinance IV. Migration
2.
Applications for migration from
one College of the University to another
shall only be entertained by the Principal if
forwarded by the Principal of the College
from which migration is sought, and the
necessary alteration in the enrolment
entries shall only be made in the University
Register by the Registrar after obtaining the
consent in writing of both Principals.”
Therefore an application seeking migration from one
W.P.(C) No. 15651/2004

page 2 of 18

colleges of the University to another requires to be forwarded by the
Principal of the College from which migration is sought and the
University is required only to effect alterations in the entry in the
register maintained by it. Consent in writing of both principals is
also imperative.
3.

The entire gamut of issues involved in consideration of

applications seeking migration and the manner in which the
applicant has to be considered have fallen for consideration in
several cases hitherto decided by this Court. An authoritative
pronouncements of the Division Bench binding on this court has
been reported at 71 (1998) DLT 202 entitled Aman Ichpuniani
wherein it was held thus:-

“ 12.
We are
conscious
of our
limitation on jurisdiction to judicially
review a decision taken in the field of
academics.
In Maharashtra State
Board of Secondary And Highter
Secondary Education & Anr. v.
Paritosh Bhupesh Kumarsheth, AIR
1984 SC 1543, their Lordships have held :
“The Court should be extremely
reluctant to substitute its own views as to
what is wise, prudent and proper in
relation
to
academic
matters
in
preferences to those formulated by
professional men possessing technical
expertise and rich experience of actual
day-to-day
working
of
educational
Institutions
and
the
departments
controlling them.”
W.P.(C) No. 15651/2004

page 3 of 18

13.
However, that does not amount
to saying that the decisions taken by the
administrative authorities in the field of
academics and education are immune
from judicial review and no writ can issue
for securing performances of statutory
duty cast on such authorities. In S.G.
Lekhraj v. N.M. Shah, AIR 1966 SC 334,
their Lordship have held that a writ of
mandamus maybe granted where there is
a statutory duty imposed upon the officer
concerned and there is a failure of that
officer to discharge that statutory
obligation. The chief function of the writ is
to compel the performance of public
duties prescribed by statute and to keep
the Subordinate Tribunals and officers
exercising public functions within the
limits of their jurisdiction.
14.
A writ of mandamus may issue
not only for enforcement of a right but
also for compelling performance of a duty.
The very provision for migration from the
College to another within the University
enacted by Ordinance IV contemplates the
existence of a right to migrate. We will
not go on to the extent of saying that such
a right is a vested unbridled right.
Nobody can be permitted to migrate just
for whim and fancy. Good education is a
scarce commodity and good Institutions
displaying pieces of good education on
their selling counters are equally scarce.
The seats are invariably limited because
the number of seats depends on very
many
considerations
including
administrative and financial.
Once a
student has been allowed admission in a
particular Institution in a particular
Course of study he occupies that seat
W.P.(C) No. 15651/2004

page 4 of 18

excluding others in waiting from entering
the Course by necessary implication. If
such a student is allowed to leaves the
seat and migrate to another Institution at
his sweet will or merely for whim and
fancy, he is certainly depriving someone
else known or unknown from learning by
leaving the seat vacant.
16.
Nevertheless, the existence of
Ordinance-IV does contemplate migration.
The provision also casts a duty on the
Principal of the College from which
migration is sought to exercise his
discretion and take a decision on prayer
for migration guided by reason keeping in
view the relevant considerations and not
merely by whim and caprice. Like all
other discretionary powers vesting in
public authorities, the power to forward
an application seeking migration is also
coupled with a duty. Each prayer shall
have to be dealt with on its own individual
merits. If the prayer for migration be a
bald prayer it may not be allowed merely
for asking. On the contrary if there are
valid
reasons
assigned
providing
reasonable justification for such demand,
the Principal on being satisfied of the
availability of just grounds for migration,
is duty bound to forward the application.
Else the exercise of discretionary power
would stand vitiated for unreasonableness
or arbitrariness.
18.
Every student aspires to have
the best education and for that purpose
searches
for
the
best
Institution
accessible to him and within his means.
Having
opted
for
an
educational
Institution and having been successful in
securing admission therein ordinarily he
W.P.(C) No. 15651/2004

page 5 of 18

would not opt out of it unless there be
reasons for doing so. Students in School
and even upto initial years of the College
are invariably advised by their parents
and guardians in choosing Course of
study and the Institution. While asking
migration they will ordinarily have the
counsel of their parents and guardians
without which they would not decide to
migrate.
In appropriate cases the
Principal would do well to have a dialogue
with the parents or guardians of the
student before taking a decision on the
students'
request
for
migration.
Applications made by the students to
their teachers and Principal are not
drafted on legal advise. They have to be
dealt with in an atmosphere full of
affection and harmony. An interview or
dialogue between the Principal and the
student, accompanied by parents or
guardian if need be, would bring out the
real reason for the prayer for migration
enabling a just decision thereon by the
Principal.
19.
No Institution can afforded to
retain good students with it by forcing
them to do so. They have to be persuaded
and made to feel convinced.
A good
student leaving a good Institution is a
contradiction in terms. It is equally true
that a student cannot be allowed to
migrate if Institutional discipline would
suffer in permitting him to do so. To
illustrate,
student
facing
disciplinary proceedings in an educational
institution cannot be allowed to migrate if
motivated by the idea of getting rid of
such proceedings.
23.
To sum up, in our opinion :
W.P.(C) No. 15651/2004

page 6 of 18

(i)
to migrate from one
College of the University to another is not
a vested right of student. A student may
seek migration from one College to
another, if there be reasons for doing so.
Ordnance-IV confers discretionary power
on the Principal of the College from which
migration is sought to forwarded or not to
forward a prayer by a student seeking
migration. The power is coupled with a
duty to act reasonably guided by relevant
consideration not by whim or caprice.
The welfare of the student and the
Institution have both to be kept in view
and weighed - if there be conflict between
the two;
(ii)
A student has a right to
choose an educational Institution of his
choice while seeking an admission, but
such right cannot be exercised with the
same vigour and vitality while seeking
migration;
(iii)
A request by student
seeking migration for reasons relevant
and germane to such prayer may not be
denied unless the Principal be satisfied of
the non-availability of the grounds or be
of the opinion that the migration will not
be in the interest of the student or the
interest of he Institution outweighs the
interest of the student. The choice of the
student has to be respected by giving due
weight; for no sensible student would
ordinarily like to leaves the Institution
which he had chosen to join.”

It is in this background that the case set up by the
petitioner would deserve to be considered.
4.

It is noteworthy that the petitioner was admitted to the

W.P.(C) No. 15651/2004

page 7 of 18

Economics Honors Course conducted by the respondent no. 2 in the
year 2003.

She is stated to have passed her first year B.A.

Economics(Hons.) admitted in the respondent no. 1 college securing
57.5% marks.

It appears that the petitioner was successful in

getting admission to the Ramjas College in the second year. The
petitioner contends that the department of Economics in the Ramjas
College displayed a written list setting out the names of the students
who were selected for migration into the B.A. (Hons.) IInd year
Course and that her name had featured at serial no. 6. Copy of the
list in this behalf has been placed on record.

The successful

candidates were required to obtain a no-objection certificate from the
college from where the student was migrating and from the Principal
of the Ramjas College. Consequently the petitioner applied to the
respondent no. 2 vide a letter dated 16th August, 2004 seeking a noobjection certificate for her migration. According to the petitioner,
the Department of Economics of the respondent no. 1 refused to even
receive her application and orally rejected the same on the purported
ground of a policy that no migration is allowed to any college within
the University of Delhi. In these circumstances, according to the
petitioner, her father made a request to the Principal(Respondent no.
2) as well as the Secretary of the Staff Council of the respondent no.
1 college on the 17th August, 2004 making the same request on her
W.P.(C) No. 15651/2004

page 8 of 18

behalf.

The petitioner submits that instead of considering the

matter in accordance with law, the petitioner has received an
intimation from the respondent no. 2 Principal communicating the
decision taken by the Department of Economics in a meeting held on
31st August, 2004 rejecting the application on behalf of the petitioner
for migration. It has been contended that the petitioner was seeking
migration on the ground of achieving academic excellence and that
the results of the respondent no. 1 in the first year of the course were
extremely discouraging for the petitioner which was one of the
reasons why she applied for migration to the Ramjas College.
5.

On the other hand, learned counsel appearing for the

respondent no.1-Satyawati College has submits that the decision on
the application seeking migration in the case of the petitioner is a
considered decision. It is contended that different departments in
the college follow different policies of admission and migration. For
instance, in the case of English department, a written test in English
is mandatory besides certain qualifications of pass percentage
whereas in the Economics Department, the students have to pass a
test in English and Maths prior to getting admission to the course.
The respondents have pointed out that so far as permission to
migrate is concerned, the Economics Department only accommodates
genuine difficulties of students as medical grounds, inability to
W.P.(C) No. 15651/2004

page 9 of 18

travel long distances, availability of hostel facilities etc. So far as the
results are concerned, the respondents have pointed out that
students in the college have been obtained first divisions both in the
academic year 2002-2003 as well as 2003-2004. Taking credit for the
performance of the petitioner, it is contended that the faculty of the
respondent no. 1 has put in tremendous effort with the petitioner
and that the same is capable of ensuring a good performance by her
even in the future. So far as the reason for lower pass percentage of
students is concerned, it has been pointed out that the pass
percentage of students in the Economic Honors Course is
comparatively lower than the percentage in other courses in the
University of Delhi. It is submitted that in case outward migration
was permitted indiscriminately, the same would mar the interest of
the department as well as the institution and that the respondent
no. 1 is justified in following a strict outward policy.
6.

According to learned counsel for the respondents no. 1 and

2, the respondent no. 2 cannot be faulted for adopting a consultative
process of examination of a request for migration from the college. It
is submitted that the consideration is elaborate and the rejection of
the application has been done after proper application of mind. The
respondents have also pointed out that the Economics Department of
the respondent no. 1 considered the matter and put its deliberations
W.P.(C) No. 15651/2004

page 10 of 18

to the Principal who considered the matter and also communicated
the decision taken.
7.

Learned counsel for the respondents has placed strong

reliance on the observations of the Division Bench of this court in
Aman Ichhupunian's case(supra) to contend that the petitioner has
no absolute and unbridled right to seek migration and further that
the petitioner cannot be permitted to migrate to another college
inasmuch as the petitioner did not have the necessary cut off
percentage in her class 12th examination and could not get admission
to the Ramjas College on merits. According to the respondent nos. 1
and 2, the petitioner ought not to be permitted to make a back door
entry to the Ramjas College especially when no reasons whatsoever
are set out in the application seeking migration.
8.

I have considered the rival contentions and have also been

taken through the record of the case.

I find that it has been

authoritatively held that no student has absolute and unbridled,
vested right to be granted permission to migrate from one course and
institution to another.

A discretion has been conferred on the

Principals of the institutions where from migration is sought as well
as to the institution to which the student seeks to migrate. The
court has held that a bald application for permission to migrate
disclosing no reasons whatsoever for the same ought not to be
W.P.(C) No. 15651/2004

page 11 of 18

granted.

It is settled law that a student cannot be permitted to

migrate merely on his/her whim or fancy.

The same is totally

opposed to academic discipline and would result in de-stabilising
procedures as well as conduct of courses in academic institutions.
Consideration of the application for migration entails examination of
the reason for which the request has been made, welfare of the
student and also sometimes of balancing conflicting interest of
students and institutions.
As noticed here-in-above, the Division Bench has laid
down the law that an institution may be justified in refusing
permission to migrate to a student if the interests of the institution
out weighed the interest and desire of a student.
9.

The request made by the petitioner to migrate has to be

examined in this background.
10.

It would be appropriate to advert to the application stated

to have been made by the petitioner to the respondent no. 2. The
same reads as under :“To,
The Principal
Satyawati College(Morning)
Ashok Vihar, Delhi-52.
Date: 16 August, 2004

W.P.(C) No. 15651/2004

page 12 of 18

Subject : Regarding grant of No Objection
certificate (NOC)
Respected Sir,
This is to bring to your kind notice
that I am Vineeta Sharma, a student of B.A.
Economics (Hons.) 2nd year in your college. I
want to migrate to Ramjas College, DU for
which I applied for and my name has also
approved in the merit list of the college. For
migration, I need a No Objection certificate
from your college so I request you to grant me
the same at your earliest convenience.
Thanking you,
Yours obediently,
SD/VINEETA SHARMA”
This request on behalf of the petitioner is stated to have
been reiterated on her behalf by her father on the 17th August, 2004
and 24th August, 2004.
Perusal of these communications which are placed as
annexures to the writ petition shows that no reason whatsoever have
been disclosed in these communications.

The only assertion on

behalf of the petitioner by her father is that migration is a legal and
democratic right of every student and preventing him/her from
migrating is an act of creating hindrances in the way of her
development and making progress in her life. Reference has been
made to judgment of the court without any particulars and also it
has been submitted that every student who had applied for

W.P.(C) No. 15651/2004

page 13 of 18

migration was permitted to migrate. The petitioner also challenged
the policy of the respondents in other departments where migration
was permitted whereas a different policy for migration was being
practiced by the Economics Department.
11.

It is thus apparent that no reason whatsoever has been

disclosed in the applications made by the petitioner or on her behalf
whereby she sought the no-objection certificate to migrate.

The

purported reason for seeking migration on the ground that the
results of the Economics Department of the respondent no. 1 were
discouraging and that this was the reason as to why the petitioner
sought migration to Ramjas college where faculty of the department
of Economics is better, have been stated for the first time in the writ
petition which was filed in this court.
12.

In view of the pronouncements of the Division Bench of

this court and also as has been held by me in Writ Petition(civil) no.
20013/2004 entitled Radhika Garg vs Delhi University & Anr., I
have no hesitation in holding that the application of the petitioner
was devoid of any reason whatsoever and could not have been
granted in the manner in which it was made by her. An application
for migration is required to give reasons with material in support.
This court is concerned with the legality and validity of the action
taken on the application of the petitioner when it was laid before the
W.P.(C) No. 15651/2004

page 14 of 18

respondents no. 1 and 2.
13.

So far as the request of the petitioner by a competent

authority namely the Principal of the respondent no. 2 is concerned,
I find that the letters of the petitioner's father on her behalf were
referred to the Department of Economics of the Satyawati
College(day). It is stated that the Department discussed the request
in detail. The resolution dated 31st August, 2004 of the Department
of Economics has been placed upon record which reads as under :“SATYAWATI COLLEGE (DAY)
(UNIVERSITY OF DELHI)
ASHOK VIHAR, PHASE-III.
DELHI-110052
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMICS HELD ON
31st August, 2004 at
10.30 A.M.
Ms. Vineeta Sharma's father's
application dated 17th August, 2004 regarding
migration was placed for reconsideration along
with the recent application of her father dated
24th August, 2004.
However, no copy of
Vineeta's application has ever been forwarded
to the department.
The members noted that it is an
application for inter-college migration within
the same University from one of the college of
Delhi to another college of Delhi. It was
further noted that no valid ground has been
mentioned in application for migration by the
applicant's father. The members were of the
view that migration is only a permissible
facility to a student. The permission can not be
granted as a matter of right until and unless
supported by valid grounds. The department of
W.P.(C) No. 15651/2004

page 15 of 18

Economics is of a considered opinion that intercollege migration within the same University
in the state of Delhi should not be allowed
without a valid reason. This decision also
protects the interest of the department in
particular and the college as a whole in
general. The department reiterates its earlier
decision not to allow migration in this case.
Sd/(DR. (MRS.)PRABHA SINGHAL)
IN-CHARGES
DEPTT. OF ECONOMICS”
It is noteworthy that the Department has duly noted that
no valid ground has been mentioned in the application for migration
by the applicant's father.

It has also been noticed that an

application seeking migration cannot be granted as of right and it is
valid relevant reasons germane to the request have to be stated.
These deliberations were put up to the Principal who is
stated to have considered the same and sent the communication to
the petitioner.
14.

In view of the law on the subject, I have no hesitation in

holding that the application of the petitioner and the requests made
on her behalf by her father gave no reasons whatsoever. Inasmuch
as considerations of academic excellence would be a relevant
consideration for permitting migration, in the instance case there
was not even a suggestion of such reason in her request.

The

application would deserve to be rejected for this reason alone.

W.P.(C) No. 15651/2004

page 16 of 18

15.

I find that the Department of Economics of the respondent

no. 1 has further considered the aspect of the interest of the
Economics Department and the College in holding that inter college
migration within the university ought not to be permitted in the
instant case.
16.

Before parting with the case, as the issue was urged before

this court, I deem it appropriate to comment upon the aspect of the
absolute prohibition as has been imposed by the Department of
Economics of respondent no. 1 for consideration of applications
seeking migration. It is noteworthy that the Division Bench of this
court in the judgment pronounced on 19th October, 1995 in writ
petition(civil) 3089/1995 entitled Sumeet Sawhney vs The Principal
Sh. Aurobindo College has held that an aspiration of a student to
improve and achieve higher academic excellence and to seek
migration to better colleges is a valid reason and would justify
making of an application seeking migration.

For this reason, it

would be unfair to reject applications on the sole ground that a
student was seeking to migrate to a better college.
17.

It is also settled law that every application seeking

migration has to be considered on the merits of the reasons set out
therein. There can be no absolute prohibition and absolute rejection
of a prayer for migration on the ground of any such policy.
W.P.(C) No. 15651/2004

page 17 of 18

In my view, an application seeking migration on grounds
of improving academic performance or seeking a transfer to a better
college, would entail perhaps a consideration as to the impact, if any,
of the migration on the requisite student teacher ratios thereby
impacting the very existence of the concerned department and such
like considerations.

Welfare of a student in any case, cannot be

permitted to be sacrificed on the altar of the claimed reputation of an
institution.
At the same time, a student's effort in achieving a
particular result has to be borne in mind while putting forth claims
of the academic training in a particular institution.
18.

In view of the aforestated discussion, for the reason that

the petitioner had made an application giving no reasons for the
prayer of migration and the position in law, I find no merit in the
petition which is hereby dismissed.
There shall be no order as to costs.

May 2nd, 2005
kr/JK

W.P.(C) No. 15651/2004

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE

page 18 of 18

