IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.9487/2003
Judgment reserved on : May 17th , 2006
Date of decision: June 2nd, 2006

SHRI AJAY KUMAR GUPTA
... Petitioner
through: Mr. Sudesh Kumar Sharma,
Advocate
VERSUS
M/S B.N. ENGINEERING COMPANY
... Respondents
through: Mr. N.B. Joshi, Advocate with Mr. Sudhir
Sethi, Advocate & Mr. Navin K. Trivedi,
Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the Judgment?
No.
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
No.
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in
the Digest?
No.
GITA MITTAL, J
1.

Shri Ajay Kumar Gupta, workman of the respondent M/s B.N.

Engineering Company, failed to file a statement of claim seeking an industrial
reference under Section 10-B(1) and Section 12(5) of the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947 which was made on a complaint made by him against the

WP (C) No.9487/2003

Page No.1

respondent. In this view of the matter, the industrial adjudicator was left with
no option but to make the award on 7th May, 1999.
2.

The undisputed facts giving rise to the writ petition would show that the

petitioner had claimed appointment with the respondent and alleged illegal
termination of his service on 8th October, 1996. On a complaint made in
respect of this termination, the appropriate government made a reference of
the dispute relating to his allegations of illegal termination to the labour court.
Despite receipt of notices by the registered post, the workman failed to appear
resulting in the no-dispute award on 7th May, 1999.
3.

No action whatsoever was taken by the workman in respect of the

reference which was made at his instance for a long period till he filed
application for setting aside of the no-dispute award dated 23 rd July, 2003.
This application was filed on the plea that the representative of the trade
union who was pursuing the petitioner’s case, did not appear before the labour
court for mala fide reason, collusion with the management and ulterior
consideration. The workman claimed lack of knowledge of the orders passed
by the labour court which was the reason for delay in filing the application.
According to him, he learnt of the no-dispute award only from the reply filed
by the respondent which was filed on 22nd July, 2003 to the statement of claim
WP (C) No.9487/2003

Page No.2

filed by the workman in a second proceedings before the conciliation officer.
In these circumstances, it was prayed that miscarriage of justice has resulted
to the workman and the no dispute award deserves to be recalled. This
application was dismissed by the labour court by its order passed on 8th
August, 2003. The writ petition has been filed assailing the order dated 8 th
August, 2003 and the Award dated 7th May, 1999 before this court.
4.

The respondent has pointed out that apart from the proceedings initiated

by the workman before the conciliation officer under the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947 which has resulted in the reference by the appropriate government
on the 16th July, 1997, the workman had also made a complaint under the
Workmen Compensation Act on the same facts and also agitated against the
respondent by way of complaint against the respondent under the Delhi Shops
& Establishment Act. All these complaints and cases were filed on behalf of
the petitioner by the same union, that is, the Delhi Pradesh Wazirpur
Industrial Area Mazdoor Union.
5.

The claim of the petitioner/workman on merits is that he was appointed

as a helper to the pressman on 1st December, 1995 on probation of a period of
three month. At the initial stage itself, it was revealed that the petitioner was
suffering from tuberculosis and was under treatment. The respondent claims
WP (C) No.9487/2003

Page No.3

to have facilitated the treatment of the petitioner but on account of his bad
performance, he could not be confirmed and his probation was extended.
Even though the respondent waited for a sufficiently long period, it was found
that the petitioner was unable to perform his normal duties and consequently,
a letter dated 8th October, 1996 with a cheque representing his earned wages
till the date of termination, wages in lieu of unavailed earned leave, one
month notice pay and service compensation equal to wages for fifteen days,
even though notice pay and service compensation was not due to him, was
sent to him.
6.

My attention has been drawn to a statement dated 28th February, 2003

made by the petitioner in the case bearing no.SA/169/96 filed by him wherein
the petitioner had admitted the receipt of the letters dated 7 th October, 1996
and 17th October, 1996 from the respondent management as well as receipt of
the cheque. The petitioner has also admitted that the claims on his behalf
were filed by the union which bore his signatures. There is no dispute to the
effect that the Delhi Pradesh Wazirpur Industrial Area Mazdoor Union
through its representative Shri Markendey Shukla is filing and contesting all
the cases filed on behalf of the petitioner. Admittedly, after the order of
reference, the workman has sought to raise the same dispute by a second
WP (C) No.9487/2003

Page No.4

complaint to the conciliation officer under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
7.

In any case, the workman has failed to explain as to why he took no

action to find out the fate of his claim even though he had made a grievance in
respect of the termination of his services in 1996 which has resulted in the
order of reference dated 16th July, 1997. A person aggrieved by any illegal
order of termination would be reasonably expected to pursue his claim and to
ascertain as to the position of the matter more so when it related to a claim of
termination of service whereby he was being denied his livelihood.
8.

The industrial adjudicator has noticed that the workman has failed to

render any explanation also for his absence despite service of his notice on 9th
March, 1999. The labour court has based its order on a binding judicial
pronouncement of this court reported at 2003 (4) AD Delhi 219 entitled Badri
Bhagat Jhandewalan Temple Vs. Delhi Development Authority wherein
this court held thus:“Instant case is wholly on sticky wicket. Negligence of a
lawyer in not appearing on one or two dates of hearing is
understandable and aggrieved party can take advantage
of such a negligence. But where the negligence and
conduct of the party is of highest magnitude and is writ
large, the party cannot take shelter behind its Advocate.
If a party does not care to know about the status of its
case or proceedings in the suit for years together when in
the past hearings were fixed after a month, two month or
WP (C) No.9487/2003

Page No.5

so, such a party has to be shown the door and denied the
discretion to set aside the ex party proceedings or
judgment passed against it.”
9.

For all the foregoing reasons, I have no manner of doubt that the

petitioner has been deliberately negligent in prosecution of the matter. In any
case, no relief can be granted in his favour. No tenable grounds have been
laid for challenging the order dated 8th August, 2003 or the award dated 7th of
May, 1999.
This writ petition is, therefore, wholly devoid of any merit and is
hereby dismissed.
There shall be no order as to costs.

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
June 2nd, 2006
aa

WP (C) No.9487/2003

Page No.6

