HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 7327/2002
Judgment reserved on : 25th May, 2006
Date of decision: 3rd July, 2006
DHARAM PAL

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. D.N. Vohra, Advocate.
versus

DTC & ORS

..... Respondent
Through Mr. Ataul Haque, Advocate.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported in
the Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J
1.

By this petition, Shri Dharam Pal, who was working as a driver with

the Delhi Transport Corporation assails an industrial award dated 18th
January, 2002 on grounds which were never raised before the industrial
adjudicator and also seeks to challenge disciplinary proceedings which were
not assailed in the industrial adjudication.
2.

Shri Dharam Pal, petitioner herein, was appointed as a driver in 1994.
Page 1 of page 16

He failed to report for duties from 12th June, 1996 to 25th August, 1996.
The Management contended that this absence was without any intimation
and without any application. It is on record that the DTC sent a letter dated
10th July, 1996 to the residential address of the workman calling upon him
to join his duties and in case of his illness he was required to submit a
medical certificate and report before the Medical Board. Thereafter another
reminder was sent to him on 8th August, 1996.

Even this did not motivate

the workman to respond and he reported for duty only on 26 th August, 1996
without submitting any medical certificate about such illness.

In these

circumstances, a charge sheet dated 17th September, 1996 was issued to the
workman alleging that he was unauthorizedly absent without sanction of
leave from 12th June, 1996 to 25th June, 1996, showing negligence towards
his duty which amounted to misconduct under Article 19(h) and 19(m) of
the standing orders which were applicable to his service. On these charges,
a disciplinary enquiry was conducted wherein it was held that the charges
stood duly proved.

After issuance of a notice to show cause by the

disciplinary authority, the punishment of removal from service of the
workman was ordered vide order dated 28th July, 1997.
3.

The workman assailed the action of the Management and sought

Page 2 of page 16

adjudication of his claim under the provisions of Industrial Disputes Act,
1947.

By an order of 13th September, 2000, the dispute raised by the

petitioner was referred for adjudication in the following terms :-

4.

“Whether the punishment inflicted upon Shri Dharam Pal by
the management vide their orders dated 28.7.97 is illegal
and/or unjustified and if so, to what relief is he entitled and
what directions are necessary in this respect.”
From the perusal of a bare terms of the reference, it is apparent that

the legality and validity of the disciplinary proceeding was not raised as an
issue by the petitioner. It was only the quantum of punishment which had
been inflicted upon him which was assailed by Shri Dharam Pal.
5.

In the industrial adjudication, on 30th April, 2001, the authorised

representative of the workman made a statement to the effect that so far as
the enquiry and findings of the Inquiry Officer are concerned, the petitioner
was not challenging the same.

The industrial adjudicator, therefore,

recorded that the enquiry was conducted in a valid and proper manner.
6.

So far as the issue relating to the challenge to the quantum and

proportionality of the punishment was concerned, it was stated on behalf of
the workman that he did not wish to lead any evidence on this issue and the
same be decided on the basis of the pleadings of the parties.
circumstances, no evidence was recorded or led.

Page 3 of page 16

In these

7.

The workman assailed the punishment of removal of service levied on

him on two grounds only.

It was firstly, alleged that the disciplinary

proceedings and the order of punishment was without jurisdiction and
illegal on the ground that the Management had failed to comply with the
provisions of Section 33(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.

The

second and only other ground of challenge was based on the submission that
the DTC has treated the period of unauthorized absence of the workman as
leave without pay which amounted to its regularization and consequently
did not remain unauthorized absence which could be treated as a
misconduct.
The industrial adjudicator held both the issues against the workman.
8.

Before this Court additional grounds of challenge to the order of

removal from service of the workman have been laid. Mr. D.N.Vohra,
learned counsel on behalf of the petitioner has submitted that the
punishment imposed upon the workman was contrary to the circular dated
8th April, 1962 which authorized and empowered the disciplinary authority
only to impose the punishment of loss of increment for absence without
leave.

It is further contended that the DTC had levelled only one charge

sheet against the workman which was a charge of unauthorized absence for
Page 4 of page 16

the period from 19th June, 1996 to 25th August, 1996 contending that one
isolated absence could not be treated as unauthorized habitual absence
which amounted to misconduct. It has been submitted that the DTC has
failed to prove the allegation that the workman was a habitual absentee and
consequently the punishment of removal from service could not have been
imposed for this reason as well.
9.

Learned counsel for the respondent, Mr. Ataul Haque has submitted

that the award of the industrial adjudicator can be assailed by the petitioner
only on grounds which were raised before it. It has further been contended
that in any case, the reliance on the circular dated 8th April, 1962 is wholly
misconceived in as much as the same is only in the nature of administrative
direction and it was never placed before the Labour Court. It has further
been submitted that the charge sheet against the petitioner clearly refers to
the past record of the workman which adequately established that the
workman was a habitual absentee.

It is further submitted that the charge

sheet clearly stated that the past record of the workman would be looked at
and was a relevant consideration so far as the imputation as against the
workman was concerned.
10.

The award dated 18th January, 2002 is based on the statements made
Page 5 of page 16

on behalf of the workman.

So far as the objection to the punishment

imposed on the workman based on the provisions of Section 33 of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 is concerned, the statutory provision would
become applicable only in the event of the pendency of an industrial dispute
before the industrial adjudicator at the instance of the workman which was
pending when the disciplinary proceedings against him were initiated and
the disciplinary orders were passed. Admittedly, this was not so in the
instant case.

Consequently, the DTC was not legally required to seek the

approval of the disciplinary action taken by it against the workman or of the
order of punishment which was imposed on him.
11.

The principles relating to the effect of management treating

unauthorised absence as leave without pay have fallen for consideration in
several cases before the Apex Court. The industrial adjudicator has placed
reliance on judicial pronouncements reported at 1969 SLR 274 entitled
State of Madhya Pradesh Vs. Harihar Gopal and a pronouncement of this
Court in 2000 (V) AD Delhi 710 entitled Ex-Constable Maan Singh Vs.
Union of India & Ors. wherein the Court has arrived at a conclusion that
the action of the management in treating unauthorized absence as leave
without pay was only for the purpose of maintaining a correct record of the
Page 6 of page 16

duration of service and adjustment of leave due to the workman and for
regularizing the record. It was held by the industrial adjudicator that such
an action did not amount to sanction as the leave of the period of his
unauthorized absence.
12.

This issue is no longer res integra and it arose for consideration

before the Apex Court in a case relating to an employee of Delhi Transport
Corporation itself.

In the authoritative and binding pronouncement in

DTC Vs. Sardar Singh, AIR 2004 SC 4161, the Apex Court declared the
law thus:
“Habitual absence is a factor which establishes lack of
interest in work.
There cannot be any sweeping
generalization. But at the same time some telltale features
can be noticed and pressed into service to arrive at
conclusions in the departmental proceedings.
Great emphasis was laid by learned counsel for the
respondent employee on the absence being treated as leave
without pay. As was observed by this Court in State of
Madhya Pradesh v. Harihar Gopal [1969 (3) SLR 274] by a
three-judge Bench of this Court, even when an order is passed
for treating absence as leave without pay after passing an
order of termination that is for the purpose of maintaining
correct record of service. The charge in that case was, as in
the present case, absence without obtaining leave in advance.
The conduct of the employees in this case is nothing but
irresponsible in extreme and can hardly be justified. The
charge in this case was misconduct by absence. In view of
the Governing Standing Orders unauthorized leave can be
treated as misconduct.
Page 7 of page 16

Conclusions regarding negligence and lack of interest can be
arrived at by looking into the period of absence, more
particularly, when same is unauthorized. Burden is on the
employee who claims that there was no negligence and/or
lack of interest to establish it by placing relevant materials.
Clause (ii) of Para 4 of the Standing Order shows the
seriousness attached to habitual absence.
In clause (i)
thereof, there is requirement of prior permission. Only
exception made is in case of sudden illness. There also
conditions are stipulated, non-observance of which renders
the absence unauthorized.
The Tribunal proceeded in all these cases on the basis as if
the leave was sanctioned because of the noted leave without
pay. Treating as leave without pay is not same as sanctioned
or approved leave.
That being the factual position, the Tribunal was not justified
in refusing to accord approval to the order or
dismissal/removal as passed by the employer. The learned
Single Judge was justified in holding that the employer was
justified in passing order of termination/removal. The
Division Bench unfortunately did not keep these aspects in
view and reversed the view of learned Single Judge.”
Therefore, it is not open to any workman to contend that the action of
the DTC in treating the unauthorized absence as leave without pay amounts
to its regularization. The finding returned by the industrial adjudicator on
this issue in view of the limited challenge raised by the petitioner before it,
is therefore legally correct and has to be sustained.
13.

It is only if the punishment awarded to the workman is so irrational

or perverse or disproportionate to the offence with which the workman has
Page 8 of page 16

been charged that it shocks the conscience of this Court that interference is
legally permissible. In this behalf, the pronouncements of the Apex Court
reported in 1997 (7) SCC 463 entitled Union of India & Anr. Vs. G.
Ganayutham; AIR 1987 SC 2386 entitled Ranjit Thakur Vs. Union of
India & Ors.; 2001 (2) SCC 386 entitled Om Kumar Vs. Union of India,
AIR 1983 SC 454 entitled Bhagat Ram Vs. State of Himachal Pradesh &
Ors., AIR 1992 SC 417 entitled Ex-Naik Sardar Singh Vs. Union of India
and a judgment of this Court reported at 2002 (4) AD 265 entitled Sepoy
Lakhbir Singh Vs. Union of India & Ors. can be usefully adverted to. In
Ranjit Thakur Vs. Union of India & Ors. (supra), the principles were laid
thus :“9. Re : contention (d) Judicial review generally
speaking, is not directed against a decision, but is
directed against the “decision making process.” The
question of the choice and quantum of punishment is
within the jurisdiction and discretion of the Court
Martial. But the sentence has to suit the offence and the
offender. It should not be vindictive or unduly harsh. It
should not be so disproportionate to the offence as to
shock the conscience and amount in itself to conclusive
evidence of bias. The doctrine of proportionality, as
part of the concept of judicial review, would ensure that
even on an aspect which is, otherwise, within the
exclusive province of the Court-Martial, if the decision
of the Court even as to sentence is an outrageous
defiance of logic, then the sentence would not be
Page 9 of page 16

immune from correction. Irrationality and perversity are
recognized grounds of judicial review. In Council of
Civil Service Unions Vs. Minister for the Civil Service
(1984) 3 WLR 1174 (HL) Lord Deplock said:“......Judicial Review has I think, developed to a stage
today when without reiterating any analysis of the steps
by which the development has come about, one can
conveniently classify under three heads the grounds
upon which administrative action is subject to control
by judicial review. The first ground I would call
'illegality', the second 'irrationality' and the third
'procedural impropriety'. That is not to say that further
development on a case by case basis may not in course
of time add further grounds. I have in mind particularly
the possible adoption in the future of the principle of
'proportionality' which is recognized in the
administrative law of several of our fellow members of
the European Economic Community..........”.
In Bhagat Ram Vs. State of Himachal Pradesh,
AIR 1983 SC 454 (at p. 460) this court held:
“It is equally true that the penalty imposed must be
commensurate with the gravity of the misconduct and
that any penalty disproportionate to the gravity of the
misconduct would be violative of Art. 14 of the
Constitution.”

14.

The point to note and emphasize is that all powers have
legal limits.
In the present case the punishment is so strikingly
disproportionate as to call for and justify interference. It
cannot be allowed to remain uncorrected in judicial
review.”
This issue was again considered by the Apex Court in (2003) 8 SCC

9 entitled Dev Singh Vs. Punjab Tourism Development Corporation Ltd.
Page 10 of page 16

& Another.
15.

In (2003) 9 SCC 480 entitled Kailash Nath Gupta Vs. Inquiry

Officer (R.K. Rai, Allahabad Bank), the court held that it is when relevant
factors are not taken note of which can have some bearing on the quantum
of punishment, the court can direct reconsideration or in an appropriate care,
to shorten litigation in case the punishment is to be awarded. The power of
the court to interfere with the quantum of punishment is extremely limited.
16.

So far as the jurisdiction of the High Court while exercising the

power of judicial review into an order imposing punishment is concerned,
the principles were laid down in (2003) 4 SCC 364 entitled Chairman &
Managing Director, United Commercial Bank & Others Vs. P.C. Kakkar,
thus:“In B.C. Chaturvedi Vs. Union of India, it was observed:
(SCC p. 762, para 18)
“A review of the above legal position would establish that
the disciplinary authority, and on appeal the Appellate
Authority, being fact-finding authorities have exclusive
power to consider the evidence with a view to maintain
discipline. They are invested with the discretion to
impose appropriate punishment keeping in view the
magnitude or gravity of the misconduct. The High
Court/Tribunal, while exercising the power of judicial
review, cannot normally substitute its own conclusion on
penalty and impose some other penalty. If the punishment
imposed by the disciplinary authority or the Appellate
Page 11 of page 16

Authority shocks the conscience of the High
Court/Tribunal, it would appropriately mould the relief,
either directing the disciplinary/appellate authority to
reconsider the penalty imposed, or to shorten the
litigation, it may itself, in exceptional and rare cases,
impose appropriate punishment with cogent reasons in
support thereof.”
xxx

xxx

xxx

xxx

14. A bank officer is required to exercise higher
standards of honesty and integrity. He deals with the
money of the depositors and the customers. Every
officer/employee of the bank is required to take all
possible steps to protect the interests of the bank and to
discharge his duties with utmost integrity, honesty,
devotion and diligence and to do nothing which is
unbecoming of a bank officer. Good conduct and
discipline are inseparable from the functioning of every
officer/employee of the bank. As was observed by this
Court in Disciplinary Authority-cum-Regional Manager
Vs. Nikunja Bihari Patnaik it is no defence available to
say that there was no loss or profit resulted in case, when
the officer/employee acted without authority. The very
discipline of an organization more particularly a bank is
dependent upon each of its officers and officers acting and
operating within their allotted sphere. Acting beyond
one's authority is by itself a breach of discipline and
operating within is by itself a breach of discipline and is a
misconduct. The charges against the employee were not
casual in nature and were serious. These aspects do not
appear to have been kept in view by the High Court.”
17.

In the instant case, the charge sheet dated 17th September, 1996

clearly notified that the past record of the petitioner would be taken into
consideration at the time of passing of final orders. The enquiry report was
Page 12 of page 16

not assailed by the petitioner and the correctness thereof was accepted by
the workman even before the industrial adjudicator.

The Inquiry Report

noticed that the workman had been issued two notices by the DTC requiring
him to report for duty or to produce certificate of sickness and present
himself before the medical board. The petitioner opted not to abide by the
directives given by the employers.

The past record which were placed

before the disciplinary authority and before the industrial adjudicator has
also been placed before this Court. This shows that apart from his absence
for the period noticed in the charge sheet, the workman was unauthorisedly
absent for 44 days in 1994, 81 days in 1995, 330 days in 1996, 151 and 30
days in 1992.

Such absence was considered as habitual absence by the

DTC and the disciplinary authority deemed it appropriate to impose the
punishment of removal from service. The DTC had also placed before the
authority the other punishments which were imposed on the petitioner for
reasons other than unauthorized absence from duty. Therefore it cannot be
held that the punishment imposed on the petitioner is so disproportionate to
the charges against the petitioner as to shock the conscience of this court.
18.

It is well settled that an adjudication can be challenged only in the

light of the material which was placed before the adjudicating authority and
Page 13 of page 16

grounds which were raised before the adjudicator.

Certainly the circulars

which are relied upon by the petitioner before this Court were not even
placed before the industrial tribunal. The challenge to the industrial award
on the ground that the same is contrary to the circular dated 8th April, 1962,
therefore, only deserves to be noticed for the purposes of rejection.
19.

The effect of non-compliance with departmental circulars in

disciplinary proceedings has arisen for consideration in earlier cases. In
1977 (2) SCC 491 entitled State of Haryana Vs. Rattan Singh, the
workman had challenged the validity of a domestic enquiry and contended
that it was a nullity because the proceedings of the domestic enquiry were
not conducted as per the departmental instructions.

These departmental

instructions required statements of the witnesses to be recorded in a
particular manner. In this case, the Apex Court held that such instructions
are instructions of prudence and not rules that bind or vitiate in the
violation.
20.

So far as the circular issued by the DTC are concerned, the argument

made on behalf of the petitioner in the instant case was laid before a learned
Single Judge of this Court in CWP 1420/2002 entitled DTC Vs. Shyam
Singh & Anr. Vide its judgment dated 29th September, 2004, the Court
Page 14 of page 16

held as under :-

21.

“10. Reliance placed by the learned Tribunal on the
circular dated 12th February, 1973 is also misplaced.
The circular requires the Enquiry Officer to ask a
delinquent, on each date of the proceeding, whether he
needs the assistance of any other workman. This circular
merely incorporate a rule of prudence and not a
mandatory direction, non-compliance of which would
invalidate an inquiry. In a case such as the present, the
Respondent-Workman, a literate conductor refused to
take the assistance of a co-worker in the very first
hearing. This being the position, the Enquiry Officer
cannot be expected to ask him in every hearing whether
he requires the assistance of any other worker.........”
Before this court a challenge has been raised to the order of removal

of service on the ground that this punishment awarded is grossly
disproportionate to the offence with which the workman was charged. The
principles which would justify interference by this Court in the same are
well settled.
22.

In these circumstances, the discretion which was exercised by the

disciplinary authority in imposing the punishment by the petitioner and the
industrial award dated 18th January, 2002 cannot be assailed on any legally
tenable grounds.
The principles laid down in these judicial precedents are binding on
this court.
For all the foregoing reasons, I find no merit in this petition which is
Page 15 of page 16

hereby dismissed. There shall, however, be no order as to costs.

GITA MITTAL, J
3rd July, 2006
`rds'

Page 16 of page 16

