IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.14992/2004
Judgment reserved on : 19 th January,
2005
Da te of decision :March 3rd, 2005
SUMAN TEJPAL
... Petitioner
through Mr. Ravi Prakash, Advocate
VERSUS
UOI & ORS.
.... Respondents
through Mr. Tanuj Khurana, Advocate for
respondent no. 1
Mr. C. Rajappa, Advocate for
respondents no. 2 and 3
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

The petitioner in the instant case has challenged the

order dated 8th September, 2004 whereby the Kendriya Vidyalaya,
Pitam Pura, Delhi - 110088 notified the petitioner of cancellation
of the admission of her son Vaibhav Tejpal under the special
dispensation quota of the Ministry of Human Resources
Development on the allegations that the list of names whereby

W.P.(C) 14992/2002

page 1 of 12

admission was granted had been forged by her.
2.

The challenge made in this petition is based on the

averment that the petitioner had registered her son Vaibhav
Tejpal, then aged five and a half years for admission to the
Kendriya Vidyalaya, T P Block, Pitam Pura, Delhi by submission of
an admission form for the purposes of securing admission in class
1 in the school. According to the petitioner she made enquiries
from the various lists notified for admission and kept on enquiring
about the status and stage of admission of her son. Finally, on 30 th
July, 2004, the petitioner was told that a list of 110 students had
been notified under the special dispensation quota in which her
son was shown at serial no. 110. The petitioner further contends
that this was orally told to her without showing her the actual list.
3.

It is further stated that the petitioner was directed to

and so deposited the fees for the period from April, 2004 to
September, 2004 in respect of her son Vaibhav Tejpal vide receipt
no. 16383 dated 30th July, 2004. Her son started attending the
school regularly without any objections till 8th September, 2004.
The petitioner submits that without issuance of any
notice to show cause, she was handed over a letter dated 8th
September, 2004 issued by the Principal of the Kendriya
W.P.(C) 14992/2002

page 2 of 12

Vidyalaya, T P Block, Pitam Pura, Delhi notifying the petitioner
that the admission of her son was cancelled on the purported
ground that the petitioner had forged the name of her son in the
list of admissions under the special dispensation quota.

The

petitioner was further notified that action would be initiated for
the alleged act of forgery on her part.
4.

The petitioner denies having any role to play in the

preparation of the lists of candidates or its being carried from
Kendriya Vidyalaya Headquarters to the school at Pitam Pura. The
petitioner submits that the allegations made in the letter of 8 th
September, 2004 are wholly unfounded and that the respondents
have conducted themselves in a totally arbitrary and mala fide
manner.

The respondents did not permit the petitioner's son to

attend the school from the 9th September, 2004 and as a result a
valuable academic session has been lost by him.
5.

The order dated 8th September, 2004 cancelling the

admission is challenged mainly on the ground of violation of
principles of natural justice and denial of notice to show cause
prior to making the impugned order. The petitioner also submits
that the order has been made by non-application of mind and that
it was the responsibility of the respondents to verify the list prior
W.P.(C) 14992/2002

page 3 of 12

to giving admission to the child and not in mid session more than
three months after the academic session had commenced.
6.

The respondents put in appearance after receipt of the

notice to show cause and have filed a counter affidavit vehemently
disputing the assertions of the petitioner. During the course of
hearing it was submitted that the name of the petitioner's son was
not recommended by the Ministry of Human

Resources

Development under the special dispensation of the Minister. It is
submitted that the Minister had recommended names of 110
students in which the name of Vaibhav Tejpal did not feature. It is
further submitted that as per the scheme of admissions, children
whose names are recommended for admission under special
dispensation had been to get their names registered as they are
admitted directly. The respondents disputed the validity of the
petitioner's son admission on the ground that the very fact that she
had registered her child's name before the issuance of the list itself
shows that the child's name did not feature in the above list.
According to the respondents, the Ministry of Human Resources
Development had sent a list of 110 names. The name of Master
Vaibhav Tejpal did not feature in these 110 names. The list issued
contained first 61 names pertaining to Kendriya Vidyalayas located
W.P.(C) 14992/2002

page 4 of 12

in Delhi, the names shown from serial no. 62 to 95 pertained to
Kendriya Vidyalayas located in the state of Madhya Pradesh; from
96 to 99 were names related to Kendriya Vidyalayas in the state of
Bihar; 101 to 110 pertained to Kendriya Vidyalayas located in
Haryana and lastly from serial no. 102 to 109 pertaining to
Kendriya Vidyalayas located in Uttar Pradesh.
7.

The respondents have sought to explain that against the

name mentioned at serial no. 22 in the list sent by the Ministry,
the location of the school was mentioned as the “Atomic Energy
Department”.

As such this admission could not be effected and

consequently the Kendriya Vidyalaya School Headquarter sent a
list of only 109 names dated 6/8th July, 2004 for admission under
the special dispensation quota.

No list containing 110

recommendations is stated to have been issued from the Kendriya
Vidyalaya School Headquarters.
8.

Learned counsel appearing for the respondents submits

that a parent name Suman who had shown her address as AG-115,
Shalimar Bagh, Delhi - 88 had submitted the same list in the
Kendriya Vidyalaya, Shalimar Bagh where the name of a Master
Prateek figured at serial no. 110 for admission in class 3.
According to the respondents, a list of 109 names was sent by the
W.P.(C) 14992/2002

page 5 of 12

Kendriya Vidyalaya Scheme Headquarters wjocj contained a
region-wise allocation. The list submitted by the petitioner for
admission of her son in class 1 of Kendriya Vidyalaya, Pitam Pura
is not a genuine document. When this was brought to the notice of
the Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangthan, it had issued an order dated 24 th
August, 2004 intimating the school that admission of the Prateek
son of Suman in class 3 did not appear to be an original admission
as the headquarters had sent a list containing only 109 names.
Allegations of forgery in respect of the list on the basis of which
Prateek had been admitted were made.
9.

The action taken by the Kendriya Vidyalaya, Pitam Pura,

T P Block, Delhi - 110088 is supported on the ground that the
original list issued by the Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangthan does not
contain the name of the child of the petitioner under the special
dispensation quota.
10.

I have given my considered thought to the record of the

case and the oral submissions made during the course of hearing.
The petitioner has not denied the allegations made by the
respondents. There is no dispute to the fact that the Ministry of
Human Resources Development had recommended 110 names
which did not contain the name of Master Vaibhav Tejpal under
W.P.(C) 14992/2002

page 6 of 12

the special dispensation quota for admission to the Kendriya
Vidyalaya Sangthan. It is also not disputed that such list of 110
names contained one name at serial no. 22 against which the
school referred to was relating to “Atomic Energy Department” .
Inasmuch as there was no such school, no admission of such child
based on a recommendation of this kind could be made and was
not made by the respondents. There is no reason to disbelieve that
the Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangthan Headquarters had actually,
therefore, recommended only 109 names for admission to the
different Kendriya Vidyalayas. Perusal of such a list also shows
that the recommendations by the Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangthan
are made in blocks relating to different states. As explained in the
counter affidavit, the first 61 names pertained to Kendriya
Vidyalaya

located

in

Delhi,

the

next

block

relates

to

recommendation for admissions in the State of Madhya Pradesh
and thereafter to Bihar, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh. None of the
list placed on record contained the name of Master Vaibhav Tejpal.
Therefore, neither the Ministry of Human Resources Development
nor the Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangthan Headquarters recommended
the name of Master Vaibhav Tejpal under the special dispensation
quota.
W.P.(C) 14992/2002

page 7 of 12

11.

I also find that the scheme for recommendation under

the special dispensation quota did not envisage registration for
admissions. The petitioner however had registered the name of
her child with the school for admission as back as in March, 2004.
This fact also supports the case of the respondents that the
petitioner's child had not even been considered for admission
under the special dispensation quota.
Under these circumstances, the admission of the
petitioner's son was obviously wholly illegal and could not have
been permitted to stand.
12.

It is a settled principle of law that the provisions of

natural justice have to be complied with prior to passing of any
administrative order with civil consequences.
Reference maybe made to the judgments of the Apex
Court reported at 1967(2) SCR 625 entitled State of Orissa vs Dr.
Ms. Beena Pani Dei; 1978 (2) SCR 272 entitled Mohinder Singh
Gill vs Chief Election Commissioner; 1970(1) SCR 457 entitled
A.K. Kraipak vs Union of India and 1982 SCC 338 Raj Rani and
Anr. Vs MCD in this behalf.

The minimum requirement of

compliance with principle of natural justice would include
issuance and service of a notice to show cause and an opportunity
W.P.(C) 14992/2002

page 8 of 12

to represent one's case.
It has been held that the provisions of natural justice
would be read into statutory provisions which are silent on the
same prior to withdrawal of a service. Notice to show cause would
be read into statutory rules as held in AIR 1984 Delhi 272.
The Apex Court has held that demands of natural justice
are met only if an opportunity to represent its case in view of a
proposed action is given. The court held that they are not met even
if the person proceeded against has furnished the very information
on which the impugned action is based. According to the Supreme
Court, merely because facts are admitted, it does not ipso facto
follow that principles of natural justice need not be observed.
Even independent proof of prejudice is not required and the
principles of natural justice know of no exception as per the law
laid down in AIR 1981 Supreme Court 136 entitled S.L. Kapoor vs
Jagmohan.
13.

In the instant case the petitioner was not put to notice

prior to the issuance of the orders of cancellation of admission and
the respondents have also stated that action is being taken for
forgery of the petitioner in the letter of 8th September, 2004. Such
allegations could not have been made without giving an
W.P.(C) 14992/2002

page 9 of 12

opportunity to the petitioner to explain her side of the story. The
petitioner has contended before me that she was not responsible
for any forgery and had nothing to do with the list which was
submitted to the Kendriya Vidyalaya at Pitam Pura, Delhi - 88. To
this extent, I am inclined to uphold the submission made on behalf
of the petitioner that she was entitled to a notice to show cause and
an opportunity to make a representation of her case to the
respondents before they proceed in the matter relating to the
allegations of forgery.
14.

However, so far as the admissions are concerned, the

fact remains that irrespective of the stand of the present petitioner
who is alleged to have committed the act of forgery, the name of
the petitioner's son was not recommended by the Ministry and as
such the child could not have been admitted under the special
dispensation scheme. The admitted position is that the child is not
pursuing the course since 8th September, 2004. Almost six months
have lapsed and the academic session is almost at its end. The
petitioner has submitted that the fees was deposited only on the
31st July, 2004. As such the child had attended barely five to six
weeks of classes prior to issuance of the impugned letter dated 8th
September, 2004. In these circumstances, pending issuance of the
W.P.(C) 14992/2002

page 10 of 12

notice to show cause and hearing thereon, I am not inclined to
restore the admission of the child.

However, in case the

respondents arrive at a different conclusion, the ward of the
petitioner would be entitled to consideration or restoration of the
admission of the child and appropriate action to enable the child to
complete the academic course in accordance with their settled
procedure.
15.

Accordingly, the respondents are directed to issue a

notice to show cause to the petitioner in respect of the allegations
made in the order dated 8th September, 2004 within two weeks of
the passing of the judgment. The petitioner is given liberty to
place her reply and all material in support thereof on record before
the respondents within one week on the receipt of the notice. The
respondents shall intimate the petitioner of a date not beyond
three days of the receipt of her reply for hearing to her/or her
authorised representative and thereafter proceed to pass a
reasoned and speaking order within two weeks.

In case the

respondents arrive at a finding in favour of the petitioner, the
respondents shall take all actions immediately on passing of their
order

on

the

petitioner's

representation

with

regard

to

restoration/fresh admission of the petitioner's son Vaibhav Tejpal
W.P.(C) 14992/2002

page 11 of 12

within one week of the passing of the order.
The writ petition is disposed of in the above terms.
There will be no order as to costs.

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
March 3rd, 2005
kr

W.P.(C) 14992/2002

page 12 of 12

