IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CM Nos. 3624 – 3630/2006 in WRIT PETITION
(C) No. 20183/2005
Date of Decision: 4th April, 2006
M/S DOLLY INTERNATIONAL
..... Petitioner
Through Mr. Harvinder Singh, Advocate
versus
WORKMEN C/O ALL INDIA GEN.MAZD ..... Respondent
Through Mr. Gajendra Giri, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest? Yes
GITA MITTAL, J. (Oral)
1.
Mr. Harvinder Singh, Advocate accepts notice and submits
that the petitioner's challenge to the award dated 7th June, 2002 is
based on the principal contention that the petitioner was
deliberately not served with any notices from the industrial
adjudicator. Therefore, the entire proceedings before the labour
court and the award is in violation of principles of natural justice
and without jurisdiction. It is also pointed out that the record of
the labour court has been called for which would enable the court

W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 1 of 43

to take a view in the matter. For these reasons an order under
Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 ought not to be
passed in favour of the respondents.
2.

Reliance is placed on the pronouncement of the Madras

High Court reported at 1992 II LLJ 201 Godrej and Boyce
Manufacturing Co. Ltd. Madras vs Principal Labour
Court, Madras & Anr. to contend that in the special facts and
circumstances of a given case, the court ought not to pass an order
directing payment of wages to workman under Section 17B of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
3.

Learned counsel for the respondent has vehemently opposed

the same and has submitted that the objections on the merits of
the matter cannot be taken in consideration while contesting an
application under Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
It has been contended that the workmen are employed and have
an industrial award directing their reinstatement. As such the
prayer made in the applications deserves to be granted.
4.

I have given my considered though to the rival contentions.

In the instant case, the illegality is glaring on the face of the record
inasmuch

as

the

respondent/workman

had

reflected

two

addresses of the management on the statement of claim filed by it.
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 2 of 43

One of these addresses, is stated to have never been the address of
the management. There is no dispute to this position. No efforts
was made to serve the management at both the addresses. The
only notice in the proceeding sent to the management, was to the
address which the petitioner has stated was never its address. The
industrial adjudicator has completely overlooked this aspect of the
matter while directing ex-parte proceedings.

The same is

therefore in glaring contravention of the principles of natural
justice rendering the Award illegal and completely without
jurisdiction. In these circumstances, the issue raised in the writ
petition goes to the very root of the jurisdiction of adjudication
before the industrial adjudicator and for this reason the writ
petition is taken up for hearing alongwith the present applications.
5.

In a pronouncement of the High Court of Judicature at

Madras reported in 1992 II LLJ 201 Godrej and Boyce
Manufacturing Co. Ltd. Madras vs Principal Labour
Court, Madras & Anr., the court held that any challenge to the
award on the ground that it is without jurisdiction or is otherwise a
nullity alone will not be sufficient to suspend the operation of
Section 17B of the Act. The final adjudication in a case where the
award is without jurisdiction or is otherwise a nullity shall
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 3 of 43

ordinarily meet the ends of justice. A workman who shall be
waiting for the implementation of the award during the pendency
of the proceedings, shall receive only the wages at the rate last paid
for period of pendency of the proceedings in the court. It is not a
burden of any serious consequence upon the employer, but it will
be a deprivation of a sort which may cause havoc to the workman
and his family. However, the power to make a final order includes
the power to make an interim order and that power will extend to
suspending the liability of the employer under Section 17B of the
Act and accordingly, the right of the workman to receive wages
pendentelite. But this will be possible only in the rarest of rare
cases as, otherwise, it would defeat the very purpose for which the
section has been introduced in the Act. The court also noticed that
there shall be any number of employers/managements, shall
successfully contrive petitions and the proceedings challenging the
award on some such ground as the award being without
jurisdiction or a nullity and that courts cannot afford to be
manipulated and allow the employer management to use the
interim order as a weapon to avoid such statutory liability. Some
error of fact or even some error of law alone will not thus be
enough to avoid the liability of the management under Section
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 4 of 43

17B. If, however, the error is such that it goes to the root of the
jurisdiction of the tribunal and the court has got sufficient
materials to ignore the effect of Section 17B of the Act, only in such
a circumstance may the court decline to order payment of wages
pendentelite.
6.

To the same effect is the pronouncement of a Division Bench

of the Jharkhand High Court reported at 2001 (90) FLR 67
Employer, The Management of Central Mine Planning
and Design Institute Ltd. vs. Union of India & Ors. where
the court held thus:
“9. We are respectful agreement with the view
expressed and the ratio laid down by the Full
Bench of Madras High Court in Godrej and
Boyce (supra). Similarly in Dena Bank, (supra)
their Lordships of the Supreme Court asserted
once again the fact that basic power still
originates from Article 226 of the Constitution.
On a consideration of all the relevant aspects of
the matter, therefore, our view is that Section
17-B of the Act does not take away the
unfettered power and plenary jurisdiction of the
High Court conferred upon it under Article 226
of the Constitution and that Section 17-B of the
Act has to be read with Article 226 of the
Constitution. We are of the view, therefore,
that whenever a writ petitioner challenges an
award passed by a Labour Court or an
Industrial Tribunal and raises contentions
concerning the very basic jurisdictional aspects
of the Award or brings to the notice of the Court
some patent error of law apparent on the face of
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 5 of 43

the award and thus satisfies the Court, prima
facie, with reference to the merits of the
aforesaid contentions (duly supported by the
material on record) that the Labour Court or
the Industrial Tribunal erred in passing the
Award (award can thus be termed as a
perversity or nullity in the eye of law) merely
because Section 17-B is there on the Statute
Book, there is no mandatory requirement that
even in such cases where the High Court, prima
facie, is satisfied about such illegality in the
Award, it must pass an order directing the writ
petitioner to pay wages last drawn to the
respondent during the pendency of the
proceedings in the High Court. We have thus no
hesitation in saying that there can be cases
where despite Section 17-B being there on the
Statute Book the High Court can decline to
grant relief paying wages last drawn to a
person. At the same time we must hasten to
add that cases where the High Court may
decline to pass an order under Section 17-B of
the Act, have to be the rarest of the rare.
Granting relief under Section 17-B of the Act
and passing orders directing payment of wages
last drawn, is generally the rule; refusing to
grant relief under Section 17-B an exception, as
it would be in the rarest of the rare cases. The
cases may be only those where an award is
challenged on the basic issue of jurisdictional
error or errors apparent on the face of the
Award. One instance of jurisdictional error can
be about the absence of the relationship of
workman and the employer between the
parties. If the writ petitioner challenging the
Award before the High Court genuinely, bona
fide, seriously and gravely raises the question of
absence of this relationship and the High Court
is satisfied, prima facie, in full measure with a
reference to such contentions of the writ
petitioner, which have to be duly supported by
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 6 of 43

7.

the material on record and the High Court
comes to a prima facie conclusion that indeed
very serious and grave doubts do exist with
respect to the question of such relationship
between the parties, it can refuse to pass an
order under Section 17-B of the Act, thus
declining to issue a direction to the writ
petitioner to pay wages last drawn to the
respondent. Since the satisfaction of the High
Court on this score has to be prima facie very
clear, it goes without saying that while declining
to grant relief under Section 17-B of the Act, we
are
required
to
act
with
utmost
circumspection.”
In the instant case, it has been found as discussed in detail

hereafter that no notice was issued to the petitioner and the entire
proceedings before the industrial adjudicator are therefore,
rendered completely illegal and without jurisdiction. For these
reasons, applying the principles laid down in the judgment of High
Court of Judicature at Madras reported in 1992 II LLJ 201
Godrej and Boyce Manufacturing Co. Ltd. Madras vs
Principal

Labour

Court,

Madras

&

Anr.

and

the

pronouncement of a Division Bench of the Jharkhand High Court
reported at 2001 (90) FLR 67 Employer, The Management
of Central Mine Planning and Design Institute Ltd. vs.
Union of India & Ors., the respondents/workmen in the
instant case, cannot be granted any relief in these applications
which are hereby dismissed.
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 7 of 43

W.P.(C) 20183/2005
1.

Counsel for the respondent submits that the counter

affidavit which was filed could not be traced out in the Registry.
Consequently he has got a copy thereof duly attested and has
handed over the same in court. Learned counsel for the petitioner
submits that no rejoinder thereto is necessary as he relies on the
record of the labour court. It is submitted by both parties that the
issue raised in the matter is narrow and urgent and that the writ
petition be taken up for final hearing.

Accordingly, with the

consent of both parties, the writ petition is taken up for hearing.
2.

This writ petition has been filed assailing an industrial award

dated 7th June, 2002 in favour of the seven respondents, each one
of whom made a claim that they were employed by the petitioner
and that their services were wrongfully terminated by the
management on 27th June, 1998 in compliance of the statutory
provisions. The workman contended that the termination of their
services were illegal and made a complaint in this behalf to the
labour authorities.
3.

The petitioner has impugned the award passed by the

industrial tribunal on the ground that without ensuring that the
petitioner was served with the notice from the labour court, the
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 8 of 43

industrial

adjudicator

directed

ex-parte

proceedings

and

proceeded to pass the award against the petitioner directing
reinstatement into service of the respondents with 50% of the last
drawn wages with effect from 27th June, 1998 in their favour. In
this behalf, it has been pointed out that the respondents had
caused a complaint dated 29th June, 1998 to be sent by the All
India General Mazdoor Trade Union to the petitioner wherein the
address of the petitioner was clearly shown as 67-68, Rampuri,
Kalkaji Opposite Valmiki Mandir, New Delhi-110019 and it had
been unequivocally stated on behalf of the workman that they were
employed at this establishment. This notice was exhibited before
the labour court as Exhibit WW1/1 in the evidence produced by the
workman.

It is noteworthy that this was only address of the

management reflected on behalf of the workman.
4.

The labour inspector is stated to have submitted a report

dated 7th June, 1998 which has been relied upon by the workmen.
This report was exhibited by the respondents before the industrial
adjudicator as Exhibit WW1/1. In this report, the inspector had
also stated that he had inspected the establishment of the
petitioner at 67-78, Rampuri, Kalkaji and a report against the
management was given.
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 9 of 43

5.

The labour inspector thereafter issued a letter dated 19th

August, 1998 informing the All India General Mazdoor Trade
Union to the effect that M/s Dolly International, 67-68, Rampuri,
Kalkaji was inspected on 13th August, 1998 but the establishment
had refused to open the door. The labour inspector had informed
that even a police report in this behalf was lodged.
6.

Before the authorities, the complaint made by the workman

commenced by issuance of a demand letter which was dated 27th
June, 1998 wherein the typed address of the respondent is shown
at Rampuri, Kalkaji, while, it appears, later in handwriting,
another address has been inserted.
7.

The grievance made by the workman was referred for

adjudication by the appropriate government by an order dated 8th
January, 1999 on the following terms :“Whether the services of S/Sh. Javed, Tabiz,
Alim Hussain, Rahim, Alamgiri, Murtaza,
Mustafa, Anzar, Irfaan, Abrar Ahmed,
Mukhtar, Lal Bahadur, Anil Kumar and Raj
Kumar have been terminated illegally and/or
unjustifiably and if so, to what relief are they
entitled and what directions are necessary in
this respect?”
It is necessary to note that in the order of reference, two
addresses of M/s Dolly International were clearly reflected being

W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 10 of 43

(i) M/s Dolly International, 67-68, Ram Puri Kalkaji, Opp. Balmiki
Mandir, New Delhi-19 (ii) M/s Dolly International, H. No. 1083
A/10, Govindpuri, IIIrd Floor, New Delhi-19.
8.

Upon receipt of the order of reference, the labour court

directed issuance of notice to the workman by its order dated 14th
January, 1999. Thereafter, the labour court directed notice to be
issued to the petitioner for 3rd August, 1999. On the next date of
hearing, the court directed notice to issued to the management by
registered AD cover for 16th December, 1999.
9.

From a perusal of the record received from the labour court,

it appears that only one registered cover was filed by the workmen
before the labour court wherein the address of the petitioner was
reflected as 'H.No. 1083 A/10, Govind Puri, New Delhi'. On this
registered cover, a noting by the postal authorities of refusal of
receipt of the notice by the addressee finds mentioned. That only
one registered cover was filed is evidenced by the fact that there is
only one postal receipt of dispatch forth coming on the record of
the industrial adjudicator. It therefore appears that notice was not
sent to the other address which was reflected in the order of
reference

or

in

the

statement

of

respondent/workman.
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 11 of 43

claim

filed

by

the

10.

Based on the report on this registered cover, on 16th

December, 1999, the labour court recorded that the summons to
the management sent by registered AD was refused. The report of
refusal was accepted and the service was deemed sufficient. As
none was present on behalf of management, it was proceeded exparte.
11.

The matter thereafter proceeded to the evidence of the

workmen. Six of the workmen filed identical affidavits wherein
they all deposed that they were employed at the establishment of
the management at “67-68, Rampuri, Kalkaji, Opposite Valmiki
Mandir, New Delhi”. These workmen appeared in support of their
claims and also proved their affidavits on record.
12.

On 11th April, 2001 after hearing arguments, the matter was

reserved for award. However, on 4th May, 2001, it was noticed
that one of the workman had not appeared in the witness box to
prove his case. Therefore, the court directed notice to issue to him
to both the parties, that is “to the authorised representative of the
workman and management” for 3rd August, 2001. This order, to
the extent that it directed notice to issue to the management was
never complied with.

No notice to the petitioner was issued

pursuant to the order dated 4th May, 2001. Perusal of the record
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 12 of 43

shows that only one notice was sent by ordinary process to the
workman.
13.

On 3rd August, 2001, without at all ascertaining as to whether

the management had been served or not, the labour court noticed
that the management was already proceeded ex-parte and that
none was present. Thereafter, the statement of the 7 th workman
was examined on 21st March, 2002 and the matter was posted for
further arguments.
14.

On 21st May, 2002, the arguments were heard and the matter

was reserved for award which was finally passed on 7th June, 2002
answering the industrial reference in favour of the workmen.
Aggrieved thereby, the petitioner has filed the present writ
petition.
15.

The grounds on which the challenge has been laid in the

present petition relate to first principles of procedure in industrial
adjudication. However, these have a vital bearing in the matter
inasmuch as failure to comply with them results in contravention
of valuable rights of a party concerned and entitled to a fair
hearing in industrial adjudication. The effect is fair reaching and
the inevitable consequence is miscarriage of justice.

As the

present case is not the only case where an industrial award has
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 13 of 43

been challenged on grounds of insufficiency of notice and want of
service, it becomes necessary to examine the matter in some
detail.
16.

So far as service of notice is concerned, it would be useful to

examine the

applicable statutory provisions and the rules in

respect thereof. In this behalf, for the purposes of convenience,
Section 11 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and the relevant
provisions of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, 1957
applicable to industrial adjudication in Delhi are reproduced in
extenso hereafter :“11. Procedure
and
power
of
conciliation officers, Boards, Courts,
and Tribunals.[(1) Subject to any
rules that may be made in this behalf, an
arbitrator, a Board, Court, Labour Court,
Tribunal or National Tribunal shall follow
such procedures as the arbitrator or other
authority concerned may think fit.]
(2) A conciliation officer or a member of a
Board, [or Court or the presiding officer of a
Labour Court, Tribunal, or National Tribunal]
may for the purpose of inquiry into any existing
or apprehended industrial dispute, after giving
reasonable notice, esnter the premises
occupied by any establishment to which the
dispute relates.
(3) Every Board, Court, [Labour Court,
Tribunal and Natinal Tribunal] shall have the
same powers as are vested in a Civil
Court under the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 (5 of 1908), when trying a suit, in
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 14 of 43

respect of the following matters, namely :(a) enforcing the attendance of
any person and exmining him on oath;
(b) compelling the production of
documents and material objects;
(c) issuing commissions for the
examination of witnesses;
(d) in respect of such other matters as
may be prescribed,
and every inquiry or investigation by a Board,
Court, [Labour Court, Tribunal or National
Tribunal] shall be deemed to be a judicial
proceeding within the meaning of sections
193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of
1860).
(4) A conciliation officer [may enforce
the attendance of any person for the purpose
of examination of such person or call for] and
inspect any document which he has ground
for considering to be relevant to the industrial
dispute [or to be necessary for the purpose of
verifying the implementation of any award or
carrying out any other duty imposed on him
under this Act, and for the aforesaid
purposes, the conciliation officer shall have
the same powers as are vested in a Civil Court
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908(5 of
1908), [in respect of enforcing the attendance
of any person and examining him or of
compelling the production of documents]].
[(5) A Court, Labour Court, Tribunal or
National Tribunal may, if it so thinks fit,
appoint one or more persons having special
knowledge of the matter under consideration
as an assessor or assessors to advise it in the
proceeding before it.
(6) All conciliation officers, members of a
Board or Court and the presiding officers of a
Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal
shall be deemed to be public servants within
the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 15 of 43

Code (45 of 1860).
(7) Subject to any rules made under this
Act, the costs of, and incidental to, any
proceeding before a Labour Court, Tribunal
or National Tribunal shall be in the discretion
of that Labour Court, tribunal or National
Tribunal and the Labour Court, Tribunal or
National Tribunal, as the case may be, shall
have full power to determine by and to whom
and to what extent and subject to what
conditions, if any, such costs are to be paid,
and to give all necessary directions for the
purposes aforesaid and such costs may, on
application made to the appropriate
Government by the person entitled, be
recovered by that Government in the same
manner as an arrear of land revenue.]
[(8) Every [Labour Court, Tribunal or
National Tribunal] shall be deemed to be Civil
Court for the purpose of [sections 345, 346
and 348 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 (2 of 1974)].
17.

So far as the Industrial Disputes (Central ) Rules, 1957 are

concerned, Rules 10B, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23 require a consideration
and read thus :
10 – B.
Proceeding
before
the
Labour Court, Tribunal or National
Tribunal . - (I)While referring an industrial
dispute for adjudication to a Labour Court,
Tribunal or National Tribunal, the Central
Government shall direct the party raising the
dispute to file a statement of claim complete
with relevant documents, list of reliance and
witnesses with the Labour Court, Tribunal or
National Tribunal within fifteen days of the
receipt of the order of reference and also
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 16 of 43

forward a copy of such statement to each one
of the opposite parties involved in the
dispute.
(2). The Labour Court, Tribunal or National
Tribunal after ascertaining that copies of
statement of claim are furnished to the other
side by party raising the dispute shall fix the
first hearing on a date not beyond one month
from the date of receipt of the order of
reference and the opposite party or parties
shall file their written statement together with
documents, list of reliance and witnesses
within a period of 15 days from the date of
first bearing and simultaneously forward a
copy thereof to the other party.
(9). In case any party defaults or fails to
appear at any stage the Labour Court,
Tribunal or National Tribunal, as the case
may be, may proceed with the reference exparte and decide the reference appliction in
the absence of the defaulting party :
Provided that the Labour Court,
Tribunal or National Tribunal, as the case
may be, may on the application of either party
filed before the submission of the award
revoke the order that the case shall proceed
ex-parte, if it is satisfied that the absence of
the party was on justifiable grounds.
xxx
18. Service of summons or notice –
Subject to the provisions contained in rule 20,
any notice, summons, process or order issued
by a Board, Court, Labour Court, Tribunal,
National Tribunal, or an Arbitrator
empowered
to
issue
such
notice,
summons, process or order, may be
served
either
personally
or
by
registered post.
xxx
20. Manner of service in the case of
numerous persons as parties to a
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 17 of 43

dispute -(1) Where there are numerous
persons as parties to any proceedings before a
Board, Court, Labour Court, Tribunal or
National Tribunal or an Arbitrator and such
persons are members of any trade union or
association, the service of notice on the
Secretary, or where there is no Secretary, on
the principal officer, of the trade union or
association shall be deemed to be service on
such persons.
(2) Where there are numerous persons as
parties to any proceeding before a Board,
Court, Labour Court, Tribunal or National
Tribunal or an Arbitrator and such persons
are not members of any trade union or
association, the Board, Court, Labour Court,
Tribunal, National Tribunal or Arbitrator, as
the case may be, shall, where personal
service is not practicable, cause the
service of any notice to be made by
affixing the same at or near the main
entrance
of
the
establishment
concerned.
(3) A notice served in the manner specified
in sub-rule (2) shall also be considered as
sufficient in the case of such workmen as
cannot be ascertained and found.
21. Procedure at the first sitting – At
the first sitting of a Board, Court, Labour
Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal, the
Chairman or the Presiding Officer, as the case
may be, shall call upon the parties in such
order as he may think fit to state their case.
22. Board, Court, Labour Court,
Tribunal,
National
Tribunal
or
Arbitrator may proceed ex parte – If
without sufficient cause being shown, any
party to proceeding before a Board, Court,
Labour Court, Tribunal, National Tribunal or
Arbitrator fails to attend or to be represented,
the Board, Court, Labour Court, Tribunal,
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 18 of 43

National Tribunal or Arbitrator may proceed,
as if the party had duly attended or had been
represented.
23. Power of entry and inspection – A
Board, or Court, or any member thereof, or a
conciliation officer, a Labour Court, Tribunal
or National Tribunal, or any person
authorised in writing by the Board, Court,
Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal
in this behalf may, for the purposes of any
conciliation,
investigation,
enquiry
or
adjudication entrusted to the conciliation
officer, Board, Court, Labour Court, Tribunal
or National Tribunal under the Act, at any
time between the hours of sunrise and sunset
and in the case of a person authorised in
writing by a Board, Court, Labour Court,
Tribunal or National Tribunal after he has
given reasonable notice enter any building,
factory, workshop, or other place or premises
whatsoever, and inspect the same or any
work, machinery, appliance or article therein
or interrogate any person therein in respect of
anything situated therein or any matter
relevant to the subject-matter of the
conciliation,
investigation,
enquiry
or
adjudication.”
(Emphasis
furnished)
18.

As per the legislative scheme, it is therefore incumbent upon

the appropriate government to direct the party raising the dispute
to file the statement of claim complete with relevant documents,
list of witnesses of the labour court, tribunal or the national
tribunal within fifteen days of the receipt of the order of reference
and also to forward a copy of such statement to each one of the

W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 19 of 43

opposite parties involved in the dispute under rule 10 B of the
aforenoticed rule.
Upon receipt of the order of reference, the industrial
adjudicator is required to ascertain that the copies of the
statement of claim are furnished to the other side by the party
raising the dispute and to fix the hearing on a date in one month
from the date of receipt of the reference. The time within which
the opposite party is required to file its written statement is also
statutorily fixed. The period of fifteen days is prescribed for filing
of the written statement together with the documents, list of
witnesses from the date of first hearing. The opposite party is
required to forward a copy thereof to the other party.
19.

In case the industrial adjudicator finds that the party raising

the dispute though directed, did not forward copy of the statement
of claim to the opposite party, it is required to give all directions to
the concerned party to furnish the copy of the statement to the
opposite party. The rule provides that in such a contingency, the
industrial adjudicator shall extend the time limit for filing its
statement under sub-rule 1 or the written statement under sub
rule 2 as additional period of fifteen days.
20.

So far as service of summons or notices is concerned, the

W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 20 of 43

rules provides that notice, summons or process or order may be
served either personally or by registered post. Where there are
numerous persons who have been arrayed as party to the dispute,
the rules permit service by affixation at or near main entrance of
the concerned establishment.
21.

The instant case raises a fundamental issue as to what would

be the proper procedure to be adopted where the management is
reflected as maintaining more than one address. Undoubtedly,
unless anything to the contrary is stated on record by the
workman, it would be necessary for the industrial adjudicator to
effect service at both the addresses which have been shown in the
order of reference. This would ensure that the party which is
shown as being available at two addresses, cannot at a later stage a
petition that it was never served at the correct address. For the
same reason, it will obviate the possibility of a workman arraying a
management at a wrong address and procuring an incorrect report
of service at such address.
22.

I find that even the requirement of Section 10B (i) and (iii)

has not been complied with in the instant case. Though the order
of reference dated 8th January, 1999 contains a direction to the
workman to file a statement of his claim complete with the list of
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 21 of 43

documents and list of witnesses, there does not appear to have
been any compliance of the same by the workman concerned.
There is no proof of forwarding of copy of such statement to the
petitioner i.e. the opposite party involved in the dispute.
The industrial adjudicator has made no effort to ascertain as
to whether the copies of the statement of claim were furnished to
the petitioner before fixing a hearing after the receipt of the order
of reference. The provisions of Rule 10b(iii) have been apparently
given a complete go bye and no direction has been issued to the
workman to furnish copy of the statement to the petitioner which
would also have had the effect of notifying the petitioner with
regard to the pendency of the dispute.
23.

So far as service of the notices are concerned, two addresses

for service of the management were given by the workmen in the
statement of claim which were also mentioned in the order of
reference. The order dated 14th January, 1999 was passed after the
receipt of the order of reference and only directed that the
workmen be served. The notices were issued to the workmen only
through the process server but no notice was issued by registered
AD post.

On the other hand, notices were issued to the

management by the order dated 3rd August, 1999 only by
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 22 of 43

registered AD post and not through ordinary process.
24.

Before the labour court, both the order of reference and the

statement of claim filed by the workmen made a reference to the
two addresses of the management. There was nothing on record
to enable the labour court to arrive at a conclusion as to which was
the correct or complete address or whether either of the addresses
was the only address of the management. The record of the labour
court shows that only one registered envelop was sent which was
addressed to the second address reflected in the order of reference
i.e. H. No. 1083, A/10, Govind Puri, IIIrd Floor, New Delhi. No
notice was sent to the other address which was reflected in the
order of reference in the statement of claim.

The second

handwritten address which was reflected as the address of the
management as inserted in handwriting in the union's complaint
dated 29th June, 1998 is alleged to be the address of the
labour/union. Furthermore, the labour inspector had also given
only one address as the place of his visit and inspection. The
labour inspector who had addressed the letter dated 19th August,
1998 had also stated that he had visited the establishment of the
management

at

67-68,

Rampuri.

Therefore,

in

these

circumstances, the industrial adjudicator could not have sent
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 23 of 43

notices to only one address of the management.
25.

Perhaps much time could have been saved in the

adjudication even if the second order which was passed by the
industrial adjudicator on 4th July, 2001 was correctly complied
with. The labour court had directed the matter to be posted afresh
after it had been reserved for award for recording of the statement
of one of the workmen. The labour court had specifically directed
notice to issue to both parties. Yet again, no notice was sent to the
management and it was simply noticed on the next date that the
management was ex-parte.
26.

All the seven workmen filed affidavits before the labour

court wherein they stated that they were employed at the
establishment of the petitioner at 67-68, Rampuri, Kalkaji,
Opposite Valmiki Mandir, New Delhi. There was no reference
even in their evidence to any establishment of the petitioner at H.
No. 1083 A/10, Govind Puri, 3rd Floor, New Delhi.
27.

Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the present

case, there is no dispute that the order of reference dated 8th
January, 2001 and that the workman had reflected two addresses
of the management in its statement of claim also reflected two
addresses. Perusal of the record of the labour court shows that
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 24 of 43

without there being any reason for the same, notice has been
addressed to only one address of the petitioner. Even as per the
deposition of the workman, the address to which the notice was
sent was not the address of the petitioner. The workman had
clearly stated that they were employed at the establishment at the
other address only. There is no explanation whatsoever from the
side of the workmen or from the record of the court as to why no
notice was sent to the other address.
28.

In these circumstances, I find force in the submission of the

petitioner that the petitioner never had any establishment at H.
No. 1083, A/10, Govind Puri, 3rd Floor, New Delhi and that such
address was given deliberately and malafide by the workmen in
order to procure an incorrect report of service on the court notices
to enable ex-parte adjudication on its complaint.
29.

Before this court, it has been stated by the petitioner that the

respondents are not its employees and have no connection
whatsoever with the petitioner.

This submission relates to the

merits of the controversy which is not being gone into in the
present petition. The petitioner has submitted that it is carrying
on its export business of leather garments from the premises at
149/A Exporter Enclave, Devli Village, New Delhi-110062.
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 25 of 43

The petitioner has submitted that it came to know about the
passing of the ex-parte award by the labour court when one of the
workman sent a letter by ordinary process to the Devli address of
the petitioner. The petitioner thereupon moved an application for
setting aside of the ex-parte award which was dated 7th June,
2004. On account of the principles of law laid down by the Apex
Court in M/s Sangham Tape Company v. Hansraj 2004(103) FLR
699, the application was not entertained. The present writ petition
is therefore impugning the order dated 16th December, 1999
whereby the petitioner was proceeded ex-parte and the award
dated 7th June, 2002 before this court.
30.

At this stage, I may appropriately advert to the observations

of the Apex Court in 1981 Lab. Industrial Cases 155
Grindlays

Bank

Ltd.

v.

The

Central

Government

Industrial Tribunal & Ors., wherein the court held that where
a party is prevented from appearing at the hearing issued to a
sufficient cause and is faced with an ex-parte award, it is as if the
party has an award without notice of the proceedings.

The

Supreme Court further observed that it was not required to be
stressed that where the tribunal proceeds to make an award
without notice to a party, the award is nothing but in nullity. I
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 26 of 43

may notice that such observations were made by the Apex Court
while considering the powers of the industrial tribunal to set aside
an ex-parte award.

The apex Court was of the view that the

tribunal has not only the power to do so but has a duty to set aside
an ex-parte award in such circumstances. In this behalf the court
held thus :“6. We are of the opinion that the Tribunal
had the power to pass the impugned order if it
thought fit in the interest of justice. It is true
that there is no express provision in the Act or
the rules framed thereunder giving the
Tribunal jurisdiction to dos o. But it is a wellknown rule of statutory construction that a
Tribunal or body should be considered to be
endowed with such ancillary or incidental
powers as are necessary to discharge its
functions effectively for the purpose of doing
justice between the parties. In a case of this
nature, we are of the view that the Tribunal
should be considered as invested with such
incidental or ancillary powers unless there is
any indication in the statute to the contrary .
We do not find any such statutory prohibition.
On the other hand, there are indications to the
contrary.
10. When sub-section (1) of S. 11 expressly
and in clear terms confers power upon the
Tribunal to regulate its own procedure, it must
necessarily be endowed with all powers which
bring about an adjudication of an existing
industrial dispute, after affording all the parties
an opportunity of a hearing. We are inclined
to the view that where a party is prevented
from appearing at the hearing due to a
sufficient cause, and is faced with an ex parte
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 27 of 43

award, it is as if the party is visited with an
award without a notice of the proceedings. It is
needless to stress that where the Tribunal
proceeds to make an award without notice to a
party, the award is nothing but a nullity. In
such circumstances, the Tribunal has not only
the power but also the duty to set aside the ex
parte award and to direct the matter to be
heard afresh.”
31.

The parameters within which the industrial adjudication

could set aside an ex-parte award were restricted by the judgment
of the Apex Court referred in M/s Sangham Tape Company
vs Hansraj 2004 (103) FLR 699. In this case, the Supreme
Court held thus:“6. An industrial adjudication is governed by
the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act' and the
rules framed thereunder. The rules framed
under the Act may provide for applicability of the
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure. Once
the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure are
made applicable to the industrial adjudication,
indisputably the provisions of Order IX, Rule 13
thereof would be attracted.
But unlike an
ordinary Civil Court, the Industrial Tribunals and
the Labour Courts ave limited jurisdiction in that
behalf. An award made by an industrial court
becomes enforceable under Section 17-A of the
Act on the expiry of 30 days from the date of its
publication.
Once the award becomes
enforceable, the Industrial Tribunal and/or
Labour Court becomes functus officio.
7.
This Court in Grindlays Bank Ltd. vs.
Central Government Industrial Tribunal and
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 28 of 43

Others [(1980) Supp SCC 420)] held that the
Tribunal does not become functus officio
provided an application for setting aside the
award is filed within thirty days of publication of
award having regard to the provisions contained
in Section 11 of the Act and Rules 22 and 24 of
the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, 1957
stating:
“The contention that the Tribunal had become
functus officio and, therefore, had no jurisdiction
to set aside the ex parte award and that the
Central Government alone could set it aside, does
not commend to us. Sub-section (3) of Section
20 of the Act provides that the proceedings
before the Tribunal would be deemed to continue
till the date on which the award becomes
enforceable under Section 17-A. Under Section
17-A of the Act, an award becomes enforceable on
the expiry of 30 days from the date of its
publication under Section 17. The proceedings
with regard to a reference under Section 10 of the
Act are, therefore, not deemed to be concluded
until the expiry of 30 days from the publication of
the award.
Till then the Tribunal retains
jurisdiction over the dispute referred to it for
adjudication and up to that date it has the power
to entertain an application in connection with
such dispute. That stage is not reached till the
award becomes enforceable under Section 17-A.
In the instant case, the Tribunal made the ex
parte award on December 9, 1976. That award
was published by the Central Government in the
Gazette of India dated December 25, 1976. The
application for setting aside the ex parte award
was filed by respondent 3, acting on behalf of
respondents 5 to 17 on January 19, 1977 i.e.
before the expiry of 30 days of its publication and
was, therefore, rightly entertained by the
Tribunal......”
8.

The said decision is, therefore, an authority

W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 29 of 43

for the proposition that while an Industrial Court
will have jurisdiction to set aside an ex parte
award but having regard to the provision
contained in Section 17-A of the Act, an
application therefore must be filed before the
expiry of 30 days from the publication thereof.
Till then Tribunal retains jurisdiction over the
dispute referred to it for adjudication and only
upto that date, it has the power to entertain an
application in connection with such dispute.”
32.

The labour courts and the Industrial Tribunals are required

to function within the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947 and the Central Rules framed thereunder.
Rule 10-B (9) provides that in case any party defaults or fails
to appear at any stage, the industrial adjudicator may proceed with
the reference ex parte and decide the reference application in the
absence of the defaulting party.
Thus, a deeming fiction is created by rule 22 to the effect that
the industrial adjudicator is empowered to proceed against a party
which fails to attend or to be represented before it without
sufficient cause being shown, as if the party had duly attended or
had been represented. Thus, the intendment of rule 10-B (9) and
rule 22 is clear that if any party without sufficient cause, defaults,
the reference can be decided in its absence. The proviso to subrule 9 of rule 10-B empowers the industrial adjudicator to set aside

W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 30 of 43

the direction to proceed ex parte if the industrial adjudicator is
satisfied that the absence of the other party was on justifiable
grounds.
33.

However, even in the present case, the question which

remains to be answered is as to the manner in which the industrial
adjudicator is to proceed once ex-parte proceedings have been
directed by it.

The Labour Court, even if it was justified in

proceeding ex parte, has no jurisdiction to grant relief without
determining or adjudicating upon the merits of the dispute
referred to it. The adjudication has to be made upon the merits of
the reference.
In 1964 I LLJ 607 (Allahabad) entitled Har Prasad
Engineering Workshop, Allahabad Vs. State of U.P. &
Ors., it was held that an ex parte decision of the labour court
which does not determine the industrial dispute referred to it is
not an award within the meaning of Section 2 (c) of the statute.
34.

The rule which empowers the industrial adjudicator to

proceed ex-parte upon the default and absence of a party without
sufficient cause does not enable it either to do away with the
enquiry or straightway decide an award without recording finding
on the merits of the dispute. The appropriate government while
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 31 of 43

making the reference under Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947 confers jurisdiction on the industrial adjudicator to
adjudicate on the dispute referred to it. The order of reference sets
into motion the adjudication proceedings which cannot be stopped
otherwise than by passing of an award. As per Section 20 (3) of
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, proceedings before the labour
court or tribunal shall be deemed to have commenced on the date
of the reference of the dispute for all adjudication and such
proceedings shall be deemed to have concluded on the date on
which the award becomes enforceable under Section 17 A of the
statute. Thus, in the event of failure of a workman to appear, the
industrial adjudicator does not have the jurisdiction to refuse to
adjudicate on the dispute and to dismiss the dispute for nonprosecution.

It is required by statute to make an award and

forward the same to an appropriate government.
35.

In this behalf, useful reference can be made to the

pronouncement of the High Court of Kerala reported at 1977 I
LLJ 182 entitled F.A.C.T. Employees' Association, Cochin
Vs. F.A.C.T. Ltd. & Ors. wherein the court held thus:10. xxxxx
xxxxx
xxxxx
Rule 22, as the heading (see Craies on Statute
Law, 7th Edn., P. 207, on “heading” as a guide to
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 32 of 43

interpretation), indicates, empowers the Tribunal
to proceed ex parte if a party, without good
cause, fails to attend the proceedings. The
absence of such a party shall not hinder or affect
the progress of the proceedings. Rule 23, as the
heading again indicates, enables the Tribunal to
set aside an ex parte decision if sufficient cause is
shown by the party for its absence. A decision
includes an award which, as defined under
Section 2 (b), “means an interim or a final
determination of any industrial dispute or of any
question relating thereto”. If power to proceed
ex parte, i.e., in the absence of a party – as if the
party was present, was not specifically conferred
by Rule 22, the Tribunal would be incompetent
to make an award on merits without hearing all
the parties. Rule 22 not only authorizes the
Tribunal to proceed in the absence of a party, but
it also creates a fiction which enables the
Tribunal to presume that all the parties are
present before it, although in fact it is not true,
and thus make an ex parte award. Rule 22 is a
deeming provision which enable the Tribunal to
imagine a state of affairs which is untrue.
xxxxx
xxxxx
xxxxx
12. The Tribunal may imagine that the
absentee is present, and having done so, it may
give full effect to its imagination and carry it to
its logical conclusion. The Tribunal has to bear
in mind the purposes for which the fiction is
created and has to give effect to them. Obviously
the intention of Rule 22 is to enable the Tribunal
to imagine that a person is present, although he
is in fact absent; and to further imagine that,
although present, he is unwilling to adduce
evidence or argue his case. The Tribunal then
has of necessity to pass an award on the basis of
the evidence placed before it by the party that in
fact participated in the proceedings. This is the
object of the fiction expressed by the words “as if
he had duty attended”.
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 33 of 43

13. In the present case the Tribunal had no
alternative but to pass an award on the basis of
the evidence and arguments of the management.
Of course, this does not mean that the Tribunal
could have shut its eyes to be intrinsic character
of such evidence and blindly put its imprimature
to it. It had to apply its mind like any other
judicial officer who examines evidence and hears
arguments before forming conclusions. The
Tribunal had to focus its judicial mind on the
merits of the points in dispute, impartially,
dispassionately and objectively.”
36.

The spirit and intendment of the provisions permitting ex-

parte proceedings appears to be that the absence of the party
should not be permitted to hinder or effectuate the progress of the
proceedings. In order to effectuate the intention of the legislature,
the industrial adjudicator has to imagine as if the person is present
before it, but is unwilling to adduce evidence or to press his case.
It is then of necessity that the adjudicator has to pass an order on
the basis of the evidence placed before it by the other party who, in
fact, participates in the proceeding.

Such intention of the

legislature is to be found in the use of the words “as if he had duly
attended”.
37.

In 1997 I LLJ 923 entitled Tamil Nadu Housing

Board, Madras Vs. The Presiding Officer, II Additional
Labour Court, Madras & Anr., it was held that even though

W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 34 of 43

the management may remain absent, the labour court was
required to consider and give reasons for passing the award in
favour of the workman. If no reasons were given, not even the
facts of the case stated, the award could not be considered to be a
speaking order and as such, was not sustainable.
38.

Adjudication presupposes application of mind.

Judicial

application of mind of the industrial adjudicator was required as
failure to exercise such jurisdiction causes great and incalculable
harm to the parties and also to the administration of justice. Prior
to forming of judicial conclusions and passing of the award, the
evidence which has been led by the party which is present has to
be scrutinized.

In the F.A.C.T. Employees' Association,

Cochin case (supra), 1977 (1) LLJ 182, Kerala, it was held
by the Court that the adjudicator could not have shut his eyes to
the intrinsic character of such evidence produced by the party
present and blindly put its imprimatur to it. It has to apply its
mind like any other judicial officer who examines the evidence and
hears arguments before forming conclusions. In other words, the
adjudicator has to focus his judicial mind on the merits of the
points in dispute, impartially, dispassionately and objectively. The
industrial adjudicator is required to take into account the
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 35 of 43

pleadings of the parties and such evidence as has been produced
by the other party before it and come to a judicial conclusion,
giving its reasons for the same [Ref: 1997 I LLJ 923 entitled
Tamil Nadu Housing Board, Madras Vs. The Presiding
Officer, II Additional Labour Court, Madras & Anr.].
Therefore, the proceedings before the industrial adjudicator
must show that there was adequate material before the adjudicator
in support of the claim laid by the claimants and that the industrial
adjudicator has applied mind to it.
39.

The issues raised in the instant case can be examined from

yet another angle. In case the adjudicator had applied judicial
mind to the proceedings, these defects in the proceedings would
have been brought to its notice instantaneously and it could have
corrected the errors which have resulted.
40.

The workmen had given two addresses of the management

and had claimed employment with the present petitioner. Thus,
the workmen were required to prove the fact that they were
employed in the establishment where they were claiming. This
would have required them to give evidence as to the place of their
deployment and enabled the industrial adjudicator to proceed in
accordance with law.
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 36 of 43

41.

Before this court, it has also been contended on behalf of the

respondents/workmen that the workmen are not responsible for
issuance of notices and that two registered covers were actually
filed by the workmen. It is submitted that the workmen do not
know as to why no notice has been sent to the other address.
42.

Such a stand is taken not only in this case but in several

other cases in this court. It has been pointed out that rules which
apply to industrial adjudication mandate that the claimant is not
required to file any court fee at the time of filing of the claim or on
account of process fee. However, registered cover envelopes are
supplied by the party at whose instance notices or summons are
being issued. In my view, even though it is not necessary to file
the process fee, however some kind of index even in the form of an
index form or process fee form must accompany the registered AD
covers filed by the party so that there is some record with regard to
the number of the postal registered covers have actually been
placed on court record for issuance of court process. There must
also be a complete record with regard to the issuance of the notice
and the receipt after service in respect of the registered AD covers
and the notices/summons which are sent by ordinary process. The
statute has conferred a discretion on the industrial adjudicator
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 37 of 43

with regard to issuance of the process which could be served either
personally or by registered covers.

In order to obviate the

assertions as have been made in the present case, it may be
advisable to attempt service by both modes prior to a direction for
proceeding ex-parte against the other side.
43.

The contours of the procedural jurisdiction of the Industrial

Tribunals are not limited by any water tight compartments. The
principle which applies to these proceedings is that the procedure
adopted should ensure a fair treatment to the parties without strict
adherence to the Code of Civil Procedure or the Evidence Act.
Discretion is given to the adjudicators to evolve and proceed and
to follow their own procedures which is aimed at mitigating the
rigors of technicalities of the procedural law for ensuring
expeditious investigation and settlement of industrial disputes.
Thus, the provisions of the law and the rules have to be read
keeping in view their practicability and not in a pedantic manner.
Service of notice enables the party to gain knowledge about the
proceedings and their pendency. The entire purpose of issuance of
a notice would be defeated if the party arrayed before the
industrial adjudicator does not gain knowledge of the pendency of
the proceedings.
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 38 of 43

Thus, if a workman in employment, who has raised an
industrial dispute, is present at his place of employment and
himself receives the notice from the labour courts through process
servers or the registered A.D. covers from the postman when they
reached the premises of the management. He himself signs the
acknowledgment resulting in a 'served' report by the process
server or the postman. It would thereby appear as if notice has
been served upon the party. However, the issuance and service of
notice is rendered ineffectual as the claimant/workman does not
inform the management about the pendency of the industrial
dispute and merely throws away the notices and the registered
covers received from the labour courts. Thereby, while the
industrial adjudicator will have been persuaded to hold that the
management was not present despite service, the reality would be
that the management would not have been aware of the pendency
of the proceedings or the issuance of the notice.
44.

It is therefore imperative that the industrial adjudicator

should require particulars of the person or authority upon whom
notice has been served also to be disclosed. Service of notice has
to be in real terms and not lip service as if it were merely a
technical requirement.
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

In the event of the other side being a
page 39 of 43

statutory authority, company or a firm, the industrial adjudicators
should insist on service on an appropriate authority. In the event
of a slightest doubt, interest of justice would merit that fresh,
proper and effective steps be taken for service of the notices before
the ex parte proceedings are directed. The industrial adjudicators
also ought to require disclosure of the full details and addresses of
the persons concerned upon whom service has been effected or
has to be effected.
45.

Before parting with the case, it is necessary duty to observe

the non-compliance of rule 10B with rule 1, 2 and 3 by the labour
court. Undoubtedly, if the procedure laid down by the rules which
are statutory in nature was followed, much delay could be obviated
and the opposite party receiving the copy of the claim would be
ensured. So far as the rules are concerned, it was observed by the
Apex Court in 1991 Lab. Industrial Cases

155 that wide

powers have been given to the industrial adjudicators in the rules
with the object of mitigating the rigour of technicalities of law, for
achieving the object of effective adjudication and thus assuring
industrial peace and harmony. The apex court has observed on
several occasions that the proceedings before the industrial
adjudicators being quasi-judicial in nature, are required to
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 40 of 43

objectively determine the matter referred to them and have to
exercise their discretion in a judicial manner, without caprice, and
according to the general principles of law and rules of natural
justice.

Certainly the mandate of rule 10B of the industrial

dispute(Central) Rules, 1957 is in furtherance of these principles
which have been highlighted by the apex court and are essential
for the complete and effective adjudication of the dispute and for
rendering complete justice between the parties and requires to be
complied with.
46.

Upon a close examination of the available record and in the

light of the foregoing discussion, I have no manner of doubt that
the address of the petitioner effected at H. No. 1083 A/10, Govind
Puri, 3rd Floor, New Delhi-19 was never its address and that no
notice was sent to the petitioner at its actual or correct addresses.
47.

Undoubtedly, the petitioner has been proceeded ex-parte

without even attempting to effect service on it and an ex parte
award has been passed without granting any opportunity to the
petitioner to file its defence or lead its evidence.

In these

circumstances, I have no manner of doubt that the writ petition
deserves to be allowed. The order dated 16th December, 1999 and
the award dated 7th June, 2002 have been passed after denying the
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 41 of 43

petitioner opportunity to contest the proceedings and therefore
are in violation of the applicable law and principles of natural
justice and cannot therefore be sustained. The order dated 16th
December, 1999 and the award dated 7th June, 2002 are
accordingly hereby set aside and quashed.

The matter is

remanded for fresh adjudication to the labour court no. IX,
Karkardooma Courts, Delhi. The parties shall appear before the
Labour Court on 1st May, 2006 for appropriate directions. The
petitioners shall file its written statement on the said date.
48.

At this stage, a request is made by learned counsel for the

respondents that the services of the respondents were allegedly
terminated in 1998 on account of the delay in adjudication and
grave injustice would result to them. In view of this request, it is
expected that the industrial adjudicator shall proceed in the matter
expeditiously and shall make efforts to complete the adjudication
within a period of one year.
The writ petition is allowed in the above terms. There shall
be no orders as to costs.
The lower court record shall be returned forthwith by the
Registry.
Having regard to the issues raised before this court arising in
W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 42 of 43

several cases and effecting two important aspects of industrial
adjudication, it is directed that copy of this order be circulated to
the industrial courts and tribunals and the Secretary(Labour) of
the Government of NCT of Delhi.

GITA MITTAL, J
APRIL 04, 2006
kr

W.P. (C) No. 20183/2005

page 43 of 43

