IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
ARBITRATION APPLICATION NO.242/2006
Reserved on 30th October, 2006
Date of decision: 4th January, 2007

M/S RATTAN SINGH ASSOCIATES
(P) LTD
......Petitioner
through: Mr. S.V. Kulkarni
Advocate
VERSUS

M/S GILL POWER GENERATION
COMPANY PVT. LIMITED
... Respondents
through: Mr. Raman Gandhi,
Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

This petition has been filed on behalf of the petitioner under Section

11(6) of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 seeking appointment of
an arbitrator. The petitioner places reliance on an agreement dated 9 th April,
2003 whereby it was awarded the civil construction work of Babhalli Hydro
Arb.A.No.242/2006

Page 1

Electric Project, Punjab vide contract no.GPGC-2003/Civil Works/001
which was to the tune of Rs.6,09,82,995/-. According to the petitioner, the
project for the hydro electric power production was funded by the World
Bank. Pursuant to the terms of agreement, the petitioner had furnished a
performance guarantee in the prescribed form for an amount of
Rs.30,50,000/-.
2.

This petition has been necessitated as, according to the petitioner, its

running bills for the work done from time to time for the purposes of
verification and payment, have been disregarded by the respondent.
According to the petitioner, it received ad hoc payments on account basis
which was much less than the value of the bills raised from time to time,
thereby, causing huge arrears to get accumulated to be paid by the
respondent. As an instance, the petitioner has alleged that bills upto 30th
May, 2004 valued at Rs.19,17,691/- for payment were paid only to the
extent of Rs.9,10,962/-. The petitioner has contended that it has completed
work to the tune of Rs.35,00,000/- in the month of June/July, 2004 and has
requested for the release of the payment immediately. Vide letter dated 25 th
August, 2004, it claims to have submitted the fourth and fifth running bills
of the work done upto 30th June, 2004 and 31st July, 2004 respectively. By a

Arb.A.No.242/2006

Page 2

letter dated 1st September, 2004, it has been claimed that the petitioner
called for the payment on outstanding bills to the tune of Rs.58,73,662/-. It
has been asserted that this was followed by a legal notice dated 9th March,
2005 calling for the outstanding amount and invoking the provisions of
arbitration notifying the respondent that in case of failure to comply with
the notice demand, measures would be taken up in the court of law. A
second legal notice was sent on 19th May, 2005.
3.

The petitioner has alleged that this resulted in the respondent agreeing

to a meeting with the petitioner which was held on 20th May, 2005 and
certain issues of dispute were agreed to be looked into positively. The
memorandum of understanding in this behalf has been placed before this
court.
4.

The petitioner has submitted that on the request of the respondent, the

petitioner had agreed to enhance the amount of the bank guarantee and had
also extended the existing guarantee upto 3rd December, 2005. Thereafter,
though the bank guarantee expired, yet the same was extended by three
months upto June, 2006. According to the petitioner, the respondent has
refused to settle out the differences even in terms of the memorandum of
understanding dated 20th May, 2005 which relates to non-payment of

Arb.A.No.242/2006

Page 3

running bills, payment of extra work done, amount towards escalation on
account of increase in the prices of raw material etc.
On these facts, by way of the present petition, the petitioner has
prayed for appointment of an arbitrator under Section 11(6) of the
Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996.
5.

This petition has been opposed on behalf of the respondent on three

major grounds.

Mr. Raman Gandhi, learned counsel appearing for the

respondent, has urged that the agreement between the parties provided the
mechanism whereby disputes redressal was required to be undertaken. It is
pointed out that the agreement dated 19th April, 2003 between the parties
stipulated that certain conditions of contract would form part of this
agreement. Clause 24 of this agreement provided for an adjudicator to
adjudicate upon the disputes. It has been pointed out that the adjudicator
namely Col. G.L. Bajpai had been named by the parties in the agreement.
In case of retirement or death of an adjudicator, Clause 26 of the Special
Conditions provided the manner in which certain vacancies would be
supplied. Clause 25 was to govern the manner in which the parties would
conduct themselves in case of the dispute subsisting with the decision of the
adjudicator. According to learned counsel, the present petition, without

Arb.A.No.242/2006

Page 4

complying with the agreed procedure, is not maintainable and has to be
rejected outright.
6.

The other ground of opposition to the petition is a challenge to the

asserted invocation of the arbitration clause. According to the respondent,
no notice has been received from the respondent invoking the arbitration in
terms of Clauses 24& 25 of the Special Conditions. It has been submitted
that upon compliance with the stipulated conditions in the agreement
between the parties, the petitioner was required to file such notice along
with the present petition.

Apart from disputing receipt of all

communications which have been relied upon by the petitioner, it has been
urged that none of the communications allegedly issued by or on behalf of
the petitioner, met the requirement of Clauses 5, 24 or 25 of the Special
Conditions.
7.

It has further been urged that the petitioner has failed to comply with

the mandate of Section 2(h) of the scheme of the Arbitration Act, 1996. In
this behalf, reliance has been placed on the judgment of this court in 2005
(Supp.) Arb.L.R. 285 Maxon Printech Limited Vs. Governemnt of
Nagaland & Anr. & AIR 1999 Kerala 440 Nirman Sindia Vs. M/s Indal
Electromelts Ltd., Coimbatore & Ors.

Arb.A.No.242/2006

Page 5

8.

Lastly, an objection has been taken to the effect that the tender was

invited by the respondent at Punjab and its acceptance issued from Punjab.
The letter of acceptance was sent by the petitioner to the respondent
addressed at Punjab. The entire contract was to be executed in Punjab and
the respondent resides and works for gain in Punjab. Placing reliance in the
judgment reported at 2006 (IV) AD (Delhi) 485 GE Countrywide
Consumer Financial Services Limited Vs. Mr. Surjit Singh, it has been
urged that situs of the arbitration would not govern the court which would
have territorial jurisdiction over the matter.
9.

Having heard learned counsel for the parties and carefully considered

the matter, in my view it becomes necessary to first decide the jurisdictional
objection raised by the respondent. The respondent has contended that it is
located at Punjab outside the territorial jurisdiction of this court. It is
further submitted that no part of the cause of action has arisen at Delhi.
10.

My attention is drawn to the documents placed by the respondent on

record which evidence the fact that the tender was invited by it at Punjab.
A copy of the letter enclosing the petitioner's bid addressed to the
respondent at Batala, District Gurdaspur, Punjab has also been placed
before this court. The same bears the rubber stamp of the respondent with

Arb.A.No.242/2006

Page 6

the signatures in acknowledgment of the receipt thereof at Batala. The
respondent conveyed its acceptance of the bid of the petitioner by the letter
dated 1st April, 2003 from its office at Batala, District Gurdaspur, Punjab.
The contract agreement dated 19th April, 2003 between the parties reflects
the address of the respondent as at Punjab.
11.

The petitioner has urged that this agreement was signed at Delhi.

However, the stamp paper dated 9th April, 2003 on which this agreement has
been typed, has been purchased at Punjab.
12.

I find that all communications which have been claimed by the

petitioner to have been sent to the respondent, are addressed to its managing
directors or have been sent to its address at G.T. Road, Batala, in the State
of Punjab. The legal notices relied upon by the petitioner were also sent to
the same address in Punjab. The communication dated 24th September,
2005 which has been sent by the petitioner to the respondent notifying it
about the extension of bank guarantee and seeking issuance of a cheque, has
been sent to the same address at Punjab. The meeting dated 20 th May, 2005
wherein the memorandum of understanding was recorded, which is relied
upon by the petitioner, was held not at Delhi but at Chandigarh. It is so
mentioned thereon. There is no dispute that the contracted work was to be

Arb.A.No.242/2006

Page 7

executed at Punjab. The petitioner has not disputed these factual assertions.

13.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on a

certificate of tax deposit at source (`TDS' for brevity) purportedly issued by
the respondent. According to the petitioner, this TDS certificate is for the
period from 1st April, 2003 to 31st March, 2004 and reflects deposit of the
tax at Delhi. The respondent has explained that for one year, the tax was
deposited at Delhi but the same would not impact the jurisdiction of this
court.
14.

So far as the territorial jurisdiction to entertain and adjudicate upon a

petition under Section 11 of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 is
concerned, it is well settled that the same requires that either the respondent
is located at Delhi or that some part of the cause of action is within the
territorial jurisdiction of the court before whom the petition is brought.
Every fact pleaded does not form part of cause of action.
15.

The principles which would apply to consideration of an objection to

the maintainability of a petition on grounds of territorial jurisdiction are
similar to those which apply to civil proceedings before a court of law.
16.

In civil proceedings, 'cause of action' is understood to mean every

Arb.A.No.242/2006

Page 8

fact, which, if traversed, would be necessary for the plaintiff to prove in
order to support his right to the judgment of the court. It is that bundle of
fact which, taken together with the applicable law, entitles the plaintiff to
relief against the defendants.
17.

In a judgment reported at AIR 1985 SC 1289 = (1985) 3 SCC 217

State of Rajasthan vs Swaika Properties, certain properties belonging to a
company which had its registered office in Calcutta were sought to be

Arb.A.No.242/2006

Page 9

acquired in Jaipur and the notice under Section 52 of the Rajasthan Urban
Improvement were served upon the company at Calcutta. Basing its right to
maintain the writ petition at Calcutta High Court, it had been contended that
service of the notice within the territorial jurisdiction of the Calcutta High
Court empowered that court to exercise jurisdiction in the matter. The Apex
Court held that the entire cause of action for challenging the acquisition of
the land under Section 152 of the Rajasthan Urban Improvement Act had
arisen within the territorial jurisdiction of the Rajasthan High Court. The
factum of service of the notice at Calcutta was held unnecessary for grant of
an appropriate writ, order or direction under Article 226 of the Constitution
for quashing the notice issued by the Rajasthan Government. It was thus
held that the High Court at Calcutta had no jurisdiction to entertain the writ
petition.
18.

The law on this aspect has been authoritatively laid down by the Apex

Court when it had occasion to examine this question further in its judgment
reported at AIR 2002 SC 126 entitled Union of India vs Adani Export Ltd.
& Ors. wherein it was held thus :“17. It is seen from the above that in order to confer
jurisdiction on a High Court to entertain a writ petition
or a special civil application as in this case, the High
Court must be satisfied from the entire facts pleaded in
Arb.A.No.242/2006

Page 10

19.

support of the cause of action that those facts do
constitute a cause so as to empower the court to decide
a dispute which has, at least in-part, arisen within its
jurisdiction. It is clear from the above judgment that
each and every fact pleaded by the respondents in their
application does not ipso facto lead to the conclusion
that those facts gives rise to a cause of action within the
court's territorial jurisdiction unless those facts pleaded
are such which have a nexus or relevance with the lis
that is involved in the case. Facts which have no
bearing with the lis or the dispute involved in the case,
do not give rise to a cause of action so as to confer
territorial jurisdiction on the court concerned. If we
apply this principle then we see that none of the facts
pleaded in Paragraph 16 of the petition, in our opinion,
fall into the category of bundle of facts which would
constitute a cause of action giving rise to a dispute
which could confer territorial jurisdiction on the courts
at Ahmadabad.”
Placing reliance on the pronouncement of the Apex Court in the State

of Rajasthan (supra) and the Adani Export matter in its judgment reported at
(2004) 9 SCC 786 entitled National Textile Corporation Ltd. & Ors. Vs
Haribox Swalram & Ors., the Apex Court elucidated the applicable
principles thus:“12.1.As discussed earlier, the mere fact that the writ
petitioner carries on business at Calcutta or that the
reply to the correspondence made by it was received at
Calcutta is not an integral part of the cause of action
and, therefore, the Calcutta High Court had no
jurisdiction to entertain the writ petition and the view to
the contrary taken by the Division Bench cannot be
sustained. In view of the above finding, the writ
petition is liable to be dismissed.”
Arb.A.No.242/2006

Page 11

In this case as the parties had litigated upto the Apex Court. In order
to put an end to the litigation, the Supreme Court however examined the
matter on merits as well.
20.

In a recent judgment reported at (2004) 6 SCC 254 entitled Kusum

Ingots & Alloys Ltd. vs Union of India & Anr. the Apex Court has
considered this issue further and held thus :“26. The view taken by this Court in U.P. Rashtriya
Chini Mill Adhikari Parishad that the situs of issue of an
order or notification by the Government would come
within the meaning of the expression “cases arising” in
clause 14 of the (Amalgamation) Order is not a correct
view of law for the reason hereafter stated and to that
extent the said decision is overruled. In fact, a
legislation, it is trite, is not confined to a statute enacted
by Parliament or the legislature of a State, which would
include delegated legislation and subordinate legislation
or an executive order made by the Union of India, State
or any other statutory authority. In a case where the
field is not covered by any statutory rule, executive
instructions issued in this behalf shall also come within
the purview thereof. Situs of office of Parliament,
legislature of a State or authorities empowered to make
subordinate legislation would not by itself constitute any
cause of action or cases arising. In other words, framing
of a statute, statutory rule or issue of an executive order
or instruction would not confer jurisdiction upon a court
only because of the situs of the office of the maker
thereof.”
21.

It is noteworthy that the doctrine of forum conveniens is also guiding

the courts in adjudicating upon and deciding issues, objections relating to
Arb.A.No.242/2006

Page 12

territorial jurisdiction. This doctrine find its basis in convenience to parties
and applies the principle that the court having the closest connection to the
lis would guide the court in gdeciding as to the objections relating to
territorial jurisdiction of the courts. In this behalf in Kusum Ingots &
Alloys Ltd. vs Union of India (Supra), the court held thus :

22.

“10. Keeping in view the expressions used in clause (2)
of Article 226 of the Constitution of India, indisputably
even if a small fraction of cause of action accrues within
the jurisdiction of the Court, the Court will have
jurisdiction in the matter.
30. We must however, remind ourselves that even if a
small part of cause of action arises within the territorial
jurisdiction of the High Court, the same by itself may not
be considered to be a determinative factor compelling the
High Court to decide the matter on merit. In appropriate
cases, the Court may refuse to exercise its discretionary
jurisdiction by invoking the doctrine of forum conveniens.
[See Bhagat Singh Bugga v. Dewan Jagbir Sawhney,
Madanlal Jalan v. Madanlal, Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. v.
Jharia Talkies & Cold Storage (P) Ltd., S.S. Jain & Co. v.
Union of India and New Horizons Ltd. v. Union of India.]”
This principle finds application in the rationale and reasoning of the

Apex Court in the Adani Export matter.

There may be some facts which

may constitute a cause of action whereby the High Court would be enabled
and empowered to decide the disputes. Yet, each and every such fact
pleaded by a party does not by itself lead to the conclusion that the court
would have the territorial jurisdiction to entertain the lis. It is only such

Arb.A.No.242/2006

Page 13

facts which have a nexus or relevance with the issues raised in the litigation
which vest the court with territorial jurisdiction. Thus, though an agreement
may have been executed within the territorial jurisdiction of the court,
however in order to decide the issue of territorial jurisdiction in cases where
the extraordinary jurisdiction of the High Court has been invoked in
exercise of ordinary civil jurisdiction or its extraordinary writ jurisdiction
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India or under special enactments
as the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996, it has to be seen whether the
execution of the agreement is such an integral part of the facts relating to
the litigation and dispute that consideration of such fact is absolutely
imperative and essential for deciding the disputes involved in the case.
23.

This question has arisen before a division Bench of this court in its

judgment reported at (2003) 69 DRJ 98 entitled A.K. Surekha & Ors. Vs
The Pradeshiya Investment Corporation of U.P. Ltd & Anr. In this case,
the court was concerned with a challenge to the issuance of an recovery
certificate against the petitioner at Delhi.

The recovery certificate was

issued pursuant to exercise of power under the statute on account of default
of payments under an agreement between the parties at Lucknow. The
agreement was entered at Lucknow and all disbursements were made from

Arb.A.No.242/2006

Page 14

U.P. The agreement also contained a clause restricting territorial jurisdiction
to the courts at Lucknow alone. In these facts, the court held as under :“28. We have examined the relevant clauses of the
agreement and decided cases of various courts on
question of territorial jurisdiction. If the principles
which have been crystallized by the various courts are
made applicable to the facts of this case, the conclusion
would be irresistible that the court has no territorial
jurisdiction to entertain this petition because in the
instant case the respondent had entered into an
agreement with the company of the petitioner at
Lucknow and in the loan agreement, it was clearly
stated that for the purposes of litigation relating to this
agreement the territorial jurisdiction shall be of
Lucknow courts alone. The petitioner on behalf of the
company was signatory to the agreement. Thereafter a
separate bond of guarantee was executed. In the bond
of guarantee it was clearly agreed that the guarantors
herein waive all rights which the Guarantors may
become entitled to as surety/sureties to compete with
the Corporation in obtaining payment of the moneys
due or to become due to the Corporation in respect of
the said loan in favour of the Corporation, as against the
said Company. In clause 9, the petitioner has agreed
that in order to give effect to the guarantee herein
contained the corporation shall be entitled to act as if
the Guarantors were the principal debtors to the
Corporation for all payments and Covenants guaranteed
by them as aforesaid, to the Corporation.
29. In this view of the matter, there was no
justification or propriety on behalf of the petitioner to
have filed a petition in this court for the relief of staying
the recovery certificate. It is indeed unfortunate that
most of the companies despite all kinds of clear and
unequivocal agreements with the public sector
undertakings and banks adopt delaying tactics
Arb.A.No.242/2006

Page 15

24.

whenever a case of re-payment of loans or dues arises.
Unless the Courts adopt strict view of the matter it
would be difficult to effectively curb this tendency.”
A similar question had fallen for consideration before this court in a

judgment reported at (2004) 73 DRJ 104 entitled Callipers Naigai Ltd. &
Ors. vs Government of NCT of Delhi & Ors. and it was held as under :“8. In this particular case, we have to examine,
therefore, what is the actual grievance of the petitioner.
The petitioners, in view of Section 3 (3) of the said Act,
cannot have any grievance with regard to the issuance
of notices dated 02.07.1998 because these have been
issued merely in compliance of the recovery certificate
received by the respondent no. 2 from the Haryana
Financial Corporation at Chandigarh. The respondent
no. 2 had no option in the matter. He was not in any
manner enjoined with any duty to examine the
correctness or otherwise of the recovery certificate
issued under Section 3 (2) of the said Act. The issuance
of the recovery certificate is conclusive proof of the
matters stated therein. In fact, the actual cause of action
is in respect of the recovery certificate which is the
causa causea and it is well-known that causa causea
est causa causati (the cause of a cause is the cause of
the thing cause) and the cause of the cause is to be
considered as the cause of the effect also (see: Black's
Law Dictionary 6th Edition, p.220). Thus, the recovery
notices are nothing but the effect and the cause, in point
of fact, is the issuance of the recovery certificate. In
other words, the recovery certificate is the causa sine
qua non (a necessary or inevitable cause); a cause
without which the effect in question could not have
happened (see: Black's Law Dictionary 6th Ediction,
p.221. Sans the recovery certificate, the recovery
notices could not have been issued. Thus, it is clear that
the recovery notices dated 02.07.1998 cannot be set
Arb.A.No.242/2006

Page 16

aside without the recovery certificate dated 21.10.1998
also being set aside. The recovery notices have no life
of their own and must necessarily depend for their
sustenance on the existence of the recovery certificate
and the cause of action for which arose entirely in
Chandigarh. The recovery notices do not form an
integral part of the cause of action. Thus, this court
does not have territorial jurisdiction to entertain the
present writ petition.
9.
In the aforesaid decision, which clearly dealt with
a similar situation, it was held that recovery notices
such as the one impugned herein do not form an integral
part of the cause of action and, therefore, this court
would not have territorial jurisdiction to entertain the
writ petition challenging the recovery notice. I see no
reason to depart from this view. The lis is with PICUP.
Consequently the cause of action is qua PICUP.
Unfortunately that has entirely arisen outside the
territorial jurisdiction of this court. The issuance of the
recovery notice has no relevance with this lis that is
involved in the case. It is the result of a purely
ministerial act on the part of Respondent No. 1 who
cannot be faulted for acting in the manner he did. The
stature required him to do so. He had no discretion in
the matter. He had no lis to decide. The recovery
notice is merely an effect and not the cause. It is the
cause which confers jurisdiction and not the effect.
Then, the answer to question No. 2 is that the mere
issuance of the impugned recovery notice at Delhi does
not clothe this court with the territorial jurisdiction to
entertain this petition.”
25.

In the judgment of the Apex Court reported at AIR 1992 SC 1514

M/s Patel Roadways Limited Bombay Vs. M/s Prasad Trading Company
territorial jurisdiction of the court was held to be restricted to a place where

Arb.A.No.242/2006

Page 17

cause of action has substantially arisen if the corporation had a subordinate
office overlapping other places which may have jurisdiction under Section
20 of the CPC. The court was of the view that it would be a great hardship
if, in spite of the corporation having a subordinate office at the place where
the cause of action arises (with which in all probability, the plaintiff has had
dealings), such plaintiff is to be compelled to travel to the place where the
Corporation has its principal place. That place should be convenient to the
plaintiff; and since the Corporation has an office at such a place, it will also
be under no disadvantage.
26.

Such a view undoubtedly supports the objection taken by the

respondent before this court.
27.

Again, in 85 (1997) DLT 81 DB Sector 21 Owners Welfare

Association Vs. Air Force Naval Housing Board & Ors., a Division Bench
of this court has held thus:“The law as reflected by the aforesaid decisions is that the
emphasis has shifted from the residence or location of the
person or authority sought to be proceeded against to the
situs of the accrual of cause of action wholly or in part. It
is also clear that a trivial or insignificant part of the cause
of action arising at a particular place would not be enough
to confer writ jurisdiction; it is the cause of action mainly
and substantially arising at a place which would be
determinating factor of territorial jurisdiction. So also it
shall have to be kept in view who are the real persons or
Arb.A.No.242/2006

Page 18

28.

authorities sought to be proceeded against or against
whom the writ to be issued by the Court would run.
Joining of proformas or ancillary parties, and certainly not
the joining of unnecessary parties, would be relevant for
the purpose of Article 226(1).”
These judgments indicate that the courts have shifted the emphasis

from the place of residence or location of the respondent or defendant to the
situs of the accrual of the cause of action. In JT 1994 (5) SC 1 Oil &
Natural Gas Commission Vs. Utpal Kumar Basu & Ors., the work in
question was to be executed in the state of Gujarat. However, the contractor
read the advertisement inviting the tender at Calcutta. It was asserted that
he had made his offer and representation from Calcutta and received a reply
also in Calcutta. He has challenged the action of the other side by way of
the writ proceedings in the Calcutta High Court and had urged that part of
the cause of action arose within the jurisdiction of the advertisement in
Calcutta. The Apex Court held that merely because the contractor read the
advertisement at Calcutta and submitted offer from Calcutta and also made
representation from Calcutta, would not constitute facts forming an integral
part of the cause of action”.
29.

In this judgment, the court made strong observation on courts

assuming jurisdiction on the sole ground that the petitioner before it resided
or carried on business within its jurisdiction. It was specifically directed
Arb.A.No.242/2006

Page 19

that a trivial event unconnected with the cause of action, occurring within
the jurisdiction of the court where the litigation is filed, should not enable a
court to exercise jurisdiction over the subject matter of the litigation.
30.

Again, in (1996) 3 SCC 443 South East Asia Shipping Company

Ltd. Vs. Nav Bharat Enterprises Pvt. Ltd., it was held that the fact that the
bank guarantee in question was executed at Delhi and transmitted for
performance to Bombay, was wholly irrelevant and that the courts at Delhi
would not have the jurisdiction to decide the dispute between the parties.
31.

In a decision rendered on 23rd December, 2005 in Writ Petition (C)

No.5133/2005 Jai Ganesh Petroleum Vs. Union of India & Anr., I had
occasion to consider similar objections in respect of the writ jurisdiction.
After a careful consideration of the principles laid down in the several
pronouncements of the Apex Court and this court, so far as the cause of
action and jurisdiction of the court is concerned, the following principles
had been culled out:(i)

making and signing of a contract is part of cause of action;

(ii)

parties cannot by consent confer jurisdiction on a court;

(iii)

In the case of several courts having jurisdiction, parties can legally

agree to exclude the jurisdiction of any of such courts and elect to restrict

Arb.A.No.242/2006

Page 20

territorial jurisdiction to one out of such courts which otherwise has
jurisdiction;
(iv)

the high court must be satisfied from the entire facts pleaded in

support of the cause of action that those facts which constitute the cause or
are necessary to decide the dispute have wholly arisen within its territorial
jurisdiction, or, in any case, which have, atleast in part, arisen within its
jurisdiction;
(v)

each and every fact pleaded in the petition does not ipsofacto lead to

the conclusion that those facts constitute cause of action vesting territorial
jurisdiction upon the court to adjudicate upon the lis;
(vi)

only those facts pleaded which have a nexus or relevance with the

issues involved in the lis confer territorial jurisdiction on the court;
(vii) in determining an objection relating to lack of territorial jurisdiction,
the court must take all the facts pleaded in support of the cause of action as
pleaded in the petition into consideration without embarking upon an
inquiry as to the correctness or otherwise to the fact that;
(viii) A question of territorial jurisdiction must be apparent on the facts
pleaded in the petition, the source or otherwise of the averments made in the
writ petition being immaterial. In matters where the parties have agreed to

Arb.A.No.242/2006

Page 21

restrict jurisdiction to one or the other court out of several courts which may
have territorial jurisdiction, such clause would be enforceable only if the
litigation which has arisen falls within the domain of the subject matter
which is being provided in such clause. The parties may have confined
jurisdiction to litigation arising only under the agreement. In such cases, the
court has to arrive at a finding that the litigation between the parties was
within the domain of the clause confining jurisdiction. If it does not, then
the territorial jurisdiction of the court could be barred;
(ix)

The court must be satisfied that all relevant facts which have merely a

substantial nexus with the lis are located within its territorial jurisdiction;
(x)

Even if it were to be held that a court has jurisdiction, yet guided by

principles of forum non-conveniens, the court may divert the parties to the
court having a closer connection with the subject matter of the litigation.
Residence of parties, location of evidence, situs of the dispute and such like
considerations could guide the decision of the court to this effect.
32.

To the above, yet another principle requires to be added. It also

requires to be borne in mind that a trivial or insignificant part of the cause
of action arising at a particular place or where it may have incidentally
arisen, would not be sufficient to confer territorial jurisdiction on the court.

Arb.A.No.242/2006

Page 22

It is the court within whose whose jurisdiction, the cause of action has
substantially or predominantly arisen which would have territorial
jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the lis.
33.

In the instant case, even if it was to be assumed that the agreement

had been executed at Delhi, yet this court would not be the proper court to
exercise jurisdiction in this matter inasmuch as the contract has not been
performed at Delhi. The respondent is located at Punjab. The records
relating to the performance of the contract and the transactions in question
would be located outside the jurisdiction of this court and the respondent
admittedly has his office at Batala in Punjab which is the only office with
which the plaintiff has transacted business. Therefore, even on application
of the doctrine of forum non-conveniens, the petitioner would merit being
sent to the courts of competent jurisdiction at Punjab.
34.

The issue relating to the place where a cause of action has accrued so

as to confer jurisdiction on a court to adjudicate upon a petition under
Section 9 of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 has arisen for
consideration before this court on earlier occasions as well.

In M/s

Engineering Projects (India) Ltd. Vs. M/s Greater Noida Industrial
Development & Anr. reported at ILR (2004) II Delhi 88, the court

Arb.A.No.242/2006

Page 23

considered several judgments and arrived at a conclusion that it is the place
where the cause of action has substantially arisen which would confer
jurisdiction on the court to adjudicate upon the subject matter of the lis. It
was held that primacy has to be given to such place where the cause of
action has mainly or substantially or predominantly arisen in preference to
or exclusion of a place where it has incidentally or partially arisen. This, the
court held, has a a great pragmatic purpose and ensures convenience of
investigation and minimization of expenses. It was noticed that the forum
of convenience from the perspective of the plaintiff has been looked
askance at. A fortiori, where the defendant does not have its principal or
concerned office and the cause of action has not substantially and
overwhelmingly arisen at that particular place, courts situated there should
decline to exercise jurisdiction in preference to the court possessing an
umbical connection with the cause of action.

This will root out the

pernicious practice of forum shopping. Courts exercising jurisdiction in the
context of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act should be mindful and
vigilant in this regard also because Section 42 thereof bars all other courts
from exercising jurisdiction over any further petitions/applications.
35.

I find that before this court, there is nothing in the agreement or in

Arb.A.No.242/2006

Page 24

any correspondence which would even remotely suggest or support the
submission that the agreement was made, signed or executed at Delhi. It is
not even contended on behalf of the petitioner that any part of the contract
was to be executed at Delhi. No correspondence has been addressed by the
petitioner to the respondent to any address in Delhi. There is no material to
indicate that the petitioner dealt with any officer of the respondent at Delhi
or with any address of the respondent at Delhi.
36.

Having regard to the nature of the disputes raised and the matters

which would be in issue in the instant case, certainly the deposit of the tax
which was deducted by the respondent at source at Delhi, does not form part
of the cause of action. The petitioner has contended that the certificates for
the tax which was so deposited show that the respondent actually had an
office at Delhi. In the light of the principles laid down in a catena of
judicial pronouncements noticed by me hereinabove, I find that it has been
repeatedly emphasised that the mere existence of an office within the
jurisdiction of the court which is called upon to exercise jurisdiction,
anything more, by itself, would not be sufficient to permit the court to
exercise jurisdiction over the subject matter of the litigation.
37.

The principles laid down by the court in this judicial pronouncement

Arb.A.No.242/2006

Page 25

undoubtedly binds this court and the present matter as well. Certainly,
deposit of the TDS even if it was deducted or deposited at Delhi, does not
form part of the cause of action. The submission by the petitioner that the
certificate shows that the respondent had a Delhi address is also of no
consequence as admittedly the petitioner has conducted all dealings with the
respondent's Punjab office. In any case, the admitted position is that the
subject matter of the present dispute has arisen at Punjab, outside the
jurisdiction of this court and certainly all material aspects of the cause of
action for bringing and maintaining the present petition have not arisen at
Delhi and consequently, this court does not have the territorial jurisdiction
on the subject matter of the present case.
38.

In this view of the matter, it would be wholly improper to record any

observations and findings on the other objections addressed by the
respondent in their opposition to the present petition. The respondents shall
be at liberty to press the same and seek adjudication thereof in the event the
petitioner agitates its disputes further.
In view of the above discussion, this petition is dismissed.

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
Arb.A.No.242/2006

Page 26

January 4th , 2007
aa

Arb.A.No.242/2006

Page 27

