IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.4006/2000
Judgment Reserved on: 12th September, 2005
Date of decision: 4th October, 2005
M/S SURAJ SINGH MEHTAB SINGH (P)
LTD.
.. Petitioner
through: Mr. Manish Pathak, Advocate
VERSUS
THE PRESIDING OFFICER, LABOUR
COURT NO.II, DELHI & ORS.
through: Nemo.

..... Respondents

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in
the Digest?
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

M/s Suraj Singh Mehtab Singh Private Limited, the petitioner

herein, was having its factory at B-35, G.T.Karnal Road, Delhi where the
respondent nos. 3 to 8 were employed.

In the unprecedented riots

ensuing in Delhi after the assassination of the late Prime Minister of
India on 31st October, 1984, the factory of the petitioner was totally
burned down by the rioters on 1st November, 1984 and reduced to ashes.
2.

The petitioner

WP (C) No.4006/2000

contends that machinery worth crores of

Page 1

rupees was burned down and nothing survived of the factory.

The

petitioner thereafter had neither the capacity nor the means to restart the
factory which remained shut down. Copies of the assessment orders
under the Sales Tax Act, 1975 showing returns of `nil' sales for the
period between 1984 to 1995 have been placed on the record of this
court.

According to the petitioner, in these circumstances, all its

workmen voluntarily settled their accounts in full and final settlement
and left the services.
3.

However, respondent nos.3 to 8 misguidedly made false

claims against the petitioner alleging illegal termination and the disputes
raised by them were referred for adjudication to the Labour Court vide
the order of reference dated 26th November, 1986.
The petitioner had contested the claims filed by these
respondents before the Labour Court by filing a written statement. Since
the factory of the petitioner was burned down in the riots, its Managing
Director Sardar Mehtab Singh received an unbearable shock and he
started remaining seriously ill with heart ailment.
4.

On 21st April, 1999, the date fixed before the Labour Court

for his evidence, it has been submitted that he was admitted in a hospital
in a serious condition. The adjournment requested by his counsel was

WP (C) No.4006/2000

Page 2

not granted and the evidence on behalf of the petitioner came to be
closed in these circumstances.
It has been contended on behalf of the petitioner that Sardar
Mehtab Singh, the then Managing Director, in fact, succumbed

to his

heart ailment and expired on 23rd June, 1999. The petitioner has placed
copy of the Medical Treatment Certificate and Death Certificate before
this court.
5.

The petitioner's application for another opportunity to lead its

evidence had been filed on 26th April, 1999. However, this application
was also not accepted and the Labour Court proceeded to make the
Award dated 10th December, 1999 holding that six workmen were
entitled to reinstatement in the job with continuity of services and 50%
back wages.

WP (C) No.4006/2000

Page 3

This Award has been impugned by way of the present writ
petition.

It has been contended that the in view of the facts and

circumstances pleaded and the documents placed on record, the Labour
Court ought to have granted an opportunity to the petitioner to lead its
evidence and further in view of the admission on the part of the
respondents/workmen to the effect that factory was completely burnt
down due to riots, and had not been revived, there was no justification
for directing of reinstatement and grant of back wages.
6.

The respondents in the instant case, could not be served by

ordinary process and consequently, were served by way of publication in
the Hindi daily (Veer Arjun) dated 14th September, 2004. However, none
appeared to contest the hearing and the matter consequently proceeded
ex parte against these respondents.
7.

I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner in the

matter and examined the available record.
8.
filed

I find that in its written statement dated 18 th November, 1987,
before

the

Labour

Court,

it

was

stated

that

the

petitioner/establishment was non-existent and stood closed on account of
the factory being completely burned down by the rioters on 1st
November, 1984 in the city following the assassination of late Prime

WP (C) No.4006/2000

Page 4

Minister Smt. Indira Gandhi. It is stated that in these circumstances, the
petitioner/Management did not have either the intention nor the capacity
to restart the factory which was closed in these circumstances having
been reduced to ashes. I find that the petitioner has also stated that they
have settled the account of the workmen in full and final settlement of
claims of any kind to the respondent/workman employed by the firm.
The petitioner has disputed any liability to any of the workmen in their
written statement.
9.

On the pleadings of the parties on 19th October, 1988, the

following issues were framed as per terms of reference:“1. As per terms of reference.
Subsequent to the amended written statement the
following additional issues were framed on 8.8.95.
1.A.

Whether the establishment/industry of the
management is non existent and stood closed
down w.e.f. 1.1.84?

1.B.

Whether the claimant settled their account with
the management in full and final as alleged in
preliminary objection No.3 in the S.W.?

1.C.

Whether the demand notice was served upon the
management?”

Issue no.1 which was framed on 19th October, 1988 was
directed to be treated as issue no.1-D.
10.

On the 21st April, 1999, the matter was fixed before the

WP (C) No.4006/2000

Page 5

Labour Court for cross-examination of some of the workmen and for
petitioner's evidence. It appears that the affidavit by way of evidence of
the witness of the petitioner was prepared and ready for filing on the 21 st
April, 1999. However, the authorised representative of the petitioner
could not reach the court in time to cross-examine the workmen and file
its evidence.

Accordingly, evidence of the workmen was closed on

account of failure of the petitioner to cross-examine the respondent.
Further, the right of the petitioner to lead evidence was also closed.
11.

The matter was fixed for 12th May, 1999.

12.

The petitioner filed an application shortly thereafter on the

26th April, 1999 seeking an opportunity to cross-examine the workmen
and adduce in its own evidence in order to facilitate appropriate and
effective adjudication. This application was supported by an affidavit of
the junior of the counsel/authorised representative who had appeared in
the case on 21st April, 1999. It has been submitted that this counsel had
requested for a short adjournment on account of inability of his senior
counsel who was his authorised representative to reach the court on that
date which was not granted.
13.

The witness of the petitioner Shri Mehtab Singh is stated to

have been hospitalised at the relevant time. The petitioner has also

WP (C) No.4006/2000

Page 6

placed on record the Death Certificate dated 23rd June, 1999 of Shri
Mehtab Singh who was the son of Shri Sardar Surjan Singh who is stated
to have been retired person. The demise is proximate to the dates of
hearing and lends credibility to the assertions of the petitioner.
14.

The petitioner has also placed on record the documents evidencing

the fact that no transaction whatsoever has been effected by the petitioner since
1984 till 1995. There is no rebuttal to these assertions of the petitioner.

15.

I find that the respondents/workmen had admitted that the

factory was closed due to riots and in this behalf, the Labour Court has
noticed in its Award dated 10th December, 1999 thus:“ But since in the present case it is admitted even by
workmen that the factory was closed temporarily
due to riots for some time on account of assassination
of the Hon'ble Prime Minister of India late Smt. Indira
Gandhi, so factory was proved to be lying locked for
some time. Which raises to presumptions that
management has also suffered losses during the riots
in 1984, thus an amount of 50% of back wages to the
workmen in my view shall meet ends of justice in
addition to reinstatement of these workmen to the job
with the continuity of service.”
16.

In view of the pleadings of the parties and the statement of the

workmen, it was incumbent upon the party who was pleading that the
factory was only temporarily locked to show that the unit was a
functional unit to which reinstatement could have been directed.
17.

The petitioner filed the application seeking an opportunity to

WP (C) No.4006/2000

Page 7

cross-examine the workmen and to lead its evidence at the earliest
opportunity after the evidence was closed on the 21st April, 1999. Such
application was filed well before the next date of hearing which was
scheduled for 12th May, 1999. In the facts and circumstances of the
present case, such application ought to have been favourably considered
in as much as delay, if any, could have been compensated by any
appropriate orders directing costs.

Perusal of the Award shows that

there is no observation that the petitioner had resorted to any dilatory
tactics or that it was guilty of protracting the litigation in any manner.
Therefore, in order to ensure justice between the parties and complete
and effective adjudication, interests of justice merited that the truth was
brought before the Labour Court by granting adequate opportunity to the
parties to lead evidence.
18.

The respondents/workmen had opted not to appear before this

Court. Service has been effected upon them by publication. I find that
the Award dated 10th December, 1999 has been passed in favour of the
respondents/workmen on the sole ground that the petitioner did not lead
evidence in support of issue no.1.A. whereby the onus was cast upon it to
establish that the industry was non-existent and stood closed down w.e.f.
1st January, 1984. There was no material whatsoever before the court to

WP (C) No.4006/2000

Page 8

show that the industry was a running unit and reinstatement could have
been effected.
19.

Placing reliance on the pronouncement of the Apex Court in

AIR 1960 SC 923 entitled M/s Hathising Manufacturing Co. Ltd.,
Ahmedabad & Anr. Vs. UOI & Anr. it has been urged by Mr. Manish
Pathak, learned counsel representing the petitioner that the issue in the
case in hand was not as to whether the services of the respondents had
been illegally terminated or retrenched inviting applicability of Section
25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, but the present case was
actually a case of closure of industry inviting the applicability of Section
25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
20.

In my view, this aspect would required to be considered by

the Labour Court seized of the original dispute in the light of the
evidence led before it and not by this court.
21.

As a normal consequence of quashing the Award, in view of

the discussion hereinabove, I would have ordinarily remanded the matter
for adjudication to the Labour Court. It has been pointed out that the
factory was burned in 1984 and for want of will and finances, it has not
resumed operations. The Managing Director has also expired as back as
in 1999. The respondent nos. 3 to 8 appear to have also not contested the

WP (C) No.4006/2000

Page 9

present proceedings.

No action has been taken for effecting

implementation of the Award dated 10th December, 1999. Therefore,
respondent nos. 3 to 8 have no interest in prosecuting their claim and no
fruitful purpose would be achieved by protracting this litigation by
directing remand and fresh opportunity to the petitioner to cross-examine
the witnesses of the respondents and to lead evidence in accordance with
law.
Accordingly, this writ petition is allowed in the above terms
and the Award dated 10th December, 1999 passed by the respondent no.1
in ID No.656/1991 is hereby set aside and quashed.

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
OCTOBER 4th , 2005
aa

WP (C) No.4006/2000

Page 10

