IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 9079/2007 & CM Nos. 17091, 17092/2007
Date of decision: 5th December, 2007
Shri Vikas Ahuja
... Petitioner
through: Mr. Jasmeet Singh and Mr. Saurabh Tiwari,
Advs.

VERSUS
BSES Rajdhani Power Ltd.
....Respondents
through: Mr. Inderbir Singh Alag and Ms. Shefi Bhatia,
Advs.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
1.Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
Judgment?
2.To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3.Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
GITA MITTAL, J(Oral)
1.

This writ petition has been filed by the petitioner complaining against the

communication dated 23rd November, 2007 received by the petitioner from the Office
of the Electricity Ombudsman before hearing of its appeal the petitioner was required
to deposit one third of the amount assessed by the Consumer Grievance Redressal
Forum. Aggrieved by this assessment, the petitioner assailed the same by way of the
appeal filed before the Electricity Ombudsman. The petitioner has contended that this
-2requirement of the pre-deposit is onerous and hence contrary to law and ought not to
be enforced. The grievance is that the petitioner is being denied hearing on its appeal

on account of the non-deposit and that the respondents have further illegally
disconnected the electricity on account of failure of the petitioner to deposit this
amount.
2.

Perusal of the communication dated 23rd November, 2007 would show that the

demand has been made in terms of clause 20(3)(iii) of the Delhi Electricity Regulatory
Commission notification dated 11th March, 2004. In the instant case the petitioner has
been required to deposit one third of the total demand of Rs.5,12,683.29. It is an
admitted position that the premises where the electricity connection is installed are
commercial premises located in a market. The petitioner has been agitating in respect
of the bill and has already filed three writ petitions in respect of the demand raised
upon him. In these facts it certainly cannot be held that the requirement of the predeposit of the demanded amount is onerous or works any injustice to the petitioner.
At this stage Mr. Jasmeet Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner prays that he
may be given time to make the pre-deposit.

It is further submitted that the

respondents have in the meantime disconnected the electricity connection on account
of failure to comply with the demand. The request is that, pending hearing of the
appeal, the respondents may be
-3directed to energise the connection subject to deposit of the pre-deposit amount.
3.

In this view of the matter, this writ petition is disposed of giving permission to

the petitioner to deposit one third of the assessed amount within a period of two days
as requested. On receipt of this amount and completion of commercial formalities, the
respondents shall energise the electricity connection pending consideration of the

petitioner's appeal before the electricity ombudsman.

The parties shall abide by

adjudication by the electricity ombudsman even on the aspect of interim relief.
The writ petition and applications are disposed of in the above terms.
It is made clear that nothing herein contained is an expression of opinion on the
respective contentions of the parties.

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
December 05, 2007
kr

