IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 2387/1995
Judgm ent reserved on : 14th February, 2006
Da te of decision: April 5, 2006
DHARAM PAL
... Petitioner
through Mr. Gurbaksh Singh, Advocate
VERSUS
DTC ETC.

.... Respondents
through Mr. J.N. Aggarwal and
Mr. Banamali Shukla, Advocates

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

By this petition the petitioner has assailed an Award dated 10th

February, 1994 whereby it was held by the industrial adjudicator that
the petitioner had committed an act of serious misconduct and as
such upheld the penalty of dismissal from service imposed on him
W.P.(C) 2387/1995

Page 1 of 21

while directing the respondent to make payment of wages to the
workman till the date of passing of the award subject to adjustment
of the amount which had been paid to the workman pursuant to the
interim award dated 21st January, 1992 passed by it.
2.

The petitioner was appointed as a sweeper in the Delhi

Transport Corporation with effect from 16th August, 1973. It appears
that he presented a claim for leave travel concession in respect of
alleged travel by his family members that is his wife and two sons.
According to the claim submitted by the petitioner on 15th March,
1982, his family members had travelled by bus no. DLP 4650 from
Delhi to Kanyakumari on 20th February, 1982 and returned on 8th
March, 1992 for the year 1982-1985. The petitioner had submitted a
printed money receipt dated 9th March, 1982 for 2 ½ tickets for a
sum of Rs.1250/-

These tickets were alleged to have been forged

tickets inasmuch as no permit was issued by the State Transport
Authority to M/s Goswami Travels who had allegedly issued the
tickets for conducting the tour to Kanyakumari on the claimed dates.
3.

On these allegations, disciplinary proceedings were initiated

against the petitioner.

W.P.(C) 2387/1995

A chargesheet dated 30th June, 1982 was

Page 2 of 21

served upon him wherein it was alleged that the petitioner had tried
to cheat the Delhi Transport Corporation by submitting a forged
claim. Upon receipt of the inquiry report, a memorandum dated 31 st
August , 1992 was served on the petitioner by the depot manager of
the Hari Nagar depot, New Delhi to show cause why the petitioner be
not removed from service and calling upon the petitioner to file his
representation against the proposed penalty.

Ultimately, vide an

order passed on 7th September, 1982, the petitioner was removed
from service with the Delhi Transport Corporation.
4.

The petitioner complained against his removal in proceedings

under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.

By an order dated 10 th

October , 1983, the government made an order in exercise of its
powers under Section 10 (1) c and 12(5) of the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947 referring the following dispute for adjudication to the
labour court :“Whether the removal from service of Shri Dharam
Pal is legal and justified and if not to what relief is he
entitled and what directions are necessary in this
respect?”
5.

Vide an order passed on 10th July, 1991, the labour court held

that the disciplinary proceedings and inquiry conducted by the Delhi
W.P.(C) 2387/1995

Page 3 of 21

Transport Corporation was not an appropriate and valid one and
consequently answered the issue as to the validity and propriety of
the inquiry against the Delhi Transport Corporation.
6.

In these circumstances, the labour court thereafter gave an

opportunity to the respondent to prove the misconduct.

The

evidence was recorded on behalf of the parties and the proceedings
culminated in an adjudication and industrial award dated 10th
February, 1994 whereby the labour court held that the Delhi
Transport Corporation had succeeded in establishing that the
claimant has furnished a bogus claim for the sum of Rs.1250/towards leave travel concession in respect of a journey which his wife
and two children had not undertaken at all. The labour court held
that the petitioner had committed an act of serious misconduct and
consequently the penalty of dismissal imposed upon him was an
appropriate penalty.
7.

Placing reliance on the law laid down by the Apex Court, the

labour court was of the view that inasmuch as the inquiry held by the
Delhi Transport Corporation had been vitiated and that only the
order of dismissal was sustained on the ground that the workman

W.P.(C) 2387/1995

Page 4 of 21

was guilty of gross misconduct, the labour court directed that the
date of dismissal would not relate back to the date of the order passed
by the employer on the basis of the illegal proceedings. In this view
of the matter, the labour court held that the dismissal of the
petitioner would come into operation with effect from the date of
passing of the award.
8.

The award also noticed that vide an order dated 21st January ,

1992, interim relief was granted in favour of the workman whereby
the appropriate government was advised to instruct the DTC for
payment of a sum of Rs.550/- per month to the workman till final
adjudication of the matter. In the award passed by the labour court
dated 10th February, 1994, for this reason, the labour court directed
that the workman would be entitled to wages till the date of the
award after adjustment of the amount paid in compliance of the
order dated 21st January, 1992.
9.

This award was assailed by the workman by way of the present

writ petition. It appears that a submission was made before this
court on 13th September, 1996 that the inquiry having been vitiated by
the order dated 10th July, 1991, it was not open for the labour court to

W.P.(C) 2387/1995

Page 5 of 21

record evidence and examine the merits of the controversy. This
contention had found favour with this court which had allowed the
writ petition and set aside the award dated 10 th February , 1994 vide a
judgment passed on 13th September, 1996.
This judgment was assailed by the DTC before the Apex Court
by way of SLP(Civil) No. 7768/1998 which was registered as Civil
Appeal No. 2295/1999. The Apex Court had held that the view taken
by this court in the judgment dated 13th September, 1996 was
contrary to the judgment of the Apex Court reported in 1973 (1)
SCC 813 entitled The Workman of M/s Firestone Tyre and
Rubber Co. Of India (Pvt.) Ltd. vs. The Management &
Ors. In these circumstances, the judgment dated 13th September,
1996 was set aside and the matter was remitted to this court for being
heard and disposed of afresh in accordance with law.
10.

Having heard learned counsel for the parties, I find that the

allegations against the petitioner related to his having submitted a
forged ticket. The management had lead oral evidence by way of a
testimony of Shri Ved Prakash Shukla before the industrial
adjudicator who had proved the ticket and the permit submitted by

W.P.(C) 2387/1995

Page 6 of 21

the petitioner in support of his leave travel concession claim. The
DTC had confirmed that the permit no. 1025 submitted by the
petitioner in respect of the claim of the journey of his family
members to Kanyakumari had actually been issued by the transport
authorities against bus no. DGP 3520 for its journey from Delhi to
Agra on 14th February, 1982 and not against the bus on which the
petitioner had claimed that his family had travelled. Despite the
petitioner being required to contact M/s Goswami Travels who had
allegedly issued a receipt and the permit, the petitioner failed to get
the corrections. It was in these circumstances that the chargesheet
was issued to the petitioner. The respondents had further proved in
evidence that the petitioner reiterated his claim in the reply filed by
him to the chargesheet. However, he sought to evade responsibility
by alleging that it was for the transporter to obtain an appropriate
permit. The DTC proved the application which was submitted by the
petitioner claiming the leave travel concession. The petitioner failed
to challenge the testimony on behalf of the respondent. In these
circumstances, the labour court has returned a clear finding of fact
that the Delhi Transport Corporation had succeeded in establishing

W.P.(C) 2387/1995

Page 7 of 21

that the petitioner had submitted a bogus claim of Rs.1250/- towards
the leave travel concession in respect of a journey purportedly
undertaken by his wife and two children whereas they had never
travelled.
11.

Before this court, it has been urged that the respondent was

required to lead evidence and should have produced a witness from
M/s Goswami Travels. It is settled law that the onus and burden of
proof for proving a fact set up lies on the party which is placing
reliance on this submission. The claim was made by the petitioner
placing reliance on tickets and permit purportedly issued to him by
M/s Goswami Travels. The same were discovered to be bogus. The
respondents had given an opportunity to the petitioner to get the
same corrected, if his contention had been true. The petitioner failed
to do so. It was for the petitioner to produce such evidence as it
relied upon in support of its contention before the labour court.
Having failed to do so, he cannot possibly shift the onus upon the
respondent to prove the case which had been set up by the workman.
12.

It is also well settled that even if a disciplinary inquiry

conducted by an employer is vitiated on account of violation of

W.P.(C) 2387/1995

Page 8 of 21

principles of natural justice or for any other reason, it is open for an
industrial adjudicator to give an opportunity to the management
which has sought the same, to prove the alleged misconduct by
leading evidence before it. It was so laid down in (2001) 5 SCC 433
Karnataka

State

Road

Transport

Corporation

vs

Lakshmidevamma (Smt) & Anr. and (2005) 2 SCC 684
Divyash Pandit vs Management. NCCBM.
13.

The right of a management to lead evidence before the labour

court or the industrial tribunal in justification of its decision taken on
the basis of a domestic inquiry which is under consideration by such
tribunal or court, is not a statutory right. It is actually a procedure
which has been approved by the Apex Court to avoid delay and
multiplicity of proceedings in the disposal of disputes between the
management and the workman. The genesis of this procedure is to
be found in the observations of the Supreme Court in AIR 1965 SC
1803 Workman vs Motipur Sugar Factory Private Limited
wherein the court held thus :“If it is held that in cases where the employer
dismisses his employee without holding an enquiry,
the dismissal must be set aside by the Industrial
Tribunal only on that ground, it would inevitably
W.P.(C) 2387/1995

Page 9 of 21

mean that the employer will immediately proceed to
hold the enquiry and pass an order dismissing the
employee once again.
In that case, another
industrial dispute would arise and the employer
would be entitled to rely upon the enquiry which he
had held in the meantime. This course would mean
delay and on the second occasion it will entitle the
employer to claim the benefit of the domestic
enquiry given. On the other hand, if in such cases
the employer is given an opportunity to justify the
impugned dismissal on the merits, the employee has
the advantage of having the merits of his case being
considered by the Tribunal for itself and that clearly
would be to the benefit of the employee. That is why
this Court has consistently held that if the domestic
enquiry is irregular, invalid or improper, the
Tribunal may give an opportunity to the employer to
prove his case and in doing so the Tribunal tries the
merits itself.”
14.

Subsequently, various decisions of the Supreme Court though

agreed on the conferment of this right of the management, however
there was difference of opinion with regard to the stage of making
such application. So far as this aspect is concerned, principles on this
issue were laid down in 1983 4 SCC 491 Shambu Nath Goyal
vs Bank of Baroda

in the Workman vs Motipur Sugar Factory

Private Limited (supra), the court laid down the following principles
:“When a question arises in a reference under Section
10 of the Act after the workman had been punished
W.P.(C) 2387/1995

Page 10 of 21

pursuant to a finding of guilt recorded against him in
the domestic enquiry, there is no question of the
management filing any application for permission to
lead further evidence in support of the charge or
charges framed against the workman. The defect in
the domestic enquiry is pointed out by the workman
in his written claim statement filed in the Labour
Court or Industrial Tribunal after the reference had
been received and the management has the
opportunity to look into that statement before it files
its written statement of defence in the enquiry before
the Labour Court or Industrial Tribunal and could
make the request for the opportunity in the written
statement itself. If it does not choose to do so at that
stage it cannot be allowed to do it at any later stage of
the proceedings by filing any application for the
purpose which may result in delay leading to
wrecking the morale of the workman and compel him
to surrender which he may not otherwise do.”
15.

In a subsequent judgment reported at 1984 Supplementary

SCC 520 Rajendra Jha vs Presiding Officer, Labour Court
the court was concerned with a case where the labour court held that
the departmental inquiry was vitiated and by the same order allowed
the employers to lead evidence to justify the order of dismissal. It
was held by the Supreme Court that in passing the order allowing the
employers to lead evidence, the labour court cannot be said to have
acted without jurisdiction. It has been noticed in the judgment that
the employers did not ask for an opportunity to lead evidence

W.P.(C) 2387/1995

Page 11 of 21

simultaneously with the filing of the application under Section 33
2(b) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 but when the hearing of that
application was nearing completion, before the final orders were
passed however, the employers asked for an opportunity to lead
evidence to justify the order of dismissal.
16.

In view of the conflict of decisions of the Apex Court in the

Shambu Nath Goyal case (supra) and Rajendra Jha vs Presiding
Officer, Labour Court, 1984 Supplementary SCC 520, the matter was
referred to a Bench of five Judges of the Apex Court which
authoritatively decided the issue in its judgment reported at (2001)
5 SCC 433 Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation
vs Lakshmidevamma (Smt) & Anr. holding thus :“16. While considering the decisiion in Shambhu
Nath Goyal case we should bear in mind that the
judgment of Varadarajan, J. therein does not refer
to the case of Cooper Engg.
However, the
concurring judgment of D.A. Desai, J. specifically
considers this case. By the judgment in Goyal case
the management was given the right to adduce
evidence to justify its domestic enquiry only if it
had reserved its right to do so in the application
made by it under Section 33 of the Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947 or in the objection that the
management had to file to the reference made
under Section 10 of the Act, meaning thereby that
the management had to exercise its right of leading
W.P.(C) 2387/1995

Page 12 of 21

fresh evidence at the first available opportunity and
not at any time thereafter during the proceedings
before the Tribunal/Labour Court.
17.
Keeping in mind the object of providing an
opportunity to the management to adduce evidence
before the Tribunal/Labour Court, we re of the
opinion that the directions issued by this Court in
Shabhu Nath Goyal case need not be varied, being
just and fair. There can be no complaint from the
management side for this procedure because this
opportunity of leading evidence is being sought by
the management only as an alternative plea and not
as an admission of illegality in its domestic equiry.
At the same time, it is also of advantage to the
workmen inasmuch as they will be put to notice of
the fact that the management is likely to adduce
fresh evidence, hence, they can keep their rebuttal
or other evidence ready. This procedure also
eliminates the likely delay in permitting the
management to make belated application whereby
the proceedings before the Labour Court/Tribunal
could get prolonged. In our opinion, the procedure
laid down in Shambhu Nath Goyal case is just and
fair.”
17.

In the same case Shivraj V. Patil, J, for Khare, J, and himself,

concurring with the aforenoticed judgment further observed thus :“44. The question as to at what stage the
management should seek leave of the Labour
Court/Tribunal to lead evidence/additional evidence
justifying its action is concerned int he draft
judgment of Hegde, J. And not the power of the
court/tribunal requiring or directing the parties to
produce evidence if deemed fit in a given case
having regard to the facts and circumstances of that
case. As per Section 11(1) of the Industrial Disputes
W.P.(C) 2387/1995

Page 13 of 21

Act, 1947 (for short “the Act”) a court/tribunal can
follow the procedure which it thinks fit in the
circumstances of the case subject to the provisions
of the Act and the rules framed thereunder and in
accordance with the principles of natural justice.
Under Section 11(3), the Labour Court/Tribunal and
other authorities mentioned therein have the same
powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code
of Civil Procedure when trying a suit in respect of
certain matters which include enforcing the
attendance of any person and examining him on
oath and compelling the production of documents
and material objects.
45. It is consistently held and accepted that strict
rules of evidence are not applicable to the
proceedings before the Labour Court/Tribunal but
essentially the rules of natural justice are to be
observed
in
such
proceedings.
Labour
Courts/Tribunals have the power to call for any
evidence at any stage of the proceedings if the facts
and circumstances of the case demand the same to
meet the ends of justice in a given situation. We
reiterate that in order to avoid unnecessary delay
and multiplicity of proceedings, the management
has to seek leave of the court/tribunal in the written
statement itself to lead additional evidence to
support its action int he alternative and without
prejudice to its rights and contentions. But this
should not be understood as placing fetters on the
powers of the court/tribunal requiring or directing
parties to lead additional evidence including
production of documents at any stage of the
proceedings before they are concluded if on facts
and circumstances of the case it is deemed just and
necessary in the interest of justice.”
18.

In a recent decision of the Supreme Court reported in (2005)

W.P.(C) 2387/1995

Page 14 of 21

2 SCC 684 Divyash Pandit vs Management, NCCBM, the
Apex Court has so held :“8. The appellant has challenged this decision of
the High Court before us. We are of the view that the
order of the High Court dated 2.12.2002 as clarified
on 3-3-2003 does not need any interference. It is
true no doubt that the respondent may not have
made any prayer for (sic submitting) additional
evidence in its written statement but, as held by this
Court in Karnataka SRTC v. Laxmidevamma this
did not place a fetter on the powers of the
Court/Tribunal to require or permit parties to lead
additional evidence including production of
document at any stage of proceedings before they are
concluded. Once the Labour Court came to the
finding that the enquiry was not est, the facts of the
case warranted that the Labour Court should have
given one opportunity to the respondent to establish
the charges before passing an award in favour of the
workman.”
19.

In view of the various judgments of the Supreme Court, there

can be no dispute that an employer has a right to adduce evidence
before the labour court and industrial tribunal to justify the
termination of the services of a workman the domestic inquiry held
by it was held to be defective. Even, the Apex Court had rejected the
objection raised by the present petitioner in this behalf.
19.

The respondent before this court sought this opportunity and

lead evidence on the misconduct. The labour court has noticed that
W.P.(C) 2387/1995

Page 15 of 21

the deposition by its witness was not assailed by the petitioner and
further that it was adequately established that the petitioner had
actually furnished a bogus claim for an amount in respect of a
journey which his family members had not undertaken at all. In my
view, the findings of fact returned by the labour court are based on a
correct appreciation on the material placed before it and on a correct
application of the principles of law, I therefore find no infirmity in
the findings returned.
20.

The petitioner has sought to assail these findings of fact by way

of the present writ petition.
The parameters of judicial review into industrial adjudication
especially on issues of fact are well settled.
21.

Noteworthy in this behalf are the observations of the Apex

Court in AIR 2000 SC 1508 entitled Indian Overseas Bank
Vs. I.O.B. Staff Canteen Workers' Union & Another wherein
which it was held thus:“The learned single Judge seems to have
undertaken an exercise, impermissible for him in
exercising
writ
jurisdiction,
by
liberally
reappreciating the evidence and drawing
conclusions of his own on pure questions of fact,
unmindful, though aware fully, that he is not
W.P.(C) 2387/1995

Page 16 of 21

exercising any appellate jurisdiction over the
awards passed by a Tribunal, presided over by a
Judicial Officer. The findings of fact recorded by a
fact-finding authority duly constituted for the
purpose and which ordinarily should be
considered to have become final, cannot be
disturbed for the mere reason of having been
based on materials or evidence not sufficient or
credible in the opinion of the writ Court to warrant
those findings at any rate, as long as they are based
upon some material which are relevant for the
purpose or even on the ground that there is yet
another view which can b reasonably and possibly
one taken. The Division Bench was not only
justified but well merited in its criticism of the
order of the learned single Judge and in ordering
restoration of the Award of the Tribunal. On being
taken through the findings of the Industrial
Tribunal as well as the order of the learned single
Judge and the judgment of the Division Bench, we
are of the view that the Industrial Tribunal had
overwhelming materials which constituted ample
and sufficient basis for recording its findings, as it
did, and the manner of consideration undertaken,
the objectivity of approach adopted and
reasonableness of findings recorded seem to be
unexceptionable. The only course, therefore, open
to the writ Judge was the relevant criteria laid
down by this Court, before sustaining the claim of
the canteen workmen, on the facts found and
recorded by the fact-finding authority and not
embark upon an exercise of re-assessing the
evidence and arriving at findings of ones own,
altogether giving a complete go-bye even to the
facts specifically found by the Tribunal below.”
22.

In this context the principles laid down by the Apex Court in

W.P.(C) 2387/1995

Page 17 of 21

Sadhu Ram vs. Delhi Transport Corporation, AIR 1984 SC
1967 may also be noticed where it was observed thus :“Para 5.... nor do we think that it was right for the High Court
to interfere with the Award of the Industrial Tribunal under Article
226 on a mere technicality. Article 226 is a device to secure and
advance justice and not otherwise. In the result, we allow the
appeal, set-aside the judgment of the High Court and restore the
Award of the Presiding Officer.”
23.

In Harbans Lal vs. Jag Mohan, (1985) 4 SCC 333 the

court ruled :
“P ara 5 .... The limitations on the jurisdiction of the High
Court under Article 226 of the Constitution are well settled. The
Writ Petition before the High Court prayed for a Writ in the nature
of certiorari, and it is well known that a Writ in the nature of
certiorari may be issued only if the order of the inferior tribunal of
subordinate court suffers from an error of jurisdiction, or from a
breach of the principles of natural justice or is vitiated by a manifest
or apparent error of law. There is no sanction enabling the High
Court to reappraise the evidence without sufficient reason in law
and reach finding of fact contrary to those rendered by an inferior
court or subordinate court. When a High Court proceeds to do so, it
acts plainly in excess of its power.”
24.

In Calcutta Port Shramik Union vs Calcutta River

Transport Association & Ors. 1988 (Supp.) SCC 768, the
court further observed that :
“Para 10. The object of enacting the enacting the Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947 and of making provision therein to refer disputes
W.P.(C) 2387/1995

Page 18 of 21

to Tribunals for settlement is to bring about industrial peace.
Whenever a reference is made by the Government to the Industrial
Tribunal, it has to be presumed ordinarily that there is a genuine
industrial dispute between the parties which requires to be resolved
by adjudication. In all such cases, an attempt should be made by
Courts exercising powers of judicial review to sustain as far as
possible the Awards made by the Industrial Tribunal instead of
picking holes here and there in the Awards on rival points and
ultimately frustrating the entire adjudication process before the
Tribunals by striking down the Awards in hyper technical grounds.
Unfortunately, the orders of the Single Judge and of the Division
Bench have resulted in such frustration and have made the Award
fruitless on an untenable basis.”
25.

In the light of these principles also the findings of fact in the

present case cannot be challenged by the petitioner.

For all the

foregoing reasons, there can be no manner of doubt that the act
which petitioner was held to have committed was a dishonest act and
amounted to a serious misconduct. The respondent was therefore
justified in considering such a charge as an act of merely turpitude
resulting in a loss of confidence in him which justifies the penalty of
dismissal from service.
26.

The labour court has however held that the inquiry conducted

by the management had been vitiated and consequently the order of
dismissal could not be considered as taking effect on the date when it
was passed pursuant to such inquiry.

W.P.(C) 2387/1995

Page 19 of 21

Accordingly, the order of

dismissal has been directed to be effective from the date of the award.
27.

The petitioner has been given wages subject to adjustment of

the amounts which he received under an interim order dated 21st
January, 1992 of the labour court.

For all the foregoing, I see no

reason to interfere with the award dated 10th February, 1994.
This writ petition is accordingly dismissed. There shall be no
order as to costs.

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
April 5, 2006
kr

W.P.(C) 2387/1995

Page 20 of 21

