IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 9055/2007 & CM No. 17063/2007
Date of decision: 5th December, 2007
Ashok Kumar
through: Mr. A. Hassan, Adv.

... Petitioner

VERSUS
Union of India & Anr.
....Respondents
through: Mr. Arun Kumar 'Atul', Adv. for the
respondent no. 1/UOI
Mr. Amit Kapur, Mr. Mansoor Ali and
Mr. Rahul, Advs. for the respondent no. 2

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
GITA MITTAL, J(Oral)
1.

This writ petition has been filed by the petitioner complaining of termination of

an agreement entered into between the petitioner and the BSES Rajdhani Power Ltd.
respondent no. 2 herein. It is the case of the petitioner that as per the agreement he
was appointed as a sub-agent to provide electricity connections to consumers and
that the agreement was valid up to the year 2010. This writ petition has been filed
by the

-2-

petitioner complaining of the action of the respondent no. 2 in issuing a legal notice
dated 15th June, 2007 whereby this agreement has been terminated. The contention of
the writ petitioner is that it has not breached any terms of the agreement with the
respondent no. 2 and that the action of the respondent no. 2 is wholly illegal and
contrary to the specific terms of the agreement.
2.

Learned counsel for the respondent no. 2 appearing on advance notice has

disputed the factual contentions of the writ petitioner and has also contested the
maintainability of this writ petition.
3.

I find that the entire challenge in this writ petition is based on the notice dated

15th June, 2007 whereby the respondent no. 2, in purported exercise of its contractual
rights, has terminated the agreement with the petitioner. It is also an admitted fact
that as on 15th November, 2007, the officers of the respondent no. 2 have removed the
meter provided in the premises also pursuant to the legal notice. The rights and
liabilities of the parties are strictly governed by the terms of the contract entered into
between them. In this writ petition the petitioner has complained on an alleged breach
of contract by the respondent no. 2.
4.

My attention has been drawn by learned counsel for the respondents to a

pronouncement of a learned Single Judge of this court dated 16th July,

-32007 in OMP No. 327/2007 Raj Electricals (Regd.) vs. BSES Rajdhani Power Limited
wherein the action of termination of a similar agreement had been assailed by the
petitioner in proceedings under section 9 of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act and an

interim order of protection had been sought. This petition was dismissed by the court
holding that the respondents had a right to terminate the agreement.
5.

I find that this pronouncement, alongwith other matters wherein the same

judgment had been passed, were assailed by way of an appeal before the Division
Bench in FAO(OS) No. 250/2007 Raj Electricals (Regd.) vs. BSES Rajdhani Power
Limited and connected appeals. By a judgment pronounced on 2 nd November, 2007,
the judgment of the learned Single Judge has been affirmed and the court has held that
the respondents would have a right to terminate the agreement.
6.

Be that as it may, the petitioner has assailed the termination on the ground that

the same is wrongful, arbitrary and not based on any terms of the contract. The entire
challenge laid before this court is to assail the action of the respondents which is
claimed by it to be based on its contractual rights. The issues raised are purely
questions of fact. In my view the present remedy by way of a writ petition under Article
226 of the Constitution of India is neither efficacious nor appropriate for the purposes

-4of adjudication into the contentions of the parties. Such disputed questions of fact
would require to be gone into by way of appropriate legal proceedings.
7.

So far as the right to terminate the agreement is concerned perhaps the same

may require to abide by the pronouncements already made. However in view of the
fact that the petitioner is challenging the termination on the ground that the same is
contrary to contract and is otherwise illegal, it is made clear that nothing herein
contained is an expression of opinion on the contentions raised by the parties before

this court.
This writ petition is therefore dismissed with liberty to the petitioner to seek
appropriate remedy in accordance with law. It shall be open for the petitioner to
challenge the action of the respondents on all grounds raised before this court and the
respondents would have the right to contest the same by way of appropriate pleadings.
The matter shall be considered in such proceedings as may be filed by the petitioner,
uninfluenced by any observations in the present matter. It is made clear that nothing
herein contained is an adjudication on the merits of the controversy.
CM No. 17063/2007
In view of the order passed in the writ petition, this application does

-5not survive for consideration. The same is hereby dismissed.
Dasti

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
December 05, 2007
kr

