IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 3873/2000
Judgment reserved on : March 22, 2006
Dat e of decision: April 5, 2006
HAWA SINGH
... Petitioner
through: Mr. Apurb Lal, Advocate
VERSUS
P.O. LABOUR COURT
..... Respondent
through: Mr. Alakh Kumar, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

The petitioner assails an order dated 11/13th September,

1990 passed by the respondents terminating his service on the
ground that termination of his service was stigmatic and could not
have been effected without conduct of inquiry.
2.

The undisputed factual matrix is that the petitioner was

appointed as a driver with the Delhi Fire Service by an order dated

W.P. (C) No. 3873/2000

Page 1 of 19

20th April, 1989 on two years probation. The petitioner contends
that while so posted at the Kirti Nagar fire service station on 4th
October, 1989 a call was received with regard to the occurrence of
a fire in the factory. While the petitioner was driving a fire truck,
the petitioner was compelled to swerve as an auto rickshaw had
come in the wrong direction from the wrong side and to avoid this
vehicle, the petitioner was compelled to move the fire truck. As a
result, the fire vehicle had overturned. The vehicle was damaged
and there was a loss to the tune of Rs.1,65,000/- to the
management.
3.

The petitioner alleges that the respondents were

persuaded by this accident to pass the order of termination of his
service on 11/13th September, 1990 and consequently this
termination which was effected without an inquiry was stigmatic
and illegal.

In this behalf, reliance is placed on judicial

pronouncement reported in 1991 3 SCC 291 Om Prakash Goel
vs H.P. Tourism Development Corporation Ltd. And 1992
(5) SLR 661 entitled Governing Council of Kidwai
Memorial Institute of Oncology, Bangalore vs. Dr.
Pandurang Godwalkar and another.

The petitioner also

places reliance on AIR 2003 SC 1789 entitled Mathew P.
W.P. (C) No. 3873/2000

Page 2 of 19

Thomas vs. Kerala State Civil Supply Corporation Ltd.
& Others to contend that even if the order of termination did not
mention any reasons which could be considered stigmatic, but
from an examination of the background and at tendant
circumstances, a conclusion could be arrived at that the alleged
misconduct was the real basis and design to terminate the services
of a probationer. In such circumstances, the order of termination
of the services of the probationer would not be legally sustainable.
4.

On the other hand, Mr. Alakh Kumar, learned counsel

for the respondent has vehemently opposed the writ petition and
has contended that the appointment of the petitioner itself
stipulated that it was with effect from 1st April, 1989 for a period of
two years and it was inherent and implicit in such appointment
that the petitioner's performance be found suitable. In the instant
case, according to learned counsel for the respondent, the
petitioner's services were terminated by the order dated 11/13th
September, 1990 and that the order was innocuous without any
colour of stigma attached thereto and that the same was not based
on any misconduct on the part of the petitioner. It is further
contended that the order has to stand on its own legs and anything
said in the counter affidavit would not impart stigma or reasons
W.P. (C) No. 3873/2000

Page 3 of 19

for the order of termination of service. It is further submitted that
the averments in the affidavit have been made only to point out the
nature of service rendered by the petitioner.
Reliance has been placed on several pronouncements of
the Apex Court and of this court in support of the submission that
the order of termination in the instant case was that of termination
simplicitor and was not stigmatic in any manner and consequently
could not be assailed by the petitioner.

The respondent has

submitted that there was no legal requirement to conduct a
domestic inquiry before terminating the service of a workman who
was on probation as the authorities were not satisfied with the
work and conduct of the petitioner was not up to the mark.
5.

Having heard learned counsel for the parties at great

length and perused the available record, I find that the petitioner
was admittedly on probation. The termination of services of the
petitioner was effected while he was still on probation by an order
which is dated 11/13th September, 1990 which reads as hereunder
:“No. F.2/EStt/DFS/90-429/D
11.9.1990

Dated
13.9.1990

OFFICE ORDER
W.P. (C) No. 3873/2000

Page 4 of 19

:

The probation period of Driver 15/48
Hawa Singh posted at Kirti Nagar Fire Station is
hereby terminated with effect from the afternoon
of 11th September, 1990.
He is directed to hand over the
complete charge of his post to the Officer-inCharge, Kirti Nagar Fire Station.
This issue in continuation of office
message dated 11.9.1990 conveyed through
Headquarters Control.
Dy.

Sd/Chief
Fire

Officer-I
6.

Delhi Fire Service”
This order even when examined closely would reflect

that the same does not appear to cast any kind of aspersion on the
petitioner or any stigma on his reputation. The order at the face of
it appears to be totally innocuous and merely informs the
petitioner that his probation period stands terminated with effect
from 11th September, 1990.
7.

So far as the instance on which the petitioner is basing

his entire writ petition is an incident which has occurred on the 4th
October, 1989. The petitioner has contended that because of the
accident which resulted for no fault of the petitioner, termination
of his services has been effected.
8.

The petitioner complained against his termination to the

labour authorities. The concerned authority considered the matter

W.P. (C) No. 3873/2000

Page 5 of 19

and by an order dated 4th September, 1990 referred the following
dispute for adjudication on the following terms :“Whether the termination of services ofShri
Hawa Singh is illegal and/or unjustified and if
so, to what relief is he entitled and what
directions are necessary in this respect?”
The labour court examined the matter at length and
after consideration of the evidence which was laid by the parties
before it and several judicial pronouncements, answered the
reference against the workman by the award dated 13th January,
2000.
9.

The petitioner has accepted the fact that his services

were not terminated immediately upon the happening of the
incident on 4th October, 1989 and he was permitted to continue the
work on probation till his services were terminated by the order
passed on 11/13th September, 1990, that is for almost a year after
the occurrence.
10.

In the counter affidavit which has been filed before this

court, undoubtedly the respondents have indicated that the
services of the petitioner were terminated after making an overall
assessment of his performance during the period of his probation
and as the same was not found to be satisfactory.
11.

It is trite that a person on probation has no right to be

W.P. (C) No. 3873/2000

Page 6 of 19

confirmed and its is equally well settled law that the services of a
person on probation can be terminated by an order of termination
simplicitor without holding any inquiry.
12.

The petitioner has placed reliance on the reference to

the accident which had occurred in the counter affidavit.
However, the impact of such statement in the counter affidavit on
the order passed would need to be examined in the light of the
principles of law laid down by the Supreme Court.
13.

Both parties have placed strong reliance on the

pronouncement of the Apex Court in AIR 1999 SC 983 Dipti
Prakash Banerjee vs Satvendra Nath Bose National
Centre for Basic Sciences.

In this case, the court was called

upon to consider the circumstances in which an order of
termination of services of the probationer could be said to be
punitive or not. In this behalf, the court held thus :“ 20.
As to in what circumstances an order
of termination of a probationer can be said to be
punitive or not depends upon whether certain
allegations which are the cause of the
termination are the motive or foundation. In
this area, as pointed out by Shah, J. (as he then
was) in Madan Gopal v. State of Punjab, AIR
1963 SC 531, there is no difference between cases
where services of a temporary employee are
terminated and where a probationer is
discharged. This very question was gone into
W.P. (C) No. 3873/2000

Page 7 of 19

recently in R.S. Gupta v. U.P. State Agro
Industries Corporation Ltd., (1998) 8 JT (SC)
585 : (1999 AIR SCW 207) and reference was
made to the development of the law from time to
time starting from Parshottam Lal Dhingra v.
Union of India, 1958 SCR 828 : (AIR 1958 SC
36), to the concept of 'purpose of inquiry'
introduced by Shah, J. (as he then was) in State
of Orissa v. Ram Narayan Das, (1961) 1 SCR 606
: (AIR 1961 SC 177) and to the seven Bench
decision in Samsher Singh v. State of Punjab,
(1974) 2 SCC 831 : (AIR 1974 SC 2192) and to
post Samsher Singh case-law. This Court had
occasion to make a detailed examination of what
is the 'motive' and what is the 'foundation' on
which innocuous order is based.
22.
If findings were arrived at in inquiry as
to misconduct, behind the back of the officer or
without a regular departmental enquiry, the
simple order of termination is to be treated as
'founded' on the allegations and will be bad. But
if the inquiry was not held, no finding were
arrived at and the employer was not inclined to
conduct an inquiry but, at the same time, he did
not want to continue the employee against whom
there were complaints, it would only be a case of
motive and the order would not be bad. Similar
is the position if the employer did not want to
inquire into the truth of the allegations because
of delay in regular departmental proceedings or
he was doubtful about securing adequate
evidence. In such a circumstance, the allegation
would be a motive and not the foundation and
the simple order of termination would be valid.”
Thus, it is not every case in which there may be
allegations against the workman but the order of termination did
not disclose any such allegations, that the order would be held to

W.P. (C) No. 3873/2000

Page 8 of 19

be bad. In such a case upon examination of the material, the order
would be sustained if a conclusion could be arrived at that the
allegations were in the nature of the motive for the order of
simplicitor termination.
14.

Therefore, in the instant case, the order of termination

has to be examined in the light of the principles laid down above.
15.

In AIR 1998 SC 327 Life Insurance Corporation

vs Raghvender Sheshagiri Rao Kulkarni, it was held that
when a clause in the letter of appointment of the employee on
probation clearly stipulated that he could be discharged from
service, at any time during the period of probation without any
notice or without assigning any cause and he was discharged from
service during probation in terms of the regulations, such
termination could not be held to be bad on the ground of failure of
the corporation to give opportunity of hearing to the probationer.
16.

To the same effect are the principles laid down by the

Apex Court in JT 1997 (9) SC 533 Rajasthan Adult
Education Association & Anr. Vs Kumari Ashoka
Bhatacharya & Anr. In this case, despite several letters to the
respondent to show improvement in her work, she failed to do so.
In these circumstances, her services were dispensed with by a
W.P. (C) No. 3873/2000

Page 9 of 19

simple letter of termination of service. It was held by the Apex
Court that the letter terminating her services does not cast any
stigma on her and hence the appointment was legally within the
right of the employer to terminate the temporary employment of
the respondent without notice or inquiry.
17.

It is well settled that a probationer has no right to the

post hold by him and his services can be terminated in accordance
with the rules. In JT 1992 6 SC 82 Unit Trust of India vs T.
Bijaya Kumar & Anr., the court held that the very purpose of
placing a person on probation is to try him during the probation
period and to assess his suitability for the job in question. It is
settled law that an order to discharge simplicitor is not an order of
punishment and consequently there is no question of giving a
hearing before the termination of his service.
18.

It has been held by the Apex Court that a person who

has been appointed on probation does not have a right to be
confirmed even merely because he had completed the period of
probation of two years and had passed the requisite test and
successfully completed the prescribed training.

In this behalf,

reliance can be appropriately placed on the principles laid down by
the Apex Court in 1985 (51) FLR 77 Dhanjibai Ramjibhai vs
W.P. (C) No. 3873/2000

Page 10 of 19

State of Gujarat.
19.

The Division Bench of this court had occasion to

examine a similar order of termination of services of a probationer
in 1987 (55) FLR 67 between K.C. Mangia and the Central
Warehousing Corporation and Others.

It was held by the

Division Bench that a probationer's service can be terminated if he
is found unsuitable for being absorbed in the service. If the order
of termination which is issued does not contain any stigma or
reference to any charge of misconduct on the part of the
probationer.

There is no obligation to afforded him an

opportunity of being heard in respect of termination of service.
20.

The petitioner has placed strong reliance on the

pronouncement of the Apex Court in AIR 2003 SC 1789
Mathew P. Thomas vs Kerala State Civil Supply
Corporation

Limited

and Others in support of the

submission that the language and form of the termination order
would not be conclusive of the issue as to whether the order is
stigmatic or not and that the circumstances and the basis thereof
have to be examined.

The petitioner was referring to the

allegations made in the show cause notice issued to him to contend
that the allegations were such which were stigmatic in nature and
W.P. (C) No. 3873/2000

Page 11 of 19

that the order of termination was not an innocuous order
simplicitor of termination.

It would be useful to consider the

principle laid down by the Apex Court in para 11 of the
pronouncement which reads thus :“11.
An order of termination simpliciter
passed during the period of probation has been
generating undying debate. The recent two
decisions of this Court in Deepti Prakash
Banerjee v. Satyendra Nath Bose National
Centre for Basic Sciences, Calcutta and others,
[(1999) 3 SCC 60) and Pavanendra Narayan
Verma v. Sanjay Gandhi PGI of Medical
Sciences and Another, [(2002) 1 SCC 520],
after survey of most of the earlier decisions
touching the question observed as to when an
order of termination can be treated as
simpliciter and when it can be treated as
punitive and when a stigma is said to be
attached to an employee discharged during
period of probation. The learned counsel on
either side referred to and relied on these
decisions either in support of their respective
contentions or to distinguish them for the
purpose of application of the principles stated
therein to the facts of the present case. In the
case of Deepti Prakash Banerjee (supra), after
referring to various decisions indicated as to
when a simple order of termination is to be
treated as “founded” on the allegations of
misconduct and when complaints would be
only as motive for passing such a simple order
of termination. In para 21 of the said judgment
a distinction is complained, thus :“21.
If findings were arrived at
in an enquiry as to misconduct, behind the
back of the officer or without a regular
departmental enquiry, the simple order of
W.P. (C) No. 3873/2000

Page 12 of 19

termination is to be treated as “founded” on
the allegations and will be bad. But if the
enquiry was not held, no findings were arrived
at and the employer was not inclined to
conduct an enquiry but, at the same time, he
did not want to continue the employee against
whom there were complaints, it would only be
a case of motive and the order would not be
bad. Similar is the position if the employer did
not want to enquire into the truth of the
allegations because of delay in regular
departmental proceedings or he was doubtful
about securing adequate evidence. In such a
circumstance, the allegations would be a
motive and not the foundation and the simple
order of termination would be valid.”
From long line of decisions it
appears to us whether an order of termination
is simpliciter or punitive has ultimately to be
decided having due regard to the facts and
circumstances of each case. Many a times the
distinction between the foundation and motive
in relation to an order of termination either is
thin or overlapping. It may be difficult either
to categorize or classify strictly orders of
termination simpliciter falling in our or the
other category, based on misconduct as
foundation for passing the order of
termination simpliciter or on motive on the
ground of unsuitability to continue in service.
If the form and language of the so called order
of termination simpliciter of a probationer
clearly indicate that it is punitive in nature
or/and it is stigmatic there may not be any
need to go into the details of the background
and surrounding circumstances in testing
whether the order of termination is simpliciter
or punitive. In cases where the services of a
probationer are terminated by an order of
termination simpliciter and the language and
form of it do not show that either it is punitive
W.P. (C) No. 3873/2000

Page 13 of 19

or stigmatic on the face of it but in some cases
there may be a background and attending
circumstances to show that misconduct was
the real basis and design to terminate the
services of a probationer. In other words, the
facade of the termination order may be
simpliciter but the real face behind it is to get
rid of services of a probationer on the basis of
misconduct.
In such cases it becomes
necessary to travel beyond the order of
termination simpliciter to find out what in
reality is the background and what weighed
with the employer to terminate the services of
a probationer. In that process it also becomes
necessary to find out whether efforts were
made to find out the suitability of the person to
continue in service or he is in reality removed
from service on the foundation of his
misconduct.”
21.

Therefore, even if there was material available on the

record before the authority which is the basis the order of
termination, existence of such material by itself would not make
an order simply terminating the service of the employee as
stigmatic. Such material may be a motive for passing the order of
termination however it is open to an employer to not to proceed by
way of a disciplinary inquiry against an employee against whom
there were complaints. In such a case, the complaints would only
be in the nature of motive and not the foundation and would not
render the termination order bad in law.
22.

In the instant case, the labour court has found no force

W.P. (C) No. 3873/2000

Page 14 of 19

in the submission made on behalf of the petitioner and a clear
finding has been returned to the effect that in the impugned award
dated 13th January, 2000 to the effect that the petitioner has failed
to establish any nexus between the action taken and the charges
which were levelled against the workman. It was held that the
termination of services of the petitioner did not amount to
retrenchment as it was termination simplicitor during the
probation and hence was not illegal or unjustified on the part of
the management.
23.

In the instant case, the petitioner has rested his entire

case that his services were terminated on the allegation against the
workman that he was involved in an accident on 4th October, 1989.
However, I find that the same did not result in the termination of
his services. The petitioner was given a fair opportunity to show
that he was suitable for the job in question. It is after assessment
of his performance during the period of probation and after
finding him not suitable for the post that the order dated 13th
September, 1990 has been passed long after the accident
terminating his probation.
24.

The Apex Court had also occasion to examine the issue

which has been raised raised in the instant case. In 2001 LLR
W.P. (C) No. 3873/2000

Page 15 of 19

260,

Krishnadevaraya

Education

Trust

vs

L.A.Balakrishna in response to the challenge by the workman
to the order of termination simplicotor, the employer stated that
the services of the probationer were not satisfactory.
behalf, it was observed by the Apex Court thus :
“5.
There can be no manner of doubt
that the employer is entitled to engage the
services of a person on probation. During the
period of probation, the suitability of the
recruit/appointee has to be seen. If his
services are not satisfactory which means that
he is not suitable for the job, then the
employer has a right to terminate the services
as a reason thereof. If the termination during
probationary period is without any reason,
perhaps such an order would be sought to be
challenged on the ground of being arbitrary.
Therefore, normally services of an employee
on probation would be terminated, when he is
found not to be suitable for the job for which
he was engaged, without assigning any
reason. If the order on the face of it states
that his services are being terminated because
his performance is not satisfactory, the
employer runs the risk of the allegation being
made that the order itself casts a stigma. We
do not say that such a contention will succeed.
Normally, therefore, it is preferred that the
order itself does not mention the reason why
the services are being terminated.
6.
If such an order is challenged, the
employer will have to indicate the grounds on
which the services of a probationer were
terminated. Mere fact that in response to the
challenge the employer states that the services
were not satisfactory would not ipsofacto
W.P. (C) No. 3873/2000

Page 16 of 19

In this

mean that the services of the probationer were
being terminated by way of punishment. The
probationer is on test and if the services are
found not to be satisfactory, the employer has,
in terms of the letter of appointment, the right
to terminate the services.”
In view of the foregoing principles, the reference to the
accident and the financial loss to the Delhi Fire Service in the
counter affidavit, that is in response to the challenge by the
petitioner instant case would not ipso facto that the services of the
probationer were terminated by way of punishment. Even at the
sake of repetition, it should be pointed out that even after the
accident, the petitioner was permitted to continue to work till his
probation came to an end as per the letter of appointment. The
petitioner was given a fair chance to show his working.
25.

In the Om Prakash Goel vs H.P. Tourism Development

Corporation, the case relied upon by the petitioner, a disciplinary
inquiry had been commenced which gave strength to the
submissions made on behalf of the probationer. This is not the
position in the instant case.
26.

In the light of the aforestated discussion, I find no

reason to interfere with the findings returned by the labour court.
The same are in consonance with the applicable principles laid
down by the authoritative and binding judicial pronouncements of
W.P. (C) No. 3873/2000

Page 17 of 19

the Apex Court which have been noticed hereinabove.
27.

There is yet another aspect of the matter. Admittedly,

the petitioner was appointed on 20th April, 1989 and his services
were terminated by the order passed on 11/13th September, 1990.
The petitioner had rendered service of barely a year and five
months. The matter was referred for adjudication by the order of
the appropriate government passed on 4th September, 1992. The
industrial adjudication culminated in the award which was passed
against the workman on 13th January, 2000 and the matter has
been pending in this court ever since. The fact that the workman
had worked for such a short period prior to the termination of his
services and the long period which has elapsed since the same
would itself disentitle the workman to any relief in the matter.
For all the foregoing reasons, I find no merit in this writ
petition which is hereby dismissed.

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
April 5, 2006
kr

W.P. (C) No. 3873/2000

Page 18 of 19

