IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 6185/2006
Date of decision: 6th December, 2007
Sanwal singh
... Petitioner
through: Mr. O.P. Sharma, Sr. Adv. with
Mr. K.R. Gupta, Adv.

VERSUS
Union of India & Ors.
....Respondents
through: Mr. Ajay Verma, Adv. for the respondent
no.2/DDA
Mr. Sanjay Kumar Pathak, Adv. for the
respondent no. 3/GNCT of Delhi

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
GITA MITTAL, J(Oral)
1.

This writ petition has been filed by the petitioner as owner of land admeasuring

1 bigha 5 biswas in khasra no. 32/16/4 and 14 biswas in khasra no. 32/25 situated at
the Badarpur on the Mathura Road, New Delhi. The contention is that the predecessor
in interest of the petitioner, Shri Nathu Singh had acquired rights in these
properties by virtue of successfully bidding in an auction conducted by the
rehabilitation
-2department of the Government and certificates dated 29th November, 1965 and 31st

July, 1963 were issued in favour of Shri Nathu Ram father of the petitioner. The
petitioner has contended that these sales have been confirmed by the Government of
NCT of Delhi in its communication dated 16th August, 2002. The construction on the
property was assessed to property tax for the assessment year 1960-61 and the
petitioner is stated to have paid property tax in respect thereof since 1st April, 1960.
There is also no dispute that the property stands mutated in favour of the petitioner.
According to the writ petitioner, the property has been put to residential as well as
commercial use.
2.

The petitioner has submitted that he was intending to build an additional temple

on the property aforenoticed and had consequently sought permission for the same
from the DDA. However on the premise that the Master Plan for planned development
of Delhi had come into vogue in 1962 which did not permit the construction, the
respondents had denied the same to the petitioner. The petitioner contends that he
has repeatedly approached the Delhi Development Authority for permission to do so.
Despite holding out that the premises that permission would be granted, the same is
not being granted. Hence by way of the present writ petition, a prayer is made that a
direction be issued to the respondents to grant approval for reconstruction of the
petitioner's property in the nature
-3of a house of worship on the land located in khasra no. 32/16/4 and 32/25 in Badarpur
on Mathura Road, New Delhi for the reason that at the time that the government had
transferred the ownership rights to the predecessor in interest of the petitioner on 13th
December, 1960, there was no such embargo on the construction.

3.

This writ petition has been opposed by the Delhi Development Authority that the

land in question falls in zone F of the notified Master Plan.

As per the zonal

developmental plan of the area, the prescribed and permitted user of this land is
described as 'Recreational (District Park)'. Mr. Ajay Verma learned standing counsel
for the DDA has submitted that in view of the provisions of Section 7, 8 and 14 of the
Delhi Development Act, 1957, no user other than the user prescribed under the Master
Plan can be permitted to the petitioner. So far as the user of premises which have been
prescribed for the purposes of district park is concerned, it is pointed out that the same
is prescribed under the clause 8 (iib) of the development code. As a temple is not
permitted in the district park in the code, it is contended that the same is not
permissible.
4.

So far as the respondent no. 3 is concerned, I find that it has been admitted that

the subject property was transferred in favour of Shri Nathu Ram in the auction held
on 13th December, 1960 and the respondent no. 3 also admits issuance of the sale
certificates on 29th November, 1965 and 31st
-4July, 1963. However this respondent has also submitted that the Delhi Development
Authority would be the concerned authority so far as further construction and
compliance with the Master Plan provisions are concerned.
5.

Having heard learned counsel for the parties I find that so far as title is

concerned, there is no real dispute to the same by the authorities in favour of Shri
Nathu Ram. The primary dispute which has been urged before this court relates to the
permissible construction on the land in question. It is an admitted position that the

petitioner acquired the property in 1960 which was prior to coming into force of the
Master Plan for Delhi 1962.
6.

The statutory provision which would govern the user of the lands and buildings

constructed prior to coming into vogue of the Master Plan is to be found in the proviso
to Section 14 of the Delhi Development Act, 1957 which reads thus :“14. User of land and building in contravention of plans –
After the coming into operation of any of the plans in a zone no person
shall use or permit to be used any land
or building in that zone otherwise than in conformity with such plan.
Provided that it shall be lawful to continue to use upon such
terms and conditions as may be prescribed by regulations made in this
behalf any land or building for the purpose and to the extent for and to
which it is being used upon the date on which such plan comes into
force.”
-5Therefore the statute has saved only such user as to which the property was
being put to on the date when the plan came into force. The statute is specific even
with regard to the extent to which the property could be utilised. Therefore it is only
the construction and the user which was existing when MPD-1962 came into force
which could be permitted on the subject property. The petitioner has submitted that it
has made payment of property tax in respect of the construction. Needless to say the
petitioner would be entitled to continue to use and maintain the same.
7.

So far as any further construction on the property in question is concerned, the

petitioner would have to abide by the statutory Master Plan in view of the provisions
of Section 7 of the Delhi Development Act, 1957. The zonal developmental plans
framed under Section 8 of the Delhi Development Act, 1957, which provide the final
detail with regard to the manner in which the property can be utilised, would also bind

the petitioner so far as construction and user of the property is concerned. According
to the respondents the Master Plan has designated the prescribed user of the land in
petitioner as that of a district park. Any further construction by the petitioner would
therefore require to abide by the description given in clause 8(iib) of the development
code which provides the permissible use premises in the district park. The existing
construction and user as in 1962 would be saved by virtue of the proviso to
-6Section 14 of the DDA Act.
In this background the action of the respondent in not granting permission to
the petitioner to raise a temple on the subject land cannot be faulted on any legally
tenable ground.
I therefore find no merit in this writ petition which is hereby dismissed.
8.

The petitioner has made a prayer for permission to undertake repairs on the

existing construction. So far as this aspect is concerned it shall be open for the
petitioner to make an appropriate application giving the requisite documents and
furnish complete details in this behalf to the DDA which may consider the same and
pass appropriate orders thereon within four weeks of the receipt of the application.
Dasti

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
December 06, 2007
kr

