REPORTABLE
*
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
+

Writ Petition (C) No. 2578 of 2003

%

Date of decision : June 6th , 2005

G. SAREEN

...... Petitioner
Through: Mr. Valmiki Mehta, Sr. Advocate
with Mr. Praveen Chauhan,
Advocate

Versus
UNION OF INDIA & OTHERS
....... Respondents.
Through: Mr. R.V. Sinha, Advocate with
Mr. A.S. Singh, Advocate
Mr. Kuldeep Singh, Assistant.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Yes
Digest?
GITA MITTAL, J
1.

By way of the present writ petition, the petitioner has sought the

following prayers:WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.1

“A) Direct the respondents by means of a writ or mandamus
and/or any other writ, order or direction to the respondents to
transfer in favour of petitioner by means of a legal document
such as the Sale/Conveyance Deed the subject plots E-51/52,
admeasuring 650 sq. yds. Situated in Kirti Nagar, New Delhi
and also transfer its possession to the petitioner forthwith and
without any delay.
B)
2.

Costs of the petition be also awarded.”

The facts giving rise to the present writ petition are that the

Rehabilitation Housing Corporation Limited was a Government owned
Limited Company in which the Central Government owned 80% shares
registered under the Indian Companies Act, 1956. Vide a resolution dated
24th June, 1972, the said corporation decided to transfer its rights and
liabilities to the Central Government who had agreed to take over the assets
and liabilities of the company in terms of the resolution.

The

High

Court approved the transfer vide order dated 2nd January, 1973 passed in CA
No.493/1972. Pursuant to the afore-stated resolution, an agreement dated
3rd April, 1974 came to be executed between the Rehabilitation Housing
Corporation Limited through its voluntary liquidator and the President of
India through the Secretary, Department of Rehabilitation, Ministry of
Supply & Rehabilitation, Government of India.
3.

It appears that Shri Kulnath Sareen, the father of the petitioner, had
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.2

come to India during partition and was allotted a plot bearing No.A-32,
Kirti Nagar, on 24th April, 1955. Copy of the allotment letter has been
placed on record. In as much as this plot stood allotted to a school, Shri
Kulnath Singh was allotted plot bearing No.E-51-52, Kirti Nagar, in lieu
thereof.
The father of the petitioner thereafter, vide application dated 12 th

4.

March, 1956, applied for transfer of allotment in the name of his son, the
present petitioner. This request was accepted and the present petitioner was
allotted plot No.E-51/52, Kirti Nagar, New Delhi vide a letter dated 27th
July, 1956.

it has been pointed out and is not disputed also by the

respondents that pursuant to the afore-stated allotment, full payment
towards the plot was received from the petitioner by a letter dated 30 th April,
1968.
5.

The petitioner has pointed out that as plot No.E-51/52 was in the

possession of squatters. Consequently vide a letter dated 13th February,
1957, the petitioner was informed by the respondents that possession would
be allotted to the petitioner after removal of squatters. It has been pointed
out that it was only after continuous pursuasion by the petitioner and
repeated representations that a suit for possession was filed by the
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.3

respondents only in 1966. The petitioner was arrayed as respondent No.1 as
a party. In para 13 of the plaint at page 35 of the paper book, it was clearly
mentioned that the petitioner was made a party to the suit because the Union
of India has agreed to sell the subject property to the petitioner. This suit
was dismissed by the court of Smt. Aruna Suresh, Sub-Judge on the ground
that the plaintiff had failed to take action in respect of defendants who had
died and the suit had abated. It appears that an appeal was filed in this court
against the dismissal of the suit which also came to be dismissed for nonprosecution.
6.

The petitioner submits that under these circumstances, it was

constrained to file Civil Writ No.47/1993 on the 2nd January, 1993 seeking a
direction to the Respondent No.1 to proceed forthwith under the Public
Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 against the
squatters/land grabbers in possession of Plot No.E/51-52, Kirti Nagar, and
hand over possession to the Petitioner after securing their eviction. An
alternative prayer was made for directions to the Respondent No.1 to allot
and give possession of an alternative similar plot in comparable liability in
lieu of the abovementioned plot on the same terms and condition if for some
reasons it is found inexpedient to remove the squatters/land grabbers and
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.4

secure possession of the plot for the Petitioner.
7.

WP (C) No. 47/1993 was disposed of with a direction on 27 th April,

1995 to the respondents to evict the unauthorised occupants from the
subject property and the proceedings were to be completed within one year.
The proceedings were contested by the petitioner before the Estate Officer
under the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1973
right from the initial stage. It is contended that the Union of India neither
filed any pleadings nor led oral evidence before the Estate Officer and all
these was done only by the petitioner who had filed applications for
intervention.
8.

The Estate Officer made an order dated 4th April, 1997. The appeal

of the unauthorised occupants against this order was dismissed by the
learned Additional District Judge on 15th November, 1997.

The writ

petition filed by the occupants was dismissed on 21st July, 1997 and further
vide judgment on 23rd November, 2000, the Division Bench of this court
dismissed the L.P.A. No.365/2000. The petitioner submits that an S.L.P.
No.20877/2000 filed by the encroachers was dismissed on 4th January, 2000.
The squatters were removed by the respondents around 6th July, 2001 and
ever since the petitioner has been requesting for handing over possession of
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.5

the plot.
9.

The petitioner submits that he was asked to supply certain minor

documents of house tax and an undertaking. It had been clearly stated that
the case of the petitioner would be processed thereafter. The petitioner was
informed even on 22nd July, 2002 that the matter was under consideration.
The petitioner served a letter dated 30th January, 2003 upon the respondents.
The petitioner submits that he has been following up the matter with the
respondents right till 9th April, 2003 and finding no result, has filed the
present writ petition.
It is submitted that after the filing of the writ petition, the respondents
have written a letter dated 22nd April, 2003 which has been enclosed to the
counter affidavit refusing to hand over possession of the subject plot
without any reason. The petitioner contends that at no point of time did the
respondents repudiate

the eligibility or entitlement of the plot to the

petitioner or their liability
petitioner.

to hand over possession of the plot to the

It is further submitted that the rights of the petitioner

crystallized when he was allotted the plot and made full payment thereupon.
It is submitted that allotment in his favour was recognised even in the
agreement dated 3rd April, 1974 executed between the Rehabilitation
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.6

Housing Corporation Limited and the Union of India and that the
respondents have merely stepped into the shoes of the erstwhile
Corporation. The allotment in favour of the petitioner was made validly
after full acceptance of the legality and validity of the application. Payment
was demanded by the respondents and so paid by the petitioner.

The

respondents cannot be permitted to defeat the binding rights of the
petitioner by such illegal and arbitrary manner.

It has been pointed out

that the petitioner has been waiting for the plot from 1957. He has paid the
entire price of the plot as back as in 1968. The amounts remain with and
have been utilised by the respondents and that the defences raised against
the petitioner in the counter affidavit are frivolous and wholly untenable.
10.

In reply, Mr. R.V. Sinha, learned counsel appearing for the

respondents, has submitted that the petitioner had failed to give the refugee
registration certificate which was required as per the form submitted by Shri
Kulnath Singh and as such the allotment made in his favour could not have
been made contrary to the prescribed procedure. It has also been contended
out that the Rehabilitation Housing Corporation Limited was wound up
pursuant to the agreement dated 3rd April, 1974 and in Clause 2 of the
agreements, it was clearly reflected that a sum of Rs.95,000/- has been paid
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.7

as damages.
11.

According to learned counsel for the respondents, the suit for

possession which was filed by the respondents came to be dismissed and
the appeal filed in respect thereof also came to be dismissed. As such, the
contract, if any, between the parties stood frustrated and no allotment of
possession could be granted to the petitioner.
In this behalf, reliance has been placed on the judgment of the Apex
Court reported at AIR 1954 S.C. 44 entitled Satyabrata Ghosh Vs.
Mugneeram Barger & Co. and 2002 (5) SCC 54 (paras 40-42) entitled
Industrial Finance Corporation of India vs. Cannanore Shipping &
Weaving Mills Ltd. Others.
12.

It has further been submitted that the respondents have litigated at

length and had spent money as well as efforts in securing eviction of the
unauthorised occupants and that the obligation on the Central Government
which required spending substantial amount from the Public Exchequer for
the benefit of an individual (petitioner herein) did not flow from the
agreement.

It is submitted that this radical change in obligation has

frustrated the contract.
13.

Additionally, it is submitted that no public purpose would be served
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.8

by transferring the plot in favour of the petitioner when it was got vacated in
the afore-stated manner. According to the respondents, the property being
public property, could not be transferred under the colour of the agreement
which simultaneously provides for disbursement of liquidated damages of
Rs.95,000/-.

Under these circumstances, the Government has taken a

conscious decision in view of the above not to execute the sale deed and
thereby transferring the plot to the petitioner. The respondents are stated to
have decided to transfer and sell the plot by way of public auction wherein
the petitioner could participate, is found eligible, could be entitled to get
the same transferred in his name.
14.

I may also notice the objection vehemently taken on behalf of the

respondents with regard to the maintainability of the writ petition on the
ground that the writ petition was seeking to enforce contractual rights by
way of the writ petition which is not permissible. In this behalf, reliance
was placed on the pronouncements of the Apex Court reported at 2004 (3)
SLJ 137 (paras 22 to 24, 28 & 30) entitled State of Uttar Pradesh Vs.
Johri Mal; 2002 Vol.1(5) SCC 64 paras 40 to 42 entitled IFCI Vs.
Cannanore Shipping & Ors. Reliance is also placed on the judgments of
this court reported in AIR 1971 Delhi 305 entitled Anand Vs. Menoram
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.9

Vs. S. Prasad, 105 (2003) DLT 455 (para 38 & 39 and 54-55) entitled
C.J. International Hotel. Vs. NDMC.
15.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has vehemently disputed the

objections raised by the respondents and has pointed out that even though
the case relates to a pre-contract stage, however, it has been held that writ
petitions in respect of matters relating to contract are maintainable where
the action of the State is arbitrary and is in violation of the rights of a
petitioner. In the instant case, it is stated that the action is mala fide,
arbitrary and without jurisdiction. The petitioner has contended that the
respondents have accepted the validity and legality of the allotment of the
plot in his favour and all the pleadings and it is the petitioner who has been
pursuaded to prosecute all the litigation resulting in the successful eviction
of the trespassers. The respondents have taken no action whatsoever and
that in fact, it is the petitioner who has laboriously and diligently pursued
the entire litigation at tremendous cost. It is also contended that no decision
as has been alleged in the counter affidavit has been communicated to the
petitioner and that such decision even if taken cannot be given effect to as
the same is illegal, arbitrary and suffers from the vice of hostile
discrimination.

The respondents, it is argued, are bound by their

WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.10

representations and actions and estopped from denying the petitioner's
entitlement.
In support of the plea that the writ petition was maintainable, the
petitioner has placed reliance on the pronouncements of the Apex Court in
2004 (3) SCC 553 entitled ABL International Limited Vs. Sport Credit
Guarantee Corporation of India Limited; AIR 2003 SC 2120 (para 7)
entitled Harbans Lal Sahnia Vs. Indian Oil Corporation;
477 entitled Biman Krishna

2001 6 SCC

Vs. United India Insurance Company

and Anr.
16.

Mr. Valmiki Mehta, learned senior counsel appearing for the

petitioner, further contends that the agreement dated 3rd April, 1974, relied
upon by the respondents, was inter se the Rehabilitation Housing
Corporation Limited and the Union of India and would be behind the back
of the petitioner.

The rights of the petitioner cannot be defeated by

reference thereto.

It has also been pointed out that even in the said

agreement, the respondents have clearly stated that the question of damages
would arise only if the squatters could not be removed. According to the
petitioner, even this agreement records and accepts the binding rights of the
petitioner and the validity of the allotment made in this behalf.
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.11

It is

contended that the respondents, having steped into the shoes of the
erstwhile Corporation, are bound by all actions taken by it in regard to
allotment of the land.
17.

Learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner has also

contended that requirement for the refugee registration certificate now
sought to be imposed on the petitioner, was wholly untenable in as much as
the certificate was required only if the transfer is to a displaced person in
this behalf. Learned counsel relies on the statement made in the application
form itself. On behalf of the petitioner, it is submitted that the petitioner
was required to submit an affidavit which satisfied all requirements. No
objection having been taken for the last almost 40 years, such a requirement
cannot be imposed upon the petitioner now. It has also been pointed out
that at no point of time, such a demand was made from the petitioner nor
any communication was made in this behalf. On the contrary, the petitioner
has throughout been promised and assured that the possession of the plot
would be given.
18.

I have given my considered thought to the submissions made on

behalf of the parties and carefully perused the available record.

The

petitioner has also placed before me a copy of the CWP No.47/1993 filed by
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.12

him and a copy of the counter affidavit of Union of India filed in LPA
No.365/2000. My attention has also been drawn to the repeated statements
on behalf of the respondents which have the effect of acceptance of the
validity of the allotment in favour of the petitioner and also the
unconditional assurance of handing over possession as soon as the squatters
were removed. The original record relating to the case of the petitioner has
also been placed before me which has been carefully perused.
19.

It is on record that the Chief Commissioner of Delhi, vide a

notification issued under the Land Acquisition Act, 1948, acquired about
150 acres of land situated towards the South of Najafgarh Road, Village
Basai Darapur.

The said land was acquired on 23 rd February, 1952. The

land vested absolutely in the then provincial Government of Delhi free from
all encumbrances and was placed at the disposal of Rehabilitation Housing
Corporation Limited, a company sponsored by the Central Government with
80% share holding on the 17th October, 1956 for the development of a
colony named as “Kirti Nagar” for displaced persons. There is no doubt
that Shri Kulnath Singh (father of the petitioner) had applied for allotment
vide an application form dated 5th April, 1955 for acquisition of a plot. It is
an admitted position that initially Plot No.A-32 was allotted to him vide a
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.13

letter dated 27th April, 1955 at a total price of Rs.6,987.8 Annas. Mode of
payment was provided in the letter dated 12th March, 1956. Shri Kulnath
Singh applied for transfer of allotment in the name of his son who is the
present petitioner. This request was accepted vide a letter dated 27th July,
1956 by the Rehabilitation Housing Corporation Limited and the petitioner
was required to execute an agreement to sell in the office at any working
day.
20.

I may notice here that the application form dated 12th March, 1956

contained the stipulation at the bottom to the following effect.
“N.B. With this form must accompany an application on
form from the transferee and an attested copy of
his refugee registration certificate in case
transferor is a DISPLACE. (portion not there)”
It is, therefore, apparent that this requirement related to a case where
the allottee was a displaced person.
If the application for transfer of plot is read in conjunction with the
tender form, it is evident that the requirement of a copy of a registration
certificate or date of arrival in Delhi after partition was required to be
submitted only by applicants who were seeking allotment as displaced
persons only.

WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.14

21.

In the instant case, perusal of the agreement to sell which was

executed on 22nd October, 1955 by the Rehabilitation Housing Corporation
Ltd. with Shri Kulnath Singh clearly stipulates that the same was an
“AGREEMENT TO SELL FOR NON-DISPLACED PERSONS”.
22.

It is also noteworthy that no requirement of refugee registration

certificate was notified to either Shri Kulnath Singh or the present petitioner
at any point of time by the Rehabilitation Housing Corporation Ltd. The
agreement to sell with Shri Kulnath Singh was executed as well as the
approval on application of the petitioner was granted without any such
requirement on 27th July, 1956. I have no manner of doubt that it was
because Shri Kulnath Singh and the petitioner satisfied all the necessary
requirements for the allotment of the plot and the transfer in his favour was
so accepted.
23.

It has been submitted that the petitioner made payment of all the

charges payable in respect of the plot. It was, however, found that this plot
was reserved for school/public utility and consequently, the petitioner was
allotted another plot bearing No.E-51/52, Kirti Nagar, New Delhi on 13th
February, 1957 on the same rate and on the same terms and conditions as
the original plot. This letter of allotment reads as under:WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.15

13th February, 1957.

“Shri G. Sareen,
17A/36, West Extension Area,
Karol Bag, New Delhi.
Dear Sir,

With reference to your letter dated 6-2-51, I am to inform
you that plot No.E/51-52 (78 x 75) area 650 sq. yds. has been
allotted to you in Kirti Nagar in lieu of plot No.A/32 at the same
rate and on the same terms and conditions of sale on which it
was originally allotted.
The possession of the plot will be handed over to you
after the removal of the squatters.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/ BBN Saxena Saxena,
Secretary.”
The letter was issued by an authorised and competent officer on
behalf of the erstwhile company and clearly notified the petitioner that in as
much as there was squatters on the plot, possession of the plot would be
allotted to the petitioner after removal.
24.

Full payment towards the plot by the petitioner was accepted without

any demur. It is an admitted position that the total price stands paid and that
the last instalment would be paid on the 30th April, 1968. This money is
even on date in the hands of the respondents.

WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.16

25.

So as to evict the unauthorised occupants from the plot in question,

the Rehabilitation Housing Corporation Limited filed a suit against the
encroachers. It is noteworthy that the petitioner was arrayed as defendant
No.18 in the suit. In para 13 of the plaint, it was stated thus:“13. That the plaintiff has agreed to sell the plots in units to
defendants no.18, and as such he has been made a party to this
suit.”
26.

Unfortunately, as is the fate of most litigations instituted on behalf of

the State, the suit was dismissed on account of failure to prosecute the same
and non-impleadment of the legal representatives of the deceased
defendants. An appeal filed before this court was also dismissed for nonprosecution by this court.
27.

In the meantime, aggrieved by the failure of Rehabilitation Housing

Corporation Ltd to take action in accordance with law, the present petitioner
filed Civil Writ No.47/1993 entitled Shri G. Sareen Vs. UOI seeking
following prayers before this Court:“a) Issue a writ, direction or order in the nature of
mandamus under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
directing the Respondent No.1 to proceed forthwith under the
Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act,
1971 against the squatters/land grabbers in possession of Plot
No.E/51-52, Kirti Nagar, and hand over possession to the
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.17

Petitioner after securing their eviction.
b)
In the alternative it is prayed that the Hon'ble Court be
pleased to issue a writ, direction or order of like nature,
directing Respondent No.1 to allot and give possession of an
alternative similar plot in comparable liability in lieu of the
abovementioned plot on the same terms and condition if for
some reasons it is found inexpedient to remove the
squatters/land grabbers and secure possession of the plot for
the Petitioner.”
28.

The Division Bench passed the following order on 27th April, 1995

while disposing of the writ petition:“Present:

Mr. Man Mohan Sarin for the petitioner.
Mr. Bhupinder Singh for the respondents.

C.W. 47/1993
In the affidavit of Shri C P Katyal, Settlement Officer,
Ministry of Home Affairs, it has been stated that proceedings
under Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants)
Act, 1971 in order to evict unauthorised occupants from plot
No.E-51/52, Kirti Nagar, New Delhi allotted to petitioner, have
been initiated. We direct that the said proceedings be
completed within a period of one year from today. The writ
petition is disposed of accordingly.
Copy of the order be given to counsel for the parties.
April 27, 1995

Sd/- Y.K. Sabharwal,
Judge
Sd/- Arun Kumar
Judge.”

WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.18

29.

It is noteworthy that respondent No.1 had accepted the validity of the

allotment in favour of the petitioner in these proceedings.
30.

It appears that action was taken against the squatters under the Public

Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 pursuant to the
afore-stated directions. Proceedings first initiated against the unauthorised
occupants resulted in an order dated 14th March, 1996 which was quashed in
appeal. Thereafter, fresh notices on 7th November, 1996 were issued under
Section 4 of the Public Premises Act, 1971. Finally, vide orders dated 4th
April, 1997, an order of eviction was passed against the unauthorised
occupants of plot No. E-51- 52, Kirti Nagar, New Delhi.
31.

It is noteworthy that in the meantime, Rehabilitation Housing

Corporation

Limited went into voluntary liquidation pursuant to a

resolution passed in its annual general body meeting held on 12 th July, 1968
and a liquidator was appointed. An application was filed in this court on
24th August, 1972 seeking permission for transfer of rights and liabilities of
the Corporation to the Central Government which inter alia included the
land in question.
32.

Vide an order dated 2nd January, 1973, this court had noticed that all

the unauthorised occupants were served with the notices and had also
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.19

approved the transfer of company's rights and liabilities in terms of the
resolution dated 24th June, 1972.

Pursuant thereto, an agreement was

entered into between the Rehabilitation Housing Corporation Limited and
the President of India through Secretary,
Department of Rehabilitation.

Ministry of Home Affairs,

This agreement referred to the terms of

agreement between the parties thereto in relation to the eviction of the
squatters from plot nos. E-51 and 52, Kirti Nagar, New Delhi. Civil Suit
No.153/66 was stated to be pending before the Sub Judge, Tis Hazari Court,
Delhi for this purpose. It was agreed between the Rehabilitation Housing
Corporation Limited (First party in the agreement) that the Central
Government (Second party in the agreement) would be entitled to be
substituted in the suit and proceed with the same. Relevant clauses of this
agreement read as under:“2. That the Party of the FIRST PART had filed a civil Suit
No.153 of 1966, which is pending before the Sub-Judge, First
Class, Tis Hazari Court, Delhi, for eviction of 18 Squatters
from plots No.E-51 and 52, Kirti Nagar, New Delhi, which
shall hereafter be pursued by the Central Government party of
the SECOND PART. The Central Government shall be
entitled to get substituted in such suit and proceed with the
same.
3.
That the party of the SECOND PART on payment of
nominal price of Rs.1/- (Rupee One) only to the party of the
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.20

FIRST PART shall take possession of the land inclusive of all
liabilities involved in the Suit referred to above and at the
same time receive from the party of the FIRST PART a sum of
Rs.95,000/- (Rupees Ninety five thousnad) only being 50% of
the total likely damages amounting to about Rs.1,90,000/(Rupees One hundred and ninety thousand) only that the
Government might be required to pay to Shri G.C. Sarin,
purchaser of plots No.E-51 & 52, Kirti Nagar, New Delhi, in
case it is not possible to evict the squatters; but if the
squatters are evicted from the said plots, the sum of
Rs.95,000/- (Rupees Ninety Five thousand) only paid by the
Corporation to the Central Government will be refunded by
the party of the SECOND PART to the Shareholders of the
Corporation pro rata.
It is hereby further agreed that stamp duty if any payable
on this document will be borne and paid by the party of the
SECOND PART namely the Union of India.”
(Emphasis supplied)
33.

The agreement between the Rehabilitation Housing Corporation Ltd.

and respondent no.1 provided for the contingency that the Government was
unable to get eviction of these squatters and consequently was required to
pay damages to the purchasers.

It was agreed between the Rehabilitation

Housing Corporation Limited and the Government of India that the total
likely damages would amount to Rs.1,90,000 and that the Government of
India and the parties would bear the damages in equal shares. As such, an
amount of Rs.95,000/- was required to be paid by the Rehabilitation
Housing Corporation Limited to the Government of India.
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.21

34.

This agreement specifically noted that such would be the position

only if it was not possible to evict those squatters. It was also noted that in
case the squatters were removed then in such event, the Central Government
would refund the amount of Rs.95,000/- to the shareholders of the
Rehabilitation Housing Corporation Limited on pro rata basis. Thus the
erstwhile Rehabilitation Housing Corporation and the Government of India
also recognised the validity of the allotment and the rights of the present
petitioner Shri G. Sareen.
35.

It appears that Shri G. Sareen made an application for intervention

before the Estate Officer and contested the proceedings on behalf of the
authorities. It appears that the unauthorised occupants were challenging the
maintainability of the proceedings on the ground that the disputed property
was owned by Shri G. Sareen who is stated to have purchased the same by
the deed dated 13th February, 1956 and for this reason the premises was not
a public property and it would be a private property.
Vide its order dated 4th April, 1997, the Estate Officer had found that

36.

Shri G. Sareen was an allottee of the Plot nos.E-51/52 Kirti Nagar, New
Delhi.
Perusal of the order passed by the Estate Officer also shows that the
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.22

contest on behalf of the petitioner was really made by the counsel engaged
by or on behalf of the present petitioner.
37.

The order dated 4th April, 1997 made by the Estate Officer was

impugned in appeals before the Additional District Judge which was
dismissed vide an order dated 15th November, 1997 passed by the learned
Additional District Judge.
Thereafter, the order of the learned A.D.J. & the Estate Officer were
impugned before this Court in Civil Writ Nos.5165/1997, 5117/97,
5152/1997, 5154/1997, 5155/97, 5156/1997, 5157/1997, 5158/1997,
5159/1997, 5160/1997, 5161/1997, 5162/1997, 5163/1997, 5164/1997,
5165/1997 and 5166/1997
38.

The petitioner G. Sareen was arrayed as respondent no.4 in all the

writ petitions. Again the principal objection of the squatters before this
court was also that the land stood allotted to Shri G. Sareen (petitioner
herein) and as such was not public premises.
39.

Vide a judgment dated 21st July, 2000, this court dismissed the writ

petitions inter alia holding as under:“I.
WHETHER
PROPERTY:-

WP (C) No.2578/2003

THE

PROPERTY

Page No.23

IS

A

PUBLIC

The parties are not at issue on the fact that the
provisions of the `Act' are applicable to a particular property
only when the said property in question is a public premises.
The expression `public premises' is also defined under the
provisions of the `Act'. The piece of land involved in the
present petition forms part of the larger parcel of land
comprising about 150 acres of land, which admittedly was
acquired by the Chief Commissioner of Delhi under the
provisions of Land Acquisition Act. With the aforesaid
acquisition of land including the present plot in question on
23.2.1952, the said land vested absolutely with the then
provincial Government of Delhi free from all encumbrances
on the date the notice of acquisition was served or was
published under Section 5 of the said Act. The said
notification acquiring the land was also published in the
gazette and, therefore, all the formalities were complied with
and the land vested with the then provincial Government of
Delhi. It is established from the records that an allotment
letter was issued to respondent No.3, Shri G. Sarin in respect
of the said land pursuant to which a certain amount was also
deposited by said Sh. G. Sarin. However, possession of the
land could not be delivered to him nor any deed could be
executed in his favour transferring the title of the property in
question in his favour. As neither possession was given nor
any sale deed or lease deed was executed in his favour
transferring the title in favour of respondent No.3, the land in
question did not cease to be the property of the Central
Government and it continued to be its owner, and, therefore, is
public premises within the meaning of Section 2 (e) of the said
Act till such time the possession and title of the land was
delivered and transferred by the Government. The land in
question, therefore, continues to belong to the Central
Government and is a public premises and, therefore, the
aforesaid contention of the counsel appearing for the
petitioner that the land in question is not a public premises and
the provisions of the Public Premises (Eviction of
Unauthorised Occupants), Act 1971 are not applicable is
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.24

found to be without any basis.”
40.

The respondents did not raise a dispute as to the validity of the

allotment in favour of the petitioner or his entitlement to possession in any
pleadings or in any proceedings of the allotment to the petitioner. It has
become necessary to advert to the observations of this court only in order to
adjudicate upon the challenge to the validity of the allotment being made in
the present writ petition in the year 2004 by the respondents.
41.

Important in this behalf are the pleadings on behalf of Union of India

on an affidavit filed in October, 2000 in the letters patent appeal filed by the
squatters against the judgment dated 21st July, 2000.

In L.P.A.

No.365/2000, a counter/reply statement on affidavit was filed by Shri
Khushal Chand, son of Shri Bhairon Ram working as Under Secretary,
Ministry of Home Affairs to the following effect:“6.(IX) xxx xxx xxx It is a fact of the case that the Plot
No.E.51/52, Kirti Nagar, New Delhi is not a private
property but a public premises which was allotted to
Shri G.C. Sareen who had made full payment also.
However, physical possession of the plot could not
be handed over to him as it was found that the same
had been encroached upon by Shri Nand Ram &
others. No Sale Deed could also be executed in his
favour. Therefore, the allottee of the plot could not
have the instrument of sale as alleged by the
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.25

appellants. However, it does not affect the rights of
the allottee, as full consideration by him had already
passed.
6.(X)

No comments except that Shri G.C. Sareen,
Intervener is the lawful allottee of the property and
as such he has right in the said property.
xxx

6.(XIII)

xxx

xxx

xxx

Plot No.E.51/52, Kirti Nagar, New Delhi was
allotted to Shri G.C. Sareen pursuant to which a
certain amount was also deposited by him. However,
the vacant possession of the plot could not be handed
over to him nor any Sale Deed issued to him so far.
He being an allottee, the land in question did not
cease to be the property of the Central Government
and continued to be its owner and, therefore, is a
public premises within the meaning of Section 2 (e)
of Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised
Occupants) Act, 1971.
xxx

xxx

xxx

xxx

6.XXIV Not admitted.
(a)

As per records available Shri G.C. Sareen is
lawful allottee of plot No.E-51/52, Kirti Nagar,
New Delhi.”
(Emphasis
supplied)

Copy of this affidavit has been placed before this court.
42.

The judgment dated 23rd July, 2000 of the Division Bench of this

court dismissing the letters patent appeal was also upheld by the Apex Court
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.26

in its order dated 4th January, 2001 passed in S.L.P. No.20877/2000.
43.

I find that it was the petitioner who diligently engaged senior

counsels and contested every case filed in respect of the property as noticed
above. He actively defended the litigations commenced by the encroachers
right up to the Supreme Court.
44.

It is only thereafter that the respondents proceeded to take action for

removal of encroachment. The encroachment was removed on or around 6th
July, 2001. Thereafter, vide a letter dated 13th July, 2001, the respondents
addressed a letter to the petitioner to the following effect:“Subject:-

Eviction of unauthorised occupants from
Public Premises at E-51/52, Kirti Nagar, New
Delhi - Handing over possession thereof.

Sir,
As you are aware, the demolition of the unauthorised
structures on the Premises as stated above has been carried out
successfully with the active co-operation of the Police force
and DDA. To consider the matter further the following
documents may be furnished urgently:(a) An Affidavit should be submitted by you to the effect
that:(i)
you have not paid any House Tax in respect of
premises at E-51/52, Kirti Nagar, New Delhi to
MCD in 1995-96; and
(ii)

you have not sold the said premises to any

WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.27

party/parties, at he cost of Rs.3 crores as has been
alleged by the unauthorised occupants of the
above plot.
2.
Furthermore, you are also requested to submit all
relevant papers in respect of allotment of the above referred
plots to you by this Department immediately to enable us to
consider the matter further. This may be treated as Most
Urgent please.”
45.

It appears that the petitioner submitted the relevant documents vide

his letter dated 17th July, 2001 and requested the authority to hand over
possession of the property to him. Vide a letter dated 3rd August, 2001, the
petitioner was asked to supply a copy of the allotment letter. The petitioner
placed all facts before the respondents in its letter dated 9th August, 2001
before the respondents.
However, vide a letter dated 9th April, 2002, the petitioner was
required to produce the original of the agreement dated 22nd October, 1955
and also the refugee registration certificate. The letter did note that the
additional copy of the certificate would have been attached with the
application dated 12th March, 1956.
46.

On 15th April, 2002, the petitioner submitted the original agreement to

sell dated 22nd October, 1955 to the respondents.

WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.28

The petitioner also

pointed out that the allotment was made by the authorities after completion
of all formalities. It was also stated that the requisite affidavit was also filed
and that the petitioner did not have the original refugee registration
certificate in his possession. It was pointed out that it was because the
application of the petitioner was complete that the transfer in his favour was
accepted and the letter in this behalf was written to the petitioner on 13th
February, 1957.
It appears that as no reply was being received by the petitioner even
to his letter dated 13th January, 2002, he was left with no option but to file
the present petition on the 9th April, 2003.
47.

At this stage, it would be appropriate to notice the manner in which

the respondents have proceeded with the request of the petitioner on their
file after the orders of eviction were upheld and were even implemented in
July, 2001. The obligation of the government to complete the process and
hand over possession to the petitioner has been noted and accepted in
notings dated 9th July, 2001 and 14th August, 2001. It appears that keeping
in view the history of the case and the fact that a conveyance deed in the
form of sale deed was being considered in favour of the petitioner, the
concerned officials had deemed it appropriate to obtain an indemnity bond
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.29

from the petitioner as a matter of abundant caution.

A draft of the

indemnity bond was placed on the file which was approved by the Legal
Adviser of the Rehabilitation Department of the Ministry of Home Affairs.
This draft indemnity bond was sent to the Ministry of Law, Justice &
Company Affairs for its scrutiny vide a noting dated 17th October, 2001.
48.

I find from the record that having removed the encroachers, the

notings are replete with the consideration of the case of the petitioner only
from the angle as to the nature of the conveyance deed in the petitioner's
favour. The matter was being considered only to see whether a lease deed
or sale deed was to be executed. The officials of the respondents were
considering the matter in the light of similar persons who had been allotted
plots in similar cases. Consideration on the file also relates to the claim of
the unauthorized occupants for alternative plots who were also making all
kinds of allegations in respect of the present petitioner.
49.

The observations made by Shri S.K. Chattopadhyay, J.S. (FER) in his

noting on 14th August, 2001 are relevant and read as under: “(i)

xxx

xxx

xxx

xxx

(ii)

xxx

xxx

xxx

xxx

(iii)

It is seen from the para 4 that all basic facts regarding

WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.30

the allotment of Plot No. E-51/52, Kirti Nagar, in favour of
Shri Sareen are available. It is also seen from the note that
this plot was allotted to him in lieu of Plot No.A-32 was
allotted. The terms and conditions of allotment of plots in
similar other cases are available. If all these facts are
available on record, then what precise is the doubt about
terms and conditions? This may be elucidated.
2.
A copy of the Indemnity Bond used by L&DO may be
obtained immediately so that the same may be incorporated
suitably in the Sale Deed before handing over the plot to
safeguard the Government interest.”
50.

The matter was referred to the Ministry of Law, Justice & Company

Affairs (Department of Legal Affairs) on the following reference made by
Shri B.L. Lahri, Under Secretary (R) on the 24th September, 2001:“6. After examination of a similar case in this regard, it has
been found that a `Sale Deed' had been executed between the
allottee concerned and the Government but there were no
`INDEMNITY BOND' involved with that. However, it is felt
that to safeguard the Government interest one such `BOND'
should be executed between the concerned party and the
Government of India in the present case. A draft `Indemnity
Bond' has accordingly been prepared and placed below at flag
`A'. The same may be referred to the Ministry of Law, Justice
& Company Affairs (Department of Legal Affairs) for their
vetting.”
51.

The query from the Ministry of Home Affairs was noted in the

following terms in the Ministry of Law, Justice & Company Affairs on the
9th October, 2001 in the following terms:WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.31

“This is a reference for vetting of an Indemnity Bond
required to be executed by an allottee of a plot in whose
favour a sale deed is stated to have been executed in the past.
The Indemnity Bond is a document in addition to a duly
registered sale deed in favour of the allottee, i.e., Shri
Kulnath Singh. We are not being to trace certified copy of
the registered sale deed on the file. Kindly place certified
copy of the registered sale deed in favour of Shri Kulnath
Singh on the file whereafter the vetting of the Indemnity
Bond will be undertaken.”
52.

A complete summary of the litigation, its result along with comments

and references to the orders was placed in the file in a detailed note dated
17th October, 2001.

It was recorded that after allotment of original plot

bearing number A-32 to Shri Kulnath Singh on 27th April, 1955, the
agreement to sell dated 22nd October, 1955 was executed in respect of the
plot in favour of Shri Kulnath Singh that allotment of the plot was
transferred in favour of his son Shri G. Sareen on 27 th July, 1956; that
number E-51/52, Kirti Nagar was allotted to him in lieu of plot No.A-32 on
13th February, 1957; that a reminder issued to Shri G. Sareen, the present
petitioner on 13th June, 1957 to pay the second half yearly installment
towards the sale of plot E-51/52 and intimation dated 3rd February, 1955 and
dated 17th November, 1965 to Shri G. Sareen with regard to matters relating
to eviction of the squatters on the plot and that legal action was being taken.
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.32

It records issuance of the notice on 18th March, 1968 to Shri G. Sareen to
pay the outstanding amount of Rs.4,131.29 paise on account of costs of the
plot by 30th April, 1968 and that payment of Rs.4,177.59 paise was made by
Shri G. Sareen for the plot on 30 th April, 1968. Summary of the litigation is
set out and in this background, the matter was referred to the Ministry of
Law, Justice & Company Affairs with the following request:“In view of the above mentioned facts, the Ministry of
Law, Department of Legal Affairs, may be requested to vet
the indemnity bond at solemn affirmation.”
53.

Therefore, the respondents were clearly of the view that a sale deed is

to be executed now in favour of Shri G. Sareen, the legal allottee of the said
plot and the possession is to be handed over to him in the same manner as
had been done in similar other cases dealt by this Ministry in the past.
The only reference to the Ministry of Law was for vetting of the
proposed indemnity bond.
54.

Instead of dealing with the matter raised before it, I find that an

observation was made on the file on 1st November, 2001 that the aforestated documents were not sufficient to take the place of the sale deed and
that there was no adjudication on the title of the land by the Delhi High

WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.33

Court and sought documents “creating rights in the property/land whereafter
the indemnity bond will be vetted.”
55.

In my view these observations were wholly unwarranted inasmuch as

there was never any dispute on the rights of the petitioner or its successorin-interest through Shri Kulnath Singh with regard to the legality and
validity of the allotment and that the parties had acted substantially and
altered their position based on such representation.

The respondents, in

fact, had relied on the allotment made in favour of the petitioner and had
asserted the legality and validity and bindingness thereto in repeated
pleadings noticed hereinabove and the matter had remained only at the stage
of execution of the formal conveyance deed. Since there was no issue ever
raised, there was no requirement of adjudication.
56.

The Ministry of Home (Department of Rehabilitation) had again

clarified the above position to the Ministry of Law, Justice & Company
Affairs clearly pointing out that not only the respondents, but the Estate
Officer and the Courts had recognized the fact that Shri G. Sareen was the
“legal allottee of the plot” and the respondents were only seeking to execute
the sale deed.

Copies of such orders have been placed on record. It was

pointed out that Shri G. Sareen was in fact entitled to possession of plot
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.34

forty years ago and that after the eviction of unauthorized occupants, this
property was to be handed over to its rightful claimant without any undue
delay. The request was made to get the proposed indemnity bond vetted
which could be obtained from Shri G. Sareen while executing the deed in
his favour on the lines that it was executed in the other similarly cases in the
past. The Director (R-II) in his note dated 8th November, 2001 even pointed
out that there were instances where sale deed was executed without any
indemnity bond.
57.

The doubts envisaged by the Ministry of Law, Justice & Company

Affairs are found to have been recorded in the noting dated 24 th December,
2001 which appear at page 78 of the note file relevant paras whereof read as
under:“3. It is stated that the Rehabilitation Housing Corporation
Ltd., allotted some plot to Shri Kulnath Sarin. In what manner
and how the same allotment has gone to Shri G. Sarin is
required to be seen from the Government of India has become
the owner of the property and thereafter, what is the necessity
of selling the plot to Shri G.Sarin. The plot can be utilised in
different other way by Government of India.
4.
Moreover, it appears that the size of the plot is more
than 500 Sq. Yards. If that is so, then the effect of the Urban
Land (Ceiling & Regulation) Act, 1976 has not been
commented upon by the administrative Ministry. Though,
Urban Land (Ceiling & Regulation) Act has been repealed
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.35

now, but it remained on the statute book for quite long time
and the effect produced by the statute on the entitlement of
Shri G. Sarin cannot be over-looked.
5.
It is requested that the facts of this case may be brought
out in a chronological order right from the very beginning and
supportive documents may be placed on the file. It is not
known how the land belonging to a Corporation came to
Government of India. It requires further elaboration that once
the land belonging to Rehabilitation Housing Corporation Ltd.
given back to Government of India then why it should be
allotted again to a private person. It is also required to be
commented upon that Government plot if has to be allotted to
somebody then why not to transfer the same in open auction.
Otherwise, it can be termed as `bounty' in favour of particular
chosen person which the State is forbidden to do in exclusion
of others. This is in violation of the right to equal treatment.”
58.

The afore-stated observations were again dealt with on the file under

a detailed note dated 24th January, 2002 to point out that 150 acres of land
was acquired after 1947 on 23rd February, 1952 for carving out the plots to
be allotted to the displaced persons as well as non-displaced persons and
that such plots were actually carved out and thus allotted by the then
Rehabilitation Housing Corporation Limited which included plot No.E51/52 which was so allotted to the petitioner. It was also pointed out that at
the time of allotment of the earlier plot to Shri Kulnath Singh and thereafter
its transfer to Shri G. Sareen, and receipt of full payment, the Land (Ceiling
& Regulation) Act, 1976 was not enforced and was also to repeal on the
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.36

date of execution of the conveyance deed and as such, there would be no
need to consider applicability of the Act to the facts and circumstances of
the present case. It was submitted that the possession of the plot could not
be allotted to Shri G. Sareen merely because of existence of the encroachers.
However, as per the agreement executed between the Government and the
Rehabilitation Housing Corporation Limited on the 7th April, 1974, whereby
the Corporation had been wound up and its statutory liability was taken over
by the Central Government, it was recognized that the plot No.E-51/52
stood allotted to Shri G. Sareen and that possession had to be transferred.
It was only in the event of that eviction of the unauthorized occupants being
rendered impossible and if the possession could not be so handed over, that
the Government was required to pay damages to the allottee Shri G. Sareen.
The Government of India had also received a sum of Rs.95,000/- on this
account. It was observed that inasmuch as the plot stood validly allotted
and Shri G. Sareen had made full payment to the Corporation for the said
plot, there can be no question of transfer of such plot to anyone else. It was
pointed out that inasmuch it has taken forty five years to get the premises
evicted that there was possibility of encroachment by other miscreants.
Meetings were conducted at highest level and in the meeting held on 12 th
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.37

February, 2002, at the level of SS (JKA) in which the representatives of the
Ministry of Law was also invited and represented. A note dated 5th March,
2002 was recorded which inter alia notes as under:“10. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, SS
(JKA) observed as under:“We discussed and decided that Indemnity
Bond as per the draft based on Ministry of
Urban Development and in other cases may
be got signed and possession handed over
with conditions stipulated in all such
allotment cases because this legal advice has
become difficult to obtain”.
11. In view of the facts mentioned above, it is proposed to
get the Sale Deed executed as per DFA-I which is based on a
similar case of Smt. Radha Bai Bhagat W/o late Shri R.B.
Bhagat Jagan Nath in which sale deed was executed in the
year 1990. Suitable changes depending upon facts of the
present case have been made in the proposed sale deed. An
Indemnity Bond has also been prepared for getting executed
from Shri G. Sarin. This bond is based on the pattern
followed by the Ministry of Urban Developement & Poverty
Alleviation.
12. The file is submitted for kind consideration and
approval before the sale deed and Indemnity Bond are
executed.”
59.

With regard to the same meeting, Shri R.K. Sharma, Special

Secretary, (FSR) recorded his note dated 19th March, 2002 and referred the
matter for the indemnity bond in the following terms:WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.38

“Shri Ashok Bhandari, Special Secretary in this Ministry
called a meeting in his office on 12.2.2002 which was
attended by Shri O.P. Nahar, Legal Adviser (Conveyancing).
Shri Bhandari had made the following observations after the
meeting “We discussed and decided that Indemnity Bond
as per the Draft based on Ministry of Urban
Development's Bonds in other cases may be got
signed and possession handed over with
conditions stipulated in all such allotment cases
because this legal advice has become difficult to
obtain.
Sd/ - A.K. Bhandari
12-2-2002”
6.
Law Secretary is requested to get the matter looked into
at his level for vetting of the Indemnity Bond before necessary
action is taken.
(R.K. Sharma)
Special Secretary (FFR)
19-3-2002.”
60.

It is at this stage that a note was put up on the 9 th May, 2002 recording

as under:“16. The dismissal of Eviction Suit and RFA has created
supervening impossibility in practical sense whereafter right
to obtain transfer by Shri G. Sarin is lost. (Satyabrata Ghose
Vs. Mugneeram Bangur & Co AIR 1954 SC 44). Even after
treating the implied condition of obtaining eviction through
Suit as condition precedent under Section 32, the same end
result shall follow. The performance of agreement by transfer
of plot to Shri G. Sarin cannot be expected legally because of
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.39

the frustration of the contract. No public purpose is served by
transferring the plot in favour of Shri G. Sarin, especially,
when it has been vacated as “public premises”. This plot is
public property and cannot be transferred under the colour of
an agreement which simultaneously provides for
disbursement of liquidated damages of Rs.95,000/-.
Otherwise, it will be against public interest especially when
special stautory powers have been exercised to obtain vacant
possession and substantial amount of money from the public
exchequer is also spent in defending litigation (Secretary
Jaipur Development Authority Vs. Daulatmal Jain (1997) 1
SCC 35. In this position drafting, vetting and execution of
indemnity bond will serve no purpose, hence, left
unattended.”
17. To sum up, transfer of plot without production of
Refugee Registration Certificate will be bad in law because
production of this certificate is a condition precedent.
Further, agreement dated 3.4.1974 does not create absolute
obligation to transfer the plot but simultaneously provides for
liquidated damages of Rs. 95,000/-. After dismissal of
Eviction Suit and RFA, the Government has used special
powers under Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized
Occupants) Act, 1971 to obtain vacant possession of the plot
besides spending substantial amount from public exchequer
which can not enure to the benefit of an individual. There is
an implied condition in the agreement of recovering
possession through Eviction Suit and non fulfilment of this
implied condition, any performance (by transfer of plot) of
the agreement under radically different circumstances is
uncalled for. The Government has never contracted for this.
The transfer of the plot to an individual after recovering the
vacant possession under special powers will go against public
policy and will amount to an abuse of administrative power.
In case Government decides to transfer the plot then every
intending purchaser may be invited to take part in the
proposed sale and it can be sold through open auction.”
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.40

61.

The matter was sent to get the indemnity bond vetted by the Ministry

of Law, Justice & Company Affairs as noticed above. It may be noticed that
the reference to the Ministry was not on the issues to which the matter was
diverted. Furthermore, admittedly the Rehabilitation Housing Corporation
Limited, Department of Rehabilitation, was the competent authority which
was vested with the jurisdiction to deal with the property in dispute and the
Department of Rehabilitation merely stepped into its shoes.
62.

Under these circumstances, the matter was again considered in the

Ministry of Home, Department of Rehabilitation when the following queries
were put on the file on 25th July, 2002 after a detailed note regarding the
entire documents of the case which is to be found at page 111 of the notesheet and reads as hereunder:“

xxx

(i)

Whether the case could be referred to the Ministry of Law
again to ascertain whether it would be correctfrom the legal
point of view to act according to their advice now in context of
our comments offered above.

(ii)

Ministry of Home Affairs had referred to Ministry of Law for
vetting a draft Indemnity Bond to be executed by Shri G.Sarin.
However, as per the note of the Ministry of Law, the vetting of
Indemnity Bond has been completely ignored. It is submitted

WP (C) No.2578/2003

xxx

xxx

Page No.41

for consideration whether the Indemnity Bond is to be referred
again to the Ministry of Law for vetting which though not
mandatory, yet have been proposed as a measure of abundant
precaution to safeguard the interest of the Government of
India.
(iii)

63.

In case of divergence of opinion arising between the Ministry
of Law and this Ministry, whether this matter could be sent to
the Hon'ble Attorney General of India for his expert opinion.”
(Emphasis supplied)

The file was again routed through the Joint Secretary (FER) with the

following observations:“3.5 As regards abuse of administrative powers as under the
Public Premises Act (1971), it may be mentioned that it is
already on record as will be evident from the relevant part of
the judgment vis-a-vis above, action was initiated to make
the plot vacant from unauthorised squatters in order to give
possession of the plot to Shri G. Sarin in furtherance of
fulfilment of the commitment since the Government is duty
bound to do so as per agreement as Shri G. Sarin has already
made full payment to the Rehabilitation Housing Corporation
Ltd., whose liabilities were transferred to Government of India
including the transfer of a plot to Shri G. Sarin. To do justice
to these liabilities, an Estate Officer was appointed by the
Government under the provision of the Public Premises
(Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971, and after
following all necessary formalities, Eviction Order dated
4.4.1997 was issued by him concluding, inter alia, that the
premises at E-51/52, Kirti Nagar, New Delhi, were Public
Premises and should be vacated within a period of 21 days
from the date of issue of the Order. After a protracted legal
battle, the unauthorized occupants could be evicted with the
help of the Police authorities and the DDA on 6th July, 2001.
The option of auction of the plot seems to be uncalled for as
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.42

the claim of allottee is still alive.”
(Emphasis supplied)
64.

The file was carried to the Home Secretary on 27th August, 2002 who

noted as hereunder:“May be referred to A.G. with a self contained note clearly
bringing the point on which advice is being sought
(Reference will go through Ministry of Law).”

65.

The queries on which the file was finally sent were noted in the

noting dated 18th September, 2002 which was as follows:“3. With reference to Home Secretary's observation at page
116/N, a self-contained note with complete details has been
prepared at page 117-122/N. Further, it is proposed that
keeping in view the Ministry's comments offered in reply to
the points raised by Ministry of Law, Justice and Company
Affairs, the valued advice of the Attorney General may be
sought on the following points :
i)
Whether Shri G. Sarin can be allotted the said plot of
land on the basis of affidavit submitted by him declaring
himself to be a refugee from West Pakistan? Also, how far it
is justifiable to raise the point of refugee registration
certificate at this belated stage when the plot has been evicted
for handing over to Shri G. Sarin and his father's declaration
and his affidavit have been accepted by the erstwhile
Rehabilitation Housing Corporation.
ii)
Whether the dismissal of Eviction Suit and RFA has
created supervening liabilities in practical sense and
whereafter the right to obtain possession of the said plot of
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.43

land by Shri G. Sarin has been lost thereafter especially in
view of the facts mentioned in the judgment (Double Bench)
of Delhi High Court and later on Supreme Court in this
regard?
iii) The view of this Ministry has to be kindly confirmed
that since the agreement signed between the erstwhile
Rehabilitation Housing Corporation and the former Ministry
of Supply and Rehabilitation did not specify any time limit
for handing over of the plot E.51-52, Kirti Nagar to Shri G.
Sarin, it has a continuous effect and according to it the
possession of the plot of land to be handed over to him is the
liability of the Government.
The responsibility is a
continuous one and has not ended with the dismissal of the
Civil Suit and RFA in 192.
iv) The Ministry of Law's comments that “there is an
implied condition in the Agreement of recovering possession
through Eviction Suit and non-fulfilment of this implied
condition, any performance (by transfer of plot fo the
Agreement under radically different circumstances is
uncalled for” are supplementaries to their comments at (ii)
above and do not seem to be well-based in view of the
reasons that the said agreement does not specify any time
limit for handing over possession of the plot to the concerned
party after eviction of the squatters on the said plot which is
further confirmed by the portion of the judgment (Double
Bench) of Delhi High Court as indicated in bold letters on
page-106/N, which did not take into account the factor that
the Eviction Suit and RFA in this regard had been dismissed
before admitting the Writ Petition submitted by Shri G. Sarin
arraying Union of India and Delhi Development Authority,
and subsequently, while considering appeal by the aggrieved
parties, the Delhi High Court (Single and Double Bench) and
the Apex Court also did not consider this factor while
dismissing the appeal.”

WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.44

66.

Despite the above, the file was returned by the Ministry of Law &

Justice on 17th October, 2002 without any reference on the ground that the
legal advice stood seen and approved by the then Minister.

Special

Secretary (FRR) put up a note on 30th October, 2002 recording the
reservation of the Ministry of Home on the advice given by the Ministry of
Law, Justice & Company Affairs. The suggestion was made to call for the
further advice of the Attorney General on the point whether the stand
suggested by Ministry of Law would stand legal scrutiny. It was suggested
that the matter be taken up with the Ministry of Law, Justice & Company
Affairs with the approval of the Deputy Prime Minister for reconsideration
of their advice after obtaining valuable expert advice of the Attorney
General of India. The reference was made to the office of Deputy Prime
Minister by the Home Secretary on the 7th November, 2002 seeking
approval for making the reference for legal opinion.
On 8th November, 2002, the Deputy Prime Minister directed that the
advice of the Law Ministry be accepted thereby rejecting the request for
reference of the matter for advice of the Attorney General.
67.

The record thereafter reflects that there were voluminous notings

relating to the manner in which the amount has to be refunded to the
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.45

petitioner. A query has been made as to whether interest would be payable
and several issues relating to the manner in which property would be put to
auction.

The requests of the petitioner for seeking possession of the plot

were noticed only on the 10th of April, 2003. It was noted that in view of
the afore-stated, a draft regret letter for handing over possession of the plot
was put up for approval.
68.

The file in the instant case only contains notings.

No order

cancelling the allotment or terminating the agreement or returning the sale
consideration to the petitioner or Rs.95,000/- to the Rehabilitation Housing
Corporation Limited (or its shareholders) has been made or communicated
to the petitioner till date.
69.

At this stage, it would be relevant to consider the law relating to

notings on government file and the effect of such notings, without
communication thereof to the effected person.

This has fallen for

consideration before the Apex Court and in this court in several cases.
In Bachhittar Singh vs. State of Punjab & Ors., reported at AIR
SC 395 (para 10) the Hon'ble Supreme Court held thus:“The business of State is a complicated one and has
necessarily to be conducted through the agency of a large
number of
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.46

1963

officials and authorities. The Constitution therefore requires
and so did the Rules of Business framed by the Rajpramukh of
Pepsu provide, that the action must be taken by the authority
concerned in the name of the Rajpramukh. It is not till this
formality is observed that the action can be regarded as that of
the State or here, by the Rajpramukh.
We may further observe that, constitutionally speaking, the
Minister is no more than an adviser and that the head of the
State, the Governor or Rajpramukh, is to act with the aid and
advice of his Council of Ministers. Therefore until such advice
is accepted by the Governor whatever the Minister or the
Council of Ministers say in regard to a particular matter does
not become the action of the State until the advice of the
Council of Ministers is accepted or deemed to be accepted by
the Head of the State. Indeed, it is possible that after
expressing one opinion about a particular matter at a particular
stage a Minister of the Council of Ministers may express quite
a different opinion, one which may be completely opposed to
the earlier opinion. Which of them can be regarded as the
`order' of the State Government? Therefore, to make the
opinion amount to a decision of the Government it must be
communicated to the person concerned.”
(Emphasis supplied)
In State of Punjab Vs. Amar Singh Harika, (AIR 1966 SC 1313 at
paragraph 11), while dealing with an order of dismissal, the Supreme
Court held:“It is a plain that the mere passing of an order of
dismissal would not be effective unless it is published and
communicated to the officer concerned. If the appointing
authority passed an order of dismissal, but does not
communicate it to the officer concerned, theoretically it is
possible that unlike in the case of a judicial order
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.47

pronounced in Court, the authority may change its mind and
decide to modify its order. It may be that in some cases, the
authority may feel that the ends of justice would be met by
demoting the officer concerned rather than dismissing him.
An order of dismissal passed by the appropriate authority and
kept with itself, cannot be said to take effect by the
appropriate authority and kept with itself, cannot be said to
take effect by the appropriate authority and kept with itself,
cannot be said to take effect unless the officer concerned
knows about the said order and it is otherwise communicated
to all the parties concerned.”
(Emphasis supplied)
In State of Bihar Vs. Kripalan Shankar, (AIR 1987 SC 1554 at
paragraph - 16) the Court observed as under:“The notings in a notes file do not have behind them
the sanction of law as an effective order. It is only an
expression of a feeling by the concerned officer on the subject
under review”.
In State of Kerala vs. A. Lakshmikutty & Ors., AIR 1987 SC 331,
the Supreme Court considered the question whether a decision of the
Council of Ministers announced to the press by the Chief Minister and
published in the newspapers can be said to be an order of the State
Government.

According to the Hon'ble Supreme Court, whatever the

Council of Ministers may say in regard to a particular matter does not
become an action of the State Government till the advice of the Ministers is
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.48

accepted or deemed to be accepted by the Head of the State. Unless and
until the decision taken by the Council of Ministers is translated into action
by the issue of a notification expressed in the name of the Governor as
required by the Article 166(1) of the Constitution, it cannot be said to be an
order of the State Government. Until then, the decision of the Council of
Ministers is only a tentative one and is liable to be reconsidered. The
Supreme Court has also pointed out that before an advice of the Council of
Ministers amounts to an order of State Government, there are tow
requirements to be fulfilled, namely, (1) the order of the State Government
had to be expressed in the name of the Governor as required by Article
166(1), and (2) it has to be communicated to the persons concerned.
70.

The Division Bench of this court was called upon to enforce notings

in a government file in favour of a petitioner in a writ petition.

The

Division Bench in its judgment reported at 60 (1995) DLT 359 (DB)
entitled Surgical Electronics & Anr. Vs. UOI held thus:“ Now we shall deal with the reliefs sought in this writ
petition. The first prayer in the writ petition is for direction
to Respondent No.1 to implement Annexure `N' order dated
19.4.1991 passed by the Minister in toto. What is produced
as Annexure `N' is not copy of any Government order which
binds any parties and which can be got implemented or
enforced through Court.
It is only a noting in the
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.49

Government file. Any Government order issued on the basis
of the noting dated 19.4.1991 has been produced. The 1st
respondent has categorically stated in its counter affidavit
that the file did not end with the note dated 19.4.1991 and
that the matter had been examined at various levels and in
depth. It is also indicated that the matter had gone up to the
level of the Minister for Welfare. We have perused the
relevant Government file which was made available by the
learned Standing Counsel for Respondent No.1. We find that
the noting made in the file by the Minister of State for
Welfare on 19.4.1991 was only the recording his views
regarding the action to be taken in the matter under
consideration. It was not the final decision or order of the
Government. In compliance with the Rules of Business in
the Government, the file was circulated to the Minister for
Welfare (the Prime Minister) and there were further
developments in the matter. Hench, it has to be taken that the
noting recorded by the Minister of State in the file on
19.4.1991 was only the expression of his views in the matter
during the decision making process in the Government. It
was just a noting in the file and not the final decision or the
order of Government. The noting dated 19.4.1991 cannot be
treated as an order of the government liable to be enforced or
implemented under compulsion of the Court. The said note
does not confer on the petitioners any enforceable right.
Hence we cannot issue any direction to Respondent No.1 to
implement any or all of the directions in the noting dated
19.4.1991.”
Therefore, even assuming that in the instant case, the respondents had
arrived at a decision, the same not having been communicated is
unenforceable.
71.

In the meantime, it is noteworthy that, the petitioner had filed the

WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.50

present writ petition after service of advance copy to the respondents as
back as on 9th April, 2003. The letter dated 22nd of April, 2003 appears to
have been issued only thereafter informing the petitioner that possession
will not be given to him. The petition was listed before this court on 24 th
April, 2003. The petitioner had also sought interim protection and vide an
order dated 24th April, 2003, this Court had directed that the respondent
would not transfer, alienate and hand over possession of the plot in question
to any person. The matter has remained pending in this court ever since.
72.

It is noteworthy that the stand of the petitioner having been brought to

the respondent's notice, yet nothing further was done by the respondents. In
a counter affidavit dated 7th October, 2003, the respondents however stated
thus:“9.
That thereafter the respondents took steps to act upon
the agreement and in the meantime had inter-ministerial
deliberations when it was observed that the petitioner has not
been able to submit the refugee registration certificate, a
condition necessary for transfer of the property in his favour.
It was further noted that dismissal of eviction suit and RFA
created supervening liabilities in practical sense and
whereafter right of obtaining possession by the petitioner lost.
It was further found that nemerous cases were prosecuted by
the replying respondents which involved time, energy and
money for such prosecution for which there was no obligation
on Union of India arising of the agreement to prosecute all
these proceedings and to obtain vacant possession of the plot
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.51

by every means for the benefit of the petitioner. The parties to
the agreement never though of such compelling circumstances.
It was considered that the corporation desired to sale the plot
on prevalent market rate to the individual. Any onerous
obligation on the Central Government including spending of
substantial amount from public exchequer for the benefit of an
individual did not flow from the agreement. This radical
change in the obligation has frustrated the contract. It was
further found that exercise of special power by the Central
Government like the use of the provision of Public Premises
Act was never intended. Thus, because of frustration of the
contract, the replying respondents were not liable to transfer
the property. It was also observed that no public purposes is
served by transferring the plot in favour of petitioner,
especially when it was got vacated a public premises. The
property being the public property which could not be
transferred under the colour of an agreement which
simultaneously provides for disbursement of liquidated
damages of Rs.95,000/- .
In view of the facts and
circumstances, it was considered that the transfer of the plot to
an individual after recovering the vacant possession of the
premises under special powers will go against public policy
and it will amount to an abuse of administrative power and
thus it was decided that in case the Government decided to
transfer the plot to the individual member of the public, the
every intending purchaser may be invited to take part in the
proposed sale and it can be sold through open auction. Thus,
the Government has taken a conscious decision, in view of the
facts and circumstances, not to execute the sale deed and
thereby transfer the plot in question to the petitioner but to
transfer and sale the same by way of public auction wherein
the petitioner could participate and if found eligible, he could
be entitled to get the same transferred in his name. It is
submitted that the petitioner does not have a vested right under
the aforesaid agreement to have the property transferred in the
facts and circumstances in his name.

WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.52

10. That the action of the replying respondents is just,
bonafide and in the public interest.”
In reply thereto, the petitioner placed reliance on the admissions made
on court records by the respondents and filed an affidavit dated 2nd
February, 1995 sworn by Shri C.K. Katyal, Settlement Officer, Ministry of
Home Affairs wherein it was stated that eviction proceedings have been
initiated against the squatters under the Public Premises Act, 1971 and,
therefore, the Writ Petition No.47/1993 had been rendered infructuous.
73.

In my view, there has been an erroneous consideration of the matter

in issue. No particulars or dates of any decision are available even in the
counter

affidavit.

The

agreement

between

the

predecessor

in

interest/petitioner, the Rehabilitation Corporation Ltd. and the respondents
does not contain any clause for liquidated damages. The agreement dated
3rd April, 1974 in fact recognised the petitioner's rights and in fact merely
envisaged a possibility of the respondent being required to pay damages in
case eviction of the encroachers was not possible.
74.

So far as the refugee registration certificate is concerned, I have

already noted the facts in relation thereto hereinabove.
75.

During the course of hearing, I had put a query to Mr. R.V. Sinha,
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.53

learned counsel appearing for the respondents, as to whether a refugee
registration certificate could be issued at this stage when the demand for it
was being made. On instructions from the officer present in court, who had
brought even the original records, he has informed the court that no refugee
registration certificates are being issued for the last 35 years. In this view of
the matter, the petitioner could not possibly be called upon to furnish a
certificate which the respondents themselves had not required the petitioner
to furnish for almost forty years and which was not being issued for over
three decades.
76.

More than one instance is noted in the original record where

allotment had been made to other similarly situated persons. Copy of the
sale deed in favour of such person is available on record. The respondents
cannot be permitted to deprive the petitioner of the benefit of allotment
made in his favour as back as on 27th July, 1956. The respondents have
received the full amount of the sale consideration in terms of a letter of
allotment after duly notifying the petitioner from time to time with regard to
the amount payable. The respondents have merely stepped into the shoes of
the Rehabilitation Housing Corporation Limited and they are bound by the
terms of allotment in favour of the petitioner. The denial of the validity of
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.54

the allotment on the specious ground of want of the refugee registration
certificate at such belated stage is wholly unwarranted, illegal and unfair.
77.

I have been taken through the judgment reported at AIR 1964 SC 44,

Satyabrata Ghosh's case, relied upon by the respondent in support of the
plea that Shri G. Sarin has lost the right to obtain a transfer by virtue of the
dismissal of the eviction suit and the appeal. Such a plea could be put forth
only if it is possibly be contended that Shri G. Sareen, at any point of time,
was intimated that he has lost the right to transfer in his favour.
78.

In order to decide the plea set up by the respondent before me, I may

notice the essential features of Doctrine of Frustration of Contract. Section
56 of The Indian Contract Act, 1872 reads thus:“56. Agreement to do impossible act.- An agreement to do
an act impossible in itself is void.
Contract to do act afterwards becoming impossible or
unlawful - A contract to do an act which, after the contract is
made, becomes impossible, or, by reason of some event which
the promisor could not prevent, unlawful, becomes void when
the act becomes impossible or unlawful.
Compensation for loss through non-performance of act
known to be impossible or unlawful. - Where one person
has promised to do something which he know, or, with
reasonable diligence, might have known, and which the
promisee did not know, to be impossible or unlawful, such
promisor must make compensation to such promisee for any
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.55

loss which such promisee sustains through the nonperformance of the promise.”
79.

Interpreting the expression “becomes impossible”, the Apex Court in

its pronouncement in Satyabrata Ghosh's case (supra) held that the word
“impossible” has not been used in the sense of physical and literal
impossibility. The court held as follows:“(a) Contract Act (1872), S. 56 - “Becomes Impossible.”
The word “impossible” has not been used in the sense
of physical or literal impossibility. The performance of an act
may not be literally impossible but it may be impracticable
and useless from the point of view of the object and purpose
which the parties had in view; and if an untoward event or
change of circumstances totally upsets the very foundation
upon which the parties rested their bargain, it can very well be
said that the promisor finds it impossible to do the act which
he promised to do.”
The Court further held that:“(b) Contract Act (1872), Ss. 32, 56 - Frustration
The essential idea upon which the Doctrine of
Frustration is based is that of impossibility of performance of
the contract; in fact impossibility and frustration are often used
as inter-changeable expressions. The changed circumstances
make the performance of it as they did not promise to perform
an impossibility. The doctrine of frustration is really an aspect
or part of the law of discharge of contract an aspect or part of
the law of discharge of contract by reason of supervening
impossibility or illegality of the act agreed to be done and
hence comes within the purview of S. 56. To the extent that
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.56

the Contract Act deals with a particular subject it is exhaustive
upon the same and it is not permissible to import the principles
of English law `dehors' these statutory provisions. The
decisions of the English Courts possess only a persuasive
value and may be helpful in showing how the Courts in
England have decided cases under circumstances similar to
those which have come before Indian Courts. In deciding
cases in India the only doctrine that we have to go by is that of
supervening impossibility or illegality as laid down in S. 56,
taking the word `impossible' in its practical and not literal
sense. Section 56 lays down a rule of positive law and does
not leave the matter to be determined according to the
intention of the parties. In cases, where the Court gathers as a
matter of construction that the contract itself contained
impliedly or expressly a term according to which it would
stand discharged on the happening of certain circumstances,
the dissolution of the contract would take place under the
terms of the contract itself and such cases would be outside the
purview of S.56 altogether. They would be dealt with under S.
32 which deals with contingent contracts or similar other
provisions contained in the Act. In the large majority of cases,
however, the doctrine of frustration is applied not on the
ground that the parties themselves agreed to an implied term
which operated to release them from the performance of the
contract. The relief is given by the Court on the ground of
subsequent impossibility when it finds that the whole purpose
or basis of a contract was frustrated by the intrusion or
occurrence of an unexpected event or change of circumstances
which was beyond what was entered into the agreement.
When such an event or change of circumstances which was
beyond what was contemplated by the parties at the time when
they entered into the agreement. When such an event or
change of circumstances occurs which is so fundamental as to
be regarded by law or striking at the root of the contract as a
whole, it is the Court which can pronounce the contract to be
frustrated and at an end. The Court undoubtedly has to
examine the contract and the circumstances under which it was
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.57

made. The belief, knowledge and intention of the parties are
evidence, but evidence only on which the Court has to form its
own conclusion whether the changed circumstances destroyed
altogether the basis of the adventure and its underlying object.
This is really a rule of positive law and as such comes within
the purview of S. 56 of the Contract Act.”
(Emphasis added)
80.

Fully satisfied with the petitioner meeting all requisite conditions, the

Rehabilitation Housing Corporation made the original allotment in favour of
Shri Kulnath Singh and transferred the same in favour of the petitioner. The
petitioner was repeatedly notified including vide letters dated 27th July, 1956
and dated 13th February, 1957 that possession of the plot would be handed
over after squatters have been removed. The validity of the allotment was
recognized by the Rehabilitation Housing Corporation Limited and the
respondents in the agreement dated 3rd April, 1974.
81.

It is noteworthy that the respondents called upon the petitioner to

make payments of the amounts and accepted the same.

The

respondent/Union of India in its pleadings filed before the court has stated
that Shri G. Sareen is the legal and valid allottee of the plots in question and
that the possession would be handed over after eviction. In this behalf, the
counter affidavit filed in L.P.A. No.365/2000 set out hereinabove is

WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.58

noteworthy.

In any case, the respondents invited Shri G. Sareen to

participate in the litigation. The petitioner was impleaded as defendant
No.18 in the original suit filed by the respondent. In the Writ Petition
No.47/1993 filed by the petitioner, the respondents persuaded the Division
Bench to accept the validity of the allotment and caused the order dated 27th
April, 1995 to be passed directing that the eviction of the unauthorized
occupants would be undertaken within a period of one year. The petitioner
has facilitated eviction petitions at every stage and has contested 18
petitions filed under the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised
Occupants) Act, 1972. Perusal of the order dated 4th April, 1997 shows that
it was the petitioner as intervener who brought the complete facts before
Estate Officer. Again, the petitioner was arrayed as respondent No.4 in the
18 writ petitions dismissed by this court on 21st July, 2002 and was again
arrayed as respondent before the Division Bench in the Letters Patent
Appeal and before the Apex Court. It is the petitioner who has spent effort
and expended money in the eviction litigation and has been represented by
counsel who has placed pleadings in possession on record to facilitate the
adjudication in the matter. Therefore, to contend that only the respondents
have incurred expenses to get the eviction of the unauthorized occupants is
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.59

a gross mis-statement.

Undoubtedly, the petitioner was pursuaded and

motivated to contest the litigation relating to the eviction by the absolute,
unconditional and unequivocal representation on behalf of the respondents
that the unauthorized occupants were being removed to enable the
respondents to hand over possession to the petitioner in terms of the
agreement.
82.

In the instant case, the encroachment existed on the date of allotment

of the plot and was noticed by the Rehabilitation Housing Corporation
Limited as back as on 13th February, 1967. For almost 40 years, it was
repeated by the said Corporation as well as by the Union of India that the
possession would be handed over to the petitioner after the unauthorized
occupants were removed. The payments were extracted from the petitioner
and are still lying with the respondents who enjoyed the benefit thereof.
83.

The Government was in fact discharging its liability under its

agreement and giving effect to its statement before this court in securing
removal of unauthorised encroachers. Having received full consideration
for the plot and having compelled the petitioner to vigorously contest the
encroachers litigation, the petitioner's rights cannot be defeated on purported
grounds of public policy. The allotment was made by the predecessor-inWP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.60

interest of the respondent no.1 and it is bound by the same. As per the
agreement dated 3rd April, 1974, having secured eviction, the only available
option for the respondent was to hand over possession to the petitioner and
return the amount of Rs.95,000.00 on the pro-rata basis to the shareholders
of the erstwhile Corporation.
84.

Therefore, there is no event which has intervened or has arisen

subsequent to the allotment which had rendered the contract impossible or
unpractical. On the contrary, the allotment was on the premise that the
possession would be given once the encroachment was removed and stands
recognized even in the agreement dated 3rd April, 1974 between the
Rehabilitation Housing Corporation Ltd. and the Union of India.

The

agreement records that the amount paid towards liquidted damages by the
Rehabilitation Housing Corporation Ltd. would be reimbursed to the
Corporation for the purposes of the shareholders on pro rata basis if
occasion to pay liquidated damages on account of successful eviction did
not arise.

It was inherent and implicit in the agreement dated 3rd April,

1974 itself that Shri G. Sareen was a legal allottee and that possession is to
be handed over when the unauthorized occupants are removed therefrom.
It is, therefore, writ large on the face of the records that right from the
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.61

time of the allotment, it was clearly contemplated by the parties that the
unauthorized occupants would be removed and possession would be handed
over. Payments were received from the petitioner on this basis which even
on date lying with the respondents.
In this view of the matter, I find myself unable to hold that there was
no obligation on the Rehabilitation Housing Corporation Limited or its
successor, the respondent/Union of India arising out of the agreement to
prosecute the proceedings or to obtain vacant possession of the plot for the
purposes of handing over possession to the petitioner. There have been no
intervening or subsequent change of circumstances or obligation which has
frustrated the contract.

The plea of frustration of contract is wholly

misconceived in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
85.

The allotment and transfer of plot in the present petition is not within

the domain of “public purpose”.

The obligation of the erstwhile

Rehabilitation Corporation Limited and the respondents have to be
examined in the background of the scheme prevalent at the time of
allotment and purpose for which it was made. The obligation to get removal
of the unauthorized occupants has also been clearly recognized. The stand
now taken by the respondents is wholly unfair. The respondents are bound
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.62

by the terms of the allotment made in favour of the petitioner.

The

respondents and its predecessor-in-interest has received full consideration
which was the reasonable consideration assessed and evaluated in terms of
the value of the property at the time the property was allotted. The amount
was received as per schedule at the appropriate time. In fact, it is the
petitioner who has been deprived of his valuable property in the face of the
delayed action and steps on the part of the respondent. Despite promises
having been made in 1956 and 1957, the respondents failed to take action in
accordance with law to secure removal of the unauthorized squatters. It was
the petitioner who contested the litigation and secured the eviction of the
unauthorised squatters. There can be no restitution for the deprivation of
the property to the petitioner for almost 40 years despite having paid the full
amount in respect thereof.
86.

The respondents cannot be permitted to absolve themselves of their

responsibility and liability to abide by sound commitment made to a citizen
who has acted upon their representation. The submissions and observations
recorded on behalf of the respondent to the effect that the handing over
possession to the petitioner would go against public policy or amounts to
abuse of administrative powers are misconceived.
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.63

87.

In any case, the respondents stepped into the shoes of the

Rehabilitation Housing Corporation Limited and cannot assert any rights
other than those of the said corporation.
88.

In the facts and circumstances of the case, the petitioner has a vested

right under the allotment and the agreement in his favour as well as in view
of the repeated representations made to the petitioner in respect of the
obligation to get the plot transferred in his name after removal of the
encroachments.
89.

I have already noticed that the Ministry has failed to notice the fact

that in the instant case, it is not a case where allotment of a plot and transfer
were at all in issue. The parties clearly recognised that the possession
would be handed over after the same was got vacated from the trespassers.
The facts with regard to the demand for payment and receipt thereof by the
petitioner were not even noticed.
90.

I find that the clarifications and issues raised by the Ministry of Home

(Department of Rehabilitation) were justified and valid and in fact deserved
to be considered before a view of the nature of the notings recorded by the
Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs was recorded. All relevant
facts noticed above which have a material bearing on the issues were
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.64

completely ignored.

The file was put up for merely vetting of the

indemnity bond and was diverted into addressing the validity and legality of
the very allotment. A question would also arise of the competency to do so
on account of the division of subjects under the applicable Government of
India (Allocation of Business) Rules and also (Transaction of Business)
Rules. No decision adversely effecting the petitioner's rights can be taken in
any case without notifying the petitioner and permitting him to place his
side of the entire matter.
91.

Under these circumstances, the petitioner is entitled to handing over

of the possession of the plot as well as execution of the Conveyance Deed.
The expressed inability to hand over possession as communicated in the
letter dated 22nd April, 2003 without anything further was legally of no
consequence and effect.
92.

The decision not to hand over possession to the petitioner also suffers

from the vice of hostile discrimination inasmuch as the original file
produced before me itself records several instances where sale deed have
been issued in identical circumstances. The same were in fact one of the
observations addressed by the Ministry of Home repeatedly requesting
reconsideration of the advice rendered to it which have not merited any
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.65

consideration.
93.

I may now examine the other arguments raised on behalf of the

respondents with regard to the maintainability of the writ petition on the
ground that the issues raised are purely in the realm of contract and a writ
petition, seeking performance of contractual obligation, is not maintainable.
Reliance was placed on behalf of the respondents on the pronouncement of
the Apex Court in the judgment reported at 2004 (3) SLJ 173 entitled State
of Uttar Pradesh Vs. Johri Mal wherein the court was considering the
matter relating to renewal of the licence of the respondent who was
appointed as Public Prosecutor and the parameters of the scope and extent
of power of judicial review of the High Court in exercise of powers under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India. I find that in this case in para 28,
the Apex Court clearly held that the scope and ambit of power of judicial
review of the High Court contained in Article 226 of the Constitution of
India would vary from case to case, depend on the nature of the order, the
relevant statute and also other relevant factors including the nature of power
exercised by public authorities, namely whether the power is statutory,
quasi-judicial or administrative. In para 27, the court noticed the judgment
rendered in the Council of Civil Services Union Vs. Minister of Civil
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.66

Services wherein the power of judicial review was restricted ordinarily to
illegality, irrationality and impropriety holding that:“If the power has been exercised on a non-consideration of
non-application of mind to relevant factors, the exercise of
power will be regarded as manifestly erroneous. If a power
(whether legislative or administrative) is exercised on the basis
of facts which do not exist and which are patently erroneous,
such exercise of power will stand vitiated.”
Reliance was also placed on Wade’s Administration Law, 8th edition
at page 33-35 wherein it was stated thus:“The system of judicial review is radically different from the
system of appeals. When hearing an appeal the Court is
concerned with the merits of a decision; is it correct? When
subjecting some administrative act or order to judicial review,
the Court is concerned with its legality; is it within the limits
of the powers granted? On an appeal the question is `right or
wrong?' On review the question is lawful or unlawful?'
Rights of appeal are always statutory. Judicial review, on the
other hand, is the exercise of the Court's inherent power to
determine whether action is lawful or not and to award
suitable relief. For this no statutory authority is necessary; the
Court is simply performing its ordinary functions in order to
enforce the law. The basis of judicial review, therefore, is
common law. This is none the less true because nearly all
cases in administrative law arise under some Act of
Parliament. Where the Court quashes an order made by a
minister under some Act, it typically uses its common law
power to declare that the Act did not entitle the minister to do
what he did and that, he was in some way exceeding or
abusing his powers.

WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.67

Judicial review thus, is a fundamental mechanism for keeping
public authorities within due bounds and for upholding the
rule of law. Instead of substituting its own decision for that of
some other body, as happens when an appeal, the Court on
review is concerned only with the question whether the act or
order under attack should be allowed to stand or not. If the
Home Secretary revokes a television licence unlawfully, the
Court may simply declare that the revocation is null and void.
Should the case be one involving breach of duty rather than
excess of power, the question will be whether the public
authority should be ordered to make good a default. Refusal
to issue a television licence to someone entitled to have one
would be remedied by an order of the Court requiring the
issue of the licence. If administrative action is in excess of
power (ultra vires), the Court has only to quash it or declare it
unlawful (these are in effect the same thing) and then no one
need pay any attention to it. The minister or Tribunal or other
authority has in law done nothing, and must make a fresh
decision.”
(Emphasis supplied)
94.

In the instant case, the petitioner has prayed for a writ of mandamus

directing the respondents to transfer the plot in his favour by execution of a
legal document in the nature of conveyance deed and to transfer its
possession to the petitioner forthwith and without any delay on the basis of
a decision taken almost 40 years ago. The respondents themselves have
contended that the allotment was legally and validly made and only formal
conveyance deed has yet to be executed. In view of the principle of law laid
down hereinabove, the action of the respondent in failing to do so is found
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.68

to be not only arbitrary but wholly unreasonable and irrational. Under these
circumstances, it is not open to the respondent to object to the
maintainability of the writ petition in view of the law laid down by the Apex
Court.
95.

Learned counsel appearing for the respondent has

also placed

reliance on the judgment reported on 2002 (5) SCC 54 entitled IFCI Vs.
Cannanore Spinning & Weaving Limited to contend that the contract
stood frustrated. Reliance has been placed on paras 40 to 42 of this
judgment. It is noteworthy that even in this case the court had observed that
the frustration of a contract occurs whenever the law recognizes that without
default of either party, a contractual obligation has become incapable of
being performed because the circumstances in which the performance is
called for, would render it radically different from that which was
undertaken by the contract.
In the instant case, there is no part of the contract, which was
rendered impossible of performance on account of any supervening
circumstances.
96.

Reliance placed on the judgment reported at AIR 1971 Delhi 301 is

also misconceived inasmuch as the present case is not concerned with the
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.69

proceedings under the Displaced Persons (Compensation & Rehabilitation)
Act, 1954 or any action taken by the respondents on account of any
statutory provision thereunder.
In the instant case, despite a solemn commitment to the petitioner that
the plot would be allotted on eviction of the squatters, attempt is being made
to go back on the same after the petitioner has acted upon such
representation.
97.

The other judgment cited on behalf of the respondents reported at 105

(2003) DLT 545 itself noticed that where the foundation of the action lies in
an administrative or an executive policy, decision taken and then applied to
the contract, the merit of the administrative or executive decisions taken are
not subject to judicial review. Where such decision suffers from the vice of
arbitrariness, the court would be justified to act in exercise of its power
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
98.

In the afore-stated case relied upon by the respondents, the issue

raised pertained to the liability to pay a license fee in a license awarded by
the N.D.M.C. and the matter was being examined on an appeal against an
injunction application in a civil suit. The reliance placed on behalf of the
respondent on the judgment rendered thus is wholly misconceived.
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.70

99.

There has been a wide extension of the parameters of judicial review

in matters arising out of contracts entered into by the State. The State enters
into a contract in exercise of its executive power. It has been repeatedly
held that such action in matters pertaining to contract cannot be taken within
the purview of judicial review.

However, this restriction has to be

understood and complied with a note of caution.

Article 14 of the

Constitution of India protects individuals against arbitrary State action. It
mandates that the State shall not deny to any person equality of law and any
protection of law. Any administrative and executive actions of the state
which are contrary to law or arbitrary or malicious or based on irrationality
or subjecting individuals to discriminatory treatment have been treated as
violative of Article 14. The distinction between judicial, quasi-judicial,
administrative or executive state action stands obliterated.
100. In the instant case, on the own admissions of the respondents, the
allotment in favour of the petitioner had not culminated in execution of the
formal conveyance deed. Further there is complete violation of principles
of natural justice.

No notice has been issued to the petitioner.

The

respondents are even on date holding the amount of the petitioner. The
action of the respondents is undoubtedly arbitrary and contrary to settled
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.71

principles of law, and as such violative of the rights of the petitioner under
Article 14 of the Constitution. The writ petition is maintainable and in this
behalf, reference can be appropriately made to the pronouncements of the
Apex Court in AIR 1999 SC 1628 entitled Ramanand Shetty Vs. IAAI;
AIR 1999 SC 1031 entitled Mahavir Auto Vs. Indian Oil Corporation
& Ors. (paras 17, 18 7 20) and AIR 1991 SC 537 entitled Sri lekha
Vidyarthi Vs. State of UP as also the judgment of the Apex Court in AIR
1989 SC 1642 entitled Duske Das Masfatia & Owners Vs. the Board of
Trustees of the Court of Bombay.
101. In addition to the pronouncements of the Apex Court, noticed
hereinabove, I may also notice the judgment reported at (2001) 6 SCC 477
entitled Biman Krishna Bose Vs. United India Insurance Company
Limited & Anr. wherein in para 3 it was held as under:“In the present case, what we find is that the respondent
Insurance Company refused to renew the insurance policy of
the appellant on the ground of his past conduct. The past
conduct attributed is that the appellant had gone in litigation
for payment of his claim lodged by him with the respondent
Insurance Company. If an insured lodges a claim with the
company and the company does not honour the claim, the
insured is left with no alternative but to knock the doors of a
court of law. Merely because the appellant had approached
the Consumer Forum and this Court for redressal of his
grievance, can such an act be attributed as bad record as to
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.72

disentitle the appellant to get the policy renewed? The answer
is “no”. Where an insurance company under the provisions of
the Act has assumed monopoly in the business of general
insurance in the country and thus acquired the trappings of the
“State” being other authorities under Article 12 of the
Constitution, it requires to satisfy the requirement of
reasonableness and fairness while dealing with the customers.
Even in an area of contractual relations, the State and its
instrumentalities are enjoined with the obligations to act with
fairness and in doing so, can take into consideration only the
relevant materials. They must not take any irrelevant and
extraneous consideration while arriving at a decision.
Arbitrariness should not appear in their actions or decisions.
In the present case, what we find is that arbitrariness is writ
large in the actions of the respondent Company when it
refused to renew the mediclaim policy of the insured on the
ground of his past conduct i.e. having gone into litigation for
payment of his claim against the respondent Company. We
are, therefore, in agreement with the view taken by the High
Court that the order of the respondent Company refusing to
renew the mediclaim policy of the appellant was unfair and
arbitrary.”
102. I may also notice the law laid down by the Apex Court in the
judgment reported at AIR 2003 SC 2120 entitled Harbanlal Sahnia and
Another Vs Indian Oil Corporation Limited & Ors. wherein the court
observed thus:“7. So far as the view taken by the High Court that
the remedy by way of recourse to arbitration clause was
available to the appellants and therefore the writ petition filed
by the appellants was liable to be dismissed, suffice it to
observe that the rule of exclusion of writ jurisdiction by
availability of an alternative remedy is a rule of discretion and
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.73

not one of compulsion. In an appropriate case, in spite of
availability of the alternative remedy, the High Court may still
exercise its writ jurisdiction in at least three contingencies: (i)
where the writ petition seeks enforcement of any of the
fundamental rights: (ii) where there is failure of principles of
natural justice or, (iii) where the orders or proceedings are
wholly without jurisdiction or the vires of an Act and is
challenged (See Whirlpool Corporation v. Registrar of Trade
Marks, Mumbai & others (1998) 8 SCC 11). The present case
attracts applicability of first two contingencies. Moreover, as
noted, the petitioners' dealership, which is their bread and
butter came to be terminated for an irrelevant and nonexistent cause. In such circumstances, we feel that the
appellants should have been allowed relief by the High Court
itself instead of driving them to the need of initiating
arbitration proceedings.”
103. In the judgment rendered at 2004 (3) SCC 553 entitled ABL
International

Limited

&

Anr.

Vs.

Export

Credit

Guarantee

Corporation of India Limited & Others, the court has held as under:“A writ petition involving serious disputed questions of facts
which requires consideration of evidence which is not on
record, will not normally be entertained by a court in the
exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the
Constitution, but there is no absolute rule that in all cases
involving disputed questions of fact the parties should be
relegated to a civil suit. It has even been held (in Gunwant
Kaur case, (1969) 3 SCC 769) that in a writ petition, if the
facts require, oral evidence can be taken. This clearly shows
that in an appropriate case, the writ court has the jurisdiction
to entertain a writ petition involving disputed questions of fact
and there is no absolute bar for entertaining a writ petition
even if the same arises out of a contractual obligation and/or
involves some disputed questions of fact.”
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.74

23. It is clear from the above observations of this Court,
once the State or an instrumentality of the State is a party of
the contract, it has an obligation in law to act fairly, justly and
reasonably which is the requirement of Article 14 of the
Constitution of India.
Therefore, if by the impugned
repudiation of the claim of the appellants the first respondent
as an instrumentality of the State has acted in contravention of
the abovesaid requirement of Article 14, then we have no
hesitation in holding that a writ court can issue suitable
directions to set right the arbitrary actions of the first
respondent.
xxx

xxx

xxx

27. From the above discussion of ours, the following legal
principles emerge as to the maintainability of a writ petition:
(a) In an appropriate case, a writ petition as
against a State or an instrumentality of a State arising out
of a contractual obligation is maintainable.
(b) Merely because some disputed questions of fact
arise for consideration, same cannot be a ground to refuse
to entertain a writ petition in all cases as a matter of rule.
(c) A writ petition involving a consequential relief
of monetary claim is also maintainable.
28. However, while entertaining an objection as to the
maintainability of a writ petition under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India, the court should bear in mind the fact
that the power to issue prerogative writs under Article 226 of
the Constitution is plenary in nature and is not limited by any
other provisions of the Constitution. The High Court having
regard to the facts of the case, has a discretion to entertain or
not to entertain a writ petition. The Court has imposed upon
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.75

itself certain restrictions in the exercise of this power. (See
Whirlpool Corpn. v. Registrar of Trade Marks.) And this
plenary right of the High Court to issue a prerogative writ will
not normally be exercised by the Court to the exclusion of
other available remedies unless such action of the State or its
instrumentality is arbitrary and unreasonable so as to violate
the constitutional mandate of Article 14 or for other valid and
legitimate reasons, for which the Court thinks it necessary to
exercise the said jurisdiction.”
The judgment 1999 (3) SC 61 entitled Hindustan Petroleum
Corporation Ltd. & Anr. Vs. Dolly Das also approved the same legal
principles.
104. The facts in issue in the present case are undisputed and do not
require any further investigation.

A writ petition involving contractual

matters in these circumstances has been held as maintainable.
105. In a judgment of the Division Bench of this court reported in 1989 (1)
Delhi Lawyer 326 (DB) entitled Phoenix Properties Pvt. Ltd. and
another Vs. Union of India and another, the petitioner sought a writ of
certiorari to quash the impugned order whereby the bids/allotment of the
petitioners were cancelled and the earnest money deposited by them at the
time of auction were directed to be forfeited. The court held that it was not
an absolute principle of law that merely because the source of the right
which was claimed initially in a contract, the parties must file a suit and not
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.76

petition by way of a writ. Relying upon the pronouncement of the Apex
Court in AIR 1977 SC 1469 entitled M/s Radhakrishnan Aggarwal Vs.
State of Bihar and others, the court noticed the division of cases into three
categories in which breach of alleged obligation by the State can be set up
which are:“(i) Where a petitioner makes a grievance of breach of
promise on the part of the State in cases where on promise on
the part of the State in cases where on assurance on promise
made by the State he has acted to his prejudice and
predicament, but the agreement in short of a contract within
the meaning of Article 299 of the Constitution;
(ii) Where the contract entered into between the person
aggrieved and the State is in exercise of a statutory power
under certain Act or Rules framed thereunder and the
petitioner alleges a breach on the part of the State; and
(iii) Where the contract entered into between the person
aggrieved is non-statutory and purely contractual and the
rights and liabilities of the parties are governed by the terms
of the contract, and the petitioner complains about breach of
such contract by the State.”
106. In its judgment, the Division Bench quashed the orders cancelling the
bids and extended the time to the petitioners to make payments of balanced
bid amount. A writ of mandamus was issued directing the respondent to
complete the contract of sale on the terms and conditions between the
parties.
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.77

107. The instant case would fall within the first category noticed in the
foregoing paragraph and the petitioner is also entitled to the relief claimed.
108. In AIR 1988 Delhi 276 entitled Surender Nath Vs. Delhi
Development Authority & Another, this court held that where the rights
flow from statutory obligations or from public functions, the authorities
were not legally entitled to cancel the allotment of the flat in the name of the
allottee arbitrarily without resorting to principles of natural justice of giving
a show cause notice to him prior to cancelling the allotment.
109. In the instant case, there has never been any dispute to the entitlement
of the petitioner to allotment of the property.

Even

on

date,

the

respondents are in possession of the entire amount of the petitioner and are
bound by principles of primisory estoppel to execute the formal conveyance
and to hand over possession to the petitioner.
110. In this view of the matter, the objection of the respondents with
regard to the maintainability of the writ petition is wholly misconceived.
The action of the respondents is contrary to settled principles of law, in
violation of principles of natural justice and devoid of competency and
jurisdiction. In these circumstances, a writ petition under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India is maintainable.
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.78

111. It has also been urged on behalf of the respondents that the court
could only test the legality and validity of the state action and decision by
examination of the decision making process and that once a decision has
been arrived at with regard to the refusal to hand over possession of plot to
the petitioner and to transfer the same by way of public auction, this court
cannot examine the decision at all.
112. In view of the afore-stated authoritative pronouncements of the Apex
Court, in my view this objection is also wholly misconceived. In the instant
case, I have found that all the relevant materials which have bearing on the
issues raised have been ignored by the authorities in arriving at such
conclusion. There is material divergence between the concerned Ministries
and the issues pointed out have not even deserved a cursory examination
while arriving at

the above so called decision on the part of the

respondents.
113. It may also be noted that the letter dated 22nd April, 2003 addressed to
the petitioner was enclosed only with the counter affidavit filed on 7th
October, 2003. This letter merely reads that the author has been directed to
convey that the request of the petitioner for handing over possession of the
plot in question has not been acceded to by the Ministry.
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.79

There is no

decision taken or conveyed to the petitioner even till date with regard to the
cancellation of the allotment of the plot for which he has made full payment
more than 30 years ago. Perusal of the record shows that the respondents
have not moved a single step towards even taking decision with regard to
the consideration deposited by the petitioner or the refund of the amount of
Rs.95,000/- received by the respondents from the Rehabilitation Housing
Corporation Limited to its shareholders.
114. Even in the counter affidavit, no date or decision has been placed
before the court. The letter has been issued to the petitioner during the
pendency of the case. The court is adequately empowered to grant and
mould relief based on facts arisen and placed before it during the pendency
of the case or available on the respondents record.
115. For all the fore-going reasons, I find that the stand taken by the
respondents and the consideration on the file is wholly devoid of any merit
and cannot and ought not to be permitted to stand. The respondents have
failed in discharging their obligation to hand over possession of the plot
after removal of the encroachments. The petitioner has been deprived of the
enjoyment of the plot for all these years without any justification even
though the squatters were removed from the plot as back as in July, 2001.
WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.80

116. The writ petition is, accordingly, allowed.

The respondents are

directed to transfer in favour of the petitioner by means of a legal document
such as the Sale/Conveyance Deed the subject plot E-51/52, ad measuring
650 sq. yards. situated in Kirti Nagar, New Delhi and also hand over its
possession to the petitioner within a period of eight weeks from today.
The petitioner shall be entitled to the costs of the present proceedings
which are quantified at Rs.11,000/-.

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
June 6th , 2005.
aa

WP (C) No.2578/2003

Page No.81

