IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
I.A. No.6546/2005 in CS (OS) NO.432/2005
Reserved on 12th October, 2006
Date of Decision 6th December, 2006
ALANKAR GLOBAL PVT. LTD. & ORS ... Petitioners
through: Mr. Sandeep Sharma, Advocate
VERSUS
MR. DINESH KUMAR MATHUR & ORS. .....Respondents
through: Mr. R.K. Jain, Advocate with Mr.Amjad
Hussain, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Yes
Digest?
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

By this judgment, I propose to decide this application filed by the

defendants under Section 8 of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996
seeking a direction that the disputes which are the subject matter of the
present suit, be referred to arbitration.
2.

The applicant places reliance on Clause 23 of an agreement dated 30th

March, 2001 which was entered into between Dinesh Kumar Mathur,
IA No.6546/2005 in CS (OS) No.432/2005

Page No.1

Subhash Rohilla, Meera Mathur and Usha Rani Rohilla. Based thereon, the
defendants/applicants have contended that the present suit cannot be
proceeded with in the light of Section 8 of the Arbitration & Conciliation
Act, 1996 and the disputes have to be referred to arbitration.
3.

For the purposes of adjudication of the present application, a

distinction has to be borne in mind with regard to the suit claim and the
subject matter of the arbitration agreement. In order to appreciate this
distinction, it would be necessary to examine a few essential facts.

It

appears that M/s Alankar Ware Corporation, a partnership firm was
established in the year 1973 between Shri Suraj Bhan Rohilla, son of Shri
Saran, and Shri Subhash Rohilla son of Shri Suraj Bhan Rohilla. It appears
that the following other businesses using the word “Alankar” were
established in 1973 were also commenced by the said Shri Suraj Bhan
Rohilla and Shri Subhash Rohilla:
(i)

Alankar Ware Corporation, a partnership firm which
was established in 1973 by Shri Suraj Bhan Rohilla son
of Shri Saran Rohilla and Shri Subhash Rohilla, son of
Shri Suraj Bhan Rohilla.
As on date, this firm is stated to be run by Shri

IA No.6546/2005 in CS (OS) No.432/2005

Page No.2

Subhash Rohilla.
(ii)

M/s Alankar International was established as a
partnership firm between Shri Suraj Bhan Rohilla and
Smt. Usha Rani in the year 1979.
This firm is being run by Shri Subhash Rohilla as
on date. M/s Alankar International through Smt. Usha
Rani, wife of Shri Subhash Rohilla entered into a
commission agreement on 29th of July, 1982 with M/s
Atlantis Exports through Smt. Meera Mathur, wife of
Shri Dinesh Mathur.

(iii) Pursuant to the above commission agreement, Shri
Subhash Rohilla and Shri Dinesh Kumar Mathur
commenced the same work in a partnership dated 18th
June, 1983 in premises belonging to Shri Subhash
Rohilla under the name and style of “Alankar Exports”.
(iv)

M/s. Alankar Export Ltd. was established in 1983 with
Shri Suraj Bhan Rohilla, Shri Subhash Rohilla, Shri
Dinesh Kumar Mathur & Smt. Meera Mathur as its
directors.

IA No.6546/2005 in CS (OS) No.432/2005

Page No.3

Upon a settlement dated 2nd February, 2000
between the parties, this company was transferred to
the control of Shri Dinesh Mathur with the stipulation
that it would get its name changed w.e.f. March, 2000.
As on date and in terms of Clause 13(1)(c) of the
agreement between the parties, the name of this
company stands changed with the Registrar of
Companies w.e.f. 28th March, 2000 to M/s Akriti
Creations Pvt. Ltd.
(v)

In 1991, Alankar Fashion Pvt. Ltd. was established
with Shri Subhash Rohilla and Shri Dinesh Mathur as
its directors. As per the agreement dated 30th March,
2001, this company was transferred to Shri Subhash
Rohilla who is the holder of registered trade mark
“Alankar”. Therefore, it was agreed that Shri Subhash
Rohilla and Smt. Usha Rani Rohilla can continue the
business in the same name. The name of this company
was changed to Alankar Global Pvt. Ltd. in the year
2001.

IA No.6546/2005 in CS (OS) No.432/2005

Page No.4

(vi). The position with regard to M/s Alankar Polymers
established in 1991 with Shri Subhash Rohilla and Shri
Dinesh Kumar

Mathur as its directors is the same. Since

this company fell to

the control of

Rohilla, the registered proprietor

of

Shri
the

Subhash
trade

mark

“Alankar”it continues to so exist.
4.

The parties had continued under the afore-noticed name and style in

partnership firm and companies incorporated under the Indian Companies
Act for a considerable period. However, as disputes arose between them,
they had entered into an agreement dated 2nd February, 2000 whereby an
attempt was made to resolve their disputes amicably. Learned counsel for
the defendants has placed reliance on Clauses 12 & 15 of this agreement
which read thus:“12. Proper notice for discontinuation of business will
be given to various agencies as Income tax, Sales tax,
customes, RBI, AEPC, FERA, Labour Laws, ROC as
stipulated under various laws.
Any liability on behalf of the Govt. agency till 3103-2000 will be borne by the common funds. In case any
further funds are required, all parties will be equally from
their own account.
All pending cases of above
department would be completed by party handling so far.
Costs of settling will be taken from the common fund.
IA No.6546/2005 in CS (OS) No.432/2005

Page No.5

xxx

xxx

xxx

15. During settlement period upto 31-03-2000, all the
parties can float new firms/companies. But there should
be a binding to all parties that they cannot do
simultaneously sampling/shipping, getting orders in their
respective new companies/firms and cannot transfer Emails, Faxes, post and orders or any other way of
communication from the existing customers.”
5.

This agreement was executed and signed by Shri Dinesh Mathur, Shri

Subhash Rohilla, Smt. Meera Mathur and Smt. Usha Rani Rohilla.
6.

As all matters could not be resolved thereby the parties afore-noticed,

executed another agreement dated 30th March, 2001 in continuation of the
memorandum of understanding dated 2nd February, 2000. The material
change which is relied upon by learned counsel for the defendants, is to be
found in Clause 6 and Clause 23 of this agreement which read thus:“6. CUSTOMERS It has been agreed by the all Parties (Including family
members directly or indirectly) to look after the existing
customers as under and no party will interfere with each
other customer for at least two years:1) First Party :- Mr. Dinesh Kumar Mathur will
take over
1.
All Customers of Switzerland –
Manor AG, Spengler, Charles Vogle
(All Countries) Charles Vellon,
IA No.6546/2005 in CS (OS) No.432/2005

Page No.6

Goslow, Logo Fashions, Mag, Otto
AG, ABM, Migros,
EPA
2.
2)

Existing Customers of SwedenAhlens

Second Party:- Mr. Subhash Rohilla will take over
1.

All Customers of Germany – Line
One, Maica, Kastard, Quinee, Fritz,
AWG, Liberty, Addessa etc.

2.

Existing customers of UK – Tabs
Clothing

The Customer - “Line One” of Germany approached Mr.
Dinesh Kumar Mathur, Proprietor of Alankar Creation,
accepted the order and executed the order under name
and style of Alankar Creation for “Line One”.
For the above reasons, now the parties agreed to
delete the Clause 6 of MOU and now both the parties are
free to work anywhere, any country, any customer, all
over the world.
xxx

xxx

xxx

23. That any dispute arising between the parties
relating to any clause, (whether contained in this
Agreement or not) shall be settled according to the
provisions of Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1958 &
1996. The arbitrators in this regard shall be Mr. H.D.
Kashyap and Mr. Popat Bhai who have been appointed
by both the parties under mutual agreement.”
7.

The defendants have filed the present application on the plea that

IA No.6546/2005 in CS (OS) No.432/2005

Page No.7

since the only prayer in the present suit relates to prohibition against the
defendants for the use of trade mark and trade name “Alankar” by the
defendants, the same falls under Clause 23 of the agreement dated 30th
March, 2001 and has to be consequently referred to arbitration.

The

defendants also place reliance largely on Clause 6 to contend that by this
clause, the defendants were given permission to use the trade mark and
trade name “Alankar” anywhere in the world.
8.

So far as the present application is concerned, the existence of the

right to use the trade mark and trade name “Alankar” has not to be
adjudicated. At this stage, the court is required to examine only as to
whether there is an arbitration agreement which binds all the parties to the
suit and whether the issues raised in the suit would be in the nature of
disputes which were the subject matter of the arbitration agreement.
9.

The suit has been filed by M/s Alankar Global Pvt. Ltd., Mr. Subhash

Rohilla & M/s Alankar International. The suit claim is made against Mr.
Dinesh Kumar Mathur, Ms. Meera Mathur & M/s Alankar Creation. The
plaintiff no.1 and plaintiff no.3 are not parties to the agreements dated 2nd
February, 2000 and 30th March, 2001.

Similarly, the firm M/s Alankar

Creation Pvt. Ltd., arrayed as defendant no.3, is also not a party to these
IA No.6546/2005 in CS (OS) No.432/2005

Page No.8

agreements.
10.

Thus, it certainly cannot be held that there is an arbitration agreement

between all the parties to the present suit or an arbitration agreement which
binds all of them. The plaintiff no.1 is a separate legal entity entitled to
bring and maintain the suit in its own name.
11.

I further find that Shri Subhash Rohilla, plaintiff no.2 has claimed

that he is the registered proprietor of the trade mark “Alankar”. He has
claimed intellectual property rights in the trade mark and trade name
“Alankar” and based thereon, sought prohibition against the defendants for
using such trade mark and trade name. While the parties had agreed to
arrange the affairs of several companies and firms in the memorandum of
understanding dated 2nd February, 2000 and the agreement dated 30th March,
2001, certainly, there was no agreement in respect of this trade mark or the
trade name. The suit has been filed by the plaintiff seeking enforcement of
his proprietary property rights over such trade mark and trade name based
whereon the following prayers have been sought:“a) For an order for perpetual injunction restraining the
defendants, their servants, agents, directors, retailers,
dealers, stockiest, representative as the case may be from
manufacturing, selling, offering for sale, stockiest,
exporting, advertising directly or indirectly dealing in
IA No.6546/2005 in CS (OS) No.432/2005

Page No.9

garments and home furnishing products and other allied
and cognate goods under the infringing trade mark
ALANKAR/ALANKAR CREATION and/or any other
trade mark/name which is either identical with or
deceptively similar with the trade mark of the plaintiff
No.2 registered in his favour.
b) For an order for perpetual injunction restraining the
defendants, their servants, agents, partners, directors,
retailers, dealers, stockists, representatives as the case may
be from manufacturing, selling, offering for sale,
stockiest, exporting, advertising, directly or indirectly
from passing off their goods as the goods of the plaintiff
and also from using the firm name Alankar Creation
amounting to passing off their business as the business of
the plaintiffs.
c) For an order for rendition of accounts of profits illegally
earned by the defendants by manufacturing, sale and
export of garments and home furnishing goods under the
name/mark Alankar/Alankar Creation and a decree for the
amount so ascertained in favour of the plaintiffs and
against the defendants be passed.
d) For an order for delivery up on affidavit by the defendants
to the plaintiffs if all the infringing labels, dyes, blocks,
wrappers, packing material, advertising material etc. for
purposes of destruction and/or erasure as the case may be.
e) A decree for a sum of Rs.5 lakhs may be passed as
damages suffered by the plaintiffs.
f) An order for costs of the suit.”
12.

Having regard to the spirit, intentment and purpose of the Arbitration

& Conciliation Act, 1996, it is evident that the legislation was enacted so as
IA No.6546/2005 in CS (OS) No.432/2005

Page No.10

to give primacy to arbitration if the parties to a litigation had entered into a
valid and binding arbitration agreement with regard to the subject matter
thereof. Two statutory provisions which are relevant in this behalf, reads
thus:5.
Extent of judicial intervention- Notwithstanding
anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, in matters governed by this Part, no judicial
authority shall intervene except where so provided in
this Part.
xxx

xxx

xxx

xxx

8.
Power to refer parties to arbitration where
there is an arbitration agreement - (1) A
judicial
authority before which an action is being in a matter
which is the subject of an arbitration agreement shall, if
a party so applies not later than when submitting his first
statement on the substance of the dispute, refer the
parties to arbitration.
(2) The application referred to in sub-section (1) shall
not be entertained unless it is accompanied by the
original arbitration agreement or a duly certified copy
thereof.
(3) Notwithstanding that an application has been
made under sub-section (1) and that the issue is pending
before the judicial authority, an arbitration may be
commenced or continued and an arbitral award made.”
13.

The Apex Court had occasion to examine the scope of these

proceedings as also the parameters within which an application under

IA No.6546/2005 in CS (OS) No.432/2005

Page No.11

Section 8 would deserve to be considered and adjudicated up-on. The Apex
Court was of the view that the matter would be referred to arbitration if all
the parties to the suit were parties to the arbitration agreement and also the
entire subject matter of the suit was covered within the subject matter of the
arbitration agreement. In this behalf, the observations of the Apex Court in
its judgments reported at 2003 (5) SCC 531 Sukanya Holdings (P) Ltd. Vs.
Jayesh H. Pandya & Anr. in paras 12, 13 & 14 deserve to be considered in
extenso and read thus:“12. For interpretation of Section 8, Section 5 would
have no bearing because it only contemplates that in the
matters governed by Part 1 of the Act, the judicial
authority shall not intervene except where so provided in
the Act. Except Section 8, there is no other provision in
the Act that in a pending suit, the dispute is required to be
referred to the arbitrator. Further, the matter is not
required to be referred to the Arbitral Tribunal, if: (1) the
parties to the arbitration agreement have not filed any
such application for referring the dispute to the arbitrator;
(2) in a pending suit, such application is not filed before
submitting first statement on the substance of the dispute;
or (3) such application is not accompanied by the original
arbitration agreement or duly certified copy thereof. This
would, therefore, mean that the Arbitration Act does not
oust the jurisdiction of the civil court to decide the
dispute in a case where parties to the arbitration
agreement do not take appropriate steps as contemplated
under sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 8 of the Act.
13.

Secondly, there is no provision in the Act that

IA No.6546/2005 in CS (OS) No.432/2005

Page No.12

when the subject matter of the suit includes subjectmatter of the arbitration agreement as well as other
disputes, the matter is required to be referred to
arbitration. There is also no provision for splitting the
cause or parties and referring the subject-matter of the
suit to the arbitrators.
14. Thirdly, there is no provision as to what is required
to be done in a case where some parties to the suit are not
parties to the arbitration agreement. As against this,
under Section 24 of the Arbitration Act, 1940, some of
the parties to a suit could apply that the matters in
difference between them be referred to arbitration and the
court may refer the same to arbitration provided that the
same can be separated from the rest of the subject matter
of the suit. The section also provided that the suit would
continue so far as it related to parties who have not joined
in such application.”
14.

The plaintiffs have asserted that the defendants admitted and accepted

their rights in such trade mark and trade name in the memorandum of
understanding and agreements afore-noticed by the fact that names of
companies and the firm were agreed to be changed. It has been urged on
behalf of the plaintiff that the parties who were not possessed of the
registered trade mark, had not only readily agreed to but had actually
effectuated change of the name of the company and stopped using the trade
mark “Alankar”. The plaintiff no.2 Shri Subhash Rohilla has vehemently
urged that he never abandoned or assigned or gave permission to any other
IA No.6546/2005 in CS (OS) No.432/2005

Page No.13

person to use the trade mark or trade name “Alankar” in which he had
exclusive propriety rights based on its registration of the trade mark.
15.

Perusal of the two agreements which have been placed before this

court dated 2nd February, 2000 and 30th March, 2001, shows that the trade
mark and trade name “Alankar” was not the subject matter of the agreement
between the parties.
16.

I, therefore, find two reasons why this application cannot be granted.

Firstly, all the parties to the suit are not parties to the agreements. Secondly,
the subject matter of the present suit has not been strictly covered under the
terms of the memorandum of understanding dated 2nd February, 2000 and
the agreement dated 30th March, 2001. It requires to be made clear that this
is only a prima facie view and is without expressing any opinion on the
merits of this claim at this stage, the impact whereof will be considered at
the time of consideration of the plaintiff's application.

However, this

submission is being noticed in order to appreciate the scope of the present
application.
17.

The claim in the suit, therefore, cannot be referred to arbitration under

Section 8 of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act. Consequently, I find no
merit in this application which is hereby rejected.
IA No.6546/2005 in CS (OS) No.432/2005

Page No.14

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
December 6th , 2006
aa

IA No.6546/2005 in CS (OS) No.432/2005

Page No.15

