IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (C) NO.4953/2002
Reserved on 27th October, 2005
Date of decision: 6th December, 2005
SHRI AJEET KUMAR
...... Petitioner
through: Mr. K.L. Gupta,

Advocate
VERSUS
THE MANAGEMENT OF M/S RAIL
INDIA TECHNICAL AND ECONOMIC
SERVICES LTD. & ANOTHER .... Respondents
through: Mr. Anil Airi,
Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in
the Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J
1.

By way of this writ petition, the petitioner is impugning an

Award dated 25th April, 2001 whereby the Labour Court has answered
the reference against the petitioner/workman.

It appears that the

petitioner was appointed as a field helper/gangman by the management
of the Rail India Technical & Economic Services Limited (Now known
as RITES). The petitioner has stated in his claim statement that he was
WP (C) No.4953/2002

Page 1

appointed w.e.f. 4th November, 1988 on casual basis while according to
the respondents, the petitioner was effected on contractual and temporary
basis w.e.f. 4th November, 1988 to 30th June, 1990 in its project known as
the O & M Project and an appointment letter dated 21st December, 1989
was issued to the petitioner wherein these terms of appointment were
mentioned. There is no dispute that the petitioner accepted the terms and
conditions on which he was appointed and functioned as a field
helper/gangman in terms thereof. The period of contract was extended
from time to time which finally expired on 30th June, 1991.

The

respondents have submitted that the petitioner/workman accepted full
payment for contract period and that his services came to an end upon
expiry of the contract.
2.

The petitioner on the other hand has contended that he was

posted on project work. On account of the nature of duties performed by
him, his eye sight started deteriorating requiring examination by Dr.
Rajinder Kumar Bali on 15th May, 1991 who referred the petitioner to Dr.
S.K. Saha. Instead of complying with the doctor's recommendation to
put the workman on light duty, the petitioner's services were terminated
on 30th June, 1991 due to his poor eye sight.
3.

The petitioner assailed the termination before the labour Court

WP (C) No.4953/2002

Page 2

upon failure of conciliation. The following dispute was referred for
adjudication to the Labour Court vide an order dated 14th October, 1992:-

“Whether the services of Sh. Ajeet Kumar have been
terminated illegally and/or unjustifiably by the
management and if so, to what relief is he entitled and
what directions are necessary in this respect.”
4.

The claim of the petitioner was challenged and the matter

proceeded to evidence culminating in the Award against the workman
dated 25th April, 2001 which has been assailed herein.
5.

According to the respondents, the petitioner was not on

regular duty and was unable to carry out the operations and and
maintenance activities due to his poor eye sight. He was examined at the
Bali Nursing Home at New Delhi which had submitted a report. Perusal
of the report dated 21st January, 1991 shows that the medical experts had
observed thus:-

6.

“Dimunision of vision both near and distant. He is
using convex lense for near vision but he can read
only at very close distance with difficulty.”
Based on these observations, the doctor had advised that the

petitioner's both near and distant eye sight was very poor and that he was
required to get corrective lenses. According to the doctor, the petitioner
could be considered for job if the vision defect to the extent of the

WP (C) No.4953/2002

Page 3

petitioner's problem was condonable.
A medical examination report dated 15th May, 1991 of the
petitioner placed on the record before the Labour Court which was
conducted by Dr. S.K. Saha shows that the petitioner, due to his visual
defect, should not be put on a job requiring perfect visual activity.
However, it was recommended that he can be put on jobs where he has
not to strain to read and write.
7.

A medical report placed before the Labour Court on 1st

August, 1991 shows that the petitioner continued to have very poor
vision in both eyes and he was opined as being colour blind as well.
This medical examination appears to have been conducted by a medical
officer at the B.S. Mehta Eye Hospital at the instance of the petitioner
and in the report it is stated that the petitioner could only be given light
office work. The medical examination of the petitioner shows that he
was having defect of vision since childhood and that he was using
corrective spectacles for a long time before his engagement. It was also
pointed out that his brother was also suffering from the same problem.

WP (C) No.4953/2002

Page 4

The record placed before the Labour Court also shows that
when the petitioner was having difficulty as a filed helper/gangman, he
was put to work as a messenger in the office of the respondent no.1 at
Nehru Place but he could not perform this duty even.
8.

In view of the afore-stated factual position, it is not possible

to hold that the petitioner suffered his visual impairment on account of
the discharge of official duties assigned to him.
9.

Furthermore, it has been pointed out by the respondent no.1

that it is engaged in the business of consultation services in the
transportation area.

If the consultation project is large, services of

various persons are engaged on temporary/casual basis for the duration
of such project. It was in such capacity that the workman's services were
engaged as a field helper for Anpara/Unchhahar projects. The petitioner
was one out of many such persons who were appointed on such basis
without any medical test. The petitioner's attendance is stated to have
been poor and in the seventh month during which he remained with the
respondent, he was on leave for 33 days. He was unable to discharge his
duties as a field helper/gangman. On account of his poor eye sight, he
could not carry out any operations and maintenance activities.

The

medical tests were necessitated in such circumstances and it was advised

WP (C) No.4953/2002

Page 5

by the experts that he could not be assigned any job requiring perfect
visual activity. It was during this period that project was completed and
the contract came to an end by efflux of time.
10.

The petitioner has been unable to prove that he was appointed

against a permanent post.

Some of the relevant clauses contained

in this appointment letter read as follows:“13.
You were appointed on contractual basis as
a daily wages temporary F.H.-Cum-G. Man in our O
& M Project w.e.f. 04.11.88 on the following terms
and conditions:14.
1. Your appointment on contractual basis
was made for the period from 04/11/88 to 30/06/99 as
it is proposed to utilise your services upto that date
against this project. Accordingly, your appointment is
purely contractual and temporary and unless
terminated earlier, it shall automatically come to an
end on 30.06.90.
4.
You are being paid wages @ Rs.28/80 per
day or as such a rate as may be in force in the
Company from time to time with effect from the date
of your appointment. On completion of 1`80 days
service on daily wages on 03/05/89 you have been and
will continue to be paid wages w.e.f. 04/05/89 in scale
of Rs. 196-232 plus dearness allowance and other
compensatory allowances as may be in force from
time to time relevant to the scale of pay.
5.
You will be entitled to reimbursements of
actual medical expenses incurred on your yourself and
the members of your family as defined in the relevant
Medical Rules of RITES, on the same basis as is
WP (C) No.4953/2002

Page 6

applicable to the other regular employees of the
Company after completion of 180 days of employment
till the date of termination of this contract.”
11.

The respondent has contended that the petitioner has

concealed the material portion of the appointment letter in the copy
which has been filed along with the writ petition. According to the
respondent, the petitioner has actually signed the appointment letter
against the stipulation that the terms and conditions offered by the
respondent in the appointment letter were acceptable to him.
12.

My attention has been drawn to an office order dated 31 st

July, 1990 issued by the respondent no.1 whereby the respondent no. 1
extended the employment of the petitioner till 31st December, 1990
besides ten other employees which letter is stated to have been
communicated to all concerned. The petitioner was, therefore, put to
notice about the duration of the contract.
13.

I find that the respondent has established on record that the

petitioner was appointed as a casual worker on contract basis for a
particular project w.e.f. 4th November, 1988 and that despite his
diminishing vision and impairing visual, the respondent no.1 continued
him for the entire duration of the contract.
14.

The Award of the Industrial Adjudicator has been further

WP (C) No.4953/2002

Page 7

assailed by the petitioner on the ground that the petitioner was appointed
to perform operation and maintenance duties which are perennial and
cannot be termed as temporary. This is adequately explained by the
respondent no.1 when they state that the respondent no.1 is itself
engaged against projects and it is for the operation and maintenance of
the respective projects during their duration that it engages the workmen
on casual basis. There is no dispute on behalf of the petitioner that the
project against which the appointment was made stands concluded.
15.

Placing reliance on the pronouncement of the Allahabad High

Court reported in 1996 ALL CJ 736 entitled Shailendra Nath Shukla &
Ors. Vs. The V.C., Allahabad University, it is contended that if the
contractual employment is resorted to as a mechanism to frustrate the
claim of the employee to become regular or permanent against a job
which continues or the nature of duties are such that the colour of
contractual engagement is given to take it out from the principle clause
then such agreement shall have to be tested on the anvil of pleadings and
bona fide. Perusal of the judgment shows that the matter related to the
post of a librarian in the university.
16.

In the instant case, the respondent no.1 itself undertakes

projects and it cannot possibly be contended that the respondent no.1 is

WP (C) No.4953/2002

Page 8

resorting to contractual employment as a facade to avoid the
consequences of regular engagement of workmen. The petitioner was
put to notice about the duration of his engagement and he
unconditionally accepted the terms on which he was offered
appointment. The petitioner also accepted the extension of the contract
period without any objection. Consequently, the principles laid down in
2001 LAB. I.C. 222 entitled Surat Mahila Nagrik Sahakari Bank Ltd.
Surat Vs. Mamtaben Mahendrabhai Joshi are of no assistance to the
petitioner as in the facts of the instant case, it cannot be held that the
contract in the present case is not genuine.
17.

Placing reliance on the judgment reported at 1990 LAB. I.C.

100 (103) Bombay entitled Dilip Hanumant Rao Shrike Vs. Zila
Parishad Yavatma, it has been contended that irrespective of post to
which an appointment is made, the court would need to examine the
nature of duties also to arrive at a conclusion as to whether the
requirement of the service was for a short duration or was perennial in
nature.
This case is clearly distinguishable in as much as in the
instant case, no material has been placed before the Labour Court by the
petitioner to show that the project where he was appointed continues to

WP (C) No.4953/2002

Page 9

subsists or that there is a perennial requirement of his services for the
same.
18.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied on 2001 Labour

I.C. 1277 entitled Wazir Singh Vs. Managing Director of Tarn Taran
Co-operative Sugar Mills Ltd., Amritsar & Another, to urge that the
very fact that the workman has continued to work beyond the period of
appointment letter would establish that the appointment of the workman
was not contractual.
19.

It is noteworthy that in the instant case, the appointment of

the petitioner for a fixed tenure was by a written letter and further the
extension of the same was by a specific written communication. The
petitioner accepted the original appointment as well as the extension
without any demur or prejudices. In this situation, it cannot possibly be
held that the engagement of the petitioner beyond the period of the
original contract was rendering the contract as a camouflage for the real
nature of his employment.
20.

I also find that the petitioner has made varying claims with

regard to his appointment in order to support his case. I find that in the
cases cited on behalf of the petitioner, no letter has been issued making
an appointment of the workman on a contract basis.

WP (C) No.4953/2002

Page 10

21.

I also find that in the pronouncement reported at (2001) 9

SCC 244 entitled Kerala Financial Corporation & Another Vs. O.K.
Muraleedharan & Another; 2000 VII AD (Delhi) 595 entitled Sanjay
Kumar Sharma Vs. National Centre for Trade Information & Others;
86 (2000) DLT 517 entitled Amit Yadav & Ors. Vs. Delhi Vidyut Board
through its Chairman; 2000 LAB I.C. 628 entitled Diwakar Sharma
Vs. University of Delhi & Another, it has been held that where a
workman is engaged on contractual basis and this appointment was
extended, the workman cannot claim to continue in employment beyond
the contract period and his appointment stood lapsed on expiry of the
specified/extended period.
22.

In view of the settled principles of law, the petitioner cannot

possibly urge any right or claim beyond what was offered to him in his
letter of appointment which was admittedly extended.
23.

In 1980 LAB. I.C. 508 entitled Tapan Kumar Jana Vs. The

General Manager, Calcutta Telephones & Others, the court held
whether a workman is engaged on casual basis without a written service
contract or letter of appointment, for a particular urgent work, his
services automatically came to an end when the work is over and there is
no retrenchment when his services are terminated and consequently,

WP (C) No.4953/2002

Page 11

there was no question following the procedure relating to retrenchment.
In such case, merely because the workman was required repeatedly for
doing urgent work and thus had to work for this considerable time and
the termination of services would not amount to retrenchment.
24.

In this view of the matter, the Award dated 25th April, 20001

cannot be impugned on any legally tenable ground. I find no infirmity in
the impugned Award.
Accordingly, the writ petition is dismissed. There shall be no
orders as to costs.
(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
December 6th , 2005
aa

WP (C) No.4953/2002

Page 12

