IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 3690 of 2001
Dat e of decision: June 6,2005
Shri Kashmiri Lal Gupta
... Petitioner
through Mr. Lalit Gupta, Advocate
VERSUS
Govt. of National Capital Territory... Respondents
through Mr. Amiet Andley with
Mr.Arun Sharma, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.
By way of this writ petition the petitioner is seeking
issuance of an appropriate writ, order or directions prohibiting the
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi through its
Public Works Department from constructing or raising any wall or
other structure in front of the weigh bridge(dharamkanta) of the
petitioner. The petitioner is also seeking a writ in the nature of
mandamus directing the respondents to remove the wall or any
other obstruction already raised by them in front of the weigh
:1:

WP(C) 3690/2001

bridge of the petitioner.
2.

These reliefs have been prayed by the petitioner on the

plea that the petitioner alongwith his three brothers purchased 5
bighas and 12 biswas of land in khasra nos.120, 122, 124 and 126
located at village Peepal Thala and as on date the petitioner retains
the ownership of 975 sq. yards of land. It is contended that this
land is built up and assessed to property tax by the Municipal
Corporation of Delhi and that the petitioner has made upto date
payment of such dues to the Corporation.
In the year 1993 the petitioner installed a weigh bridge
(dharam kanta) which was named as Shri Ganesh Dharam Kanta.
A Certificate of verification dated 17th September, 1993 was issued
by the authorities to this weigh bridge. Subsequently the name of
this weigh bridge was changed to Tata Computer Kanta.
According to the petitioner, several Government Agencies
including the CPWD are using the petitioner's weigh bridge from
the date of its installation till date.
3.

The main GT Karnal Road is stated to be located in front

of the property of the petitioner.

By passage of time several

constructions have come up on both sides of road and the entire
area is said to be urbanised. The petitioner claims that he has left
:2:

WP(C) 3690/2001

15 ft. open space because of the nature of his trade which requires
space for ingress and egress of trucks and heavy vehicles.
According to the petitioner, originally there was a total
clearance of 170 ft. wide strip meant for the GT Karnal Road.
However constructions are alleged towards the main road running
from 13 to 20 ft. towards the GT Road so that the total clearance
has been reduced in certain areas to even about 85 ft.
approximately. The petitioner submits that the land measuring 15
ft. in front of his property is owned by him.
4.

On 23rd September, 2000 officials of the respondent are

alleged to have visited the area and threatened the petitioner with
demolition action of the front portion of the weigh bridge alleging
the same to be part of the GT Karnal Road.

Apprehending

demolition of the business premises the petitioner filed a suit
bearing no.532/2000 entitled Shri Kashmiri Lal Gupta vs. PWD &
others on 29th September, 2000 praying for prohibitory injunction
restraining the defendants from demolishing any portion of his
weigh bridge. This civil suit is pending even on date. Interim
orders have been passed in favour of the petitioner in this matter.
According to the petitioner the respondents became vindictive
against him on account of his having taken legal action and
:3:

WP(C) 3690/2001

consequently, on or about 25th April, 2001 collected huge stocks of
cement, bricks and other masonary items in front of his weigh
bridge and started constructing a wall. It is submitted that about 6
months ago division/partition of the double laned GT Karnal Road
by virtue of iron grills had been effected by the respondent and the
access to the petitioner's weigh bridge for the vehicles plying on
the opposite half of the GT Road had been seriously impaired by
the respondents thereby pre-judiciously affecting the business of
the petitioner.
5.

In these circumstances the petitioner has filed the

present writ petition alleging that the respondent had collected
building material in front of his property to construct a wall with
the intention of completely paralysing

the business of the

petitioner as free ingress and egress thereto of the trucks etc.
plying on the GT Karnal Road would be completely prevented by
construction of the proposed wall.
Under these circumstances, alleging impingement of the
petitioner's rights he has sought protection of his rights under
Article 19(i)(g) of the Constitution of India and the present writ
petition has been filed seeking the following prayers:“a) Issue a writ order or direction in the nature of
:4:

WP(C) 3690/2001

writ of prohibition thereby prohibiting the
respondent not to construct or raise any wall or
any
other
structure
in
front
of
dharamkanta/weigh bridge of the petitioner.
b) Issue a writ order or direction in the nature of
writ of mandamus/declaration thereby declaring
the act of the respondent in constructing wall in
front of Dharam kanta/weigh bridge of the
petitioner.
c) Issue a writ order or direction in the nature of
writ of mandamus thereby directing the
respondent to remove the wall or any other
obstruction already raised by them in front of
the dharamkanta/weigh bridge of the
petitioner.
d)Award cost to the petitioner.

6.

e) Any other proper and further order which this
Hon'ble Court deems fit in the peculiar
circumstances of the present case may kindly be
passed in favour of the petitioner and against the
respondent.”
The petitioner places reliance on a sketch of the area

placed on record to allege that there exist innumerable weigh
bridges and cuts providing access directly to other premises.
Reference has specifically been made to Shubh Dharamkanta, Om
Dharamkanta, Avery Dharamkanta, Adarsh Dharamkanta & Jai
Durga Dharamkanta. Arbitrariness and hostile discrimination is
being pleaded besides the threat to the right of way to the
petitioner's premises. Several photographs showing existence of

:5:

WP(C) 3690/2001

the weigh bridges have been also filed on record. It has been
vehemently contended that there are contradictions in the site
plans filed by the respondents.
7.

Pursuant to an order dated 14th September, 2004 passed

in the writ petition, a Local Commissioner was appointed by this
Court who has given a detailed report pointing out that there is no
closure of any cut whatsoever effected by the respondents on the
road stretch in question at the time of his inspection. The learned
Local Commissioner has stated that he found no evidence
whatsoever of any construction. It is also contended that all cuts
are still working.
8.

It has been vehemently submitted on behalf of the

petitioner that there is no service lane in existence in front of his
property and that there is no scheme for closure of cuts as has
been contended by the respondents as there was no evidence
whatsoever of any construction found by the Local Commissioner.
9.

The claim made by the petitioner is disputed by the

respondents. Several affidavits have been filed on the record of
this case on their behalf. It is submitted that there is 22 ft. wide
service road in front of the

properties running alongside GT

Karnal Road including the petitioner's weigh bridge. Access has
:6:

WP(C) 3690/2001

been provided through this service road at several points to the GT
Karnal Road

which is being used by commercial vehicles.

According to the respondents this service road can be used even by
the petitioner and his customers

without any hindrance or

obstruction to have ingress or egress to his premises to and from
the GT Karnal Road.
The respondents have placed reliance on the Delhi
Master Plan 2000 where the width of the road is found to be 200
ft. It is submitted that a road of such width exists at most parts of
its length except in some places where encroachments have been
made. According to the respondents, upon measurements being
taken by the Revenue Authorities, it was found that the petitioner
himself has encroached about 3 ft. of Government land for
construction of the weigh bridge.
So far as the cuts leading from the inner land to the
main GT Karnal Road are concerned, the respondents submit that
all unwanted cuts on the central verge of the GT Karnal Road are
being closed every where in Delhi as per the requirements and
instructions of the Delhi Police so as to minimise traffic blockages
and accidents.
10.

So far as the wall is concerned, the respondents have
:7:

WP(C) 3690/2001

submitted that the same is being constructed as per the approved
scheme of the Delhi Government to improve greenery in the area.
It has been submitted that construction of the wall is being done
on a stretch of 1 kilometer and not in front of the petitioner's
property alone.

The same also is necessary to ensure proper

continuous and safe flow of traffic.
11.

Mr.Amiet Andley, Advocate, learned counsel appearing

for the respondents has painstakingly explained the expression
'RD' as road distance which is used in technical language for
marking locations and distance on the road from different points
and contended that there is no contradiction or ambiguity in either
the pleadings or in the maps placed on record. Learned counsel
has submitted that the work being undertaken was in public
interest and was to commence from 10.02.2001. However, on
account of interdiction by the interim order dated 31.05.2001
passed in the present petition, the same could not be proceeded
with. There is no hostile discrimination being exercised against
the petitioner and reliance is placed on the deposition in the
counter affidavit that all unwanted cuts are being closed. The
respondents place reliance on the existence of the 22 ft. wide
service road where from access is available to the petitioner's
:8:

WP(C) 3690/2001

property. It is this service road which provides the connectivity to
the main road. The respondents are stated to have received a
letter from the traffic police dated 28.05.2002 reiterating the
urgency in the matter.
12.

The respondents submit that the report of the Local

Commissioner is not in terms of the Court order. The respondents
have laboriously explained the site position and the proposal
which was being implemented on the plans filed on record and
state that there is no error in the plans filed on record. So far as
lack of building material is concerned, it is pointed out that the
project could not be completed on account of the stay order dated
31.05.2001 and the Local Commissioner visited the spot only
pursuant to the order dated 14.09.2004. It is pointed that the
construction material must have been taken away by the public
over the three and half year gap.
13.

Reliance

has

been

placed

on

the

judicial

pronouncements reported at 1995(3) SCC 33 entitled Mahadeo
Savalam Shelka vs. Pune Municipal Corporation to
contend that interests of the public would over ride all private
considerations.
14.

I have carefully scrutinized the record of the present
:9:

WP(C) 3690/2001

case and considered the submissions made before me.

The

respondents proposed to undertake the work of closure of cuts and
prepared a plan from Model Town II at RD 11 to Mukarba Chowk
which is the Mall Road Extension and is located at RD 15.20.
Rajghat is taken as zero point. RD 11 & RD 15.20 have been
explained to mean points at a distance of 11 kilometers and 15.20
kilometers from the Rajghat.
If measured in kilometers, work of closing the
unwanted cuts was taken up between RD 12.00 to RD 13.00. This
road distance is stated to be in kilometers from the Raj Ghat which
taken as the zero point.
15.

It is further explained that as per the technical

expressions used in indicating points on the road, distance is also
measured in meters. So far as the instant project is concerned Mall
Road Extension has been taken as zero point and distance in
meters has been taken as the road distance. Consequently when it
is stated that the petitioner's dharam kanta is located between RD
1800 (which means 1800 meters from the starting point at Mall
Road Extension) and RD 2250 (that is 2250 meters from the
starting point at Mal Road Extension).
16.

In this view of the matter, there is no discrepancy in the
: 10 :

WP(C) 3690/2001

site plans filed by the Police. In one plan distance has been shown
in meters, while in the other, it is in kilometers. Doubt has been
created only on account of failure to understand the manner in
which the road distance is stated on a map. I find that the same
has been removed by the explanation on behalf of the respondents
which has been noticed hereinabove.
17.

Before adverting to the other submissions made on

behalf of the petitioner, it is necessary to note that the petitioner
has litigated at length with regard to the issues raised. The first
proceedings taken out by the petitioner on 29.9.2000 is the civil
suit filed by him. In the oral submissions made before me, it was
contended that the property of the petitioner is located on the GT
Karnal Road itself and that construction of the wall as was being
proposed would completely block access to the petitioner's
property. I may notice here the pleadings of the petitioner in this
behalf. In his plaint dated 29.9.2000, copy whereof has been
placed on record, the petitioner had stated as under:“It is relevant to mention here that the plaintiff
and his three brothers above named had
purchased 5 bighas 12 biswas of land falling in
khasra no.120, 122, 124 and 126 also which was
situated away from the main road. Thus the
total and purchased by the plaintiff and his
brother was in all 18 bighas 6 biswas situated in
: 11 :

WP(C) 3690/2001

18.

the village Peepal Thala.”
In this plaint, the petitioner has sought to explain the

existence of the service road as being part of his land and had
made the following averment:“10. That the plaintiff had left 15 ft. wide land
strip in front of his property because of this
reason that he wanted to use the same as
Thada/Phar in front of his shop/property for
keeping his goods etc. as was the custom
prevalent at that time and the said custom is
still prevalent today. 85 ft. width of the GT
Road towards the side of the plaintiff ends at
the corner of 15 ft. wide land strip of the
plaintiff. It is relevant to mention here that 15
ft. wide land strip in front of the property of the
plaintiff belongs to him and the same can be got
measured or demarcated by any Revenue
Officer/Patwari or Tehsildar.”
19.

Before this Court, the petitioner has reiterated and has

reproduced the same averments in para 3.1 and 3.10 of the writ
petition. Therefore, even according to the petitioner his land is
away from the GT Karnal Road and that there is a lane of 15 ft. in
front thereof. According to the respondents this is stated to be a
service road of 22 ft. width.
In the oral submissions made before me it was conceded
on behalf of the petitioner that a service road was in existence.
Therefore there is no dispute that there is a service road
and that the same would provide access to the premises of the
: 12 :

WP(C) 3690/2001

petitioner. This service road would also provide the necessary
connectivity to the main GT Karnal Road to the properties which
are located on it.
20.

I may also notice the submission made by the

respondents in their affidavit dated 13th March, 2002 in para 3.8
and 3.10 to the effect that upon measurement by the Revenue
Authorities, it was found that the petitioner had encroached upon
about 3 ft. of the Government land for construction of weigh
bridge. The petitioner has denied the same in his rejoinder. It is
noteworthy however that there is nothing on record to show the
exact land which is occupied by the petitioner and the extent of the
land which is in his occupation or is being utilised as the weigh
bridge.
21.

The respondents have categorically stated that all

unwanted cuts were being closed in the entire city of Delhi as per
the requirements and instructions of the Delhi Traffic Police so as
to minimise traffic accidents. The wall was being constructed as
per an approved scheme of the Delhi Government so as to improve
greenery in the area. It has also been stated that the construction
of the wall was being done on a stretch of one kilometer. There is
no reason to disbelieve the statement made on behalf of the
: 13 :

WP(C) 3690/2001

authorities. The respondents have stated on affidavit that there is
no exercise of hostile discrimination against the petitioner and
that the wall was being built in front of the properties of other
persons as well.
22.

In an affidavit which was filed on 10.12.2003, the

respondents have stated that during the last 1 ½ year, closure of
unwanted cuts at places which have been marked in yellow on the
site plan annexed thereto has been undertaken and a green belt
has been developed on the footpath.
The cuts which have actually been closed have been
shown on the site plan. There is no dispute to this fact on behalf of
the petitioner. These cuts have been closed on the same stretch of
the road as on which the petitioner is located. However further
work has not been undertaken on account of the interim order
dated 31.05.2001 passed by this Court.
23.

The urgency in executing the work has been aggravated

with passage of time. The experts on the matter i.e. the officers of
the traffic police have stated that there was no iron grill or
cemented grill on either the central verge of the main GT Karnal
Road or on the service road. It has been stated that as a result the
pedestrians,

fruit/vegetable
: 14 :

vendors,

rehris(hand

carts),

WP(C) 3690/2001

rickshaws come on the main carriage way, breaking the free flow
of the traffic. The traffic police has stated that there was an urgent
need to install grills on the footpath between the service road and
the main GT Karnal Road so that the pedestrians can be compelled
to use the footpath and prevented from coming to the main road
thereby risking their life. The traffic police had directed that iron
grills/concrete grills be installed on both side of the road on top
priority. It has been stated that despite the best efforts of the
traffic police to educate the citizens to use zebra crossing and
footpaths, it has not been possible to inculcate road safety habits.
The traffic police has also stated that despite completion of the
subway, various measures of installation of the iron grills/concrete
grills on both sides of the service road deserved top priority and
the respondents and has required that the PWD should intimate
execution of the project to the Deputy Commissioner of
Police(Traffic) after execution of the work with expedition.

A

detailed communication dated 28th May, 2002 received by the
respondents from the Deputy Commissioner of Police(Traffic) has
been placed on record. This communication clearly notices that
the Azadpur Sabji Mandi is the biggest Mandi of Asia. It is noticed
that all types of traffic and all types of people alongwith all types of
: 15 :

WP(C) 3690/2001

fruits and vegetables are located at this Mandi. It is located on the
main GT Karnal Road.

Several authorised and unauthorised

colonies exists opposite the Mandi which are old villages including
Sarai Peepal Thala.

The traffic police has pointed out to the

respondents that there are jhuggi clusters and also three industrial
areas besides GTK and DTC bus depot. According to the traffic
police, the GT Karnal Road was having service road on both sides
of the road which had been developed by the PWD. However iron
grills on the central verge have been damaged at places and need
repairs. The problem was serious and a result of there being no
other solution by grill or otherwise on the service road as well as
on the central verge of the main GT Karnal Road.
24.

In view of the above position, it is conclusively

established that the respondents have fully considered the matter.
The traffic police has communicated the imperative and urgent
need of creating this separation between the service road and the
main road as also installation of a separator along the middle of
the main GT Karnal Road. The reasons for the same have been
stated in detail in the letter of the Deputy Commissioner of
Police(Traffic) dated 28.5.2002 noticed here-in-above.

The

respondents have drawn up a plan as back as in 2001 to effectuate
: 16 :

WP(C) 3690/2001

the aforestated need of the public at large. The measure is being
undertaken not only to ensure free flow of traffic but is necessary
in order to protect the lives of the road users.

The proposed

construction was wholly in public interest and the proposal of the
respondents cannot be faulted for any reason. The traffic police
and the respondents are the expert body who have been vested
with statutory functioning and public law obligations and duties
which they are discharging.
25.

I find that no person can claim a right and entitlement to

have access to the main road directly from its property.

The

scheme of public facilities and road planning is to ensure provision
of circulation and access to all properties. The petitioner has a
service lane in front of its property whereby access is to be
provided to the petitioner's property. The connectivity to the main
road has to be regulated by the respondents and cannot be from
every property but has to be at such points which are considered
appropriate by the traffic authorities and the officials of the Public
Works Department who are best placed to assess, evaluate,
propose and provide points of access, entry and exits to and from
main roads. I have no reason to find or hold that in the instant
case, the respondents deserve to be interdicted by this court in the
: 17 :

WP(C) 3690/2001

discharge of such public duties and obligations.
26.

I also find no reason or material on record in support of

the plea of hostile discrimination against the petitioner as has been
alleged before me. The respondents have stated that the road is
being built in continuity over a stretch of one kilometer.

The

respondents have arrived at the deliniation of the length of the
proposed wall upon consideration of the matter. Needless to say,
if it is considered necessary in public interest, they would exercise
their discretion and make further construction at spots considered
necessary, keeping in view changed perspectives of the imperative
need of the pedestrians and the traffic in the future.
27.

I also find plausible the justification given on behalf of

the respondents for the non-existence of the building material on
the date of the visit by

Local Commissioner

on 23.9.2004.

Construction works are taken at a stretch and works are awarded
by the Government Authorities as a whole. Vide an order dated
31.05.2001 in the present proceedings the respondents were
restrained from closing the claimed passage of the petitioner on
points stated therein. The proposed work, therefore, obviously
could not be completed and has resulted in dis-continuation
thereof.

It would be unrealistic to expect building material to
: 18 :

WP(C) 3690/2001

remain at the spot even after expiry of over three years between
24.05.2001 and 23.09.2004.
28.

The Apex Court has repeatedly cautioned the Courts

against interdicting public projects by issuance of orders of stay. It
is settled law that interest of the public at large would over ride all
considerations of private interest.
29.

In this behalf, I may advert to the observations of the

Apex Court in the judgment reported at 1995(3) SCC 33 entitled
Mahadeo

Savalaram

Shelke

and

others

vs

Pune

Municipal Corporation and another to the following effect:“14. It would thus be clear that in a suit for
perpetual(sic) injunction, the court should
enquire on affidavit evidence and other material
placed before the court to find strong prima facie
case and balance of convenience in favour of
granting injunction otherwise irreparable damage
or damage or damage would ensue to the
plaintiff. The court should also find whether the
plaintiff could adequately be compensated by
damages if injunction is not granted. It is
common experience that injunction normally is
asked for and granted to prevent the public
authorities or the respondents to proceed with
execution of or implementing scheme of public
utility or granted contracts for execution thereof.
Public interest is, therefore, one of the material
and relevant considerations in either exercising or
refusing to grant ad interim injunction. While
exercising discretionary power, the court should
also adopt the procedure of calling upon the
plaintiff to file a bond to the satisfaction of court
: 19 :

WP(C) 3690/2001

that in the event of his failing in the suit to obtain
the relief asked for in the plaint, he would
adequately compensate the defendant for the loss
ensued due to the order of injunction granted in
favour of the plaintiff. Even otherwise the court
while exercising its equity jurisdiction in granting
injunction has also jurisdiction and power to
grant adequate compensation to mitigate the
damages caused to the defendant by grant of
injunction restraining the defendant to proceed
with the execution of the work etc. The pecuniary
award of damages is consequential to the
adjudication of the dispute and the result therein
is incidental to the determination of the case by
the court. The pecuniary jurisdiction of the court
of first instance should not impede nor be a bar to
award damages beyond its pecuniary jurisdiction.
In this behalf, the grant or refusal of damages is
not founded upon the original cause of action but
the consequences of the adjudication by the
conduct of the parties, the court gets inherent
jurisdiction in doing ex debito justitiae mitigating
the damage suffered by the defendant by the act
of the court in granting injunction restraining the
defendant from proceeding with the action
complained of in the suit.
It is common
knowledge that injunction is invariably sought for
in laying the suit in a court of lowest pecuniary
jurisdiction even when the claims are much larger
than the pecuniary jurisdiction of the court of first
instance, may be, for diverse reasons. Therefore,
the pecuniary jurisdiction is not and should not
stand as an impediment for the court of first
instance in determining damages as part of the
adjudication and pass a decree in that behalf
without relegating the parties to a further suit for
damages. This procedure would act as a check on
abuse of the process of the court and adequately
compensate the damages or injury suffered by the
defendant by act of court at the behest of the
plaintiff.”
: 20 :

WP(C) 3690/2001

30.

It has been held by the Apex Court that the court may

not issue an order in favour of a petitioner even if the petitioner
had made out a point in law if overriding considerations of public
interest required otherwise in the judgment reported at 1997(1)
SCC 134 entitled Ramniklal Bhutta and another vs. State
of Maharashtra and others. The Court observed thus:“10. Before parting with this case, we think it
necessary to make a few observations relevant to
land acquisition proceedings. Our country is
now launched upon an ambitious programme of
all-round economic advancement to make our
economy competitive in the world market. We
are anxious to attract foreign direct investment
to the maximum extent. We propose to compete
with China economically. We wish to attain the
pace of progress achieved by some of the Asian
countries, referred to as “Asian tigers”, e.g.,
South Korea, Taiwan and Singapore. It is,
however, recognised on all hands that the
infrastructure necessary for sustaining such a
pace of progress is woefully lacking in our
country. The means of transportation, power
and communications are in dire need of
substantial
improvement,
expansion
and
modernisation. These things very often call for
acquisition of land and that too without any
delay. It is, however, natural that in most of
these cases, the persons affected challenge the
acquisition proceedings in courts.
These
challenges are generally in the shape of writ
petitions filed in High Courts. Invariably, stay of
acquisition is asked for and in some cases, orders
by way of stay or injunction are also made.
Whatever may have been the practices in the
past, a time has come where the courts should
: 21 :

WP(C) 3690/2001

keep the larger public interest in mind while
exercising
their
power
of
granting
stay/injunction. The power under Article 226 is
discretionary.
It will be exercised only in
furtherance of interests of justice and not merely
on the making out of a legal point. And i the
matter of land acquisition for public purposes,
the interests of justice and the public interest
coalesce. They are very often one and the same.
Even in a civil suit, granting of injunction or
other similar orders, more particularly of an
interlocutory nature, is equally discretionary.
The courts have to weigh the public interest visa-vis the private interest while exercising the
power under Article 226---indeed any of their
case it finds finally that the acquisition was
vitiated on account of non-compliance with some
legal requirement that the persons interested
shall also be entitled to a particular amount of
damages to be awarded as a lump sum or
calculated at a certain percentage of
compensation payable. There are many ways of
affording appropriate relief and redressing a
wrong; quashing the acquisition proceedings is
not the only mode of redress. To wit, it is
ultimately a matter of balancing the competing
interests. Beyond this, it is neither possible nor
advisable to say. We hope and trust that these
considerations will be duly borne in mind by the
courts while dealing with challenges to
acquisition proceedings.”
31.

I have already held that the petitioner has no right

whatsoever to claim access to the main road directly from its
property. Merely because the public land and the service road
were not separated, the admitted position is that traffic was
coming directly on to the weigh bridge and was existing therefrom
: 22 :

WP(C) 3690/2001

as well. The traffic police has fairly stated that the GT Karnal Road
was carrying a tremendous volume of traffic and that pedestrians,
cycle rickshaws and hand carts were also creating obstructions.
Judicial notice can be taken of the obstruction to the free flow
which would result from heavy vehicles etc. turning on to the main
road from properties as that of the petitioner inasmuch as they
need much wider area to effectuate a turn.
32.

It has been held that even if an order had been made

which was contrary to law the same would not be quashed by
issuance of a writ if such quashing resulted in greater harm to
society. It was so held in the pronouncements of the Apex Court
reported in 1994(2) SCC 481 entitled State of Maharashtra
vs. Prabhu and 1984(1) SCC 370 entitled State of
Karnataka vs. Surender Kotiankar.

33.

In the judgment reported at 1984 (4) SCC 371

entitled MP Mittal vs. State of Haryana it was held that
where writ jurisdiction is invoked to secure dishonest advantage or
perpetuate and unjust gain, no writ would issue. The relevant
paragraph of the aforesaid judgment reads as under:“The record also shows that before instituting
: 23 :

WP(C) 3690/2001

coercive proceedings, the Assistant Collector
provided the appellant an opportunity to pay up
the amount due from him, and that the appellant
made no attempt to discharge the liability. When
that is so, we are of opinion that he is not entitled
to relief in these proceedings. The appeal arises
out of a writ petition, and it is well settled that
when a petitioner invokes the jurisdiction of the
High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution,
it is open to the High Court to consider whether,
in the exercise of its undoubted discretionary
jurisdiction, it should decline relief to such
petitioner if the grant of relief would defeat the
interests of justice. The Court always has power
to refuse relief where the petitioner seeks to
invoke its writ jurisdiction in order to secure a
dishonest advantage or perpetuate an unjust
gain. This is a case where the High Court was
fully justified in refusing relief. On that ground
alone, the appeal must fail.”
34.

The admitted position is that there is a service road in

front of the petitioner from where access is provided to the
petitioner's property. In these circumstances the petitioner has no
absolute and unfettered right to have a direct access to the main
highway.

For the reasons as have been noticed in the

communication dated 28.5.2002 set out here-in-above, also the
petitioner cannot claim an absolute right or seek prohibition of
construction of means of separation between the service road and
the main road. The judgment of the Madras High Court report at
AIR 1972 Madras 386 entitled Damodran Naidu vs. P

: 24 :

WP(C) 3690/2001

Amal and others relied upon by the petitioner in the
circumstances of the present case, has no applicability. For the
same reason, inasmuch as there is no obstruction being created to
the service road where from there is access to the petitioner's
property, no damage would result to the petitioner by the
impugned action of the respondent and the judgments reported at
AIR 1975 Allahabad 341 entitled Mst. Bhagwanti vs. Mst.
Jiuti and another and AIR 1976 All 41 entitled Ranjit
Singh vs. Ram Nath Singh are of no assistance to the
petitioner.
35.

I have already held that the impugned action and

construction is being undertaken by the respondents purely in the
interest of public at large after full consideration of the entire
matter. In this view of the matter, the principles laid down in AIR
1972 Rajasthan 103 entitled Firm Pyare Lal Satpal vs Sant
Lal and others relied upon by the petitioner would not further
its case.
36.

I find that in the judgment reported at AIR 1985

Kerala 2 Godawari Bai vs Kannanaur Municipality relied
upon by the petitioner, the Municipal Council was effecting
construction on the road margin which was the pathway of the
: 25 :

WP(C) 3690/2001

public street.

It had been held that such construction was

impermissible.
In the instant case the construction is being effected in
order to secure the service road as well as the main GT Karnal
Road purely in public interest. The facts in the case of the Kerala
High Court are clearly distinguishable from the instant case.
37.

The petitioner has also relied upon the judgment

reported at 1965(2) SCR 242 entitled Municipal Board,
Manglaur vs Sri Mahadeoji Maharaj to contend that the side
lands are the parts of the main highway.
In the instant case the respondents are not taking away
any portion of the private or public property. The service road and
the pedestrian way remain available to the public and the
petitioner. The main GT Karnal Road

is

being

secured

so

that the same is not converted into
a pedestrian walk way and the lives of the pedestrians and
Rickshaw and hand cart pullers are secured.
38.

The petitioner has succeeded in delaying a public

interest project for which there was grave urgency as has been
reminded by the traffic police to the respondents as back on
28.5.2002. It is an admitted position that the respondents had
: 26 :

WP(C) 3690/2001

commenced some activity in respect thereof as back as in
September, 2000 resulting in
petitioner.

the filing of the suit by the

In May, 2001 the respondents were actually

implementing their proposal which was pursuant to the
requirements by the traffic police and was purely in the interest of
the road users as well as the pedestrians. Over this period, the
respondents would have expended public money on the building
material and the work which was commenced in 2001. Judicial
notice can be taken of the fact that costs of implementing the
project would have increased manifold over this period of five
years.
39.

For all the foregoing reasons, I find no merit in the writ

petition which is hereby dismissed.
The respondents shall be entitled to costs of the
proceedings which are assessed at Rs.10,000/-.
GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
June 6, 2005
JK

: 27 :

WP(C) 3690/2001

