IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
OMP NO.14/2000
Date of Decision 7th March, 2007
UNION OF INDIA
... Petitioner
through: Ms. Gitanjali Chauhan, Advocate
with Ms. Richa Kapoor, Advocate
VERSUS
M/S N.B. PHARMA & ANR.
through: Nemo.

.....Respondents

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
GITA MITTAL, J (Oral)
1.

This petition has been filed by the petitioner under Section 34 of the

Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 limited to the award dated 8 th October,
1999 made in respect of only Claim – II by the claimant. The respondent
was served with the notice of this objection petition and despite service, has
opted not to appear in the matter or contest the petition. Accordingly, by an
order dated 26th September, 2006, it was directed that the matter shall be
heard ex parte.

There has been no appearance before this court even

OMP No.14/2000

Page No.1

thereafter on the last two dates and none appears for the respondent even
today.
Accordingly, this petition is being taken up for hearing.
2.

The Union of India had entered into a contract dated 20 th July, 1992

with the respondent M/s N.B. Pharma for the supply of 502889 outfit water
sterilizing units. Advance acceptance of the tender dated 23rd April, 1991
was issued by the Union of India on 29th May, 1992 which was followed by
a work order dated 20th July, 1992. Inasmuch as the respondent failed to
supply any stores within the stipulated delivery period, the claimant had
objected to the delays. Subsequently, by a communication dated 27th May,
1993, the delivery period was extended by the Union of India. However,
even thereafter, the respondent could not effect the delivery of the goods on
the stipulated dates and consequently committed breach of the contract. The
contract was cancelled by the Union of India by an order dated 12 th July,
1994 to the extent of non-supply of quantities of the store and a purchase
was effected on the risk and cost of the respondent after due notice to it. On
these facts, the claimant urged having suffered a loss of Rs.17,82,504/- for
the fault of the respondent no.1 which was demanded from it by the letters
dated 11th October, 1994 and 24th October, 1997. The respondent failed to
OMP No.14/2000

Page No.2

comply with the notice demand resulting in the issuance of the reference
thereto to the sole arbitrator in accordance with the arbitration clause
between the parties.
3.

These arbitration proceedings culminated in an Award dated 8th

October, 1999. On the receipt of the award by the arbitrator, the present
objections were filed in this court on 17th January, 2000. The objector who
was the claimant before the arbitrator, has pointed out that the arbitrator
allowed the claims of the Union of India for the loss which was suffered by
it to the extent of Rs.17,82,504/- disallowing the claim of interest thereon
on the amount awarded for the reason that no interest could be levied being
as the claimant can raise a claim on the damages and no interest would be
awarded on the amount which has been claimed.
4.

Before this court, learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that

this position was contrary to the settled principles of law. Reliance has been
placed on the principles laid down by the Apex Court in (1999) 4 SCC 327
entitled Oil & Natural Gas Commission Vs. M.C. Clelland Engineers S.A.
wherein it was held that the interest on the amount of interest may be termed
as interest on damages or compensation for the delayed payment and that
the arbitrator had the jurisdiction to award the same.
OMP No.14/2000

Page No.3

5.

I have given my thoughtful consideration to the issues urged on

behalf of the claimant. A narrow issue has been urged placing reliance on
the principles of law laid down by the Apex Court. Perusal of the judgment
rendered in Oil & Natural Gas Commission (Supra) shows that it was held
by the Apex Court that the arbitrator had the powers to grant interest akin to
Section 34 of the CPC which is the power of the court in view of Section 29
of the Arbitration Act, 1940. In this behalf, the court held thus:-

6.

“There cannot be any doubt that the arbitrators have
powers to grant interest akin to Section 34 of the CPC
which is the power of the court in view of Section 29 of
the Arbitration Act, 1940. It is clear that interest is not
granted upon interest awarded but upon the claim made.
The claim made in the proceedings is under two headsone is the balance of amount claimed under invoices and
letter dated 10-2-1981 and the amount certified and paid
by the appellant and the second is the interest on delayed
payment. That is how the claim for interest on delayed
payment stood crystalized by the time the claim was filed
before the arbitrators. Therefore, the power of the
arbitrators to grant interest on the amount of interest
which may, in other words, be termed as interest on
damages or compensation for delayed payment which
would also become part of the principal. If that is the
correct position in law, we do not think that Section 3 of
the Interest Act has any relevance in the context of the
matter which we are dealing with in the present case.
Therefore, the first contention raised by Shri Datta,
though interesting, deserves to be and is rejected.”
In the instant case, the petitioner had undoubtedly, raised a claim for

OMP No.14/2000

Page No.4

the loss which was suffered by it and it was being compelled to effect risk
purchase for breach of the contract which has been committed by the
respondent.
7.

Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that no objections have

been filed to the award by the respondent.
8.

The amount which was claimed was therefore arising out of the

liability of the respondent for the breach of contract on its part.

The

petitioner/objector has claimed the same amount from the respondent which
it has failed to comply by the notice demand resulting in the initiation of the
arbitration proceedings.

Liability of the respondent, undoubtedly,

cristalizes upon the award being made by the learned arbitrator. In the light
of the pronouncement by the Apex Court, there was no impediment to the
award of interest, in any case, from the date of the award.
9.

In my view, the findings of the arbitrator and the award disallowing

the claim of interest from the date of the award on the ground that the claim
made by the petitioner was a claim for damages, was contrary to law and
deserves to be set aside and consequently quashed in the light of Section 34
of the Arbitration, 1940.
Accordingly, the objections are accepted and this petition is allowed.
OMP No.14/2000

Page No.5

10.

The award dated 10th October, 1999 is consequently modified. In

addition to the amount awarded, it is held that the objector is entitled to
interest at the rate of 12% per annum on the amount awarded on claim w.e.f.
10th October, 1999 till date of payment.
The award dated 10th October, 1999 shall stand modified to the above
extent.
(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
March 07, 2007
aa

OMP No.14/2000

Page No.6

