IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 8455/2005
Date of decision: 7th December, 2007
Smt. Arti Gupta
... Petitioner
through: Mr. Raj Kumar Gupta, Adv.
VERSUS
Delhi Development Authority
....Respondents
through:
Mr. C. Mohan Rao, Adv. for the DDA
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
GITA MITTAL, J(Oral)
1.

By this writ petition the petitioner has challenged the costing of the flat No. 94D,

First Floor, Sector-D, Pkt. 2, Kondli, Gharoli. As per the petitioner, the respondents
have charged differential rates for flats located in the same area including flat nos.
98A, 14B and 82B in the same sector and constructed at the same time as the flat
which has been allotted to the petitioner.
2..

The DDA was directed to file an affidavit explaining the differential costs by an

order made on 13th October, 2006 and 7th May, 2007. The
-2differential rates have been explained by the DDA in affidavits which have been filed
on 17th January, 2007 and 20th October, 2007. It would appear from the depositions in

these affidavits that the cost which had been charged from the petitioner would be as
per the applicable policy and that the DDA has demanded the cost of the flat from
different persons on the same basis. It is well settled that the cost of the flat would
depend on the date and year of allotment.
3.

In view of the submissions placed by the DDA on record, Mr. R.K. Gupta learned

counsel for the petitioner submits that he does not press the challenge made in the writ
petition subject to the DDA giving possession of the flat in question to the petitioner in
a time bound manner. My attention has been drawn to an affidavit dated 26 th July,
2005 sworn by Mr. J.P. Aggarwal, Director (Housing) DDA (para 2 at page 51) wherein
it has been confirmed that the petitioner has submitted the required documents and
also made the payment of the demanded amount of Rs.2,53,561/- for issuance of the
possession letter.
In this view of the matter this writ petition is disposed with the direction to the
DDA to issue the possession letter to the petitioner within a period of three weeks from
today. So far as execution of the conveyance deed is concerned, steps in this behalf be
completed by the respondent within a period of eight weeks from today. It is made
clear that execution
-3of the conveyance deed would not come in the way of handing over of possession of the
above flat to the petitioner as per prescribed policy.
Dasti
(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE

December 07, 2007
kr

