IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 9112/2007 & CM No. 17156/2007
Date of decision: 7th December, 2007.
Shri Nitin Sehgal
... Petitioner
through: Mr. R.P. Sharma and Ms. Ritu Sharma, Advs.
VERSUS
MCD & Ors.
....Respondents
through: Mr. Anoop Bagai, Standing Counsel with
Mr. Devendra Nautiyal, Adv. for the
respondent/MCD alongwith Mr. S.I. Bairwa,
Executive Engineer (Bldg.) in person
Mr. Rakesh Mukhija, Advs. For the respondent
nos. 3-6

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
GITA MITTAL, J(Oral)
1.

This writ petition has been filed by Shri Nitin Sehgal who claims to be the owner

of the basement which he has described as 'lower ground floor' of the property no. 4/8,
West Patel Nagar, New Delhi. The admitted position is that the Municipal Corporation
of Delhi had sanctioned the building plan for construction of a basement, ground, first
and second floor only on this property. It is contended by Mr. R.P. Sharma learned
counsel
-2for the petitioner that the petitioner purchased a portion which has been described as

the lower ground floor of the property.

The writ petition has been filed on the

grievance that the respondents are not treating the portion which is occupied by the
petitioner as the ground floor and the portion occupied by the respondent nos. 2, 3 and
4 as first, second and third floor of the property.
2.

The petitioner has also placed before this court the copies of the proceedings in

an earlier writ petition which was filed by him. The principle contention to support the
prayer

made in the writ petition is that the entire area has been constructed in a

similar manner wherein basements have been described as lower ground floors and
that no action has been taken by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi in respect of the
same.
3.

The writ petition has been vehemently opposed by Mr. Anoop Bagai, learned

standing counsel appearing for the MCD and Mr. Rakesh Mukhija counsel for
respondent nos. 3, 4, 5 and 6. My attention has been drawn to proceedings in the
earlier writ petition to urge that this petitioner has failed to comply with undertakings
given to the court. Reliance has also been placed on an order dated 29th November,
2007 passed in W.P.(C) No. 8852/2007 wherein this court had directed that the MCD
shall ensure that undertakings given by the present petitioners (respondent no. 2
therein)
-3are strictly complied with.
4.

Having heard learned counsel for the parties and having perused the writ

petition I find that Shri Nitin Sehgal had earlier filed a writ petition bearing no.
5886/2000. This writ petition was listed before the court on 28 th September, 2000. I

find that in the order which has been recorded on that date, the court had noted that
the MCD was taking action pursuant to orders passed in a writ petition bearing no.
4414/2000. The petitioner had sought a stay against demolition action which was
being undertaken by the MCD. This prayer was rejected by the court.

The present

petitioner who was present in court had on the 28th of September, 2000 undertaken
that on receipt of the site plan from the MCD he would demolish the unauthorised
construction and deviations pointed out therein within one week thereafter. Certain
other directions were issued with regard to access to be provided to the MCD staff to
make the site plan and measure the deviations as also with regard to the demolition
which was to be undertaken.
5.

It is an admitted fact before the court today that the petitioner has failed to

comply with the undertaking given by him to this court as back as on 28 th September,
2000 and the premises continue to exist in the same condition as they existed on that
date.
6.

It is noteworthy that this is despite orders of demolition which were
-4-

being executed by the MCD against which the earlier writ petition had been filed by the
petitioner.
7.

Mr. Anoop Bagai learned standing counsel on instructions from Shri S.I. Bairwa,

Executive Engineer of the concerned zone has submitted that the property is one of the
properties which had been sealed by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi pursuant to
further orders of the Division Bench. The seals affixed by the MCD had been tampered
by the petitioner.

8.

It is well settled that buildings have to be raised strictly in accordance with the

building plans sanctioned by the MCD in accordance with the provisions of the Delhi
Municipal Corporation Act, 1857. Certain deviations which are compoundable have
been permitted but this does not create any right in favour of any builder or citizen to
raise construction as per his whim and fancy and seek its regularisation. In the instant
case, it is an admitted position that the Municipal Corporation of Delhi had permitted
a basement apart from some other floors. The builder and the petitioner have opted to
assign the nomenclature of a 'lower ground floor' to this portion. Such nomenclature
as has been assigned by the builder and the petitioner would be of no consequence
inasmuch as it is the nomenclature assigned as per the DMC Act, 1957, Building Bye
Laws and the sanctioned building plan on which the matter has to be examined.
Certainly the petitioner has no right to claim that the portion which is in its
-5occupation was not a basement but was a ground floor inasmuch as the builder has
raised the construction based on the sanction granted by the MCD.
9.

It would therefore have to be held that expression the lower ground floor has

been utilised in respect of the basement which had been permitted to be constructed.
In any case, Mr. R.P. Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioner, admits that part of
the portion over which his client is seeking rights, is two and half feet below the ground
level. The same cannot form part of the ground floor in any case.
10.

It is also necessary to note that the petitioner having purchased the basement,

rights of other parties vis a vis the other floors into which would include the ground,
first and upper floor have come into existence. So far as the legality of the construction

is concerned, it is for the Municipal Corporation of Delhi to determine the same. In
the instant case the MCD had considered the matter and passed orders of demolition
which were being implemented. W.P.(C) No. 5886/2000 was filed assailing those
orders and action of the MCD which considered the matter and is proceeding in
accordance with law.
11.

I find from the record placed before this court that in compliance of the

directions made by the court on 28th September, 2000, the Municipal Corporation of
Delhi had made available the plan to the petitioner as back
-6as on 3rd October, 2000. The petitioner has not only failed to comply with his solemn
undertaking given to the court on 28th September, 2000 but even had the temerity to
break open seals which were fixed by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi. This writ
petition has been filed after deliberately flouting the orders of this court for over seven
years. In my view, the same is a grossest abuse of the process of law. The petitioner
having wilfully violated the undertaking given to and the order passed by the court has
rendered himself liable for appropriate action under the contempt of court act.
12.

I find no merit in this writ petition which is therefore dismissed with costs which

are quantified at Rs.30,000/- which shall be equally apportioned between the
Municipal Corporation of Delhi and the Delhi High Court Bar Association Lawyers'
Social Security & Welfare Fund, New Delhi. Costs shall be deposited within the period
of one week from today.
13.

The matter however cannot end here. In view of the wilful failure of the

petitioner to comply with his undertaking given to the court and the order passed on

28th September, 2000, notice is hereby issued to the petitioner to show cause why
contempt of court proceedings be not initiated against him.
The petitioner who is present in court accepts notice and prays for time to file a
reply.
-7Reply shall be filed within a period of three weeks from today. Mr. Anoop Bagai
learned counsel representing the Municipal Corporation of Delhi shall assist the court
in the contempt of court proceedings which shall be listed before the appropriate
Bench as per roster on 29th January, 2008.
14.

The Registry shall place the orders dated 28th of September, 2000 and 16th of

October, 2000 in W.P.(C) No. 5886/2000,t he order passed today and to register the
contempt petition separately and place the same before the appropriate Bench as per
the roster.

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
December 07, 2007
kr

