REPORTABLE
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 6934/2001
Date of decision :7th October, 2004.
LILA RAM
through

... Petitioner
Mr. Yogesh Sharma, Advocate

VERSUS
UOI & ORS.
through

.... Respondents
Mr. Amit Bansal with Ms. Manisha Singh,
Advocates

CORAM:
HON'BLE JUSTICE DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest? Yes
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, J (ORAL)
The present writ petition is filed by the petitioner praying for grant of special
pension to the petitioner which prayer was rejected by the respondents.
2.

The petitioner was enrolled in the Indian Army on 26th April, 1951 as a barber,

therefore, the petitioner belongs to non-combatant category of the Indian Army. The
petitioner was declared surplus and was discharged from service on 6th July, 1964.
After the petitioner was declared surplus and was discharged from service, the
petitioner also received gratuity in terms of the provisions of Pension Regulations For
The Army, 1961. After receiving and utilising the gratuity the petitioner submitted an
WP(C) 6934/2001

page 1 of 3

application sometime in 2001 to the army authorities, namely, the respondents, for
grant of pro rata pension. The aforesaid prayer of the petitioner was considered
by the respondents and the said prayer was rejected by communication dated
16th October, 2001. Being aggrieved by the said order, the petitioner has preferred this
petition before this court on which we have heard the learned counsel appearing for
the parties.
3.

Counsel appearing for the petitioner during the course of his arguments seeks

to rely upon the provisions of Regulation 164 which provides that special pension or
gratuity may be granted at the discretion of the President to individuals who are
transferred to the reserve and are discharged in large numbers in pursuance of Govt.
Policy of reducing the strength of establishment of the Armed Forces or of
reorganisation which results in disbandment of any unit/formation.
4.

The petitioner was admittedly discharged as he was declared surplus by the

respondents after rendering 13 years and 71 days of service. Regulation 164 of the
Pension Regulations also gives a discretion to the President to pay special pension or
gratuity, as the case may be according to the discretion to be exercised by the
President.
5.

In the present case the competent officer to whom the powers of the President

have been conferred recommended only service gratuity to the petitioner. The said
services gratuity was also accepted by the petitioner without any demur or protest.
6.

So far special gratuity is concerned, it is provided that in order to receive the

same a person has to serve for five years or more but less than 15 years. In terms
thereto special gratuity was paid to the petitioner.

WP(C) 6934/2001

page 2 of 3

7.

The petitioner also was discharged from service as far back as 1964 and he has

approached this court only in the year 2001. There is unexplained delay and laches on
the pat of the petitioner in approaching this court. In view of inordinate delay and
laches also this writ petition cannot be entertained.
8.

In any event, it is also explicit from the Pension Regulations that the

petitioner was not entitled to receive special pension as he belonged to the noncombatant category and as he did not have any qualifying service as is indicated from
the length of actual qualifying service rendered by the petitioner and which is required
for receiving such benefit of special pension by a non-combatant staff.
9.

Therefore we find no merit in this petition and the petition stands dismissed.

DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, J

GITA MITTAL, J
OCTOBER 07, 2004
kr
P

