IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 2726 - 27/2005
Da te of decision: September 7, 2006
UNIVERSAL MUSIC INDIA LTD. & ANR.
... Petitioner
through Mr. Ashok Desai, Sr. Advocate
with Mr. Rajiv Nayyar, Sr. Advocate,
Mr. Sanjay Sen, Mr. Pragyan Sharma
and Mr. Shekhar Menon, Advocates
VERSUS
UNION OF INDIA

.... Respondents
through Mr. Rajiv Shakdher, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

The present case raises very basic and interesting questions

of the content and contours of fairness in administrative action. In
fact, it would appear that the oft repeated words of V.R. Krishna Iyer,
J in AIR 1977 SC 965, The Chairman, Board of Mining Examination
and Chief Inspector of Mines, and others v. Ramjee to the effect that
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 1 of 96

natural justice is no unruly horse, no lurking land mine, nor a judicial
cure-all.

If fairness is shown by the decision-maker to the man

proceeded against, the form, features and the fundamentals of such
essential processual propriety being conditioned by the facts and
circumstances of each situation, no breach of natural justice can be
complained of.

Unnatural expansion of natural justice, without

reference to the administrative realities and other factors of a given
case, can be exasperating. We can neither be finical nor firm in this
jurisdiction.

No man shall be hit below the belt – that is the

conscience of the matter were said in the light of issues as have arisen
for consideration in the instant case. The impugned order and action
of the respondents seeks to expand the requirement of compliance of
principles of natural justice to exercise of purely administrative
jurisdiction which results in no civil consequences.
2.

By this writ petition, the petitioners assail the order and

action of the respondents in requiring them to serve on the other side
a copy of their application under Section 399(4) seeking leave to
maintain a petition under Section 397 and 398 of the Companies Act.
The petitioners contend that they are not required to serve notice or
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 2 of 96

grant hearing on such application to the company against whom the
applicant is seeking permission to initiate such proceedings.
3.

The petitioners are music companies carrying on business,

inter alia, of producing, publishing and marketing music albums,
cassettes and compact disks.
4.

The Indian Performing Rights Society was incorporated on

the 23rd August, 1969 as a company limited by guarantees, having no
share capital. In 1996, this company was registered as a copyright
society under Section 33 of the Copyright Act, 1957 with the object of
carrying out copyright business in respect of literary and musical
copyrights in musical works.

It is stated to have 1413 members

divided into four broad categories consisting of song writers(367
members);

composers

(532

members);

film

producers

(188

members); and music companies (171 members). Apart from these,
there are 155 members who are stated to be legal heirs of certain
deceased song writers and composers.
The petitioners claim that they are amongst the top six
music companies which are members of the society.
Alleging that the society was constituted and is required to
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 3 of 96

function in terms of the dicta of the Apex Court in AIR 1977 SC 1443
Indian Performing Right

Society vs Indian Motion Pictures

Association and the amendments made to the Copyright Act, 1957
with effect from 10th May, 1995, it is contended that the respondent is
not so functioning.

An attempt was even made to remove the

petitioners from the governing council, that is the board of directors
of the society.
5.

In these circumstances, the petitioners were of the view

that the Company Law Board be requested to exercise its jurisdiction
under Section 397, 398 and 402 of the Companies Act, 1956 in
respect of the functioning and working of the Indian Performing
Rights Society Ltd.
6.

Since the petitioners were not in a position to satisfy the

conditions laid down by the provisions of Section 399(1) of the
Companies Act, 1956 to file the petition under Section 397 and 398,
they applied to the respondents to exercise its jurisdiction under
Section 399 (4) of the Act by way of an application for this purpose
on 10th January, 2005. Instead of considering this application, upon
its receipt, the respondent appears to have issued a letter dated 19th
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 4 of 96

January, 2005 requiring the petitioner to serve a copy of its
contemplated petition under Section 397 and 398 of the Companies
Act, 1956 on the Indian Performing Right Society.

This

communication of the respondent has been impugned in the present
writ petition and deserves to be considered in extenso and reads thus
:“ To,
M/s Universal Music India Pvt. Ltd.
Samir Complex
St. Andrews Road, Bandra (West)
Mumbai 400050
2.
Ltd.

BMG Sony Music Entertainment(India) Pvt.

Centre,
South Avenue,
Mumbai 400054
Subject: Application Under Section 399(4) of the
Companies Act 1956 for Permission to file a Petition
Under Section 397 & 398 of the Act, in respect of the
affairs of The Indian Performing Right Society
Limited.
Sir,
I am directed to refer to your application
dated 10 January, 2005 on the abvoe subject and to
request you to serve a copy of the petition on the
subject Company at an early date under intimation to
this Ministry. Thereafter, the matter will be processed
further.
Yours faithfully,
th

W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 5 of 96

Sd/(N.K.Vig)
Under Secretary to the Government
of India”
7.

The petitioners contend that it has been indicated to their

authorised representative that upon completion of service and
pleading, there would be a full fledged hearing of the application in
order to determine whether the same should be granted or not.
Aggrieved by this threatened action and the requirement of the
respondents to serve a copy upon the society, the petitioners have
filed the present writ petition.
8.

Mr. Ashok Desai, learned senior counsel on behalf of the

petitioners has submitted that Section 399 (4) of the Companies Act
and Rule 13 of the Companies(Central Government) General Rules
and Forms, 1956 does not postulate any notice to the company in
question nor grant of any hearing to it. The consideration of an
application under Section 399 (4) of the Act, is contended to be a
subjective consideration by the Central Government and that, at this
stage of the matter, where the applicant is seeking to file the petition,
there is no lis and no adversarial party or interests have come into

W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 6 of 96

play which would require that hearing be given to the other side. It is
further contended that the government is required to form an
opinion and pass an order based thereon and that it is not acting in
discharge of any judicial or quasi-judicial functions when it is
considering an application under Section 399 (4) of the Companies
Act but is acting in discharge of administrative and executive
functions. It is further contended that there can be no requirement to
comply with principles of natural justice at this stage inasmuch as the
rights of the other side are not effected. It is further contended that
in the event of permission being granted, the other side would have
adequate and full opportunity to place its case and to get a hearing
before the Company Law Board after the permission is granted.
9.

My attention has also been drawn to the fact that even if

permission was not granted, if so satisfied, then the Central
Government is itself empowered to initiate proceedings under
Section 401 of the Companies Act and to file a petition seeking
initiation of proceedings under Section 397 and 398 of the
Companies Act against the company.

According to Mr. Desai,

learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner, an applicant
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 7 of 96

cannot be required contest a matter twice, one at the stage when it
would be held entitled to removal of the prohibition whereby it is
prohibited from bringing the petition under Section 397 of the
Companies Act and, thereafter, before the Company Law Board
during the hearing.
It is further contended that as per the statutory scheme, no
hearing is postulated at the stage of consideration of an application
under Section 399(4).

Reliance is placed on rule 13 of the

Companies(Central Government) General Rules and Forms, 1956 to
submit that this rule provides the manner in which an application is
to be made and decided under Section 399 (4) of the Companies Act.
The submission is that, therefore, at the stage of consideration of this
application, no hearing is required to be given to the other side under
any statutory provision.
10.

It was lastly urged that so far as several comparable

statutory provisions which inter alia, include, Section 92 of the Code
of Civil Procedure; Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947;
Section 197 of the Code of Criminal Procedure etc where the
authorities have been vested with powers similar to those under
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 8 of 96

Section 399 (4) are concerned, it has been repeatedly held that no
prior hearing has to be given to persons who are likely to be effected
by the proceedings which are to be instituted if the prohibition is
removed under Section 399 (4) of the Companies Act, 1956.
11.

In support of its contentions, the petitioners have also

relied heavily on the pronouncement of a Single Judge of this court in
1978

(48)

Company

cases

728

Sri

Krishna

Tiles

And

Potteries(Madras) P. Ltd. vs Company Law Board & Anr. which was
upheld by the Division Bench in the judgment reported at 1979 (49)
Company Cases 409 Sri Krishna Tiles & Potteries(Madras) P. Ltd. vs
Company Law Board & Anr.
12.

On the other hand, Mr. Rajiv Shakdhar, learned counsel

appearing for the respondents has opposed the writ petition on the
ground that the judicial pronouncements noticed hereinabove have
to be disregarded on the ground that they are per incurium for the
reason that they do not take into account the judgments of the
Supreme Court reported at AIR 1967 SC 1268 State of Orissa vs
Binapani Dei and (1969) 2 SCC 262 A.K. Kraipak & Ors. vs UOI &
Ors. According to the respondents, the Apex Court has held that
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 9 of 96

principles of natural justice apply to all administrative actions and
that since the rights of the company are severely effected in case the
permission is given to a member to file a petition under Section 397
and 398, failure to give a hearing would result in violation of
principles of natural justice and consequently result in failure of
justice.
13.

Having heard learned counsels and having been taken

through the available record and the judgments relied upon by both
parities, the fulcrum of the dispute in the present matter can be
enumerated thus :(i)
is the Central Government required to comply with the
principles of natural justice while considering an application under
Section 399 (4) of the Companies Act, 1956.
(ii)
if it is held that principles of natural justice have to be
complied with, then, what would be the scope and ambit of the
requirement and the procedure which the Central Government would
be required to adopt ?
These questions can be conveniently examined under the
following heads and aspects :
(i)

Statutory scheme and applicable provisions;

(ii)

Scope of the expression 'in its opinion' as used in Section

W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 10 of 96

399 and elsewhere in the statute;
(iii)

Judicial pronouncements on the spirit, intendment and

purpose of Section 399(4) of and scope of enquiry thereunder;
(iv)

Principles governing exercise of similar discretion under

other statutes;
(v)

Scope and limits of applicability of principles of natural

justice to the consideration by the Central Government of an
application under Section 399(4).
Statutory Scheme & applicable provisions
14.

In order to fully appreciate the questions raised raised in

the present matter, it would be instructive to examine the statutory
scheme and the relevant provisions. Section 397 and 398 of the
Companies Act, 1956 which have been adverted to, read thus :
“ 397.
Application to [Tribunal} for relief
in cases of oppression. _ (1) Any member of a
company who complaint that the affairs of the
company [are being conducted in a manner
prejudicial to public interest or] in a manner
oppressive to any member or members (including
any one or more of themselves) may apply to the
[Tribunal] for an order under this Section, provided
such members have a right so to apply in virtue of
Section 399.
(2)
If, on any application under sub-section
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 11 of 96

(1), the Court is of opinion (a)
that the company's affairs [are
being conducted in a manner prejudicial to public
interest or] in a manner oppressive to any member
or members; and
(b)
that to wind up the company
would unfairly prejudice such member or members,
but that otherwise the facts would justify the making
of a winding-up order on the ground that it was just
and equitable that the company should be would up,
the [Tribunal], may, with a view to bringing to an
end the matters complained of, making such order
as it thinks fit.
398. Application to [Tribunal] for relief in
cases of mismanagement.-(i) Any members of a
company who complaint (a)
That the affairs of the company
[are being conducted in a manner prejudicial to
public interest or] in a manner prejudicial to the
interests of the company; or
(b)
that a material change not being
a change brought about by , or in the interests of,
any creditors including debenture holders, or any
class of shareholders, of the company) has taken
place in the management or control of the company,
whether by an alternation in its Board of directs, [or
manager], or in the ownership of the company's
shares, or if it has no share capital, in its
membership, or in any other manner whatsoever,
and that by reason of such change, it is likely that the
affairs of the company [will be conducted in a
manner prejudicial to public interest or] in a manner
prejudicial to the interests of the company,
may apply to the [Tribunal} for an order under this
section, provided such members have a right so to
apply in virtue of section 399.
(2)
If, on any application under sub-section
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 12 of 96

15.

(1), the [Tribunal} is of opinion that the affairs of the
company a re being conducted as aforesaid or that
by reason of any material change as aforesaid in the
management or control of the company, it is likely
that the affairs of the company will be conducted as
aforesaid, the [Tribunal] may, with a view to
bringing to an end or preventing the matters
complained or of apprehended, make such order as
it thinks fit.”
It is also necessary to consider the provisions of Section

399 of the Companies Act, 1956 which reads as follows :“ 399.
Right to apply under sections 397
and 398. - (1) The following members of a
company shall have the right to apply under
section 397 or 398 :(a)
in the case of a company
having a share capital, not less than one hundred
members of the company or not less than onetenth of the total number of its members,
whichever is less or any members or members
holding not less than one-tenth of the issued
share capital of the company, provided that the
applicant or applicants have paid all calls and
other sums due on their shares ;
(b)
in the case of a company not
having a share capital, not less held by two or
more persons jointly, they shall be counted only
as one member.]
(2)
For the purposes of sub-section (1),
where any share or shares are held by two or
more persons jointly, they shall be counted only
as one member.
(3)
Where any members of a company are
entitled to make an application in virtue of subsection (1), any one or more of them having
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 13 of 96

obtained the consent in writing of the rest, may
make the application on behalf and for the benefit
of all of them.
(4)
The Central Government may, if in its
opinion circumstances exist which make it just
and equitable so to do, authorise any member or
members of the company to apply to the
[Tribunal] under Section 397 or 398,
notwithstanding that the requirements of clause
(a) or clause (b), as the case may be, of subsection (1) are not fulfilled.
(5)
The Central Government may, before
authorizing any member or members as
aforesaid, require such member or members to
give security for such amount as the Central
Government may deem reasonable, for the
payment of any costs which the [Tribunal]
dealing with the application may order such
member or members to pay to any other person
or persons who are parties to the application.”
(Emphasis supplied)
16.

Prior to the amendment being effected by Act 31 of 1988,

the power to adjudicate on proceedings under Section 397 was vested
in the court.

Subsequently, by virtue of Section 44 of the

Companies(IInd Amendment) Act, 2003, 'Court' was substituted by
the 'Company Law Board' which is empowered to undertake
proceedings under Sections 397 and 398 of the Companies Act, 1956.
17.

Examination of the statutory scheme shows that the

Companies Act, 1956 vests executive or administrative powers in the
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 14 of 96

Central Government as also quasi-judicial powers. Section 10E of the
Companies Act empowers the Central Government to constitute a
Board to be called the Board of Company Law Administration by
issuance of a notification in the official gazette.

This Board is

authorised to exercise and discharge such powers and functions as
may be conferred on it under the statute and is also empowered to
exercise and discharge such other powers and functions of the
Central Government as are statutorily required.

The power to

appoint a chairman of the Company Law Board is also vested in the
Central Government by virtue of the proviso to sub-section (2) of
Section 10E of the enactment and sub-section 3 of Section 10E. Subsection 4b permits the Company Law Board to form Benches. It is
these Benches which have the powers of a court under the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit under sub-section 4C of
Section 10E. Further, sub-section 4D provides that every Bench of
the Company Law Board shall be deemed to be a civil court for the
purposes of Section 195 and Chapter XVI of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 and every proceeding before the Bench shall be
deemed to a judicial proceeding within the meaning of Sections 193
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 15 of 96

and 228 of the Indian Penal Code and for the purposes of Section 196
of the Criminal Procedure Code.
18.

It is noteworthy that sub-section 5 of Section 10E

specifically provides that, without prejudice to the provisions of subsections 4C and 4D, the Company Law Board shall, in exercise of its
powers and the discharge of its functions under the Act or any other
law, be guided by the principles of natural justice and shall act in its
discretion. The Company Law Board has the power to regulate its
own procedure by virtue of sub-section 6 of Section 10E.
19.

Prior to the amendment effected by Act 31 of 1988, sub-

section 5 of Section 10E laid down that the procedure of the Company
Law Board

shall be such as may be prescribed.

The Central

Government had framed rules in exercise of powers conferred by
Section 642 read with sub-section 4B of Section 10E of the Act and
had notified the Company Law Board(Bench) Rules, 1975.
After the amendments effected in 1988 which came into
effect with effect from 31st May, 1991, the Company Law Board has
been vested with wide powers and can regulate its own procedure
guided by principles of natural justice and is required to act in its
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 16 of 96

discretion. It is statutorily mandated that it would have the powers
vested in a civil court for the purposes stated in sub-Section 4C and
shall be deemed to be a civil court for the specific purposes noted
under Section 4D.
20.

So far as proceedings in respect of complaints under

Section 397 and 398 of the Companies Act, 1956 are concerned,
Section 399 enables a section of the members to bring a complaint
thereunder provided they satisfy the conditions laid down in subsection 1, 2 and 3 thereunder. Sub-section 4 of Section 399 enables
any member or members to apply to the Company Law Board under
Section 397 and 398 even if they do not satisfy the requirements of
clause (a) or (b) of sub-Section 1, if they are able to satisfy the Central
Government that circumstances exist which make it just and
equitable to authorise such member to so apply.
21.

The powers of the Company Law Board on receipt of an

application under Section 397 or 398 of the Companies Act, 1956
have been delegated under Section 402. Perusal of the statutory
scheme shows that the Board is empowered to make any interim
order which it thinks fit for regulating the conduct of the company's
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 17 of 96

affairs upon such terms and conditions as appear to be just and
equitable under Section 403 of the statute.
Therefore, as per the statutory scheme, the statute draws a
clear distinction between administrative jurisdiction and functions
requiring constitution of benches, distribution of work and judicial
functions requiring adjudication. A distinction is also drawn between
an interim stage, an interim application and substantive proceedings.
22.

Some light on the exercise of discretion by the Central

Government under Section 399(4) is thrown by the procedure
provided for making an application under Section 399 (4). It is to be
found that in order to enable effective discharge of the functions, the
Central Government was authorized by Section 642 of the statute to
frame rules in respect of all or such matters which under the
Companies Act, 1956 are, or may be, prescribed by the Central
Government and generally to carry out the purposes of the Act.
Pursuant to exercise of these powers, the Central Government
promulgated the Companies (Central Government) General Rules
and Forms, 1956. Rule 13 of these rules provides the procedure for
making and consideration of an application under Section 399 (4).
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 18 of 96

This rule reads thus :“Rule 13. Section 399(4)-(1) Every application
under clause (4) of Section 399 to the Central
Government by any members of a company who
wish to be authorised to apply to the Court shall
specify (a)
the names and addresses of the
applicants.
(b)
if the company has a share capital, the
voting power held by each applicant.
(c)
the total number of applicants;
(d)
their total voting power; and
(e)
the reasons for making the application.
(2)
The reasons given in pursuance of clause
(e) of sub-rule (1) shall be precise and specific.
(3)
Every
such
application
shall
be
accompanied by such documentary evidence in
support of the statements made therein as are
reasonably open to the applicants.
(4)
Every such application shall be signed by
the applicants and shall be verified by their affidavit
stating that paragraphs
thereof are true to
their knowledge and paragraphs
to the best of
their information and belief.
(5)
The Central Government may, before
passing orders on the application, require the
applicants or any one or more of them, to produce
such further documentary or other evidence as the
Central Government may consider necessary (a)
for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the
truth of the allegations made in the application; or
(b)
for ascertaining any information which, in
the opinion of the Central Government, is necessary
for the purpose of enabling it to pass orders on the
application.”

W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 19 of 96

23.

The statutory rules clearly provide the manner in which the

Central Government would function in consideration of the
application under Section 399(4). The applicants can be required to
produce documentary evidence as considered necessary to enable the
Central Government to form an opinion as to whether circumstances
exist which would make it just and equitable to give the authorisation
which has been sought. The manner in which the application is to be
made and the contents thereof are clearly deleniated. Sub-rule 5 of
Rule 13 provides the nature of enquiry which the Central Government
may conduct and requires production of evidence only by the
applicant.
24.

Having regard to the statutory scheme, more specifically,

the provisions of Section 397, 398 and 399 of the Companies Act,
1956 coupled with the specific provisions of Rule 13 noticed
hereinabove, it is therefore noteworthy that diverse functions are to
be performed by the Central Government and the Company Law
Board.

Now a tribunal has been proposed under further

amendments to the Companies Act, 1956 which are yet to take effect.
While some of the functions may be executive or administrative,
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 20 of 96

there are others which require quasi-judicial determination. Matters
which are required to be heard judicially include applications under
Section 397 and 398 as well as petitions under Section 79 of the
Companies Act or other petitions for confirming or alterations of
memorandum of associations.
25.

However, the functions of the Central Government

postulated by sub-section 4 of Section 399 of the Companies Act
involve a subjective process. It only requires that there must be
material before the Central Government to form its “opinion” that
circumstances exist which make it just and equitable to give the
requisite authorisation. The legislature has specifically empowered
to the Central Government, an executive authority, to formulate its
opinion and then take a subjective decision.
26.

In view of the submissions made before this court, it

becomes necessary to scrutinise the provision of Section 399(4)
which empowers the Central Government to authorise any member
of the company to apply to a tribunal under Section 397 or 398
notwithstanding the prohibition contained in clauses a or b of subsection 1 of the section. The statute permits the Central Government
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 21 of 96

to so authorise the member, if, “in its opinion” circumstances exist
which make it just and equitable to do so.

The power which is

specific is conferred in the Central Government.
Scope of the expression 'in its opinion' as used in Section
399 and elsewhere in the statute
27.

It would be topical and instructive to consider other

provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 which contain the same
expression as utilised by the legislative in Section 399(4).
28.

It is noteworthy that the statutory scheme contains a

similar power under Section 237 of the Companies Act. This section
again empowers the Central Government to appoint investigators to
investigate the force of a company and to report thereon if, inter alia,
“in the opinion” of the Central Government, there are circumstances
suggesting that the business of the company is being conducted with
the intend to defraud its creditors, members or any other persons or
otherwise for a fraudulent or unlawful purpose or in an oppressive
manner. Other circumstances have been set out in Section 237 (b).
29.

Under Section 237 of the Companies Act, the Central

Government, inter alia, thus may appoint inspectors to investigate
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 22 of 96

the prayers of the company, if, 'in its opinion', there are
circumstances suggesting that the business of the company is being
conducted with intend to defraud its creditors, members of other
persons etc. Undoubtedly the same is as serious a matter as an
application under Section 397 or Section 398 of the Companies Act,
1956. The expression “in the opinion of” used in clause (b) of Section
237 are similar to the words used in sub-section (4) of Section 399 of
the Companies Act, 1956.

It is a basic principle of statutory

interpretation that the words used in the enactment in its various
provisions have to be construed as having been used in the same
sense at all places where they occur unless the legislature has
specifically otherwise so provided or the context justifies any other
interpretation.
30.

It is equally well settled that observations made in a

judicial precedent with reference to one statute cannot be applied
with reference to the provisions of another statute which is not in
pari materia with the statute which forms the subject matter of the
previous decision. However, in the instant case, at this point, this
court is considering the expression “in its opinion” which has been
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 23 of 96

utilised in two places in the same statute both of which confer the
discretion on the Central Government. It would therefore be useful
to consider the consideration of the courts of the scope and spirit of
the expression “in

the opinion” occurring in Section 237 and

elsewhere.
31.

The parameters of judicial review into the “opinion” and

the manner in which it is to be formed under Section 237 (b) of the
Companies Act came up for consideration in a pronouncement of the
Apex Court in AIR 1967 SC 295 Barium Chemicals Ltd. vs
Company Law Board. The court was of the opinion that so long
as the order was not malafide, it must be held to have been made in
exercise of administrative powers and the words “reason to believe”
or “in the opinion” do not always lead to the construction that the
process of entertaining “reason to believe” or “the opinion” is an
altogether subjective process not lending itself even to a limited
scrutiny by the court that such a “reason to believe” or “the opinion”
was not formed on relevant facts or within the limits or the restraints
of the statute as an alternative safeguard to rules of natural justice
where the function is administrative.
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 24 of 96

The court noticed that the object of Section 237 of the Act
was to safeguard the interests of those dealing with a company by
providing for an investigation where the management is conducted
so as to jeopardise those interests or where a company is floated for a
fraudulent or an unlawful object.

It was held that ordering the

investigation was left to the purely subjective satisfaction of the
Government or the Board and that such an opinion was not subject to
challenge on the grounds of propriety, reasonableness or sufficiency.
The opinion is based on existence of circumstances suggesting what
is set out in sub-clauses (i), (ii) and (iii). The court held that if it is
shown that the circumstances set out in sub-clauses (i), (ii) and (iii)
do not exist or that they are such that it is impossible for any one to
form an opinion therefrom suggestive of the aforesaid, the opinion is
then challengeable on the ground of non-application of mind or
perversity or on the ground that it was formed on collateral grounds
and was beyond the scope of the statute.
Thereby, the Apex Court recognised the permissibility of
the scrutiny by a court as to existence of some circumstances within
limited parameters and not as to the sufficiency thereof.
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 25 of 96

32.

The same expression also arose for consideration before

the Apex Court in (1969) 1 SCC 325 Rohtas Industries vs. S.D.
Agarwal wherein the court was also considering the scope of
judicial scrutiny into the opinion formed by the Government under
Section 237 of the Companies Act. After detailed consideration of the
judicial dicta, the court reconciled the law laid down in various
decisions.
The court noticed that the subject matter of a legislation
has an important bearing on the interpretation of a provision. It is
well settled that when something is to be done which is within the
discretion of the authorities, then that something is to be done
according to the rules of reason and justice and not according to
private opinion.

Discretion necessarily implies good faith in

discharging a public duty. There is always a perception within which
a statute is intended to operate. It is to be done according to law and
is to be legal and regular and not arbitrary, vague or fanciful. The
power is to be exercised by the authority in good faith. As was held
by Lord Denning M.R. in Associated Provincial Pictures
Houses Ltd. Vs. Wednesbury Corporation (1948) 1 KB 223
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 26 of 96

CA 'that a person entrusted with the discretion must direct himself
properly in law. He must call his own attention to the matters which
he is bound to consider. He must exclude from its consideration
matters which are irrelevant to the matters that he is to consider'.
In Rohtas Industries (Supra), the Apex Court re-stated the
principle laid down in Barium Chemicals Company Limited case
(supra) to the effect that the power conferred on the Central
Government under Section 237 of the Companies Act, was not an
arbitrary power and that the same has to be exercised in accordance
with the restraints imposed by law. Upon existence of circumstances
which were a condition precedent for the Government to form the
required opinion, it has been held by the Supreme Court that if the
existence of these conditions is challenged then the courts are
entitled to examine whether those circumstances were existing when
the order was made or not. Therefore, as per the law laid down by
the Apex Court, though the opinion formed by the Government was
not amenable to review by the court, however, the existence of the
circumstances in question was open to judicial review.
Judicial pronouncements on the spirit, intendment and
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 27 of 96

purpose of Section 399(4) & scope of enquiry thereunder
33.

The very contentions raised by the respondents justifying

compliance of principles of natural justice and hearing to the
company prior to passing an order under Section 399 (4) are
concerned, fell for consideration on identical contentions which were
urged before this court in 1978 (48) Company Cases 728 Sri
Krishna Tiles and Potteries(Madras) Pvt. Ltd. vs The
Company Law Board & Ors. The arguments raised on behalf of
the company were rejected by this court, inter alia, on the ground
that :
(i) if the central government arrived at a decision on the basis of nonexistent or untenable material, it is always open to the effected party
to come to court and challenge the subjective decision by invoking
the rule enunciated in the Barium Chemicals Limited Case (supra);
(ii) sub-section 5 of Section 399 of the Companies Act empowers the
Central Government before authorising any member or members as
contemplated by sub section 4 to require the applicant or applicants
to give security for the payment of any costs which the court dealing
with the application may order, such member or members to pay to
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 28 of 96

any other person or persons who are party to that application. This is
adequate protection for preventing frivolous application being moved
or if moved, then from being granted;
(iii) Rule 13 above-noticed provides sufficient safeguards.

The

application of the member/members has to be accompanied by
documentary evidence in support of the statements made in the
application. The application is required to be signed and verified by
an affidavit and the Central Government may, before passing orders
thereon, require the applicant (s) or all or one or more of them to
produce further documentary or other evidence considered necessary
for satisfying itself as to the truth of the allegations made by the
applicant;
(iv) the Central Government, upon a report being made to it by a
member or members, is empowered to itself move an application
under Section 397 or 398 by virtue of the provisions of Section 401.
This being the position, there is no legal basis as to why the company
has to be heard prior to grant of an authorisation contemplated by
sub-section 4 of Section 399.
(v)

The provisions of Section 399 do not provide protection to

W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 29 of 96

the company. A company is constituted by its members. On the
contrary, provisions of sub-section 1 Section 399, contain a bar and
provide eligibility conditions as to when a member or members can
bring a petition under Section 397 and 398 against the company. The
statutory bar created by the legislature can be removed “if
circumstances exist”. For this reason, there is no legal justification as
to why the member should be required to first battle with the
company before the Central Government and then battle again when
the substantive petition under Section 397 and 398 is permitted to be
brought before the Company Law Board.
34.

So far as the scope of inquiry which is postulated by sub-

section 4 of Section 399 of the Companies Act is concerned, it was
held by the learned Single Judge that the same is two fold; firstly,
Section 399 (4) requires ascertainment as to whether, indeed,
primafacie, any case is made out of oppression or mis-management
so as to effect public interest prejudicially as postulated by Section
397 and Section 398.
Secondly, the statutory scheme necessitates consideration
as to whether the applicant or applicants are indeed members who
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 30 of 96

should in the circumstances be allowed to move the court, not for
their personal gain but in the interest of the company and the general
body of shareholders and the public. Whether such circumstances,
infact, exist to grant the application under Section 397 of Section 398
is a question and matter which the court while considering the
substantive application has to decide.
The learned Single Judge rejected all the contentions
raised by the company and held that while passing orders on an
application under Section 399(4) of the Companies Act, 1956, the
authorities are acting in discharge of executive and administrative
functions, which consideration is based on their subjective
satisfaction.
35.

This judgment of the learned Single Judge was affirmed by

the Division Bench in its decision reported at 1979 (49) Company
Cases 409 Sri Krishna Tiles & Potteries Pvt. Ltd. vs The
Company Law Board.

The Division Bench divided its

consideration into three broad aspects - firstly, the nature of the
functions under Section399; secondly, the nature of inquiry to be
made by the Government before granting or refusing to grant the
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 31 of 96

authorisation and thirdly, the nature of the right or interest of the
company to be heard before the decision was taken by the
Government or the Board under Section 399 (4).
The Division Bench rejected all contentions raised on
behalf of the company on a consideration of the relevant provisions
of the Act and the rules and even on first principles.
36.

It is noteworthy that at the relevant point of time when the

aforestated judgments came to be pronounced, the statute contained
Section 10A to Section 10D in the Companies Act, 1956 wherein
further powers and functions of the Government were envisaged.
So far as the present case is concerned, the amendment to
the statute has made no material difference to the state of position as
was before the court in Krishna Tiles and Potteries Pvt. Ltd. and now.
There is no change in the provisions of Section 399 (4) of the
Companies Act, 1956. The only difference which has come into effect
is that whereas earlier the petition under Section 397 and 398 had to
be filed before the Company Court, however by virtue of statutory
amendment, the same now has to be brought before the Company
Law Board. Otherwise the principles laid down by the learned Single
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 32 of 96

Judge as were sustained in appeal by the Division Bench apply on all
fours to the instant case.
37.

In addition to the aforestated reasoning given by the

learned Single Judge, the Division Bench held as under :(i). granting authorisation by the Central Government under Section
399(4) is similar to the granting of such authorisation by it under
Section 401. Even if a person does not make an application under
Section 399 (4), the Central Government can grant him the
authorisation under Section 401, or, itself make an application to the
court under Section397 and 398 by virtue of Section 401. The Bench
held that on reading of the statutory scheme, it would appear that it is
the right of the Central Government either to make the application
itself under Section 397 and 398 or allow such application to be made
by authorising any other person to do so either under Section 401 or
under Section 399 (4);
(ii)

the object of enacting Section 399 (1) was to effectuate the

recommendations made in the report of the Company Law
Committee, 1952. The committee took note of Section 210 of the
English Act which allowed any member to present a petition to the
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 33 of 96

court against the company under statutory provisions similar to
Section 397 and 398 of the Companies Act. The committee then
advised that in this country, such right, which is freely accessible in
England, should be restricted 'to discourage the presentation of
frivolous petitions by one or more disgruntled shareholders'. The
restriction under Section 399 (1) was provided against members
filing frivolous petitions against the company. The exception to this
restriction is to be found under Section 399 (4) whereby the Central
Government is empowered to authorise such persons to apply under
Section 397 and 398 even though he does not hold one-tenth of the
issued share capital of the company.

Though where the statute

confers the right, in the same breadth, it provides the remedy for
enforcement of such right. The remedy provided by the statute is an
exclusive one.
(iii)

Placing reliance on the principles laid down in 1976 (1) SCC

496 Premier Automobiles Ltd. vs Kamlalkar Shantaram Wadke &
Ors., it was held by the Division Bench that a company does not have
any common law right not to be sued. In fact, the continuous trend
of development of statutory law reflects that it is intended more and
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 34 of 96

more to discourage immunity from being sued. Immunity of persons
who could not fairly be sued has been whittled down. For instance,
even a sovereign can be sued in respect of non-sovereign functions
discharge by him or by a foreign government.
(iv)

There are no parties while considering of the application

under Section 399(4) and there is no lis in these proceedings.
(v)

In fact, it is well settled that no hearing is given to a person

in a preliminary inquiry which is to lead to a regular inquiry or action
against such a person during which a full hearing would be available
to him. The Bench noticed that this conclusion was arrived at by a
Division Bench of this court and placed upon G.S. Harmal v. Union
of India, ILR (1971) 2 Delhi 129 at 137 wherein reliance was upon
Amalender Ghosh v. District Traffic Superintendent, North Eastern
Railway, Air 1960 SC 992 at 994; Champaklal Chimanlal Shal v
Union of India [1964] 5 SCR 190 at 205, 207 : AIR 1964 SC 1854;
State of U.P. v. Akbar Ali Khan, AIR 1966 SC 1842 at 1846 and
Parry-Jones v. Law Society [1968] 2 WLR 397 (CA).
38.

Placing reliance on Raja Narain Lal Bansi Lal vs Manik

Feroz Mistri (1961) 1 SCR 417 at 444; 1960 (30) Company Cases 644,
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 35 of 96

the Division Bench in Krishna Tiles and Potteries Pvt. Ltd. case
(supra) also noticed that the Apex Court had drawn a distinction
between the interest of the shareholders and the interest of the
persons incharge of the management of a company.

The court

identified the interest of the company with the interest of
shareholders and it was recognised that it was necessary to provide
for necessary safeguards and checks against the possible abuse of
powers vesting in the manager. It was therefore held that when a
request is made that a hearing must be given to the other side while
considering an application under Section 399(4), it is the manager
and not the company itself who is seeking a prior hearing before a
member is authorised under Section 399(4) to file a petition under
Section 397 and 398. Since the very right of the management is a
result of the Companies Act, the right of a shareholder under the
same Act to file a petition under Section 397 and 398 cannot be made
subject to such a restriction that even the authorisation of the Central
Government cannot be granted to such a member under Section 399
(4) except after the company management is heard.
39.

In this behalf, Lord Dening M.R. put it trenchantly in

W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 36 of 96

Norwest Holst Limited vs the Secretary of State for Trade reported in
the Times of 2nd February; [1978] (3) WLR 73 when it was observed
that new shareholders often in practice had little control over their
company's affair, the directors were often “a self-perpetuating
hierarchy”. The department's power to appoint inspectors should be
seen as a substitute for inadequate shareholder control and
consequently, the court should not fetter investigations that “might
be, only machinery available for keeping the public interest and seen
that companies were properly conducted”, even if this machinery
might be slightly unfair to individuals. Thereby the policy reasons for
not applying the principles of natural justice were made explicit. The
court of appeal was concerned that the duty of the Government to
appoint investigators should not be elaborated and expanded so as to
turn a basically inquisitorial procedure into an accusational one so as
to defeat the public interest in encouraging witnesses to be frank and
in enabling the inspectors to complete their task as speedily as
possible.
Principles governing exercise of similar discretion under
other statutes
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 37 of 96

40.

At this stage, it would be instructive to notice some pari-

materia statutory provisions which are provided in other statutes
wherein the legislature has recognised more and more that immunity
to protection from judicial scrutiny of the responsibility and actions
of a person or body has to be restricted. Such examination would
certainly facilitate an understanding of the permissible limits of
judicial review when discretion is conferred by legislative exercise on
various authorities.
In this behalf, an examination of the provisions of Section
92 and 86 of the Code of Civil Procedure and Section195 and 197 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure which envisage authorisation or
permission or sanctions to sue or prosecute would be of some
relevance. It has been repeatedly held that the authorities who are to
give the sanction, authorisation or permission are acting in
administrative capacities and not in quasi judicial capacity. In a Full
Bench decision of the Kerela High Court reported in AIR 1975
Kerala 57 Mayer Simon vs Advocate General of Kerala, the
court held that no civil rights of the applicant are effected nor can
anyone said to be prejudicially effected by

a grant or refusal of

W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 38 of 96

consent under Section 92(1) of the Code of Civil Procedure. Under
Section 92 of the Code, consent of the Advocate General is necessary
to file a suit in case of a breach of a public trust. The intendment of
this statutory provision is also to prevent frivolous petitions against
public trusts by persons having no real interest in its affairs. The
court held that the Advocate General acted as a statutory
administrative authority while considering such an application; that
grant of the application does not prejudicially effect persons who
were proposed to be made defendants as no rights are determined
and that the administrative order is amenable to correction in
proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution if it is not based on
relevant facts. In this behalf the court held thus :
“ 12.
If the petitioner before us has been
prejudicially affected by the conclusion reached by the
Advocate General, he would be entitled to move this
Court under Article 226 of the Constitution. This
leads us to the question when a person can be said to
be prejudicially affected as a result of the grant or
refusal of the consent by the Advocate-General? The
grant of the consent cannot, of course, prejudicially
affect the grantee.
It is urged that it would
prejudicially affect the rights of those who opposed
the grant of consent and who are likely to be
impleaded in a suit as defendants and who would
then be called upon to spend time and money and
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 39 of 96

energy in defending the action. We do not think it
would be open to the persons who are likely to be
made defendants in the action to contend that they
would be prejudicially affected by the grant of the
consent. It is well established that the Advocate
General does not determine any question that will
affect the rights of parties. It will be open to the
defendants to raise all the contentions that they had
raised before the Advocate-General or even all the
contentions that are available to them in the action.
None of their rights is affected by the consent granted
by the Advocate-General. The inconvenience and
temporary expenses caused by a suit being filed
against such persons cannot be said to be such a
prejudice which will enable to sustain a petition under
Article 226 of the Constitution. After all no one has
the right to say that no suit should be filed against
him.
xxx
16.
xxx The Advocate-General acts as a
statutory administrative authority performing the
parens partriae jurisdiction of the State in regard to
public trusts and while acting thus can and does cause
substantial injury at times : preventing the taking of a
step in aid of vindicating a right and this can cause
injury for Section 92(2) bars any action for the reliefs
mentioned in Section 92(1). Nor are we able with
equal respect to agree with the decision in AIR 1962
Ker 90 (FB). The support sought to be derived for the
conclusion arrived at in that decision from the
decision in State of Madras v. C.P. Sarathy, AIR 1953
SC 53 is no more available. The Supreme Court in
Rohtas Industries Ltd. v. S.D. Agarwal AIR 1969 SC
707 has explained that decision. The Court said that
the decision in AIR 1953 SC 53 “cannot be considered
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 40 of 96

as an authority for the proposition that whenever a
provision of law confers certain power on an authority
on its forming a certain opinion on the basis of certain
facts, the courts are precluded from examining
whether the relevant facts on the basis of which the
opinion is said to have been formed were in fact
existed.”
And the rejection of the argument of Counsel that
even treating the order as an administrative one, it is
amenable to be corrected in proceedings under Article
226 of the Constitution on the ground that the
Advocate-General decides nothing, does not, with due
respect, appeal to us. His conclusion to refuse
consent can very adversely affect those who had
applied for consent, certainly cause substantial injury.
This aspect had not been considered in the decision.
Indeed, this has not been considered in any of the
numerous decisions on the subject to which our
attention has been drawn and which were referred to
by us earlier. None of these decisions also considered
the distinction between granting and refusing
consent. It is quite true, and we have already said so,
that while granting consent no one is adversely
affected, not even such prejudice as to sustain a
petition under Article 226 is caused. But can the
same be said while refusing consent? The answer
must be no in the light of what we have said.”
41.

Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 confers a

similar discretion on the appropriate government to decide as to
whether an industrial dispute raised should be referred for industrial
adjudication or not. The scope of the enquiry which the Government
is required to conduct and the nature of the order have been
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 41 of 96

repeatedly questioned in proceedings before the Supreme Court and
the parameters laid down indubitably make relevant reading.

It

stands authoritatively stated that the order of the Appropriate
Government under Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 is
an administrative order and not a judicial or a quasi-judicial one. No
lis is involved and the order is made on the subjective satisfaction of
the Government. The consideration by the Government is restricted
to a primafacie determination as to whether the claim is frivolous or
bogus or put forth for extraneous and irrelevant reasons not for
justice or industrial peace and harmony.

If the administrative

determination is based on the irrelevant, extraneous or grounds not
germane to the exercise of power, it is liable to be questioned in
exercise of the power of judicial review (Re: (2000) 3 SCC 93
Secretary, Indian Tea Association vs. Ajit Kumar Bharat
and Others; (1985) 3 SCC 189 Ram Avtar Sharma & Ors.
vs. State of Haryana; 1989 SCC L&S 465 Telco Convey
Drivers Mazdoor Sangh & Anr. vs. State of Bihar).
42.

While considering the question raised with regard to

exercise of the power of the Central Government under Section 19 of
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 42 of 96

the Army Act, 1950 with Rule 14 of the Army Rules, 1954, the Apex
Court in (2001) 5 SCC 593 Union of India & Ors. v. Harjeet
Singh Sandhu held that the parameters of administrative law
governing the judicial review of administrative action are well settled.
Such power to review administrative action shall

be undertaken

when the exercise of power is shown to have been vitiated by
malafides or is found to be a clear case of colourable exercise of/or
abuse of power or what is sometimes called fraud on power i.e. where
the power is exercised for achieving an oblique end. The truth or
correctness or the adequacy of the material available before the
authority exercising the power cannot be revalued or weighed by the
court while exercising power of judicial review. Even if some of the
material, on which the action is taken is found to be irrelevant, the
court would still not interefere so long as there is some relevant
material available on which the action can be sustained. The court
would presume the validity of the exercise of power but shall not
hesitate to interfere if the invalidity or unconstitutionality is clearly
demonstrated.

If two views are possible, the court shall not

interefere by substituting its own satisfaction or opinion for the
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 43 of 96

satisfaction or opinion of the authority exercising the power.
It is well settled that whether an administrative tribunal
has a duty to act judicially or administratively has to be gathered
from the provisions of the particular statute or the rules made
thereunder. If an authority is called upon to decide respective rights
of contesting parties or, to put in other words, if there is a lis,
ordinarily there will be a duty on the part of the said authority to act
judicially. (Re : AIR 1959 SC 308 Gullapalli Nageswara Rao
&

Ors.

v.

Andhra

Pradesh

State

Road

Transport

Corporation & Anr.; AIR 1958 SC 398 Nagendra Nath Bora
vs. Commissioner of Hills Division; AIR 1950 SC 222=1950
SCR 621 Province of Bombay v. Khushaldas S. Advani). In
Gullapalli Nageswara Rao & Ors. v. Andhra Pradesh State
Road Transport Corporation & Anr. AIR 1959 SC 308, the
Supreme Court laid down the following criteria to ascertain whether
a particular act is a judicial act or an administrative one; (a) the body
of persons must have legal authority; (b) the authority should be
given to determine questions affecting the rights of subjects and (c)
they should have a duty to act judicially. In this case, the Apex Court
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 44 of 96

had further stated thus :
“(i)
that if a statute empowers an
authority not being a Court in the ordinary sense,
to decide disputes arising out of a claim made by
one party under the statute which claim is
opposed by another party and to determine the
respective rights of the contesting parties who are
opposed to each other, there is a lis and prima
facie and in the absence of anything in the statute
to the contrary it is the duty of the authority to act
judicially and the decision of the authority is a
quasi-judicial act; and
(ii)
that if a statutory authority
has power to do any act which will prejudicially
affect the subject then, although there are not two
parties apart from the authority and the contest is
between the authority proposing to do the act and
the subject opposing it, the final determination of
the authority will yet be a quasi-judicial act
provided the authority is required by the statute
to act judicially.”
Therefore, the correctness of the material or the truth
thereof is not material at the stage of formation of the opinion.
43.

In (1992) 2 SCC 299 Baikuntha Nath Das & Anr. v.

Chief District Medical Officer, Baripada & Anr., the court
was concerned with a challenge to an order of compulsory retirement
from service passed against the appellant. It was held by the court
that an order for compulsory retirement was not a punishment which
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 45 of 96

did not imply stigma. It was to be passed by the Government on
forming the opinion that it was in public interest to retire the
Government servant.

The order was passed on the subjective

satisfaction of the Government.

The court held that therefore

principles of natural justices would have no place in the context of the
order of compulsory retirement.

Judicial scrutiny would not be

excluded altogether. The court can interfere if it was satisfied that
the order was passed malafide or that it was based on no evidence or
was arbitrary in the sense that no reasonable person would form the
requisite opinion on the given material; in short, if it was found to be
a perverse order. The court held that the nature of the notification of
the Government was not quasi judicial in nature and because action
had to be taken on the subjective satisfaction of the Government,
there was no room for importing the facet of natural justice in such a
case, more particularly when the order was not a punishment and did
not involve stigma.
44.

Similar questions have arisen for consideration in respect

of the scope of power of the appropriate government under Section
17(4) of the Land Acquisition Act. Under Section 17(4) of the Land
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 46 of 96

Acquisition Act, the acquiring authority has been empowered to
invoke urgency powers for acquisition of a land on a subjective
satisfaction that the purpose of acquisition of the land is urgent. The
Apex Court has held that such a decision was in the nature of an
administrative order and no reasons are necessary. It has even been
held that the language of the order or notification is not conclusive of
the urgency of the purpose. (Re: (1993) 2 SCC 84 Rajasthan
Housing Board v. Sri Krisna; JT 1996 9 SC 624 UOI v.
Praveen Gupta (Paras 7, 8 and 9); 1996 1 SCC 9 Jai Narayan
v. UOI ( Paras 4, 5, 10 and 11).
45.

Several statutory provisions have similarly empowered

authorities to act in a particular manner upon their having `reasons
to believe' of the existence of some particular state of affairs. The
decision of the authorities also impacts availability or foreclosure of
judicial review remedies.

It would be instructive to examine the

manner in which this expression has been explained which could be
of use in understanding of the issue before this court.

While

considering the provisions of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act,
the Apex Court has held that the expression 'reason to believe' is not
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 47 of 96

synonymous with the subjective satisfaction of the officer. The belief
must be held in good faith; cannot merely be a pretence.

The

question whether the reasons for the belief have a rational connection
or a relevant bearing to the formation of the belief and are not
extraneous or irrelevant to the purpose of the section, is open to the
court for examination (Re: 1985 (3) SCC 72 Dr. Partap Singh & Anr.
Vs. Director of Enforcement, Foreign Exchange Regulation Act &
Ors.).
`Reasons to believe' suggests that the belief must be that of
an honest and reasonable person based on reasonable grounds not
merely suspicion, gossip or rumour. The court can examine whether
the reasons for the belief that the pre-conditions statutorily required
are satisfied, actually exist or not. It is however well settled that the
declaration or sufficiency of the reasons to believe cannot be
investigated by the court. (Re: 1996 (3) SCC 757 The Income-Tax
Officer, I Ward District, District VI, Calcutta & Ors. Vs. Lakhmani
Mewal Das; (1972) 3 SCC 234 Sheo Nath Singh Vs. Appellate
Assistant Commissioner of Income Tax, Calcutta).
`Reasons to believe' conveys that there must be some
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 48 of 96

rational basis to form the belief. Reasonable grounds necessarily
postulate that they must be germane to the formation of the belief. If
the grounds are of an extraneous character, the same would not
warrant initiation of proceedings.

However, if the grounds are

relevant and have a nexus with the formation of the belief, then the
authority would be clothed with the jurisdiction to take action under
the statutory provisions. (Re: 1973 (3) SCC 265 The Commissioner of
Sales Tax, U.P. Vs. Bhagwan Industries Private Limited, Lucknow).
The expression `reasons to believe' means that even
though the formation of the opinion may be subjective, it must be
based on material on the record.

There is thus a check on the

exercise of peremptory powers. (Re: (1994) 6 SCC 205 N. Nagendra
Rao & Company Vs. State of A.P.)
Therefore, sufficiency of reasons is not a justiciable issue
but existence of reasons is.

These principles would guide

examination of a challenge to the exercise of discretion and formation
of opinion by an authority as well.
46.

“In the opinion of” signifies the subjective opinion of the

Government and not an opinion subject to objective tests. In AIR
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 49 of 96

(36) 1949 Privy Council 136 The Hubli Electricity Co. Ltd.
vs The Province of Bombay, the court was required to consider
the opinion of the Government under Section 4(1)(a) of the
Electricity Act, 1910. It was observed that there was nothing in the
language of the sub-section or in the subject matter to which it relates
upon which to found the suggestion that the opinion of the
Government is to be subject to objective tests. In terms the relevant
matter is the opinion of the Government - not the grounds on which
the opinion is based. The language leaves no room for the relevance
of a judicial examination as to the sufficiency of the grounds on which
the Government acted in forming an opinion.
47.

Undoubtedly these principles laid down by the courts

would guide the consideration by the Central Government in exercise
of its discretion under Section 399(4). These principles would also
guide examination of a challenge to the exercise of discretion and
formation of opinion by an authority as well.

Thus, once the

circumstances statutorily provided are shown to exist, then the
opinion of the Central Government that it was just and equitable to
grant the authorisation thereunder, is not open to challenge.
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 50 of 96

If this be the position in law, then certainly it cannot be
held that the company in respect of which the permission has been
sought has a right to challenge the circumstances asserted by the
applicant in support of its application under Section 399(4) before
the Central Government.
48.

In the light of the foregoing discussion, I have no hesitation

in holding that the consideration of the Central Government of the
application under Section 399(4) is subjective. So long as there is
some material to enable it to be satisfied that the circumstances
envisaged under Section 399(4) exist, the order passed by the Central
Government would not be justiciable. I am fortified in the view I
have taken by the weight of judicial precedents noticed by me
hereinabove.
Scope and limits of applicability of principles of natural
justice to the consideration by the Central Government of an
application under Section 399(4)
49.

It becomes necessary now to deal with the contention of

learned counsel for the respondent that the judgment of the Division
Bench is per incurium on the ground that it had ignored the law laid
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 51 of 96

down by the Apex Court in State of Orissa vs Binapani Dei AIR 1967
SC 1268 and A.K. Kraipak & Ors. vs Union of India & Ors. (1969) 2
SCC 262. It has been contended that in view of the law laid down by
the Apex Court in these judgments, the Government is bound to
comply with the principles of natural justice even when it is
considering an application made under Section 399 of the Companies
Act, 1956.
So far as the pronouncement of the Apex Court in AIR
1967 SC 1268 State of Orissa v. Dr. (Miss) Binapani Dei &
Ors. was concerned, the case related to an inquiry conducted by the
Government of Orissa on the issue relating to the correctness of the
date of birth of the respondent who was employed with it. The State
of Orissa conducted the enquiry but the report of the enquiry was not
made available to the respondent and an order of compulsory
retirement based on such enquiry was passed.

This order of

compulsory retirement was challenged by the petitioner on the
ground that the same was arbitrary and malafide and violative of the
principles of natural justice inasmuch as the order of retirement
amounted to a punishment involving consequences such as loss of
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 52 of 96

pay, status and deprivation of service. It was in these circumstances
held by the Apex Court that the decision of the state could be based
upon the result of an enquiry which is conducted in a manner
consonant with the basic concept of justice. As per the Apex Court,
an order by the State to the prejudice of a person in derogation of his
vested rights may be made only in accordance with the basic rules of
justice and fairplay. The deciding authority, it is true, is not in the
position of a Judge called upon to decide an action between
contesting parties, and strict compliance with the forms of judicial
procedure may not be insisted upon. He is, however, under a duty to
give the person against whom an enquiry is held an opportunity to set
up his version or defence and an opportunity to correct or to
controvert any evidence in the possession of the authority which is
sought to be relied upon to his prejudice.

For that purpose the

person against whom an enquiry is held must be informed of the case
he is called upon to meet, and the evidence in support thereof. The
rule that a party to whose prejudice an order is intended to be passed
is entitled to a hearing, applies alike to judicial tribunals and bodies
of persons invested with authority to adjudicate upon matters
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 53 of 96

involving civil consequences. It is one of the fundamental rules of
our constitutional set-up that every citizen is protected against
exercise of arbitrary authority by the State or its officers. Duty to act
judicially would, therefore, arise from the very nature of the function
intended to be performed: it need not be shown to be super-added. If
there is power to decide and determine to the prejudice of a person,
duty to act judicially is implicit in the exercise of such power. If the
essentials of justice be ignored and an order to the prejudice of a
person is made, the order is a nullity. That is a basic concept of the
rule of law and importance thereof transcends the significance of a
decision in any particular case.
50.

Therefore, it is in the nature of the power which is being

exercised that the manner of the exercise of the power is to be found.
In this case, the order which was impugned worked civil
consequences on the respondent and hence it was held that the
principles of natural justice had to be abided by.
51.

In 1969 (2) SCC 262 A.K. Kraipak & Ors. v. UOI &

Ors., the court was concerned with a challenge by the petitioners for
quashing the notification notifying the list of officers of state forest
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 54 of 96

service for appointment to post in senior and junior service of the
service on the ground that the selections which were notified were
vitiated by the contravention of the principles of natural justice as the
power conferred on the selection board was a quasi judicial power.
The court held that dividing line between the administrative power
and quasi judicial power was being gradually obliterated. So far as
the submission that the selection was in violation of rules of natural
justice was concerned, the court held thus :“20.
The aim of the rules of natural justice
is to secure justice or to put it negatively to
prevent miscarriage of justice. These rules can
operate only in areas not covered by any law
validly made. In other words they do not
supplant the law of the land but supplement it.
The concept of natural justice has undergone a
great deal of change in recent years. In the past
it was thought that it included just two rules
namely : (1) no one shall be a judge in his own
case (Nemo debet esse judex propria causa) and
(2) no decision shall be given against a party
without affording him a reasonable hearing (audi
alteram partem). Very soon thereafter a third
rule was envisaged and that is that quasi-judicial
enquiries must be held in good faith, without
bias and not arbitrarily or unreasonably. But in
the course of years many more subsidiary rules
came to be added to the rules of natural justice.
Till very recently it was the opinion of the courts
that unless the authority concerned was required
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 55 of 96

by the law under which it functioned to act
judicially there was no room for the application
of the rules of natural justice. The validity of that
limitation is now questioned. If the purpose of
the rules of natural justice is to prevent
miscarriage of justice one fails to see why those
rules should be made inapplicable to
administrative enquiries. Often times it is not
easy to draw the line that demarcates
administrative enquiries from quasi-judicial
enquiries. Enquiries which were considered
administrative at one time are now being
considered as quasi-judicial in character.
Arriving at a just decision is the aim of both
quasi-judicial enquiries as well as administrative
enquiries.
An unjust decision in an
administrative enquiry may have more far
reaching effect than a decision in a quasi-judicial
enquiry. As observed by this Court in Suresh
Koshy George v. The University of Kerala and
Others the rules of natural justice are not
embodied rules. What particular rule of natural
justice should apply to a given case must depend
to a great extent on the facts and circumstances
of that case, the framework of the law under
which the enquiry is held and the constitution of
the Tribunal or body of persons appointed for
that purpose. Whenever a complaint is made
before a court that some principle of natural
justice had been contravened the court has to
decide whether the observance of that rule was
necessary for a just decision on the facts of that
case.”
52.

As noticed hereinabove, in the instant case, the legislature

has specifically permitted formulation of an opinion and then a
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 56 of 96

subjective decision to be taken. The statutory scheme envisages that
while considering an application under Section 397 and 398 of the
statute, the Board would be required to comply with the principles of
natural justice. The Company Law Board has been empowered with
the discretion to evolve its own procedure. So far as consideration of
an application under Section 399(4) of the statute is concerned, rule
13 of the Companies (Central Government) General Rules & Forms,
1956 specifically provides the procedure which is required to be
followed.
53.

Even in AIR 1977 SC 965 The Chariman, Board of Mining

Examination and Chief Inspector of Mines and another v. Ramjee,
the Apex Court had observed that general observations relating to
principles of natural justice must be tested on the concrete facts of
each case and every minuscule violations do not spell illegality. In
the totality of circumstances satisfy the Court that the party visited
with adverse order has not suffered from denial of reasonable
opportunity the Court will decline to be punctilious or fanatical as if
the rules of natural justice were sacred scriptures.
54.

The petitioner before this court has approached this court

W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 57 of 96

at the stage when the Government of India vide a communication
dated 19th January, 2005 has required it to serve a copy of the
petition on the special company and it stated that the matter would
be processed thereafter. The petitioner has contended that it was
informed that the government would follow principles of natural
justice in deciding upon the application filed by them under Section
399(4) of the Companies Act, 1956.
55.

Before this court, Mr. Shakdhar, learned counsel for the

respondent has submitted that in the light of the Supreme Court in
Dr. Binapani's case and A.K. Kraipak's case (supra), the requirement
to comply with the principles of natural justice is essential. The
principles governing requirement of compliance principles of natural
justice in administration action and judicial function have fallen for
consideration in several later judgments of the Apex Court and now
are well settled. The Apex Court has clearly delineated the exceptions
to the requirement of exceptions to the principles of natural justice.
In view of the submission made on behalf of the respondent, it
becomes necessary to examine them in some detail.
In cases of the authority seeking to blacklist a contractor, it
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 58 of 96

has been held by the Apex Court that compliance with the principles
of natural justice is a must, even if the rules do not so postulate. It
was so held in (1994) Supp. 2 SCC 699 Southern Painters vs
Fertilizers and Chemicals Travencore Ltd.

This was so

because the effect of the order has serious consequences to the
contractor.
56.

In

M/s

Shrikrishnadas

Tikara

Vs.

State

Government of Madhya Pradesh & Ors., (1977) 2 SCC 741,
the Supreme Court had an occasion to consider a challenge to second
notice under the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960, Rule 27 (5) when
the mining lease already stood cancelled after failure to comply with
such earlier notice. The petitioner had set up a plea of contravention
of principles of natural justice. Observing that principles of natural
justice cannot be petrified or fitted into rigid moulds, it was held that
the petitioner had the opportunity to fully and fairly state his case
and was even given a personal hearing pursuant to the second notice
and consequently, failure to hear the petitioner personally pursuant
to the first notice would not lead to the conclusion that there was
failure of justice on account of contravention of principles of natural
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 59 of 96

justice.
57.

Even a duty to act fairly can be interpreted as meaning a

duty to observe certain aspects of rules of natural justice. A body
may be under a duty to give a fair consideration to the facts and to
consider the representations, but, not to disclose to those persons
details of information in its possession. Sometimes, a duty to act
fairly can also be sustained without providing an opportunity for an
oral hearing. It will depend on the nature of interest to be affected,
the circumstances in which a power is exercised and the nature of the
sanctions involved therein.

It was so observed in Erusian

Equipment and Chemicals Ltd. Vs. State of West Bengal &
Anr., (1975) 1 SCC 70. The court noticed that since a disability is
created by an order of blacklisting, it is indicative of the requirement
that the relevant authority is to have an objective satisfaction.
Fundamentals of fair play requires that the person concerned should
be given an opportunity to represent his case before he is put on a
black list.
58.

This issue has been elaborated in later judgments wherein

the courts have been called upon to consider as to what would
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 60 of 96

constitute adequate opportunity to represent against impugned
action.
59.

In (1973) 4 SCC 183 Union of India Vs. G.R.

Prabhavalkar & Ors., the apex court held that it is not implicit in
every decision that there is an obligation on the authority to give
personal hearing to the officers concerned in the matter. Principles
of natural justice cannot be put in any straitjacket. Their applicability
depends upon the context and the facts and circumstances of each
case, the objective being to ensure a fair hearing and a fair deal to a
person whose rights are going to be affected.
In (2005) 1 SCC 13 Ganesh Santa Ram Sirur Vs.
State Bank of India & Anr. the court cited with approval the
principles laid down in (1993) 4 SCC 727 ECIL Vs. B.
Karunakar, which approach and test should govern all cases where
the complaint is not that there was no notice, no opportunity and no
hearing but one of not affording a proper hearing, that is adequate or
a full hearing or

violation of a procedural rules or requirement

governing the enquiry.
As back as in (1970) 2 SCC 458 Union of India Vs.
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 61 of 96

Col. J.N. Sinha, it was held that rules of natural justice are not
embodied rules nor can they be elevated to the position of
fundamental rights.
60.

It was held by the Supreme Court in A.K. Kripak Vs.

Union of India, (1969) 2 SCC 262, that the aim of the rules of
natural justice is to secure justice or to put it negatively, to prevent
miscarriage of justice. These rules can operate only in areas not
covered by any law validly made.

In other

words, they do not

supplant the law, but supplement it. Whether the exercise of a power
conferred should be made in accordance with any of the principles of
natural justice or not depends upon the express words of the
provision conferring the power, the nature of the power conferred,
the purpose for which it is conferred and the effect of the exercise of
that power.
61.

Placing reliance on these principles, in (1991) I SCC 654

Union of India & Ors. Vs. Ex-constable Amrik Singh, upon a
consideration of the statutory scheme and legislative intent, the Apex
Court held that the authority which disposed of a post-confirmation
petition under the Border Security Force Act, 1968 and rules framed
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 62 of 96

thereunder is not a court and every order passed administratively
cannot be subjected to the rigors of principles of natural justice.
62.

In (1989) 3 SCC 396 entitled Sundarjas Kanyalal

Bhatija & Ors. Vs. Collector, Thane, Maharashtra & Ors.,
the Apex Court had occasion to consider the nature of functions of
the government in establishing a corporation under the provisions of
Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporation Act, 1949. The court held
that this function was neither executive nor administrative. It is a
legislative process. No traditional duty is laid on the government in
discharge of the statutory duties and that in exercise of the powers to
establish a Corporation, the government is not required to comply
with the rules of natural justice any more than the legislature itself.
This was because the rules of natural justice were not applicable to
legislative action, plenary or subordinate, of the government.
63.

It is well settled that rules of natural justice are not

applicable to legislative action, plenary or subordinate.

The

procedural requirement of hearing is not implied in the exercise of
legislative powers, unless hearing was expressly prescribed.
64.

The scope and applicability of the principles of natural

W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 63 of 96

justice and the requirement of a hearing in different eventualities
have also arisen for consideration before the courts.

In James

Edward Jeffs Vs. New Zealand Dairy Production and
Marketing Board, (1967) 1 AC 551 = (1966) 3 All ER 863, the
court made observations of a general nature indicating circumstances
when evidence could be recorded and submissions of the parties
heard by a person other than the decision making authority.
65.

In Chandra Bhavan Boarding and Lodging Vs.

State of Mysore, AIR 1970 SC 2042, the Supreme Court found
that the procedure adopted by the Government in fixing the
minimum wage under Section 5 (1) of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948
was not vitiated merely on the ground that the government had failed
to constitute a committee under Section 5 (1) (a) of the statute. In
this case, the court found that reasonable opportunity had been given
to all the concerned parties to read their case before the government
made the impugned order.
66.

In K.L. Tripathi Vs. State Bank of India, (1984) 1

SCC 43, the petitioner complained of prejudice to the principles of
natural justice on the ground that he was not given an opportunity to
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 64 of 96

rebut the material gathered in his absence. In this case, the Supreme
Court held that no real prejudice had been suffered by the
complainant in the circumstances of the case.
67.

In (1986) 4 SCC 537 Institute of Chartered

Accountants of India Vs. L.K. Ratna & Ors., an issue arose as
to whether the Tribunal or the body responsible to take the first
determinative decision which has grave adverse effects on the
persons against whom it is taken should afford opportunity of
hearing to the concerned persons before taking a decision. The fact
that such an opportunity had already been afforded to him by a
subordinate body, the conclusions of which are not “finding” but is
subject to the decision of the parent body and that the statute
provided for appeal against that decision, was not sufficient to deny
opportunity of hearing before the parent body or Tribunal before
taking the decision.
68.

There is yet another very pertinent aspect of the matter

which requires to be considered. It is necessary to understand and
clearly discern as to the real implications and the consequences of the
order passed by the Government under Section 399(4). In a case
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 65 of 96

where an order causes serious injury as soon as it is made, which
injury is not capable of being entirely erased when the error is
corrected on subsequent appeal, the damage can be immediate and
far-reaching. In such kind of a case, after the blow suffered by the
initial decision, it is difficult to contemplate complete restitution
through an appellate decision. Therefore, there is a manifest need to
ensure that there is no breach of fundamental procedure in the
original proceeding and to avoid treating an appeal as an overall
substitute for the original proceeding. It is in proceedings and orders
having such consequences that the compliance with principles of
natural justice is an absolute must and failure to do so would vitiate
the action.
69.

Such principles would hold where, for instance, the order

by the trial body has the effect of expelling a member from
membership of the expelling body. Denial of principles of natural
justice by such trial body would have the far-reaching effect if a
respected and public trusted professional is prima facie found guilty
of misconduct resulting in the penalty of expulsion. The damage
which is thus caused to the professional by a decision taken in
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 66 of 96

violation of principles of natural justice would be irreparable after the
blow has been suffered on account of the initial decision. There can
be no complete restitution through any appellate decision, unlike
restitution in the case of a money decree where interest etc. may
adequately compensate or cause restitution of the loss suffered.
70.

In this behalf, Sir William Wade in his classic treatise

“Administrative Law” 5th edition observed at page 487 “in principle
there ought to be an observance of natural justice equally at both
stages”. It was so observed because the erudite author observed that
“if natural justice is violated at the first stage, the right of appeal is no
so much a true right of appeal as a corrected initial hearing : instead
of fair trial followed by appeal, the procedure is reduced to unfair
trail followed by fair trial”.
Such a view was taken by Megarry, J in Leary Vs.
National Union of Vehicle Builders, (1971) Ch 34, 49,
wherein it was held by the learned Judge that an unfair trial, though
not resulting in the valid expulsion would nevertheless have the effect
of depriving the member of his right of appeal when a valid decision
to expel him is subsequently made.
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 67 of 96

Therefore,

it

appears

that

it

is

the

impact

and

consequences of the initial order as soon as it is passed which would
require to be considered to decide as to whether a breach in
fundamental procedure in the original proceeding results in manifest
injustice or was a curable irregularity.
71.

There is yet another consideration where an issue is raised

that there is failure of justice on account of violation of principles of
natural justice. It has been repeatedly held that a person so asserting
must be able to establish a legal right with regard to the claim raised.
Thus, where a person did not have the pre-requisite minimum
qualifications for appointment to a post resulting in cancellation of
his illegal appointment, the Apex Court held that the action was taken
swiftly within a short interval and mere continuance of the person on
the post to which he was appointed in pursuance of the interim order,
would not vitiate the action taken by the employer nor would it
entitle the persons to the posts on which they were illegally
appointed. It was so held in (1996) 7 SCC 118 entitled State of
M.P. vs. Shyama Pardhi.
72.

In this behalf, it would be useful to also notice the

W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 68 of 96

observation of the Apex Court in (2006) 2 SCC 315 entitled Mohd.
Sartaj & Anr. Vs. State of U.P. & Ors., several judicial
pronouncements were noticed and discussed and the court held
thus:“12.
It is the case of the appellants that once
appointed, their services could not have been
cancelled, without affording them an opportunity of
being heard and giving them a chance to explain
their position.
13.
In the matter of S.L.Kapoor V.Jagmohan
this Court has observed that a separate showing of
prejudice caused is not necessary and the nonobservance of natural justice is in itself a prejudice
caused. The Court has relied upon the decision
given in State of Orissa v. Dr. Binapani Dei for the
proposition that even if an administrative action
involves civil consequences it must observe the rules
of natural justice. Mohinder Singh Gill v. Chief
Election Commr. has also been cited, as civil
consequences undoubtedly cover infraction of not
merely property or personal rights but of the civil
liberties, material deprivation and non-pecuniary
damages.
In its comprehensive connotation,
everything that affects a citizen in his civil life
inflicts a civil consequence. The Court has also cited
the observation of one of the judges of the House of
Lords in Ridge v. Baldwin for the purpose that the
administrative body may in a proper case be bound
to give a person who is affected by their decision, an
opportunity of making representation. But all
depends on whether he has some right or interest or
some legitimate expectation of which it would not
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 69 of 96

be fair to deprive him. Similarly, the Privy Council's
decision in Alfred Thangarajah Jaurayappah v. W.J.
Fernado has also been referred to show that there
are three matters which should always be borne in
mind while considering whether the principle audi
alteram partem should be complied with or not.
First, what is the nature of property, the office held,
the status enjoyed or services to be performed by
the complainant of injustice. Secondly, in what
circumstances or upon what occasions is the person
claiming to be entitled to exercise the measure of
control entitled to intervene. Thirdly, when the
right to intervene is proved, what sanctions in fact is
the latter entitled to impose upon the other. It is
only upon a consideration of all these matters that
the question of the application of the principle can
properly be determined.
14.
However, in S.L.Kapoor v. Jagmohan this
Court has also observed as under: (SCC p. 395, para
24)
“In our view the principles of natural
justice know of no exclusionary rule dependent on
whether it would have made any difference it
natural justice had been observed. The nonobservance of natural justice is itself prejudice to
any man and proof of prejudice independently of
proof of denial of natural justice is unnecessary. It
will comes from a person who has denied justice
that he person who has been denied justice is not
prejudiced. As we said earlier where on the
admitted or indisputable facts only oen conclusion
is possible and under the law only one penalty is
permissible, the court may not issue its writ to
compel the observance of natural justice, not
because it is not necessary to observe natural justice
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 70 of 96

but because courts do not issue futile writs.”
15.
In the matter of Shrawan Kumar Jha v.
State of Bihar the appellants were appointed as
Assistant Teachers and before joining they were
supposed to get their certificates and other
qualifications verified form the authorities and as
per the appellants, they had joined their respective
schools. By an order dated 2-11-1988, the Deputy
Development
Commissioner
cancelled
the
appointment of the appellants because, according to
him the District Superintendent of Education had
no authority to make the appointments and the
conditions which were part of the appointment
order were not complied with. The Court set aside
the order of cancellation holding that it is settled
that no order to the detriment of the appellants
could be passed without complying with the rules of
natural justice.
16.
Shrawn Kumar Jha was distinguished in
State of M.P. v. Shyama Pardhi. In this case, the
persons
not
possessing
the
prerequisite
qualifications prescribed by the statutory rules,
were wrongly selected. They have completed their
training and were appointed as Auxiliary Nursecum-Midwife.
Their services were terminated
without giving any prior notice. Holding it to be
illegal, the termination was challenged before the
service Tribunal and the order of termination was
set aside as the principle of natural justice was not
followed. This Court had found in an appeal that
the original petitioners did not possess the
prerequisite qualifications viz. 10 +2 with Physics,
Chemistry and Biology as subjects. The rules
specifically provided that qualification as condition
for appointment to the post. Since the prescribed
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 71 of 96

qualifications had not been satisfied, the
appointment and training was per se illegal and,
therefore, the Tribunal was not right in directing
their reinstatement. Shrawan Kumar case was
distinguished on the ground that they were not
disqualified to be appointed but they had not
undergone the training and the appointment was
set aside on the ground of want of training. The
Court has drawn a distinction between the initial
disqualification for appointment and irregularity in
the appointment and subsequent training for
application of the principle of natural justice.
17.
In M.C. Mehta v. Union of India this
Court has laid down that there can be a certain
situation in which an order passed in violation of
natural justice need not be set aside under Article
226 of the Constitution. For example, where no
prejudice is caused to the person concerned,
interference under Article 226 is not necessary.
18.
In Aligarh Muslim University Vs.
Mansoor Ali Khan this court considered the
question whether on the facts of the case the
employee can invoke the principle of natural justice
and whether it is a case where even if notice has
been given, result would not have been different
and whether it could be said that no prejudice was
caused to him, if on the admitted or proved facts
grant of an opportunity would not have made any
difference. The Court referred to the decisions
rendered in M.C. Mehta Vs. Union of India, the
exceptions laid down in S.L. Kapoor case and K.L.
Tripathi Vs. State Bank of India where it has been
laid down that not mere violation of natural justice
but de facto prejudice (other than non-issue of
notice) has to be proved. The Court has also placed
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 72 of 96

reliance in the matter of State Bank of Patiala Vs.
S.K. Sharma and Rajendra Singh Vs. State of M.P.
where the principle has been laid down that there
must have been some real prejudice to the
complainant. There is no such thing as merely
technical infringement of natural justice. The Court
has approved this principle and examined the case
of the employee in that light. In Viveka Nand Sethi
Vs. Chairman, J & K Bank Ltd. this Court has held
that the principles of natural justice are required to
be complied with having regard to the fact situation
obtaining therein. It cannot be put in a straitjacket
formula. It cannot be applied in a vacuum without
reference to the relevant facts and circumstances of
the case. The principle of natural justice, it is trite,
is no unruly horse. When facts are admitted, an
enquiry would be an empty formality. Even the
principle of estoppel will apply. In another recent
judgment in State of U.P. vs. Neeraj Awasthi while
considering the argument that the principle of
natural justice had been ignored before terminating
the service of the employees and therefore, the
order terminating the service of the employees was
bad in law, this court has considered the principles
of natural justice and the extent and the
circumstances in which they are attracted. This
Court has found in Neeraj Awasthi case that if the
services of the workmen are governed by the U.P.
Industrial Disputes Act, they are protected under
that law. Rules 42 and 43 of the U.P. Industrial
Disputes Rules lay down that before effecting any
retrenchment the employees concerned would be
entitled to notice of one month or in lieu thereof pay
for one month and 15 days' wages for each
completed year of service by way of compensation.
If retrenchment is to be effected under the
Industrial Disputes Act, the question of complying
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 73 of 96

with the principles of natural justice would not
arise. The principles of natural justice would be
attracted only when the services of some persons
are terminated by way of a punitive measure or
thereby a stigma is attached.
Applying this
principle, it could very well be seen that
discontinuation of the service of the appellants in
the present case was not as a punitive measure but
they were discontinued for the reason that they
were not qualified and did not possess the requisite
qualifications for appointment.”
Upon consideration of the case of the petitioners, it was
held that no prejudice had been caused by the appellants in similar
circumstances by not serving notice for the date of hearing before the
order of cancellation of appointment was made in this case.
73.

It would also be useful to notice the observations of the

apex court wherein the court was called upon to consider the
question as to whether the failure to observe the principles of natural
justice would mandate issuance of a writ in every case. In this behalf,
in (1980) 4 SCC 379 S.L. Kapoor Vs. Jagmohan & Ors., the
court held thus:“17.
Linked with this question is the question
whether the failure to observe natural justice does
at all matter if the observance of natural justice
would have made no difference, the admitted or
indisputable facts speaking for themselves. Where
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 74 of 96

on the admitted or indisputable facts only one
conclusion is possible and under the law only one
penalty is permissible, the court may not issue its
writ to compel the observance of natural justice, not
because it approves the non-observance of natural
justice but because courts do not issue futile writs.
But it will be a pernicious principle to apply in other
situations where conclusions are controversial,
however, slightly, and penalties are discretionary.”
74.

The issue raised in the instant case can be looked at yet

another angle. If it were to be held that the consideration by the
Central Government is akin to an interlocutory stage in the entire
proceeding, then is it enough if the company is required to answer
the material against him after a preliminary consideration. A similar
issue arose for consideration before the Apex Court in (1984) 3 SCC
465 entitled Liberty Oil Mills & Ors. Vs. Union of India &
Ors. wherein the court considered the applicable law in detail. The
court noticed several judicial pronouncements of different courts.
The issue raised before the court was noticed thus:15. xxx Has a show- cause notice to be issued first,
then followed by an investigation and finally
concluded by yet another show-cause notice? Or is
it enough if a show-cause notice is issued after the
investigation is concluded and the person
concerned is tasked to explain the evidence
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 75 of 96

gathered against him? When may investigation be
said to be have commenced? Should investigation
be necessarily preceded by a show-cause notice? We
do not think that the Central Government or the
Chief Controller is bound to follow any rigid, hidebound, pre-determined procedure. The procedure
any be different in each case any may be determined
by the facts, circumstances and exigencies of each
case. The authority may design its own procedure to
suit the requirements of an individual case. The
procedure must be fair and not so designed as to
defeat well-known principles of justice and thus
deny justice. That is all. If the procedure is fair it
matter not whether the investigation is preceded,
interjected or succeeded by a show-cause notice.
The word ' Investigation' is not defined but in the
context it means no more than the process of
collection of evidence or the gathering of material. It
is not necessary that it should commence with the
communication of an accusation to the person
whose affairs are to be investigated. That may follow
later. xxxx We do not think that it is permissible
to interpret any statutory instrument so as to
exclude natural justice, unless the language of the
instrument leaves no option to the Court.
Procedural fairness embodying natural justice is to
be implied whenever action is taken affecting the
rights of parties. It may be that the opportunity to
be heard may not be pre- decisional; It may
necessarily have to be post-decisional where the
danger to be aerated or the act to be prevented is
imminent or where the action to be taken can brook
no delay. If an area is devastated by flood, one
cannot wait to issue show-cause notices for
requisitioning vehicles to evacuate population. If
there is an outbreak of an epidemic, we presume
one does not have to issue show-cause notices to
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 76 of 96

requisition beds in hospitals, public or private. In
such situations, it may be enough to issue postdecisional notices providing for an opportunity. It
may not even be necessary in some situations to
issue such notices, but it would be sufficient but
obligatory to consider any representation that may
be made by the aggrieved person and that would
satisfy the requirements of procedural fairness and
natural justice. There can be no tape-measure of the
extent of natural justice. If may and indeed it must
vary from statute to statute, situation to situation
and case to case. Again, it is necessary to say that
pre-decisional natural justice is not usually
contemplated when the decisions taken are of an
interim nature pending investigation or enquiry. Ad
interim orders may always be made ex parte and
such orders may themselves provide for an
opportunity to the aggrieved party to be heard at a
later stage. Even if the interim orders do not make
provision for such an opportunity, an aggrieved
party has, nevertheless, always the right to make an
appropriate representation seeking a review of the
order and asking the authority to rescind or modify
the order. The principles of natural justice would be
satisfied if the aggrieved party is given an
opportunity at his request. There is no violation of a
principles of natural justice if an ex parte ad interim
order is made unless of course, the statute itself
provides for a hearing before the order is made as in
Clause 8-A. Natural justice will be violated if the
authority refuses to consider the request of the
aggrieved party for an opportunity to make his
representation against the ex parte ad interim
orders.
75.

The court considered the law laid in several judicial

W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 77 of 96

precedents including Queen Vs. Randolph et. al., 56 DLR (2d) 283;
Commissioner of Police Vs. Tanos, 98 CLR 383; Lewis Vs. Heffer
(1978) 3 All ER 354 (CA); Furnell Vs. Whangarei High Schools Board,
1973 AC 660 : (1973) 1 All ER 400 : (1973) 2 WLR 92 (PC) and
Chingleput Bottlers Vs. Majestic Bottling Co., (1984) 3 SCC 258.
76.

The maxim audi alteram partem has reference to the

making of decisions affecting rights of parties which are final in
nature [Re : Queen vs. Randolph etc at 56 DLR(2nd) 283 of the
Supreme Court of Canada].
In Furnell vs. Whangarei High Schools Board (1973 AC
660) the Privy Council upheld the suspension of a teacher pending
determination of charges against him. It was held that suspension in
such a case is merely done in the interest of the public payments and
of the public and a situation has arisen in which something must be
done at once.
However in Lewis vs. Heffer (1978) 3 All ER 354 (CA), Lord
Denning MR distinguished the observations of Megarry J in John vs.
Rees (1969) 2 All ER 274 to point out the difference between
suspension which is inflicted by way of punishment, as for instance
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 78 of 96

when a member of the Bar is suspended from practice for six months
when principles of audi alteram partem would mandatorily apply.
But they would not apply to suspensions made pending enquiries as
for irregularities allegedly done by an employee in a Government
department or in a business house. In the later case, the suspension
is effected only by way of good administration.
The Apex Court also considered the decision rendered by
the High Court of Australia (Dixon C. J and Webb, J) in the
Commissioner of Police vs. Tanos (98 CLR 383). The court was
considering the question whether an ex parte order of closure of a
Disorderly House may be made. It was held that it is in a broad sense
a procedural matter and while the general principle must prevail, it is
apparent that exceptional cases may be imagined in which because of
some special hazard or cause of urgency an immediate declaration is
demanded.
77.

Upon noticing the principles laid down in the aforenoticed

cases, the Apex Court in Liberty Oil Mills & Ors. (supra) held thus:“20. We have referred to these four cases only to
illustrate how ex parte interim orders may be made
pending a final adjudication. We, however, take
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 79 of 96

care to say that we do not mean to suggest that
natural justice is not attracted when orders of
suspension or like orders of an interim nature are
made. Some orders of that nature, intended to
prevent further mischief of one kind, may
themselves be productive of greater mischief of
another kind. An interim order of stay or
suspension which has the effect of preventing a
person, however temporarily, say, from pursuing
his profession or life of business, may have
substantial,
serious
and
even
disastrous
consequences to him and may expose him to grave
risk and hazard. Therefore, we say that there must
be observed some modicum of residual, core
natural justice, sufficient to enable the affected
person to make an adequate representation. (These
considerations may not, however, apply to cases of
liquor licensing which involve the grant of a
privilege and are not a matter of right : See
Chingleput Bottlers v. Majestic Bottling Company
(MANU/SC/0026/1984). That may be and in some
cases, it can only be after an initial ex parte interim
order is made.
xxxxx
xxxxx
xxxxx
26. We have held that action under Clause 8-B is of
an interim nature and it may be ex parte, in which
case the affected party may make a suitable
representation bringing out all the outweighing
circumstance in his favour. That is the real remedy
of the party. Courts do not enter the picture at that
stage unless the action is mala fide or patently
without jurisdiction. The action will be patently
without jurisdiction if it is not based on any
relevant material whatsoever. If the authority
declines to consider the representation, or if the
authority after consideration of the representation
eschews relevant consideration and prefers to act
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 80 of 96

on irrelevant considerations or from oblique
motive, or the decision is such as no reasonable
man properly directed on the law would arrive at on
the material facts it will be open to the party to seek
the intervention of the court at that stage. Our
attention was drawn to the well known cases of
Barium Chemicals Ltd. v. Company Law Board
MANU/SC/0037/1966, Rohtas Industries Ltd. v.
S.D. Agarwal MANU/SC/0020/1968, M.A. Rasheed
v. State of Kerala MANU/SC/0051/1974, and the
recent cases of Shalini Soni v. Union of India
MANU/SC/0227/1980, and CIT v. Mahindra and
Mahindra Ltd. MANU/SC/0181/1983 and we have
considered all of them in arriving at our conclusion.
78.

A question arose before the Apex Court as to whether the

power exercised by the Chief Justice of India or by the Chief Justice
of the High Court under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration &
Conciliation Act, 1996 is a judicial power or exercise of merely
administrative power. The reasons and findings of the Apex Court in
this case have material bearing on the questions raised before this
court as well. In the Constitution Bench pronouncement reported at
(2005) 8 SCC 618 SC entitled S.B.P. & Co. vs. Patel
Engineering Limited, it was held that the Chief Justice or his
designate while functioning under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration &
Conciliation Act, 1996 is bound to decide whether he has jurisdiction;

W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 81 of 96

decide also on the validity of an arbitration agreement; whether the
person requesting the arbitration is a party to the arbitration
agreement; whether there is a live claim/dispute subsisting capable
of being arbitrated upon and other such like issues. Holding that this
power is conferred not on an administrative authority, but on the
highest judicial authority in the country or in the state and that the
power under Section 11 is derived from statute which itself describes
the conditions that should exist for the excise of that power, it was
held that in the process of exercise of such power, obviously the
parties would have the right of being heard. This was so because the
existence of the conditions for the exercise of the power are found on
accepting or overruling the contentions of one of the parties, it
necessarily amounts to an order, judicial in nature, having attained
finality not subject to any available judicial challenge as envisaged by
the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 or any other statute or the
Constitution of India. It was held that it was the nature of the power
that is relevant and not the mode of exercise in determination of
whether the function performed requires a judicial adjudication or is
merely administration. In this context, the court observed thus :W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 82 of 96

“9.
Normally, any tribunal or authority
conferred with a power to act under a statute, has
the jurisdiction to satisfy itself that the conditions
for the exercise of that power existed and that the
case calls for the exercise of that power. Such an
adjudication relating to its own jurisdiction which
could be called a decision on jurisdictional facts, is
not generally final, unless it is made so by the Act
constituting the tribunal. Here, sub-section (7) of
Section 11 has given a finality to the decisions taken
by the Chief Justice or any person or institution
designated by him in respect of matters falling
under sub-sections (4), (5) and (6) of Section 11.
Once a statute creates an authority, confers on it
power to adjudicate and makes its decision final on
matters to be decided by it, normally, that decision
cannot be said to be a purely administrative
decision. It is really a decision on its own
jurisdiction for the exercise of the power conferred
by the statute or to perform the duties imposed by
the statute. Unless the authority satisfies itself that
the conditions for exercise of its power exist, it
could not accede to a request made to it for the
exercise of the conferred power. While exercising
the power or performing the duty under Section
11(6) of the Act, the Chief Justice has to consider
whether the conditions laid down by the section for
the exercise of that power or the performance of
that duty exist. Therefore, unaided by authorities
and going by general principles, it appears to us
that while functioning under Section 11(6) of the
Act, a Chief Justice or the person or institution
designated by him, is bound to decide whether he
has jurisdiction, whether there is an arbitration
agreement, whether the applicant before him is a
party, whether the conditions for exercise of the
power have been fulfilled, and if an arbitrator is to
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 83 of 96

be appointed, who is the fit person, in terms of the
provision. Section 11(7) makes his decision on the
matters entrusted to him, final.
10.
The very scheme, if it involves an
adjudicatory process, restricts the power of the
Chief Justice to designate, by excluding the
designation of a non-judicial institution or a nonjudicial authortity to perform the functions. For,
under our dispensation, no judicial or quasijudicial decision can be rendered by an institution
if it is not a judicial authority, court or a quasijudicial tribunal. This aspect is dealt with later
while dealing with the right to designate under
Section 11(6) and the scope of that designation.
11.
The appointment of an arbitrator against
the opposition of one of the parties on the ground
that the Chief Justice had no jurisdiction or on the
ground that there was no arbitration agreement, or
on the ground that there was no dispute subsisting
which was capable of being arbitrated upon or that
the conditions for exercise of power under Section
11(6) of the Act do not exist or that the qualification
contemplated for the arbitrator by the parties
cannot be ignored and has to be borne in mind, are
all adjudications which affect the rights of parties.
It cannot be said that when the Chief Justice
decides that he has jurisdiction to proceed with the
matter, that there is an arbitration agreement and
that one of the parties to it has failed to act
according to the procedure agreed upon, he is not
adjudicating on the rights of the party which is
raising these objections. The duty to decide the
preliminary facts enabling the exercise of
jurisdiction or power, gets all the more emphasis,
when sub-section (7) designates the order under
sub-sections (4), (5) or (6) a “decision” and makes
the decision of the Chief Justice final on the
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 84 of 96

matters referred to in that sub-section. Thus,
going by the general principles of law and the
scheme of Section 11, it is difficult to call the order
of the Chief justice merely an administrative order
and to say that the opposite side need not even be
heard before the Chief Justice exercises his power
of appointing an arbitrator. Even otherwise, when
a statute confers a power or imposes a duty on the
highest judicial authority in the State or in the
country, that authority, unless shown otherwise,
has to act judicially and has necessarily to consider
whether his power has been rightly invoked or the
conditions for the performance of his duty are
shown to exist.
xxx

xxxx

36.
Going by the above test it is seen that at
least in the matter of deciding his own jurisdiction
and in the matter of deciding on the existence of an
arbitration agreement, the Chief Justice when
confronted with two points of view presented by
the rival parties, is called upon to decide between
them and the decision vitally affects the rights of
the parties in that, either the claim for appointing
an Arbitral Tribunal leading to an award is denied
to a entertaining a claim is facilitated by the Chief
Justice. In this context, it is not possible to say
that the Chief Justice is merely exercising an
administrative function when called upon to
appoint an arbitrator and that he need not even
issue notice to the opposite side before appointing
an arbitrator.
37.
It is fundamental to our procedural
jurisprudence, that the right of no person shall be
affected without he being heard. This necessarily
imposes an obligation on the Chief Justice to issue
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 85 of 96

notice to the opposite party when he is moved
under Section 11 of the Act. The notice to the
opposite party cannot be considered to be merely
an intimation to that party of the filing of the
arbitration application and the passing of an
administrative order appointing an arbitrator or an
Arbitral Tribunal. It is really the giving of an
opportunity of being heard. There have been cases
where claims for appointment of an arbitrator
based on an arbitration agreement are made ten or
twenty years after the period of the contract has
come to an end. There have been cases where the
appointment of an arbitrator has been sought, after
the parties had settled the accounts and the party
concerned had certified that he had no further
claims against the other contracting party. In
other words, there have been occasions when dead
claims are sought to be resurrected. There have
been cases where assertions are made of the
existence of arbitration agreements when, in fact,
such existence is strongly disputed by the other
side who appears on issuances of notice.
Controversies are also raised as to whether the
claim that is sought to be put forward comes within
the purview of the arbitration clause concerned at
all. The Chief Justice has necessarily to
apply his mind to these aspects before
coming to a conclusion one way or the other
and before proceeding to appoint an
arbitrator or declining to appoint an
arbitrator.
Obviously,
this
is
an
adjudicatory process. An opportunity of
hearing to both parties is a must. Even in
administrative functions if rights are
affected, rules of natural justice step in. The
principles settled by Ridge v. Baldwin (1963) 2 All
ER 66 are well known. Therefore, to the extent,
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 86 of 96

Konkan Rly.Corpn.Ltd. v. Rani Construction (P)
Ltd., (2002) 2 SCC 388 states that no notice need
be issued to the opposite party to give him an
opportunity of being heard before appointing an
arbitrator, with respect, the same has to be held to
be not sustainable.”
The clear principle laid down by the Apex court thus is that
if rights of the parties are being finally effected, then even if such
decision is being taken in performance of administrative functions,
there must be compliance of principles of natural justice. This would
not be so if, as in present case, the rights of the parties are not finally
affected.
79.

The respondents have urged that principles of natural

justices would have to be complied with in view of the law laid down
by the Apex Court in A.K. Kraipak (supra) or in Dr. Binapani's case
(supra). It is trite that no judgment can be read or applied without
reference to the factual context in which it was rendered. In this
behalf, it would be useful to advert to the words of the Apex Court
which indubitably make relevant reading.

The following passages of

the Apex Court in JT 2002 (1) SC 482 Haryana Financial
Corporation & Anr. v. M/s Jagdamba Oil Mills & Anr. are of

W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 87 of 96

irreplaceable and irrefutable topicability :“19.
Courts should not place reliance on
decisions without discussing as to how the
factual sitaution fits in with the fact situation jof
the decision on which reliance is placed.
Observations of Courts are not to be read as
Euclid's theorems nor as provisions of the
statute. These observations must be read in the
context in which they appear. Judgments of
courts are not to be construed as statutes. To
interpret words, phrases and provisions of a
statute, it may become necessary for judges to
embark into lengthy discussions but the
discussion is meant to explain and not to define.
Judges interpret statutes, they do not interpret
judgments. They interpret words of statutes,
their words are not to be interpreted as statutes.
In London Graving Dock Co. Ltd. v. Horton [1951
AC 737 at P. 761], Lord Mac Dermot observed :
“The matter cannot, of course, be
settled merely be treating the
ipsissima vertra of Willes, J. as though
they were part of an Act of Parliament
and applying the rules of interpretation
appropriate thereto. This is not to
detract from the great weight to be
given to the language actually used by
that most distinguished judge.”
In Home Office v. Dorset Yacht Co.
(1970 (2) All ER 294) Lord Reid said, “Lord
Atkin's speech...........is not to be treated as if it
was a statute definition.
It will require
qualification in new circumstances.” Megarry, J.
in (1971) 1 WLR 1062 observed : “One must not,
of course, construe even a reserved judgment of
even Russell L.J. as if it were an Act of
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 88 of 96

Parliament.”
And, in Herrington v. British
Railways Board, [(1972) 2 WLR 537] Lord Morris
said :
“There is always peril in treating the
words of a speech or judgment as
though they are words in a legislative
enactment, and it is to be remembered
that judicial utterances made in the
setting of the facts of a particular case.”
Circumstantial flexibility, one additional or
different fact may make a world of difference
between conclusions in two cases. Disposal of
cases by blindly placing reliance on a decision is
not proper.
20.
The following words of Lord Denning
in the matter of applying precedents have
become locus classicks :
“Each case depends on its own facts and
a close similarity between one case and
another is not enough because even a
single significant detail may alter the
entire aspect. In deciding such cases,
one should avoid the temptation to
decide cases (as said by Cordozo) by
matching the colour of one case against
the colour of another.
To decide,
therefore, on which side of the line as
case falls, the broad resemblance to
another case is not at all decisive.”
xxx
xxx
xxx
“Precedent should be followed only so
far as it marks the path of justice, but
you must cut the dead wood and trim off
the side branches else you will find
yourself lost in thickets and branches.
My plea is to keep the path to justice
clear of obstructions which could
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 89 of 96

impede it.”
80.

From the above discussion, it is apparent that the absolute

proposition urged on behalf of the respondent that principles of
natural justice would have to apply in every case where a decision
was to be taken by an authority was not laid down by the Apex Court
in either A.K. Kraipak (supra) or in Dr.(Miss) Binapani Dei (supra).
The parameters of discretion and requirement of compliance of the
principles of natural justice have been laid down in the aforenoticed
binding judicial precedents. In the Board of Mining Examination and
Chief Inspector of Mines & Anr. v. Ramjee AIR 1977 SC 965, the
Supreme Court had warned the courts how over judicialization can be
subversive of the justice of law. This note of caution would clearly
apply to the instant case. In view of the above, the contentions of the
respondent that the judgment of the Division Bench in Shri Krishna
Tiles & Potteries P. Ltd. v. Company Law Board & Ors. is per
incurium for the reason that it has ignored principles laid down by
the Apex Court in A.K. Kraipak and Dr. (Miss) Binapani Dei (supra)
has to be rejected. It has already been noticed hereinabove that while
granting the permission under Section 399 (4), the Central
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 90 of 96

Government merely removes the prohibition which would obstruct
an opportunity to the members of a company from making a
complaint against the company with regard to matters set out in
Section 397 and 398 of the Companies Act, 1956.

There is no

adjudication on the merits of the case or of the dispute.
So far as the jurisdiction of the Government under Section
399 is concerned, there is no finality to its order. There is also no
adjudication nor is there any binding decision effecting rights of any
party rendered by the Government on the matters raised by the
petitioner seeking leave to agitate the matter before the Company
Law Board. Therefore, it cannot at all be contended that the rights of
the other side are in any manner impinged or effected.

The

adjudication has to be undertaken by the Company Law Board which
issues notices to the other side and grants full opportunity to it to
place its defence and its side of the case before a decision effecting
rights of the parties is taken. The company would have the right of
being heard before adjudication is completed and a view taken by the
Company Law Board.

No issue of jurisdiction even arises for

consideration before the Central Government while considering an
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 91 of 96

application under Section 399(4) of the Companies Act.
81.

In the instant case undoubtedly, the exercise of the

discretion 'by the government' does not impact the rights of the
company in as much as there is no decision on the contentions of the
petitioner or the person against whom the initiation of the
proceeding has been sought.
82.

The consequence of an order under Section 399(4)

granting the request of a member is to permit him to bring a petition
under Section 397 and 398.

It merely removes the prohibition

contained under Section 399(1) without anything further. There is no
adjudication on the merits of the allegations made. The company
against whom the allegations are made would have ample
opportunity to repudiate the same in the proceedings before the
Company Law Board.
83.

In the light of the afore-stated well settled legal principles,

therefore, the scope of inquiry before the central government in
Section 399 (4) is narrow. It is exercising executive or administrative
powers and does not act in a judicial or a quasi judicial capacity. It is
not a main proceeding but a subordinate proceeding.
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 92 of 96

The scope of consideration has to be found in the object
and reasons for incorporating Section 399 (1) and Section 399 (4).
The government is required to have only a preliminary look at the
application proposed to be made by the member under Section 397
and 398 with a view to see whether the application can be said to be a
frivolous one by a disgruntled member. The petitioners are required
to have provided all the information required to be furnished under
Rule 13 afore-noticed.

Very little scrutiny is required to know

whether the same is a frivolous application. An application without
merits would not necessarily be frivolous and the scrutiny by the
Central Government does not involve any finding about the merits of
the case.
It has been held by the Division Bench in the Krishna Tiles
and Potteries Pvt. Ltd. case (supra) that it would be desirable that the
Central Government should not be required to give reasons for grant
of the authorization under Section 399(4) for such reasons would
needlessly prejudge the merits of the case. It would be rather in the
interest of the company or the management of the company that no
observations on merits should be made by the government at that
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 93 of 96

stage.
84.

I am in respectful agreement with the reasoning given by

the learned Single Judge in Krishna Tiles and Potteries (supra) and I
am bound by the authoritative pronouncement by the Division Bench
in the appeal which was filed assailing the judgment of the learned
Single Judge.
As noticed hereinabove, there is nothing which effects the
reasoning or the principles of law laid down by the Bench in the
Krishna Tiles and Potteries case (supra) which could make any
material difference to the conclusions which I have arrived at.
In the light of the detailed discussion hereinabove, I have
no hesitation in rejecting the submission on behalf of the respondent
that the judgments of the Division Bench and the Single Bench are
per incurium for the reason that they have ignored the law laid down
by the Apex Court in A.K. Kraipak (supra) or in Dr. Binapani's case
(supra).
85.

The petitioners have further placed before this court that

apprehending interpolation in the lists of members and other actions
which would have impacted the proposed petition of the petitioners,
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 94 of 96

they have been constrained to file a composite petition under Section
397, 398, 402 as well as Section 111 (4) of the Companies Act, 1956
being Company petition no. 21/2005. Vide an order passed on 16th
March, 2005, the Company Law Board directed the company officers,
Mumbai to authenticate the rights of members/owners of the
company immediately.
Alongwith the written submissions filed by the petitioners
on 6th February, 2005, a report dated 4th April, 2005 filed by the
branch officer pursuant to the afore-stated affairs has been placed on
record wherein it is stated that the company is not maintaining any
register of members or proper records of ownership of copyright and
no proper record has been maintained of the company in this behalf.
Further that the company has not given any membership numbers to
the members.
86.

The application of the petitioner under Section 399(4) is

yet to be decided by the respondent.
Accordingly the writ petition is allowed. In view of the
position in law discussed hereinabove, there can be no requirement
of the petitioner's to serve a copy upon the company concerned and
W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 95 of 96

as such the direction made in the letter dated 19th January, 2005 is
hereby set aside and quashed.
87.

Consequently, the Central Government is required to

consider and make appropriate orders on the application of the
petitioners under Section 399 (4) of the Companies Act, 1956 within
a period of eight weeks from today without joining the special
company in its consideration and after compliance of rule 13 of the
Companies (Central Government) General Rules and Firms, 1956
and any other statutory provision, rule or regulation. Orders passed
in this behalf shall be communicated to the petitioner within the
aforestated period.
This writ petition is allowed in above terms. There shall be
no order as to costs.

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
September 7, 2006
kr

W.P.(C) No. 2726-27/2005

page 96 of 96

