IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
I.A. No.11450/2006 in CS (OS) NO.1938/2006
Reserved on 17th October, 2006
Date of Decision 8th , December, 2006
THE COMPUTERONICS INTERNATIONAL
LIMITED
... Petitioner
through: Mr. Chetan Sharma, Sr. Advocate
with Mr. Karma S. Bhutia, Adv. &
Mr. Sushil Kumar Pandey, Adv .
VERSUS
M/S INFINITE COMPUTER SOLUTIONS
(I) PVT. LIMITED & OTHERS
.....Respondents
through: Mr. Jayant Bhushan, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Ajay Bhargava, Adv. & Mr. Susmit Pushkar,
Adv. for Defendant Nos.1 to 6.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest? Yes

GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

By this judgment, I propose to dispose of this application which has

been filed by the plaintiff under the provisions of Order 39 Rules 1 & 2 of
the Code of Civil Procedure, praying for order of restraint against the
defendants “from dispossessing the Geographical Data Base, more
specifically described in the plaint, to defendant nos. 7 to 9 and/or creating
IA No.11450/2006 in CS (OS) No.1938/2006

Page No.1

any third party interest or otherwise deal with the same in the similar
fashion”. A further order is prayed for prohibiting the defendants from
“dealing with such Geographical Data Base or encumber the same or
entering into any agreement whatsoever in respect of the same during the
pendency of the present suit.”
2.

In order to appreciate the respective contentions, it becomes

necessary to examine some basic facts.

It appears that defendant no.1

entered into an agreement with the Kanpur Electricity Supply Company
Limited (referred to as “KESCO” hereafter for brevity). M/s KESCO issued
a letter of intent dated 23rd July, 2005 in favour of the defendants for
computerisation of KESCO (Stage I) with supply and commissioning of
related

materials

(on

turnkey

basis)

vide

tender

specification

no.KESCO/APDRP/2004-05/09 under a scheme known as the APDRP
Scheme. The defendant no.1 entered into a contract dated 8th August, 2005
with KESCO pursuant to this letter of intent. The defendant company
outsourced a part of the project to the plaintiff and placed a work order upon
it for conducting a survey, collecting, updating or collating of consumer and
network assets data to an accuracy level of 99.9% to enable the defendant
company to create a comprehensive geographical data base so established
IA No.11450/2006 in CS (OS) No.1938/2006

Page No.2

that it was, spatially consistent, plotted and geo referenced on 1:1000 scale
KNN maps as required by KESCO to determine any loss incurred by it on
account of unregistered consumer not paying for electricity consumed, theft
etc. The defendants have asserted that accuracy of the data, therefore, was
the essence of the contract. It was urged that otherwise the basic purpose of
KESCO's project would not be achieved.
3.

The plaintiff has placed reliance on the work order dated 28th

September, 2005 of the defendant company for supply of the aforesaid data
for 15 divisions and with regard to quality control and the respective
responsibilities clearly laid down therein. On the other hand, as per the
stipulated methodology, the maps provided by the defendant no.1 were
required to be split into divisions by the plaintiff and the existing networks
as such were to be verified, marked and updated on the hard copies of the
grid maps which were to be provided by the defendant to the plaintiff. The
parameters were set out in the work order itself. Door to door survey was
required to be conducted and a format was to be provided by the KESCO.
The work order contained stipulations with regard to quality control and
required accuracy level of 99.9% after the validation of the data.
4.

It is contended by the plaintiff that the defendants failed to provide
IA No.11450/2006 in CS (OS) No.1938/2006

Page No.3

the maps and that the plaintiff drew the maps and marked on the same
manually. Mr. Chetan Sharma, learned senior counsel appearing for the
plaintiffs, has placed reliance on the delivery challans whereby the data was
supplied to the defendant no.1 by the plaintiff. Learned senior counsel has
pointed out that the delivery challans were from 21st May, 2003 to 24th
December, 2005. It is pointed out that whenever any mistake was pointed
out by the defendant no.1, the same would be corrected by the plaintiff and
the corrected copies were also duly handed over to the defendant no.1
against receipts on the invoices.
5.

It has further been urged that no complaint was ever made by the

defendant no.1 with regard to the work done by the plaintiff and that the
same is further evidenced by the fact that the defendant took no action under
the terms of Clause F(3) of the work order whereby the defendant no.1 was
entitled to liquidated damages at the rate of 1% on per week of delay subject
to a maximum of 10% of the project value. According to Mr. Chetan
Sharma, learned senior counsel appearing for the plaintiff, the very fact that
the defendant no.1 had not taken any action to levy any liquidated damages
even as per the affidavit filed in the present proceedings, it is apparent that
there was no fault with the work of the plaintiff.
IA No.11450/2006 in CS (OS) No.1938/2006

Page No.4

6.

The plaintiff has based its case also on the fact that despite an invoice

dated 6th September, 2006, having been raised on the defendant no.1, it had
failed to act in accordance with Clause G(2)(c)(d) of the work order
whereby it was stipulated that 90% of the payment would be released to the
plaintiff within 15 days of submission of the data against the invoices raised
which would be submitted by the plaintiff division-wise while the balance
10% would be released within 30 days of the completion of the work.
The plaintiff served legal notices dated 29th September, 2006 and 6th

7.

October, 2006 upon the defendant no.1. Mr. Chetan Sharma, learned senior
counsel, has submitted that as the defendants failed to abide by the notice
demand, the plaintiff has been constrained to file the present suit seeking
recovery of amounts due to it from the defendants for the work done. It is
urged that the interim protection sought by way of the present application is
essential in order to protect the rights of the plaintiffs who would have no
other means of recovery against the defendants in case it succeeds in the
suit.
8.

This application, on the other hand, has been vehemently opposed on

behalf of the defendants. A short affidavit dated 13th October, 2006 has
been placed on record setting out the opposition. A preliminary objection
IA No.11450/2006 in CS (OS) No.1938/2006

Page No.5

has been taken to the effect that the present application seeking injunction
in a suit for recovery of money simplicitor is not maintainable. On the
merits of the case, it has been contended that the plaintiff is also not entitled
to any relief on the ground of concealment of material facts. Mr. Jayant
Bhushan, learned senior counsel who has opposed the application on behalf
of defendant nos.1 to 6, has urged that the agreement between the parties
stands cancelled by notice dated 3rd July, 2006 sent to defendant no.1 by email. It has been pointed out that as per the records of the defendant no.1,
this e-mail stands received by the plaintiff.

The invoice dated 6th

September, 2006 was raised upon the plaintiff more than three months after
the termination of the agreement and was a dishonest and malafide attempt
to compel the defendant no.1 to make payments of amounts to which the
defendants were not entitled. It is further submitted that in the notice dated
29th December, 2006, the plaintiff had raised a demand of only
Rs.14,63,993.00 while by the notice dated 6th October, 2006 the plaintiff
was claiming a hefty amount as due and payable towards interest at the rate
of 24% per annum. According to learned senior counsel for the defendant,
the plaintiff has claimed interest at the rate of 24% per annum on the
amount allegedly due to it and thereby claimed damages of Rs.6,00,000/-,
IA No.11450/2006 in CS (OS) No.1938/2006

Page No.6

raising the aggregate claim of Rs.20,63,993/-.
9.

The defendants have also challenged the contentions on behalf of the

plaintiff on merits. In its affidavit, it has been stated on behalf of the
defendants that the plaintiff did not supply any data till 23 rd March, 2006 in
breach of the stipulations in the work order dated 28th September, 2005.
The data which was submitted was found to be wholly inaccurate and
completely useless for the purposes for which the same was required. The
defendants have urged that the plaintiff was in breach of the work order
dated 28th September, 2005.

Upon a verification conducted by the

defendant no.1, the inaccuracies in the data submitted by the plaintiff were
pointed out to it by the e-mail of 31st March, 2006. The inaccuracy is
revealed in the data which was further supplied by the plaintiff was way
below the contractual requirement of 99.9%.
10.

The plaintiff was duly informed that a fresh survey was required to be

conducted in respect of all the fifteen divisions. According to Mr. Bhushan,
learned senior counsel, the plaintiff by its e-mail of 29th June, 2006, had
agreed that a re-survey would be required. Further e-mails have been placed
on record whereby the defendants pointed out the inaccuracies in the data
provided by the plaintiff.

As the plaintiff was unable to deliver the data,

IA No.11450/2006 in CS (OS) No.1938/2006

Page No.7

the defendant no.1 by the e-mail dated 3rd July, 2006 clearly informed the
plaintiff that the date of delivery cannot be extended beyond 15th July, 2006
for the reason that the last date by which the data had to be given to KESCO
was 8th August, 2006. The defendant no.1 had duly notified the plaintiff
that if by 8.00 p.m. of the same date, that is, 3 rd July, 2006, it did not
receive any structured plan for the fresh survey, the contract would stand
nullified and void.

Since the defendant company did not receive any

structured plan, as such, the contract stood terminated on 3 rd July, 2006 as
already notified. The defendant no.1 has asserted that on account of the
delay on the part of the plaintiff, it may have rendered the defendant
company liable to a claim for liquidated damages at the hands of M/s
Kesko.
11.

Mr. Jayant Bhushan, learned senior counsel appearing for defendant

nos.1 to 6 has further contended that no injunction deserves to be granted in
favour of the plaintiff for the reason that the defendant company conducted
its own fresh survey regarding all the divisions and submitted such freshly
surveyed data to KESCO to 21st September, 2006 and on 4th October, 2006.
According to learned senior counsel for the plaintiff, the plaintiff has no
right over such data which has been collected and collated by the defendants
IA No.11450/2006 in CS (OS) No.1938/2006

Page No.8

without any contribution from the plaintiff.
12.

Having heard learned senior counsel for the parties and having

perused the record of the case, I find that in the instant case, the invoices
which have been placed before this court as proof of accurate data to the
plaintiff, are merely receipts of some invoices. The admitted position is that
there was a delay in submission of the data by the plaintiff, though the
reasons for the same are disputed.
13.

The defendant nos. 1 to 6 have placed before this court the e-mail

dated 31st March, 2006. In this e-mail, the plaintiff was informed that in the
data furnished by the plaintiff, in approximate 50% of the records, the
requisite information had not been furnished. Incomplete addresses were
given. Essential particulars in order to match the data furnished with the
inspection and verification was missing. In its answer dated 29th June,
2006, the plaintiff referred to an earlier e-mail of 28th June, 2006 reiterating
that a re-survey was required. It is also admitted herein that the re-survey
that would be conducted would be afresh.
The defendant no.1 has placed strong reliance on its e-mail dated 3rd
July, 2006 whereby it clearly notified the plaintiff that it cannot extend the
date of delivery of the re-survey beyond 15th July, 2006 and that unless a
IA No.11450/2006 in CS (OS) No.1938/2006

Page No.9

plan for the fresh survey was received by 8.00 p.m. of the same date, the
contract would stand cancelled and be treated as null and void. The plaintiff
has orally disputed receipt of this e-mail. However, the admitted position is
that no re-survey plan was intimated to the plaintiff. In fact, the plaintiff
has not placed before this court anything done by it in furtherance of the email sent by it on 28th June, 2006. There is also no dispute that the plaintiff
did not raise any invoices periodically in terms of the work order dated 28 th
September, 2005. The only invoice which has been raised on the defendant
no.1 is dated 6th September, 2006. There is no explanation for the nonraising of the invoices if the work had actually been done and the data
furnished as has been claimed.
14.

It would be useful also to examine the receipt given by the defendant

no.1 on the invoices relied upon by the plaintiff. The only endorsement in
the purported acknowledgment of the receipt is a mere squiggle upon
receipt of “Items in good condition”. It is not possible to see to ascertain
who has received these goods. In any case, certainly upon delivery of the
data which was not in a hard copy form, it would not be possible for the
recipient to give a receipt or acknowledge the correctness of the data. It
cannot be accepted that the mere receipt of the goods on the invoice
IA No.11450/2006 in CS (OS) No.1938/2006

Page No.10

amounted to a certification of the correctness of the data on behalf of the
defendant nos.1 to 6.
15.

In this behalf, it would be useful to notice in extenso some of the

assertions made on behalf of the plaintiff in the legal notice dated 29th
September, 2006. In this legal notice, in paras 3 to 5 thereof, the plaintiff
has stated thus:“3. That despite numerous requests telephonically, you
Noticee No.1 to 6 did not supply the said maps and even
when you did the same were in short of supply to the
demand and further more without workable
grids/blocks(division/subdivision wise). However, since
our clients, who had already hired employees for the
purpose of executing the Order, couldn't afford to lay off
them and having no other option, our clients were forced
to draw maps with their hands and work on the same
manually.
5.
Simultaneously, our clients raised an Invoice
No.COIL/ICS/06-07/01/284 dated September, 06, 2006
for a sum of Rs.14,63,993.00/- (Rupees fourteen lacs
sixty three thousand nine hundred and ninety three only)
for the work carried out in 8 division only, which was
duly received by you. It may be pertinent to mention
here that though the work was carried out and the data
were handed over to you for the entire 15 divisions but
invoices were raised only for 8 divisions only to recompensate you for the alleged loss that you have
suffered.”
16.

I find force in the submission on behalf of Mr. Jayant Bhushan,

IA No.11450/2006 in CS (OS) No.1938/2006

Page No.11

learned senior counsel for the defendant nos.1 to 6, that prima facie the
assertion of the plaintiff that it was restricting the invoice to eight divisions
so as to “Only to re-compensate you for the alleged loss that you have
suffered” prima facie supports the submissions on behalf of defendant no.1
that the plaintiff had committed breach of contract resulting in loss to the
defendant nos.1 to 6 and for this reason, even in the legal notice, the
plaintiff has sought to compensate the defendants for the loss which has
enured to them. Furthermore, there is strength in the assertions of the
defendant nos.1 to 6 to the effect that the defendant had been agitating
against the defective work conducted by the plaintiff. Detailed submissions
in this behalf have been made in the e-mails and affidavit which were sent
by the defendants to the plaintiff which have been placed on record. In its
reply, the plaintiff has accepted the fact that “a fresh re-survey” was
required.
17.

The defendant no.1 has placed before this court the e-mail whereby it

cancelled the work order.

It has filed an affidavit in support of this

submission which remains unrebutted by any affidavit or pleading on the
part of the plaintiff.
18.

The principles applicable and which would govern exercise of

IA No.11450/2006 in CS (OS) No.1938/2006

Page No.12

discretion for grant of injunction are well settled and would guide
consideration of the present application as well. The plaintiff has to make
out a prima facie case in its favour and show that irreparable loss and
damage would result to it if interim protection was not granted. Balance of
convenience, interest of justice and equity must also weigh in favour of the
plaintiff. These principles were reiterated by the Supreme Court in Shanti
Kumar Panda Vs. Shakuntala Devi (2004) 1 SCC 438, where the court
held thus:“22. At the stage of passing an interlocutory order
such as on an application for the grant of ad interim
injunction under Rule 1 & 2 of Order 39 CPC, the
competent court shall have to form its opinion on the
availability of a prima facie case, the balance of
convenience and the irreparable injury - the three pillars
on which rests the foundation of any order of injunction
.......”
19.

In Gujarat Bottling Co. Ltd. Vs. Coca Cola Co. (1995) 5 SCC 545 at

page 576, the Supreme Court made observations while considering an
application for vacation of injunction which are instructive. It was observed
by the court thus:“47. In this context, it would be relevant to mention that
in the instance case GBC had approached the High Court
for the injunction order, granted earlier, to be vacated.
Under Order 39 of the Code of Civil Procedure,
IA No.11450/2006 in CS (OS) No.1938/2006

Page No.13

jurisdiction of the Court to interfere with an order of
interlocutory or temporary injunction is purely equitable
and, therefore, the Court, on being approached, will, apart
from other considerations, also look to the conduct of the
party invoking the jurisdiction of the Court, and may
refuse to interfere unless his conduct was free from blame.
Since the relief is wholly equitable in nature, the party
invoking the jurisdiction of the Court has to show that he
himself was not at fault and that he himself was not
responsible for bringing about the state of things
complained of and that he was not unfair of inequitable in
his dealings with the party against whom he was seeking
relief. His conduct should be fair and honest. These
considerations will arise not only in respect of the person
who seeks an order of injunction under Order 39 Rule 1 &
2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, but also in respect of the
party approaching the Court for vacating the ad interim or
temporary injunction order already granted in the pending
suit or proceedings.”
20.

The principles laid down by the Supreme Court in Dalpat Kumar Vs.

Prahlad Singh (1992) 1 SCC 719 at page 719 which would govern exercise
of discretion under Order 39 of the Code of Civil Procedure would guide
adjudication in the present matter and read thus:“4. Order 39 Rule 1(c) provides that temporary
injunction may be granted where, in any suit, it is proved
by the affidavit or otherwise, that the defendant threatens
to dispossess the plaintiff or otherwise cause injury to the
plaintiff in relation to any property in dispute in the suit,
the court may by order grant a temporary injunction to
restrain such act or make such other order for the purpose
of staying and preventing .... or dispossession of the
plaintiff or otherwise causing injury to the plaintiff in
IA No.11450/2006 in CS (OS) No.1938/2006

Page No.14

relation to any property in dispute in the suit as the court
thinks fit until the disposal of the suit or until further
orders. Pursuant to the recommendation of the Law
Commission clause (c) was brought on 1977. Earlier
thereto there was no express power except the inherent
power under Section 151 CPC to grant ad interim
injunction against dispossession. Rule 1 primarily
concerned with the preservation of the property in dispute
till legal rights are adjudicated. Injunction is a judicial
process by which a party is required to do or to refrain
from doing any particular act. It is in the nature of
preventive relief to a litigant to prevent future possible
injury. In other words, the court, on exercise of the power
of granting ad interim injunction, is to preserve the
subject matter of the suit in the status quo for the time
being. It is settled law that the grant of injunction is a
discretionary relief. The exercise thereof is subject to the
court satisfying that (1) there is a serious disputed
question to be tried in the suit and that an act, on the facts
before the court, there is probability of his being entitled
to the relief asked for by the plaintiff/defendant; (2) the
court's interference is necessary to protect the party from
the species of injury. In other words, irreparable injury or
damage would ensue before the legal right would be
established at trial; and (3) that the comparative hardship
or mischief or inconvenience which is likely to occur from
withholding the injunction will be greater than that would
be likely to arise from granting it.”
The present case has to be examined in the context of the above
principles.
21.

In addition to these considerations, it is also necessary to consider the

maintainability of the prayer for interim injunction in the background of the

IA No.11450/2006 in CS (OS) No.1938/2006

Page No.15

claim in the suit wherein no injunction is prayed for. Perusal of the plaint
shows that no relief of permanent injunction or injunction of any other kind
has been sought by the plaintiff. The only prayers made in the suit are to the
following effect:“i. pass a decree for an amount of Rs.20,63,993/- in favour of
the Plaintiff and against the Defendants;
ii. Award pre suit, pendentilite and future interest @24% from
the date of accrual till the day of the payment in favour of
the Plaintiff and against the Defendants.
iii. award cost of the suit incurred by the plaintiff by way of ad
valorem fee and litigation expenses.
iv. any other order(s) direction(s) that this Hon'ble court may
deem fit and proper in the interest of justice.”
22.

This issue has also fallen for consideration in several cases. The

applicable principles were also succinctly stated by the High Court of
Judicature at Madras in its pronouncement reported at AIR 1958 Madras
287 K.P.M.Aboobucker v. K.Kunhamoo and Others when the court
delineated the law thus:“(13) In 70 Mad LJ 257: (AIR 1936 Mad 276)(B), the
learned Chief Justice observed at p.261 (of Mad LJ): at
p.278 of AIR):
“I very strongly take the view that, when a decree has
been passed against a party who is himself seeking to
obtain an injunction, the court has to no jurisdiction,
whatever, merely because an appeal is pending in
another suit, to grant an injunction on the ground that the
IA No.11450/2006 in CS (OS) No.1938/2006

Page No.16

property is in danger of being wrongfully sold in
execution. If the other view were correct, then the
appellant would have a greater remedy in such cases,
i.e., an injunction, than he has in the suit under appeal.
Whilst the decree remains unreversed, it is a good decree
an d all steps in execution of it are perfectly legal.”
Whether it was really a case of jurisdiction or one of
discretion, the scope of both of which was governed by
Order 39 rule 1(a), and whether the proposition laid
down by the learned Chief Justice in the first sentence of
the passage I have extracted above is not too wide as it
stands, if taken out of its context, may have to be
considered should occasion arise for it.
However, if I may say so with respect I find
myself in complete agreement with the principle that
underlies the second sentence in the passage I have
extracted above, that an interim relief granted during the
pendency of a suit should not be of greater scope than
what could be granted in the suit itself, after the party
has established his right in the suit to that relief. In my
opinion, that would be a very relevant factor to be taken
into account in deciding whether a court should or even
could grant such an interim relief, especially so when the
person against whom the interim injunction is sought is
not a party to the suit and against whom no relief could
be granted in the suit itself.”
xxx

xxx

xxx

(17) An interim relief is granted to a person on the
footing that that person is prima facie entitled to the
right, on which is based the claim for the main relief as
well as the interim relief. That relief is granted as an
interim measure till the disposal of the suit, in which is
to be investigated the validity of the claim of right that
IA No.11450/2006 in CS (OS) No.1938/2006

Page No.17

has been put forward.
If no such claim has been put forward in the suit, it
means that there can be no occasion for the investigation
of such a claim in the suit, there can be no justification
for the grant of an interim relief which will just lapse on
the termination of the suit, but which will leave the
parties in the same position in which they were before
the institution of the suit, in the course of which the
interim relief was sought and obtained. That, as I
conceive it, is not the scope of Order 39 rule 1(a) C.P.C.
In the present case the rights of the respondent, the
decree-holder in C.S.No.228 of 1954, will remain
unaffected by the disposal of the partition suit,
O.S.No.1119 of 1955.
(18) Under such circumstances, where no relief could be
granted to the appellant against the respondent in the
main suit itself, it is not permissible to grant any interim
relief, to be operative till the disposal of the suit. Even
where it is only a question of discretion, I should hold
that in such a case the Court should exercise its
discretion against the grant of interim injunction. I
would go further and hold that the Court has no
jurisdiction to grant by way of interim relief what could
never be granted in the main suit itself. It is on this basis
that I rest my decision to confirm the order of the learned
Additional City Civil Judge, who refused to grant
interim injunction for which the appellant petitioner
applied.”
23.

This court had occasion to consider this issue in AIR 1974 Delhi 207

entitled Raman Hosiery Factory, Delhi & Ors. v. J.K. Synthetics Ltd. &
Ors., and it was held thus:-

IA No.11450/2006 in CS (OS) No.1938/2006

Page No.18

“19. It is settled law that no interim injunction would
be issued if the final relief cannot be granted. As was
held in K.P. M. Aboobucker v. K. Kunhamoo, AIR 1958
Mad 287 : “An interim relief is granted to a person on
the footing that that person is prima facie entitled to the
right on which is based the claim for the main relief as
well as the interim relief. That relief is granted as an
interim measure till the disposal of the suit in which is to
be investigated the validity of the claim or right that has
been put forward. If no such claim has been put forward
in the suit, it means that there can be no occasion for
investigation of such a claim in the suit, there can be no
justification for the grant of an interim relief which will
just lapse on the termination of the suit, but which will
leave the parties in the same position in which they were
before the institution of this suit in the course of which
the interim relief was sought and obtained. That is not
the scope of O. 39 Rule 1.”
24.

It would be useful to advert to the judicial pronouncement reported at

AIR 1982 Gujarat 289 (at page 293) entitled Gujarat Electricity Board,
Gandhinagar v. M/s. Maheshkumar & Co., Ahmedabad wherein the
principles on the same issue were stated thus:“ .......... It is a settled principle of law that in a suit
where there is a no permanent injunction sought for,
in the final analysis, ordinarily a temporary injunction
cannot be granted. The principles that govern the grant
of perpetual injunction, therefore, would govern the grant
of temporary injunction also. It is, therefore, too late in
the day for Mr.Vakil to submit that the principles
underlying Sec.41 are not to be invoked while dealing
with the case of a temporary injunction.”

IA No.11450/2006 in CS (OS) No.1938/2006

Page No.19

25.

In the light of the above, it is evident that the plaintiff has failed to

make out a prima facie case for grant of an interim injunction, even if the
same was otherwise legally permissible. It is well settled that an injunction
would be issued in favour of the plaintiff who had made out a prima facie
case for grant of injunction and who was able to establish that grave and
irreparable loss and damages would occur to it in case the injunction as
prayed for, was not granted. The plaintiff is also required to show that the
balance of convenience, interest of justice and equity are in its favour.
Grant of injunction is guided by well settled legal principles and shall not be
issued at the mere asking of the plaintiff.
26.

In the judgment reported at (1993) 3 SCC 161 Shiv Kumar Vs. MCD,

the Apex Court observed thus:“30...............It has been pointed out repeatedly that a party
is not entitled to an order of injunction as a matter of right
or course. Grant of injunction is within the discretion of
the court and such discretion is to be exercised in favour of
the plaintiff only if it is proved ot the satisfaction of the
court that unless the defendant is restrained by an order of
injunction, an irreparable loss or damage will be caused to
the plaintiff during the pendency of the suit. The purpose
of temporary injunction is, thus, to maintain the status quo.
The court grants such relief according to the legal
principles—ex debito injustitiae. Before any such order is
passed the court must be satisfied that a strong prima facie
case has been made out by the plaintiff including on the
IA No.11450/2006 in CS (OS) No.1938/2006

Page No.20

question of maintainability of the suit and the balance of
convenience is in his favour and rfusal of injunction would
cause irreparable injury to him.”
27.

The plaintiff before this court has failed to satisfy any of the afore-

noticed ingredients.
28.

This application must fail for yet another reason. The plaintiff has

claimed a relief of recovery of money for data which it claimed it compiled
with a lot of efforts which it furnished to defendant nos.1 to 6. The plaintiff
has quantified the money which according to it, is due and payable by the
defendant no.1. In the facts and circumstances of the case, it cannot be at all
be held that the amount of money being quantified in the prayer clause, the
damages which would result to the plaintiff in case injunction was not
granted, would be irreparable. Furthermore, even if the injunction as sought
was granted, the defendants would stand prohibited from using such data.
The data has been compiled pursuant to a contract placed by M/s KESCO
upon the defendant no.1. Such data would not be of any utility to any other
person. The same may be rendered obsolete even in the time it would take
for proceedings in the suit to come to a close. In any case, the defendant
no.1 has clearly said that it does not intend to use any data which has been
furnished by the plaintiff. For all these reasons, no interim protection as has
IA No.11450/2006 in CS (OS) No.1938/2006

Page No.21

been sought by the plaintiff, can be issued in its favour. I find that even if it
could be or were granted, it would serve no fruitful purpose.
29.

In any case, it is trite that the plaintiff cannot be granted interim relief

which is beyond the prayers in the suit.
30.

In view of these legal principles, I have no manner of doubt that the

plaintiff cannot be granted any relief in the present application filed by it
seeking an injunction of the manner which has been sought. The plaintiff
would also not be entitled any injunction in the light of the prayer for
simplicitor recovery of money in the plaint as it stands. In any case, no
fruitful purpose would be served even by the injunction which, I have held,
is not legally permissible. No relief can be granted by way of an interim
measure when no such final relief has been sought or is being considered for
grant by the court.
31.

I also find substance in the detailed submissions addressed by

Mr. Jayant Bhushan, learned senior counsel for the defendant nos.1 to 6
who has pointed out that the plaintiff has deliberately concealed the e-mails
containing the complaints made by the defendant no.1 to the plaintiff as
well as the e-mails whereby it admitted the demands on behalf of the
plaintiff. These were material facts which the plaintiff was duty bound to
IA No.11450/2006 in CS (OS) No.1938/2006

Page No.22

disclose.

The application would deserve to be dismissed on this very

ground itself.
32.

For all the foregoing reasons, there is no substance in the application

and the same is hereby dismissed with costs which are quantified at
Rs.25,000/-. The plaintiff shall pay a sum of Rs.15,000/- to the defendant
no.1 while the balance amount of Rs.10,000/- shall be apportioned equally
between National Legal Aid Fund and Delhi High Court Legal Services
Committee. The plaintiff shall deposit and pay these costs within a period
of ten days from today and tender proof of payment/deposit in the Registry.

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
December 8th , 2006
aa

IA No.11450/2006 in CS (OS) No.1938/2006

Page No.23

