IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.2167/2007
Date of decision: 8th August, 2007
MOTIA KHAN HIG FLATS ALLOTTEE
ASSOCIATION
... Petitioner
through: Mr. Pravin Chaturvedi,
Advocate.
VERSUS
DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
...Respondent
through: Ms. Sangeeta Chandra,
Advocate
ALONG WITH
Writ Petition (C) No.1677/2007
LOVEKESH
... Petitioner
through: Petitioner in person.
VERSUS
DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
...Respondent
through: Ms. Sangeeta Chandra,
Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1.Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the Judgment?
2.To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3.Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?

WP (C) No.1677/2007

Page No.1

GITA MITTAL, J. (Oral)
1.

WP (C) No.2167/2007 has been filed by the Motia

Khan HIG Flats allottee association on behalf of its
allottees and WP (C) No.1677/2007 has been filed by
the individual allottee namely Mr. Lovekesh.

Since

both petitions involve common questions of law and
more or less identical facts, these petitions are being
disposed of by this common order.
2.

WP (C) No.1677/2007 has been filed by the

petitioner who has assailed the allotment letter dated
19th January, 2007 issued by the Delhi Development
Authority allotting a DDA Flat No.308, Type `B' on the
third floor at Motia Khan, Delhi at a total cost of
Rs.56,56,511/- to him.

The petitioner has placed

reliance on the brochure which was issued to the
petitioners wherein the respondent had indicated that
the range of cost of the flat in Motia Khan, which the
petitioners had applied for, would be Rs.49.5 lakhs to
Rs. 55.8 lakhs only. The petitioners also assailed the
demand of surcharge as contained in the demand
letter dated 19th January, 2007 based on the plea that
there is nothing in the brochure to indicate that Motia
WP (C) No.1677/2007

Page No.2

Khan was a prime locality and for this reason, the levy
of surcharge in respect of Motia Khan flats is wholly
misconceived. The petitioners claims interest at the
rate of 18% on the excess amount so charged by the
DDA from the petitioners.
3.

The respondent has challenged the contentions

of the petitioner and stated that the brochure had
clearly indicated only tentative cost of the flats to the
applicants.

It is further submitted that the levy of

surcharge is based on a decision taken by the
competent authority of the DDA and that the power of
the DDA to levy surcharge has been upheld by the Full
Bench of this court in a judgment reported at 128
(2006) DLT 204 (FB) entitled Renu Bali Vs. Delhi
Development Authority.

Ms. Sangeeta Chandra,

learned counsel, also places reliance on an order
dated 15th September, 2004 passed by this court in a
bunch of writ petitions including Writ Petition (C)
No.2355/1998 K.L. Luthra & Ors. Vs. Lt. Governor of
Delhi & Ors. to urge that the present writ petition is
misconceived.
Counter affidavit of the DDA though filed, was
WP (C) No.1677/2007

Page No.3

not forthcoming on record.

Accordingly, a copy

thereof has been handed over by learned counsel for
the DDA in court today.
4.

The respondent has placed before this court

various provisions contained in the brochure whereby
the DDA had invited applications in respect of 3500
ready for occupation flats.

It has been pointed out

that there is a basic distinction between the earlier
applications which had been solicited by the DDA
wherein applicants were required to opt under any
scheme and they would have been allotted flats under
a draw of lots. Thus, an applicant could draw a flat in
any area in Delhi.
5.

Against this method of allocation, so far as the

Housing Scheme 2006 is concerned, the details of
certain flats were notified to the public and they could
opt for not only the size of the flats but also the
locality in which they wanted to apply. The petitioners
would like this court to hold that the DDA had notified
a fair rate of the flats in this brochure and that they
cannot charge anything more.
6.

Perusal of the Clause 1(III) of the brochure shows

WP (C) No.1677/2007

Page No.4

that the DDA had clearly indicated that flats are given
on "as is where is basis". The DDA had notified the
applicants that all the flats are already constructed
and are ready for occupation.
7.

Clause 4 of the brochure notified the applicants

of the method in which the applications had to be
submitted.

It was clearly stated in Clause 4(II) that

DDA would presume that the applicant has seen the
locality before giving the preference.
8.

So far as the cost of flat is concerned, the same

was set out in a tabulation mentioned as annexure 1
in the brochure.

It is clearly indicated on this

tabulation that the DDA was indicating only the
tentative cost which was also under a heading titled
"Broad Range of Tentative Cost".

The area of the flat

which was mentioned was also in approximation while
conversion charges were mentioned as “provisional
freehold charges”. Thus, there was nothing firm in the
cost which had been communicated in the brochure.
Even the tentative range of the cost which was
indicated was varying from two to five lakhs in the
different categories.
WP (C) No.1677/2007

Page No.5

9.

It is an admitted position that the petitioners had

applied for a three bed room flat in Motia Khan
locality.

The tentative plinth area of the flat was

indicated as varying from 140 to 158 sq. mtrs. and its
tentative cost was expected to range from Rupees
49.5 to 55.8 lakhs. Clause 13 of the brochure clearly
notified the applicant thus:"DISPOSAL COST OF THE FLATS
a)
The tentative cost of the flats is
given in annexure `A'. The above cost
includes land premium and cost of
construction and 20% surcharge on
"land
premium
and
cost
of
construction" in case of flats situated in
South Delhi.
Cost of construction
includes departmental charges and
interest during construction period.
The land premium is normally revised
every year on first April while cost of
construction is normally revised twice
during the year on every 1st October
and 1st April. The variation in cost
within category is due to variation in
plinth area of the flats. There may be
some more flats added or deleted (at
the discretion of DDA).
If the area
changes, the cost of newly added flats
will change accordingly.
b)
In addition to above, allottee is
liable to pay Free hold charges. Present
provisional, free hold charges are given
in annexure `A'. If these rates are
revised upward, difference will
be
claimed from the allottee."
WP (C) No.1677/2007

Page No.6

10. Thus, there were several factors including the
size of the flat which would result in variation of the
broad range of costing given in annexure `A' to the
brochure. In these circumstances, it cannot at all be
said that the DDA had made a positive statement that
a flat in Motia Khan would cost only a particular figure.
11. So far as the challenge to the levy of surcharge is
concerned, it appears that the DDA has been levying
surcharge

in

respect

of

the

areas

which

are

considered to be prime location by it. The jurisdiction
of the DDA to so levy surcharge, the spirit, intendment
and purpose of such a levy and ancillary issues have
arisen for consideration in several cases prior hitherto.
By an authoritative binding pronouncement of the Full
Bench of this court reported at 128 (2006) DLT 204
(FB) entitled Renu Bali Vs. Delhi Development
Authority, the power of the DDA to levy surcharge
has been upheld.
12. In the Instant case, the petitioners have asserted
that Motia Khan area is not a prime location.
However, this submission in my view, is not supported
by the very brochure which is relied upon by the
WP (C) No.1677/2007

Page No.7

petitioners. Bare examination of the annexure `A' of
the brochure would indicate that the respondent had
invited applications for different areas including Sarita
Vihar in South Delhi, Dwarka in South-West Delhi and
Motia Khan. The tentative cost of the same size flats
as applied for by the present applicant in these areas
shows a gross variation. The three bed room flats in
Sarita Vihar which would have a plinth area ranging
between 115 sq. mtrs. and 145 sq. mtrs is indicating
as costing between Rs.38.7 lakhs to 46.1 lakhs.
Against this, the three bed room flats in Motia Khan
which would have a plinth area ranging between 140
sq. mtrs. to 158 sq. mtrs. has been indicated to carry
a tentative cost of Rs.49.5 to 55.8 lakhs.
flats

in

Motia

Khan

as

notified

by

Thus, the
the

Delhi

Development Authority in the brochure itself would
indicate that its cost is much more even than the
South Delhi flats.
13. The respondent had put the petitioners to notice
with regard to the cost of the flat and it certainly
cannot be contended by the petitioners that they were
not aware of the fact that the flats in Motia Khan were
WP (C) No.1677/2007

Page No.8

valued higher than the flats in South Delhi prime
colony.
14. Ms. Sangeeta Chandra, learned standing counsel
for the respondent/DDA, has drawn my attention to
the averments made in the counter affidavit filed by
the DDA.

It has been indicated that Motia Khan

locality had been declared to be prime locality since
1998. The levy of 20% surcharge for these flats has
the approval of Lt. Governor, Delhi in 1998 itself.
Copy of the decision which was taken has been placed
before this court. Copy of the recommendation dated
15th August, 1998 of the Finance Member of the DDA
which was approved by the Vice-Chairman, DDA and
Lt. Governor has been placed before this court.
15. It has further been urged that several writ
petitions challenging the levy of surcharge with regard
to Motia Khan were filed in this court in 1998 which
batch of petitions was disposed of by an order dated
15th September, 2004.
16. These writ petitions were disposed of with the
direction that inasmuch as the issue of surcharge was
then pending before the Full Bench, in case this court
WP (C) No.1677/2007

Page No.9

held that 20% surcharge cannot be levied and the
decision was affirmed by the Supreme Court and the
DDA accepts the same, the DDA would be entitled to
refund the same.
17. So far as this litigation is concerned, learned
counsel for the DDA has submitted that the Full Bench
of this court has been pleased to upheld the legality
and validity of the levy of surcharge of the DDA and
that this decision of the Full Bench is pending final
judgment by the Apex Court. It is further submitted
that the DDA is legally bound by such orders as the
Apex Court may pass in this behalf and can enforce
the same so far as this writ petition is concerned.
18. From the perusal of the record, I find that on 23rd
May, 2007, an order had been passed in WP (C)
No.1677/2007 that subject to the petitioner submitting
a duly stamped and filled up conveyance deed, the
petitioners would be put in possession of the flat.
19. The petitioner submits that the conveyance deed
was duly stamped and filled up conveyance deed
deposited in the office of the DDA more than two
months back and that the petitioner is not being put in
WP (C) No.1677/2007

Page No.10

possession of the flats for the reason that the flat is
suffering from deficiencies.
20. This fact is vehemently disputed on behalf of the
DDA and it is submitted that all flats were ready for
occupation when the applications were invited.

It is

further submitted that even after the last date of
hearing, any deficiency which was pointed out by the
petitioner, has been removed and that in fact the
concerned executive engineers have even acceded to
every request of the petitioner so as to satisfy him.
21. According to Ms. Sangeeta Chandra, learned
counsel for the DDA, the communication dated 3rd
May, 2007 addressed by the Deputy Director (SFS)
(Housing) to the concerned executive engineer only
noticed that the petitioner has pointed out several
shortcomings and that all defects as may be pointed
out by the allottee be got rectified on top priority
basis.
22. Today, again a grievance has been made that
despite repeated reminders, defects are not being
removed.

It may be noted that the orders were

passed by this court lastly on 23rd May, 2007. It was
WP (C) No.1677/2007

Page No.11

open to the petitioners to approach this court by
making an appropriate application in case they were
aggrieved by any non-action of the DDA for this entire
period.

No such steps have been taken.

The letter

which has been written by the petitioner and placed
along with its rejoinder dated 23rd July, 2007 also
does not refer to anything in particular but merely
refers to doing the needful by the DDA. In my view,
therefore, there is nothing which prohibited the
petitioner from taking possession of the flat. In case
he was aggrieved by the failure of the DDA or any
deficiency in the flat which was handed over to him,
the petitioner could have taken possession and taken
appropriate action in respect of the same thereafter.
23. In this view of the matter, so far as the challenge
to the levy of surcharge is concerned, the submission
of the DDA is accepted. The writ petition shall stand
disposed of with the declaration that in case the Apex
Court holds that 20% surcharge cannot be levied, then
the petitioner would be entitled to refund of 20%
surcharge levied and recovered from the petitioner by
the DDA.

The DDA would refund the same to the

WP (C) No.1677/2007

Page No.12

petitioner in consonance with the orders which may
be passed by the Apex Court in the matters pending
before the court.
24. So far as the issue of stamp duty which is
payable on the surcharge is concerned, the petitioner
in WP (C) No.1677/2007 has also urged that he is not
liable to pay the stamp duty on the amount of
surcharge for the reason that the same does not form
the cost of the flat. The DDA has pointed out that the
requirement of the stamp duty is imposed by the
Government of Delhi.

It has been pointed out that

the petitioner has already paid stamp duty and has
furnished the conveyance deed to the DDA. In these
circumstances, it is left open to the petitioners to
make

an

appropriate

representation

to

the

Government of NCT of Delhi in respect of the defects
and take appropriate action in this behalf.
25. By way of WP (C) No.2167/2007, the Motia Khan
HIG Flat Allottees Association has made the same
grievances as Mr. Lovekesh petitioner in WP ©
No.1677/2007. Its members would thus be required to
be treated similarly as the other petitioner.
WP (C) No.1677/2007

Page No.13

It is

pointed out that these persons are yet to get the
conveyance deed completed and stamped.
26. Therefore, in the light of the foregoing discussion
in WP (C) No.1677/2007, a direction is issued to the
DDA to hand over the possession of Flat No.308,
Pocket

`B',

Motia

Khan,

Delhi

forthwith.

The

petitioner-Mr. Lovekesh shall make himself available
at this flat on 11.00 a.m. tomorrow for this purpose.
27. So

far

as

the

members

of

the

petitioner

association in WP (C) No.2167/2007 are concerned, it
is stated that the petitioner shall submit the duly
stamped and completed conveyance deed with the
DDA on or before the 24th September, 2007. The
applicants who submit such conveyance deed shall be
indicated the date and time to complete all formalities
mentioned in Clause 5 (II) of the brochure on or before
24th September, 2007. The Director (SFS) (Housing)
shall inform the applicants about the date and time
when possession of the flats would be handed over to
him.
So far as the members of the petitioner in WP (C)
No.2167/2007 are concerned, upon the allottees'
WP (C) No.1677/2007

Page No.14

making complete payment and submitting a duly
stamped and filled up conveyance deed, the allottees
of the Motia Khan HIF Flats Association would be put in
possession of the flats.
These writ petitions are disposed of in the above
terms.

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
August 08, 2007
aa

WP (C) No.1677/2007

Page No.15

