IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 70-71/2004
Dat e of decision: 9th October, 2007
Essar Steel Limited & Anr.
... Petitioner
through: Mr. Krishan Venegopal and
Mr. Prasad Vijay Kumar, Advocates
VERSUS
UOI

....Respondents
through: Mr. P.P. Malhotra, Additional Solicitor
General with Mr. Sidharth Mridul for the
respondent/UOI
Ms. Meenakshi Arora, Adv. with
Mr.Jay Savla and Ms. Reena Bagga, Advs.
for the intervenors

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the Judgment?
No
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
No
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
No
GITA MITTAL, J
1.

By this writ petition the petitioners have laid a challenge to the

order dated 27th August, 2003 passed by the Designated Authority in
exercise of its powers under Section 14(b) of the Customs Tariff Act,
1995 and Customs Tariff (Identification, Assessment & Collection of
Anti Dumping Duty on Dumped Article and for Determination of
Injury) Rules, 1995 whereby the Designated Authority in the
Directorate of Anti-Dumping in the Ministry of Commerce, New

W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 1 of 52

Delhi informed the petitioners of its decision to terminate antidumping investigation into imports of Hot rolled coils, Sheets, Plates
and Strips originating in or exported from South Africa, Rumania,
Venezuela, Saudi Arabia,

European Union, Australia, Canada and

Singapore.
2.

Both the

petitioners are stated to be engaged in the

manufacture and production of steel and steel products . The Steel
Authority of India, the petitioner no. 2 has claimed that it produces
approximately 50% of India's steel, which has been disputed by the
intervenor.
3.

India has effectuated measures to protect the domestic

industry following the

principles

laid down in the General

Agreement on Tariffs & Trade, 1994 (GATT for brevity) whereby the
member countries agreed on certain principles to be followed for
imposition of

anti-dumping duties, countervailing duties and

safeguard measures.

Member countries of the World Trade

Organisation were party to this agreement. The legislature effected
statutory amendments to the Customs Tariff Act, 1973 which were
effectuated with effect from 1st January, 1995 to bring the statute in
line with the provisions of Article 6 of GATT, 1994. Dumping, in
simple language, takes place when an exporter sells a product to
India at a price less than the price prevailing in its domestic market.
Though dumping
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

per se has been held not to be condemnable.
page 2 of 52

However, if such dumping causes or threats to cause material injury
to the domestic industry of India, the statute has prescribed certain
measures to be taken.

There is no dispute that the Designated

Authority has been duly nominated by the Central Government in
compliance with the requirements of the statute.
4.

The petitioner has urged that the Indian Steel Industry had

been shut out of industrial trade on account of the anti-dumping,
countervailing duties or safeguard measures undertaken by the
United States of America, European Union, Canada, China, South
Africa, Indonesia and Thailand. On a complaint that exports from
South Africa, Romania, Venezuela, Saudi Arabia, European Union,
Australia, Canada and Singapore were resulting in dumping of their
products in India causing injury to the domestic

industry, the

petitioners consequently made an application in April, 2002 seeking
imposition of anti dumping duties in respect of the imports from
these countries. It is the petitioner's contention that the Designated
Authority formally issued an initial notification only on 25th
September, 2002 in purported exercise of powers under rule 5 of the
aforenoticed anti dumping rules. The Designated Authority in the
impugned order has pointed out that the preliminary scrutiny of the
application revealed deficiencies which were required to be rectified
by the petitioners and it was only thereafter considered as properly
documented.
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 3 of 52

5.

On a prima facie view, based on the material placed by the

petitioners before it, the Designated Authority decided to initiate
investigation against
aforenoticed

products

the alleged dumping of imports of the
from

the

subject

countries

noticed

hereinabove.
6.

So far as notice to the concerned parties is concerned, the

Designated Authority in compliance that sub rule 5(5) of the rules,
notified the embassies of the subject countries/territories about the
receipt of the dumping allegations before proceeding to initiate the
investigation.
A public notice dated 25th September, 2002 was also published
in the Gazzette of India Extraordinary initiating the anti dumping
investigations.
Copies of the public notice were forwarded to those exporters
whose details were made available by the petitioners and such
importers whose details were made available by the petitioners giving
them opportunity to make their views known in writing.
7.

The impugned order dated 27th August, 2003 shows that the

products in respect of which the petitioner had made a grievance fell
under several specific heads of the classification under Chapter 72 of
the Customs Tariff Act, 1975.
The Designated Authority also undertook an enquiry by making
a request to the Central Board of Excise and Customs to arrange for
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 4 of 52

details of imports of the subject goods from the subject
countries/territory.
8.

In compliance of the statutory rules, it appears that the

authority also provided copies of the petition to the known exporters
and embassies of the subject countries/territory. A questionnaire to
elicit relevant information was sent to several exporters under the
subject countries in accordance with Rule 6(iv). The delegations of
the European Union; embassies of the subject countries in India were
informed in accordance with rules 6(ii) with the request to advise the
exporters/producers of their countries/territories to respond to the
questionnaire within a prescribed time. The authority also appears to
have sent copies of the letters, non-confidential petition and
questionnaire to all these persons with specific individual request.
9.

So far as the exporters were concerned, the authority sent a

questionnaire calling for necessary information in accordance with
rule 6(4) to several known exporters.
10.

There is no dispute that the authority made available to all

concerned, the non-confidential version of the evidence presented by
various interested persons in the form of a public file.

Upon a

detailed consideration of the investigations conducted by the
authority as well as the evidence placed before it by the petitioner and
all interested parties, the authority carried out investigations for the
period from 1st April, 2000 to 30th September, 2001. Oral hearings
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 5 of 52

were conducted on 23rd November, 2002 and 5th May, 2003. The
proceedings appears to have culminated in the passing of the
impugned orders dated 27th August, 2003 whereby the Designated
Authority decided to terminate the investigation.
11.

This order has been assailed by the petitioner before this court

on both legal and factual grounds.
12.

In order to examine the challenge laid by the petitioners on the

merits of the notification, a brief consideration of the applicable
statutory provisions and rules is necessary.

Section 9A of the

Customs Tariff Act, 1975 enables the Central Government to impose
an anti dumping duty not exceeding the margin of dumping relating
to any article which is exported from any country or territory into
India at less than the normal value.

Such anti dumping duty is

statutorily required to not exceed the margin of dumping in relation
to the article. Section 9A also explains the expression of the 'margin
of dumping' as meaning the difference between the export price and
its normal value.

The export price in relation to an article is

described as the price of the article exported from the exported
countries or territory. The expression normal value is defined in
Section 9A(c).
13.

Determination of the export price, normal value and margin of

dumping with regard to exports of any article requires compliance
with the provisions of the Customs Tariff (Anti Dumping Rules) 1995.
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 6 of 52

Under these rules, a duty has been assigned to the Designated
Authority to perform the functions detailed under rule 4. This rule
casts a mandate upon the Designated Authority to investigate as to
the existence, degree and effect of any alleged dumping in relation to
import of any article; to identify the article liable for anti dumping
duty; to submit its findings provisional or otherwise to the Central
Government with regard to the normal value, export price and the
margin of dumping in relation to the article under investigation; and
the injury or threat of injury to an industry in India or material
retardation to the establishment of an industry in India consequent
upon the import of said article from the specified countries. The
Designated Authority is also empowered to recommend the amount
of anti dumping duty equal to the margin of dumping or less which,
if levied, would remove the injury to the domestic industry and the
date of its commencement.
Rule 5 lays down the procedure which the Designated Authority
is required to follow which requires a determination as to whether the
application has been made to it or on behalf of the domestic industry
and examination of the accuracy and adequacy of the evidence
provided in the application.

The application contains a deeming

provision that the application shall be deemed to have been made by
or on behalf of the domestic industry if it is supported by those
domestic producers whose collective output constitutes more than
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 7 of 52

50% of the total production of the like article produced by that
portion of the domestic industry.
14.

The principles governing the investigation have been provided

in rule 6 which reads thus :“6. Principles governing investigations. (1)
The Designated Authority shall, after it has
decided to initiate investigation to determine the
existence, degree and effect of any alleged
dumping of any article, issue a public notice
notifying its decision and such public notice shall,
inter alia, contain adequate information on the
following :(i) the name of the exporting country or
countries and the article involved;
(ii) the date of initiation of the
investigation;
(iii) the basis on which dumping is alleged
in the application;
(iv) a summary of the factors on which the
allegation of injury is based;
(v) the address to which representations
by interested parties should be directed; and
(vi) the time-limits allowed to interested
parties for making their views known
(2) A copy of the public notice shall be
forwarded by the Designated Authority to the
known exporters of the article alleged to have been
dumped, the government of the exporting
countries concerned and other interested parties.
(3) The Designated Authority shall also provide
a copy of the application referred to in sub-rule
(1d) of rule 5 to (i) the known exporters or to the
concerned trade association where the number of
exporters is large, and
(ii) the governments of the exporting
countries:
Provided that the Designated Authority
shall also make available a copy of the application
to any other interested party who makes a request
therefor in writing.
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 8 of 52

15.

(4) The Designated Authority may issue a notice
calling for any information, in such form as may
be specified by it, from the exporters, foreign
producers an other interested parties and such
information shall be furnished by such persons in
writing within thirty days from the date of receipt
of the notice or within such extended period as the
Designated Authority may allow on sufficient
cause being shown.
Explanation :- For the purpose of this sub-rule,
the notice calling for information and other
documents shall be deemed to have been received
one week from the date on which it was sent by the
Designated Authority or transmitted to the
appropriate diplomatic representative of the
exporting country.
(5) The Designated Authority shall also provide
opportunity to the industrial users of the article
under investigation, and to representative
consumer organisations in cases where the article
is commonly sold at the retail level, to furnish
information which is relevant to the investigation
regarding dumping, injury where applicable, and
causality.
(6) The Designated Authority may allow an
interested party or its representative to present the
information relevant to the investigation orally but
such oral information shall be taken into
consideration by the Designated Authority only
when it is subsequently reproduced in writing.
(7) The Designated Authority shall make
available the evidence presented to it by one
interested party to the other interested parties,
participating in the investigation.
(8) In a case where an interested party refused
access to, or otherwise does not provide necessary
information within a reasonable period, or
significantly impedes the investigation, the
Designated Authority may record its findings on
the basis of the facts available to it and make such
recommendations to the Central Government as it
deems fit under such circumstances.”
The rules envisage participation of interested persons or their

representatives in the investigations who are permitted to place not
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 9 of 52

only oral information but all documentary information for the
consideration of the Designated Authority. The evidence presented
by one interested party is required to be made available to the other
interested party under rule 6(7).
16.

Sub rule 2 of rule 7 enables the Designated Authority to require

the party providing information on confidential basis, to furnish a
non-confidential summary thereof and if, in the opinion of the party
providing such information, the information is not susceptible of a
summary, such party may submit to the Designated Authority, a
statement of reasons as to why the summarisation is not possible.
The rules also confer discretion upon the Designated Authority to
consider the request for confidentiality made by a party and if it is
satisfied that the same is not warranted or that the supplier of the
information is unwilling to make an information public or to
authorise its disclosure in a generalised or summary form, it may
disregard such information.
17.

It has been noticed by the Designated Authority that the landed

price for imports was based on the confidential data submitted by the
cooperating exporters. The non injurious price and the landed value
of imports was not disclosed as there were no final findings and the
case was terminated under
18.

rule 14.

Inasmuch as an objection has been taken that the entire

information which was furnished to the Designated Authority was not
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 10 of 52

available to the petitioners it becomes necessary to notice the
statutory power of the Designated Authority in this behalf. By virtue
of rule 7 of the Customs Tariff (Anti Dumping Duty) Rules 1995 the
Designated Authority is empowered to, upon receipt of application or
information provided to it on a confidential basis by any party in the
course of investigation and upon being satisfied as to the
confidentiality, to treat the same as such and no such information
shall be disclosed to any other party without specific authorisation of
the party providing such information.

The Designated Authority

made available all material which it was statutorily required to do so
to the petitioners. The legislation itself contemplates confidentiality
which could enable a party to prevent the information with regard to
its business becoming public. Serious concerns of the business and
stakes of the concerned parties are involved in revealing details of the
operations conducted by it.

Such power having been statutorily

conferred under the rules certainly it is not open to the petitioners to
object to the refusal to provide such information which had been
submitted by third parties subject to the same being maintained as
confidential.
19.

Sweeping powers have been conferred on the Designated

Authority to arrive at a fair result based on the assessment of the
accuracy of the supplied information. It is empowered to carry out
investigation in the territory of other specified countries. Rule 10
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 11 of 52

requires the authority to arrive at a considered view of the normal
value export price and margin of dumping.

Rule 11 requires the

Designated Authority to arrive at a determination of the material
injury thereof to any established industry in India.
20.

In order to determine the injury to domestic industry thereof

the Designated Authority is required to ascertain the existence of a
causal link between the dumped imports and effect, if any, on the
price in the domestic market for like articles and the consequential
effect of such imports on domestic producers of such articles in
accordance with the principles set out in the annexures to the rules.
Rule 12 enables the Designated Authority in an appropriate case
to record preliminary findings with regard to the export price the
normal value and the margin of dumping and in respect of imports
from specific countries to record a further finding regarding injury to
the domestic industry.
21.

Under rule 14 the Designated Authority is empowered to

terminate investigation either on a request on behalf of the domestic
industry at whose instance the investigation was commenced in the
following eventualities :“(b). it is satisfied in the course of an investigation,
that there is no sufficient evidence of dumping or,
where applicable, injury to justify the continuation
of the investigation;
(c). it determines that the margin of dumping is
less than two per cent of the export price;
(d). it determines that the volume of the dumped
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 12 of 52

22.

imports, actual or potential from a particular
country accounts for less than three per cent of the
imports of the like product, unless, the countries
which individually account for less than three per
cent of the imports of the like product, collectively
account for more than seven per cent of the import
of the like product; or
(e) .......”
In the instant case two fold objections have been taken with

regard to the consideration and findings of the Designated Authority.
One of the main limbs of the petitioners challenge is based on the
submission that the Designated Authority has committed a patent
error of taking into account undumped imports from the subject
countries. The petitioner has in several grounds placed in the writ
petition and oral submissions, urged that the Designated Authority
took into account imports from Germany that were not found to be
dumped, in determining the CIF price of the imports of hot rolled
products from the European Union (EU for brevity) and compared it
to the non injurious price of the domestic industry. It has further
been submitted that the Designated Authority was bound to take
action based on the information provided by the petitioners with
regard to the estimated normal value in the United Kingdom and the
Netherlands. The contention also is that only a finding of dumping
based on facts available under rule 6(8) could have been reached by
the Designated Authority for imports from the UK and the
Netherlands because no exporter from these countries responded.
23.

In this behalf Mr. P.P. Malhotra, learned Additional Solicitor

W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 13 of 52

General for the respondent no. 1 has drawn my attention to a letter
dated 18th June, 2002 written by the petitioner to the competent
authority enclosing copy of the order dated 21st November, 1999
passed by the High Court of Calcutta stating the withdrawl of the
notification no. 31/1999; calculation of landed price based on the
minimum floor price for import of the product; statement giving
break up of imports of products concerned from the non subject
countries for 1998-99, 1999-2000 and 2001-02 and a note on the
causal link between the dumped imports and injury to the domestic
industry.
24.

Noteworthy is the statement made on behalf of the petitioner in

para 5 of this letter dated 18th of June, 2002 wherein it was stated
thus :"5. We would like to state that in the subject petition,
United Kingdom and Netherlands are among the subject
countries covered for investigation. Since these two
countries are part of the European Union, as per the
practice followed by the DGAD, the investigation may
include European Union as a whole i.e. all countries, which
fail under the ambit of European Union."

Having so stated and having called upon the Designated
Authority to include the European Union as a whole, that is all
countries who fall within its ambit, it is certainly not open to the
petitioner to object to the respondents having included the entire
European Union in its considerations and deliberations.

No

objection appears to have been made by the petitioner at the time the

W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 14 of 52

investigation was pending even after it had issued this letter as back
as on 8th June, 2002.

The petitioner is certainly bound by its

representation to the respondent no. 1. It is also not open to the
petitioner to object to the action taken by the Designated Authority
on such action of the respondent. After having so requested the
respondent no. 1, it does not lie in the mouth of the petitioner to
submit that the action of the Designated Authority in including all
countries of the European Union including Germany was erroneous
or illegal. In view of its consent, as conveyed to the respondent no. 1
in the letter of 18th June, 2002, it has to be held that the petitioners
waived objections if any to the inclusion of all members of the
European Union in the investigation.
25.

The order of the Designated Authority is based on data on

imports furnished by the domestic industry that is the petitioners
vide their letters dated 22nd and 23rd July, 2003. These letters have
been placed before this court. The applicable rules postulate that the
enquiry may be terminated unless the countries which individually
count for less than 3% of the imports of the like project, collectively
count for more than 7% of the import of the like project.

The

authority is also entitled to terminate the investigation if it
determines that the injury where applicable is negligible. As per subrule 'b' of rule 14 the Designated Authority may terminate the enquiry
in the course of an investigation if there is no sufficient evidence of
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 15 of 52

dumping, or injury where applicable, to justify continuation of the
investigation.
26.

So far as the issue of the volume of imports from the subject

countries is concerned, it is necessary to advert to Annexure II of the
Customs Tariff (Anti Dumping Duty) Rules 1995 dealing with
principles for determination of injury which reads thus :-

"The Designated Authority while determining
the injury or threat of material injury to domestic
industry or material retardation of the establishment
of such an industry hereinafter referred to as "injury"
and casual link between dumped imports and such
injury, shall inter alia, take following principles
under consideration:(i)

(ii)

W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

A determination of injury shall involve
an objective examination of both (a) the
volume of the dumped imports and the
effect of the dumped imports on prices in
the domestic market for the like article
and (b) the c onsequent impact of these
imports on domestic producers of such
products.
While examining the volume of dumped
imports, the said authority shall consider
whether there has been a significant
increase in the dumped imports, either
in absolute terms or relative to
production or consumption in India.
With regard to the effect of the dumped
imports, on prices as referred to in subrule (2) of rule 18 the Designated
Authority shall consider whether there
has been a significant price under cutting
by the dumped imports as compared
with the price of like product in India, or
whether the effect of such imports is
otherwise to depress prices to a
page 16 of 52

27.

significant degree or prevent price
increase which otherwise would have
occurred, to a significant degree.
Clause (iii) of Annexure II further provides that in a case where

imports of a product from more than one country are being
simultaneously

subjected

to

anti

dumping

investigation

the

Designated Authority will cumulatively assess the effect of such
imports only when it determines that the margin of dumping
established in relation to the imports from each country is more than
2% expressed as a percentage of the export price and the volume of
the imports from each country is three per cent of the imports of the
like article or where the export of the individual countries is less than
three per cent, the imports cumulatively account for more than seven
per cent of the imports of the like articles. It is further required that
the cumulative assessment of the effect of imports is appropriate in
the light of the conditions of competition between the imported
article and the like domestic article.
The impact of the above rule is that, first an assessment of the
volume of the dumped imports has to be undertaken and it is only on
such cumulative assessment that the effect of the dumped imports on
prices would required to be considered.
28.

Placing reliance on the import data submitted by the petitioners

vide their letters dated 22nd July and 23rd July, 2003 the authority
arrived at a conclusion that with the exception of European Union,

W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 17 of 52

South Africa and Romania which account for 6.68%, 4.67% and 3% of
the total imports of the subject goods and all other subject countries
cumulatively account for 4.88% of the total imports and hence are
deminimis.
29.

From a reading of the above noticed rule, it would appear that

the cumulative assessment of the effect of imports of the subject
goods can be effectuated only when the volume of such imports from
the subject countries is 3% of the imports or where the imports from
the individual countries which are less than 3% the imports
collectively count for more than 7% of the total imports.

The

Designated Authority arrived at a conclusion that the imports from
Venezuela, Saudi Arabia, Canada and Singapore were less than 3%
and cumulatively accounted for 4.88% of the total imports and were
therefore deminimis. These countries consequently being below the
prescribed limit did not qualify for cumulative assessment and could
not be proceeded against. This reasoning and consideration is based
on the Customs Tariff (Anti Dumping Duty) Rules 1995.
30.

I also find that such an assessment of the volume of the imports

is required to be done in order to arrive at a finding as to whether the
subject countries are guilty of dumping the products in question. The
Designated Authority having proceeded in accordance with the rules
in order to assess as to whether the imports by these countries
amounted to dumping; the findings of the authority as to whether the
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 18 of 52

imports from these countries made the volume requirement under
the rules and whether the imports amounted to dumping of the
articles, cannot be faulted on any legally tenable grounds.
31.

The submissions of the petitioner fail to consider that even if

there maybe dumping of like articles, it cannot mandatorily be
subject to enquiry and investigation by the Designated Authority.
Such anti dumping investigation can be commenced only if the
dumped imports meet the prescribed percentage and cause injury
under the rules.
32.

At this stage it is noteworthy that the Designated Authority has

not excluded the deminimis volume of imports from the subject
countries from its computation of the total volume of imports as
evidenced from the tabulation set out in the notification. There is
substance in the contention of the respondent no. 1 that there is a
typing error in noting the total volume of imports at 136850 metric
tonnes whereas the same actually read 150542 metric tonnes. This is
manifested by the tabulation of the Authority.
33.

So far as the price effect of the imports is concerned, the

Designated Authority has considered the same also at great length.
From the data submitted by the petitioners, the Designated Authority
has concluded that the CIF value of the subject imports from the
European Union was higher then the non injurious price of the
domestic industry and the minimum import price.
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 19 of 52

The Designated

Authority has assessed the degree of price under cutting based on the
landed value of the subject goods from the subject countries.

A

conclusion has been reached that there was no undercutting the
prices of the domestic product, irrespective of whether the subject
goods were dumped or not.
34.

I find that so far as the petitioner's objection that the imports

from Germany were not dumped articles; the Designated Authority
has noticed that even if the imports of the subject goods by
cooperating exporters from Germany are excluded, the cif value of
the dumped subject goods from the EU is higher than the NIP of the
domestic industry and the minimum import price stipulated in the
DGFT notifications which were applicable at the relevant time.
Consequently the apprehension of injury based on imports from
Germany has been found to be misconceived.
35.

Before this court intervenor has pointed out that the petitioners

in their letters dated 26th July, 2003 have pointed out that the
average CIF prices of the goods from the subject countries were based
on data published by the DGCIS & Joint Plant Committee which
were adjusted to arrive at the ex-works price. In a communication of
21st January, 2003, the petitioners had stated that DGCIS had shown
inability to supply information of the segregation for the reason that
it did not maintain the break up of the imports under the advance
licence scheme.
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 20 of 52

Therefore, for the inability of the petitioners to supply
segregated data, the authority was constrained to add custom duty on
all imports. After an analysis it was concluded that injury, if any, to
the domestic industry was caused by total imports and therefore
imports under the advance licence should be included.

The

respondent points out that if duty free imports were to be excluded,
the average export price from the subject countries/territory would
have been even higher.
36.

It is noteworthy that imports under the advance licence scheme

entered India exclusively for export production with an actual user
condition. Thus they were not likely to compete with 'like products'
in the domestic market. Such imports, therefore, obviously had no
impact on the domestic demand and prices. However, it is evident
that duty free imports which were occupying a share of the input
market of the country could negatively impact of the sales of the
domestic industry.
There is thus force in the submission on behalf of the
respondents that injury, if any, to the domestic industry was required
to be examined taking into account the landed value of the subject
goods after including the custom duties and that such domestic prices
were effected by the level of protection given by way of custom duties.
37.

Ms. Meenakshi Arora, learned counsel appearing for intervenor

submits

that this respondent

W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

had pointed out during
page 21 of 52

the

investigations itself that the products under consideration which had
been complained of by the petitioner and selected by the Designated
Authority were not a homogeneous class.

The petitioners had

clubbed hot rolled coils silicon grade, sheets, plates and strips and
boiler quality plate on the grounds that they were produced by the
domestic industry in India or that they had been clubbed together as
the production process for these items was the same. It is pointed out
that this was erroneous.

These products have been found to be

having different BIS and global technical specifications; usage and
application. The sale price of these products within the domestic and
global markets differs widely. They have been also been separately
classified in the Custom/Excise Manual and the Exim Policy with
different norms have now cut out to be and DEPB rates.
38.

In view of the complaint of the petitioners, the Designated

Authority was required to examine this position and has found that
the silicon grade steel was not being manufactured by the petitioners.
Seconds/defectives and prime products could not be treated as like
products.

It would thus appear that the petitioner had placed

incomplete information as well as complained of non-comparable
articles without disclosing the complete relevant material with regard
to the pricing etc of the goods allegedly dumped by the subject
countries.
The petitioners do not assail the observations and findings of
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 22 of 52

the Designated Authority on these aspects.
39.

So far as imports from South Africa are concerned the

Designated Authority has found that the imports from South Africa
were low carbon seconds and defectives of HR coils as submitted by
the cooperating exports. Such goods obviously bear no comparison
to the other products of sufficient grading and good quality. Still it
was found that the landed value of the imports of the subject goods
was higher than the non-injurious price of the domestic industry
during the period of investigations and the minimum import price
notified for these imports as per the DGFT notifications.
40.

The notification dated 27th August, 2003 also notices the two

responses received from exporters in Germany wherein it has been
stated that they had effected exports of HR coils having more than
1.5% silicon and steel with lesser percentage. Silicon grade steel is
not even produced by the Steel Authority of India Limited which has
been noticed by the authority. Tabulations placed by the Designated
Authority in the impugned notification show a detailed consideration
of the imports from the various importers and the impact on the
pricing during the period of investigation of all the subject countries.
The petitioners objection that only a representative or a sample
assessment had been undertaken is not borne out from the order as
laid before this court.
41.

The petitioners have made a grievance with regard to the

W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 23 of 52

submissions made on behalf of the respondents that even if the
imports of Germany were left out of consideration still it would have
no impact on the findings of the Designated Authority. In the light of
the detailed reasoning given by the Designated Authority and the
letter dated 18th June, 2002 addressed by the petitioner, this
objection is wholly devoid of any merit. I find that the submission of
the respondents are based on material already placed before the
Designated Authority.
42.

On a detailed consideration of the value of the dumped imports

from the different countries and their volume, the Designated
Authority has concluded that there was no price effect on the price of
the articles in this country from which it could be concluded that
there was no material injury to the value of the goods or threat of
injury or retardation in the development of the domestic industry.
43.

Mr. K. Venugopal learned counsel appearing for the petitioners

has urged at length that the enquiry having commenced and the
Designated Authority having considered the imposition of a price
undertaking had clearly indicated a finding of dumping on the part of
the subject countries.
44.

So far as the impression of the petitioner based on the price

undertaking is concerned, I find that in para F(6) of the impugned
order the Designated Authority has noted that no price undertaking
proposal had been suggested for HR plates, but the domestic industry
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 24 of 52

had submitted that it was willing to agree to a price undertaking and
had suggested the basic cif price for HR coils and sheets/strips. The
Designated Authority had noted that the actual cif and landed values
of HR coils were higher at the price at which the domestic industry
was willing to enter into an undertaking with the concerned
exporters.
It would thus appear that the price undertaking which had been
suggested by the domestic industry i.e. the petitioner was lower than
the CIF and landed values of the goods in question. This would itself
undermine the primary contention of the petitioners that the imports
of the goods in question had caused injury to the domestic industry.
45.

On a detailed analysis of the figures placed by the petitioners

the authority concluded that dumped imports have been found to
count for only 1.74% of the demand from April, 2000 from
September, 2001 which was the period of investigation.
It has been noticed that while the petitioners had a significant
market share of the subject goods accounted for only 88.21% of the
demand.
46.

Ms. Meenakshi Arora, learned counsel appearing for intervenor

– CORSMA has pointed out that in the light of the escalation in prices
commanded by the domestic industry, it cannot be said that it any
injury has resulted to the domestic industry.
47.

The authority has also concluded that the landed value of the

W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 25 of 52

subject goods from the subject countries were significantly higher
than the net selling price of the petitioners and the non-injurious
price determined that the domestic industry during the period of
investigation.

Consequently questions of price undercutting or

material injury to the petitioner from the imports did not arise.
48.

Yet another material fact which has not been placed by the

petitioner before this court deserves to be considered.

The

Designated Authority had noted that the Government of India in
exercise of powers under Section 5 of the Foreign Trade
(Development & Regulation) Act, 1962 issued a notification dated 11th
December, 1998 enforcing a floor price for prime steel as well as for
second and defective items of steel to provide a shield for the
domestic industry against dumping of products in the domestic
market by foreign suppliers and international competition.
49.

M/s Essar Steel Limited had apparently made an application for

levy of anti-dumping duty of hot rolled coils, steel coils, strips, sheets
and plates originating and exported from South Africa, Japan, Saudi
Arabia, China and Australia on the ground of their resulting in injury
to the domestic industry. This petition was disposed of by an order
dated 8th February, 1999 by the Designated Authority holding that the
petition had been examined and it was not possible to initiate anti
dumping proceedings since the floor price was in operation on the
merits of the subject goods.
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 26 of 52

50.

After the disposal of this petition, another application seeking

initiation of anti dumping investigation was filed by the Steel
Authority of India Limited on 6th January, 1999. This inquiry was
terminated on 10th July, 2000 by the Designated Authority pointing
out that the applicants had failed to provide data on all India basis to
assess volume of total imports from the subject countries and also
failed to furnish prima facie evidence of injury, which was a prerequisite for assessment of prima facie evidence of dumping, injury
and causal link for initiation of anti-dumping investigations.
The Steel Authority of India Limited filed a writ petition being
W.P.(C) No. 12492(W)/1999 before the High Court of Calcutta
seeking a direction to the Designated Authority to dispose of their
application/petition.
51.

In the meantime, by a notification of 1st November, 1999, the

Government of India withdrew the minimum floor price fixed for
import of steel under the notification dated 10th/11th December, 1998.
The petitioners contended before the High Court of Calcutta that the
Designated Authority had withheld disposal of the anti-dumping
petition and if the floor price was withdrawn, they would be left
without protection. My attention has been drawn to an interim order
dated 16th February, 2000 passed by the High Court of Calcutta
directing that the floor price of the imported HR hot rolled steel coils
which had been fixed at USD 302 per metric tonne would continue.
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 27 of 52

The operation of the notification dated 1st November, 1999
withdrawing the floor price for various items of steel mentioned
therein, thus, remained stayed.
52.

It is an admitted position that this price continue to hold the

field during the pendency of the writ petition.
53.

It is noteworthy that the petitioner no.1 was respondent no. 6

while petitioner no. 2 Steel Authority of India was respondent no. 7 in
the matter before the Calcutta High Court.
54.

The High Court of Calcutta by a detailed judgment dated 5th

December, 2003 dismissed the Writ Petition No. 12492(W)/1999 and
vacated the interim order dated 16th February, 2000 holding that the
Government was justified in effecting the change in the fixation of the
floor price which was based on all relevant considerations. In its
detailed judgment, the court noticed that in order to protect domestic
industries, two modes are envisaged to protect their pricing. One
mode is levy of anti-dumping duties under the Customs Tariff
(Identification, Assessment & Collection of Anti Dumping Duty on
Dumped Article and for Determination of Injury) Rules, 1995 therein.
The second mode is by fixation of the floor price which prevented
import of steel below the floor price fixed by the Government. In the
instant case, when the Government had sought to remove the
protection provided by fixation of the floor price, the decision of the
Government was assailed before the High Court of Calcutta and the
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 28 of 52

manufacturers were fully protected by the interim orders.
55.

The petitioners have approached the Designated Authority in

April 2002 under the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 for investigation into
their allegations of dumping. Such complaint was disposed of by the
order dated 27th August, 2003 passed by the Designated Authority
who upon investigation found that there was no case of injury to the
domestic industries.
56.

In this background the Division Bench of the High Court of

Calcutta held that so far as the petitioners before it were concerned,
their basic prayer relating to non-disposal of their request for
investigation into dumping activities also stood disposed of.

The

court extensively noticed the conclusions drawn by the Designated
Authority in the order dated 27th August , 2003 wherein the
authority had held that the present petitioners had not been able to
provide sufficient evidence of injury to the domestic industry from
the imports of the subject goods to justify continuation of the enquiry.
57.

The Division Bench also noticed that despite the order passed

by the Designated Authority on 27th August, 2003, the domestic
industry (which included the present petitioners) had the protection
of the interim orders passed by the court resulting in the continuation
of the prices fixed under the exim policy. Thus, the prices of the
product of the domestic industry had the protection of the notified
floor price as well.
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 29 of 52

58.

It is noteworthy that

challenge has been laid to the order

passed on 27th August, 2003 by the petitioners by way of the present
writ petition which has been registered in 2004, after the
adjudication by the High Court at Calcutta. This judgment of the
Division Bench has not even been placed by the petitioners before
this court.
In my view, the facts relating to the filing of the writ petition;
interim orders passed therein; the impact thereof and the final
judgment are material facts having bearing on the case.

The

petitioner having concealed the same, deserves to be non-suited for
this reason alone. The writ petitioner has also not placed the letter of
June 2002 addressed by it to the Designated Authority which it was
bound to do so.
59.

In the facts noticed by the Designated Authority and its

conclusions with regard to the price of the products, the
pronouncements reported at (2000) ELT 356 Jai Corporation
Vs. Designated Authority; (2001) 132 ELT 520 Steel
Authority Vs. CEGAT; (2002) 140 ELT 283 Jai Corporation
Vs. Designated Authority would have no application to the
matter in hand.
60.

Mr. P.P. Malhotra learned Additional Solicitor General for the

respondent has contended that under rule 17(1) of the Customs Tariff
(Anti Dumping) Rules, 1995 the period statutorily prescribed for
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 30 of 52

investigation is ordinarily 12 months which can be extended by a
maximum of a further six months. Investigation in this case had been
initiated on 25th September, 2002 and terminated on 27th August,
2003. According to the respondent the period statutorily permissible
for conduct of the investigations would have ended on 25th March,
2004. It has been urged that in the instant case a notification dated
27th August, 2003 cannot be quashed at this stage or the matter
remanded for the reason that the period for investigation is over.
61.

In this behalf Mr. K. Venugopal learned counsel for the

petitioner has submitted that in case anti dumping duties have been
imposed by virtue of Section 9A(5) the petitioners would have had a
right to anti dumping duties for a period of five years from the date of
imposition of the duties subject only to an interim review by the
Designated Authority. It has been pointed out that the writ petition
was filed on 27th November, 2004 before the expiry of the period of 18
months for investigation and that the respondents have delayed
adjudication. My attention has been drawn to the decision of the
Apex Court reported at 1975 4 SCC 568 (para 6) Director, Income Tax
Vs. Puran Mal; 1980 1 SCC 370 (para 13) Commissioner of Income
Tax Vs. National Taj Traders and 1995 1 SCC 642 (paras 19 and 20)
Bombay Metropolitan Region Development Authority Vs. Gokak
Patel Volkart Ltd. & Ors.
62.

I find that the principles in this behalf were authoritatively laid

W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 31 of 52

down by the Apex Court in 1975 4 SCC 568 Director of Income
Tax (Investigation) Vs. Puranmal.

A similar question had

arisen before the Apex Court with regard to an order made by the
authority under Section 132(5) of the Income Tax and wherein also
appeals stands prescribed.

A similar objection that the period

statutorily prescribed being over no order directing the authority to
pass an order fresh could be made was negated. In this behalf the
court observed thus :“6. Even if the period of time fixed under Section
132(5) is held to be mandatory that was satisfied
when the first order was made. Thereafter if any
direction is given under Section 132(12) or by a
court in writ proceedings, as in this case, we do not
think an order made in pursuance of such a
direction would be subject to the limitations
prescribed under Section 132(5). Once the order
has been made within ninety days the aggrieved
person has got the right to approach the notified
authority under Section 132(11) within thirty days
and that authority can direct the Income Tax
Officer to pass a fresh order. We cannot accept the
contention on behalf of the respondents that even
such a fresh order should be passed within ninety
days. It would make the sub-sections (11) and (12)
of Section 132 ridiculous and useless. It cannot be
said that what the notified authority could direct
under Section 132 could not be done by a court
which exercises its powers under Article 226 of the
Constitution. To hold otherwise would make the
powers of courts under Article 226 wholly
ineffective. The court in exercising its powers
under Article 226 has to mould the remedy to suit
the facts of a case. If in a particular case a court
takes the view that the Income Tax Officer while
passing an order under Section 132(5) did not give
an adequate opportunity to the party concerned it
should not be left with the only option of quashing
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 32 of 52

63.

it and putting the party at an advantage even
though it may be satisfied that on the material
before him the conclusion arrived at by the
Income Tax Officer was correct or dismissing the
petition because otherwise the party would get
unfair advantage. The power to quash an order
under Article 226 can be exercised not merely
when the order sought to be quashed is one made
without jurisdiction in which case there can be no
room for the same authority to be directed to deal
with it. But in the circumstances of a case the
court might take the view that another authority
has the jurisdiction to deal with the matter and
may direct that authority to deal with it or where
the order of the authority which has the
jurisdiction is vitiated by circumstances like failure
to observe the principles of natural justice the
court may quash the order and direct the authority
to dispose of the matter afresh after giving the
aggrieved party a reasonable opportunity of
putting forward its case. Otherwise, it would
mean that where a court quashes an order because
the principles of natural justice have not been
complied with it should not while passing that
order permit the Tribunal or the authority to deal
with it again irrespective of the merits of the case.
A Division Bench of the Punjab High Court in
C.I.T. Vs. Ramesh Chander took the view that
what the notified authority could do under Section
132(12) a court could do in writ proceedings.
Though the observation was obiter we consider
that it is correct.”
The principles laid down by the Apex Court in this judgment

were reiterated by the Apex Court in the subsequent pronouncement
in Commissioner of Income Tax Vs. National Taj Traders
and BMRDA Vs. Gokak Patel Volkart Ltd. & Ors.
In the Bombay Metropolitan Region Development
Authority Vs. Gokak Patel Volkart Ltd. & Ors. reported at
(1995) 1 SCC 642 placing reliance on the pronouncement in
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 33 of 52

Puranmal (supra) the court laid down the principles succinctly thus :"19. It is well settled that when the statute lays
down the period of limitation for passing an order that
requirement is fulfilled as soon as an order is passed
within that period. If the order is set aside on appeal
and the appellate order directs a fresh order to be
passed then there is no requirement of law that the
consequential order to give effect to the appellate order
must also be passed within the statutory period of
limitation. This proposition of law is well settled."
For this reason the submission on behalf of the respondents
that the writ petition must fail on the ground of the period prescribed
under rule 17(1) being over cannot be sustained.
64.

Reliance is placed by Mr. Malhotra learned Additional Solicitor

General upon the pronouncement of the Apex Court reported at
2005 (2) SCALE 237 M/s S.S. Enterprises Vs. Designated
Authority & Ors. in support of his contention that upon the
Designated Authority arriving at a conclusion that the volume of
dumped imports actual or potential or the injury is negligible, the
investigation must be terminated.

The observations of the Apex

Court in para 11 and 12 of the pronouncement are pointed out
wherein it has been held that it was incumbent on the Designated
Authority to have closed investigation under rule 14(d) it came to the
conclusion that the volume of the dumped imports was less than 3%
of the total imports. It would thus appear that on a finding that the
volume of the imports is deminimus, the Designated Authority is

W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 34 of 52

required to close the investigation without anything further.
65.

Learned counsel for the petitioner however has contended

otherwise and urged that irrespective of the finding on volume, the
price impact has to be assessed by the Designated Authority.
However, such a submission is not supported by the observations of
the Apex Court in the judicial pronouncement placed by the
respondents before this court.
66.

The petitioners have objected to the termination of the

investigation by the respondent on the ground that they were
persuaded to believe that the Designated Authority had reached a
positive finding on dumping, injury and the causal link inasmuch as
the Designated Authority had required the exporters to furnish a
price undertaking. I find that the impugned order itself notices that
such undertaking was required only on a prima facie view in the
matter and not on a final consideration based on the material placed
by the domestic industry as well as the concerned persons before the
Designated Authority. Furthermore on a consideration of the matter
the Designated Authority had found that the applicable price of the
subject product was higher than the price undertaking which had
been suggested by the domestic industry and was being considered.
In any case the prima facie view cannot be held to be a final view of
the Designated Authority which would be based on a consideration of
the entire material placed before it.
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 35 of 52

67.

Ms. Meenakshi Arora learned counsel appearing for intervenor

has placed reliance on the pronouncement of the Apex Court reported
at 2005 (2) SCALE 395 Shenyang Mastsushita S. Battery
Co. Ltd. Vs. M/s Exide Industries Ltd. & Ors. in support of this
submission.
Perusal of this judgment would show that the court was not
concerned with consideration of any finding on this aspect of the
matter. The observation has been made by the court having regard to
the facts and circumstances of the case alone.
68.

It has been vehemently urged at great length by learned counsel

for the petitioners that the Designated Authority had gravely erred in
not segregating data relating to imports which had not been dumped.
As a result the computation of the volume and percentage of the
dumped goods was erroneously reached. In this behalf, it becomes
necessary to advert to the letter dated 18th June, 2002 addressed by
the petitioners to the Designated Authority based whereon the
Designated Authority has taken into consideration the imports from
different countries.
69.

It has been held that examination of the legality and validity of

an administrative order would require an examination as to whether
it is actuated with unreasonableness or irrationality or not. If it is
found that the order is not reasonable or rational, then it is certainly
open to the courts to interfere in the matter. But what is reasonable
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 36 of 52

and rational depends on each case and no hard and fast rule or strait
jacket formula can be laid down. Such question has to be examined
in the facts and circumstances of each individual case. (Ref : 1997 7
SCC 463 Union of India Vs. G. Ganayutham).
70.

Consideration

of

the

decision

under

scrutiny

requires

consideration as to whether the same is based on relevant material
and factors and not irrelevant material. If the relevant material has
not been ignored, then the court would not interfere with the decision
(Ref.: (1978) 1 SCC 405 Mohinder Singh Gill Vs. The Chief
Election Commissioner, New Delhi & Ors.)
71.

The parameters within which a challenge can be laid to an order

passed in exercise of statutory power have been laid down in AIR
1967 SC 295 Barium Chemicals Limited Vs. The Company
Law Board. It was held by the Apex Court that even if an order is
passed in good faith and with the best of intention to further the
purpose of the legislation which confers the power, since the
authority has to act within the limits of the legislation, its order can
be challenged if it is beyond those limits or passed on grounds
extraneous to the legislation or if there are no grounds at all for
passing it or if the grounds are such that no one can reasonably arrive
at the opinion or satisfaction requisite under the legislation. In this
pronouncement, the court held that an order passed in exercise of
statutory power cannot be challenged on the ground of impropriety
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 37 of 52

or sufficiency but would be liable to be quashed on grounds of
malafide, dishonesty or corrupt purpose.
The parameters of judicial review into the “opinion” and the
manner in which it is to be formed under Section 237 (b) of the
Companies Act had come up for consideration in this pronouncement
of the Apex Court.
The Apex Court thus recognised the permissibility of the
scrutiny by a court as to existence of some circumstances within
limited parameters and not as to the sufficiency thereof.
The court noticed that the subject matter of a legislation has an
important bearing on the interpretation of a provision. It is well
settled that when something is to be done which is within the
discretion of the authorities, then that something is to be done
according to the rules of reason and justice and not according to
private opinion.

Discretion necessarily implies good faith in

discharging a public duty. There is always a perception within which
a statute is intended to operate. It is to be done according to law and
is to be legal and regular and not arbitrary, vague or fanciful. The
power is to be exercised by the authority in good faith. As was held
by Lord Denning M.R. in Associated Provincial Pictures
Houses Ltd. Vs. Wednesbury Corporation (1948) 1 KB 223
CA 'that a person entrusted with the discretion must direct himself
properly in law. He must call his own attention to the matters which
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 38 of 52

he is bound to consider. He must exclude from its consideration
matters which are irrelevant to the matters that he is to consider'.
72.

In (2005) 1 SCC 13 Ganesh Santa Ram Sirur Vs. State

Bank of India & Anr. the court cited with approval the principles
laid down in (1993) 4 SCC 727 ECIL Vs. B. Karunakar, which
approach and test should govern all cases where the complaint is not
that there was no notice, no opportunity and no hearing but one of
not affording a proper hearing, that is adequate or a full hearing or
violation of a procedural rules or requirement governing the enquiry.
73.

As back as in (1970) 2 SCC 458 Union of India Vs. Col.

J.N. Sinha, it was held that rules of natural justice are not embodied
rules nor can they be elevated to the position of fundamental rights.
74.

It was held by the Supreme Court in A.K. Kripak Vs. Union

of India, (1969) 2 SCC 262, that the aim of the rules of natural
justice is to secure justice or to put it negatively, to prevent
miscarriage of justice. These rules can operate only in areas not
covered by any law validly made.

In other

words, they do not

supplant the law, but supplement it. Whether the exercise of a power
conferred should be made in accordance with any of the principles of
natural justice or not depends upon the express words of the
provision conferring the power, the nature of the power conferred,
the purpose for which it is conferred and the effect of the exercise of
that power.
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 39 of 52

75.

In K.L. Tripathi Vs. State Bank of India, (1984) 1 SCC

43, the petitioner complained of prejudice to the principles of natural
justice on the ground that he was not given an opportunity to rebut
the material gathered in his absence. In this case, the Supreme Court
held that no real prejudice had been suffered by the complainant
in the circumstances of the case.
76.

There is yet another consideration where an issue is raised that

there is failure of justice on account of violation of principles of
natural justice. It has been repeatedly held that a person so asserting
must be able to establish a legal right with regard to the claim raised.
It was so held in (1996) 7 SCC 118 entitled State of M.P. vs.
Shyama Pardhi and Mohd. Sartaj & Anr. Vs. State of U.P. &
Ors..
77.

The petitioners have also assailed the notification dated 27th

August, 2003 on the ground of failure to comply with the principles
laid down by the Apex Court in 1970 (1) SCC 764 Messers.
Mahabir Prasad Santosh Kumar Vs. State of U.P. & Ors.;
AIR 1990 SC 1984 S. N. Mukherjee Vs. UOI. These judgments
recognised the duty cast on all quasi judicial and administrative
authorities to give reasons for their decisions. The submission is that
the Designated Authority failed to record reasons for its findings.
78.

So far as the pronouncement of the Apex Court in S.N.

Mukherjee Vs. UOI AIR 1990 SC 1984 is concerned, the issue
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 40 of 52

before the court was

the requirement of recording reasons in

findings and sentence of the court martial and an order passed by the
confirming authority which is concerned with confirmation of the
finding and sentence. The court extensively considered the principles
which would govern exercise of a particular power by an
administrative authority including exercise of judicial or quasi
judicial functions. In this behalf the Apex Court had observed thus :“35. ......In our opinion, therefore, the requirement that
reasons be recorded should govern the decisions of an
administrative authority exercising quasi-judicial
functions irrespective of the fact whether the decision is
subject to appeal, revision or judicial review. It may,
however, be added that it is not required that the reasons
should be as elaborate as in the decision of a court of law.
The extent and nature of the reasons would depend on
particular facts and circumstances. What is necessary is
that the reasons are clear and explicit so as to indicate
that the authority has given due consideration to the
points in controversy. The need for recording of reasons
is greater in a case where the order is passed at the
original stage.”

79.

In Mahavir Prasad Santosh Kumar Vs. State of U.P. &

Ors. (1970) 1 SCC 764, the court was concerned with an order
cancelling licences held by the petitioners under the U.P. Sugar
Dealers Licencing Order 1964 to delink sugar. In this case the court
held that the order cancelling the licences was quasi judicial and
could be made only on a consideration of the charges and the
explanation given by the appellants. It was observed that having
regard to the nature of the allegations it was necessary for the district
magistrate to pass the order to give some reasons as to why he held

W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 41 of 52

the charges as proved. The right of the petitioners to appeal against
the order could be effectively exercised only if reasons were recorded
by the district magistrate. On account of failure to record reasons the
appeal had been rendered an empty formality.
So far as the practice of the executive authority dismissing
statutory appeals against order without giving reasons is concerned,
it was held that this prima facie seriously prejudices the rights of the
aggrieved party. It was further held to be a negation of the rule of
law. In this behalf the court observed thus :“7. Opportunity to a party interested in the dispute
to present his case on questions of law as well as
fact, ascertainment of facts from materials before
the Tribunal after disclosing the materials to the
party against whom it is intended to use them, and
adjudication by a reasoned judgment upon a
finding of the facts in controversy and application
of the law to the facts found, are attributes of even
a quasi-judicial determination. It must appear not
merely that the authority entrusted with quasijudicial authority has reached a conclusion on the
problem before him : it must appear that he has
reached a conclusion which is according to law and
just, and for ensuring that end he must record the
ultimate mental process leading from the dispute
to its solution. Satisfactory decision of a disputed
claim may be reached only if it be supported by the
most cogent reasons that appeal to the authority.
Recording of reasons in support of a decision on a
disputed claim by a quasi-judicial authority
ensures that the decision is reached according to
law and is not the result of caprice, whim or fancy
or reached on grounds of policy or expediency. A
party to the dispute is ordinarily entitled to know
the grounds on which the authority has rejected
his claim. If the order is subject to appeal, the
necessity to record reasons is greater, for without
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 42 of 52

recorded reasons the appellate authority has no
material on which it may determine whether the
facts were properly ascertained, the relevant law
was correctly applied and the decision was just.”
80. In the instant case the order dated 27th August, 2003 passed by
the Designated Authority is a considered and reasoned decision
which give reasons for its findings. In the light of the principles laid
down

by

the

Apex

Court

in

the

afore-noticed

judicial

pronouncements, it certainly cannot be held that the same does not
meet the requirements of law so far as giving of reasons in support of
its conclusions is concerned. The order contains a detailed analysis
and reasons for every finding returned by the authority.
81.

It now becomes necessary to first deal with the contention of

the petitioner that the notification dated 27th August, 2003 issued by
the Designated Authority terminating the investigations holding that
there was no sufficient evidence of injury to justify the continuation
of the investigations, requires to be set aside on grounds of violation
of principles of natural justice.

It has been urged that before

terminating the investigation, the authority was required to conduct
an oral hearing for the reason that the petitioners had been led to
believe that the authority had arrived at a positive finding on
dumping injury and causal link when the Designated Authority had
required the exporters to furnish a price undertaking. It has further
been urged that the findings of the authority with regard to the
volume and value of the landed imports are based on information
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 43 of 52

supplied by the Directorate General of Commercial Intelligence and
Statistics (DGCIS for short) which has been kept as confidential by
the authority without any justification.
It has been contended that the Designated Authority had placed
reliance on data put together by the Directorate General of
Commercial Intelligence and Statistics which was not placed in the
public file.

The petitioner has also urged that the notification

deserves to be set aside for the reason that no adequate opportunity
of representing an oral hearing was given by the Designated
Authority to the petitioner.
82.

In this behalf, it is noteworthy that in the written submissions

placed by the petitioners before this court it has been urged that the
cumulative data put together by the Directorate General of
Commercial Intelligence and Statistics (`DGCIS' for short) is publicly
available from the export data of the subject countries. In this view of
the matter certainly the petitioner cannot be heard to contend that it
was not aware of such public data. There is yet another reason why
this objection is misconceived. From the record placed before this
court and as noticed in the notification dated 27th of August, 2003,
such import data as per the

DGCIS have been provided to the

Designated Authority by the petitioners themselves vide their letters
dated 22nd of July 2003 and 23rd of July 2003. No prejudice could
possibly have been suffered by the petitioners merely because such
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 44 of 52

data furnished by them was not kept in the public file. No other
person has objected to the same.
83.

The petitioners have repeatedly complained that the Designated

Authority violated principles of natural justice for the reason that it
did not disclose the information relating to sales realisation and other
information of the petitioners to the petitioners themselves.

As

noticed herein the Designated Authority made available information
which was in the public domain in the public file. The petitioners
were well aware of all information which have been furnished by
them to the Designated Authority.

Furthermore the Designated

Authority has relied upon the floor price which had been fixed by the
respondent no. 1 which had continued to bind all parties by virtue of
the interim orders passed by the High Court of Judicature at Calcutta
in the earlier writ petition filed by the petitioners. For this reason the
objection taken by the petitioners is misconceived.
84.

I find that the Designated Authority has repeatedly noticed that

the petitioner has clubbed several items and products without
providing bifurcated quantities of sales of the sheets.

The only

figures which were placed before the authority were consolidated
data relating to imports made under different schemes.

The

Designated Authority had made a specific request made on 3rd
December, 2002, requiring the domestic industry to furnish the
quantity and value of imports of the subject goods from the subject
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 45 of 52

countries and from other sources against advance list.

No

bifurcated/segregated data was available in respect of the imports
made under the advance license scheme.

The intervenor M/s

CORSMA had however placed certain material and data in this behalf
before the authority which was placed in the public file. In the given
facts, it is apparent that the petitioner has been given adequate
opportunity to placing material as well as being hand by the
Designated Authority. The order of Designated Authority is based on
material placed by the petitioner and the co-operating exporters, all
of which manifests consideration of the relevant material.
85.

Perusal of the record would show that the petitioners have

admitted that the authority had called upon it to give clarifications
and that the original notification had been issued only thereupon. No
grievance was made by the petitioner with regard to want of material
or want of an opportunity to make adequate representation. The
petitioner has admitted that oral hearing was given to it on 23rd
November, 2002 and 5th May, 2003.

The petitioners have given

clarifications to the authority on 5th February, 2003, 9th July, 2003.
Data has been submitted on 22nd July, 2003 and 23rd July, 2003.
86.

I find that the petitioner had been given adequate opportunity

to place the entire material in support of their complaint before the
Designated Authority as well as having been given opportunities for
oral hearing on 23rd November, 2002 and 5th May, 2003. The
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 46 of 52

Designated Authority has complied with the requirements of issuing
notice and receiving material which has been placed in the public file.
In this background it certainly cannot be contended that the order
dated 27th August, 2003 violates any principle of natural justice.
87.

It has been pointed out by the Cold Rolled Steel Manufacturers

Association of India-respondent no.2 that the steel consuming
industry is much more than the steel producing industry in India.
Furthermore, apart from the petitioners, that is the Steel Authority of
India Limited and M/s Essar Steel India Limited, there are other
major producers of steel namely the Tata Iron & Steel Company;
Jindal Vijaynagar Steel Limited; the Ispat Industries Limited and the
Lloyds Steel Limited. According to the intervenor additionally, there
are 20 secondary producers of steel in the relevant year 2001-02 who
produced 0.676 million tonnes of steel as per the data published by
the Joint Plant Committee constituted by the Ministry of Steel.
Against the total production of steel in the country of 36.18 million
tonnes in the year 2003-04, the petitioner no. 2 is stated to have
produced only 8.57 million tonnes equivalent to approximately 24%
of the total steel manufactured.
88.

So far as the losses which have been claimed by the petitioners

are concerned, the respondents vehemently contended that the same
were incurred due to mis-utilisation and diversion of funds resulting
in sharp escalation of their project cost and heavy burden of interest
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 47 of 52

charges, higher consumption of energy and other inputs vis a vis
global standards and unhealthy competition between the domestic
HR coil producers.
89.

The respondents have complained that on account of failure of

M/s Essar Steel and Steel Authority of India Limited to repay their
loans resulting in destabilisation of public and private financial
institutions in India and abroad, the Government of India had to
constitute committees to investigate into their functioning. It has
been pointed out that during this period of investigation the Tata Iron
and Steel Company earned healthy profits. For these reasons the
findings of the Designated Authority are supported by these
submissions to the effect that the losses, if any, incurred by the
petitioners were not related to imports of HR coils but to their own
inefficiencies.
90.

The intervenor has complained that on account of a cartel

formed by the domestic industry manipulating the prices of hot rolled
steel gates to gain undue benefits, prices were being controlled at the
cost of public interest by them. The domestic industry was jointly
fixing the prices of HR coil products on a monthly basis in an
arbitrary and monopolistic manner.

As a result, major steel

producers were deriving undue benefits and exporting HR coils at
prices lower than the domestic prices to create an artificial scarcity in
the domestic market. For this reason the Government of India had
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 48 of 52

intervened and warned the hot rolled steel and coil producers to
stabilise the prices.

No positive response forthcoming, the

Government was compelled to take inter alia the following measures
to curb capitilisation and monopolistic pricing to provide relief to the
consumers which included :“(a). reduction in customs duty on HR Coils and
other products from 25% to 15%
(b) suspension of DEPB Scheme for the export of
HR Coils and other products till June 2004 to
improve availability in the domestic market and curb
shortages.
(c). reduction in excise duty on HR coils and other
steel products from 16% to 8% to protect the
consumers from the high cost of steel.”
It has been contended that this writ petition is wholly
misconceived and malafide and deserves summary rejection.
The petitioners have denied these allegations and have
attributed the escalation in the prices of steel on account of increase
in raw material prices
91.

Intervenor points out that during the period of investigation,

due to lack of demand, the steel industry was subjected to cyclic
fluctuations and prices of hot rolled HR coil as well as the products
like CR Coils, sheets, galvanized sheets, tin plates and pipes in India
as well as abroad varied primarily because of lack of demand.
However the domestic prices of HR coils have since sharply escalated
by over 100% from Rs.12000/- per tonne in March, 2002 to
Rs.26,000/- per tonne in March, 2004, ex steel plant, excluding

W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 49 of 52

custom and other taxes. As on the date of filing its counter affidavit
on 24th May, 2004, the respondent no.2 has pointed out that the
current prices of the domestic producers were also higher by around
Rs.4500/- per tonne vis a vis the global price of USD 410
(approximately Rs.22,000/-) per tonne FOB.
It is noteworthy that these figures do not relate to the period of
investigation.
92.

It has further pointed out that there was no injury to the

domestic producers from the imports of HR coils for the reason that
the domestic producers were protected by the custom duty of 25%
and an additional SAD at the rate of 4%; that bulk of the imports of
HR coils were under the 'advance license scheme' for export
production and thus had no impact on the domestic demand and
prices; and that hot rolled steel coil producers in India were protected
during the period of investigation by an exorbitant minimum CIF
value/floor price of USD 302 C&F for the import of HR coils with the
landed cost of Rs.18000/- per tonne against the selling price ranging
from Rs.12000/- to Rs.14000/- per tonne by the domestic producers.
It is also pointed out that the floor price of the defective hot rolled
coils was similarly much above the selling price of defective grade HR
coil by the domestic producers.
93.

I find that the petitioner has not laid any challenge to the

findings of the non injurious price of the domestic industry arrived at
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 50 of 52

by the Designated Authority. It is also an admitted position that the
petitioner was not able to segregate goods which had been imported
under the advance licence scheme of the government. The petitioner
also does not challenged the price protection by fixation of the flour
price by the Government of India which was prevalent during the
entire period of investigation by the Designated Authority.

The

petitioner has also not challenged the conclusion of the Designated
Authority that the CIF value of the imports was higher than the value
at which it was willing to accept a price undertaking from the
respondents. Looked at from any angle the challenge laid by the
petitioners in the instant writ petition is wholly misconceived.
94.

It is well settled that judgments have to be examined in the light

of the facts in which they were rendered. Furthermore in the facts of
the instant case the reliance placed by the petitioners on the several
writings on dumping and anti dumping measures would not be
relevant for the purposes of the instant case.
95.

It is noteworthy that the statutory scheme requires notice to all

effected persons. In fact care has to be taken by the Designated
Authority which in the instant case has sent notices not only to
known exporters as informed by the petitioners but also to embassies
of the countries against whose imports the petitioners had laid a
grievance. There is certainly merit in the respondent's objection that
the petitioners has failed to implead the necessary effected parties
W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 51 of 52

before this court. Even intervenor was joined in the matter on an
application made by it for impleadment.
96.

The petitioners have sought to refer to other orders passed by

the Designated Authority in other matters. From a scheme of the
statutory rules and regulations therein and the nature of disputes it is
evident that each matter entails a close enquiry into the issues raised
before the Designated Authority. The nature of investigation and
discussion would depend on the material which is placed before the
authority. Certainly an order passed in one matter cannot determine
either the nature of the investigation or orders which are passed by
the authority in other matter.
In the light of the foregoing discussion I find no merit in this
writ petition which is hereby dismissed.

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
October 9, 2007
kr

W.P.(C) No. 70-71/2004

page 52 of 52

