IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Writ Petition (Civil) NO.1454/2007
Date of decision on

9th October, 2007

MS. ANITA BHARGAVA
... Petitioner
through: Mr. Vikas Dhawan,
Advocate
VERSUS
DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY .... Respondent
through: Mr. Rajiv Bansal,
Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1.
Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2.
To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3.
Whether the judgment should be reported in
the Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

By this writ petition, the petitioner has assailed a demand

made by the Delhi Development Authority (`DDA' in short) by
its letter dated 8th August, 2006 whereby the respondent has
called

upon

the

Rs.11,39,194/-.

petitioner

to

deposit

an

amount

of

The demand has been made by the DDA on

account of misuse charges towards conversion of the property
bearing no.46, Anand Lok, Block No.X in the lay-out plan of
Anand Lok Cooperative House Building Society from leasehold
to freehold.
2.

There is no material dispute to the relevant facts. To the

WP (C) No.1454/2007

Page No.1

extent necessary, the same are briefly noticed hereinafter. By a
perpetual sub-lease deed dated 15th October, 1970 in respect of
Plot No.46, Anand Lok, Block No.X in the lay-out plan of Anand
Lok Cooperative House Building Society admeasuring an area of
780 sq. yards, lease hold rights were conferred upon Shri N.K.
Bhargava for residential purposes. After constructing a house
on this plot, Shri N.K. Bhargava on 26th May, 1982 rented the
premises to M/s Brooke Bond India Limited for a period of three
years for the residence of its officers and their families.

The

tenant was required to pay a monthly rent of Rs.2,500/- and a
further sum of Rs.500/- towards hire of fixtures and fittings. The
tenancy expired on or about the end of August, 1985.

The

terms and conditions of the lease was set out in a letter dated
26th May, 1982 exchanged between the parties.
3.

The DDA served a notice dated 31st May, 1983 upon Shri

N.K. Bhargava alleging that the property was being used as a
guest house which was a user contrary to the terms and
conditions of the perpetual sub-lease. Consequently, Shri N.K.
Bhargava was required to show cause as to why the perpetual
sub-lease be not determined.
4.

By a communication dated 10th June, 1983, Shri N.K.

Bhargava informed the respondent that the property was being
used purely for residential purposes by the tenant which fact
WP (C) No.1454/2007

Page No.2

was confirmed by M/s Brooke Bond India Limited to the DDA by
the letter dated 22nd August, 1983.
The petitioner contends that the DDA accepted this
explanation rendered by M/s Brooke Bond India Limited and Shri
N.K. Bhargava took no further proceedings on this notice to
show cause.
5.

It is on record that in any case, M/s Brooke Bond India

Limited vacated the premises on or about the 31st December,
1986 on expiry of the lease.
6.

Shri N.K. Bhargava, sub-lessee is stated to have expired on

20th July, 1989 leaving behind his last Will and Testament
bequeathing the subject property in favour of his sister-in-law
Smt. Anita Bhargava, the petitioner herein. The premises
remained vacant between 1985 to 1992.

Thereafter, the

petitioner along with her family members started residing in the
subject property and continue to occupy and possess the
premises even on date.
7.

On a request of the petitioner to the DDA, the DDA

mutated the name of the petitioner as a sub-lessee of the
subject property in its records.

Intimation in this behalf was

sent by a letter dated 17th May, 1994 to the Secretary of the
Anand Lok Cooperative House Building Society.
It is noteworthy that there is no imputation of any misuse
WP (C) No.1454/2007

Page No.3

on the subject property nor any demand made upon the
petitioner for any such reason at the time of mutation of this
property.
8.

In the meantime, the DDA floated a policy for conversion of

property from leasehold basis to freehold.

The petitioner

submitted an application dated 21st July, 2005 for a conversion
of the subject property to freehold in her hands.

Conversion

charges amounting to Rs.8,01,822/- were deposited by the
petitioner with the respondent. By a letter dated 18th January,
2006, the DDA required the petitioner to furnish an attested
copy of the rent agreement with the M/s Brooke Bond India
Limited. The petitioner forwarded a copy of the letter dated 26th
September, 1983 addressed by Late Shri N.K. Bhargava, the
then sub-lessee of the property, accepting the terms of the
agreement between him and the Brooke Bond India Limited.
The DDA was informed that the tenancy commenced on 1st
September, 1982 and that the premises had been taken for the
residence of the employees of M/s Brooke Bond India Limited
and their families.
The DDA was requested to process the petitioner's request
for conversion of the property from leasehold to freehold.
9.

Instead of proceeding in the matter with regard to

conversion, the DDA sent a wholly cryptic letter dated 8th
WP (C) No.1454/2007

Page No.4

August, 2006 demanding an amount of misuse charges of
Rs.11,39,194/- which was required to be paid within a period of
30 days from the date of issue of the letter failing which interest
at the rate of 15% per annum was chargeable from the due date
till the date of payment.
10. This letter discloses neither the nature of the misuse nor
the period for which the charges were being claimed.

It is

noteworthy that there was no allegation of misuser of the
property by the petitioner till date. No notice to show cause had
been issued to her. So far as the earlier notice dated 31st May,
1983 is concerned, the conduct of the DDA would show that the
explanation

given

by

Shri

N.K.

Bhargava,

allottee

and

corroborated by M/s Brooke Bond India Limited, had been
accepted by the DDA and a quietus was given in the matter.
11. The petitioner reacted immediately and objected to the
demand made by the DDA by the letters dated 21st August,
2006 and 5th October, 2006. These were, however, rejected by
the DDA by its letter of 19th December, 2006 when the demand
already made was reiterated in order to process the petitioner's
application for conversion of the property from leasehold to
freehold.
12. In the counter affidavit placed by Mr. Rajiv Bansal, learned
standing counsel for the DDA before this court, it has been
WP (C) No.1454/2007

Page No.5

stated that the premises were being misused for a period of 16
months w.e.f. 1st September, 1982 till 31st December, 1984 and
consequently, the demand for misuse charges has been made.
It is noteworthy that the demand raised upon the petitioner is
based on a formula for calculation of misuse charges received
by the DDA from the Ministry of Urban Development & Poverty
Alleviation which was effective from 1st September, 1989.
13. Mr. Vikas Dhawan, learned counsel for the petitioner has
pointed out that in the instant case, as per the policy of the
DDA, utilisation of a residential property for the purposes of
guest house is not considered as its misuse.

Reliance in this

behalf is placed also on binding judicial pronouncements of this
court reported at 2007 (93) DRJ 470 Sagar Enterprises
Private Limited Vs. U.O.I. & Anr. and 105 (2003) DLT 98
Ashwni Kumar Khanna Vs. DDA.
14. I find that the principles in this behalf were authoritatively
laid down by this court in Ashawni Kumar Khanna Vs. DDA
(Supra) wherein the court held thus:“14. I
have
considered
the
submissions
advanced by the learned Counsel for the parties.
I consider it appropriate to first deal with the
issue of the allegation of misuser of the property
in question. Learned Senior Counsel for the
petitioner referred to the provisions of the
Master Plan, which had even been dealt with in
the aforesaid judgments, as also the Master Plan
– 2001 to submit that such lodging and guest
houses are permitted as residential user. I find
WP (C) No.1454/2007

Page No.6

force in the contention of the learned Senior
Counsel for the petitioner. In fact, this aspect of
user of the residential premises for residence of
more than one person has been considered in R.
Ramanujam's case (supra) and Bawa Holiday
Home's case (Supra). It has been held that
character of the residential lease does not
change and remains residential. It may also be
noticed that it would make no difference to the
residential use merely by reason of the fact that
instead of the owner running the guest house
himself, it is the tenant running the same. It is
the user which is the relevant and not who runs
the guest house. It may also be noticed that in
the judgments in question, it is the tenant who
who was running the guest house. Insofar as
plea of the respondent in this behalf is
concerned, the same is based on a letter issued
to one of the persons and which has been filed
along with the rejoinder of the petitioner.
However, different letters have also been placed
on record with the rejoinder where there is no
such restriction. There are restrictions in terms
of the number of user, the number of rooms
used and the number of guests in a room. The
common thread, however, which runs through
them is that no restaurant or eating place could
be open except to the occupants of the building.
The judgments mentioned above have also
considered this aspect and came to the
conclusion that it is only when non-residents are
permitted use of restaurant and eating place,
the user becomes a commercial user.
15. Once the Master Plan itself prescribes the
residential user as residences, hotels and
boarding houses, this provision cannot be
watered down. I am also unable to appreciate
the contention of the learned Counsel for the
respondent that the guest house should be a
part of the approved lay-out plan or some
special permission should be obtained when it is
a permissible residential user. Even if there is a
requirement of seeking permission for running
the guest house, running of the same without
such permission cannot convert the user
from `residential' to `commercial'.
WP (C) No.1454/2007

Page No.7

xxx

xxx

xxx

17. I am, thus, of the considered view that the
respondent is not entitled to recover the misuse
charges
of
Rs.6,94,975/or
any
other
surcharge(s) thereon.”
15. Placing reliance on this pronouncement, this court in
Sagar Enterprises Private Limited Vs. UOI & Anr. (Supra)
held that in similar facts, use of a property for running the guest
house did not change residential user of the premises.
16. In the instant case, there is nothing to show any kind of
misuser by the petitioner. The only allegations made out from
the record are contained in the DDA letter dated 31st May, 1983.
As per the available record, it would seem that tenant M/s
Brooke Bond India Limited has utilised the subject premises for
the guest house of its own employees and their families for a
period of about 16 months. In view of the principles laid down
in Ashawni Kumar Khanna (Supra) and Sagar Enterprises
(Supra), it has to be held that such utilisation of the property by
the tenant of the deceased allottee strictly cannot be held to be
misuser.
17. It is also noteworthy that user for the guest house came to
an end on expiry of the tenancy on the 31st December, 1986.
This was long before the DDA mutated the premises for
conversion to freehold.

The DDA has also accepted the

submissions made by the deceased allottee and has taken no

WP (C) No.1454/2007

Page No.8

action pursuant to the notice dated 31st May, 1983.

No such

objection was taken when DDA effected mutation of the
property in the name of the petitioner on 17th of May, 1994.
Certainly, it cannot be permitted to make such allegations or to
raise a demand in respect of such misuser of almost 23 years.
18. Mr. Vikas Dhawan, learned counsel for the petitioner, has
submitted that in any case, the demand against the petitioner is
wholly illegal also for the reason that claim against the
petitioner is based on the formula
September, 1989.

which is effective from 1st

Certainly, such demand cannot be legally

sustained also for the reason that the alleged misuser came to
an end long before the formula was even conceptualized.
Even assuming that such demand could have been validly
made, the DDA was required to provide full details of the terms
in the communication which is addressed to a person against
whom the same is being made.

Such arbitrary functioning

certainly deserves to be deplored.
19. In view of the foregoing discussion, I have no hesitation in
holding that demand made by the respondent by its letter dated
8th August,

2006

is

arbitrary,

illegal

and

wholly

unreasonable. The demand has been raised without any
application of mind to relevant material.
Accordingly, rule is made absolute. The demand made by

WP (C) No.1454/2007

Page No.9

the respondent against the petitioner by the letter dated 8th
August, 2006 is hereby set aside and quashed.
The respondent is directed to proceed to consider the
application of the petitioner for conversion of the property
bearing no.46, Anand Lok Cooperative House Building Society,
New Delhi to freehold in accordance with the scheme of
conversion formulated by it.

Orders in this behalf shall be

positively passed within six weeks of the pronouncement of the
present judgment.
In case any clarification or objection still exists, the same
shall be intimated to the petitioner within a period of two weeks
from the passing of this judgment. The petitioner shall meet the
Deputy Director (C.S.), DDA on any working day during office
hours within a period of one week of receipt of such
communication and remove all deficiencies or objections.
In the event of favourable decision by DDA, all formalities
with regard to execution of the conveyance deed shall be
completed within a period of three months from today.
The petitioner shall be entitled to costs of the present
petition which are quantified at Rs.11,000/-.

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
October 9, 2007
aa
WP (C) No.1454/2007

Page No.10

