IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Writ Petition (C) No.5563/2003
Date of decision: 9th March, 2007
RAJ PAL & OTHERS
... Petitioners
through: Mr. Sanjoy Ghose,Advocate
VERSUS
MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF DELHI & ANR
... Respondents
through: Mr. Gaurang Kanth,Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
GITA MITTAL, J (Oral)
1.

This writ petition has been filed by the petitioner assailing

the award dated 4th September, 2002 against him made by the
industrial

adjudicator.

The

petitioners

had

assailed

the

termination of their services on the 1st April, 1995 inter alia on the
ground of violation of Sections 25-F, 25-G & 25-H of the Industrial
Disputes Act, 1997 (hereinafter referred to the `Act'). Inasmuch as
before this court, the petitioners have confined their challenge to
the violation of Section 25-G of the Act by the respondent in
WP (C) No.5563/2003

Page 1 of 12

terminating their service, only this issue has been addressed in the
present judgment.
2.

I find that there is no dispute that the petitioners were

appointed on different dates on daily wages as mali/beldar. While
the petitioners contended that they were appointed for indefinite
period, the respondent has urged that they were appointed for a
specific period.

The petitioner no.1 was engaged by the

respondent no.1 w.e.f. 25th October, 1989, the petitioner no.2 was
engaged w.e.f. 20th October, 1993; petitioner nos.3 & 6 were
engaged by the respondent no.1 w.e.f. 16th September, 1994 while
the petitioner no.4, 5 & 7 were engaged by the respondent no.1
w.e.f. 28th December, 1993.
3.

My attention has been drawn to the fact that by a demand

notice dated 27th February, 1995, these petitioners demanded inter
alia the relief of regularisation from the Municipal Corporation of
Delhi. Inasmuch as the MCD did not favourably consider to the
demand made by the petitioners, the petitioners raised an
industrial dispute before the conciliation officer under the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and had filed a claim dated 13th
March, 1995 in this behalf. Perusal of the suggested terms of
reference as urged by the petitioners in their statement of claim,
WP (C) No.5563/2003

Page 2 of 12

also shows that the petitioners had sought regularisation of their
services with the Municipal Corporation of Delhi.

There

is

no

dispute that the services of the petitioners were terminated on 1st
April, 1995. According to the petitioners, this was so done for the
reason that the respondent did not want to grant relief of
regularisation to them.
4.

The petitioners at this stage, made a complaint to the

conciliation officer which was dated 7th April, 1995 under Section
33-A of the Statute complaining that the services of the petitioners
had been illegally terminated during the pendency of the
conciliation proceedings. At the same time, the petitioners also
now sought reference of the disputes inasmuch as the conciliation
of the request of the petitioner failed.
submitted

by

the

conciliation

The failure report was

officer

to

the

appropriate

government which consequently referred the following disputes
for adjudication to the industrial adjudicator by an order passed
on 18th June, 1996:"1. Whether the services of S/Sh. Raj Pal,
Arvind Kumar Pandey, Ram Milan, Om Vir,
Krishna Kumar, Ajay Singh and Rajender Singh
have
been
terminated
illegally
and/or
unjustifiably by the management and if so, to
what relief are they entitled and what directions
are necessary in this respect?
WP (C) No.5563/2003

Page 3 of 12

5.

2.
Whether S/Shri Raj Pal, Ajay Singh and
Rajender Singh, daily rated/casual/muster roll
are entitled to be regularized on the post of
Mali/Beldar in proper pay scale and if so, from
which date and what directions are necessary in
this respect?"
The learned industrial adjudicator on completion of the

pleadings, permitted evidence to be led in support of the
respective contentions. The petitioners inter alia set up a claim
that apart from the fact that their services have been illegally
terminated during the pendency of the conciliation proceedings,
however, the same was also bad for non-compliance of Section 25G of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 inasmuch as the persons
junior to them have been retained on the rolls of the Municipal
Corporation of Delhi. On this plea, the petitioners had filed an
application dated 5th May, 2006 under Section 11(3) (b) of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 praying for production of the muster
roll of the workmen for the period mentioned against their name.
It may also be noted that the petitioners in para VII of their claim
filed before the industrial adjudicator, had assailed the action of
the respondent in terminating their services on grounds of
violation of Sections 25-F, G & H. In its written statement, the
MCD had made the submission that it did not deny the same and

WP (C) No.5563/2003

Page 4 of 12

merely submitted that no comments were necessary to these
averments on behalf of the petitioner.
6.

At this stage, it becomes necessary to notice the evidence

which was brought by the parties on record. The respondent had
examined Shri Kewal Singh, the Assistant Director (Horticulture)
of Rohini Zone as MW-2. In his cross-examination, this witness
had clearly stated that the petitioners had worked under him in
Keshav Puram for four months when he was section officer at the
site. It was also submitted that the attendance of all the muster
roll employees is marked in the muster roll including these
concerned workmen. However, so far as the violation of Section
25-G of the Statute is concerned, reliance was placed on the
seniority in which workmen on muster roll have been engaged.
Shri Kewal Singh in his deposition clearly stated that a combined
seniority list is placed for Mali and Beldar for all the 12 zones. For
this reason, there is no doubt that this seniority list is the material
document evidencing that the respondent had complied with the
requirement of Section 25-G. I find that there is no dispute that
this document was not produced before the industrial adjudicator.
7.

It is also important to note that MW-2 Kewal Singh had also

clearly stated that no appointment letter was issued to the muster
WP (C) No.5563/2003

Page 5 of 12

roll employees. No particulars of the work to which the petitioners
were assigned has been placed before the court. Such documents
would have established the plea which has been set up by the
respondent before this court to the effect that the petitioners were
engaged for a fixed tenure appointment. This witness has also
admitted the fact that several beldars were engaged in the years
1994, 1995 & 1996 in similar conditions. There was no evidence
that services of such beldars were terminated on or before the
termination of the services of the petitioners. In the light of the
admission made by the respondent, so far as the petitioners' plea
for violation of Section 25-G is concerned, it would have to be held
that the plea of the petitioners of violation of Section 25-G of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 was amply borne out from the
record.
8.

Mr. Gaurang Kanth, learned counsel appearing for the MCD,

has submitted that the petitioners have made a grievance before
this court for non-production of the muster roll record. He has
drawn my attention to the fact that most of the record relating to
the muster roll of the petitioners was placed before the learned
industrial adjudicator.

In the light of the case set up by the

petitioners and what has been noticed hereinabove, in my view,
WP (C) No.5563/2003

Page 6 of 12

nothing much would turn on the fact that some record relating
muster roll of the petitioners was produced. Undoubtedly, the
respondent was required to establish that it had not retained any
persons juniors to the petitioners on its rolls in the light of the case
set up by the petitioners. In any case, this fact had been admitted
in the written statement which has been filed.
9.

The petitioners have assailed the award dated 4th September,

1992 also on the ground that the industrial adjudicator has denied
relief to the petitioners for the reason that they did not complete
240 days on the muster rolls. It has been pointed out that such
finding was wholly erroneous in the light of the statutory
provisions violation whereof had been pleaded which entitled the
petitioners to the relief prayed for. Mr. Sanjoy Ghose, learned
counsel for the petitioners, has drawn my attention on the earlier
pronouncement of this court reported in 2006 II AD (Delhi) 43
entitled Amar Pal (Shri) & Another Vs. Municipal
Corporation of Delhi. In this case placing reliance on several
pronouncements of the Apex Court, it was held thus:“14. In the pronouncement reported at 2005(9)
AD SC 761 Shamishtha Dubey vs. City Board and
another, it was held by the Apex Court that the
definition of 'workman' in industrial law is not
restricted to regular employees; that the same
WP (C) No.5563/2003

Page 7 of 12

would include daily wagers and that the rule of
seniority was applicable to daily wagers. It was also
held that there was no such restriction in Section
2(z) of the UP Act which corresponds to Section 2(j)
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 whereby the
expression 'workman' is defined. The Court was
considering the provisions of Section 6P of the UP
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 which corresponds to
Section 25G of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947
which is applicable to the instant case.
xxx

xxx

xxx

15. It is also necessary to consider the statutory
provisions setting out the circumstances in which
retrenchment of the workman is permissible. The
same are to be found in Section 2(oo) of the
Industrial Disputes Act 1947. By this statutory
provision the management has been permitted to
terminate the service of the workmen for any
reason otherwise then as a punishment inflicted
by way of a disciplinary action. Three exceptions
have been statutorily provided which read as
follows:(a) voluntary retirement of the workman; or
(b) retirement of the workman on reaching
the age of superannuation if the contract of
employment between the employer and the
workman concerned contains a stipulation
in that behalf; or
(bb) termination of the service of the
workman as a result of the non-renewal of
the contract of employment between the
employer and the workman concerned on its
expiry or of such contract being terminated
under a stipulation in that behalf contained
therein; or

WP (C) No.5563/2003

Page 8 of 12

( c ) termination of the service of a workman
on the ground of continued ill-health;”
xxx

xxx

xxx

19. There can be no dispute that all documents
relating to the appointment and service of the
petitioners were in the power and possession of the
Municipal Corporation of Delhi. It was for the
respondent to show that the petitioners cases fell
within the exception which was provided under
Section 2(oo)(bb). The MCD had to show that the
employment was under a contract which stipulated
that it would come to an end with the expiry of the
particular project or scheme for which the workmen
were engaged and the workmen were required to be
shown to have been made aware that such a
stipulation at the commencement of the
employment.
20. Mere proof of employment of casual workers
or daily wagers in a project or scheme and
termination of the services on the project or scheme
coming to an end is not enough to attract the
exception provided under sub-clause(bb) of Section
2(oo).
21. This issue had arisen for consideration before
the Supreme Court in S.M.Nilajkar and others vs.
Telecom District Manager, Karnataka reported at
(2003) 4 SCC 27. Answering the same in favour of
the workmen, the Apex court had held thus:“13. The termination of service of a workman
engaged in a scheme or project may not
amount to retrenchment within the meaning
of sub-clause (bb) subject to the following
conditions being satisfied:
(i)“that the workman was employed in a
project or scheme of temporary duration;
WP (C) No.5563/2003

Page 9 of 12

(ii)the employment was on a contract, and
not as a daily-wager simpliciter, which
provided inter alia that the employment
shall come to an end on the expiry of the
scheme or project;
(iii)the employment came to an end
simultaneously with the termination of the
scheme or project and consistently with the
terms of the contract; and
(iv)the workman ought to have been apprised
or made aware of the abovesaid terms by
the employer at the commencement of
employment.”
14. The engagement of a workman as a daily
wager does not by itself amount to putting the
workman on notice that he was being engaged in a
scheme or project which was to last only for a
particular length of time or upto the occurrence of
some event, and therefore, the workman ought to
know that his employment was short lived. The
contract of employment consciously entered into
by the workman with the employer would result
in a notice to the workman on the date of the
commencement of the employment itself that his
employment was short lived and as per the terms
of the contract the same was liable to termination
on the expiry of the contract and the scheme or
project coming to an end. The workman may not
therefore complain that by the act of the employer
his employment was coming to an abrupt
termination. To exclude the termination of a
scheme or project employee from the definition of
retrenchment it is for the employer to prove the
abovesaid ingredients so as to attract the
applicability of sub-clause(bb) abovesaid. In the
case at hand, the respondent employer has failed
in alleging and proving the ingredients of subWP (C) No.5563/2003

Page 10 of 12

clause (bb), as stated hereinabove. All that has
been proved is that the appellants were engaged
as casual workers or daily-wagers in a project.
For want of proof attracting applicability of subclause(bb), it has to be held that the termination
of the services of the appellants amounted to
retrenchment.”
xxx

xxx

xxx

25. The rights of daily wagers have fallen for
consideration in several cases both before the Apex
Court as well as this Court. In Samishtha Dubey's
case(supra) the Apex Court has held that the
workman who have even less than 240 days of
service would be entitled to the protection of
Section 25 F, G & H of the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947.
In Central Bank of India vs. S.Satyam and
others 1996 SCC L&S 1273, it was held by the Apex
Court that the applicability of the Section 25G was
not confined to workmen who were in continuous
service for one year or both only. The principle of
'last come, first go' has to be complied in respect of
daily wagers in service for a period of less than 240
days as well.”
10.

It is also noteworthy that there is nothing on record which

supports the submissions of the respondent to the effect that the
petitioners had been appointed for a fixed tenure or that the work
for which they were appointed was over.
11.

In my view, the facts of the instant case are on all fours with

the facts which were laid before this court in Amar Pal Singh
(Shri) & Anr. Vs. MCD (supra). For these reasons, it has to be

WP (C) No.5563/2003

Page 11 of 12

held that the findings returned by the industrial adjudicator on the
question of violation of Section 25-G of the industrial award
cannot be sustained.
The award dated 4th September, 1992 is hereby set aside and
quashed.
As a result, the respondent is directed to reinstate the
petitioners in service with such consequential benefits as are
available in the position in which the petitioners were placed.
Necessary orders in this behalf shall be passed within eight weeks
from the date of passing the present judgment.
This writ petition is allowed in the above term.

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
March 09, 2007
aa

WP (C) No.5563/2003

Page 12 of 12

