IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 9144/2007 and CM Nos. 17229 & 17230/2007
Date of decision: 10th December, 2007.
Shri Gulshan Mongia
through: Mr. R.P. Sharma, Adv.

... Petitioner

VERSUS
MCD

....Respondents

through: Mr. Sanjeev Sabharwal, Standing Counsel for
the MCD alongwith Mr. S.I. Bairwa, concerned
Executive Engineer from MCD in person
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
GITA MITTAL, J(Oral)
1.

This writ petition has been filed by the petitioners claiming to be co-owners of

the property bearing no. 1/1, East Patel Nagar, New Delhi admesuring 800 sqm. which
is equivalent to 649.37 sqm. (erroneously mentioned as 776.67 sqm.). The admitted
position is that as per the applicable Building Bye-Laws, an area of 174 sqm. out of the
front of the plot is required to be left out for road widening. The petitioner has
submitted that this plot is located right next to the Patel Nagar Metro
-2Station.
2.

Mr. R.P. Sharma learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the Delhi

Metro Rail Corporation has informed the petitioner that the pillars on which its station
has already been erected, cannot be shifted any further.
By way of present writ petition the petitioner seeks exemption from the vacant
space which has to be left on its plot for the purposes of road widening as per the
Building Bye laws, on the ground that inasmuch as the station cannot be extended any
further, this requirement is of no consequence.
3.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has further submitted that in case the

petitioner is permitted to construct on this portion, the petitioner is willing to give an
undertaking to the effect that he would demolish such construction if required to do so
in the future.
4.

Mr. Sanjeev Sabharwal, learned standing counsel for the MCD, has appeared on

receipt of advance notice and has vehemently opposed the petition. He has placed a
brief status report dated 6th December, 2007 on record under instructions from Mr.
S.I. Bairwa the concerned executive engineer.

The same is taken on record. It has

been pointed out that this property is one of the 54 properties of Patel Nagar which are
being monitored by the Monitoring Committee under orders of the Division
-3Bench of this court.

On account of unauthorised construction in the petitioner's

property, the MCD had passed demolition orders in accordance with statutory
provisions. However a representation dated 31st May, 2007 had been received from
the petitioner seeking time to carry out the necessary rectification/demolition of the
non-compoundable portions. The property which stood sealed by orders dated 5th
September, 2007 of the Monitoring Committee, was de-sealed only for the purposes of

rectification on 10th October, 2007.
5.

It is further pointed out that a further representation dated 22nd October, 2007

was submitted by the petitioner seeking extension of time for rectification.

On this

assurance of the petitioner, the Monitoring Committee has passed orders on 20th
November, 2007 giving time till 5th December, 2007 to the petitioner to demolish the
entire non-compoundable portion. The MCD states that it is on these facts alone, that
the property was de-sealed and not resealed till 5th December, 2007.
6.

I find that the petitioner had sought relaxation of the front set back requirement

from the MCD also which has been considered by it. This request stands rejected. On
this request, it has been directed by the Chief Town Planner, MCD thus :“The applicant has sought the relaxation in front set back. The Building
Plans was sanctioned by taking the set backs on the net plot area i.e.
after area affected under road
-4widening as per then policy.
The set back shall be maintained as per sanctioned building
plan/as per MPD 2021 on the net area of the plot.”
7.

The Municipal Corporation has stated that inasmuch as the petitioner has not

rectified the unauthorised construction as per the regularisation plans submitted by
him, the property is likely to be sealed today.
8.

There are no dispute that the petitioner has not stated any of the above facts in

the writ petition. The explanation which has been rendered by Mr. Sharma learned
counsel for the petitioner is to the effect that the earlier demolition orders, sealing and
desealing action had no connection with the prayer made in the writ petition. This, in
my view cannot be countenanced at all. The petitioner was required to place the true,

correct and complete facts relating to the legality of the construction undertaken by it
as well as the action taken by the MCD in respect of the same. The facts relating to the
orders of the Monitoring Committee acting under the orders of the Division Bench; the
requests having been placed before the Monitoring Committee and MCD and the same
having been rejected are certainly material facts for the purposes of the present
petition. The petitioner has been given time on two occasions on his request for
undertaking the rectification and has failed to do so.
In my view the petitioner is clearly guilty of concealment of material

-5facts. The present writ petition is thus an instance of a petitioner abusing process of
law.
9.

It is unfortunate that first a building is constructed without compliance of the

sanctioned building plan. Thereafter when action is taken by the MCD, the matter is
diverted towards regularisation and compounding.

Time was given to the property

owner on requests to rectify as per the rectification plan. Even then there is not even a
pretense of compliance with the orders or the provisions of law.
10.

In this manner valuable time of officers performing statutory functions and

public duties is unnecessarily caused to be wasted on matters which stand decided by
it. Representation after representation is made requiring consideration. At the same
time property owners and builders show no intention of complying with orders which
have been passed for statutory compliance. There is no respect for the letter of the law
or community interest.

The Building Bye Laws stand notified in compliance with the provisions of the
Master Plan. The same take into consideration the larger interest of the community at
large. Statutory in nature, no person has any right to flout the same.

-611.

It was held by the Apex Court in AIR 2005 SC 1 Friends Colony

Development Committee v. State of Orissa & Ors. that compounding can be of
only a bonafide aberration/error in following a sanctioned building plan.

The

Municipal Corporation of Delhi cannot treat the compounding provisions as a right
conferred on persons deliberately raising unauthorised and illegal construction in
violation of the Master Plan.
12.

The writ petition is also premised on an admitted violation of statutory

provisions, directives of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi and that of the sanctioned
plan. Building activity in the setbacks impacts rights of the neighbour. The petitioner
has been found to have concealed material facts.
In this view of the matter in my view this writ petition is wholly malafide and
without any merit and is hereby dismissed with costs which are quantified at
Rs.50,000/-. Out of these costs, an amount of Rs.40000/- shall be deposited with the
Municipal Corporation of Delhi while the balance amount of Rs.10000/- will be
deposited with the Delhi High Court Legal Services Committee. The costs shall be so
deposited within a period of ten days from today.
Proof of deposit shall be placed before this court.
Copy of the order be given dasti to learned standing counsel for the

-7MCD and also sent to the Delhi High Court Legal Services Committee.

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
December 10, 2007
kr

