1

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
R.F.A. NO.193/2001 & C.R. No.589/2001
Date of decision :10th August, 2004
VEENA JAIN
through:

... Petitioner
Mr. Mohan Vidhani
Advocate

VERSUS
NEERJA FILMS (P) LTD.
.... Respondents
through: Mr. G.C. Aggarwal,
Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE JUSTICE DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, J (ORAL)
*

This appeal arises out of the judgment and order passed by the

Additional District Judge, Delhi in Suit No.233/1995 dated 18th January, 2001
dismissing the suit filed by the appellant-plaintiff on the ground that the said
suit is hit by the provisions of Limitation Act and that the defect in filing the
suit could not be cured by amendment of any nature.

2

2.

The appellant herein also filed revision petition being CR

No.589/2001 being aggrieved by the order passed by Additional District Judge,
Delhi, dismissing the application-s filed by the appellant, praying for
amendment of the plaint and/or impleading the applicant-plaintiff in her
personal name instead of her firms' name. Since the issues, which arise for
consideration in both the cases, are similar in nature, we propose to dispose of
the appeal and revision by a common judgment and order.
3.

The plaintiff filed a suit in the Court of Additional District Judge

praying for a decree of permanent injunction restraining infringement under
the trade name Neerja Films. It is the contention of the plaintiff that the
plaintiff is the prior user of Neerja Films and, therefore, the defendant has been
passing of the trade name and trade mark of the plaintiff. The respondentdefendant is contesting the suit on various grounds and denied the claim of the
appellant-plaintiff contending inter alia that the defendant has been using the
trade name Neerja Film Private Limited even prior to the plaintiff.
4.

Issues were framed in the suit by order dated 13th February, 1996.

At that stage, a preliminary issue was also raised regarding the maintainability
of the suit on the ground that the suit is filed in the name of M/s Neerja Films
through its proprietor Veena Jain and, therefore, it was hit by the provisions
30(10) of the Code of Civil Procedure.
5.

The appellant-plaintiff moved an application under Order 6 Rule 17

of the Code of Civil Procedure praying for amendment of the plaint by

3

changing the name of the proprietor Ms. Veena Jain in place of the name of the
firm, namely M/s Neerja Films. Another application under Order 1 Rule 10
C.P.C. was filed praying for impleading Ms. Veena Jain in her personal name
as against of her firm's name. It was, however, held by the learned Additional
District Judge that none of the aforesaid applications are maintainable.
6.

It was held that even if the amendment is allowed, the suit could be

barred by limitation as the appellant-plaintiff had filed the suit in the year 1995.
7.

We have perused the records of the case and also heard the learned

counsel appearing for the parties. In para 1 of the plaint, it was mentioned that
the plaintiff is engaged in the business since 1989 under the trading style/trade
name `Neerja Films'. Therefore, the details of the plaintiff in the cause title
were a mis-description.

Having considered the records, we are satisfied that

the application which was filed by the appellant-plaintiff under Order 6 Rule 17
C.P.C. seeking for amendment in the name of the parties could itself have been
treated as an application under Order 1 Rule 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure
as actually the said application was filed changing the name of proprietor who
is already named in the cause title as the plaintiff.

It was prayed in the

application that Ms. Veena Jain, proprietor of the firm be shown as the plaintiff
in place of the firm.
8.

In our considered opinion, the said application which was filed

under Order 6 Rule 17 C.P.C. could, therefore, have been treated as an
application under Order 1 Rule 10 C.P.C..

The approach of the learned

4

Additional District Judge, in our considered opinion, was hyper technical. In
this connection, we may place reliance on Jai Jai Ram Manohar Lal Vs.
National Building Material Supply AIR 1969 Supreme Court 1267 wherein it
was held by the Supreme Court that the application could not be refused on the
ground that there is no averment therein that misdescription is on account of a
bona fide mistake. It was also held that the power to grant amendment of the
pleadings is intended to serve the ends of justice and is not governed by any
such narrow or technical limitations. We are, therefore of the considered
opinion that in the facts and circumstances of the present case and in the light
of the provisions of Order 1 Rule 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the prayer
of the appellant-plaintiff could be allowed. It is also to be mentioned at this
stage that if the Court is satisfied that the suit is instituted in the name of a
wrong person as plaintiff, in that event the Court can order that the name of
such person could be substituted on such terms as the court thinks fit. We are
of the considered opinion that in exercise of the powers vested under Order 1
Rule 10 of Code of Civil Procedure, we may direct for substitution of the name
of Veena Jain, the proprietor of M/s Neerja Films as the plaintiff in the
aforesaid suit but while doing so, we impose a cost of Rs.5,000/- on the
appellant-plaintiff which shall be paid within four weeks from today.
9.

In terms of the aforesaid order, both the appeal and the revision

petition stands disposed of.
10.

In view of the aforesaid order, we may also hold that the provisions

5

of Section 21 of the Limitation Act would be applicable in which case it shall
be treated that the suit, as regards the plaintiff, as directed to be substituted
now, would be deemed to have been instituted at the time of institution of the
suit itself.
The parties shall now appear before the learned District Judge on
25th August, 2004 when the learned District Judge shall allot the suit to an
appropriate Court.

(DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
JUDGE
(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
August 10, 2004
aa

