IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 20999-21000/2005
Dat e of decision:10th January, 2006
M/S SYSTEMS & STAMPING & ANR.
through Mr. S.K. Gupta, Adv.

... Petitioner

VERSUS
EMPLOYEES PROVIDENT FUND APP. ....
Respondents
through Mr. M. Mahani, Adv. for resp. Nos.
1 to 3
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

By this writ petition the petitioner has impugned the order

dated 23rd February, 2001 passed by the Regional Provident Fund
Commissioner, Kanpur and the order dated 7th September, 2005
passed by the Employees Provident Fund Appellate Tribunal, New
Delhi. It has been contended that one Shri Solil Chatterjee was a
partner of M/s Systems & Stamps having its registered office at
40-42, Uptron Estate, Kanpur. Besides Shri Solil Chatterjee, one

W.P.(C) 20999-21000/2005

page 1 of 25

Shri Umesh Bhargava was also a partner of the firm. Due to
financial crisis, the provident fund contribution was not deposited
within the stipulated time.
2.

In these circumstances, a show cause notice dated 20th

October, 2000 was issued by the office of the Regional Provident
Fund Commissioner to the petitioner notifying that it had
defaulted payment of the employees provident fund contribution
and other charges for the period November, 1989 to February,
2000 and called upon the petitioner to show cause as to why
damages at the rates specified be not imposed upon it.

A

statement showing the default by the petitioner was enclosed with
the show cause notice.
In response thereto, vide a letter dated 21st November, 2000
through Shri Solil Chatterjee, the petitioner informed the
provident fund authorities that it has been trying to finalise
accounts up to a statutory amounts but the accounts could not be
finalised. It was stated in this letter that “the PF payment is due to
this, we have no intentions to default.”
3.

This letter was followed with a communication dated 11th

December, 2000 again written by Shri Solil Chatterjee alleging
that Shri Umesh Bhargava had mismanaged the affairs of the firm
W.P.(C) 20999-21000/2005

page 2 of 25

and as a result he has withdrawn his name from the firm pursuant
to a memorandum of partnership. Shri Solil Chatterjee alleged
that Shri Umesh Bhargava had misappropriated the funds of the
establishment and not made payment of the statutory dues to the
provident fund authorities. Shri Solil Chatterjee himself stated
that “the revelation came to the knowledge of the petitioner
sometimes in January, 2000”. Notice for dissolution of the firm
was given by the said Shri Chatterjee thereafter on 3rd May, 2000.
Further allegations were made against the conduct of Shri Umesh
Bhargava.

It was further stated that as accounts were not

available, further time was sought by the petitioner “for finalising
accounts so that the dues of the provident fund of the
establishment may be cleared”.
4.

It is noteworthy that in neither of these communications,

there was any dispute with regard to the fact that there was a
default with regard to payment of the provident fund dues and
there was no denial of liability.
5.

These communications were followed up by further

communications in January, 2001 wherein, Shri Solil Chatterjee,
still acting for the petitioner firm, informed the office of the
Regional Provident Fund Commissioner of his ill health and that
W.P.(C) 20999-21000/2005

page 3 of 25

he was sending further documents. On 24th January, 2001, Shri
Solil Chatterjee informed the office of the Regional Provident Fund
Commissioner that he had sent information with regard to “list of
debtors of our company who can be approached to paid
outstanding to the PFs”. It was stated that this list was being sent
with the intention of recovering the PF dues through PF
adjustment procedure.

On 5th February, 2001, Shri Solil

Chatterjee required the Provident Fund Commissioner's office to
initiate proceedings against the parties. The debtor's list had been
given.
6.

In these circumstances, after having waited from 20th

October, 2000 when the show cause notice giving the details of the
dues and the proposed damages had been given to the petitioner,
an order dated 12th March, 2001 was passed by the Regional
Provident Fund Commissioner, Kanpur levying damages of
Rs.6,49,056/- at different rates depending on the period of default
for the period September, 1997 to February, 2000 under Section
14B of the Employees Provident Funds and Miscellaneous
Provisions Act, 1952. Further interest was awarded on the dues
delayed payment till the date of its actual payment under Section
7Q of the Act by an amount of Rs.1,69,630/- as such a total sum.
W.P.(C) 20999-21000/2005

page 4 of 25

7.

The petitioner, it appears assailed the order dated 12th

March, 2001 and filed an appeal through Shri Solil Chatterjee
before the Employees Provident Fund Appellate Tribunal and this
appeal was disposed by the Tribunal vide its order dated 7th
September, 2005. The petitioner has assailed the order dated 12 th
March, 2001 of the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner and
the order dated 7th September, 2005 by way of this writ petition. It
is submitted before this court that the respondents have issued a
circular dated 28th November, 1990 which prohibits the
respondents from levying damages for a period beyond three
years. It is contended that this circular cannot be overlooked by
the department in view of the pronouncement reported at 1992
Lab.I.C. 1125 entitled M/s Flour Millers Engg. Corpn.,
Nagpur

&

etc.

vs

The

Regional

Provident

Fund

Commissioner, Bombay. It has further been contended that
the order of the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner cannot be
permitted to stand for the reason that it records no findings. In
support of this submission, reliance is placed on 1990 LLR SC 64
Food Corporation of India vs The Provident fund Commissioner &
Ors.
Further placing reliance on 1997 Lab. I.C. 1207 Atal Tea
W.P.(C) 20999-21000/2005

page 5 of 25

Company

Limited

vs

Regional

Provident

Fund

Commissioner, it is submitted by Mr. S.K. Gupta, learned
counsel for the petitioner that damages cannot be levelled at the
rate of 100% in view of the provisions of para 32 of the employees
provident fund scheme, 1952 which provides the maximum of 37%
as damages.
8.

On behalf of the petitioner, it is further urged that the

petitioner firm was suffering losses which was a mitigating factor
and no damages ought to have been levelled upon the petitioner.
In support of this contention, reliance is placed on 1999 III LLJ
980 Presidency Kid Leathers (P) Ltd., Madras vs
Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, Madras. So far
as delay in issuing the show cause notice is concerned, the
petitioner has placed reliance on JT 2001 (4) SC 542 M/s K.
Streetlite Electric Corporation v. Regional Provident
Fund Commissioner, Haryana and it is contended that no
proceedings could have been taken against the petitioner.
9.

Learned counsel for the respondent appearing on advance

notice has pointed out that on account of the assessment under
Section 7A of the Employees Provident Fund & Miscellaneous
Provisions Act and the damages under Section 7Q and interest
W.P.(C) 20999-21000/2005

page 6 of 25

under Section 7 Q and damages under Section 14B, a total amount
of Rs.14,5,990/- was due and payable by the petitioner. Pursuant
to three auctions effected of properties of the petitioner, inter alia,
on 18th December, 2000 and 29th June, 2001 a sum of
Rs.10,28,000/- was recovered by the provident fund authorities.
It has been contended that the petitioner has never disputed its
liability to make payment of the assessed dues, damages or the
interest. On the contrary in every letter written on behalf of the
petitioner, it was contended by the petitioner that the liability to
pay the demanded amount enured and that the same could be
recovered from the debtors of the firm. It is further pointed out
that Shri Solil Chatterjee had accepted the responsibility on behalf
of the partnership firm. The only effort by Shri Solil Chatterjee to
avoid the liability was made by levelling allegations against the
other partners of the firm.
10.

The respondent have placed reliance on the pronouncement

of the Apex Court in 1998 Labour I.C. 483 M/s Hindustan
Times Ltd. vs Union of India & Ors. to contend that no
limitation is prescribed for the exercise of powers under the
Employees Provident Funds & Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952
and further that the legislation is a social welfare legislation. The
W.P.(C) 20999-21000/2005

page 7 of 25

amount which has been deducted from the salary and wages of the
employees towards the provident fund is an amount which is in
trust in the hands of the employer. No employer can withhold the
payment of this amount and thereafter plead mitigation on the
ground of losses or any other reason for non-deposit of the
amount within the statutory period.

In this behalf, the

respondents have placed reliance on 1979 Labour. I.C. 1261
Organo Chemical Industries & Anr. Vs Union of India &
Ors. It is further contended that the circular relied upon by the
petitioner is in the nature of administrative instructions issued to
guide the provident fund commissioners to take timely action
against establishments the statutory liability of the petitioner or
the statutory duty of the respondents to recover all amounts which
have not been deposited with it.
11.

Having heard learned counsel for the parties, I find that the

petitioner at no point of time has disputed its liability to make
payment of the dues demanded by the respondents There was also
admitted delay in deposit of the dues which had been recovered
from the salaries of the workmen. No submission was made giving
any valid reason as to why the amounts which had been deducted
from the salaries of the workmen had not been deposited with the
W.P.(C) 20999-21000/2005

page 8 of 25

provident fund authorities. In every letter written on behalf of the
petitioner in view of the letters dated 21st November, 2000 and 11th
December, 2000 and thereafter in 2001, the petitioner has
accepted its liability. List of debtors were forwarded on behalf of
the petitioner to the provident fund authorities to effect recoveries
of the amounts due. There is no dispute that the show cause
notice was issued on 20th October, 2000 and it sets out the details
of the default and the proposed levy under Section 14B and Section
7Q of the Employees Provident Fund & Miscellaneous Provisions
Act, 1972.
12.

After giving repeated opportunity to the petitioner, the

respondent no. 1 passed the order dated 12th March, 2001
assessing the damages.
13.

Perusal of the orders dated 12th March, 2001 shows that

there was no appearance on behalf of the petitioner before the
Commissioner on 8th January, 2001, 29th January, 2001 and 19th
January, 2001. The order was passed on the material which had
been placed by Mr. S. Chatterjee before the authorities.
Thereafter, the respondents have effected recovery of amounts by
auctioning the properties of the petitioner which have not been
objected by the respondents.
W.P.(C) 20999-21000/2005

page 9 of 25

14.

At this stage, it would be appropriate to refer to the law laid

down by the Apex Court so far as the power of the respondent
under

Section14B

of

the

Employees

Provident

Fund

&

Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 is concerned. In its judgment
reported at AIR 1979 SC 1803 Organo Chemical Industries
& Anr. Vs Union of India & Ors. In this case, the vires of
Section 14B had been challenged on the ground that it conferred
unguided power for fixing the quantum of damages. After detailed
consideration, it was held thus :“3. The pragmatics of the situation is that if
the stream of contributions were frozen by
employers' defaults after due deduction from
the wages and diversion for their own
purposes, the scheme would be damnified by
traumatic starvation of the fund, public
frustration from the failure of the project and
psychic demoralization of the miserable
beneficiaries when they find their wages
deducted and the employer get away with it
even after default in his own contribution and
malversation of the workers' share. 'Damages'
have a wider socially semantic connotation
than pecuniary loss of interest on nonpayment when a social welfare scheme suffers
mayhem on account of the injury. Law
expands concepts to embrace social needs so
as to become functionally effectual.
xxx
14. The further submission is that damages
being compensatory in character could not
exceed the interest the amount defaulted
would have carried during the period of delay.
W.P.(C) 20999-21000/2005

page 10 of 25

The respondent has gone beyond the mere
quantum of interest and has rounded it off to a
sum equal to the defaulted contribution. Is
this excess an illegal extravagance or a legal
levy? This turns on what is 'damages' in the
setting of the Act.
xxx
18. I am clearly of the view that 'damages',
as imposed by Section 14-B, includes a
punitive sum quantified according to the
circumstances of the case. In 'exemplary
damages' this aggravating element is
prominent. Constitutionally speaking, such a
penal levy included in damages is perfectly
within the area of implied powers and the
legislature may, while enforcing collections,
legitimately and reasonably provide for
recovery of additional sums in the shape of
penalty so as to see that avoidance is obviated.
Such a penal levy can take the form of
damages because the reparation for the injury
suffered by the default is more than the
narrow computation of interest on the
contribution.
xxx
27. Organo Chemical Industries, an 'establishment'
within the meaning of Section 1 (3) of the
Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous
Provisions Act, 1952 (hereinafter referred to as 'the
Act') to which the Act applies, committed defaults
in payments of Provident Fund and Family Pension
Scheme dues for the period from March to October
1975 and again for the period from December 1975
to November 1976 to the extent of Rs. 92,687.00
and of administrative charges amounting to Rs.
2,309.80 i.e. Rs. 94,996.80 in all. The Regional
Provident Fund Commissioner, Chandigarh,
accordingly, issued a show cause notice dated June
7, 1977 requiring the petitioners to show cause why
damages should not be levied under Section 14-B of
the Act.
W.P.(C) 20999-21000/2005

page 11 of 25

The notice was accompanied by a statement
showing a break-up of the various amounts in
arrears and the extent of delay in respect of each
payment and the details of damages proposed to be
imposed on the belated payments. The period of
delay in payment of the amounts remitted varied
from a few months to a year. It was proposed to
levy damages at a uniform rate of hundred per cent
on each of the amounts in arrears. In response to
the notice, the petitioners tried to explain away the
delay by alleging that it was due to difficulties
beyond their control and, therefore, the payments
could not be made in time viz., the facts that there
were disputes between the partners of the firm as a
result of which, there was a loss of Rupees
1,40,165.15, there was a power cut of 60% by the
Haryana Electricity Board w.e.f. May 6, 1974, which
compelled the petitioners to purchase a Generating
set to tide over the difficulties and that the
establishment had borrowed huge sums from the
Haryana Financial Corporation and in payment of
which it had defaulted for want of financial
resources etc. It was, accordingly contended that
the default, if any, was not wilful as they had no
intention to commit a default. The Regional
Provident Fund Commissioner after giving to the
petitioners the opportunity of a hearing by his
reasoned order dated August 16, 1977 considered in
detail each of the grounds taken in mitigation of the
defaults and came to the conclusion that none of
the grounds alleged furnished a legal justification
for the delay in making contributions in time. As
regards the alleged dispute among the partners
leading to a loss of Rs. 1,40,165.15, he observed:
“Even if it is assumed that there was a
loss as claimed it does not justify the delay in
deposit of Provident Fund money which is an
unqualified statutory obligation and cannot
be allowed to be linked with the financial
W.P.(C) 20999-21000/2005

page 12 of 25

position of the establishment, over different
points of time.
Besides 50% of the
contributions deposited late represented the
employees' share which had been deducted
from the employed wages and was a trust
money with employer for deposit in the
statutory fund. The delay in the deposit of
the part of the contribution amounted to
breach of trust and does not entitle the
employer to any consideration for relief.”
With respect to the plea that the
petitioners had been subject to a power-cut of
60% w.e.f. May 6, 1974 by the Haryana
Electricity Board, he negatived the plea by
observing that this restriction was not
exclusive to them and further that no cause
had been shown as to how this prevented
them from depositing the provident fund dues
in time. Even if the power-cut had resulted in
any substantial loss, it would have reduced the
liability on the amount of provident fund dues
also. He went on to observe that where an
employer can pay wages, it is not conceivable
why it cannot pay the provident fund dues. As
regards the stand taken that the establishment
had borrowed huge sums from the Haryana
Financial Corporation and in repayment of
which it had defaulted, he held that even if it
were so, the fact did not absolve the
establishment of its statutory obligation for
deposit of provident fund dues in time.
Similarly, the other reasons furnished like the
purchase of a new generating plant or internal
dispute among the partners and the
dissolution of the partnership firm etc. did not
constitute sufficient cause beyond the control
of the petitioners to justify the late deposit of
provident fund dues. He, accordingly,
concluded that the petitioners had failed to
carry out their obligation to contribute to the
W.P.(C) 20999-21000/2005

page 13 of 25

Employees' Provident Fund and Family
Pension Scheme within the time limit
provided therefor, and that no convincing case
had been made out to justify the delay in
making the deposits. He also on the material
on record found, as a fact, that the petitioners,
having regard to their past record, were
'habitual defaulters' and had, therefore, to be
severely dealt with, and should be visited with
the maximum penalty.
xxx
47. The expression 'damages' occurring in S.
14-B is, in substance, a penalty imposed on the
employer for the breach of the statutory
obligation. The object of imposition of penalty
under S. 14-B is not merely 'to provide
compensation for the employees'. We are
clearly of the opinion that the imposition of
damages under S. 14-B serves both the
purposes. It is meant to penalise defaulting
employer as also to provide reparation for the
amount of loss suffered by the employees. It
is not only a warning to employers in general
not to commit a breach of the statutory
requirements of S. 6, but at the same time it is
meant to provide compensation or redress to
the beneficiaries i.e. to recompense the
employees for the loss sustained by them.
There is nothing in the section to show that
the damages must bear relationship to the loss
which is caused to the beneficiaries under the
Scheme. The word 'damages' in S.14-B is
related to the word 'default'. The words used
in S. 14-B are 'default in the payment of
contribution' and, therefore, the word 'default'
must be construed in the light of Para 38 of
the Scheme which provides that the payment
of contribution has got to be made by the 15th
of the following month and, therefore, the
word 'default' in S. 14-B must mean 'failure in
performance' or 'failure to act'. At the same
W.P.(C) 20999-21000/2005

page 14 of 25

time, the imposition of damages under S. 14-B
is to provide reparation for the amount of loss
suffered by the employees.”
15.

Further in 1997 Lab. I.C. 990 Regional Provident

Fund Commissioner vs S.D. College, Hoshiarpur & Ors.,
the Supreme Court held thus :
“10. A reading of Section 14-B of the Act would
indicate that the employer is under an obligation
under the statute to comply with the payment of the
amount. In the event of his committing default in the
payment of the contribution to the fund or in the
payment of any charges payable under any other
provisions of the Act or any scheme or insurance
scheme or any of the conditions specified in Section 17,
the Central Provident Fund Commissioner or such
other officer as may be authorised by the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette in this behalf, recover from the employer, by
way of penalty, such damages, not exceeding the
amount of arrears, as may be specified in the scheme.
The second proviso only lifts the embargo in the even
of the industry becoming sick and it was reconstructed
under the provisions of Section 4 of the Sick Industrial
Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 subject to
such terms and conditions as may be specified in the
scheme of rehabilitation. In other words, the Act
envisages the imposition of damages for delayed
payments. The Act is a beneficial welfare legislation to
ensure health and other benefits to the employees.
The employer under the Act is under a statutory
obligation to deduct the specified percentage of the
contribution from the employee's salary and matching
contribution, the entire amount is required to be
deposited in the fund within 15 days after the date of
the collection, every month.
11. Thereby the employer is under a statutory
obligation to deposit the amount to the credit of the
W.P.(C) 20999-21000/2005

page 15 of 25

fund every month. In the event of any default
committed in that behalf, Section 14-B steps in and
calls upon the employer to pay damages by way of
penalty, the maximum of which is the accumulated
arrears. The Regional Provident Fund Commissioner
is given discretion only to reduce a percentage of
damages and he has no power to waive penalty
altogether.
In this case, admittedly, after the
judgment, there was no reason for the respondent to
deposit the amount with the University. We can
understand that since there was a scheme framed by
the University and the respondent was under an
obligation to comply with the scheme, they can have a
feeling of doubt as to whether they should abide by the
scheme framed by the University or under the Act.
Since they had filed the writ petition in this Court, this
Court gave direction on 29-1-1988 directing the
respondents to deposit the contribution with the
appellant. Thereby the respondents have a statutory
obligation to deposit the amount from February 1988
onwards.
Therefore, there is no justification
whatsoever to deposit and keep depositing the amount
in the University account after the judgment of this
Court. The mere fact that the University has given
permission to redeposit the amount with the appellant
does not enable the respondents to take shelter
thereunder for non-deposit of the amount in the fund.
12. Under these circumstances, we do not think that
there is any justification in the contention for waiver of
the penalty imposed by the Regional Provident Fund
Commissioner. As held earlier, there is no discretion
left to the Commissioner to totally waive the penalty.
What was left to his discretion is the rate at which it is
to be computed by way of penalty. In this case,
admittedly, 25% of the damages was computed as
penalty. Since the respondent had deposited the
amount in fixed deposit and it earned 9% interest
thereon, the balance amount is required to be
deposited and the respondent is directed to deposit the
balance amount within six weeks from today.”

W.P.(C) 20999-21000/2005

page 16 of 25

16.

It was held by the Supreme Court that Section 14B does not

vest unguided or uncontrolled discretion upon the Regional
Provident Fund Commissioner to impose damages.

On the

contrary the commissioner is exercising his quasi judicial
functioning and has to exercise power after giving notice to the
defaulter and reasonable opportunity of being heard. Limits of the
imposition have been statutorily fixed. The court held that the
Regional Provident Fund Commissioner has discretion only to
reduce percentage of damages and has no power to waive the
penalty altogether. In view of the law laid down by the Apex
Court, it is evident that the liability to grant and recovery penalty
under Section 14B of the Employees Provident Funds &
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 is absolute.
17.

In this view of the matter, there can be no manner of doubt

that in view of the admitted default in the instant case, the
employer was bound to pay damages.
18.

The liability to pay interest on the delay is to be found under

the provisions of Section 7Q of the statute. This provision was
incorporated by an amendment effected to the statute with effect
from 1st July, 1997 and is a liability which is independent of the
liability to pay damages under Section 14B of the statute.
W.P.(C) 20999-21000/2005

page 17 of 25

19.

The petitioner has pointed out no mitigating factors before

the assessing authority pursuant to the notice to show cause dated
20th October, 2000 which it would consider for reducing the
amount of damages. In these circumstances, the petitioner cannot
possibly be permitted to plead that there were any mitigating
circumstances which ought to have been considered prior to
passing of the order dated 12th March, 2001.

Even before this

court, no mitigating circumstances have been pleaded or brought
out on record. Except allegations against the other partner of the
firm, the petitioner has not brought out any circumstances which
could support its plea that the damages ought to be reduced. For
this reason, the judgment reported at 1999 II LLJ 980 is of no
benefit to the case of the petitioner.
20.

Perusal of the para 32A of the Employees Provident Fund

Scheme, 1952 shows that a table has been provided which permits
the respondents to recover damages by way of penalty at specified
rates. The table sets out the period of default and the rate of
damages as a percentage of arrears per annum. For default of six
months and above, it is provided that 37% of the arrears can be
imposed as damages for every year of default. Therefore, this
would mean that in the event of damages of a period of more than
W.P.(C) 20999-21000/2005

page 18 of 25

six months for more than one year is concerned, damages of 37%
per annum would become leviable for every year that the default
occurred. It is in this manner that for a period of three years,
damages would become leviable at the rate of 100% of the arrears.
It has been pointed out that in case of the petitioner, it is for the
period where damages were beyond three years that they have
been levied at the rate of 100% per annum on the default/belated
payment. The levy on this basis therefore cannot be faulted on the
ground that the scheme does not postulate the same.
21.

My attention has been drawn to the circular dated 28th

November, 1990. It is pointed out that this circular was issued by
the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner to the various
provident fund commissioners and officials under it to the effect
that expeditious action should be taken in respect of all cases
where damages had not been levied and to complete all pending
cases so that the interest of the provident fund authorities is not
adversely effected. The central provident fund commissioner had
given the time limit of 60 days to his officials to complete this job.
Perusal of this circular shows that it is an internal circular
intended to motivate its officials to expeditiously complete
assessment proceedings and did not set any binding outside limit
W.P.(C) 20999-21000/2005

page 19 of 25

for imposition of damages under Section 14B. I find force in the
contention on behalf of the respondent that this circular was
necessitated upon it being brought to the notice of the Central
Provident Fund Commissioner that matters relating to damages
are kept pending for several years from the date of commission of
the evidence. It was in view of the seriousness of the matter that
the circular was issued to ensure that the officials do not delay
matters unnecessarily. These instructions were in the nature of
administrative instructions.
22.

The legislation in instant case is a social welfare legislation.

The employer is required to effect deductions from the salaries of
the employees which he is bound to deposit with the provident
fund authorities. Damages are proposed where the employer may
effect the deductions and does not deposit the same with the
provident fund authorities. The statute prescribes the limitation
within which the amounts have to be deposited with the provident
fund authorities. However, so far as recovery of damages under
Section 14B from the defaulter is concerned, the statute provides
no limitation.
23.

In 1998 Labour I.C. 483 M/s Hindustan Times Ltd.

Vs Union of India & Ors., the Apex Court noticed that :W.P.(C) 20999-21000/2005

page 20 of 25

“The Act does not contain any provision
prescribing a period of limitation for
assessment or recovery of damages. In spite
of number of amendments, over a period of
more than thirty years, the legislature did not
think fit to make any provision prescribing a
period of limitation. This is significant and it
is clear that it is not the legislative intention
to prescribe any period of limitation for
computing and recovering the arrears. As the
amounts due to the Trust Fund and the
recovery is not by suit, the provisions of the
Indian Limitation Act, 1963 are not attracted.
The rule that where no period of limitation is
prescribed for exercise of a power, still such a
power must be exercised within reasonable
time, cannot apply to monies withheld by a
defaulter, who holds them in trust.
The
reason is that while in the cases where rule of
'reasonable time' was applied the exercise of
powers by the authority at a very belated
stage was likely to result in the deprivation of
property which rightly and lawfully belonged
to the person concerned, the position under
S. 14-B of the Act of an employer is totally
different. The employer who has defaulted in
making over the contributions to the Trust
Fund had, on the other hand, the use of
monies which did not belong to him t all.
Such a situation cannot be compared to the
above line of cases which involve prolonged
suspense in regard to deprivation of property.
In fact, in cases under S. 14-B if the Regional
Provident Fund Commissioner had made
computations earlier and sent a demand
immediately after the amounts fell due, the
defaulter would not have been able to use
these monies for his own purposes or for his
business. It does not lie in the mouth of such
a person to say that by reason of delay in the
exercise of powers u/S. 14-B, he had suffered
W.P.(C) 20999-21000/2005

page 21 of 25

loss. On the other hand, the defaulter has
obviously had the benefit of the 'boon of
delay' which “is so dear to debtors”.
24.

In these circumstances, the court directed that the authority

under Section 14B has to apply its mind to the facts of the case and
the material placed on record by the defaulter and pass an order
after following principles of natural justice.

The number of

debtors of the establishment, the period of delay, the frequency of
default and the amounts involved are all considerations which
would weigh with the authority. The Apex Court further held that
:“28. From the aforesaid decisions, the
following principles can be summarised. The
authority under Section 14-B has to apply his
mind to the facts of the case and the reply to
the show cause notice and pass a reasoned
order after following principles of natural
justice and giving a reasonable opportunity of
being heard; the Regional Provident Fund
Commissioner
usually
takes
into
consideration the number of defaults, the
period of delay, the frequency of default and
the amounts involved; default on the part of
the employer based on plea of power-cut,
financial problems relating to other
indebtedness or the delay in realisation of
amounts paid by the cheques or drafts,
cannot be justifiable grounds for the
employer to escape liability; there is no
period of limitation prescribed by the
legislature for initiating action for recovery of
damages under Section 14-B. The fact that
W.P.(C) 20999-21000/2005

page 22 of 25

proceedings are initiated on demand for
damages is made after several years cannot
by itself be a ground for drawing an inference
of waiver or that the employer was lulled into
a belief that no proceedings under Section 14B would be taken; mere delay in initiating
action under Section 14-B cannot amount to
prejudice inasmuch as the delay on the part
of the department, would have only allowed
the employer to use the monies for his own
purposes or for his business especially when
there is no additional provision for charging
interest. However, the employer can claim
prejudice if there is proof that between the
period of default and the date of initiation of
action under Section 14-B, he has changed his
position to his detriment to such an extent
that if the recovery is made after a large
number of years, the prejudice to him is of an
“irretrievable” nature; he might also claim
prejudice upon proof of loss of all the relevant
records and/or non-availability of the
personnel who were, several years back in
charge of these payments and provided he
further establishes that there is no other way
he can reconstruct the record or produce
evidence; or there are other similar grounds
which could lead to “irretrievable” prejudice;
further, in such cases of “irretrievable”
prejudice, the defaulter must take the
necessary pleas in defence in the reply to the
show cause notice and must satisfy the
concerned authority with acceptable material;
if those pleas are rejected, he cannot raise
them in the High Court unless there is a clear
pleading in the writ petition to that effect.”
25.

So far as the plea of prejudice on the account of delay in the

initiation of the action under Section 14B is concerned, the Apex

W.P.(C) 20999-21000/2005

page 23 of 25

Court was of the view that the defence of prejudice on account of
default in taking action has to be taken in the reply to the show
cause notice and the defaulter himself satisfy the concerned
authority with acceptable material.
In the instant case, no such pleas were raised before the
assessing authority.

On the contrary the petitioner infact had

admitted its liability to make payment of the dues. Lists of debtors
were forwarded by the petitioner requiring the respondents to
recover its dues from them. Not only this, the petitioners accepted
the action of the respondents in auctioning its properties to
recover provident fund dues.
26.

In these circumstances, the circular dated 28th November,

1990 cannot be relied upon by the petitioner to avoid its liability to
pay the damages under Section 14B of the Employees Provident
Fund Act & Miscellaneous Provisions Act and cannot be permitted
to urge delay in commencement of the proceedings under Section
14B to avoid the penalty of damages.
27.

As already noticed, part of the dues have already been

recovered before the Appellate Tribunal and by auction. The only
ground raised by the petitioner was that Shri Solil Chatterjee had
retired from the partnership. This plea was totally disbelieved by
W.P.(C) 20999-21000/2005

page 24 of 25

the Appellate Tribunal. I find that the appeal before the Appellate
Tribunal was filed by Shri Solil Chatterjee before the Tribunal who
has filed the present writ petition as well.

The entire

correspondence on behalf of the petitioner has been conducted by
the same Shri Chatterjee. For these reasons, retirement, if at all,
can be of no effect so far as the provident fund dues or the
damages are concerned. Admittedly Shri Chatterjee was a partner
during the period the deposits became due.

As per the law laid

down by the Supreme Court and the statutory scheme, the
provident fund was to be deposited when the salary became
payable. The liability for damages & interest accrued immediately
on default of the deposit.
For this reason also I find the orders passed by the Tribunal
or the order of assessment of damages cannot be assailed.
I therefore find no merit in the writ petition which is hereby
dismissed.

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
January 10, 2006
kr

W.P.(C) 20999-21000/2005

page 25 of 25

