IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.889-92/2005
Judgment reserved on : 18th January, 2005
Dat e of decision : March 10th, 2005
SH. JAGAT SINGH & ORS. ... Petitioners
through Mr. R.K. Saini with
Mr. N.R. Sharma, Advocates
VERSUS
DSIDC LTD. & ORS.
.... Respondents
through Ms. Anusuya Salwan,
Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J
1.

The present writ petition impugns the action of the

respondents in rejecting applications of four of the sons of Sh.
Mithan Lal whose land was acquired for individual shops on the
ground that as per the scheme for allotment of shops to persons
whose land was acquired, the expression“Displaced Family” would
include one member of the family of the “Recorded Owner” only
W.P.(C) 889-92/2005

page 1 of page 28

and that Mithan Lal was the only“recorded owner” of the land
acquired whereas the petitioners were only his representatives and
entitled to shares in the compensation awarded to Mithan Lal.
2.

The undisputed facts giving rise to the petition are that

one Sh. Mithan Lal was the owner of a 14th share in land at
measuring 67 Bighas 7 Biswas in village Bhorgarh, Delhi. From
the documents placed on record by the petitioner, it is evident that
this land was notified for acquisition under Section 4 of the Land
Acquisition Act, 1989 in the year 1963. The award with regard to
this land came to be made vide award no. 19/78-79 dated 12th
June, 1978. The purpose of acquisition appears to be for planned
development of Delhi.

This acquired land was earmarked for

development of an industrial complex known as the Narela
Industrial Park.
The admitted position is that possession of the land was
taken by the land acquisition collector on 10th July, 1978.
Compensation payable under the statutory scheme of the Land
Acquisition Act was paid on 18th November, 1978.
3.

It appears that the authorities had identified the

creation of Narela Township as an industrial complex to be
developed by the Delhi State Industrial Development Corporation
W.P.(C) 889-92/2005

page 2 of page 28

as part of the integrated development of the plan of Narela. The
industrial complex which was to be developed was to cover an area
of 240 hectares and was earmarked for industrial activity.

In

addition to the industrial plots which were developed, seven
facility centres to cater to the basic needs of the industries were
planned spread over the various sectors of the complex.
For purposes of allotment of the commercial spaces in
these facility centers, the respondents had published “BROCHURE
FOR ALLOTMENT OF SHOPS AT NARELA INDUSTRIAL PARK”.
In this brochure, the respondents had notified that the
allotment of shops is only for the persons/members of the
displaced families whose land had been acquired for the
development of the industrial complex.
4.

The petitioners are stated to have made applications for

allotment of shops/spaces at the Narela Industrial Complex vide
application nos. 123, 124, 126 and 127. The required amount of
Rs.15,000/- was also duly deposited by them on the 13th
December, 1997. The draw of lots for allotment of the shops was
conducted by the DSIDC on the 12th August, 1988 as per the letter
dated 4th August, 1998 received by the petitioners from the
respondents and all the petitioners were notified that allotments
W.P.(C) 889-92/2005

page 3 of page 28

were made to them against their applications in the draw of lots
held. Thereafter the petitioners were notified vide letter dated
10thDecember, 1998 to comply with formalities and deposit
amounts.
The petitioners have pointed out that they made the
deposit of the notified amounts of Rs.42,250/- vide receipts dated
8th January, 1999 and 25th January, 1999 respectively. Further
amount of Rs.57,500/- deposited on 9th February, 1999 and that
they also deposited the documents required as per clause 22 of the
letter dated 10th December, 1998.
5.

It appears from the documents filed by the petitioner

that the DSIDC had appointed a committee for looking into the
eligibility conditions for allotment of shops which had scrutinised
the documents submitted by the four petitioners. Pursuant to
such scrutiny, the DSIDC appeared to have addressed letters dated
19th May, 2000, to the four petitioners whereby it was contended
that as per the eligibility conditions laid down in the brochure at
clause 5(c) for the allotment of shops in F-C(iv), only one person
from each of the displaced family was eligible for allotment.
Accordingly, the petitioners were given a notice to show
cause to explain as to why the provisional allotment of the shop
W.P.(C) 889-92/2005

page 4 of page 28

made in the name of each of the petitioners be not withdrawn.
The petitioners appeared to have addressed a letter dated 16th
June, 2000 in reply to this notice and sought proper guidelines
from the DSIDC.

It was contended that the petitioners had

deposited the entire amount as was required by the DSIDC.
6.

The DSIDC thereafter sought further information from

the petitioners for proceeding in the matter vide letters dated 4th
July, 2002 issued to the petitioners. This information was sought
in terms of a proforma which was required to be verified by the
Land Acquisition Collector.

This letter also notices that the

original allotment made in terms of the offer dated 10th December,
1998 was provisional and that scrutiny of the documents
submitted by the petitioner was effected subsequently.

The

petitioner complied with this on 11th July, 2002. Thereafter the
respondents considered the matter and passed the order dated 7th
November, 2002 holding that only one shop can be allotted to the
heirs of Sh. Mithan Lal.
7.

The decision dated 7th November, 2002 has been

impugned by way of the present petition principally on the
contention that the DSIDC has changed the definition and
criterion for allotment. This writ petition was listed on the 18 th
W.P.(C) 889-92/2005

page 5 of page 28

January, 2005. Keeping in view the nature of the issues raised,
counsel for both parties submitted that the petition can be
disposed of on the basis of the record filed with the writ petition
only. Accordingly the matter was heard at length at that stage
itself on the request of the parties. According to the submissions
made on behalf of the petitioners, they were the land owners and
were all members of different families. It was firstly contended
that as such the DSIDC had no jurisdiction to change the
definition and criterion to interpret the expression “displaced
family” to mean only the family of the recorded owner.
The second contention made on behalf of the petitioners
is that an offer was made to the petitioners of allotment by the
DSIDC vide the letter dated 10th December, 1998.

Pursuant

thereto, the petitioner accepted the offers and made full payment
thereof. The DSIDC having accepted the payments is precluded on
the ground of application of principles of promissory estoppel
from taking a decision to the prejudice of all the petitioners and
cannot be permitted to withdraw the allotments made in favour of
the petitioners.
8.

The respondents have submitted that the action of the

DSIDC was in accordance with the scheme of allotment which was
W.P.(C) 889-92/2005

page 6 of page 28

duly announced.

The respondents have vehemently contended

that there was no change in the scheme of allotment.

It has

further been submitted that in view of the law laid down by this
court, the petitioners have no right to claim allotment of the shop
inasmuch as they have been compensated by disbursement of the
compensation under the Land Acquisition Act, 1998.

The

respondents have further submitted that the petitioners were fully
aware that only one shop could be allotted to one displaced family.
The petitioners were merely heirs of late Sh. Mithan Lal who was
the owner of the land and in whose favour the award has been
made. It has further been submitted that the allotment in favour
of the petitioners vide the letter dated 10th December, 1998 was
clearly provisional. No benefit could be taken by the petitioner for
having made payment in terms thereof. The same letter required
the petitioners to submit documents which place beyond any
doubt that only one member of a displaced family or one member
of the family of a deceased land owner who was entitled to the
shop. Reliance has been placed on the documents required by
DSIDC in para 22 and 23 of this letter.
9.

I have given my considered thought to the submissions

made. The scheme for allotment itself postulates that only one
W.P.(C) 889-92/2005

page 7 of page 28

member each of the displaced family whose land has been
acquired for development of the industrial complex would be
eligible.
10.

The writ petitioners have stated that Sh. Mithan Lal was

the owner of land which was so acquired. It is stated that he died
on 3rd April, 1978 and at the time of his death he had six sons. The
four writ petitioners were four out of his six sons who at the time
of his death were living separately and individually from him
alongwith their own families. Averrments in this behalf have been
made in para 1 and para 6 of the writ petition which read as under
:“1.
That the petitioners are citizens of
India. All of them sons of late Shri Midhan Lal,
who was the recorded owner of the demised land
as on the date of notification U/s 4 but died about
3 months before the announcement of the award.
6.
That Shri Mithan Lal died on
03.04.1978 and at the time of his death, all th four
petitioners
were
living
separately
and
independently from him, along with their own
families. A true copy of the death certificate is
annexed herewith marked as Annexure P-3. True
copies of the ration cards etc. of the petitioners
are annexed herewith collectively marked as
Annexure P-4.”
Therefore, it is the case of the petitioners themselves
that there was no joint status of the petitioners and Sh. Mithan Lal,
the deceased land owner and that the four petitioners were not
W.P.(C) 889-92/2005

page 8 of page 28

living as part of the family of late Sh. Mithan Lal.
It is an admitted position that Sh. Mithan Lal was the
only recorded owner and had pursued the award proceedings in
such capacity. The petitioners have also admitted that late Sh.
Mithan Lal was the recorded owner of the land.
11.

The copy of the award no. 19/78-79 dated 12th June,

1978 has been placed on record by the petitioners as annexure P-1.
Perusal thereof shows that late Sh. Mithan Lal had participated in
the acquisition proceedings and in response to notices issued
under Section 9 & 10 of the Land Acquisition Act, had lodged the
claim for compensation in respect of the land. The award no.
19/78-79 was made in respect of the claim lodged by Sh. Mithan
Lal.
As Sh. Mithan Lal died, the petitioners and their two
other brothers have received the compensation from the Land
Acquisition Collector not on account of their

being the land

owners. They have also not received the compensation as
members of “the family” of Sh. Mithan Lal but by virtue of their
relationship as sons of Sh. Mithan Lal and consequent succession
as heirs/legal representatives to the compensation awarded to
him. Admittedly, the petitioners were not living with Sh. Mithan
W.P.(C) 889-92/2005

page 9 of page 28

Lal as members of his family. They were all living independently
with their respective families. Ration cards in this respect have
been placed on record. According to the petitioners themselves,
they did not form part of the family of the displaced land owner of
Sh. Mithan Lal and were living separately. As per the information
given by the petitioners and the certificate of the land Acquisition
Collector placed on record, the petitioners were not the recorded
owners of the land.

12.

It is necessary to examine the conditions notified in the

“Brochure For Allotment Of Shops At The Narela Industrial Park”
to decide the issues raised before me.
The eligibility conditions were laid down in clause 5 of
the brochure and the material term in respect thereof reads as
hereunder :“5. ELIGIBILITY
a) XXXX
b) XXXX
c) Only one member each of the displaced families
whose land had been acquired for development of
this Industrial Complex shall be eligible.
d) Only one shop shall be alloted to one applicant
and that one applicant will not be allowed to apply
for more than one shop. In case the applicant
applies for more than one shop than his/her
application shall be rejected and he/she shall not
W.P.(C) 889-92/2005

page 10 of page 28

be considered for allotment. All the members of
the family of the displaced person can apply for
allotment of a shop/Kiosk/office space/canteen
but only one shop/Kiosk/office space/canteen will
be alloted to one such member of the said family.
e) XXXX
f) XXXX
g) If no. of eligible candidates for a particular
shop/shops is more than its numbers then the
shop/shops shall be allotted through draw of lots.
The Corporation may adopt any method for
allotment of shop as the competent authority may
deem fit and proper in the circumstances.
h) Decision of DSIDC regarding allotment of
space shall be final and binding on the applicant.”
The scheme of allotment also included the power to
surrender or cancel the allotment which was as hereunder :“8.

SURRENDER OR CANCELLATION
In case of allotment of shop/office space
made to an applicant is sought to be
surrendered/cancelled, the allottee shall be liable
to pay 10% of the registration deposit as
cancellation charges, if the request for
surrender/cancellation is made within 1 month of
date of allotment. In case of refund/cancellation
is made after one month of the date of the
allotment interest @ 18% per annum on the
amount due w.e.f. The date of issue of the
allotment letter shall be charged in addition to
deduction of 10% of the registration deposit. Like
wise, if the allotment of shop is cancelled by
DSIDC for non payment of balance amount, the
allottee shall be liable to pay the interest @ 18%
for the delayed period in addition to the payment
of aforesaid cancellation charges. In case the
period of default exceed 3 months the allotment of
shops will be liable to cancelled.”
17.
ARBITRATION
Dispute, if any, regarding allotment or
W.P.(C) 889-92/2005

page 11 of page 28

13.

any of its terms and conditions shall be referred to
the sole arbitration of the Chairman-cumManaging Director, DSIDC , or any other person
nominated by him and in his absence by
Managing Director or such authority which is
notified to discharge the duties and functions of
the Chairman-cum-Managing Director of the
corporation.
The Arbitrator so appointed may be a
DSIDC employee and No Objection whatsoever on
this score will be entertained by DSIDC . In the
event of the Arbitrator so appointed being unable
to act or carry on with his job or vacating his
office, the Chairman-cum-Manging Director,
DSIDC shall appoint another person to be his
successor who will pick up the thread from where
it was left by his predecessor. Subject as aforesaid
provision of the arbitration and conciliation act
1996 and the rules applied thereunder for the time
being in force shall apply to arbitration
proceedings under this clause.
It is also a term of this clause that if the
applicant fails to make any demand for arbitration
in writing within 90 days of cause of action, the
claim of the applicant will be deemed to have been
waived and absolutely barred and DISDC shall be
discharged and relieved of all the liabilities in
respect of these claims.
19.
GENERAL
i)
The above terms and conditions will be
followed generally, but DSIDC reserves its rights
to alter any of them if and when considered
necessary.
ii)
The DSIDC also reserves its right to
withdraw the scheme at any time.”
Admittedly, this consideration for allotment of shop was

in addition to the compensation received for acquisition of the
land under the Land Acquisition Act.

W.P.(C) 889-92/2005

page 12 of page 28

14.

Perusal of the letter dated 10th December, 1998 issued by

the DSIDC notifying the petitioners about the provisional
allotment shows that the intimation given to the petitioners was
that the DSIDC was provisionally offering shops to the petitioners
for allotment.

The petitioners were required to fulfill certain

formalities which include the following :“22.
You are further requested to deposit the
following documents with the DSIDC within one
month :
(i)
An attested copy of Khatoni/LR-4/LR5, as the case may be;
(ii)
Copy of Partnership Deed (in case of
Partnership) ;
(iii)
SC/ST/Ex-Serviceman Certificate of
competent authority (in case of SC/ST/ExServiceman);
(iv)
Certificate of mutation (in case of
mutation);
(v)
Affidavit declaring legal heirs of the
deceased in case of death of the person whose
land was acquired;
(vi)
N.O.C. from all the legal heirs of the
deceased;
(vii)
Death Certificate of the deceased;
(viii)
Attested copy of the Ration Card.
23.
It is hereby clarified that the allotment
has been made on the declaration, information
furnished by the applicant and believed to be
correct by the Corporation. In the event of any
information/declaration found to be incorrect,
false or in any way untrue or that any misrepresentation made to the Corporation and in
the event of any breach being committed by the
applicant of the terms and conditions of
W.P.(C) 889-92/2005

page 13 of page 28

15.

Brochure, the allotment, letter and such other
conditions as imposed by the Corporation from
time to time, the Corporation shall have right to
cancel the allotment.”
There is also no dispute to the information or the

certificate given by the Land Acquisition Collector as was sought
vide the letter dated 4th July, 2002.
The petitioners appeared to have deposited the
information as well as the certificate of the Land Acquisition
Collector vide the letter dated 11th July, 2002.
The answer by the petitioner to some of the columns and
the certificate of the collector is material.
Each of the petitioners has given the information in an
identical manner. The application forms submitted by Sh. Jagat
Singh contained the following submissions :“
8. Whether any land owned by
No
the applicant, his wife/husband
If yes, then give particulars
&
dependent
relations .................................................
(including
the
unmarried
Village..............................
children) in Delhi, New Delhi &
Delhi Cantt. Has been acquired?
Award No. & Date............
If yes, its particulars
Khasra No.........................

W.P.(C) 889-92/2005

page 14 of page 28

9. If the recorded owner at the
time of Notification u/s 4 has
died, then
(i) Name of legal heirs, their age
and relation with recorded
owner
Name

Age
Relationship

Jagat Singh

75 years
Son

“12.

Verification by Land Acquisition Collector

D. Whether the possession of
the acquired land has been
taken over wholly. If yes, then
give date if not give details

10/07/78

B. Details regarding Ancestral
land
(i) Number and date of
Notification u/s 4 of the Land
Acqusiition Act.

W.P.(C) 889-92/2005

No.F.1(43) 163-L&H
Date : 30.10.63

page 15 of page 28

D. Whether the possession of
the acquired land has been
taken over wholly. If yes, then
give date if not give details

10/07/78

(ii) Name of recorded owner at
the time of notification u/s 4 of
the Land Acquisition Act.

Mittan Lal S/o Samay Singh

C. If the compensation of the
acquisition land has not been
paid to the recorded owner
shown in Col. 12B (ii) above,
then the names of his legal
heirs, amount and share of
compensation paid to each of
them.

¼ share
Shadi Ram, ½ share

E. Details regarding selfacquired land

Yes/No

Whether this land has been
mutated in favour of the
applicant? If yes, then No. and
date.

No.N/A
Date.................

Sd/Signature of LAC with stamp”
16.

This proforma also contains the following explanation:“CONDITIONS OF ELIGIBILITY
a)
In case of ancestral land, person who is
the recorded owner prior to the issue of
notification under Section 4 of the Land
Acquisition Action is eligible.
b)
In case where land has been purchased,
land should have been purchased prior to the
issue of notification under section 4 of the Land

W.P.(C) 889-92/2005

page 16 of page 28

17.

Acquisition Act and the mutation should also
have been carried out.
c)
When recorded owner of the land dies
before notification under section 4, allotment is to
be made separately to all the legal heirs of
deceased according to their share recognized by
the LAC but if he dies after the notification, all
legal heirs are entitled to only one plot.”
Based on the information furnished by the petitioners,

the respondent seem to have considered the matter and passed an
order which was communicated to the petitioner vide letter dated
7th November, 2002. It would be useful to notice the material
terms which reads as hereunder :“This has reference to your letter dated 11/7/02
and 25/7/02 on the above cited subject. In this
connection it has been noticed on scrutiny of the
certificated duly endorsed by the office of the
Land Acquisition Collector that recorded owner of
land at time of notification under Section (4) of
the Land Acquisition Act was your father late Sh.
Mithan Lal and as per the terms and conditions of
brochure only one person from each displaced
family was eligible for allotment of shop, whereas
you all have got the allotment of four shops as
mentioned above.
The
competent
authority
has
considered the issue and has decided that
eligibility criteria be adopted to the definition of
“recorded owner” only and in your case the
recorded owner of land was your father late Sh.
Mithan Lal, as such only on shop can be allotted
to him or his legal heirs. You are accordingly
requested to indicate one of the above mentioned
shops that you would like to retain jointly or in
favour of one.”

W.P.(C) 889-92/2005

page 17 of page 28

18.

No action was taken by the petitioner thereafter.

However only on the 1st March, 2004 the petitioners appeared to
have submitted a representation to the DSIDC with a reminder
thereto on 26th April, 2004. According to the petitioners, as the
respondents have failed to consider the assertions on behalf of the
petitioners, the petitioners have impugned the decision taken by
the DSIDC by way of the present writ petition.
19.

Looking at the matter from the aspect of land acquisition

itself, transfer of a land which is a subject matter of acquisition on
account of issuance of a notification under Section 4 of the Land
Acquisition Act is interdicted on account of the application of the
Delhi Lands(Restriction on Transfer) Act, 1972.

The position

which emanates is that any person acquiring rights in land
subsequent to the issuance of the notification under Section 4 of
the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, becomes entitled only to the
compensation under the Award which may be made in respect of
such land.
20.

The petitioners had no right in the land whatsoever

during the life time of Sh. Mithan Lal. The notification under
Section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act was in place since 1963. Sh.
Mithan Lal had also lodged the claim with the Land Acquisition
W.P.(C) 889-92/2005

page 18 of page 28

Collector in respect of the land in question.
Upon his death, his six sons became entitled only to the
compensation under the Award in the matter without acquiring
any right in the land which had been acquired. The petitioners,
therefore, did not fall into definition of either the “land owners” or
the “recorded owner” for the purposes of the Land Acquisition Act.
As noticed above, the petitioners were clearly not
members of the family of the “displaced person”.
21.

In acceptance of the above legal position, the petitioners

and the other sons accepted the Award in favour of their father
Late Sh. Mithan Lal and accepted payment of the compensation.
22.

The other aspect which deserves to be noticed relates to

the status of a land owner. Under the scheme of acquisition of
land in accordance with law, a land owner is the person in whose
name the ownership rights of the land are recorded at the time of
issuance of the Section 4 notification. The material date is the date
of issuance of such notification.

Any person acquiring rights

subsequent to the issuance of the notification is legally considered
and entitled to only such rights as were held by the recorded owner
in whose name the land stood on the date of issuance of the
Section 4 notification.
W.P.(C) 889-92/2005

page 19 of page 28

The petitioners were not the owners of the land at the
time of issuance of the notification under Section 4 of the Land
Acquisition Act.
23.

The DSIDC appears to have been conscious of such a

contingency where a land owner or recorded owner may have died
prior to the allotment under the scheme being complete. For this
reason, vide the letter notifying a person with regard to the
provisional allotment, the DSIDC had required submission of a
certificate of mutation, affidavit declaring legal heirs of the
deceased in case of death of the person whose land was acquired as
well as no objection certificates from all the legal heirs of the
deceased.

Such requirements were communicated to the

petitioners as well vide the letter dated 10th December, 1998.
24.

The admitted case of the petitioners, themselves is that

such documents were duly submitted by the petitioners to the
DSIDC. Only four out of the six sons of the deceased Sh. Mithan
Lal had made the applications and are petitioners before this
court.
25.

The petitioners were aware of the above position as they

have contended that the required documents were deposited with
the respondents. Therefore, the petitioners cannot be heard to
W.P.(C) 889-92/2005

page 20 of page 28

contend that there was any change in the definition or the criterion
for allotment after allotment. The scheme clearly stipulated that
only one member of the “Displaced Family” was to be considered
for allotment of the shop.

The purpose appears to be

rehabilitation of the land owner and aim of the authorities to
provide a source of livelihood to the displaced family. Only a
member of such displaced family was thus eligible to make the
application and not four separately settled sons of a deceased land
owner.
There exists a distinction between “member of a family”
and an “ heir/representative of a person” who is not living as part
of the family of an individual. The severance of joint status is
recognized by law.
26.

It appears that in view of claims as have been raised in

the present case, the position was explained by the DSIDC in the
note appended to their format which was submitted by the
petitioner on the 11th June, 2002. The format has clearly explained
the definition of a land owner who would be entitled for
consideration for allotment of the land.

The petitioner has

accepted the position stated by DSIDC and raised no objection
thereto.
W.P.(C) 889-92/2005

page 21 of page 28

27.

The action taken by the respondents cannot be faulted

for yet another reason. The scheme for allotment of alternative
land upon acquisition of his land under a Land Acquisition Act has
fallen for consideration before this court in several cases.

The

legal position in respect thereof has been authoratitively laid down
in the Full Bench judgment reported at AIR 1994 Delhi 29, entitled
Ramanand vs UOI & Ors. which has been relied upon by learned
counsel for the respondents. In this case, large chunks of land
were acquired for development and disbursement of land for the
purposes of planned development of Delhi. A scheme was also
announced for grant of alternative land in addition to the
compensation payable for residential purposes. However, after
consideration of the matter the authorities had reduced the size of
the plots which was available for allotment. The petitioners in this
case had impugned both the action of reduction of size of the plots
as well as the increase in the premium on which the plots were to
be allotted. So far as the issues necessary for consideration before
the present case are concerned, the same were answered as follows
:“29.
Now, let us turn to the second question.
It may be stated at the outset that individuals
whose land has been acquired are not given
W.P.(C) 889-92/2005

page 22 of page 28

28.

residential plots in lieu of acquisition of their
land, for which they are paid full compensation,
under he Land Acquisition Act. This is an
additional benefit envisaged for resettlement of
the displaced individuals, and premium is
chargeable
from
such
individuals
at
predetermined rates for allotment of alternative
plots under the Nazul Rules.
34.
We, therefore, proceed to answer the
second question, and hold that the rates of
premium chargeable from different categories of
persons, including an individual whose land has
been acquired, shall be the predetermined rates
in force at the time when the offer is made to the
concerned person for allotment of a specific plot
of land in a particular area or zone, under rule 6
of Nazul Rules.
40.
For the foregoing reasons, we over-rule
the decision in the case of Rajinder Kumar
(Supra). We hold that an individual, whose land
is acquired, does not have an absolute right to the
allotment of alternative plot of land for
residential purposes, and that such a person is
only eligible to be considered for allotment of a
plot, subject to certain conditions. Further, we
hold that premium shall be chargeable from such
a person at the pre-determined rates prevailing
on the date when the offer is made to him by the
DDA for allotment of a specific plot of land in a
particular area or zone, under the Nazul Rules.”
In my view, the material date relevant for the purposes

of eligibility for consideration for allotment of the plot would be
the date of issuance of the notification under Section 4.
Admittedly, the petitioner was not a land owner on such date.
Furthermore, the petitioner admittedly was also not a member of
the family of late Sh. Mithan Lal. Only four out of the six sons
W.P.(C) 889-92/2005

page 23 of page 28

have submitted application.

The petitioners were duly put to

notice with regard to the fact that only one member of the
displaced family was entitled for consideration for allotment of the
shop. The petitioners were required to submit documents showing
that every heir had no objection and also the name of the person
who was the owner on the date of Section 4 notification. The
petitioners did not participate in the acquisition proceedings. It
was the claim of the late Sh. Mithan Lal which was considered by
the Land Acquisition Collector and the petitioners accepted this
Award and position.
The petitioners for all the aforesaid reasons did not fall
under the definition of a “member of the displaced family” whose
land was acquired. There is thus no change in the definition of
such expression by the respondents.
29.

The petitioners in any case have no vested right or

entitlement to allotment. The respondents have considered the
matter at length and have held that only one member of the family
of Sh. Mithan Lal was entitled to allotment. The allotments made
to the petitioners were provisional and were obviously subject to
verification of the claims made. The respondents have passed the
orders after considering the matter at length and giving full
W.P.(C) 889-92/2005

page 24 of page 28

opportunity to the petitioners in support of their claim made
before the respondents as well as in this court.
The principles of promissory estoppel are not attracted
in this view of the matter.
Furthermore, keeping in view the spirit, intendment and
purpose of the scheme, it is evidently a welfare measure to
facilitate rehabilitation of the land owners who may be losing
livelihood on account of the acquisition. Such scheme cannot be
permitted to be converted into a method of acquisition of
commercial property by separated children of a deceased land
owner. Even though the principles of promissory estoppel are not
attracted, but it has been held by the Apex Court in the judgment
reported AIR 1979 Supreme Court 621 entitled M.P. Sugar Mills vs
State of U.P. that assuming that the Government has made a
promise and if the Government is able to show that in view of the
facts which have

transpired since the making of the promise,

public interest would be prejudiced if the Government were
required to carry out the promise, the court would have to balance
the public interest in the government carrying out a promise made
to a citizen which has induced the citizen to act upon it and alter
his position and the public interest likely to suffer if the promise
W.P.(C) 889-92/2005

page 25 of page 28

were required to be carried out by the Government and determine
which way the equity lies.
Further the doctrine of promissory estoppel represents a
principle evolved by equity to avoid injustice and though named
“promissory estoppel”it is neither in the realm of contract nor in
the realm of estoppal.

The basis of this doctrine is the

interposition of equity which has always, true to its form, stepped
in to mitigate the rigour of strict law. It was so held by the Apex
Court in 1985 4 SCC 369 in Union of India & Ors. vs Godfrey
Philips India Ltd. The Apex Court further held that the doctrine
of promissory estoppel being an equitable doctrine, it must yield
when the equity so requires.

If it can be shown by the

Government or public authority that having regard to the facts as
they have transpired, it would be inequitable to hold the
Government or public authority to the promise or representation
made by it, the Court would not raise an equity in favour of the
person to whom the promise or representation is made and
enforce the promise or representation against the Government or
public authority. The doctrine of promissory estoppel would be
displaced in such as case, because on the facts, equity would not
require that the Government or public authority should be held
W.P.(C) 889-92/2005

page 26 of page 28

bound by the promise or representation made by it.
30.

I have already held that there was no variation in the

definition of “members of family of a displaced person” by the
respondents and that principles of promissory estoppel were not
applicable to the instant case. Even assuming that the same were
attracted, it would be necessary to bear in mind the purpose for
which the scheme for allocation of shops to members of families of
the displaced persons has been evolved by the respondents. The
purpose obviously benovelent inasmuch as, in addition to the
compensation being paid under the provisions of the Land
Acquisition Act, the respondents are allotting shops. The zone of
consideration for such allotment was restricted to a member of the
displaced family and the intention clearly being to secure a means
of livelihood.
31.

Assuming that it were to be held that the respondents

were bound on considerations of promissory estoppel to issuance
of a writ petition, then as a result, four members of one family
would get four shops in addition to the compensation paid in
respect of the land of their father. Such an order if implemented in
respect of the several land owners, would result in greater harm to
society and would completely defeat the purpose and intendment
W.P.(C) 889-92/2005

page 27 of page 28

of the scheme of allocation.
32.

It is also settled law that writ jurisdiction will not be

exercised to perpetuate an unjust gain (reference 1984(4) SCC 371
entitled M.P. Mittal vs State of Haryana). It has also been held by
the Apex Court that no writ would be issued merely on the making
out of a legal point if the larger interest of the public at large so
required in Ramniklal N. Bhutta & Anr. Vs State of Maharashtra &
Ors. reported at 1997 (1) SCC 134.
33.

It has been held by the Apex Court that if quashing of an

order results in greater harm to society, then even an order
contrary to law cannot be quashed. It was so held in 1994(2) SCC
481 entitled State of Maharashtra & Ors. vs. Prabhu.
In the aforestated position of law, I am of the view that
there is no merit in the writ petition which deserves to be
dismissed.
Accordingly, the writ petition is dismissed.
There is no order as to costs.
GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
March 10th, 2005
kr

W.P.(C) 889-92/2005

page 28 of page 28

