*IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.3039/2002
Judgment reserved on: 19th January, 2005
Date of decision: March 10th, 2005
NEHA SHARMA
... Petitioner
Through Mr. Jitender Sharma, Sr.
Advocate with Mr. K.V. Bharati Upadhyay,
Advocate
VERSUS
THE VICE CHANCELLOR & ORS..... Respondents
Through Mr. G.D. Goel, Advocate with
Mr. Sanjiv Goel, Advocate for
respondents no.1 and 2
Mr. Suryakant Singla, Advocate
for respondent no.3
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

The present petition has challenged action taken by

respondent no.1 in forfeiting 75% of the deposit made by her
towards tuition fee at the time of her admission to a course being
conducted by respondent no.3, which is affiliated to the

WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.3039/2002

Page 1 of 19

respondent no.1. The facts giving arise to the present petition are
within a narrow compass and are not disputed by the respondents.
2.

The

petitioner

completed

her

Senior

Secondary

Examination from the Air Force Golden Jublee School (Delhi
Board) and applied for admission to several universities including
the University of Delhi and the Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha
University, Delhi.
The petitioner has stated that in the first instance, she
was offered admission by the Indraprastha College for Women
affiliated to the Delhi University which she had joined.
Thereafter she was called for counselling by the Guru
Gobind Singh Indraprastha University, Delhi on 31.7.2000 and
she had opted to join the Bachelor of Information Systems which is
a three years course being conducted in the Institute of
Information Technology and Management, arrayed as respondent
no.3 in the present petition.

The Petitioner was given an

admission slip on the spot itself and was required to deposit total
sum of Rs.57,500/- which amount was consequently paid vide
receipt No.1/926 dated 31.7.2000/ According to the parties, the
amount deposited was on account of tuition fess for the sum of
Rs.50,000/-, security deposit of Rs.5000/- and examination fess
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.3039/2002

Page 2 of 19

of Rs.2,500/-.
3.

Petitioner had also applied to Guru Jambeshwar

University at Hissar in Haryana, where she was called upon for
counselling.

Accordingly, in order to enable the petitioner to

participate in the counselling at Hissar on 4.8.2000, the petitioner
made an application for return of her original documents. The
documents were returned to the petitioner pursuant to her
application.
4.

In the counselling conducted at Hissar, the petitioner

was granted admission to the Bachelor of Engineering (Computer
Science and Engineering) course. As the same was a better course
than the course to which the petitioner had been admitted with
respondent no.3, she opted to take admission at Hissar and as
such duly deposited her fees in the said course and college on
23.8.2000.
5.

The petitioner contends that the admission process

of

the respondents was not over even on the 31.8.2000. She was
called upon to participate in a counselling for Bachelor of
Engineering in Computer Science and Engineering course

by

respondent no.1 for seats at the Mahila Institute of Technology at
Kashmiri Gate, Delhi. It is pointed out that unfortunately the
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.3039/2002

Page 3 of 19

petitioner could not get admission to this institute because the
seats were filled up before her turn for the counselling came.
6.

In these circumstances, as the petitioner preferred to

pursue the Bachelor of Engineering course in Computer Science
and Engineering at Hissar instead of Information Systems, she
made an application to the respondent no.2 to refund the amount
deposited by her on the 31.7.2000.
Despite several reminders to the respondents, and
personal visits on behalf of the petitioner by her relatives, the full
amount deposited has not been refunded to the petitioner.
7.

It appears that 25.9.2000, the respondents no.1 and 2

intimated the petitioner that they were returning 75% of the
amount deposited by the petitioner and the balance was not liable
to be returned in terms of the applicable rules. Accordingly a
cheque bearing No.926773 for a sum of Rs.7,500/- dated
25.9.2000 for such refund was enclosed with the communication
dated 25.9.2000. The petitioner has reportedly protested to the
respondents for withholding of the balance amount of the
petitioner and has even caused a notice under Section 80 of the
Code of Civil Procedure to be served upon the respondents. But
the same was of no consequence compelling the petitioner to seek
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.3039/2002

Page 4 of 19

redressal by way present writ petition.
It is contended by the petitioner that she was entitled to
full refund and that the respondents action in forfeiting her money
was wholly illegal and untenable. Reliance has been placed on the
judgment of the Apex Court reported as (2002) 10 SSC 487
entitled Ramdeo Baba Kamala Nehru Engineering College and
Others vs. Sanjay Kumar and Others.
8.

The respondents on the other hand have not disputed

the aforestated facts but have based their entire arguments on the
statements made in the Information Bulletin issued by respondent
no1. for the year 2000-2001.

It has been contended that the

petitioner took admission to the paid category of candidates of her
own free will and choice and paid the fees in terms of the said
Information Bulletin. Copy of the Information Bulletin has been
handed over in the Court. It has been pleaded before me that
there was the rules contained in the Information Bulletin are
binding on the petitioner.

It is also contended that the writ

petition which was filed almost one and a half years after the
refund was made to the petitioner was misconceived and that no
challenge to the stipulations in the Information Bulletin in the writ
petition. An objection has also being raised to the maintainability
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.3039/2002

Page 5 of 19

of the writ petition on the ground that the writ petition raised
disputed questions of facts. It is submitted that in any case the
petitioner herself had caused to be served a notice under Section
80 of the Code of Civil Procedure and hence the petitioner could
have at best brought a suit for recovery of the amount. According
to the respondents, no writ petition would lie for recovery of
amount against the respondents.

The respondents have also

drawn the court's attention to the conduct of the petition who is
stated to have been of wavering mind and as to the manner in
which she has caused seats in different courses and institutions to
be wasted.
9.

The Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University has

been established by the Govt. of Delhi under the provisions of the
Delhi Legislative Act (9 of 1998) read with the amendment in 1999
as an affiliating and teaching university to facilitate and promote
studies, research and extension work in emerging areas of higher
education with focus on professional education in the disciplines
of engineering, technology, management studies, medicines,
pharmacy, nursing, education, law, etc. and also to achieve
excellence in these and related fields and other matters.

It is

endeavouring to ensure excellence at all levels of professional
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.3039/2002

Page 6 of 19

education. It has been set out that the respondent no.1 intends to
maintain high standards in all affiliated institutions also in terms
of teaching, research, faculty, infrastructures and other related
determinants of quality. The institutions are requires to conduct
programmes strictly adhering to norms and standards set out by
the university.

A curriculum to be pursued by the institute

affiliated by respondent no.1 has been set out by the university
itself.
10.

It appears that in order to achieve its objective to

encourage participation of self financing institutions in the area of
professional education, the Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha
University/respondent no.1 had admitted various institutions to
certain privileges and granted them affiliation for the conduct of
professional programmes. The programmes being conducted are
in conformity with projected manpower requirements in various
relevant areas of specialization.
11.

The number of seats available for admission to different

disciplines are strictly controlled by the respondent no.1
university. Admission to all the courses of study offered by these
self-financing institutions which are affiliated to the university are
made centrally by the Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University.
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.3039/2002

Page 7 of 19

Fifty percent of the seats in these affiliated institutions are treated
as free seats and the remaining fifty percent are payment seats.
However, the allotment of seats is made on inter se merit
determined on the basis of the common entrance test conducted
by the respondent no. 1.
12.

In order to effectuate to the preference of the

meritorious candidates, and to ensure that admissions are made
strictly in the order of merit, the candidates who clear the entrance
exam are called for counselling.

For such counselling the

candidate is physically called and informed of the available choices
of courses and institutes.

The candidate thereupon make his

considered choice and opts for an institute and course which seat
is accordingly filled up.
13.

It is inherent in the scheme of admissions that the seats

available for allotment are limited.

It also needs no further

elaboration that admissions have to be effected in a time bound
manner in order to meet academic deadlines and to ensure
commencement of course on stipulated dates. Any deviation from
either merit or effecting admissions after the commencement of
the academic course has been deprecated by the Supreme Court of
India whenever the matter have been raised before it in various
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.3039/2002

Page 8 of 19

courses.
14.

So far as the admissions to the courses and institutions

under respondent no.1 is concerned, the criterion for eligibility
and all other conditions remains to be the merit rank attained in
the common entrance exam. The same criteria is maintained for
both free seats and payments seats, the distinction only being in
the requirement of higher fees for payment seats.
15.

So far as the schedule of admissions for the year 2000-

2001 us concerned, which is the relevant academic year, the
Information Bulletin published and circulated provided, inter alia,
the following stipulations:Program
me

Total fees payable per annum
(including tuition fee,
instructional support,
development fee, University
examination & enrolment fee)
Free Seat

BIT/BCA

Payment
Seats

Rs.15,000 Rs.50,000

NRI Seat

Security
deposit *
(includin
g Library
security
deposit)

US $2,000 Rs.5,000

+Rs.2,500# +Rs.2,500# +Rs.2,500#
LLB (Hons)

Rs.15,000 Rs.42,000

US $2,000

Rs.5,000

+Rs.2,500# #Rs.2,500# +Rs.2,500#
BPT/B.Phar Rs.15,000 Rs.45,000 US $2,500 Rs.5,000
m
+Rs.2,500# +Rs.2,500# +Rs.2,500#
* One time payment at the time of admission (refundable)

WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.3039/2002

Page 9 of 19

# This amount is the University examination and enrollment fee
for both semesters/annual examination.
Note: (i)
The fee given above is payable at the time of
counselling/admission by cash or
demand draft in favour of
Registrar, Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University payable at
Delhi. Cheque will not be accepted under any circumstances and
admission will be made only when the entire fee is deposited (no
part payment will be acceptable).
(ii)
The above fee structure is provisional.
4.2

Withdrawal of admission and refund of fee
(a) If a student applies for withdrawal of
admission on or before 16 Aug.2000, the total fee after
deduction of 20 per cent will be refundable.
(b) No refund of fee, except the security deposit,
will be made on withdrawal of admission after 16 August
2000 under any circumstances.

16.

Admissions have been admittedly made strictly in

accordance with the method set out in the Information Bulletin.
Perusal of the same also shows that no admissions were to have
been effected after the 31.8.2000.
17.

The petitioner was duly notified by the respondents that

in the Information Bulletin itself that if fees are deposited by her
and admission is taken to a course, no withdrawal thereof or
refund of the entire fee would be permissible if the student seeks
withdrawal of admission after the 16.8.2000. In case withdrawal
of admission was sought after the 16.8.2000, no refund of fee was

WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.3039/2002

Page 10 of 19

permissible and only the security deposited would be refunded
after such date.
There is no challenge to the said stipulation made in the
Bulletin in the present writ petition.
18.

The petitioner admittedly first took admission to the

course in the Indraprastha College of the University of Delhi.
Thereafter she took admission to a course of Bachelor of
Information Systems with the respondent no.3 and duly deposited
the fees in respect thereof. She thereby blocked one seat in the
Indraprastha College and then another seat with respondent no.3
in the Bachelor of Information Systems course. The petitioner
thereafter opted to go to Hissar and took admission there also in
the Bachelor of Engineering in Computer Science and Engineering
course and claims that she deposited fees there as well. Thus, the
petitioner had simultaneously blocked at least two, if not three,
seats in three different courses and institutions.
19.

The petitioner has submitted that she had so also

participated in the second counselling on 31.8.2000 as she was
desirous of taking admission to the Bachelor of Engineering
Course in Computer and Electrical Engineering at the Mahila
Institute of Technology, Delhi. It is only because by the time her
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.3039/2002

Page 11 of 19

turn came and the seats in this course and institute were filled up,
that the petitioner did not take admission in this course as well.
20.

Apart from the stipulations contained in the Information

Bulletin, it is noteworthy that the scheme of a Combined Entrance
Exam and counselling thereafter has been envisaged in different
professional courses to only enable to candidates to make an
informed choice for admission and not to cause wastage of seats by
shifting from one course to another.

The practice of repeated

counsellings has been struck down by the Courts which have
enjoined upon the universities to restrict counselling and not to
permit shifting of candidates from one course to another as the
same results in wastage of seats.
For this reason, so far as the scheme of admission to
medical courses in Delhi is concerned, it has been held that a
candidate having participated in a counselling and having opted
for a course and institute, having paid fees thereto and thereby
having taken admission and having blocked a seat is precluded
from participating in any counselling thereafter. It has been held
that if a candidate does not wish to take the seats available for his
struck his/her choice at the time of his/her counselling stage
candidate must not take admission to any of the offered
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.3039/2002

Page 12 of 19

seats/courses and should opt to be wait listed.

The second

counselling should be held only for such wait listed candidates.
21.

Thus, the conduct of the petitioner in fact results in

negation of the very reason for setting up of the scheme of
admission by a centralised examination test and counselling
thereafter. By this conduct, the petitioner has caused seats to be
wasted with the Indraprastha College as well as the seats in the
Bachelor of Engineering and Information Systems of the
respondent no.3.
22.

On a query being made, the Court was informed that no

candidate was admitted against such seats in as much as the
petitioner has made the request for refund of her fee only on the
31.8.2000. It is only on such date that the respondent no.3 was
informed on behalf of the petitioner that her admission to the
course of Bachelor of Engineering and Information Systems be
cancelled and fees refunded. As such the seat could not have been
offered in the second counselling.
23.

Learned counsel appearing for the respondent no. 1 has

relied upon the judgment reported at 2002 (6) SCALE 332 entitled
Medical Council of India vs Madhu Singh and (2003) 3 SCC 366
entitled Neelu Arora vs Union of India to contend that no
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.3039/2002

Page 13 of 19

admission can be made after the second round of counselling and
no admission can be granted after the schedule dates.
24.

It is necessary to remember that the Institutes are

required to provide “free seats” on projections and calculations
based on amounts which are recovered from the paid seats. It is
evident that the stipulations of last dates for withdrawl of
admissions forfeiture has been made on the basis that the
Institution would not be able to effect further admission or to
recover such amounts after the date and the paid seat would go
waste. The Institution has to meet the expenses of the free seats.
It cannot therefore possibly be contended that the stipulation of
forfeiture in the Bulletin results in any injustice.
25.

So far as the requirement of maintaining the schedule in

professional course is concerned, the same had been considered
with by the Supreme Court of India in the judgment reported as
2002 (6) SCALE page 332 (supra) wherein the Court has held
hereunder:
“There is, however, a necessity for
specifically providing the time schedule for
the course and fixing the period during
which admissions can take place, making it
clear that no admission can be granted after
the scheduled date, which essentially should
be the date for commencement of the course.”
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.3039/2002

Page 14 of 19

In another matter reported as (2003)3 SCC 366 entitled
Neelu Arora vs. Union of India. It has been held that no admission
can be made after the second round of counselling.
I have also so held in a decision dated 17th February,
2005 rendered in W.P.(C) 16128/2004 entitled Miss Sunint Kaur
vs Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University & Anr.
For this reason the seat vacated by the petitioner or after
31.8.2000 would be of no benefit to the candidates seeking
admission. As submitted the same would not have been available
for allocation in the second counselling and has gone waste.
26.

It needs no elaboration that educational discipline must

be maintained. The same would include financial discipline which
has been notified to the students in the information bulletin
published and made available to candidates at the time of their
admission. There is no allegation that any amount in excess of the
amount set out in the clause 4.2 has been deducted by the
respondents. The amount has been refunded to the petitioner in
terms of this clause of Information Bulletin has been received by
her.
27.

I am therefore, of the considered view that the petitioner

WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.3039/2002

Page 15 of 19

is bound by the terms and conditions notified to her in the
Information Bulletin. This Information Bulletin was available for
sale from 17.4.2000. The petitioner accepted these terms and
conditions and submitted her application form.
The petitioner applied for admission of her own
violation took the common entrance exam hold on 3.6.2000 and
the result was declared on 16.6.2000. The students were called for
counselling as per merit declared by them from 18.7.2000. The
petitioner appeared in the counselling and deposited the fees as
prescribed.
28.

It is also important to note that the form contained the

following declaration which was made by the petitioner also:“ I hereby solemnly and sincerely affirm that
the statement made and information furnished
by me in this application form are true and
correct. I have not kept any information
secret. If it is found that any information
furnished herein is fraudulant, incorrect or
untrue in material particulars, I realise that I
am liable to prosecution and that the
admission to the course is liable to be
cancelled. I agree to abide by the rules and
regulations governing the examination and as
contained in the Information Bulletin. I am
also aware that my admission to take the
entrance test is provisional and is subject to
verification of my eligibility at the time of
admission after qualifying the entrance test(s).

WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.3039/2002

Page 16 of 19

Date:___________

Signature of the
Candidate

I have carefully read and verified the
information
furnished
by
my
son/daughter/ward and affirm that it is true
and correct.
Date: __________

Signature of the

Father/Guardian”

The

same

was

also

counter

signed

by

her

parent/guardian.
The petitioner is bound by the undertaking given by her.
29.

In the instant case, the Information Bulletin set out the

extent and amount of deduction at the time of a refund. The cut
off date has been provided in the Information Bulletin. There is no
dispute that the action of the respondents is in accordance with the
Information Bulletin. No legally sustainable ground of challenge
to the respondents' action has been made in the facts set out. In
view of the findings of the Supreme Court of India in the
judgments relied upon, the respondents were entitled to effect the
deduction made in terms of the Information Bulletin in the instant
case.
Having thus taken admission deposited the amount and
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.3039/2002

Page 17 of 19

admittedly having withdrawn admission after the stipulated cut off
date of her own free will fully knowing the consequences thereof
the petitioner cannot be heard to contend that the action of the
respondents was illegal in any manner.
30.

Perusal of the judgment cited on behalf of the petitioner

being (2002) 10 SSC 487 entitled Ramdeo Baba Kamala Nehru
Engineering College and Others vs. Sanjay Kumar and Others.
(Supra) would show that the same is not applicable to the present
case. The facts of the case which was before the Apex Court shows
that the respondent in that case was granted admission after the
process of admission was over.

The respondent withdrew his

admission around two months after he got admission elsewhere.
However, the refund given by the petitioner to those students was
found by the Court to be in violation of the Government order
issued by the State Government whereby only a notional deduction
of Rs.1,000/- was permissible while making the refund. The only
plea taken as a defence by the Institutions was that it was a private
education institution and hence was not amenable to writ
jurisdiction by way of a writ petition under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India. It was in these circumstances held by the
Apex Court that the Institution was entitled to make a deduction
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.3039/2002

Page 18 of 19

only in terms of applicable government circular and for this reason
alone, the Institution was directed refund of the balance amount
deposited by the students to them.

In the instant case, the

deduction is admittedly in terms of the rule stipulated in the
Information Bulletin.
For all the foregoing reasons, I find no merit in the
present case.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
There is no order as to costs.

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
March 10th, 2005
ps/kr

WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.3039/2002

Page 19 of 19

