:1:

WP(C)2493/2003

REPORTABLE
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 2493/2003
Date of decision : 10th November, 2004
Brig Iqbal Singh, VSM(Retd)
... Petitioner
through Mr.Jayant
Bhushan,
Senior
Advocate with
Mr.P.C.Khanna,Advocate
VERSUS
Union of India & others
.... Respondents
through Ms.Jyoti Singh, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE JUSTICE DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in
the Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J:
1.
The present writ petition has been filed by the
petitioner impugning inter alia the decision of the respondents
placing the petitioner under close arrest/military custody and
prayed for issuance of a writ of prohibition against the
respondents from taking any disciplinary action against the
petitioner after his retirement on 28th February, 2003

with

:2:

WP(C)2493/2003

further directions to the respondents to allow all pensionary
benefits

as

may

be

available

upon

his

retirement

on

superannuation.
2.

The factual matrix laid before us is narrow. On

successful completion of 36 years of unblemished service by the
petitioner with the Indian Army, the respondents issued an order
dated 24th July, 2002 directing that the petitioner's retirement
on superannuation had been ordered with effect from 28th
February, 2003.
3.

Unfortunately for the petitioner, on 13th March, 2001

the country was subjected to expose with the release of video
tapes under the caption “Operation Westend”on the Zee TV
Network by a Website named Tehelka.Com, claiming to be
engaged in the field of investigative journalism.

The released

tapes were of the duration of 4 ½ hours. It is contended that as
per the website these had been edited from 105 hours of filming.
The video tapes purportedly contained footage attributed to be of
the petitioner alleging his participation in procurement of
defence equipments by undue influence. As serious allegations
were leveled against officials in the Defence Ministry as well as
six Army officials, the Ministry of Defence vide orders dated
13/14th March, 2001 required the petitioner to give written
comments to the contents of the video tapes.

:3:

4.
contained

WP(C)2493/2003

It is alleged that based on the same allegations
in

the

video

tapes

the

Army

Authorities

simultaneously ordered a court of inquiry into the matter on 15th
March, 2001.
5.

The order dated 15th March, 2001, appointing the court

of inquiry has been placed before us as Annexure P-2 which
reads as hereunder:-

6.

“A Court of Inquiry will assemble at a place,
date and time to be fixed by the Presiding Officer
to enquire into allegations of influencing the
procurement of defence equipments as made
against Army Officers by Tehelka.com on 13th
March, 2001. The Court will also investigate the
complicity of any other person(s) who might be
involved in any way.”
It was directed in this order that the court of inquiry

would also pin point the responsibility and culpability, if any, of
the Army Officers/persons involved. It was also directed that the
proceedings of the court of inquiry be submitted to the
Headquarters of the Western Command by 10th April, 2001.
7.

The petitioner states that the terms of reference were

subsequently amended vide order dated 16th March, 2001 and
again by order dated 18th March, 2001. However the perusal of
the order dated 16th March, 2001 would show that the terms of
reference remained the same and only para 2 of the order
convening order dated 15th March, 2001 were amended.
8.

It is an admitted position that Justice K.Venkataswami

:4:

WP(C)2493/2003

Commission of Inquiry under the Commissions of Inquiry Act,
1952 was appointed by the Government of India on 24th March,
2001 for investigation into the Teheleka.com affair.

The

petitioner was required to participate in the proceedings of
Justice

K.Venkataswami

Commission

of

Inquiry

which

proceedings are stated to have commenced in May, 2001.
9.

On 9th July, 2001 the petitioner was attached with 1

Armd Div located at Patiala and Major General Aditya Singh, the
GOC of 1 Armd Div was nominated to be his Commanding
Officer.
10.

The petitioner submits that as he was required to

participate in the Justice K.Venkataswami Commission of
Inquiry at New Delhi, he had objected to his attachment and had
submitted a statutory complaint dated 10th July, 2001 to the
respondents to restrain the Army Authorities from taking further
disciplinary action against him on the basis of the court of
inquiry commenced by the respondents.
11.

The objections raised by the petitioner in his statutory

:5:

WP(C)2493/2003

complaint, which need a closer look, include the following:“2 . In view of the above stated position, it is
respectfully submitted on behalf of my client
that the findings of Army Court of Inquiry, at the
present stage, cannot be considered to have
attained a stage of finality. It is therefore legally
not tenable to initiate further disciplinary or
administrative action in the matter on the basis
of findings and recommendations of the Army
Court of Inquiry.
3.
It is also respectfully submitted that
by virtue of the implication of Section 3 of the
Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952; it will be
legally not admissible to appoint more then one
Inquiry to investigate the same charge or
allegation by the Government. Since the Central
Government has specifically appointed Hon'ble
Mr. Justice K. Venkataswami Commission of
Inquiry and the Army Court of Inquiry is also
subject to final jurisdiction of the Central
Government it is legally not tenable to subject
the persons including my client to simultaneous
and concurrent jurisdiction of both the
Inquiries, as it is being presently done. Adjutant
General's Branch, Army HQ, vide their letter No.
C/6290/270/WC/AG/DV-2 dated 01 June,
2001 had permitted Brig. Iqbal Singh to appear
before Justice K. Venkataswami Commission of
Inquiry and make statement. Thereafter, there
was no basis for them to have continued to take
further action on the basis of report of Army
Court of Inquiry.
4.
It may be appreciated that he
simultaneous and concurrent conduct of
proceedings by the two different agencies who
are investigating the same subject mater,
wherein very complicated questions of Law are
involved, if allowed to continue, shall cause legal
prejudice to my client. In case of proceedings
before the Hon'ble Mr. Justice K. Venkataswami
Commission of Inquiry, my client is open to
liability of meeting the challenge of issue of

:6:

WP(C)2493/2003

notice under Section 8B of the Commissions of
Inquiry Act, 1952. In such an event, it will be
open to my client to assail the findings of the
Army Court of Inquiry, as per the statutory legal
right available to him under Section 8B of the
said Act. This legal right of my client will
become meaning less, if Army Authorities are
allowed to continue o take further action in the
matter on the basis of findings of Army Court of
Inquiry, at the present stage.
5.
It is further submitted that in the
present matter large number of civilians,
including Senior Politicians nd bureaucrats are
also facing the investigation and they are not
subject to proceedings based on Army Court ;of
Inquiry, & it is for the same cause of action that
they are subject to proceedings only before the
Hon'ble
Mr.
Justice
K.
Venkataswami
Commission of Inquiry. Therefore, the action of
Army authorities to continue in the matter on
the basis of findings of the Army Court of
Inquiry and take action in the matter against my
client will be discriminatory.
6.
In the present case, a very complicated
questions of law are involved. The basis of
arriving at the findings by the Army Court of
Inquiry is solely based on presumptions drawn
with the logic that the same are derived from the
circumstantial evidence.
This position may
cause irreparable damage by the actions based
on findings of Army Court of Inquiry. In the
proceedings before the Army Court of Inquiry,
the veracity of Tehelka tapes, which are the
basis of allegations and investigations, has not
been tested as per provisions of law. It is for
situations that a major guide line is given in
Manual of Military Law, which reads “ certain
civil offences, for example complicated frauds,
are not suitable for trial by Court Martial and
better relegated to the Civil Court,as is a case
where intricate questions of law are likely to
arise.”

:7:

WP(C)2493/2003

Keeping in-view this guideline, there is
no legal justification to progress action against
my client on the basis of Army Court of Inquiry,
without awaiting the findings of the Hon'ble
Justice K. Venkataswami Commission of
Inquiry.

12.

7.
In view of the facts and circumstances
as above, it is respectfully prayed on behalf of
my client that the Central Government/The
Chief of Army Staff may issue appropriate
order/direction not to take any further action in
the matter against my client on the basis of
findings of Army Court of Inquiry at this stage,
without awaiting the out come proceedings
before the Hon'ble Justice K. Venkataswami
Commission of Inquiry.”
Perusal of the foregoing shows that the petitioner

himself was objecting to the proceedings to the court of inquiry
principally on the ground that the matter involved complicated
questions of law, that large number of civilians including senior
politicians and bureaucrats were facing the investigation who
were not subject to the proceedings under the Army Act and that
there was no legal justification to proceed in the matter under
the Army Act in view of the pendency of the proceedings under
the Commission of Inquiry Act, 1952. Therefore the objections
raised were largely relating to complexity of the issues on merits
and it was the contention of the petitioner that the civil courts
would be the better forum.
13.

The petitioner contends that even though the court of

inquiry against him was pending, yet an affidavit dated 27th July,

:8:

WP(C)2493/2003

2001 was filed by one Shri S.L.Bunker, working as OSD in the
Ministry of Defence before the K. Venkataswami Commission of
Inquiry. In para 2 of this affidavit it was deposed as under:“The
Army
Chief
has
accepted
the
recommendations made by the GOC-in-C,
Western Command both as regards the setting up
of a General Court Martial as well as the
administrative action.
A chart showing the
recommendations made by the Court of Inquiry,
the recommendations made by the GOC-in-C,
Western Command and the direction given by
the Chief of Army Staff is set out herein below:
Recommendations of
Court of Inquiry

Recommendation of
GOC-in-C, Western
Command

Direction of Chief of the
Army Staff

1. Disciplinary action i.e. Disciplinary action
Recommendation of GOCsetting up of General Court recommended against:
in-C, WC accepted
Martial (GCM) against:
1. Maj Gen PSK Choudary
1. Maj Gen PSK Choudary 2. Brig Iqbal Singh
2. Brig. Iqbal Singh

3. Col Anil Sehgal

3. Col Anil Sehgal
4. Lt. Col BB Sharma
II. Administrative action
against:

1. Maj Gen MS Ahluwalia Recommendation of GOCin-C, WC accepted and
(Dismissal)
direction given accordingly
1. Maj Gen MS Ahluwalia 2. Lt. Col BB Sharma
2. Maj Gen Satnam Singh
(Dismissal)
3. Maj Gen Satnam Singh
(Censure)

14.

The petitioner has contended that he had made a

representation dated 7th November, 2001 to the respondents in
this behalf.
15.

We have perused the representation made by the

petitioner. It is found that even at this stage the petitioner was

:9:

WP(C)2493/2003

largely aggrieved by the fact that the Military Authorities were
not competent to deal with the serious allegations leveled against
the petitioner. The petitioner was challenging the jurisdiction of
a Court Martial to try offences under the Prevention of
Corruption Act. It was again being contended that in view of the
complexity of the matter the proper exercise of discretion was to
direct trial by the civil courts and not by military courts in the
instant case. To support this request, the petitioner had made
the allegations of manipulation of the video tapes and the fact
that serious forensic evidence was required to fairly deal with the
matter.

The petitioner made a specific prayer to be given an

opportunity to defend himself before Justice K. Venkataswami
Commission of Inquiry.

It was specifically contended as

hereunder:-

16.

“It may also be appreciated that during the
proceedings before the Commission of Inquiry,
the Army Court of Inquiry cannot be considered
to have reached the stage of finality and any
disciplinary action taken against me at this
stage will be highly premature as the action at
this stage against me will be highly
discriminatory and arbitrary.”
The aforesaid narration has become necessary only to

indicate that the case of the petitioner consistently was that the
matter was under investigation either by the Court of Inquiry
constituted

by

K.Venkataswami

the

Army

Act,

1950

Commission of Inquiry.

or

before

Justice

At every stage the

: 10 :

WP(C)2493/2003

petitioner contended that the Army Authorities were not
possessed with material or allegations to initiate action against
him. His challenge to the purported decision as contained in the
affidavit dated 27th July, 2001 was that the same was illegal and
baseless inasmuch as the Court of Inquiry against him was not
complete even and that the civil court was a better forum.
Similar representations were made on 21st November, 2001.
17.

The petitioner has contended that in September, 2002

his attachment was changed from Armed Division to

another

formation i.e. HQ 40 Arty Div and Major General Lakhwinder
Singh, YSM, GOC HQ 40 Artillery Division was nominated to be
his new Commanding officer.
18.

The respondents explain this by saying that it became

necessary to effect this change of attachment from HQ-1 Armd
Div to HQ-40 Arty Div with Major General Lakhvinder Singh,
GOC 40 Arty Div being appointed as his Commanding Officer
because the GOC 1 Armd Div was already detailed as an officer
to record the Summary of Evidence in the case of Major General
PSK Chaudhary also connected with the Teheleka.com case.
19.

The Court of Inquiry in respect of the petitioner was

conducted in terms of Army Rule 180, and the petitioner was
given opportunity to cross examine the witnesses.
Major

Lakhvinder

Singh

the

Commanding

Therefore,

Officer

of

the

: 11 :

WP(C)2493/2003

petitioner exercised the option in term of the proviso to Army
Rule 22(1) and dispensed with the procedure provided in sub
rule (1) of Army Rule 22.
20.

The petitioner has challenged this action on the

ground that this was done without application of mind under the
directions of the COAS who had already prejudged the issue and
had passed directions for the General Court martial of the
petitioner as stated here-in-above.

He submitted another

representation in this behalf dated 30th September, 2002 and
also sought authenticated copies of video tapes. The petitioner
has also contended that as the court of inquiry was conducted in
his presence he was entitled to the complete proceedings thereof.
21.

The petitioner has also alleged that his representations

were not considered by the competent authorities.
22.

Finally vide an order dated 11th December, 2002, Brig.

S.S.Gill was detailed as officer to record the summary of
evidence against the petitioner in respect of the tentative charge
sheet dated 29th September, 2002 issued against the petitioner.
The tentative charge sheet dated 29th September, 2002 reads as
under:“TENTATIVE CHARGE SHEET
The accused IC-26796Y Brigadier Iqbal
Singh, Vishisht Seva Medal, Deputy Director
General,
Procurement
and
Progressing
Organisation, Master General of Ordnance

: 12 :

WP(C)2493/2003

Branch, Army Headquarters, attached with
Quarter
Master
General
Branch,
Army
Headquarters, attached to Headquarters 40
Artillery Division, an Officer holding a
permanent Commission in the Regular Army, is
charged with :First Charge
Army Action
COMMITTING
A
CIVIL
OFFENCE, THAT IS TO SAY, Section 69 BEING
A
PUBLIC
SERVANT,
ACCEPTING
FOR
HIMSELF GRATIFICATION OTHER THAN LEGAL
REMUNERATION, AS A MOTIVE FOR DOING AN
OFFICIAL ACT IN THE EXERCISE OF HIS
OFFICIAL
FUNCTIONS,
CONTRARY
TO
SECTION 7 OF THE PREVENTION OF
CORRUPTION ACT 1988
In that he, at New Delhi, on 05 November 2000,
while holding the appointment of Deputy
Director General, Procurement and Progressing
Organisation in Master General of Ordnance
Branch, Army Headquarters, directly accepted
for himself from Shri Samuel Mathew, a
representative of M/S West End International, a
non-existent foreign firm, gratification other
than legal remuneration, as a motive, to promote
the interests of the said Firm in introduction of
their products in the Army.
Second Charge
Army Act COMMITTING A CIVIL OFFENCE,
THAT IS TO SAY, Section 69 BEING APUBLIC
SERVANT,
ACCEPTING
FOR
HIMSELF
GRATIFICATION
OTHER
THAN
LEGAL
REMUNERATION, AS A MOTIVE FOR DOING AN
OFFICIAL ACT IN THE EXERCISE OF HIS
OFFICIAL FUNCTIONS CONTRARY TO SECTION
7 OF THE PREVENTION OF CORRUPTION ACT
1988
In that he, at New Delhi, on 05 November 2000,
while holding the appointment
of
Deputy
Director General, Procurement and Progressing
Organisation in Master General of Ordnance

: 13 :

WP(C)2493/2003

Branch, Army Headquarters, directly accepted
for himself from Shri Samuel Mathew, a
representative of Ms. West End International,
a non - existent foreign firm, a woman, a
gratification other than legal remuneration, as
motive, to promote the interests of the said Firm
in introduction of their products in the Army.
Third Charge
Army Act
Section 63

AN ACT PREJUDICAL TO
GOOD ORDER AND
MILITARY DISCIPLINE

in that he, at New Delhi, on 05 Nov 2000, while
holding the appointment of Deputy Director
General,
Procurement
and
Progressing
Organisation in Master General of Ordnance
Branch, Army Headquarters, improperly met
Shri Samuel Mathew, a representatives of M/s
West End International, a non existent foreign
firm, without verifying his antecedents and the
products intended to be introduced in the Army
by the said Firm.
Fourth Charge
Army Act
Section 63

23.

AN OMMISSION PREJUCIAL
TO GOOD ORDER
AND MILITARY DISCIPLINE

in that he,
at the place and date mentioned in the
third charge, while holding the appointment of
Deputy Director General, Procurement and
Progressing Organisation in Master General of
Ordnance Branch, Army Headquarters, having
met Shri Samuel Mathew, a representatives of
M/S West End International, a non existent
foreign firm, improperly omitted to report about
the proceedings of his meeting to proper military
authority.”
In the meantime the petitioner also submitted a

statutory complaint dated 9th December, 2002 to the Minister of

: 14 :

WP(C)2493/2003

Defence through his counsel. It appears that this representation
was returned to the petitioner as according to the respondents
the same was without any authority of the petitioner and hence
not legally tenable.
2002

The representation dated 11th December,

to the Commanding officer of the petitioner was to the

same effect.

However, in view that the Summary of Evidence

against the petitioner was already in progress, no action was
taken thereon.
24.

The

petitioner

was

to

retire

from

service

on

superannuation with effect from 28th February, 2003. The
respondents therefore took recourse to their power under
Section 123 of the Army Act, 1950. The petitioner was directed
to be placed under open arrest vide order dated 26th February,
2003 by the respondents in exercise of

their power under

Section 123 of the Army Act, 1950. It was directed herein that
the petitioner was placed under military custody(open arrest)
with effect from 28th February, 2003.
25.

The petitioner made a strong grievance of his having

been placed under military custody vide letters dated 28th
February, 2003 and 9th March, 2003.

The petitioner was also

aggrieved by the fact that despite his superannuation on 28th
February, 2003 his retirement benefits were not finalised and he
was not being given any pension.

Aggrieved by the aforesaid

: 15 :

WP(C)2493/2003

directions on the part of the respondent, the petitioner filed the
present writ petition on 4th April, 2003 seeking the following
reliefs:“(a)
to declare the detention of the
petitioner in military custody (open arrest) in
the facts and circumstances of the present case
to be not justified and to further restrain the
respondents by issue of an order or direction in
the form of mandamus from continuing to
implement the impugned order dated 26 Feb
2003 issued by respondent No. 4 to the extent
of placing the petitioner under military custody
(open arrest) and release him from custody
accordingly, for which the petitioner gives
undertaking that he shall participate in
proceedings conducted against him in the
aforesaid matter.
(b)
to direct the respondents to file the
proceedings of Court of Inquiry held by Army
Authorities in tehelka.com matter before the
Hon'ble Court, scrutinise the same and quash
the Convening Order dated 15 March 2001 with
amendments dated 16 & 18 March 2001 along
with the proceedings and findings of the said
Army Court of Inquiry.
(c)
to direct the respondents not to base
disciplinary actions against the petitioner on
tehelka.com videotapes, which have been held
by the Hon'ble Defence Minister and Ministry of
Defence to have been tampered and doctored,
and further direct the respondent No. 4 to
examine the prosecution witnesses for hearing
of charge against him as per provisions of Army
Rule 22 (1) by giving opportunity of crossexamining the witnesses in the presence ;of the
Commanding Officer.
(d)
to direct the respondents to file the
complete record of proceedings, wherein the
respondent No. 2 has passed directions for trial

: 16 :

WP(C)2493/2003

of petitioner by General Court Martial,
scrutinize the same and quash the said
direction which has been passed in violation of
provisions of Army Act and Rules and principles
of natural justice.
(e)
to
direct
the
respondents
to
immediately release pension and pensionary
benefits in the form of payment of gratuity,
commutation value of pay, leave encashment
etc. in favour of the petitioner.

26.

(f)
to direct the respondents to allow the
petitioner to retain the Govt. married
accommodation in his occupation on payment
of normal license fee for accommodation,
electricity and water etc up to the period of
three months from the date once the petitioner
ceases to be subject to the Army Act Sec 123 as
far as instant disciplinary proceedings are
concerned.”
It is noteworthy that the allegations with regard to the

authenticity of the tapes and depositions of witnesses are being
relied upon by the petitioner in support of his afore-stated
prayers.
The petitioner has dealt at length with the affidavit of
Sh.S.L.Bunker dated 27th July, 2001 to contend in the writ
petition as follows:“9 (vi)
On 27th July, 2001, Shri S L Bunker,
OSD, in the Ministry of Defence, on behalf of
Union of India filed an affidavit before Justice K.
Venkataswami Commission of Inquiry to say
that the COAS has passed directions for action
against the petitioner by General Court Martial.
A copy of affidavit dated 27th July 2001 is
annexed as Annexure P-6. At this stage the
COAS had no material as per Army Act and
Rules before him to pass such an order,

: 17 :

WP(C)2493/2003

which is illegal and without jurisdiction.
Thus the COAS pre-judged the issue and acted
in a biased manner.
xxxxxxx
22.
That, the COAS (respondent No.2) in
passing direction/order to Court-martial the
petitioner has acted in violation of provisions of
Army Act and Rules. The respondent No. 2 is a
Superior Military Authority, who could have
acted upon in the present matter only after
reference was made by the Commanding
Officer for seeking his indulgence as per the
procedure under Army Rule 22(3) (b), or Army
rule 241(b).
In the present case, the
Commanding Officer has made no reference to
the Superior Military Authority because he has
no material before him in the form of record of
summary of evidence, which he could have
considered and made the required reference as
per law.
23.
That, the power to order trial under
the Army Act and Rules is to be exercised by the
competent authority by endorsing the said order
on the charge sheet. In the present case the
occasion for existence of charge sheet has not
arisen.
Thereafter the power for trial of
delinquent by General Court Martial or District
Court Martial has been described in Army Rule
37, which reads as under:(Section 37 reproduced)
Under the present facts and circumstances, the
respondent no.2 had no material before him to
exercise the power and issue direction for
disciplinary action against the petitioner by
setting of General Court Martial against him, as
has been indicated in respondents' affidavit of
27 July 2001 (Annexure-P6).
24.
That, in view of the aforesaid
circumstances the petitioner has been aggrieved
for various reasons described here-in-before, for
which he has filed this writ petition amongst
other on the following :

: 18 :

WP(C)2493/2003

GROUNDS

27.

(i)
Because, at the time of retirement of
the petitioner from service on 28 February,
2003, there was no material on record before
the Commanding Officer or any other Superior
Military Authority, to frame any “charge(s)”
against the petitioner. Therefore, under the
provisions of Army Act and Rules, it cannot be
said that he petitioner has committed any
“offence” under the Army Act, which is a
necessary requirement for invoking provision of
Army Act Sec 123. As such, no occasion as per
law had arisen for the Chief of Army Staff or any
superior authority to have passed orders for trial
of the petitioner by Court Martial and take him
into Military Custody(open arrest).”
The respondents filed a detailed counter-affidavit on 8th

May, 2003 supporting the legality of their action.

It was

contended that to the extent the representations of the petitioner
deserved to be considered, they were dealt with in accordance
with law. It was also contended that the Commanding Officer
was justified in dispensing with the examination of the witnesses
since provisions of Army Rules 180 were complied with at the
court of inquiry and directions were issued for recording of
Summary of Evidence against the petitioner. The respondents
contend that at every stage the matter was proceeded with after
application of mind and that the proceedings carried out by the
Commanding Officer were held in compliance of the law and that
the issue had not been prejudged either by the Commanding
Officer or by any other

authority. The respondents have also

: 19 :

WP(C)2493/2003

submitted that every assistance was rendered by them to enable
the petitioner to participate in the proceedings so that his
interests are safeguarded.
28.

The

respondents

denied

the

allegations

of

the

petitioner that Major General Mathew Mammen, AVSM, VSM,
who was member of the court of inquiry, had any connection
with Samuel Mathew of Teheleka.com or with Teheleka.com.
The respondents have also contended that there was no predetermination of the issue by the Chief of Army Staff.

The

respondents submit that the court of inquiry was ordered by the
Headquarters, Western Command vide case no.0337/3072/DV2 on 15th March, 2001 and that this Court of Inquiry was
finalised only on 14th June, 2001.

The competent authority

directed disciplinary action against the petitioner and other
Army officers thereafter.
29.

The

respondents

defend

the

invocation

of

the

provisions of Section 123 of the Army Act placing the petitioner
in military custody(open arrest) and state that the same was as
per the existing rules and regulations in vogue. According to
the respondents the petitioner was lodged in the Officers' Mess
and was being given all the privileges as are available to an
officer of his rank.

The respondents submit that close arrest

ensures availability of a person subject to the Army Act for any

: 20 :

WP(C)2493/2003

proceedings under the Army Act.

It is further contended that

the same assures that the evidence is not tampered with and the
witnesses are not influenced. It is stated that the

Commanding

Officer conducted the hearing of charge under Army Rule 22
exercised discretion under the proviso to Army Rule 22(1) and
ordered the recording the Summary of Evidence. It was stated to
be in progress at the time of filing of the counter affidavit. The
respondents

submit

that

the

pensionary

benefits

of

the

petitioner would be determined in accordance with the Pension
Regulations for the Army, 1961.
30.

The respondents submit that all statutory provisions

have been complied with and that the writ petition was wholly
misconceived.

Allegations of discrimination in issuance of the

impugned order placing the petitioner under close arrest were
misconceived.

The instance of Brig. V.K.Nijhawan cited was

untenable inasmuch as Brig. Nijhawan was under open arrest
and was not released as has been alleged by the petitioner.
31.

According to the respondents, however, their action

was according to law and that his representations were heard
and dealt with at every stage.

In this behalf the respondents

have placed on record their letter dated 27th March, 2003.
32.

The present writ petition was taken up for hearing on

10th April, 2003 when notice to show cause was issued to the

: 21 :

WP(C)2493/2003

respondents. The purport of the petitioner's contention on 10th
April, 2003 would also show that the petitioner was aggrieved
principally by the action of the respondents in keeping the
petitioner under close arrest. The following order was made by
this Court on 10th April, 2003:“CW 2493/02
Issue notice to the respondents to
show cause as to why rule nisi be not issued,
returnable on 19th of May, 2003.
Ms. Jyoti Singh accepts notice on
behalf of the respondents.
CM 4161/03
Mr.Jayant Bhushan appearing for the
petitioner has contended that since March, 2001
though the matter has been under investigation,
but the petitioner was not taken into military
custody while exercising the jurisdiction under
Section 101 of the Army Act and simply on his
retirement on 28th of February, 2003, impugned
order has been issued to keep the petitioner in
open house arrest. He further contends that as
per the instructions and guidelines of the
respondent circulated on 14th of December,
1990 guideline 9 has detailed the effect of scope
of Section 123 of the Army Act.
Mr.K.K.Sud, learned ASG, prays for
some time to bring the amended guidelines.
Notice.
Ms.Jyoti Singh
behalf of the respondents.

accepts

notice

Reply be filed within two
Rejoinder within one week thereafter.

on

weeks.

: 22 :

WP(C)2493/2003

Renotify on 19th of May, 2003.

33.

Record be produced on the next date
of hearing.”
Thereafter the matter came to be adjourned from time

to time. Alongwith the writ petition the petitioner had filed CM
4161/03 praying for an ad interim order against the respondents
restraining them from continuing to implement the impugned
order dated 26th February, 2003 and for a further direction for
release of the petitioner from military custody(open arrest) with
immediate effect. This application was dismissed as not pressed
on 19th September, 2003.
34.

The officer detailed to record the summary of evidence

proceeded to record the same from 11th December, 2002 to 1st
October, 2003.
35.

During the summary of evidence, the prosecution had

examined six witnesses. They were subjected to detailed crossexamination by the petitioner.
36.

It is submitted before us that in the meantime, with

regard to the submission of the original video tapes for
examination by the expert witnesses and their authenticity, the
officer recording the Summary of Evidence proceedings directed
on 17th March, 2004 to the following effect:“accused is informed that since the video tapes
produced by prosecution witness no.3 Sh.

: 23 :

37.

WP(C)2493/2003

Aniruddha Bahal on 26th December, 2002 do not
form part of admissible evidence as already
intimated vide letter no.1600/19/IS/A/CF/11
dated 17th April, 2003(Exhibit 'T' refers), no
adverse decision would be taken on the basis of
these tapes”
This directive deals with the matter relating to the copy

of the original video tapes and also renders prayer 'C' of the writ
petition infructuous.
38.

The petitioner claims that he sought production of 19

witnesses in support of his defence in the proceedings for
recording of the summary of evidence. So far as the list of 19
witnesses is concerned, the officer recording summary of
evidence permitted examination of three witnesses required by
the petitioner.

With regard to the remaining 16 witnesses, he

appears to be dissatisfied with the relevance of those witnesses
and on 27th March, 2004 and the officer recording Summary of
Evidence directed as under:“Accused is informed that remaining sixteen
defence witnesses and documents requested by
him for examination are not being provided to
him. The accused is further informed that in
the absence of examination of said witnesses
and documents, no adverse decision would be
taken on the proceedings. Hence he should
proceed with his statement, if any.”
On the request of the petitioner, he was even permitted
to recall a prosecution witness for cross examination in addition
to the three witnesses listed by him.
39.

On 14th May, 2004 the petitioner filed CM 5693/04 for

: 24 :

WP(C)2493/2003

issuance of directions to the respondents to allow the petitioner
to examine 16 defence witnesses and to decide the issue of
limitation as per his representation dated 26th April, 2004 before
issuance of any order for trial of the petitioner by a General
Court Martial. The petitioner was submitting in this application
that he has been denied his statutory and constitutional right to
examine 16 defence witnesses before the officer recording the
Summary

of

Evidence;

that

the

officer

named

by

the

Commanding officer commenced recording of Summary of
Evidence as per Army Rule 23 against the petitioner on 11th
December, 2002 and that a list of 19 defence witnesses given by
the petitioner on 6th August, 2003 was not being permitted to be
examined.
40.

It is vehemently contended that the witnesses sought

to be summoned by the petitioner would have established that
the Court Martial of the petitioner was barred by limitation by
virtue of Section 122 of the Army Act and that he is gravely
prejudiced by the failure to summon the remaining 16 witnesses
by the officer recording the summary of evidence.
41.

It is also pertinent to mention that there was no

allegation made in the writ petition with regard to the recording
of the Summary of Evidence. It is also to be noticed here that by
this application being CM 5693/04 the petitioner was seeking a

: 25 :

WP(C)2493/2003

relief wholly beyond his prayers in the writ petition.

The

petitioner himself was also now contending in this application
that he should be given an opportunity to examine his 19
witnesses before decision is taken by the competent authority for
trial of the petitioner by court martial. The petitioner was also
seeking a direction to the respondents to decide the issue of the
trial by court martial now being barred by limitation as per the
petitioner's representation dated 26th April, 2004.
42.

The petitioner, therefore, was apparently abandoning

part of his challenge and was himself admitting that there was
no order till now directing trial of the petitioner by court martial
in accordance with law. As per the allegations of the petitioner
made in CM 5693/04 it was apparent that the matter was at the
stage of the recording of Summary of Evidence which admittedly
was not complete even on the date of filing the application and
that no decision had been taken to direct trial of the petitioner
by the General Court Martial.
43.

In the meantime it appears that on receipt of the

documentation

from

the

Commanding

Officers,

and

consideration of the matter, the convening authority framed a
charge sheet dated 18th May, 2004 and directed the petitioner to
be tried by a General Court Martial vide orders signed on 19th of
May, 2004.

: 26 :

44.

WP(C)2493/2003

The petitioner made a strong grievance before this

Court on 26th of May, 2004 in respect of the order dated 19th
May, 2004 placing reliance on a letter dated 12th April, 2004
alleging that the Commanding Officer had recommended that the
petitioner ought not to be subjected for trial by a court martial.
45.

After examining the matter the following order was

recorded by this Court on 26th May, 2004:“Learned counsel for the petitioner has
contended that at the time of recording of
summary of the evidence the petitioner had
requested the Commanding Officer that the
defence witnesses for whom, he had submitted
detailed justification and accepted the liability to
defray their cost as desired by the Commanding
Officer, were to be provided to him before the
matter was considered under Army Rules 22, 23
& 24. He had also requested the Commanding
Officer that no adverse decision be taken till all
the defence witnesses and documents requested
vide his letter dated 15th March, 2004 of the
petitioner are examined by him.
We have perused the original record of
the proceedings and the summary of evidence in
which it has been recorded that “accused is
informed that remaining 16 defence witnesses
and
documents
requested
by
him
for
examination are not being provided to him. The
accused is also informed that in the absence of
the examination of the said witnesses and
documents, no adverse decision would be taken
on the proceedings, hence he should proceed
with his additional defence statement, if any.”
Mr.Sood, learned ASG appearing for
the respondent has contended that the aforesaid
note was only in relation to the plea of the
limitation of the petitioner as the petitioner has

: 27 :

WP(C)2493/2003

contended that the Tehlaka tapes came to the
knowledge of the authorities as well as to the
public on 14th & 15th March, 2001 and it was for
no other purposes. Mr.Sood has also contended
that the plea of the limitation will also be
available to the petitioner before the General
Court Martial.
As the matter would require some time
to consider the effect of recording that no
adverse decision will be taken by the
respondent in the proceedings at the time of
recording the summary of evidence as well as
the effect of the letter dated 12.4.2004 to the
same effect and we are left with no time, there
are two alternatives either the respondent
themselves should not hold the GCM till the
next date of hearing or in the alternative we
have to direct the respondent not to hold the
GCM till the next date of hearing till we decide
the aforesaid issue authoritatively.
Mr.Sood
expresses his difficulty that limitation may
expire and the respondent may be barred from
proceedings with General Court Martial. We
make it clear that in the event of the aforesaid
issue decided against the petitioner, the
petitioner will not claim limitation for this
period.
Renotify on 26th July, 2004, the date
already fixed.

46.

Till the next date of hearing, General
Court Martial proceedings be not held.”
When the matter was listed before us on 26th July,

2004, an adjournment was requested on behalf of the petitioner
that a substantive application for amendment of the writ petition
would be filed. Accordingly CM 9137/04 praying for amendment
of the writ petition was filed which was taken up for
consideration alongwith the writ petition on 6th August, 2004.

: 28 :

WP(C)2493/2003

The petitioner had sought liberty to withdraw CM 5693/04,
however reserving the right to rely upon the documents annexed
thereto for the purposes of decision on the writ petition. CM
5693/04 was accordingly dismissed as withdrawn on 6th August,
2004.
47.

By virtue of CM 9137/04 the petitioner was seeking to

contend that he may not be subjected to trial by court martial
inasmuch as according to him on 27th March, 2004 the
possibility of his trial by General Court Martial had become time
barred on the ground of limitation as per Section 122 of the
Army Act. It was being contended that it was to support this
plea of limitation that the petitioner was seeking to call the
persons cited in his list of witnesses. The petitioner was seeking
to impugn the failure to take decision on his statutory
representation dated 26th April, 2004 whereby he had impugned
the respondents' action as being barred in terms of the limitation
provided under Section 122 of the Army Act, 1950.
48.

Additionally it was contended that the respondent no.5

had taken over the process of this Court and illegally issued
charge sheet dated 18th May, 2004 bearing the endorsement of
respondent no.4 dated 19th may, 2004 directing trial of the
petitioner by General Court Martial.
49.

The application seeking amendment of the writ petition

: 29 :

WP(C)2493/2003

was filed seeking addition of pleas to the afore-stated effect and
directing additional prayers to be made in the existing petition.
Since

the

petitioner

had

been

released

from

military

custody(open arrest) after the filing of the writ petition the
petitioner was seeking its modification. The petitioner was also
seeking to add the respondents 4 & 5 to the existing petition by
name as respondents 7 & 8.
50.

It is essential to examine the charge sheet dated 18th

May, 2004 which was issued to the petitioner. The same reads
as hereunder:“CHARGE SHEET
The accused, Shri Iqbal Singh,
formerly IC-26796Y Brigadier Iqbal Singh,
Vishist Seva Medal, Army Headquarters, now
attached to Headquarters 40 Artillery Division,
and liable to trial by Court Martial under Section
123 of the Army Act, is charged with :
First Charge - Army Act Section 69
COMMITTING A CIVIL OFFENCE, THAT IS TO
SAY, BEING A PUBLIC SERVANT, ACCEPTING
FOR HIMSELF GRATIFICATION OTHER THAN
LEGAL REMUNERATION, AS A MOTIVE FOR
DOING AN OFFICIAL ACT IN THE EXERCISE OF
HIS OFFICIAL FUNCTIONS, CONTRARY TO
SECTION 7 OF THE PREVENTION OF
CORRUPTION ACT, 1988,
in that he,
at New Delhi, on 05 November 2000,
which came to the knowledge of the authority
competent to initiate action on 14 Jun 2001,
while holding the appointment of Deputy
Director General, Procurement and Progressive
Organisation in Master General of Ordnance

: 30 :

WP(C)2493/2003

branch, Army Headquarters, accepted for
himself a sum of Rs.50,000/- (Rupees fifty
thousand only) from Shri Samuel Mathew, a
representatives of M/S West End International,
a gratification other than legal remuneration, as
a motive to promote the interest of the said firm
in the Army.
Second Charge - Army Act Section 45
BEING AN OFFICESR BEHAVING IN A MANNER
UNBECOMING HIS POSITION AND THE
CHARACTER EXPECTED OF HIM,
in that he,
at New Delhi, on 05 November 2000, which
came to the knowledge of the authority
competent to initiate action on 14 Jun 2001,
while holding the appointment is mentioned in
the first charge, met Shri Samuel Mathew, a
representative of M/S West End International, at
Park Hotel and accepted hospitality of wine and
woman offered by him to promote the interests
of the said firm in the Army.
Third Charge - Army Act Section 63
AN OMISSION PREJUDICIAL TO
ORDER AND MILITARY DISCIPLINE,

GOOD

in that he,
at New Delhi, on 05 November 2000, which
came to the knowledge of the authority
competent to initiate action on 14 Jun 2001,
while holding the appointment as mentioned
in the first charge improperly omitted to
comply with the provisions of Chapter XV of
the “Instructions on Contact with Foreign
Nationals-1987”, with regard to his meeting
with Lt Col(Retd) VP Sayal and the aforesaid
Shri Samuel Mathew.”
51.

The respondents have stated in the charge sheet that

the allegations forming the basis of the charge came to the

: 31 :

WP(C)2493/2003

knowledge of the authority competent to initiate action on 14th
June, 2001.
52.

It is noteworthy that incidentally, the court of inquiry

had made its report on 14th June, 2001. In the tentative charge
sheet on which summary of evidence was recorded four charges
were levelled against the petitioner. Whereas the petitioner was
being arraigned for trial on the charge sheet dated 18th May,
2004 wherein only three charges were levelled against the
petitioner.
53.

Perusal of the prayers in the existing writ petition

shows that prayers (a) & (b) made by the petitioner stood
satisfied and were infructuous.

So far as prayer 'c' was

concerned, the direction of the officer recording the evidence on
17th March, 2004 decided the matter.
54.

In reply to prayer (e)

of the petitioner,

seeking a

direction for release of his pensionary benefits, the respondents
had stated that the same would be released in accordance with
law. It is apparent that the prayers made in the existing writ
petition stood either satisfied or were infructuous.
The assertions made in CM 9137/04 seeking to amend
the writ petition were therefore based on a wholly new cause of
action, if available, to the petitioner.

In our view, the

amendment of the existing petition on the facts and to

: 32 :

WP(C)2493/2003

incorporate the prayers made in the CM 9137/04 cannot be
permitted.
55.

The entire matter was argued before us on 6th August,

2004. Both parties have addressed arguments not only on CM
9137/04 being the amendment application but on the merits of
the matter when judgment was reserved. The petitioner however
filed CM 9374/2004 dated 9th August, 2004 which was praying
for consideration of the annexures(judgments) annexed with the
application for consideration at the time of adjudication as well
as supply of the documents placed before the Court on 6th
August, 2004. In this view of the matter further opportunity for
addressing arguments was given to both the parties on 12th
August, 2004. We were called upon to decide the issues raised
in the amendment application even on merits and as such have
considered the entire matter on the merits of the contentions
raised.
56.

It has been vehemently contended on behalf of the

petitioner that his valuable right to call witnesses granted to him
under Army Rule 23 has been violated and his defence severely
prejudiced inasmuch he has been denied opportunity to examine
the 16 witnesses cited by him. The petitioner contends that the
examination of these witness was essential inasmuch as these
witnesses would have established that the trial of the petitioner

: 33 :

WP(C)2493/2003

was barred by limitation.
57.

In the context of the facts in the instant case the

petitioner is seeking to advance the argument that the limitation
had commenced from the date the tapes were broadcast on
television. In this behalf, according to the respondents, by virtue
of the broadcast, merely
revealed.

commission of some offence was

Accordingly a Court of Inquiry was directed in

accordance with the provisions of Army Rule 177 to 182 i.e.
under Chapter VI of the Army Rules. The terms of appointment
of the court of inquiry required inquiry into allegations of
influencing the procurement of defence equipments as made
against the Army Officers by Tehelka.com on 13th March, 2001.
The Court was required to investigate the complicity of any other
person(s) who might been involved in any way.
58.

The court of inquiry was concluded on 14th July, 2001.

Summary of Evidence was recorded thereafter.

Only on its

conclusion the respondents have issued the charge sheet dated
18th May, 2004 wherein it is stipulated that it was brought to the
notice of the competent authority only on 14th July, 2001 about
the commission of the offence and the identity of the offender as
being that of the petitioner. This charge sheet has been issued
after considering the material on record including the summary
of evidence by the convening authority.

: 34 :

59.

WP(C)2493/2003

The petitioner contends that he was entitled to lead his

defence and examine the 16 witnesses sought by him in order to
support his plea of limitation to the effect that no trial of the
petitioner could have been conducted as the same was barred in
law under Section 122.
60.

At this juncture it becomes necessary to examine the

nature and scope of the proceedings conducted by Court of
Inquiry under Chapter VI of the Army Rules.

The same is

conducted under the provisions of Army Rules 177 to 184. Upon
examination of the judicial pronouncements, the position in law
can be appropriately summarised as hereunder:(i) A Court of inquiry is intended for investigating
circumstances under which irregularities occur and for
fixing responsibility. It is primarily a fact finding body to
collect evidence and make a report thereon. It is set up
whenever an incident occurs of which the true and correct
position is to be ascertained at the pre-charge level
contemplated by law.
Conducting of a Court of Inquiry
prior to a direction to hold a trial or Court Martial is not a
sine qua non whenever or wherever in any inquiry in respect
of person such to the Army Act his character or military
reputation is likely to be effected. (Re: AIR 1982 SC 1413
entitled Lt. Col.Prithipal Singh Bedi Vs. UOI.
(ii)
Court of Inquiry has been held to be akin to a
preliminary enquiry in civil proceedings. Its procedings are
not admissible in evidence subject to the exceptions
mentioned in Army Rule 182 (Re: Lt. Col. G.S.Dima Vs. UOI
1987 Labour Industrial Cases 1264) (Gau).
(iii)
Proceedings of the Court of Inquiry are not
adverserial and are not part of pre trial investigation. (Re:
1998(1) SC 537 (para 19) entitled UOI Vs. Major A. Hussain;

: 35 :

WP(C)2493/2003

1997 (9) SCC 1 entitled Major Gen. Inderjit Kumar Vs. UOI.
(iv)
Principles of natural justice are not applicable
during Court of Inquiry though adequate protection to an
army official is given by Army Rule 180. (Re 1997(9) SCC 1
entitled Major General Inderjit Kumar Vs. UOI.
(v)
There is no mandatory requirement of supply of
copy of a Court of Inquiry to a person who may be arraigned
for trial (Re: 1998(1) SCC 537(para 19) Union of India Vs.
Major A.Hussain; 1997(9) SCC page 1 (Head Note A) para 8
Major General Inderjit Kumar Vs. UOI.
61.
After receipt of the report of court of inquiry the
commanding officer is required to comply with Army Rule 22 and
may direct recording of a summary of evidence in compliance
with Army Rule 23 to 25.
It is noteworthy that the Army Act, 1950 was amended
pursuant to the Amendment Act 37 of 1992.

Sec 22 saw

material amendments which become evident from the following
comparison:Section 22(1) Prior to amendment
22. Hearing of Charge---(1) Every
charge against a person subject to the Act
other than an officer, shall be heard in the
presence of the accused. The accused
shall have full liberty to cross-examine
any witness against him, and to call any
witnesses and make any statement in his
defence.

Section 22(1) subsequent to amendment

22. Hearing of Charge---(1) Every
Charge against a person subject to the Act
shall be heard by the Commanding
Officer in the presence of the accused.
The accused shall have full liberty to
cross-examine any witness against him,
and to call such witness and make such
statement as may be necessary for his
(2) The commanding officer shall dismiss defence:
a charge brought before him if, in his Provided that where the charge against
opinion the evidence does not show that the accused arises as a result of
an offence under the Act has been investigation by a Court of inquiry,
committed, and may do so if, in his wherein the provisions of rule 180 have
discretion he is satisfied that the charge been complied with in respect of that
ought not to be proceeded with.
accused,the commanding officer may

: 36 :
Section 22(1) Prior to amendment

WP(C)2493/2003

Section 22(1) subsequent to amendment
dispense with the procedure in subrule (1).
(2) The commanding officer shall dismiss
a charge brought before him if, in his
opinion the evidence does not show that
an offence under the Act has been
committed, and may do so if, he is
satisfied that the charge ought not to be
proceeded with:
Provided that the commanding officer
shall not dismiss a charge which he is
debarred to try under sub-section (2) of
Sec.120 without reference to superior
authority as specified therein.

The word 'charge' appearing in Army Rule 22(1) has
been held to mean nothing more than a mere “accusation”. It
does not amount to a charge as contained in a charge sheet.
(Re:1983 Crl.L.J 1059 Head Note F(para 35) entitled Gian Chand
vs. UOI).
62.

The respondents had also issued the procedure

governing hearing of charge under Army Rule 22 by the
Commanding Officer was set out by the respondents in Army
Orders 70/84.

Subsequent to the statutory amendment the

respondents canceled Army Order 70/84 and substituted the
same by Army Order 24/94 which reads as under:“A.O.24/94 Discipline: Hearing of a charge by
the Commanding Officer
1.Disciplinary process under the Military Law
commences with Army Rule 22 which lays down
that every charge against a person subject to the
Army Act shall be heard by the Commanding

: 37 :

WP(C)2493/2003

Officer in the presence of the accused. The
accused shall have full liberty to cross-examine
any witness against him and to call such
witness and make such statement as may be
necessary for his defence. This is a mandatory
requirement and its non-observance will vitiate
any
subsequent
disciplinary
proceedings.
However, where the charge against the accused
arises as a result of investigation by a Court of
Inquiry,wherein the provisions of Army Rule 180
have been complied with in respect of that
accused, the Commanding Officer may dispense
with the procedure as prescribed in Army Rule
22(1) in so far as it relates to calling and hearing
of the witnesses. It may be noted that even in
such cases the commanding officer shall read
out and explain the charge(s) to the accused and
make appropriate orders on conclusion of the
hearing.
2. It is, therefore, incumbent on all Commanding
Officers processing a disciplinary case to ensure
that “Hearing of the Charge” enjoined by Army
Rule 22 is scrupulously held in each and every
case and the provisions of the ibid Rule are
complied with in letter and spirit.
3. It may be clarified that the charge at this
stage is a 'Tentative' charge which may be
modified after the hearing or during the
procedure described in Army Rule 22(3)(c) or
during examination after completion of the
procedure under the said sub Rule, depending
on the evidence adduced, under Army Rule
22(4). It is, however, not necessary at this stage
to hear all possible prosecution/defence
witnesses provided that CO has heard sufficient
evidence in support/disproof of the charge(s).
As a matter of abundant caution, it would be
desirable to have one or two independent
witnesses during the hearing of the charge(s).
4. After the procedure laid down in Army Rule
22 has been duly followed, other steps as
provided in Army Rules 23 and 24, shall be

: 38 :

WP(C)2493/2003

complied with in letter and spirit. In order to
ensure that there is no omission or laxity in the
strict compliance of the procedure laid down in
the Army Rules, the form given in Appendix 'A'
to this Army Order shall be duly completed by
the Commanding Officer and kept on record in
all cases.
5. A copy of this Army Order will be kept in the
Unit Court Martial Box.
63.

6. AO 70/84 is hereby cancelled.”
The manner in which the record of proceedings is to be

recorded by the Commanding Officer under Army Rule 22 is
provided in Appendix 'A' to Army Order 24/94.
64.

The original record of the proceeding in the instant

case has been produced before us and were perused. We find
that the petitioner has confirmed that calling and hearing of
witnesses in terms of proviso to Army Rule 22(1) have been
dispensed with, since provisions of Army Rule 180 had been
complied with at the Court of Inquiry. The Court of Inquiry was
recorded in the presence of the petitioner and he was afforded
opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses.

Therefore, the

decision of the Commanding Officer to exercise his discretion &
dispense with compliance with Army Rule 22 cannot be
challenged.
65.

The status of the summary of evidence is that of an

investigation conducted prior to a criminal trial. Army Rule 37
mandates consideration of the evidence and satisfaction of the

: 39 :

WP(C)2493/2003

convening authority prior to direction to conduct a trial of a
person subject to Army Act for offences thereunder by Court
Martial.
66.

The summary of evidence recorded under Army Rule

23 to 25 can be compared to the stage of investigation by an
investigating officer in a criminal trial.
67.

The trial commences only when a General Court

Martial assembles to consider the charges and examines
whether the Court Martial would proceed with the trial.

The

preceding preliminary investigation is only part of investigation
to see whether a charge could be framed and placed before the
competent authority to constitute a General Court Martial.

It

was so held in AIR 1996 SC 1340 (para 21 & 24) entitled UOI Vs.
Major General Madan Lal Yadav.
68.

Therefore, the recording of summary evidence amounts

to conducting the preliminary investigation prior to the direction
to conduct a trial.
It has been held by the Supreme Court that the
requirement of proper and adequate

investigation is not

jurisdictional and any violation thereof does not necessarily
invalidate the Court Martial unless the accused is prejudiced or
any mandatory provision violated.

It is only such procedural

defects as are vital and substantial which would effect a

: 40 :

WP(C)2493/2003

subsequent trial. This was so held in the judgment reported at
1998(1) SCC 537 (paras 18 and 23) entitled UOI vs. Major
A.Hussain; 1991(2) SCC 382 entitled Major G.S.Sodhi Vs. UOI;
and

AIR 1982 SC 1413 entitled

Col. Pritipal Singh Bedi Vs.

UOI. In the instant case the writ petition was filed before even
such stage.
69.

As per statutory scheme, the summary of evidence is

recorded at a stage prior to the convening of a Court Martial.
Therefore, a plea that a trial by court martial is barred by
limitation cannot fall for consideration before an officer recording
the summary of evidence inasmuch as the summary of evidence
is concerned with investigation into the tentative charges leveled
against the person against whom the summary of evidence is
being recorded. The evidence recorded has to be considered by
the competent authority under Section 109 of the Army Act read
with Army Rule 37 who may or may not direct that the court
martial is to be convened.
70.

The petitioner contends that he was entitled to lead his

defence and examine the 16 witnesses sought by him in order to
support his plea of limitation to the effect that no trial of the
petitioner could have been conducted as the same was barred in
law under Section 122 of the Army Act.
71.

In this behalf, it is necessary to examine the statutory

: 41 :

WP(C)2493/2003

provisions governing the law of limitation as applicable to trials
by Court Martial and the manner in which such objections can
be raised. Limitation has been provided by the legislature under
Section 122 of the Act. Prior to an amendment effected in the
statute in 1992, the statute had another prohibition. It would be
useful to place the statute prior and subsequent to the
amendment along side so as to appreciate the valuable
amendments deemed fit by the legislature:-

: 42 :

Section
122(1)
amendment

prior

WP(C)2493/2003

to Section 122(1) subsequent to
amendment

122.Period of limitation for
trial--- (1) Except as provided
by sub-section (2), no trial by
court-martial of any person
subject to this Act for any
offence shall be commenced
after the expiration of a period
of three yars from the date of
such offence.

122. Period of limitation for
trial--- (1) Except as provided
by sub-section(2), no trial by
court-martial of any person
subject to this Act for any
offence shall be commenced
after the expiration of a period
of three years and such period
shall commence--(a) on the date of the offence; or
(b) where the commission of
the offence was not known to
the person aggrieved by the
offence or to the authority
competent to initiate action,
the first day on which such
offence comes to the knowledge
of such person or authority,
whichever is earlier; or

72.

(c) where it is not known by
whom
the
offence
was
committed, the first day on
which the identity of the
offender is known to the person
aggrieved by the offence or to
the authority competent to
initiate action, whichever is
earlier.
Coming to the main plea advanced before us that the

trial by General Court Martial of the petitioner was barred by
limitation, it is necessary to consider the scheme of the
enactment.
73.

After the amendment, Section 122(1) of the Army Act

is ipsi sima verba with Section 469 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 which reads as hereunder:-

: 43 :

WP(C)2493/2003

“469. Commencement of the period of
limitation---(1) The period of limitation, in
relation to an offence, shall commence,--(a) on the date of the offence; or
(b) where the commission of the offence was not
known to the person aggrieved by the offence or
to any police officer, the first day on which such
offence comes to the knowledge of such person
or to any police officer, whichever is earlier; or
(c) where it is not known by whom the offence
was committed, the first day on which the
identify of the offender is known to the person
aggrieved by the offence or to the police officer
making investigation into the offence, whichever
is earlier.

74.

(2) In computing the said period, the day from
which such period is to b computed shall be
excluded.”
The Supreme Court in the judgment reported at AIR

1996 SC 2004 entitled Radha Kishan Vs. UOI has held that the
Army Act is a complete Code in itself. It not only provides that
the period of limitation for trial by Court Martial but also
provides under sub-Section (2) of Section 122 such offences in
respect of which the limitation clause would not apply.
75.

Section 122(1)(a) of the Act lays down that the period of

limitation commences on the date of the offence. This presents
no difficulty in its application inasmuch as both the offence and
offender are deemed to be known and identity and knowledge
thereof is attributable to the

authority competent to initiate

action. Section 122(1)(b) of the Act contemplates that the period

: 44 :

WP(C)2493/2003

of limitation commences on such date when the commission of
the offence came to be known to the “person aggrieved” or on the
first date when such offence came to the knowledge of an
authority who is competent to order the Court Martial, subject,
however to the rule that the earlier of the two dates shall be the
date for reckoning the period of limitation.
76.

The expression 'person aggrieved' has been considered

by the Supreme Court of India in the case entitled Registrar of
Companies Vs. Rajshri Sugar & Chemicals Limited reported at
2000(6) SCC 133.
77.

It was held by the Supreme Court that where a

misconduct is said to have been committed,

the officer in

command is required to take action for charges and trial by the
Court Martial as per Section 1 and Chapter V of the Rules or
order Court of Inquiry. Placing reliance on an earlier decision of
the

Supreme

Court

rendered

in

Delhi

Special

Police

Establishment Vs. S.K.Loraiya reported in AIR 1972 SC 2548, it
was held that it is for the Court Martial to decide the issue of
limitation and it alone has the jurisdiction to entertain upon the
inquiry in the case.
78.

This issue fell for consideration before a learned Single

Judge of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh in a judgment
reported at 2001(5) ALT 52 entitled Col. D.D.Pawar and another

: 45 :

WP(C)2493/2003

Vs. Commander Head Quarter Andhra pradesh sub-area,
Secundrabad and others. The judgment rendered by the learned
Single Judge was impugned before the Division Bench of the
High Court of Andhra Pradesh in Writ Appeal nos. 687 & 688 of
2001 and it was held as hereunder:“It is also well settled that the Parliament or the
Legislature is presumed to be in the know of the
things, including the statute law that existed
prior to such amendment and but also the
binding law that was declared by the competent
court of record. By the time 1992 amendment
was introduced the Supreme Court decision in
Delhi
Special
Police
Establishment
vs.
S.K.Loraiya was available. In this case, the
Supreme Court interpreted Sections 122(1) and
(3) of the Army Act and laid down the following
principle.
“....On a conjoint reading of sub-ss.(1)
and (3) of S.122, it is evident that the
Court Martial and not the ordinary
criminal court has got jurisdiction to
decide the issue of limitation. There is
nothing on record before us to indicate
that the respondent had not been
evading
after commission of the
offence.
As the Court Martial has
initial jurisdiction to enter upon the
enquiry in the case, it alone is
competent to decide whether it retains
jurisdiction to try the respondent in
spite of sub-s(1) of S.122. The issue of
limitation is a part of the trial before
it. If the Court Martial finds that the
respondent cannot be tried on account
of the expiry of three years from the
date of the commission of the offence,
he cannot go scot free. Section 127 of
the Army Act provides that when a
person is convicted or acquitted by a
Court martial, he may, with the

: 46 :

WP(C)2493/2003

previous sanction of the Central
Government, be tried against by an
ordinary criminal court for the same
offence or on the same facts. So it
would be open to the Central
Government to proceed against the
respondent after the Court martial has
recorded a finding that it cannot try
him on account of the expiry of three
years from the date of the commission
of the offence.
(emphasis supplied)
In the light of the law laid down by the Supreme
Court in Loraiya's case(supra) we agree with the
observations made by the learned Single Judge
that it is not desirable for this Court to embark
upon any further in the matter. However, as
the learned counsel for appellants and
respondents have made elaborate submissions
we only propose to deal with the question of law
as to interpretation of Section 122(1) of the Act
after amendment Act 37 of 1992 and also deal
with the related submissions.
Section 122(1) lays down that no trial by Court
Martial of any person subject to Army Act for
any offence shall be commenced after the
expiration of a period of three years.
The
second part of sub-section 122(1) visualises
three different situations of commencement of
period.
Applying the test laid down in Rajshree Sugar
case, we need to examine question as to who is
the “person aggrieved”for the purpose of Section
122(1)(b) of the Act. When any misconduct or
offence is alleged to have been committed the
Officer in Command is required to take action
for investigation of charges and trial by the
Court Martial as per Section 1 Chapter V of the
Rules or order Court of Inquiry under Section 2
Chapter VI of Rules. Section 1 of the Chapter V
deals with such investigation Rule 22 of the
Rules provides that the Commanding Officer

: 47 :

79.

WP(C)2493/2003

has to hear the charged army person, record
summary of evidence and after completing the
investigation if the Commanding officer is of the
opinion that the charged ought to be proceeded
with, he may refer the case to the proper
superior authority or take such other action as
contemplated in Rule 122(3). Under Rules 177
to 185 Court of Inquiry may be assembled by
Officer in Command of anybody of troops.
Chapter XII of the Defence Service Regulations
or Regulations of the Army also deal with Court
of Inquiry. In this context we may also refer to
Chapter II of Army Regulations, which deals
with the powers and duties of General Officer
Commanding in Chief Core Commander,
Divisional Commander, Area Commander and
independent Sub Area Commander. The duties
functions
and
responsibilities
of
the
Independent Sub Area Commander are
analogous to those of Area Commander which
are provided in Regulations 16 Command,
discipline and administration in his area are the
responsibilities of the Area Commander or
independent Sub Area Commander as the case
may be.”
The principles of law laid down above were considered

by this Court in the judgment reported at 2002(64) DRJ 379
entitled V.N.Singh (Lt. Col.) Vs. Union of India and others.
Inasmuch as the court was examining the finding and sentence
of the court martial and the petitioner had already been held to
be guilty, there was no possibility for that petitioner to have
recourse to the plea in bar in accordance with Army Rule 53.
Though it was held that it is the jurisdiction of the Court Martial
to examine a plea in bar, however in view of the fact the Division
Bench was concerned with the finding and sentence of the Court

: 48 :

WP(C)2493/2003

Martial after trial, the Court examined the plea raised.
80.

It is, therefore, settled law that the period of limitation

starts from the date of knowledge of the offence and the identity
of the offender. Law of limitation in the context of Court Martial
proceedings being in the nature of a criminal trial necessarily
has to be interpreted strictly.
However examining the spirit, intendment and purpose
of the Army Act, 1950 and the rules framed thereunder,
statutory power and procedure has also to be strictly construed
to the extent that rights of person subject to Army Officers are
curtailed by statutory provisions.

In this context the Courts

have negated even reading applicability of principles of natural
justice into the provisions of the Army Act, 1950.

In the

judgment reported at 1990(4) SCC 593 entitled S.N.Mukherjee
Vs. Union of India while considering the applicability of the rules
of natural justice and requirement of recording reasons by the
authorities exercising powers under Section 164 of the Army Act
1950 it was observed as hereunder:“39. The object underlying the rules of natural
justice “is to prevent miscarriage of justice” and
secure “fair play in action”. As pointed out
earlier the requirement about recording of
reasons for its decision by an administrative
authority exercising quasi-judicial functions
achieves this object by excluding chances of
arbitrariness and ensuring a degree of fairness
in the process of decision-making. Keeping in

: 49 :

WP(C)2493/2003

view the expanding horizon of the principles of
natural justice, we are of the opinion, that the
requirement to record reason can be regarded as
one of the principles of natural justice which
govern exercise of power by administrative
authorities. The rules of natural justice are not
embodied rules. The extent of their application
depends
upon
the
particular
statutory
framework where under jurisdiction has been
conferred on the administrative authority. With
regard to the exercise of a particular power by
an administrative authority including exercise of
judicial or quasi judicial functions the
legislature,while conferring the said power, may
feel that it passed by the administrative
authority be recorded in the order and be
communicated to the aggrieved party and it may
dispense with such a requirement. It may do so
by making an express provision to that effect as
those contained in the Administrative procedure
Act, 1946 of USA and the Administrative
Decisions (Judicial Review) Act, 1977 of
Australia whereby the orders passed by certain
specified authorities are excluded from the
ambit of the enactment. Such an exclusion can
also arise by necessary implication from the
nature of the subject matter, the scheme and
the provisions of the enactment. The public
interest underlying such a provision would
outweigh the salutary purpose served by the
requirement to record the reasons. The said
requirement cannot, therefore, be insisted upon
in such a case.”
Therefore, the provisions of the Army Act 1950 brook
no deviation and the provisions have to be strictly complied with.
81.

The plea of a trial being barred by limitation goes to

the root of the jurisdiction of the Court Martial. The statute has
provided a valuable protection with regard to jurisdictional pleas
to persons facing Court Martials. The statute also provides the

: 50 :

WP(C)2493/2003

stage at which the objection is to be taken and the manner in
which it is to be proceeded. The same is to be found in Army
Rule 53 which reads as hereunder:“53. Plea in bar--- (1) The accused, at the time
of his general plea of “Guilty”or “Not Guilty” to a
charge for an offence, may offer a plea in bar of
trial on the ground that--(a) he has been previously convicted or acquitted
of the offence by a competent criminal court or
by a court-martial, or has been dealt with
summarily under sections 80, 83, 84 and 85, as
the case may be, for the offence, or that a
charge in respect of the offence has been
dismissed as provided in sub-rule (2) of rule 22
or
(b) the offence has been pardoned or condoned
by competent military authority;
(c) the period of limitation for trial as laid
down in section 122 has expired.
(2) If he offers such plea in bar, the court
shall record it as well as his general plea, and
if it considers that any fact or facts stated by
him are sufficient to support the plea in bar,
it shall receive any evidence offered, and
hear any address made by or on behalf of the
accused and the prosecutor in reference to
the plea.
(3) If the court finds that the plea in bar is
proved, it shall record its finding and notify it to
the confirming authority, and shall either
adjourn, or if there is any other charge against
the accused, whether in the same or in a
different charge-sheet,which is not affected by
the plea in bar, may proceed to the trial of the
accused on that charge.
(4) If the finding that the plea in bar is proved is
not confirmed, the court may be re-assembled

: 51 :

WP(C)2493/2003

by the confirming authority, and proceed as if
the plea has been found not proved.

82.

(5) If the court finds that the plea in bar is not
proved, it shall proceed with the trial, and the
said findings shall be subject to confirmation
like any other finding of the court.”
Army Rule 53(1)(c) did not exist on the statute book

and has been introduced by the amendment to the rules on 6 th
December, 1993. The legislature, in its wisdom has, therefore,
taken into consideration that the limitation for trial laid down in
Section 122 is a question of fact and law and goes to the root of
the matter i.e. amounts to questioning the very jurisdiction of
subjecting a person to trial by Court Martial.

Consequently,

Army Rule 53(2)(4) provides that as soon as such a plea in bar
to the trial is offered, the Court Martial shall receive any
evidence offered in support of the plea and also hear any
address made on behalf of the accused and the prosecutor in
reference to such plea.
83.

After receipt of the report the court of inquiry and

recording of the summary of evidence, the competent authority
had directed that the petitioner be tried by the General Court
Martial. The stage of recording of the general plea on behalf of
the petitioner as well as a plea in bar to the jurisdiction of the
Court Martial on account of the trial being barred by limitation
or otherwise has yet to come.

It is at this stage that the

: 52 :

WP(C)2493/2003

petitioner would plead the bar to trial of limitation, if available,
and lead such evidence in accordance with law as is permissible.
It has been so held even in the judicial pronouncements cited
therefore by which we are bound.
84.

It is a settled principle of law that where the statute

mandates a particular thing to be done in a particular manner, it
must necessarily be done in such manner or not at all. (Re: AIR
1936 PC 253 Nazir Ahmed Vs Emperor; JT 1993(3) SC 238 Shiv
Kumar Chadha Vs. MCD); AIR 1975 SC 915 entitled Ram
Chandre Adke Vs. Govind; 2001(4) SCC 9 entitled Dhananjaya
Reddy Vs. State of Karnataka.
85.

In the instant case the statute lays down the method

and manner in which plea of bar of jurisdiction on account of
limitation is to be taken and the statute itself provides the
procedure to be followed by the Court Martial when such a plea
is taken.

That stage for

the petitioner is yet to arrive in the

instant case. The plea at the face of it requires evidence. The
petitioner cannot pre-empt either the stage or the adjudication
by the authority, tribunal or forum, statutorily created for
adjudication of such a plea by virtue of taking recourse to the
extraordinary jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India.
86.

The statute has conferred the jurisdiction upon the

: 53 :

WP(C)2493/2003

General Court Martial to adjudicate upon and decide its
jurisdiction under Section 53 of the Army Act, 1950.
87.

We have dealt at length with the allegations of the

petitioner with regard to the fact that there was no material for
initiation of disciplinary action of Court Martial against him in
his representation and even in the writ petition. The petitioner
was vehemently denying all the allegations levelled against him
and was disputing the authenticity of the tapes.

In these

circumstances, it was thought fit by the respondents to call for
the report of a Court of Inquiry and thereafter directed recording
of Summary of Evidence.
88.

We may point out here that in the instant case the

respondents have framed the charge specifically attributing a
specific date of knowledge of the offence and offender to the
competent authority. It is trite to say that the burden of proving
the

same

would thereupon be upon the prosecution in

accordance with settled criminal jurisprudence.

In view of the

special procedure prescribed for trial by court martial, the
petitioner would have an opportunity to raise objection at the
stage of raising a plea in Bar. Even if the plea is not taken by
the petitioner, in view of the frame of the charge, the
respondents would have to prove every element of the charge
including such date of knowledge beyond reasonable doubt and

: 54 :

WP(C)2493/2003

the defence would have its opportunity to rebut the same. This
would obviously include the date of knowledge of the offence and
the identity of the offender.
89.

The officer conducting the summary of evidence was of

the view that evidence of only three out of the nineteen of the
witnesses demanded by the petitioner were relevant to the
tentative charges on which a summary of evidence was being
recorded.
We do not agree with the petitioner that such a
decision by the officer recording a summary of evidence can in
the instant case be subjected to judicial scrutiny at this stage.
In

any

case,

these

witnesses

have

been

cited

admittedly in support of a plea in bar to the trial on account of
limitation.

On the own showing of the petitioner, such plea

before the officer recording the summary of evidence was
premature.

Statute provides the stage and manner in which

such plea has to be raised.
We have held that the occasion for a person arraigned
to stand trial to take the plea in bar would arise before a Court
Martial. In the case of the petitioner, such stage is yet to come.
90.

The original record relating to the correspondence as

well as the record relating to convening of the Court Martial has
been produced before us and carefully perused.

: 55 :

91.

WP(C)2493/2003

We find that after conclusion of the summary of

evidence, the Commanding Officer of the petitioner addressed a
letter to the Headquarters dated 12th April, 2004 which read as
hereunder:“ 1.Ref your HQ letter no.1451/3/WC/IBS/A1 dt
23 Oct 03 and telecon with DJAG your HQ dt 08
Apr 04.
2. Pre-trial docus in respect of IC-26796Y Brig
Iqbal Singh, VSM(Retd) are re-submitted
herewith as per details given in the
application for Court Martial (in lieu of IAFD937) for pre-trial advise please.
3. There appears to be no conclusive evidence in
so far as the First and Second charges against
the Accused are concerned. In so far as the
Third and Fourth charges are concerned,
whereas they appear to be serious
omissions, however dealing with them
administratively can also be an option so as
to close the case expeditiously.
4. As regards the tapes are concerned, it has
been brought out by the Officer recording the S
of E that as they are copies of copies and hence
not admissible as evidence under Indian
Evidence Act Sec 62 and 63, and to that extent
we have to await the forensic report as and
when it comes. Evidence so deduced can be
acted upon at that stg as otherwise the case will
get delayed/time barred.”
(emphasis supplied)

92.

It is evident that the Commanding Officer considered

the omissions to be serious.

While submitting his views, an

option for expeditious adjudication has been suggested. Along
with this letter he

had enclosed forms for constitution of the

: 56 :

WP(C)2493/2003

Court martial in Form IAFD, all dated 12th April, 2004,
forwarding along with the Court of Inquiry report, report under
Section 22 of the Act, tentative charge sheet, summary of
evidence, documentary exhibits etc. as well as the additional
summary of evidence to the competent authority.

In any case,

the letter dated 12th April, 2004 relied upon by the petitioner
reproduced above cannot be read in isolation or devoid of the
position in law. The commanding officer's communication has to
be examined in the light of the rest of the documentation sent
under his signatures.
In these circumstances, the contention on behalf of the
petitioner that the Commanding Officer was of the firm view that
the case was not a fit case for convening a Court Martial has to
be rejected.
93.

The power to convene a Court Martial is derived by an

authority from the provisions of Section 109 of the Army Act
read with Army Rule 37. Delegation is to be by issuance of an
appropriate warrant.

The only jurisdiction vested in the

Commanding Officer was to refer the case to a superior officer
for consideration for further action. The Commanding Officer in
the instant case had referred the matter in accordance with
Army Rule 24 in forwarding form IAFD to the Corps Commander
for exercise of his jurisdiction under Section 109 and Army Rule

: 57 :

37.

WP(C)2493/2003

It is not disputed that the Corps Commander was legally

competent and had the jurisdiction to convene a Court Martial in
respect of the petitioner.
94.

Upon receipt of the letter dated 12th April, 2004 as well

as the form IAFD and the enclosures from the Commanding
Officer,

the convening authority i.e. Corps Commander took

legal advise from the Deputy Judge Advocate General.

Such

advise was received by him on 7th May, 2004. After considering
the material on record, the charge sheet was prepared and the
trial by General Court Martial of the petitioner ordered vide
orders dated 19th May, 2004.
95.

So far as the submissions on behalf of the petitioner

based on the recommendations of the Commanding Officer dated
12th April, 2004 are concerned, we may appropriately refer to the
law laid down by the Supreme Court in AIR 1997 SC 2085
entitled Major General Inderjit Singh Vs. UOI. In this case the
Commanding Officer recommended framing of charge under a
particular statutory provision. The Chief of the Army Staff, upon
advise from the Deputy Judge Advocate General, framed a
charge under other statutory provisions as well. This was held
to be valid exercise of power.
96.

For this reason as well, the direction to try the

petitioner by General Court Martial issued by the Corps

: 58 :

WP(C)2493/2003

Commander in the instant case cannot be faulted.
In the judgment dated 23rd March, 2004 in Civil Appeal
1883/2004 entitled UOI vs. Gurnam Singh, it has been held by
the Supreme Court of India that Army Rule 37 does not
contemplate that the Officer who actually convened the Court
Martial would himself be satisfied that the charges framed
against the delinquent person are within the Army Act and the
evidence justifies trial. Such satisfaction can be entered by an
officer empowered by virtue of the warrant under Section 109 of
the Army Act. It was also held that even the successor of an
officer so recording a satisfaction is competent to convene the
Court Martial.
In 1999(4) SCC 577 entitled UOI Vs. Harish Chander
Goswami, the Supreme Court it was held that the satisfaction of
the convening authority under Army Rule 37 alone is sufficient.
97.
and the

It is pertinent to note that there is no dispute before us
parties

are at ad idem

on the issue that the

competent authority vested with the power to convene a Court
Martial acting under Section 109 read with Army Rule 37 can
over ride any reference made by the Commanding Officer under
Army Rule 24.
Even assuming that the letter dated 12th April, 2004 of
the Commanding Officer did amount to an opinion that no court

: 59 :

WP(C)2493/2003

martial ought to be convened against the petitioner, there can be
no dispute that the convening authority, acting under Section
109 of Army Act and Army Rule 37, had the power to over ride
any such view taken by the Commanding officer and as such the
decision to direct trial of the petitioner that the General Court
Martial cannot be faulted.
98.

The petitioner, in prayer (d), had sought a direction to

the respondents to file the record of the proceedings wherein
respondent

no.2

had

allegedly

passed

directions

for

the

petitioner's trial by General Court Martial, based on the affidavit
of Sh.S.L.Bunker before Justice

Venkataswami Commission.

This prayer was in direct conflict with the categorical assertions
of the petitioner set out above that there was no material for
proceeding against the petitioner and that no direction had
actually been made directing convening of a General Court
Martial inasmuch as the matter was pending for recording of
Court

of

Inquiry

and

later

the

Summary

of

Evidence

proceedings.
We have also noticed here-in-above that the petitioner
took a different posture when the respondents issued the charge
sheet in May 2004, abandoning this plea.
In any case no such decision of the Chief of the Army
Staff or any other person is forthcoming on the record produced

: 60 :

before us.

WP(C)2493/2003

The respondents have themselves admitted that

information of the offences was received by the competent
authority on 14.7.2001. This appears to be from the report of
the court of inquiry which submitted its report on this date.
Based thereon hearing of the charge under Army Rule 22 was
undertaken by the Commanding Officer. The record in relation to
this hearing has been produced.

Summary of evidence was

directed to be recorded thereupon. Even the respondents in the
counter affidavit have stated that based on the directions on the
court of inquiry by the competent authority disciplinary action
has been initiated.
99.

The petitioner has placed reliance upon the affidavit

dated 27th July, 2001 stated to have been filed by the Central
Government

before

Justice

Venkataswami

Commission

of

Inquiry stating that the entire issue was pre-mediated and predetermined and the entire proceedings were an eyewash. At the
same time it was the contention of the petitioner himself in the
writ petition as set out above that the respondents have no
material before them before taking any decision as

alleged in

the affidavit filed by the Government before the Commission.
100.

We have given our thoughtful consideration to the

entire material laid before us and submissions made by both
sides. We have not been able to find any decision on the record

: 61 :

WP(C)2493/2003

placed before us with regard to any decision having been taken
to convene the Court Martial prior to 19th May, 2004. The basis
of the affidavit filed by the commission or its correctness is not
the subject matter of the present writ petition. The contention of
the petitioner is that the respondents had prejudged the issue.
Pleas to this effect were made by the petitioner in
paras 21 to 22 of the writ petition.

The counter affidavit on

behalf of the respondents dated May 2003 has been deposed and
swornby Major Devendra Singh, Deputy Assistant Adjutant
General (Legal), Army Headquarters on the basis of official
records.

In reply to paras 21 and 22 it has been deposed as

under:“Paras 21 & 22. The contents of para 21 & 22
are denied being false and baseless.
On
finalisation of the Court of Inquiry, disciplinary
action was directed agaist the involved Army
officers including the petitioner by the competent
authority. Provisions of Army Rule 22 were
complied with by the Commanding officer & he
ordered recording of Summary of Evidence which
is still in progress. Till date, the case is under
investigation and no decision has been taken
to convene General Court martial in respect
of the petitioner. The COAS at no stage gave
orders to try the petitioner by the General
Court Martial. Therefore, there is no merit in
this contention of the petitioner. Such a
decision, if at all it would be, it can be taken
after the conclusion of on going Summary of
Evidence and its consideration under Army
Rule 24.”
101.

In this behalf there is no dispute that the Court of

: 62 :

WP(C)2493/2003

Inquiry submitted its report on 14th July, 2001 which report is
the basis of information to the Commanding Officer. It is an
admitted case that the Court of Inquiry was convened under
Army Rule 177 to Army Rule 180 and also a Summary of
Evidence was ordered to be directed against the petitioner under
Army rules 23 to 24. The Commanding Officer has referred the
matter in terms of Army Rule 24 and even made his submissions
which have been relied upon by the petitioner in the letter dated
12th April, 2004. The proceedings under Army Rule 22 were held
on 30th September, 2002 and the summary of evidence recorded
from 30th September, 2002, 11th December, 2002 to 1st October,
2003.
102.

We have not been able to find any material to support

the plea taken by the petitioner that there was any previous
decision or direction of the Chief of the Army Staff to hold the
trial of the petitioner by a General Court Martial in the instant
case. There is nothing in the record produced before us to this
effect.

The petitioner had also abandoned his challenge and the

issues narrowed down to those noted in the orders of this Court
dated 26th May, 2004.

As such, we are unable to uphold the

pleas of the petitioner.
103.

In any case

the

petitioner will be

afforded

an

opportunity to challenge, the action of the respondents and

: 63 :

WP(C)2493/2003

conduct the cross-examination of the prosecution witnesses in
this behalf before the General Court Martial.

In case of such

challenge the Court Martial shall decide the issue strictly in
accordance with law uninfluenced by observations made by us
as well as views, if any, of any authority.
104.

The learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner

has placed reliance on several judicial pronouncements. It has
been vehemently contended that in view of the law laid down in
1992(24) DRJ 125 entitled Lal Dafedar Lakshman Vs., UOI the
action of the respondent in the instant case cannot be sustained.
This judgment was rendered in the light of the

mandate of

Section 122 of the Army Act and Army Rule 53 prior to their
amendment.
In view of the substantial changes effected to the
statute, the judgment would not apply

to the matter in issue

before us.
105.

Reliance has been placed on behalf of the petitioner on

para 5 of the judgment reported at AIR 1985 SC 703 entitled
Chief of Army Staff Vs. Dharam Pal to urge that where the order
to try by General Court Martial is without jurisdiction, then
there would be no warrant for exposing the petitioner to the
prolonged trial by General Court Martial.
We have carefully considered the judgment cited.

In

: 64 :

WP(C)2493/2003

view of the statute as it exists after the amendment, we have
held that the stage for taking an objection relating to the
jurisdiction of the Court Martial to proceed with the trial by
virtue of the bar of limitation is at the stage of recording of the
general plea in bar and further that such plea has to be raised
before a General Court Martial itself.
Such a stage in the instant case has yet to come.
Limitation being a question of law and fact, necessitates
evidence to be recorded.

This is more so in the instant case

where the change incorporates a specific date of knowledge.
106.

On behalf of the petitioner, another judgment reported

at MIMJ 2003 SC 146 entitled Union of India and others Vs. Dev
Singh has been cited. This decision also does not support the
case of the petitioner inasmuch as, in this case the officer was
not permitted to cross-examine the witnesses produced by the
prosecution. There is no such allegation in the instant case.
107.

Learned senior counsel for the petitioner has also

challenged the charge sheet in the instant case and submitted
that in view of the law laid down in 1997(4) SLR 165 entitled
Subedar Kashmira Singh Vs. Govt. of India and others, the
charge sheet has suffered from fatal errors and the trial could
not be proceeded with for this reason.
We are unable to agree with the proposition sought to

: 65 :

WP(C)2493/2003

be urged by the learned senior counsel for the petitioner
inasmuch as the statute and rules framed thereunder provide
the specific stage at which such an objection has to be taken
before the Court Martial itself.

In the decision rendered in

Subedar Kashmira Singh's case(supra), the court was examining
the verdict rendered by the court martial and its proceedings. In
any case in hand, the trial is yet to commence.
108.

The respondents have referred to the decision

rendered by one of us (Dr.Justice Mukundakam Sharma) dated
2nd May, 2001 in CW 1259/99 entitled Major S.L.Sharma Vs.
UOI wherein a similar plea raised before the writ court was
rejected giving liberty to the petitioner to raise the issue of
limitation before the Court Martial which was required to enter
upon the inquiry in accordance with law.
109.

So far as the issue of non-decision of the various

complaints made by the petitioner is concerned, Section 26 & 27
of the Army Act 1950 provide remedies to aggrieved persons
against decisions taken by the authorities against them. Section
27 of the Army Act confers a right of redressal to any officers
who deems himself wrong by his Commanding Officer or any
superior

officer

who

on

due

application

made

to

such

Commanding Officer does not receive redressal to which he
considers himself entitled.

Such officer is given the right to

: 66 :

WP(C)2493/2003

make a complaint to the Central Government in such manner as
may from time to time be specified by the proper authority.
110.

It is to be mentioned that

protracted petitioning/

representations to the authorities results in deviation from the
main matter in hand. Such petitioning, as well as litigation and
stay orders are devices adopted to create situations for
withholding commencement of trials.

It is noticed that after

creating situations for delayed commencement of trial, persons
have pleaded the bar of limitation to the trial by General Court
Martial.
111.

In such situations, the Apex Court has held that no

man can take advantage of his own wrong and that the
delinquent officer having himself created a situation withholding
commencement

of trial is estopped from pleading the bar of

limitation and the trial commenced on vacating of judicial order
of restraint on the court martial shall be a valid trial. It was so
held in the judgments reported at (2001) 5 SCC 593 para 40
entitled Union of India Vs. Harjit Singh Sandhu and 1996(4) SCC
127 entitled UOI Vs. Maj Gen Madan Lal Yadav(Retd.)
112.

The respondents have brought to our notice a circular

bearing no.62736/AG/DV-1 dated 21st December, 1990 wherein
the

Army

Authorities

have

considered

the

issue

of

representations/complaints being made in respect of disciplinary

: 67 :

proceedings.

WP(C)2493/2003

Vide this letter the authorities have directed as

hereunder:“1. It has come to the notice of this
Headquarters that with a view to stall
disciplinary proceedings, a number of Army
personnel submit statutory complaints under
the provisions of Army Act, Sections 26 and 27
at various stages of such disciplinary
proceedings. The matter has been examined
carefully at this Headquarters in consultation
with Ministry of Law and it has been ruled that
complaints under Sections 26 and 27 of the
Army Act are not entertainable pertaining to the
court martial and disciplinary matters after
cognizance of offence has been taken and
disciplinary proceedings commenced. Adequate
remedies are already available with regard to
such proceedings under Army Act Section 161,
Section 179 and Army Rule 33.

113.

2. Suitable instructions to the units/ formations
under your command may, accordingly, be
issued.”
The respondents have taken the stand that such

representations as were permissible in law and by virtue of the
aforesaid circular have been dealt with and orders thereon stand
duly communicated to the petitioner. In view of the foregoing,
we find that the statutory scheme provides valuable safeguards
to the petitioner in respect of every stage of the proceedings. The
petitioner

was

afforded

an

opportunity

to

cross-examine

witnesses at the Court of Inquiry as well as at the time of
recording of summary of evidence. The applicable statute and
rules framed thereunder provide valuable remedies to the

: 68 :

WP(C)2493/2003

petitioner. In case the petitioner is aggrieved by any order
passed by the Court Martial, the petitioner has a right to petition
the confirming authority by a petition under Section 164(1) of
the Army Act, 1950.

Such confirming authority is required to

take all steps to satisfy itself to the correctness, legality or
propriety of the order passed or to the regularity of the
proceedings to which the order relates.
114.

For this reason the petitioner cannot be heard to

contend that he is being prejudiced on account of failure on the
part of the respondents to pass orders on every communication
made by him as was noticed in the letter dated 21st December,
1990.

More so, in the instant case, the petitioner is making

representations even relating to matters on which statutory
provisions have laid out the procedure.
115.

In view of the aforesaid discussion, the writ petition

and the applications are misconceived and are hereby dismissed.
The petitioner will be at liberty to raise the pleas with regard to
the trial being barred under Section 122 of the Army Act, 1950
before the General Court Martial in accordance with the
elaborate procedure laid down thereunder. In the event of the
petitioner raising such plea in bar or any other issues, the same
shall be decided by the General Court Martial in accordance with
law uninfluenced by any observations or views expressed herein.

: 69 :

116.

WP(C)2493/2003

We may also advert to the prayer made in the

application for supply of documents produced before us.

The

relevant documents relied upon have been extracted here-inabove and detailed reference made to the original records
produced before us.
117.

In view of the order of this Court dated 26th May, 2004,

it will not be open for the petitioner to rely upon the period from
26th May, 2004 till pronouncement of the present judgment in
support of his plea of the trial being barred by limitation.
118.

We may add

a note of caution at the end.

Undoubtedly this case has received tremendous attention in view
of the nature of allegations as well as the status of the
personalities involved.

The legislature has provided adequate

safeguards for protecting the rights of a person who has been
arraigned to stand trial by Court Martial. We expect the Army
Authorities to abide with and to ensure that valuable rights of
the petitioner are not compromised or jeopardised in any
manner and he is given adequate opportunity to defend himself
in accordance with law, uninfluenced by the stature of the
personalities involved or the publicity generated in the matter.
Ordered accordingly.

GITA MITTAL

: 70 :

WP(C)2493/2003

JUDGE

November 10, 2004
JK

DR.MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA
JUDGE

