IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 963/2005
Judgment reserved on: March 3 rd,
2005
Da te of decision: March 11th, 2005
GUNJAN VERMA
... Petitioner
through Mr. Alok Sinha with
Mr. Shayur M. Shah, Advocates
VERSUS
VICE CHANCELLOR & ORS
..... Respondents
through Mr. Anurag Mathur, Advocate for
respondent no. 1to 3
Mr. A.P.S. Ahluwalia with
Mr. K.J.S. Kaha, Advocates for
respondent no. 4
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

This writ petition has been filed by a student of the Delhi

University impugning the manner in which the revaluation was
effected by the respondents of her answer scripts in the B.Se.
Second Year Examination. The petitioner has made the following
W.P.(C) 963/2005

page 1 of 19

prayers in the present writ petition :-

2.

“a)
issue a writ of mandamus or
any other writ, order or direction in the
nature thereof for disclosing the marks of
petitioner and to verify whether the
marks have been correctly recorded
against the roll number of the petitioner.
b)
in the alternative, to issue an
appropriate writ, order or direction for
appointment of an independent person or
committee to verify whether the marks
haves correctly been given and recorded
against he roll number of the petitioner,
within a given time frame;
c)
issue an appropriate writ, order
or direction including writ in the nature
of mandamus for calling of the records
from the Respondents ; and
d)
issue an appropriate writ, order
or direction including writ in the nature
of Mandamus directing the Respondents
to allow the petitioner to attend the
classes for B.Sc.(Hons)-III and to
provisionally appear in the annual
examination conducted by the university,
pending the disposal of the writ.”
The petitioner has sought the aforestated reliefs on the

plea that after a meritorious record in her school and having
passed her All India Secondary Examination from the St. Xaviers
School in Delhi with 82.5% marks, she was granted admission in
the B.Sc(Hon.) Electronics Course being conducted by the Khalsa
College which is affiliated and recognised by the Delhi University.
It is claimed that the petitioner maintained a brilliant track record

W.P.(C) 963/2005

page 2 of 19

and scored 63.50% marks in the first year examination. According
to the petitioner she was regular even in her academic year and
had taken B.Sc(Hon.) Part II examination after full preparation
giving satisfactory answers to all questions in all the papers of the
subject course.

However to her shock, when the result was

declared on the 15th July, 2004, the petitioner was informed that
she had failed in five subjects of the second year and had obtained
barely passing marks in the remaining subjects.
3.

As the petitioner apprehended some error in the result

which was declared in respect of her examination, the petitioner
submitted

an

application

dated

15th

July,

2004

with

a

recommendation of the respondent no 5, Principal of the Khalsa
College seeking rechecking of her result in the prescribed
proforma. The petitioner was not satisfied with the rechecking.
Consequently she made representations dated 21st September,
2004/19th November, 2004 and 22nd November, 2004 stating that
the petitioner believed that her answer scripts might have been
exchanged with somebody else or that her marks were wrongly
transferred to somebody else due to some technical glitch.
4.

Based on information given by the officials of the Delhi

University, the petitioner claims that she also applied for
W.P.(C) 963/2005

page 3 of 19

revaluation of all her answer scripts from papers bearing code no.
2.1 to 2.7.

The result of the revaluation were declared in

November, 2004 when the petitioner was informed that the
position remained the same so far as her result was concerned.
Under these circumstances, the petitioner is stated to have
requested the Controller of Examination, respondent no. 2 to give
her an opportunity to look at her examination scripts and the
marks obtained vide her letter dated 22nd November, 2004. In
view of the apprehensions expressed, the respondent no. 2 had
permit the petitioner to see her own answer sheets. According to
the petitioner, the marks given to her answers were concealed by
brown stickers. On her request to permit her to see her marks, she
was informed that the same could not be done as these stickers
had been fixed in order to maintain secrecy for the purposes of
revaluation.

The petitioner submits that as per the results

declared upon revaluation she was declared as having failed in six
subjects of the B.Sc.Electronics Course Part II Examination. It has
been submitted on her behalf that she had a brilliant academic
record and that there could not be such a drastic or remarkable
change in her academic performance unless there was discrepancy
in the revaluation process. The petitioner has claimed to have
W.P.(C) 963/2005

page 4 of 19

made a representation to the respondents on 11th December, 2004
and sent a legal notice to the authority requesting disclosure of the
marks scored by her but the same has been of no avail.
5.

The respondents on the other hand have contended that

the University cannot be asked to grant any relief which is not
permissible under the Delhi University Act, Statutes, Ordnances
and the Examination Rules. There is no rule requiring the Delhi
University to permit a candidate to verify the marks awarded to
the candidate and no writ in this behalf can be granted. According
to the respondents, in order to reassure the petitioner in view of
her expressed apprehensions that she was even permitted to see
the mark sheets. The respondents have submitted that in order to
allay her apprehension that there was a mix up with regard to the
roll number and that the marks awarded to her, actually related to
her answer sheets and her roll number, the respondents even
showed the petitioner the answer sheets written by her. She had
confirmed the same in writing.
6.

The respondents state that the rules provide only for

rechecking and revaluation of answer sheets. There is no rule or
procedure permitting a candidate to assess his/her own answer
sheets or to have her answer sheets made available to judge as to
W.P.(C) 963/2005

page 5 of 19

whether the student has been awarded the appropriate marks. In
support of the contention that the petitioner cannot be granted a
relief which is not permitted by the rules reliance has been placed
on the judgment of the Apex Court reported at 1993 (4) SCC 401
entitled Guru Nanak Dev University vs. Parminder Kr. Bansal &
Ors. and 1984 (4) SCC 27 entitled Maharashtra State Board of
Secondary & Higher Secondary Education & Anr. vs Paritosh
Bhupeshkumar Sheth & Ors.
The respondents have also cited the judgment of the
Supreme Court reported at (2003) 2 SC 724 entitled K.M.
Chinnappa vs Union of India & Ors.

in support of their

contention.
Placing reliance on the notes given in the form for
rechecking and the form for revaluation, it has been asserted that
the petitioner was fully aware of the scope of both rechecking and
the revaluation, and that the petitioner had no right to claim the
relief which has been sought in the instant writ petition.
7.

The original record relating to the petitioner has been

placed before me. The respondents have placed also the marks
obtained by the petitioner on the revaluation. I have given my
careful consideration to the material placed before me and the
W.P.(C) 963/2005

page 6 of 19

rival contentions. It is well settled law that a party can be granted
only such relief as is permitted by statute or by delegated
legislation thereunder. So far as academic institutions and courses
are concerned, it is well settled that a student only has such rights
and can only be granted such relief as are permitted under the
rules governing the issues.
8.

There is no dispute that the petitioner took the

B.Sc.(Hons.) Part II Examination conducted by the Delhi
University. So far as the rechecking is concerned, the rules for the
same have been set out on the Application Form itself. It would be
useful to notice the rule 2 which has been printed on the
application form which reads as hereunder :“2.
Rechecking
in
Practical
Examination is not undertaken. But in
the courses/subjects where rechecking
is permissible the Answer books are
checked just to ensure that all the
questions attempted by the candidate
have been valued, that the marks
awarded have been totalled correctly
and that the total marks have been
correctly carried over to the result
statement.”
The respondents have stated on affidavit that the
rechecking was done as per this rule and that the respondents
ensured that all of the question attempted by the petitioner had
W.P.(C) 963/2005

page 7 of 19

been evaluated and that the marks were totalled correctly and
further that the totalled marks were correctly carried over to the
result statement.
9.

Admittedly, the petitioner made requests for revaluation

on the 21st September, 2004 after her papers had been rechecked.
However, no copy of the application made by her has been placed
on record.

The respondents have placed a sample of an

application for revaluation of results. As per this application, the
petitioner made the following declaration on the application
form:“DECLARATION
I have carefully read rules
regarding revaluation printed overleaf and I
agree to be governed by the same. I am fully
aware that as a result of seeking revaluation
the original marks secured by me can also be
reduced.
I undertake to surrender my
original result and to accept the final result
when declared by the University as a result of
revaluation applied for by me, as per rules
laid down in this behalf.”
10.

The petitioner thereupon surrendered her original

results and had undertaken that she would be bound by the final
result declared by the Delhi University as a result of the
revaluation as per the rules in this behalf. The petitioner was

W.P.(C) 963/2005

page 8 of 19

aware that as a result of the revaluation the original marks scored
by her could also be reduced.
11.

It is noteworthy that the rules for revaluation were also

mentioned on the form itself. The relevant rules in this behalf may
be noted which reads as under :“1.
When you apply for revaluation,
you surrender your original performance
and will now accept the revised performance
in which :(a) there can be NO CHANGE,
(b) there can be INCREASE in the
marks,
(c) there can be Decrease in the
marks.
2.
The application is to be made by
the candidate in his/her own hand-writing
and under his/her own signature and not by
anyone else on his/her behalf.
4.
(a) If the award of the Revaluator
varies from the Original award upto and
including + 5%,of the maximum marks, the
original award will stand.
(b)
If the award of the first
revaluator is beyond + 5% and upto + 10%,
the average of the marks of the original
examiner and the first revaluator will be
taken.
(c)
If the award of the
Revaluator varies from the original award by
more than + 10% of the maximum marks,
the answer scripts will be examined by a
Second Revaluator and the average of the
two nearest awards out of the three awards
thus available (including the original award)
shall be taken as final.”

W.P.(C) 963/2005

page 9 of 19

It is evident that the scheme of revaluation has been
appointed so as to get the fairest assessment for a student. The
respondents have ensured that in case of an unreasonable
variation, the answer scripts would undergo a second revaluation
to rule out any possibility of arbitrariness.
12.

Perusal of the record produced before me shows that in

one of the papers bearing code 2.6, there was variation beyond the
10% fixed by the Delhi University and even the second revaluation
was undertaken of the answer scripts of the petitioner to ensure
that complete justice was done to her.
13.

It is also evident that despite their being no rule

permitting a candidate to see her answer scripts in view of the
apprehension stated by the petitioner that the result declared in
respect of her candidature was not relating to her answer scripts,
the respondents had gone beyond the call of duty and had
permitted her to scrutinise her answer sheets. The answer sheets
in terms of her request made in her letter dated 22nd November,
2004. After scrutinising the answer sheets, the petitioner had
made the following endorsement on the same :“All answer sheets seen, checked, verified
and found to be mine.”

W.P.(C) 963/2005

page 10 of 19

14.

It is noteworthy that the petitioner apparently was

satisfied and thereafter did not convey or make any objection. She
is stated to have made a representation only on the 11th December,
2004 but the respondents had done everything that was possible
and permissible. This writ petition has thereafter been filed on the
19th January, 2005 seeking the prayers set out hereinabove.
15.

I find that the petitioner's contentions and prayers are

all made on a self assessment and self appraisal of her abilities.
The same is neither objective nor can be expected to be a fair or
reasonable assessment. The respondents have caused the papers
of the petitioners to be originally evaluated as per the scheme of
examination. It is an admitted position that the identity of the
candidate is not disclosed to the original examiner as the answer
sheets bear only roll numbers.

Thereafter on her request for

rechecking of the marks awarded, rechecking was carried out as
per rules. The petitioner was not satisfied and sought revaluation
which was also done. The result was declared based upon the
revaluation of the petitioner's answer sheets by independent
evaluators. The final result of the petitioner remained unchanged.
16.

The Courts have had occasion to examine similar

contentions and prayers in certain matters. It would be useful to
W.P.(C) 963/2005

page 11 of 19

set out herein some of the observations made by the Courts in this
behalf.
“In JT 1995 Volume 2 SC 291 (page 302) entitled Madan
Lal vs State of Jammu & Kashmir the Apex Court held as under :“17.
In the light of what is stated above,
while dealing with contention no.1, this
contention also must fail. The petitioners
subjectively feel that as they had fared better
in the written test and had got more marks
therein as compared to concerned selected
respondents, they should have been given
more marks also at the oral interview. But
that is in the realm of assessment of relative
merits of concerned candidates by the expert
committee before whom these candidates
appeared for the viva voce test. Merely on the
basis of petitioners apprehension or suspicion
that they were deliberately given less marks at
the oral interview as compared to the rival
candidates, it cannot be said that the process
of assessment was vitiated. This contention is
in the realm of mere suspicion having no
factual basis. It has to be kept in view that
there is no even a whisper in the petition
about any personal bias of the members of the
interview committee against the petitioner.
They have also not alleged any mala fides on
the part of the interview committee in this
connection.
Consequently, the attack on
assessment of the merits of the petitioners
cannot be countenanced. It remains in the
exclusive domain of the expert committee to
decide whether more marks should be
assigned to the petitioners or to the concerned
respondents. It cannot be the subject matter
of an attack before us as we are not sitting as a
court of appeal over the assessment made by
W.P.(C) 963/2005

page 12 of 19

the committee so far as the candidates
interviewed by them are concerned. In the
light of the affidavit in reply filed by Dr. Girija
Dhar to which we have made reference earlier,
it cannot be said that the expert committee
had given a deliberate unfavourable treatment
to the petitioners.
Consequently, this
contention also is found to be devoid of any
merit and is rejected.”
In AIR 1991, Bombay 240 entitled Dr.(Miss.) Suraina
Subhash Rane vs University of Bombay & Ors.(para 5) the court
held as under :“5. .
xxxxx In both theory nd practicals
the petitioner secured an aggregation of 3 and
that sufficed to enable a pass. She had to get a
similar aggregate in orals and what stumped
her there was a deficit of three points which
had she got would have enabled the aggregate
of 3 instead of 2.2. In fact a raise of the points
by a fraction of 0.3would have entitled her to
get an aggregation of 3 by the rounding-up
process. Petitioner ascribes her missing the
prize to the machinations of respondent 6.
Like may allegations of this nature, there is no
material to bear out even a little thereof. As
good a refutation as any is the pointer to
respondent 6 awarding a point more to
petitioner than Dr. Kikani.
Petitioner's
contention that the orals were a repeat of the
theory papers and having successfully waded
through the latter, she could not have failed in
the former is an assumption no more. A
conclusion based on assumptions and that too
of an interested party can carry no weight.
Therefore the factual mala fides aspect cannot
be held in petitioner's favour.”

W.P.(C) 963/2005

page 13 of 19

17.

Therefore, the reliance placed by the petitioner only on

her past record to submit that it was impossible for her to secure
the declared result cannot be accepted.
18.

So far as the parameters of functioning of the

educational institutions are concerned and the discretion of the
court to grant relief beyond the limits circumscribed by the
applicable statutes, bye-laws and rules in this behalf is concerned,
the same has come up before the courts for consideration at
several

occasions.

I

may

appropriately

refer

to

the

pronouncements of the Supreme Court in this behalf which are
reported at AIR 1998 SC 2235 entitled CBSE v/s P.Sunil Kumar
; AIR 1986 SC 1490 entitled A.P. Christian Medical Educational
Society vs. Govt. of Andhra Pradesh ; J.T. 1991(2) SC 343
entitled State of Tamil Nadu vs. Jospeh Teachers Training
Institute ; AIR 1992 SC 1926 ( JT 1992 (5) SC 175) entitled
State of Maharashtra vs. Vikas Sahib Rao ; (1984) 4 SCC 401
(1993) vol. IV SCC 401 entitled Guru Nanak Dev University vs.
Parminder Kumar Bansal ;(1984) 4 SCC 27 entitled Maharashtra
State Board of Secondary & Higher Secondary Education Vs
Paritosh Bhupeshkumar Sheth & Ors.
19.

In Maharashtra State Board of Secondary & Higher

W.P.(C) 963/2005

page 14 of 19

Secondary Education & Anr. Vs Alpana V. Mehta(supra), the court
held as under :“26.
We are unable to agree with the
further reason stated by the High Court that
since “every student has a right to receive fair
play in examination and get appropriate
marks matching his performance” it will be a
denial of the right to such fair play if there is
to be a prohibition on the right to demand
revaluation and unless a right to revaluation is
recognised and permitted there is an
infringement of rules of fair play. What
constitutes fair play depends upon the facts
and circumstances relating to each particular
given situation. If it is found that every
possible precaution has been taken and all
necessary safeguards provided to ensure that
the answer books inclusive of supplements are
kept in safe custody so as to eliminate the
danger of their being tampered with and that
the evaluation is done by the examiners
applying uniform standards with checks and
cross-checks at different stages and that
measures for detection of malpractice, etc.
have also been effectively adopted, in such
cases it will not be correct on the part of the
courts to strike down the provision
prohibiting revaluation on the ground that it
violates the rules of fair play.
29.
Far from advancing public interest
and fair play to the other candidates in
general, any such interpretation of the legal
position would be wholly defeasive of the
same. As has been repeatedly pointed out by
this Court, the Court should be extremely
reluctant to substitute its own views as to
what is wise, prudent and proper in relation to
academic matters in preference to those
formulated by professional men possessing
W.P.(C) 963/2005

page 15 of 19

technical expertise and rich experience of
actual day-to-day working of educational
institutions and he departments controlling
them. It will be wholly wrong for the Court to
make a pedantic and purely idealistic
approach to the problems of this nature,
isolated from the actual realities and grass
root problems involved in the working of the
system and unmindful of the consequences
which would emanate if a purely idealistic
view as opposed to a pragmatic one were to be
propounded. It is equally important that the
Court should also, as far as possible, avoid any
decision or interpretation of a statutory
provision, rule or bye-law which would bring
about the result of rendering the system
unworkable in practice. It is unfortunate that
this principle has not been adequately kept in
mind by the High Court while deciding the
instant case.”
These views of the court were emphasised further in the
later judgments cited hereinabove.
20.

I may also notice the findings of the Apex Court in the

judgment reported at 2003 Volume 12 SCC 724 entitled Sayyed
Aquel Arif vs University of Pune wherein the court had occasion to
examine the provisions relating to revaluation of answer scripts
here similar to the provisions in force in Delhi University. The
court held as under :“6.
As to the interpretation of the
Ordinance concerned, we are of the view
that the interpretation put thereupon by the
High Court is correct.
Clause (2) of
W.P.(C) 963/2005

page 16 of 19

Ordinance 134-A-B specifically provides
that after the process of verification of
marks is done, the marks obtained as a
result of verification before the process
contemplated in clause (7) of the Ordinance
is initiated, the marks arrived at as a result
of the process of verification under clause
(2) is taken as the basis. With this as the
basis, revaluation is carried out as
contemplated under clause (7). Unless
there is a difference of 10% or more of the
total marks between the “original marks”
and the marks awarded after revaluation, no
effect is given to the revaluation. The words
“original marks”, of course, have to be read
and understood as defined in clause (2) of
the Ordinance, meaning thereby, the marks
obtained after the verification process.
7.
We are satisfied that the
Ordinance was correctly applied to the case
of the appellant.
Since the difference
between the “original marks” within the
meaning of clause (2) arrived at as a result
of verification, did not exceed 10% of the
maximum marks, the appellant was rightly
denied the benefit of the revaluation for the
purpose of clause (7) of the Ordinance.”
21.

In view of the position under the applicable rules framed

by the University of Delhi, the factual matrix as set out
hereinabove and the dicta of judicial pronouncements which are
binding on me, I am of the view that no further relief can be
granted to the petitioner.

There is no provision/permitting

appointment of an independent person/committee to verify
whether the marks have been correctly awarded to the answer
W.P.(C) 963/2005

page 17 of 19

scripts of the petitioner. The petitioner was fully aware of the
applicable rules and made the application firstly for rechecking
and thereafter for revaluation of her answer scripts. The method
in which revaluation is undertaken was clearly notified to the
petitioner and I have no reason to disbelieve the respondents that
the revaluation was effected by independent evaluators. In order
to ensure anonymity and secrecy to the marks originally awarded
to the petitioner, the same have been admittedly concealed by
pasting paper over the same. It is the contention of the petitioner
herself that the original marks were not visible when she examined
the mark sheets on the 22nd November, 2004.
22.

The petitioner also gave a declaration that she would be

bound by the marks awarded upon revaluation. The respondents
have made a fair disclosure of the marks in the records placed
before me. I also find that in the paper no. 2.6 in terms of Rule
4(c) aforestated the second revaluation by a second revaluator was
even undertaken. The respondents having complied with every
requirement of law, their action cannot be faulted for any legal
reason or ground. Furthermore, the respondents themselves took
a wholly sympathetic view in the facts and circumstances of this
case and in the light of the representations of the petitioner and
W.P.(C) 963/2005

page 18 of 19

permitted her to see her answer sheets for the purpose of
identification of the same. It is the contention of the petitioner
herself that the same was beyond any applicable rule in this
behalf.
23.

In view of the foregoing discussion, I am of the

considered view that the relief claimed by the petitioner is
admittedly and clearly beyond legal provisions and the applicable
rules and cannot be granted to her.
For all the foregoing reasons, the petitioner is not
entitled to the relief sought for in the writ petition which is hereby
dismissed. There shall however be no order as to costs of the
present proceedings.

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
March 11th, 2005
kr

W.P.(C) 963/2005

page 19 of 19

