IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Cont. Cas. (C) No. 638/2007
Date of decision: 11th December, 2007.

Sh. B.L. Kantroo Bhatia
through:

... Petitioner
Ms. Maldeep Sidhu, Adv.

VERSUS
Sh. sunil Shourie,
HOD (Law & Enforcement),
BSES Rajdhani Power Ltd.
through:

....Respondent

Ms. Anjali Sharma and
Ms. Shefi Bhatia, Advs.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
GITA MITTAL, J(Oral)
1.

This petition has been filed by the petitioner complaining of wilful violation of

the order dated 17th July, 2007 passed by this court in W.P.(C) No. 5124/2007. By this
petition the petitioner had assailed the action of the respondents in making allegations
of theft against the petitioner and raising a bill on this ground without issuance of any
notice to the petitioner
-2and without making available the material which had been relied upon by the

respondent in support of their allegation. This court considered the grievance of the
petitioner on 17th July, 2007 and issued directions to the respondents to afford
opportunity to the petitioner of being heard on its representation dated 21st June, 2007
before taking any further coercive action. The representative of the petitioner was
directed to appear before the head of the department (Enf.) of the respondent on 20 th
July, 2007. The court had also directed that the petitioner would be shown the video
stated to have been recorded by the respondent at the time of the inspection and any
other material that might have been gathered at the same time. The petitioner was
also given liberty to present all arguments and material in support of its pleas.
It is an admitted position that the respondent before this court that in the
proceedings which were conducted on the 20th July, 2007, only the photographs was
shown to the petitioner. The sealed material was not shown to the petitioner on the
ground that the same was lying sealed.
2.

Aggrieved by the action of the respondents in failing to show the entire material

as directed by this court by the order dated 17th July, 2007, the present petition has
been filed seeking initiation of action under the Contempt of Court Act against the
respondents.
3.

Though in the counter affidavit filed by the respondents a plea has
-3-

been taken that the respondents have complied with the order passed by the court,
however during the course of oral submissions, Ms. Anjali Sharma learned counsel
has submitted that infact such submission was made on an erroneous
understanding that the material having been sealed and pending further proceedings

before the Special Magistrate in accordance with the Electricity Act, 2003, the seized
material could not be shown to the petitioner. She submits that the respondents have
no intention of flouting any orders passed by this court and has utmost respect for the
proceedings and orders of the court. The submission is that the respondents would
abide by the specific directions passed by this court on 17th July, 2007 and ensure that
the seized material which has been held by the respondents for passing the orders
against the petitioner would be shown to him.
4.

In view of the admitted position noticed above it is apparent that the

order dated 17th July, 2007 has not been complied with in entirety and the present
proceedings have been necessitated as a result thereof. Even in the reply which has
been filed before this court, a stand has been taken that the contempt petition is an
abuse of the process of the court and that the same amounts to brow beating the
respondents.
It is really unfortunate that such a stand has been taken in the face of admitted
position that the order dated 17th July, 2007 has not been
-4complied with in its entirety. The order passed by the court was explicit and did not
suffer from any ambiguity. The respondent has expressed regret today and it has been
stated that the respondent would abide by thedirections made before this court so that
the rights of the petitioner are not prejudiced.
For these reasons I am not inclined to accept the explanation given today.
However in view of the fact that the petitioner has been compelled to invoke the
jurisdiction of this court by way of filing this petition and judicial time has been

expended on such matter, it is necessary that the respondents compensate the
petitioner as well as the system for its actions.

Accordingly this petition is disposed

with the following directions :(i)

The respondent shall afford an opportunity afresh to the petitioner of being

heard on its representation dated 21st June, 2007 for which purpose the petitioner or
its authorised representative shall appear before the head of the department (Enf.) of
the respondent on 24th December, 2007 at 2 p.m.
(ii).

The petitioner shall be shown not only the video stated to have been

taken by the respondent of the inspection but also all other material gathered by the
respondents at the same time. Such material which is stated to have been kept in
sealed cover by the respondent shall be de-sealed under the signatures of both parties
that is the respondent as well as
-5the petitioner or his authorised representative. The same shall be resealed thereafter
and stored in safe custody as per the procedure adopted by the respondents for this
purpose.
A detailed speaking order shall be passed by the respondents within a period of
ten days thereafter. Copy whereof shall be furnished to the petitioner who shall be at
liberty to assail the same by way of appropriate proceedings, if still aggrieved thereby.
(iv)

In view of the aforesaid discussion the respondents shall pay costs of

Rs.30000/- which shall be equally apportioned between the petitioner and the Delhi
High Court Legal Services Committee. The costs shall be deposited within a period of
one week from today. Proof of deposit shall be placed before this court.

List for reporting compliance of the order passed today on 15th January, 2008.
Dasti
(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
December 11, 2007
kr

