IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Arbitration Application No. 30/2004
Da te of decision: May 11, 2007
Shri Kamal Nath Monga
.... Petitioner
through: Mr. Anil Sapra, Advocate
VERSUS
Shri Navin Kumar & Ors
.... Respondents
through: Mr. Sunil Magon, Advocate for respondent
no.3
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
No
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
No
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?No
GITA MITTAL, J
1.

By this judgment I propose to dispose of the present petition

filed under Section 11 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
praying for appointment of an arbitrator to refer the disputes
which have arisen between the parties to arbitration.
2.

The facts giving rise to the present petition briefly noticed

show that by a partnership deed dated 15th February, 1962, Shri
Arb.P. 30/2004

page 1 of 12

Prem Nath Monga (father of the petitioner herein); Shri Kishan
Lal Kumar (father of respondent no. 1); Shri Bal Kishan Monga
(father of respondent no. 2); Mrs. Sillina Abrecht (mother in law of
respondent no. 3) and Mrs. Anita Abrecht had agreed to carry on
the business of sale and purchase of watches, time pieces, clocks,
spare parts thereof, and accessories and allied things thereto
under the name and style of M/s. Meridian Watch Company. Mrs.
Sillina Abrecht was the mother in law of Mrs. Anita Abrecht who
died on 29th August, 1991. The partnership firm was carrying on
its business from tenanted premises at no. 269, Dr. Dadabhai
Naoroji Road, Fort, Mumbai. The partnership was reconstituted
by means of a partnership deed dated 19th February, 1977 whereby
the shares of the partners were redefined. On the death of Shri
Kishan Lal Kumar on 24th September, 1981, his son Shri Naveen
Kumar (respondent no. 1 herein) was inducted as a partner and a
partnership deed dated 19th October, 1981 was executed. Another
partnership firm of these partners namely M/s Farmag Watch
Company was also carrying on its business from the same

Arb.P. 30/2004

page 2 of 12

premises.
3.

It has been brought on record that on the death of Shri Prem

Nath Monga on 21st January, 1982, the present petitioner, Shri
Kamal Nath Monga was inducted as a partner and a partnership
deed dated 1st March, 1982 was executed. The five partners were
holding 20% share each in the firm.
4.

Shri Bal Kishan Monga expired on the 11th June, 1986 when

his son Shri Ranjan Monga was inducted as a partner and a
partnership deed dated 4th August, 1986 was executed.

This

partnership deed has been placed before this court. The petitioner
has contended that under the partnership deed dated 4th August,
1986, Shri Naveen Kumar, respondent no. 1 herein was made incharge of the entire business and authorised to act for and on
behalf of the said firm either by himself or through any manager or
other person. He was also authorised to appoint any other person
to operate the bank account of the partnership. Clause 12 and 14
of the partnership deed have been relied upon by the plaintiff in
support of this contention.

Arb.P. 30/2004

page 3 of 12

5.

The disputes arose between the parties for the reason that

even though respondent no. 1 was not authorised to exclude the
other partners from the management, control and administration
of the affairs of the firm or to deprive them from having access to
the books of accounts or other documents, since 1998, the
respondent no. 1 fraudulently arrogated to himself all powers of
managing the business and affairs of the firm to the exclusion of
the other partners. The petitioner was also not granted access to
the books of account of the other documents. The petitioner also
points out that apart from the Meridian Watch Company, the
parties were also partners in two other partnership firms namely
M/s Farmag Watch Company and M/s Ch. Abrecht.

The

respondent no. 1 is alleged to have caused these partnership firms
to run in continuous losses while deriving unlawful gains to
himself from the business of the partnership by falsification and
defrauding of accounts and denying access to the records of the
firm and also ousting the other partners from participation in the
management of his affairs.

Arb.P. 30/2004

page 4 of 12

6.

In support of the allegations of complete loss of confidence,

trust and faith by the petitioner in the respondent no. 1, the
petitioner has referred to an alleged sale of land by the respondent
no. 1, which land actually belonged to another partnership firm of
which the petitioner was a partner alongwith the respondent no. 1.
The second instance which has been cited is that of the illegal and
unauthorised closure of the business of the partnership firm M/s
Ch. Abrecht at Delhi and Calcutta and the usurption of the assets
of the partnership firm by surrendering the tenancy of this firm in
property at Calcutta and disposal of its movable assets.
7.

The petitioner has also submitted that the partnership firm

was also the owner of the property bearing no. 63B, 6th Floor,
Mehrina Building, Napeanea Road, Mumbai and tenancy rights in
the premises no. 269, Dr. Dadabhai Naoroji Road, Fort, Mumbai
which the respondent no. 1 is treating as his self acquired
properties and has threatened to alienate and transfer the same
and also to surrender the tenancy rights of the partnership firm
without the consent of the partners and to usurp the amounts

Arb.P. 30/2004

page 5 of 12

received therefrom.
8.

In these circumstances, apprehending illegal dispossession

of the various assets of the partnership firm, the present petitioner
filed an application under Section 9 of the arbitration &
Conciliation Act before this court, being OMP No. 466/2003
seeking interim orders against the respondent nos. 1 and 2 from
parting with possession or surrendering the tenancy rights or
other assets of the partnership firm till adjudication of the disputes
between the parties by arbitration. This court by an order dated
9th December, 2003 has issued a direction to the parties to
maintain status quo

in respect of both the aforenoticed

immovable properties.
9.

The petitioner claims to have approached the respondent

nos. 1 and 2 seeking dissolution of the partnership firm by mutual
consent and division of its properties and assets including
goodwill, tenancy and ownership. However, the respondents have
failed to react positively. Accordingly, the petitioner has got issued
a notice dated 28th November, 2003 upon the respondents calling

Arb.P. 30/2004

page 6 of 12

upon them to agree to the appointment of Justice S. Ranganathan,
a retired Judge of the Supreme Court of India who is conducing
arbitration between some of the parties herein with regard to M/s
Standard Restaurant, another partnership concern of some of the
parties to the present petition. Despite a lapse of 30 days from the
date of service of the notice, the respondents have failed to
respond. In these circumstances, placing reliance on clause 19
under the partnership agreement which contains the agreement of
the parties to refer all disputes relating to the partnership to
arbitration, the petitioner has filed the present petition seeking
appointment of an arbitrator. Copy of the legal notice as well as
the acknowledgment due card duly served has been placed before
this court.
10.

The respondent nos. 2 and 3 have not opposed reference of

the disputes to arbitration in terms of the arbitration agreement
contained in clause 19 of the partnership deed dated 4th August,
1986. The prayer made in the present application is opposed only
by Shri Naveen Monga, respondent no. 1. The principal ground of

Arb.P. 30/2004

page 7 of 12

objection to the grant of the present petition is to the effect that
this court does not have the territorial jurisdiction to entertain and
adjudicate upon the subject matter of the present case for the
reason that the partnership firm was carrying on business at
Mumbai; the immovable properties are located at Mumbai and
that no part of the cause of action had accrued at Delhi.
11.

In order to adjudicate upon this objection, it becomes

necessary to notice the relevant legal provisions which provide the
boundaries within which the court would exercise jurisdiction.
Section 2(e) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 defines
the expression Court and reads thus :"Section 2(e)
"Court" means the principal Civil
Court of original jurisdiction in a district, and
includes the High Court in exercise of its ordinary
original civil jurisdiction, having jurisdiction to
decide the questions forming the subject-matter
of the arbitration if the same had been the
subject-matter of a suit, but does not include any
civil court of a grade inferior to such principal
Civil Court, or any Court of Small Causes;"
12.

Under the Code of Civil Procedure, the relevant provisions

which provide the courts which would have territorial jurisdiction

Arb.P. 30/2004

page 8 of 12

to entertain and adjudicate upon a lis are to be found in Section 16
to 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure. Section 20 of the Code of
Civil Procedure provides that a suit may be appropriately filed
against a defendant either at the place where the cause of action
has arisen wholly or in part or where one or more of the
defendants to the suit resides. I find from the array of parties in
the present case that apart from the petitioner, the respondent
nos. 1 and 2 are also residing at Delhi within the jurisdiction of this
court.

These persons have also submitted that this court has

territorial jurisdiction and that they have no objection if the
present petition is allowed and disputes between the parties are
referred to the arbitration in terms of the arbitration agreement
between the parties.
The petitioner has separately filed OMP No.466/2003 under
Section 9 of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 praying for
interim orders. The respondent no. 3 has filed a reply with her
affidavit submitting that she has no objection to the grant of this
petition. It is therefore evident that the respondent no. 3 has also

Arb.P. 30/2004

page 9 of 12

no objection to the exercise of jurisdiction by this court.
13.

There is yet another factor which would guide adjudication

in the present case. Suit No. 1066/1992 (suit for rendition of
accounts and permanent injunction) has admittedly been filed in
respect of the properties of the partnership firm which is pending
at Delhi.

This court has restrained the petitioner and the

respondent nos. 1 and 3 who have been arrayed as defendants in
this suit from parting with possession or surrendering the tenancy
rights of the premises or the other immovable property.
14.

In this background, even on application of the doctrine of

forum non conveniens, it would be appropriate to conduct the
arbitration at a place which is closest to the parties. It is nobody's
case that any of the partners are residing in Mumbai.

The

petitioner has also stated that the business of the partnership firm
is lying closed. In this view of the matter, having regard to Section
2(e) of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 and Section 20 of
the Code of Civil Procedure, I have no hesitation in rejecting the
opposition to the grant of this petition on the ground that this

Arb.P. 30/2004

page 10 of 12

court does not have the territorial jurisdiction to entertain and
adjudicate upon the present petition.
15.

The respondent does not dispute that an arbitration

agreement is contained in clause 19 of the partnership deed dated
4th August, 1986. There is also no contest that disputes have arisen
between the parties which are covered under the arbitration
agreement between the parties. In this view of the matter, having
regard to the principles laid down by the Apex Court in SBP &
Co. v. Patel Engineering Limited (2005) 8 SCC 618, there
is no impediment to the grant of the present petition. It has been
pointed out that Justice S. Ranganathan, a retired Judge of the
Supreme Court of India is also seized of the matter relating to the
Standard Restaurant where some of the parties herein are
partners.
In this view of the matter, this petition is allowed.

The

disputes between the parties are referred to the sole arbitration of
Justice S. Ranganathan, retired Judge of the Supreme Court of
India who shall be at liberty to fix his own fees and the procedure

Arb.P. 30/2004

page 11 of 12

to be followed by him.
The petitioner and respondents shall be at liberty to raise
their claims and counter claims before the arbitrator in accordance
with law.
(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
May 11, 2007
kr

Arb.P. 30/2004

page 12 of 12

