IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Arbitration Application No. 35/2004
Da te of decision: May 11, 2007
Shri Kamal Nath Monga
.... Petitioner
through: Mr. Anil Sapra, Advocate
VERSUS
Shri Navin Kumar & Ors
.... Respondents
through: Mr. Sunil Magon, Advocate for respondent
no.3
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
1.Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
No
2.To be referred to the Reporter or not?
No
3.Whether the judgment should be reported in
the Digest?No
GITA MITTAL, J
1.

By this order I propose to decide this petition filed under

Section 11 of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 for
appointment of an arbitrator.
2.

The petition has been filed by Shri Kamal Nath Monga and

Shri Vimal Nath Monga on the averment that they alongwith Shri
Naveen

Kumar

(respondent

no.

1);

Shri

Ranjan

Monga

(respondent no. 2) and Ms. Anita Abrecht have been carrying on
Arb.P.35/2004

page 1 of 11

business in partnership with each other under the name and style
of M/s Farmag Watch Company under a partnership deed dated
4th August, 1986. This partnership firm was originally constituted
on 3rd February, 1962 and consisted of Shri Prem Nath Monga
(father of the petitioner); Shri Kishan Lal Kumar (father of
respondent no. 1); Shri Bal Kishan Monga (father of respondent
no. 2); Mrs. Sillina Abrecht and Mrs. Anita Abrecht (respondent
no. 3 herein). Mrs. Sillina Abrecht was the mother in law of Mrs.
Anita Abrecht died on 29th August, 1991.
3.

The partnership was reconstituted on 19th February, 1997

when the shares of the partners were redefined. Thereafter on the
death of Shri Kishan Lal Kumar, a new partnership deed dated
19th October, 1981 was executed inducting Shri Naveen Kumar,
respondent no. 1 as the partner. The petitioners were inducted
into the partnership firm upon the death of their father Shri Prem
Nath Monga on 21st January, 1982 when a fresh partnership deed
dated 1st March, 1982 was constituted.
Thereafter, on the death of Shri Bal Kishan Monga on 11th
June, 1986, another partnership deed dated 4th August, 1986, was
Arb.P.35/2004

page 2 of 11

executed when Shri Ranjan Monga respondent no. 2 stepped into
the shoes of his father Shri Bal Kishan Monga and became a
partner of the firm.

The shares of the partners under this

partnership deed became as follows :"(a) Shri Kamal Nath Monga
15%
(b) Shri Vimal Nath Monga
10%
(c)
Shri Ranjan Monga
15%
(d) Mrs. Sillina Abrecht
20%
(e) Mrs. Anita Abrecht
20$
(f) Shri Navin Kumar
20%"
th
Under the partnership deed dated 4 August, 1986, Shri
Naveen Kumar, respondent no. 1 herein was made in-charge of the
entire business and authorised to act for and on behalf of the said
firm either himself or through any manager or other person. He
was also authorised to appoint any other person to operate the
bank account of the partnership.

Clause 12 and 14 of the

partnership deed have been relied upon by the plaintiff in support
of this contention.
4.

The disputes arose between the parties for the reason that

even though respondent no. 1 was not authorised to exclude the
other partners from the management, control and administration
of the affairs of the firm or to deprive them from having access to
Arb.P.35/2004

page 3 of 11

the books of accounts or other documents, since 1998, the
respondent no. 1 fraudulently arrogated to himself all powers of
managing the business and affairs of the firm to the exclusion of
the other partners. The petitioner was also not granted access to
the books of account of the other documents. The petitioner also
points out that apart from the Farmag Watch Company, the
parties were also partners in two other partnership firms namely
M/s Meridian Watch Company and M/s Ch. Abrecht.

The

respondent no. 1 is alleged to have caused these partnership firms
to run in continuous losses while deriving unlawful gains to
himself from the business of the partnership by falsification and
defrauding of accounts and denying access to the records of the
firm and also ousting the other partners from participation in the
management of his affairs.
5.

In support of the allegations of complete loss of confidence,

trust and faith by the petitioner in the respondent no. 1, the
petitioner has referred to an alleged sale of land by the respondent
no. 1, which land actually belonged to another partnership firm of
which the petitioner was a partner alongwith the respondent no. 1.
Arb.P.35/2004

page 4 of 11

The second instance which has been cited is that of the illegal and
unauthorised closure of the business of the partnership firm M/s
Ch. Abrecht at Delhi and Calcutta and the usurption of the assets
of the partnership firm by surrendering the tenancy of this firm in
property at Calcutta and disposal of its movable assets.
6.

The petitioner has also submitted that the partnership firm

was also the owner of the properties including tenancy rights in
the premises bearing no. 269, Dr. Dadabhai Nauroji Road, Fort
Mumbai which the respondent no. 1 is treating as his self acquired
properties and has threatened to alienate and transfer the same
and also to surrender the tenancy rights of the partnership firm
without the consent of the partners and to usurp the amounts
received therefrom.
In view of the threats of the respondent no.1 to dispose of
and transfer, alienate and part with possession of the properties of
the partnership, the petitioner filed the OMP No. 465/2003 under
Section 9 of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996. This court by
an order passed on 9th December, 2003 directed the parties to
maintain status quo with regard to the tenanted premises bearing
Arb.P.35/2004

page 5 of 11

no. 269, Dr. Dadabhai Naoroji Road, Fort, Mumbai.
7.

The petitioner has pointed out that the respondent no. 2 had

earlier filed a suit before this Hon'ble Court being Suit No.
957/1992 titled Shri Ranjan Monga vs. Shri Navin Kumar & Ors.
against the petitioners as well as the respondent nos. 1 and 3
herein, which is pending . The respondent no. 2 has sought relief
of rendition of accounts in the partnership firm M/s Farmag
Watch Company and a relief of permanent injunction from
expelling respondent no. 2 from the partnership or for execution
of any fresh partnership deed to his exclusion. The respondent no.
2 had also prayed for an injunction from transferring or
surrendering of the tenancy rights of the partnership business.
This court has granted an interim injunction restraining the
defendants, i.e. the present petitioner and the respondent nos. 1
and 3 from parting with possession or surrendering tenancy rights
in the said premises no. 269, Dr. Dadabhai Nauroji Road, Fort,
Mumbai initially even though the present respondent no. 1 was
contesting the claim of the plaintiff, however, subsequently the
respondent no. 1 started colluding with the respondent no. 2 to
Arb.P.35/2004

page 6 of 11

persuade him not to pursue his Suit No. 957/1992 inasmuch as the
interim injunction granted therein would thereupon stand vacated
and would have enabled the respondent no. 1 to implement his
illegal design of surrendering the tenancy rights of the partnership
firm, selling the assets as well as stocks etc to the exclusion of the
partners.
8.

The petitioner claims to have approached the respondent

nos. 1 and 2 seeking dissolution of the partnership firm by mutual
consent and division of its properties and assets including
goodwill, tenancy and ownership. However, the respondents have
failed to react positively. Accordingly, the petitioner has got issued
a notice dated 28th November, 2003 upon the respondents calling
upon them to agree to the appointment of Justice S. Ranganathan,
a retired Judge of the Supreme Court of India who is conducting
arbitration between some of the parties herein with regard to M/s
Standard Restaurant, another partnership concern of some
petitioners to the present petition. Despite a lapse of 30 days from
the date of service of the notice, the respondents have failed to
respond. In these circumstances, placing reliance on clause 19
Arb.P.35/2004

page 7 of 11

under the partnership agreement which contains the agreement of
the parties to refer all disputes relating to the partnership to
arbitration, the petitioner has filed the present petition seeking
appointment of an arbitrator. Copy of the legal notice as well as
the acknowledgment due card duly served has been placed before
this court.
9.

The main ground of opposition to the present petition is

based on the objection raised with effect to his Hon'ble Court not
having the territorial jurisdiction to entertain and adjudicate upon
the subject matter of the present case.
10.

I have recorded detailed reasons rejecting this objection of

the respondent no. 1 while passing orders on Arb.A. 30/2004. In
view of the Section 2 (e) of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996
which defines the expression Court, it would be apparent that so
far as territorial jurisdiction of the court is concerned, Section 16
to 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure would guide consideration of
such an objection. Section 20 permits a suit to be filed in such
court which whose territorial jurisdiction the cause of action has
arisen wholly or in part or within whose territorial jurisdiction the
Arb.P.35/2004

page 8 of 11

defendants resides.
11.

The respondent no. 1 in his reply has taken a plea that so far

as the tenanted premises no. 269, Dr. Dadabhai Nauroji Road,
Fort, Mumbai is concerned, the tenancy rights of the premises
belong to the respondent no. 1 and other legal heirs of late Shri
Kishan Lal Kumar who was a tenant. In view of the pleadings of
the petitioner in Suit No. 1022/2000, it has further been urged
that so far the property bearing no. 63B, 6th Floor, Mehrina
Building, Napeanc Road, Mumbai is concerned the partners of the
firm had orally decided to give the flat to the manager of the
partnership firm namely Mr. Austin for the reason that he had
long served the firm and had not received any remuneration for
the last several years. So far as the Flat bearing no. 63B, 6th Floor,
Mehrina Building, Napeanc Road, Mumbai is concerned, the
petitioners have not contended that this property was owned by
the partnership firm.
12.

So far as the submission made by the petitioner in its written

statement in Suit No. 957/1992 (suit for rendition of accounts and
permanent injunction) is concerned, the impact thereof has to be
Arb.P.35/2004

page 9 of 11

examined in the arbitration proceedings. The arbitrator would be
required to examine the partnership deed and the impact of the
assignment deed relied upon by the respondent no. 1. In any case
apart from the tenancy right, the petitioner has sought dissolution
of all other movable assets including the goodwill and other
movable properties of the partnership firm.
13.

The respondent does not dispute that an arbitration

agreement is contained in clause 19 of the partnership deed dated
4th August, 1986. There is also no contest that disputes have arisen
between the parties which are covered under the arbitration
agreement between the parties. In this view of the matter, having
regard to the principles laid down by the Apex Court in SBP &
Co. v. Patel Engineering Limited (2005) 8 SCC 618, there
is no impediment to the grant of the present petition. It has been
pointed out that Justice S. Ranganathan, a retired Judge of the
Supreme Court of India is also seized of the matter relating to the
M/s Standard Restaurant where some of the parties herein are
partners.
In this view of the matter, this petition is allowed.
Arb.P.35/2004

page 10 of 11

The

disputes between the parties are referred to the sole arbitration of
Justice S. Ranganathan, retired Judge of the Supreme Court of
India who shall be at liberty to fix his own fees and the procedure
to be followed by him.
The petitioner and respondents shall be at liberty to raise

their claims and counter claims before the arbitrator in accordance
with law.
(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
May 11, 2007
kr

Arb.P.35/2004

page 11 of 11

