IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Probate Case No.25/2000
Reserved on 1st August, 2007
Date of decision: 12th November, 2007
VIJAY KUMAR MEHRA
... Petitioner
through Mr. Arvind Nigam, Advocate
with Mr. L.K. Garg, Advocate
VERSUS

STATE & OTHERS
.... Respondents
through Mr. M.A. Khan, Advocate with
Mr. Vikas Chopra, Adv.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1.Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the Judgment?
Yes
2.To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3.Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J
1.

By this judgment, I propose to dispose of the present petition

under Section 276 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 seeking grant of
probate/letters of administration of the Will dated 1st January, 1989
executed by the deceased Smt. Vidyawati Mehra widow of late Shri
J.N. Mehra with the Will annexed.
2.

There is no dispute so far as the legal heirs of the deceased and

her estate are concerned. It has been established before this court
that late Smt. Vidyawati Mehra was the widow of late Shri J.N. Mehra.
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.1

She had expired at New Delhi on the 26th March, 1993. Her demise
was duly registered with the Municipal Corporation of Delhi.

The

death certificate has been exhibited on record as Exhibit PW1/1.
3.

Deceased Smt. Vidyawati Mehra, was succeeded by the following

legal heirs:(i)

Son – Shri Vijay Kumar Mehra

Petitioner herein

(ii)

Daughter-Smt. Chandrakanta

Respondent no.2 herein

(iii) Daughter-Smt. Manju Vij

Respondent
herein

no.

3

(iv) Daughter-Smt. Neeru Khurana Respondent no.4 herein
(v)

Daughter-Smt. Shama Rani

Respondent no.5 herein

(vi) Daughter-Smt. Rajni Gujral

Respondent no.6 herein

There is also no dispute to the fact that late Smt. Vidyawati
Mehra, at the time of her death owned the immovable property
bearing no. 65, Bhagwan Nagar, New Delhi-110014 which consisted of
a plot of land admeasuring about 200 sq. yards with a built up ground
floor consisting of 7 rooms with kitchen and bath as well as three
shops. There is also no material dispute to the movable properties of
the deceased, all of which constituted part of her estate and have
been set out in Annexure C to the plaint.
4.

The petitioner has placed reliance on a writing dated 1st January,

1989 and has asserted that the same was the last Will and testament
executed by the deceased Smt. Vidyawati Mehra while in sound
disposing mind and of her own free will and accord. This document
was also registered with the Sub-Registrar III, New Delhi as document
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.2

no. 5915 in additional book no. III, Volume 766 at pages 159-160 on
27th of December, 1993 after the demise of the late Smt. Vidyawati
Mehra.
5.

By way of the present petition, the petitioner has sought probate

of this Will and grant of letters of administration with the Will
attached.
6.

This court had directed a public notice to be published in the

newspapers, the Statesman and the Jansatta, Delhi edition and also
issued

notices

to the Deputy Commissioner

(Chief Revenue

Controlling Authority) of the area where the property of the deceased
were located calling for a report of the valuation of the property.
7.

Notice was also issued to the respondents of the filing of the

present petition.
8.

The office of the Dy. Commissioner (South) Delhi has submitted a

report dated 23rd January, 2001 submitting that the value of the estate
of late Smt. Vidyawati Mehra for which the petitioner has applied for
probate, has been assessed at Rs.twenty lakh six hundred and eighty
as per the prescribed rate and upon consideration of the inspection
report of the Naib Tehsildar. This report has been exhibited on record
in the statement of the petitioner as Exhibit P1/3.
9.

So far as the respondents are concerned, the respondents 2 to 5

had entered appearance on service and had filed written statements
cum objections dated 3rd March, 2001.
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.3

10. On a consideration of the pleadings of the parties, this court had
framed the following issues by the order passed on 2nd November,
2001 :"1. Whether Smt. Vidyawati, w/o Late Sh. J.N.
Mehra duly
executed the Will dated 1st
January, 1989?
OPP
2.

Relief"

The parties were put to evidence in respect of their respective
contentions.
11. In order to establish the execution of the Will and its attestation
in accordance with law, the petitioner has examined both the
attesting witnesses, Mr. C.L. Shah and Mr. P. Chandra Sekharan,
Advocate who appeared as PW-5 & 6 respectively. The family doctor
Dr. T.K. Chakraborty as PW-7 has been examined to prove the state of
mind and health of the petitioner on 1st January, 1989 apart from his
own statement.

The petitioner has also summoned the record of

witnesses from the Punjab & Sind Bank, New Friends Colony, New
Delhi; the official/inspector from the Food & Civil Supplies Department
of Government of Delhi who have appeared as PW-1 & PW-2
respectively in order to prove the manner in which the deceased was
described and known as well as the manner in which she affixed her
signatures.
To prove the registration of the Will, the petitioner has also
summoned the officials from the office of the Sub-Registrar who has
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.4

appeared as PW-3
12. The respondent no. 3 Smt. Manju Vij had appeared as DW3; the
respondent no. 4 Smt. Chandrakanta as DW2 and the respondent no.
5 Shama Rani as DW1 in support of their objections.
13. The respondent no. 6 Smt. Rajni Gujral had filed a no objection
dated 30th September, 2000 to the grant of probate on 9th October,
2000. After filing her no objection to the grant of probate, respondent
no. 6 did not contest the present proceedings and was proceeded
exparte by an order passed on 11th of July, 2003. The respondent no.
6 had admitted and accepted the execution and validity of the Will
dated 1st January, 1989 executed by the deceased Smt. Vidyawati
Mehra as her last Will and testament and had clearly stated that she
had no objection if probate in respect of this Will dated 1st January,
1989 was granted to the petitioner. These submissions were made in
the supporting affidavit as well.
14. Smt. Neeru Khurana, respondent no.4 had initially supported the
respondent nos.2, 3 & 5 in their objections before this court. At the
same time, Smt. Neeru Khurana had also filed Suit No.353/2002
against her brother Shri Vijay Kumar Mehra (petitioner herein) and her
other four sisters as defendant nos.2, 3, 5 & 6.

In this suit, Smt.

Neeru Khurana had stated that Smt. Vidyawati was the absolute
owner of the property no.65, Bhagwan Nagar,New Delhi and that she
had died intestate at Delhi on 26th March, 1993. Consequently, it was
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.5

prayed that the suit property was liable to be partitioned between the
parties to the suit.
15. The present petitioner was contesting the suit and had set up the
present Will as his defence.
16. The petitioner had filed IA No.4179/2003 in the present
proceedings under Section 24 of the Code of Civil Procedure praying
for transfer of Suit No.353/2002 titled Smt.Neeru Khurana Vs. Smt.
Vijay Kumar Mehra and Others pending before the Civil Judge to this
court for adjudication with the present case.

This application was

allowed on 11th July, 2003 and Suit No.353/2002 was transferred and
listed alongwith the present case.
Upon its transfer to this court, the suit was registered as CS (OS)
No.1354/2005 in this court.
17. It appears that thereafter the respondent no. 4 Smt. Neeru
Khurana also decided that she did not wish to press her claim in
CS(OS)

No.

1354/2005

(originally

before

the

trial

court).

Consequently, she filed IA No. 7564/2005 in Suit No. 1354/2005
praying for leave to withdraw the suit. A statement was made by her
on 23rd September, 2005 to the effect that she was no longer
interested in prosecuting the suit before this court and that she had
decided not to oppose the probate case no. 25/2000. Consequently IA
No. 7564/2005 which was under Order 23 Rule 1 was allowed and
CS(OS) No. 1354/2005 was dismissed as withdrawn on the 23rd of
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.6

September, 2005.
18. On the same day, the respondent no. 4 Neeru Khurana made a
statement in the present petition to the effect that she withdrew her
objections dated 3rd March, 2005 filed in the present proceedings as
also the suit filed by her and that she did not wish to contest the
present case.

This statement was made by her in support of IA

No.7563/2005 filed in the present proceedings.

Consequently, the

prayer made in IA No.7563/2005 was allowed and the objections filed
by the respondent no.4 were permitted to be dismissed as withdrawn.
Respondent no.4 has also therefore not opposed grant of the
probate to the petitioner.
19. The issues framed on 15th November, 2001 have to be tested in
the context of the three-fold objections raised by the respondent
nos.3 to 5. The same can be summed up thus:“I. The signatures on the propounded Will dated 1st
January, 1989 are not of the deceased inasmuch as she
used to sign in Hindi as `Vidyawati' and had never affixed
her signatures as “Vidyawati Mehra”. The signatures on the
Will which bears the signature of the testator as Vidyawati
Mehra thus are not of the mother of the petitioner and the
respondent nos.2 to 6.
II.
Smt. Vidyawati Mehra was not keeping good health
and was not in sound disposing mind on 1st January, 1989.
III
The Will was unnatural and suspicious for the reason
that the petitioner had openly threatened the deceased and
had obtained her thumb impression and signatures
compelling her to file Civil Suit No.773/1992 against Shri
Vijay Kumar Mehra, the present petitioner in the court of
Civil Judge.
The objectors have further asserted that
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.7

Smt.Vidyawati Mehra was not having cordial and
harmonious relations with the petitioner and consequently,
there was no question of her making a bequest in favour of
the petitioner.
IV
The Will was registered after the death of
Smt.Vidyawati Mehra in collusion with the attesting
witnesses named on the Will dated 1st January, 1989.”
20. As per Section 63 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925, execution
of a Will requires the testator to sign or affix his mark to the Will, or
that it shall be signed by some other person in his presence and by
his direction.

Sub-Section (b) of Section 63 requires that the

signature or mark of the testator, or the signature of the person
signing for him, shall be so placed that it shall appear that it was
intended thereby to give effect to the writing as a Will.
Attestation of a Will has been provided under Sub-Section (c) of
Section 63 which mandates that the Will shall be attested by two or
more witnesses, each of whom has seen the testator sign or affix his
mark to the Will or has seen some other person sign the Will, in the
presence and by the direction of the testator, or has received from
the testator a personal acknowledgment of his signature or mark, or
the signature of such other person; and each of the witnesses shall
sign the Will in the presence of the testator, but it shall not be
necessary that more than one witness be present at the same time,
and no particular form of attestation shall be necessary.
21. The proof of execution of a Will is stipulated under Section 68 of
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.8

the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 which mandates that if a document is
required by law to be attested, it shall not be used as evidence until
one attesting witness at least has been called for the purpose of
proving its execution, if there be an attesting witness alive, and
subject to the process of the Court and capable of giving evidence.
22. The primary question which arises for consideration in the
present case is as to whether the document dated 1.1.1989 is the last
Will and testament of the deceased Smt. Vidyawati Mehra and that
the same was executed by her in accordance with law. The execution
of this document has to satisfy the provisions of Section 63 of the
Succession Act, 1925 and also Section 67 and 68 of the Evidence Act.
It is well settled that the onus of proof of execution of the Will is on
the propounder or the beneficiary thereof.
23. However, if an objection is taken by any person to the effect that
the Will was forged or that it was obtained under undue infleunce or
coercion or by playing a fraud, the onus to so prove is on the person
who alleges it to be so. (Ref. JT 2006 1 SC 225 Mathew Oommen
vs. Suseela Mathew (para 8); AIR 2003 SC 3109 Ramabai
Padmakar Patil (dead) by LRs & Ors. Vs. Rukminibai Vishnu
Vekhande & Ors. (Para 8 and 9).
24. A Will is required to be proved like any other document except
for the fact that it has to be proved after the death of the testator.
Hence the person executing the document is not alive to give
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.9

testimony in support thereof. The propounder, in the absence of any
suspicious circumstance surrounding the execution of the Will, is
required to prove the testamentary capacity and the signatures of the
testator.
25. In AIR 1995 SC

2086 Vrindavanibai Sambhaji Mane Vs.

Ramchandra Vithal Ganeshkar & Ors., the court considered the
large body of the case law on the issue as to what are considered as
suspicious circumstances surrounding the execution of the Will which
require the propounder to explain them to the satisfaction of the court
before the Will can be accepted as genuine. Some of the suspicious
circumstances of which the court took note of are:"(1) The propounder taking a prominent part in the
execution of a Will which confers substantial benefits
on him; (2) Shaky signature; (3) A feeble mind which
is likely to be influenced; (4) Unfair and unjust
disposal of property."
It was also observed by the court that when a court is dealing
with testamentary cases where there is a large and consistent body of
testimony evidencing the signing and attestation of the Will, but
where it is suggested that there are circumstances which raise a
suspicion and make it impossible that the Will could have been
executed, the correct line of approach is to see that the improbability,
in order to prevail against such evidence, must be clear and cogent
and must approach very nearly to, if it does not altogether constitute,
an impossibility.
26. In the case before the Apex Court, it was held that the motive for
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.10

making the Will was not relevant and also the fact that the testatrix
made a Will at the age of 50 cannot be considered as a suspicious
circumstance reflecting on its genuineness.

In 1996 (9) SCC 324

Joyce Primrose Prestor (Mrs.) (Nee Vas) Vs. Vera Marie Vas
(Ms) and Others, the court held that so far as a holographed Will is
concerned, there is a greater presumption of the Will being regularly
executed. The propounder would be required only to formally prove
the Will for which very little evidence is required.

The court is

required to look at the nature of the Will, pleadings of the parties,
facts admitted or proved and the presumptions available. The court
placed reliance on the earlier pronouncement reported at AIR 1964
SC 529 Shashi Kumar Banerjee & Ors. Vs. Subodh Kumar
Banerjee

since

deceased

and

after

him

his

legal

representatives & Ors., a decision rendered by the Constitutional
Bench.
In this case, the court has noticed that as the caveator alleges
undue influence, fraud and coercion, the onus is on him to prove the
same.

Even where there are no such pleas, but the circumstances

give rise to doubts, it is for the propounder to satisfy the conscience
of the court.

The suspicious circumstances may be as to the

genuineness of the signatures of the testator, the condition of the
testator's mind, the depositions made in the Will being unnatural,
improbable or unfair in the light of relevant circumstances or there
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.11

may be other indications in the Will to show that the testator's mind
was not free. In such a case the court would naturally expect that all
legitimate suspicious should be completely removed before the
document is accepted as the last will of the testator. In this behalf,
the court held thus:“4.
xxx
In such a case the court would
naturally expect that all legitimate suspicion should be
completely removed before the document is accepted
as the last will of the testator. If the propounder
himself takes part in the execution of the will which
confers a substantial benefit on him, that is also a
circumstance to be taken into account, and the
propounder is required to remove the doubts by clear
and satisfactory evidence. If the propounder succeeds
in removing the suspicious circumstances the court
would grant probate, even if the will might be
unnatural and might cut off wholly or in part near
relations. It is in the light of these settled principles
that we have to consider whether the appellants have
succeeded in establishing that the will was duly
executed and attested.”
The issues in the present case have to be considered in the light
of these well settled principles.
27. The objections raised by the contesting respondent nos.2, 3 and
5 would require to be considered as against the evidence which has
been led by the petitioner.

As noticed above, the principles which

would guide adjudication are well settled. Undoubtedly, the burden to
prove due execution and attestation of the Will lies on the propounder
who has also to explain any suspicious circumstances in the execution
of the Will. Such suspicion must be inherent in the transaction itself.
The onus to establish any doubt that may arise from conflict of
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.12

testimony which becomes apparent on the investigation of the
transaction.

So far as the allegation that the Will

was executed

under undue influence is concerned, proof thereof rests upon the
person making such allegation.
Signature & Execution of the Will
28. Shri C.L. Shah and Shri P. Chandra Sekharan have stepped into
the witness box as PW 5 and PW 6 respectively to prove the execution
of the Will and its attestation.

Shri Chaman Lal Shah, PW-5 in his

examination-in-chief on affidavit stated that he knew Smt. Vidyawati
Mehra, who is the mother of the present petitioner before the
execution of the Will. According to this witness, the Will was executed
by Smt. Vidyawati Mehra in the afternoon of 1st January, 1989 in the
presence of Mr. P. Chandra Sekharan, Advocate and himself.

They

were invited by the testator to witness its execution. The Will was
drafted by Mr. P. Chandra Sekharan who got it typed. Only PW-5 & 6
were present when the executant Smt. Vidyawati Mehra signed the
Will in their presence.

This witness categorically stated that the

testator was in a sound state of mind and she affixed her signatures
first; then the same was signed by PW-5 as witness and signed lastly
by Mr. P. Chandra Sekharan, Advocate. The witness proved the Will
and identified the signatures of the testator as well the signatures of
Mr. P. Chandra Sekharan, Advocate and his own thereon which was
tendered in evidence as Exh.PW2/1.
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.13

29. In his cross-examination, the witness explained that the family of
Late Smt. Vidyawati Mehra were his family friends; that he knew Shri
Vijay Kumar Mehra since 1980 but was not good friends with him. In
his cross-examination, Shri C.L. Shah, PW-5 has explained that Smt.
Vidyawati Mehra and his mother were close friends and that is how he
knew the deceased. The witness stated that his mother introduced
him to the petitioner.
30. PW 5 was asked to identify the signatures of the deceased on the
record of the bank which was on this courts record as Exh.PW1/7. He
also identified her signatures in this record.
31. It has come in the cross-examination of this witness that the
contents of the Will were also explained in vernacular to

Smt.

Vidyawati Mehra in his presence by Mr. P. Chandra Sekharan,
Advocate before she signed it and that the witness had also explained
the same to her. He not only deposed that the Will was signed in the
house of the deceased, but pointed out that she signed the same in
the puja sthal located therein.
32. In the cross-examination of PW-5, it has also come that the
deceased was examined by Dr. T.K. Chakraborty, the family doctor on
1st January, 1989 and that the testator had shown a certificate issued
by the doctor regarding her state of health.
The witness also supported the registration and stated that he
had gone to the office of the Sub-Registrar, Asaf Ali Road, New Delhi
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.14

where his signatures were taken on record.
This witness denied all allegations of being an interested witness
on the ground that he was a friend of the present petitioner.
33. Mr. P. Chandra Sekharan, Advocate who has appeared as PW-6,
has corroborated the testimony of PW-5 in all material particulars. His
examination-in-chief on affidavit was tendered in evidence as Exhibit
PW-6/X. In his cross-examination, he affirmed that he had known the
family of Late Smt. Vidyawati Mehra since 1984 including the
petitioner. The witness has stated that he had drafted the Will as per
her instructions and had got the same typed. At the time of execution
of the Will, only the testator; Shri C.L. Shah, PW 5 and this witness
were the persons present.

He has also corroborated PW 5 in the

manner in which the contents were explained in vernacular before
each signed the same. The witness has deposed that he explained
the contents of the Will both at the time of drafting and before the
execution of the Will by her and that the DW-5 had also explained the
documents of the Will in vernacular. This witness also affirmed that
the Will was executed in the puja sthal at around 4.00 P.M. and that
the deceased was medically examined by Dr. T.K. Chakraborty.

DW-

6 also deposed that he was a neighbour of the deceased testator and
several meetings took place between testator and him.
34. This witness also confirmed that the original Will was kept with
PW-5 Shri Chaman Lal Shah by the deceased and that they were
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.15

directed by the deceased not to disclose the existence of the Will to
her family till she passed away.

The witness also proved the

registration of the Will and confirmed the fact that he had gone to the
Sub-Registrar's office where he signed the proceedings sheet when
his statement was recorded by the Sub-Registrar. PW-5 identified the
signatures of Smt. Vidyawati Mehra Exh. on Exhibit PW-1/7.
35. So far as the execution of the Will is concerned, the primary
ground taken by the respondent nos.3 and 5 for urging that the Will
has not been signed or executed by the deceased Smt.

Vidyawati

Mehra is based on the manner in which her signatures appears on the
document. The signatures on the document bears the full name of
the deceased that is `Vidyawati Mehra' in vernacular.
36. The objectors have raised a dispute with regard to these
signatures appearing on the Will.

It is their submission that the

deceased used to sign as only `Vidyawati' and never signed as
`Vidyawati Mehra'.

For this reason, according to the objectors, the

signatures on the document were not of the deceased mother of the
parties.
37. The petitioner has summoned and proved the various records
including the record from the bank, ration card and even her gas
connection to prove that Smt. Vidyawati Mehra was known by her full
name that is Vidyawati Mehra and she was signing the full name that
is Vidyawati Mehra and `Vidyawati' on some occasions.
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.16

38. The petitioner summoned the record pertaining to the Saving
Bank Account no.164 which was held by Smt. Vidyawati Mehra in the
Punjab & Sind Bank, New Friends Colony Branch, New Delhi.

The

petitioner had also summoned the record relating to the locker
account no.166 which was also held in the name of Smt. Vidyawati
Mehra.

On the basis of these records, the PW-1 Shri Man Mohan,

Computer Terminal Operator of the Punjab & Sind Bank who produced
the same stated that Smt. Vidyawati was holding a saving bank
account no.164 which was opened on 28th December, 1979 (Exh.P-1).
In respect of this saving account, the account holder had made an
application dated 28th December, 1979 which has been proved on
record as Exh.P-11. The deceased had given her specimen signatures
for opening this account.

The deceased had signed both the

applications and given two specimen signatures which consisted of
her full name that is `Vidyawati Mehra'. Even on the locker account,
the deceased had given a specimen signatures on 3rd May, 1988 as
Vidyawati Mehra and signed instructions also by her full name.
39. Perusal of Exh.P-3 (also marked as Exh.PW-1/7 by the court
commissioner recording evidence on 28th November, 2002) would
show that it relates to the period from 1979 till 1990. It appears that
the deceased has signed as both `Vidyawati Mehra' and `Vidyawati'
over all these years.

Her signatures as `Vidyawati Mehra' were

identified on Exh.PW-1/5 as well on this exhibit. The testimony of this
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.17

witness was based on record inasmuch as the deceased had not
operated the locker in the presence of this witness.
The locker was operated as noticed above on large number of
occasions till her death when the deceased had signed on thirteen
occasions as `Vidyawati Mehra' and on four occasions as `Vidyawati'
between the period 29th December, 1979 and 8th May, 1988

as per

Exh.P-3 (Exh.PW1/6 as well).
40. A bare comparison of the signatures appearing on the Will dated
1st January, 1989, the document which has been proved on record as
Exh.6/1 as against the signatures which appear on Exh. PW1-1/6 (also
marked Exh.P-3, PW-1/7) and Exh.PW-2 would show that they bear the
signatures of the same person.

There is, therefore, no reason to

disbelieve the testimony of PW 4, Shri Vijay Kumar Mehra;

PW-5

Chaman Lal Shah and PW-6 Mr. P. Chandra Sekharan that the Will
dated 6th January, 1989 was signed and executed by the deceased.
41. Shri S.P. Bakshi, Inspector from Food & Supplies Department,
Circle No.5, Lajpat Nagar, New Delhi appeared as PW-2 was another
witness examined by the petitioner in support of his contention that
the deceased was known as Smt. Vidyawati Mehra. He had produced
the muster register from his office with regard to the issuance of
ration cards and proved that the ration card has been issued in the
name of Smt. Vidyawati Mehra who was the resident of 65, Bhagwan
Nagar, New Delhi – 110 014 and that she was the head of the family.
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.18

The photocopy of the relevant extracts of the register brought by him
and proved in court has been marked Exh.PW-4.
42. Ex.PW-6/1 that is the Will in question, runs into two pages and
the full signatures of the testator Smt. Vidyawati Mehra appeared at
mark `A' on the first page of this document and mark `B' of the
second page of this document.
43. So far as the signatures on the Will dated 1st January, 1989 are
concerned, the same were put to the respondent nos.3 and 5 in their
cross-examination. Smt. Chander Kanta who appeared as DW-2 in her
cross-examination

on

20th

February,

2007

admitted

that

the

signatures at mark `B' of Exh.PW-6/1 was that of her mother. It is
noteworthy that the Will in question has been marked as Exh.PW-6/1
as well as Exh.PW-1/5.
Again, Smt. Manju Vij, respondent no.3 who appeared as DW-3 in
her cross-examination on 19th May, 2006, stated that she could
recognise and

identify the signatures of her mother.

She

categorically stated that the signatures at mark `B' on the second
page of Exh.PW-6/1 were of her mother and that the same was her
reply to the signatures of her mother appearing at page 1 of Exh.PW6/1.
44. It may be appropriate to notice that in order to prove their
contentions, the respondents have filed a list of witnesses dated 6th
May, 2003.

The respondent had cited a hand writing expert as a

Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.19

witness at serial no.6 to prove the signatures of Smt. Vidyawati Mehra
on their behalf. The respondents failed to produce any such witness.
45. In view of this documentary evidence supported by the oral
evidence of the witness and admissions of the objectors, I have no
hesitation in holding that the signatures appearing at points `A' & `B'
on the Will Exhibit 6/1 are the signatures of the deceased Smt.
Vidyawati Mehra.
FITNESS OF THE DECEASED
46. The respondent nos.3 to 5 have in their objections stated that
the deceased was not in a sound disposing mind for the reason that
she had suffered a paralytic attack in the year 1988. Undoubtedly,
the objectors have

contradicted each other on this aspect.

Smt.

Shama Rani, respondent no.5, entered the witness box as DW-1. Her
examination-in-chief on affidavit was tendered and exhibited as DW1/X and she was cross-examined before the local commissioner on
28th September, 2005. In her cross-examination, she made a vague
statement that in July, 1998, the deceased was admitted in the Jeevan
Nursing Home and that she did not remain in hospital even for a day.
The witness admitted that the hospital was near her house and that
the deceased remained in coma for only few hours.

According to

DW.1, thereafter, she remained under treatment for two-three
months.

The witness DW-1 further stated that after this paralytic

attack in July, 1988, Smt. Vidyawati Mehra started visited her house
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.20

after three-four months of the attack.

The witness categorically

stated that she had no deformity or infirmity in her body.
47. Even if this witness was to be believed that Smt. Vidyawati
Mehra suffered a paralytic stroke in July, 1988, according to her the
deceased was in sound health after two-three months of such attack.
In the plaint filed by Smt. Shama Rani in Suit No.773/1992, she has
stated in para 7 that the deceased was ailing for the last eight months
or so.

There is not an iota of evidence to suggest that the deceased

was unwell, incapacitated or not in sound disposing mind in January,
1989 when the Will was executed by the deceased.
48. So far as Smt. Chander Kanta DW-2 is concerned, she tendered
her examination-in-chief on affidavit as Exh.DW-2/X and stated in her
cross-examination that there was no dispute amongst the petitioner,
herself and their mother.

With regard to her state of health, this

witness also vaguely stated that her mother had a paralytic attack in
July, 1998 and that she want to see her mother after one or two days
of the same when she was in hospital in coma. The witness did not
know when she was shifted from hospital to the house and stated that
she had only visited hospital once when she was in coma for twothree days. The witness thus completely contradicts the deposition of
DW-1 who stated that the witness was hospitalised only for two-three
hours.

However, even DW-2 stated that she became well and was

doing her work.
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.21

49. So far as the state of health of the deceased was concerned,
Smt. Manju Vij, DW-3 was cross-examined on 22nd March, 2006 and
19th May, 2006. She stated that she met with the mother for the last
time on 18th January, 1992 when accompanied by the petitioner, Smt.
Vidyawati Mehra visited the Manju Vij, DW-3 at her house on 18th
January, 1992. According to this witness, Smt. Vidyawati Mehra was
in good health and absolutely normal and talking in a normal way.
Later it was stated that Smt. Vidyawati Mehra had her first paralytic
attack on 17th July, 1998 and that at that time she was taken to the
hospital.

This witness did not know who took her to hospital and

could not recollect the next date as to when she went to see her
mother. She stated that it was one or two days after that she went to
visit at home when the petitioner and his family were there.

The

witness confirmed that the deceased recognised her and was in her
senses at the time of visit.
50. In her cross-examination on 19th May, 2006, Manju Vij-DW-3
categorically stated that after 1988 till December, 1991, or before
having paralytic attack in January, 1992, Smt. Vidyawati Mehra was
absolutely fit and normal. She also stated that during this time the
deceased contested litigation against her tenants and also appeared
in courts.
51. Mr. Arvind Nigam, learned counsel for the petitioner, has pointed
out that in fact respondent no.5 Shama Rani did not have good
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.22

relations with her mother Smt. Vidyawati Mehra and has gone to the
extent of stating in her cross-examination as DW-1 that the case filed
by her mother against the tenants were wrong.
52. So far as the contentions of the respondent nos.2 to 5 that
because Smt. Vidyawati Mehra suffered a paralytic attack in 1988,
therefore she was not having a sound disposing mind, is concerned,
there is no cogent or reliable evidence in support of the fact that Smt.
Vidyawati Mehra suffered any paralytic attack in 1988.

The evidence

of these respondents is vague and contradictory with each other.
53. This contention of the respondent is liable to be disbelieved in
the face of the documentary evidence which has been placed on
record by the respondents themselves.

The respondent no.5 has

proved in her evidence the plaint filed by her in Suit No.773/1992 filed
by Shri Vidyawati Mehra and Smt. Shama Devi Vs. Shri Vijay Kumar
Mehra, Smt. Manju Vij, Neeru Khurana, Smt. Rani Mehra (119) Part -1.
54. This suit was purportedly filed by Smt. Shama Rani on behalf of
her mother Smt. Vidyawati Mehra as well as herself.

The plaint is

dated 18th August, 2000. The averments made by Smt. Shama Rani
the respondent no.5, who was plaintiff no.2 in this plaint in para 7 & 9
deserves to be considered in extenso and read thus:“7. That for the last eight months or so, the plaintiff
No.1 is lying under total coma and she can not
understand good or bad and looking to her condition
and services which plaintiff no.2 is rendering to the
plaintiff no.1, the defendant no.1 has started
apprehending that the property may not at any
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.23

moment be bequeathed by the plaintiff no.1 to the
plaintiff no.2, if at any moment she regains conscious.
xxx

xxx

xxx

9.
That the plaintiff no.1 being under unconscious
condition, cannot safeguard her interest, rights, and
title in the aforementioned house and in case, the
defendant no.1 succeeded in making manipulations
and
transferred/alienate
or
dispose
off
the
aforementioned house, the plaintiffs will suffer an
irreparable loss and injury which cannot be
compensated in terms of money and which will give
rise to multiplicity of litigations.”
Thus, according to Smt. Shama Rani, Smt. Vidyawati Mehra was
lying in hospital since January, 1992 when the plaint was filed.
Consequently, Smt. Shama Rani was filing the suit as her guardian so
long she was lying in hospital having suffered an attack of paralysis
and was in coma.
There is no mention of the alleged paralytic attack in the year
1988 anywhere in this plaint. On the contrary, in para 7 a categorical
stand was taken that the mother was ill only for the last eight months.
55. In this suit, Smt. Shama Rani had prayed for a decree of
perpetual injunction against the defendant no.1 restraining him from
transferring, alienating, selling or in any way creating any interest in
favour of anybody with regard to the house bearing municipal number
65, Bhagwan Nagar, New Delhi.
56. It is noteworthy that Smt. Shama Rani filed the suit in 1992
through Smt. Shakuntala Devi, Advocate who was the lawyer of the
tenant against Smt. Vidyawati Mehra and was opposing Smt.
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.24

Vidyawati Mehra.
57. DW 1 has also not stated the correct facts with regard to filing of
the suit bearing no.773/1992 which was dated 24th August, 1992.
The plaint in the suit has been exhibited in record as Exh.PW-1/PA.
The witness has stated that even though she became aware of the
existence of the Will for the first time on 7th July, 1992 when Mr. P.
Chandra Sekharan told her about its existence.

She has neither

mentioned the mother's alleged sickness in July, 1988 nor about the
existence of the Will in the plaint which was filed by her on 24th
August, 1992.
58. It is also in the evidence of the objectors that the deceased was
actively pursuing litigation against her tenants.

Smt. Shama Devi,

DW-1 has stated that her mother was examined and cross-examined
in August, 1991 in Suit No.73/1994 in the court to Smt. Savitri Rao,
Civil Judge, Delhi. This fact amply evidences the healthy mental state
of the deceased.
59. To prove the state of mind and health of the deceased, the
petitioner has examined Dr. T.K. Chakraborty as PW-7.

The

examination-in-chief on affidavit has been proved on record as
Exh.PW-7/X. This witness has proved that he was a family doctor of
Late Smt. Vidyawati Mehra and used to examine her as and when she
visited his clinic at 44, Bhagwan Nagar, New Delhi. He deposed that
Late Smt. Vidyawati Mehra was a patient of diabetes.
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.25

According to

DW-7, Smt. Vidyawati Mehra visited his residence for her usual check
up on 1st January, 1989 and that he had examined her. The witness
had deposed that her blood pressure on check up was found to be
alright and being satisfied with her physical condition, Dr. T.K.
Chakraborty issued her a fitness certificate dated 1st January, 1989
which has been proved on record as Exh.PW-1/2.
60. In the cross-examination, the witness stated that he was a
general physician and that he did not have a record to show that the
deceased was under his treatment. He was basing his testimony on
his personal knowledge.

The witness could not recollect as to

whether Smt. Vidyawati Mehra ever had a paralytic stroke from 1981
to 1989 and that he did not ask her the reason for which she required
the medical fitness certificate. The witness clarified that Exh.PW-1/2
was not a medical certificate but was merely a fitness certificate and
that there was no legal requirement for keeping a record for issuance
of such a certificate. The witness also explained that because of the
reason that the deceased Smt. Vidyawati Mehra visited Dr. T.K.
Chakraborty at his residence, the fitness certificate was not issued on
a letter head. However, he confirmed his stamp and signatures.
61. So far as the stand of the respondents/objectors are concerned,
Shri M.A. Khan, learned counsel has placed strong reliance on the
provisions of Clause 1.3.3 of Chapter 1 of Code of Medical Ethics to
urge that the certificate which has been given by Mr. P. Chandra
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.26

Sekharan PW-7 which has been proved as PW-7/1, does not satisfy the
mandatory requirements of a medical certificate which have been
supported by the Medical Council of India.
As noticed above, the doctor as PW-7 has explained the nature of
the certificate which was given by him and the reason for the same
not being on his letter head and the reasons thereof.

There is no

requirement of either any provisions of the Succession Act, 1925 or
The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 that a certificate of fitness has to
accompany the Will. The doctor has stepped into the witness box and
stated he has closely examined Late Smt. Vidyawati Mehra on 1st
January, 1989 and that the certificate only records her fitness. The
evidence of the doctor was corroborated by the evidence of the
attesting witness.
62. I find that even if PW-7 Dr. T.K. Chakraborty is disbelieved, on
the strength of the cross-examination of the respondent nos.3 to 5 the
petitioner would have to succeed.

The respondents have led no

credible evidence that the deceased suffered any kind of paralytic
attack in July, 1998 as averred by them. On the contrary, they have
hopelessly contradicted each other.

In any case, they have

categorically stated that shortly after July, 1988, the deceased was
good health, hearty and was visiting their houses; was attending court
cases and discharging social obligations.

She has admittedly been

cross-examined in court in 1991. It is not the case of the respondents
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.27

themselves that the deceased was incapacitated physically or
mentally on 1st January, 1989 or that she was not in a sound disposing
mind. Therefore, this submission on behalf of the respondents must
necessarily failed.
63. These facts also amply establish that Smt. Vidyawati Mehra was
not incapacitated and was fully conscious at the time she made and
executed Exhibit PW 6/1.
Challenge to the testimony of the petitioner and the attesting
witnesses
64. The petitioner also filed his examination-in-chief on affidavit and
has appeared as PW-4 in the witness box. He tendered his affidavit in
evidence which was marked Exh.PW-4/X.

This witness has proved

that he had cordial relations with the deceased who was cohabiting
with him.

He proved also the death certificate in respect of the

demise of Smt. Vidyawati Mehra on 26th March, 1993 as Exh.PW-1/1
and; that the deceased was a Hindu at the time of her death. He has
proved the Will and the certificate issued by the doctor. It has come
in the testimony of the petitioner that he was not aware about the
execution of the Will by his mother and came to know about this fact
only from Shri C.L. Shah, Chartered Accountant after her demise. He
was not aware of the execution of the Will by his mother during her
lifetime. The witness has submitted that the Will was executed by the
mother of the parties while she was in sound mind and health in the
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.28

presence of the witnesses who have attested the same and that the
same was executed without any force, pressure, coercion or undue
influence while she was residing at a fixed place at 65, Bhagwan
Nagar, New Delhi - 110 014.
65. PW-4 has also proved the valuation of the assets of the property
left by the deceased which was the subject matter of the Will dated
1st January, 1989.

This witness proved the certificate dated 23rd

January, 2001 issued by the Tehsildar, Head Quarters, New Delhi
confirming the value of the property at Rs.20,00,680/-.
66. The petitioner as PW 4 also proved the signatures of the
deceased in the record of the bank as Smt. Vidyawati Mehra and the
ration card issued by the Delhi Administration which indicates the
name of Smt. Vidyawati Mehra as head of the family.

The witness

proved the fact that she was having a saving bank account no.1644
(Old number) in Punjab & Sind Bank, New Friends Colony, New Delhi
and also a locker bearing account no.166 and the signatures of the
mother Smt. Vidyawati Mehra on the original Will.
67. The testimony of this witness could not be shaken by the
respondents in the cross-examination. On the contrary, he has
established that both he and his wife were looking after the deceased.
This witness deposed that Smt. Vidyawati Mehra was ill only from 31st
January, 1992 till 26th March, 1993 when she was looked after by the
petitioner, his wife and also a full time maid for which the petitioner
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.29

was paying Rs.800/- per month apart from lodging, boarding and food.
68. The witness denied all suggestions that Smt. Vidyawati Mehra
was not well from July, 1988 till death or that she was of unsound
mind.

The petitioner also denied all suggestions that he had ever

threatened the mother in 1992 to dispose of the property on the basis
of the signatures on blank paper or that he did not look after the
mother as both he and his wife were employed.

This witness also

stated that he had incurred the expenses on the mother's treatment.
69. So far as the testimony of the petitioner as PW-4 is concerned,
the only contradiction on which the respondents have heavily relied is
his statement that Shri C.L. Shah and Mr. P. Chandra Sekharan were
not known to him. This witness in the later part of the statement has
denied the suggestion that Shri C.L. Shah and Mr. P. Chandra
Sekharan

were his close friends or that the Will was prepared in

collusion by the petitioner with them.
70. I find that it has also come in the testimony of PW-5 & 6 that
they were not friends of the petitioner. Appearing as PW-5, Shri C.L.
Shah has clearly stated that his mother was the friend of the
deceased Smt. Vidyawati Mehra and that is how he knew Smt.
Vidyawati Mehra.

This witness had clearly stated that Shri Vijay

Kumar Mehra was not his good friend but that he merely knew him.
Mr. P. Chandra Sekharan, PW-6, has stated that he knew the family of
late Smt. Vidyawati Mehra since 1984. This witness also denied that
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.30

he had deposed falsely to help the petitioner who was his friend.
71. In my view there is no contradiction in the three statements. The
explanation for the petitioner's statement is to be found in the
statements of PW 5 & 6. Certainly the respondents have not been
able to prove that PW-5 & 6 were friends of the petitioner or shared a
close relationship with him. They have only stated that they knew the
petitioner without anything further. Even assuming that the petitioner
was to be disbelieved that he did not know PW-5 & 6 as stated by
him, nothing much would turn on this issue so far as the execution
and attestation of the Will or the trustworthiness of the testimony of
the PW-5 & 6 is concerned in view of the facts which have been
noticed hereinabove.
72. DW-1, Smt. Shama Rani, respondent no.4 in her testimony does
not inspire any confidence. This witness admits that she knew Shri
C.L. Shah, PW-5 because he had got her daughter admitted in the
school in 1986 and also the fact that Mr. C.L. Shah knew her mother
or other family members.
73. The

objectors

have

been

unable

to

establish

any

such

relationship between the petitioner and PW 5 & 6 so as to give them a
motive to influence the execution of the Will.

The objectors have

failed to even place material which could even remotely support an
element of influence by any person upon the deceased to make the
bequest or to execute the Will.
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.31

Registration of the Will
74. It has also been objected on behalf of the respondents that the
Will has been registered long after its execution and after the demise
of the testator and must be disbelieved.
75. A Will is not a document which is compulsorily registrable under
section 17 of the Registration Act, 1908. Registration of the Will has
been made optional under section 18 of the statute.

So far as the

registration of the Will is concerned, the same is covered by sections
27, 40 & 41 of the statute. A Will may be presented for registration to
any registrar by the testator or after his death, by any person
claiming as executor or otherwise under the Will. By virtue of Section
41 of the Statute, a Will shall be registered if the registering officer is
satisfied that firstly, the Will was executed by the testator or donor, as
the case may be; secondly, that the testator or donor is dead; and
lastly, that the person presenting the Will or authority is, under
section 40, entitled to present the Will.
76. I find no contradiction in the evidence of PW-5 and PW-6 when
they disclosed the manner in which they received information of the
requirement to go to the office of the Sub-Registrar. PW-5 has stated
that he has received summons while PW-6 has stated that when he
received information from the petitioner for this purpose.

Both

witnesses stated that they were not required to sign the proceeding
sheet. It has also come on the evidence that the SDM has accepted
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.32

due execution of the Will.
77. So far as the registration of the Will after the date of death of the
testator is concerned, the same is statutorily permitted by Section 40
of the Registration Act.
78. So far as the registration of the Will is concerned, apart from the
statements of PW-5 and PW-6, the petitioner had also summoned the
witness from the office of Sub-Registrar-III, Asaf Ali Road, New Delhi.
Accordingly, Shri Ramesh Chander record clerk had brought the office
copy of the Will executed by Smt. Vidyawati Mehra dated 1st January,
1989 which was registered in the office on 27th December, 1993 vide
registration no.5917, diary no.466 at pages 159-160.
79. Shri.

M.A.

Khan,

learned

counsel

for

the

objectors,

had

vehemently disputed the presence of the attesting witness at the time
of registration. In this behalf, strong reliance was placed on the one
line statement in the cross-examination of PW-3 that the attesting
witnesses were not present.
80. Both PW-5 & 6 have explained that they were not required to
sign the original Will at the time of registration and that their
signatures were taken on record. DW-6 had clearly stated that SubRegistrar had satisfied himself with regard to the execution of the Will
and its attestation before registration was effected.
81. I find that no question was put on behalf of the objectors to the
PW-3 as to whether there was any record relating to the registration.
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.33

The witness had brought with him only an office copy of the Will.
From the testimony it does not appear that any other record was
produced by him. This witness in any case was merely a record clerk
who has not stated that the registration was effected in his presence.
Consequently, the testimony of this witness to the effect that the
attesting witnesses were not present at the time of registration, does
not inspire confidence.
82. The respondents have put a vague question to the PW-3 who was
merely a record clerk from the office of the Sub-Registrar without
seeking production of the record relating to the registration of the
Will.
It was nowhere in the testimony of this witness that he was
present at the time of registration.
This witness merely produced record and was not a witness to
either execution or registration of the Will. In view of the above, the
objectors have not been able to cast doubt on the registration of the
Will.

Even assuming that there was no registration of the Will in

accordance with law, the same would be of no consequence inasmuch
as it would still be open to this court to test if the Will had been
executed and attested in accordance with the provisions of law.
Relationship of the deceased with the petitioner & the objectors
83. The petitioner has claimed

that Smt. Shama Rani, respondent

no.5, had bad relations with her mother Smt. Vidyawati Mehra which
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.34

according to her, was evidenced by the fact that she filed Suit
No.773/1992 through Smt. Prem Lata Aggarwal, Advocate who was
opposing the deceased in the tenants' eviction case.

It has been

established on record that the deceased Smt. Vidyawati Mehra had
sued the tenant in the property and had sought his eviction.

Smt.

Prem Lata Aggarwal, Advocate was representing the tenant against
Smt. Vidyawati Mehra in this eviction proceedings against the Babu
Lal & Pritam Singh. In her deposition, Smt. Shama Rani has stated
that Smt. Vidyawati Mehra had filed false cases against the tenant.
84. Yet, as per Smt. Shama Rani, Smt. Vidyawati Mehra alone used
to attend the cases filed by her against her tenant accompanied by
the petitioner Shri V.K. Mehra and that some time Mr. P. Chandra
Sekharan

accompanied her.

She has also stated that the case

against the tenant Babu Lal was pending at the time of death of Smt.
Vidyawati Mehra and on the basis of the Will set up by the petitioner,
he was substituted as legal

heirs in these proceedings in August,

1994.
She also admits that she did not ask her mother before filing this
suit.
85. In my view, this plaint, a vital piece of evidence, completely
negates the case of the respondent nos.2, 3 and 5 with regard to the
sickness of the deceased in 1988. There is no evidence to show that
it was filed with her consent or concurrence.
Probate Case No.25/2000

From the statement
Page No.35

made by Smt. Shama Rani in her cross-examination, it also
demolishes their case that this plaint evidences bad relations between
the mother and her son (that is the petitioner) for the reason that the
plaint was not signed by the deceased.
86. The respondent nos.3 & 5 have sought to challenge the Will on
the plea that the deceased did not share cordial relations with the
petitioner and for this reason, she could not have made the bequest in
her favour. Smt. Shama Rani, DW-1 has admitted that the petitioner,
his wife and children lived together along with Smt. Vidyawati Mehra
in the same house till her death and also that the petitioner's son
would stay with his grand mother, Smt. Vidyawati Mehra in the
absence of the petitioner and his wife.
She has stated that the petitioner spent Rs.1,00,000/- on the
treatment of Shri Vidyawati Mehra at the time she had paralytic
attack in 1988 till she died and later got the same reimbursed. She
also admitted that Shri Vijay K. Mehra, the petitioner used to
accompany the mother for attending the court cases, bank and also
for attending social functions and to visit relatives and friends.
Smt.

Shama

Rani,

DW-1

has

thus

made

vague

and

unsubstantiated allegations that the petitioner had bad relations with
the deceased or that he had threatened her and obtained her
signatures on blank paper.
87.

Ms. Manju Vij, DW-3, who is the respondent no.3 in this petition,

Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.36

in her testimony has stated that the deceased Smt. Vidyawati Mehra
was accompanied by the petitioner when they attended the Terhvi &
Pagri Rasam of her mother-in-law.

She also confirmed that her

mother had got the name of the petitioner included as a joint holder
of her locker during her lifetime. She identified the signatures of Smt.
Vidyawati Mehra on Exh.PW-1/6 (also marked Exh.P-3) and Exh.PW1/7 and PW-1/5. The witness also confirmed that the petitioner used
to take Smt. Vidyawati Mehra to different hospitals and major care of
the deceased was done by the petitioner who also bore the expenses
of any of the treatment. Amongst others, the objector stated that the
deceased received treatment in the Jeevan Nursing Home, Batra
Hospital and Pant Hospital. This witness made a positive statement
that the relations between the petitioner and mother were cordial and
that they had a common kitchen.
88. A copy of the ration card showing that the deceased along with
the petitioner and his family were having a joint ration card has been
proved as Exh.PW-1/4.

The witness from the Food & Supplies

Department produced the muster register of ration card the relevant
extract whereof has been proved as Exh.P-4.
89. It has come in the evidence of respondent nos.2 to 5 that neither
the mother nor any of objectors have lodged any complaint against
any of the alleged acts and threats mentioned in the objections.
90. From the testimony of DW-1/2 & 3, it is an admitted fact by all
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.37

the parties that the petitioner and his family looked after the
deceased Smt. Vidyawati Mehra.

It is also established that the

petitioner took his mother for treatment to various hospitals including
the Jeevan Nursing Home, Apolo Hospital and Batra Hospital and that
he spent the money on her treatment and that the mother took care
of the children of the petitioner while he and his wife were away to
work; that they had a common kitchen, cooked the same food in the
same utensils. There was no acrimony between them. The mother's
trust in her son is manifested from the statement that she looked to
the petitioner to accompany her to court proceedings and that she
had included his name as a joint locker holder.
91. There is thus credibility in the case which has been set up by the
petitioner.

It has been conclusively established that the deceased

executed the document dated 1st January, 1989 as her last Will and
testament which was attested by two witnesses in her presence. The
petitioner was not even present at that time. The Will was retained
by one of the witnesses who as per the instructions of the deceased,
made the same known only after her death. The respondent no.5 has
herself stated that she learnt about the Will for the first time when
Terhavi ceremony was being performed after the demise of the
mother.
92. In Joyce Primrose Prestor (Mrs.) (Nee Vas) Vs. Vera Marie
Vas (Ms) and Others (supra), the court also noticed that there was
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.38

absolutely no cross examination on the various aspects stated by the
witness regarding the due execution and the attestation of the Will as
extracted hereinabove. It was held that the objectors had failed to
prove that there were any suspicious circumstances surrounding the
Will and there was no evidence to show that the plaintiff exercised
undue influence over the testatrix.
Non-registration of a Will would by itself not render the same as
suspicious (Ref: AIR 1954 SC 280 Ishwardeo Narain Singh vs.
Smt.Kamta Devi & Ors.)
93. As noticed above, it has been repeatedly held that the onus of
proving the Will is on the propounder and in the absence of suspicious
circumstances surrounding the execution of the Will, proof of
testamentary capacity and proof of signatures of the testator as
required by law, are sufficient to discharge the onus of proof.

In

(2005) 1 SCC 280 Meenakshiammal (Dead) Through LRs & Ors.
v. Chandrasekaran & Anr., the court enumerated further instances
of suspicious circumstances. The onus is the propounder to explain
the legitimate suspicion to the satisfaction of the court before it
accepts the Will as genuine.

If the propounder takes a prominent

part in the execution of the Will which confers a substantial benefit on
him, the propounder is required to remove the doubts by clear and
satisfactory evidence. In this behalf, the court held thus:"16. We do not find any merit in this civil appeal. The
onus of proving the will is on the propounder and in
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.39

the absence of suspicious circumstances surrounding
the execution of the will, proof of testamentary
capacity and proof of the signature of the testator, as
required by law, is sufficient to discharge the onus.
Where, however, there are suspicious circumstances,
the onus is on the propounder to explain them to the
satisfaction of the court before it accepts the will as
genuine. Even where the circumstances give rise to
doubts, it is for the propounder to satisfy the
conscience of the court. The suspicious circumstances
may be regarding the genuineness of the signature of
the testator, the condition of the testator's mind, the
disposition made in the will being unnatural,
improbable or unfair in the light of relevant
circumstances, or there might be other indications in
the will to show that the testator's mind was not free.
In such a case, the court would normally expect that
all legitimate suspicions should be completely
removed before the document is accepted as the last
Will of testator.
xxx
19. In the case of Chinmoyee Saha Vs. Debendra Lal
Saha it has been held that if the propounder takes a
prominent part in the execution of the will, which
confers a substantial benefit on him, the propounder is
required to remove the doubts by clear and
satisfactory evidence. Once the propounder proves
that the Will was signed by the testator, that he was at
the relevant time in a sound disposing state of mind,
that he understood the nature and effect of the
disposition and put his signature out of his own free
will, and that he signed it in presence of the witnesses
who attested it in his presence, the onus, which rests
on the propounder, is discharged and when allegation
of undue influence, fraud or coercion is made by the
caveator, the onus is on the caveator to prove the
same.
20. In the case of Ryali Kameshwara Rao Vs.
Bendapudi Suryaprakasarao the Court while discussing
the provisions of Section 63 of the Succession Act,
1925, has held that the suspicion alleged must be one
inherent in the transaction itself and not the doubt
that may arise from conflict of testimony which
becomes apparent on an investigation of the
transaction. That suspicious circumstances cannot be
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.40

defined precisely.
They cannot be enumerated
exhaustively. They must depend upon the facts of
each case. When a question arises as to whether a
will is genuine or forged, normally the fact that nothing
can be said against the reasonable nature of its
provisions will be a strong and material element in
favour of the probabilities of the will. Whether a will
has been executed by the testator in a sound and
disposing state of mind is purely a question of fact,
which will h ave to be decided in each case on the
circumstances disclosed and the nature and quality of
the evidence adduced. When the will is alleged to
have been executed under undue influence, the onus
of proving undue influence is upon the person making
such allegation and mere presence of motive and
opportunity are not enough."
94. It would be apposite and useful to consider the observations of
the Apex Court in (2002) 2 SCC 85 = AIR 2002 SC 637 Madhukar
D. Shende Vs. Tarabai Aba Shedage wherein the court laid down
the principles thus:"8. The requirement of proof of a Will is the same as
any other document excepting that the evidence
tendered in proof of a Will should additionally satisfy
the requirement of Section 63 of the Indian Succession
Act, 1925 and Section 68 of the Indian Evidence Act,
1872. If after considering the matters before it, the
facts and circumstances as emanating from the
material available on record of a given case, the court
either believes that the Will was duly executed by the
testator or considers the existence of such fact so
probable that any productive person ought, under the
circumstances of that particular case, to act upon the
supposition that the Will was duly executed by the
testator, then the factum of execution of Will shall be
said to have been proved. The delicate structure of
proof framed by a judicially trained mind cannot stand
on weak foundation nor survive any inherent defects
therein but at the same time sought not to be
permitted to be demolished by wayward pelting of
stones of suspicion and supposition by wayfarers and
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.41

waylayers. What was told by Baron Alderson to the
jury in R. Vs. Hodge may be apposite to some extent:
"The mind was apt to take a pleasure in
adapting circumstances to one another and
even in straining them a little, if need be, to
force them to form parts of one connected
whole, and the m ore ingenuous the mind of
the individual, the more likely was it,
considering such matters, to overreach and
mislead itself, to supply some little link that
is wanting, to take for granted some fact
consistent with the previous theories and
necessary to render them complete."
The conscience of the court has to be satisfied by
the propounder of the will adducing evidence so as to
dispel any suspicions or unnatural circumstances
attaching to a will provided that there are something
unnatural or suspicious about the will. the law of
evidence does not permit conjecture or suspicion
having the place of legal proof nor permit them to
demolish a fact otherwise proved by legal and
convincing evidence. Well-founded suspicion maybe a
ground floor closure scrutiny of evidence but suspicion
alone cannot form the foundation of a judicial verdict positive or negative.
9.
It is well settled that one who propounds a will
must establish the competences of the testator to
make the will at the time when it was executed. The
onus is discharged by the propounder adducing prima
facie evidence proving the competence of the testator
and execution of the will in the manner contemplated
bylaw. The contestant opposing the will may bring
material on record meeting such prima facie case in
which event the onus would shift back on the
propounder to satisfy the court affirmatively that the
testator did know well the contents of the will and in
sound disposing capacity one would leave no room for
suspicion, assume significance. If there is nothing
unnatural about the transaction and the evidence
adduced satisfies the requirement of proving a will,
the court would not return a finding of "not proved"
merely on account of certain assumed suspicion or
supposition who are the persons propounding and
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.42

supporting a will as against the person disputing the
will and the pleadings of the parties would be relevant
and of significance."
95. It is equally well settled that genuineness of a Will is required to
be provided by primary evidence except where the court permits its
proof by secondary evidence.

The suspicious circumstances are

required to be removed by the propounder.

However, in case a

person alleges a will as being forged or obtained under undue
influence or coercion, the onus to prove the same shifts to the person
who so alleges. It was so held by the Apex Court in (2005) 1 SCC 40
Daulat Ram & Ors. Vs. Sodha & Ors.
96. In JT 2006 (1) SC 225 Mathew Oommen Vs. Suseela
Mathew, the Apex Court held that there is no requirement in law that
a scribe cannot be an attesting witness to the will. It was held that
what is required is an intention to bequeath. In this case, one of the
circumstances mentioned by the respondent for challenging the Will is
that the beneficiary never applied for probate or for mutation of the
property soon after the death of the father. It was held that this was
no reason to dislodge the will.
97. A bequest of the entire estate to a widowed daughter who lost
her husband at an early stage to the exclusion of all daughters by the
testatrix mother was upheld in AIR 2003 SC 3109 Ramabai
Padmakar Patil (dead) by LRs and others Vs. Rukminibai
Vishnu Vekhande & Ors.
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.43

In this case the court observed that if the background in which
the Will was executed examined carefully that it would be apparent
that the bequest in favour of the widowed daughter was the most
natural conduct of the mother and that giving of equal shares to all
the daughters would have entailed a serious hardship to the plaintiff
who was living with her for over 20 years and looking after her. It was
also noticed that the other daughters were living at different places
with their husbands whereas the mother had merely made a provision
for a widowed daughter who had been left a destitute on account of
death of her husband at an early stage.
98. Mr. Arvind Nigam, learned counsel for the petitioner has also
adverted to the conduct of the respondent who is stated to have
displayed greed in the property towards which end she had filed Suit
No.1535/1993 for partition which was transferred to the District Court
and was then registered as Suit No.641/1996.

In this suit, Smt.

Shama Rani had sought partition of the estate of Late Smt. Vidyawati
Mehra on the plea that she had died intestate.

This suit was

dismissed for default of appearance on 15th March, 1996. Smt. Shama
Rani then filed an IA No.76/1996 therein for restoration which was
dismissed on 13th December, 2006. The respondents thereafter filed
FAO No.72/1977 assailing the aforenoticed order which was also
dismissed for default of appearance.
99. The petitioner contends that the respondents also instigated
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.44

Smt. Neeru Khurana, respondent no.4 herein, to file the suit for
partition which was registered as Suit No.43/1997 and, as noticed
hereinabove, was transferred to this court and registered as CS (OS)
No.1354/2005. Subsequently, the same has been withdrawn by her.
100. The petitioner has contended that the mother of the parties did
not have cordial relations with Smt. Shama Rani, respondent no.5 and
that she did not even attend the function which was celebrated on the
occasion of birth of her son. It is in evidence that were not attending
functions hosted by each other. Smt Shama Rani has deposted that
she did not know her mother's signatures and has attributed
falsehood to her.
101. From the above, the irresistible conclusion thus is that there is
no substance in the contention of the objectors that relations between
the petitioner and his deceased mother were acrimonious that the
petitioner influenced the execution of the Will.
102. It is trite that though it is a duty of the propounder of the Will to
remove all the suspect features but there must be real, genuine and
valid suspicious features and not the fantasy of the doubting mind.
In this behalf, in AIR 1995 SC 1852 PPK Gopalan Nambiar Vs.
PPK Balakrishnan Nambiar & Ors., it was held that the factum of
giving the whole estate to the son under the Will depriving two

Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.45

daughters was by itself not a suspicious circumstance.
103. The deceased Smt. Vidyawati Mehra was cohabiting with her son
and his family. From the evidence on record, he was devoted to her.
She had faith and trust in him. The objectors did not seem to share a
close relationship with their mother. One of the admitted fact is that
she had not seen her mother for years. There is therefore nothing
unnatural in the bequest made by the deceased in favour of her only
son without bequeathing any part of her estate in favour of her
daughters.
104. It is equally well settled that if the propounder succeeds in
removing the suspicious circumstance, the court would have to give
effect to the will even if the Will might be unnatural, in the sense that
it has cut off wholly, or in part, real relations (Ref: AIR 1972 SC 2492
Pushpavati & Ors. Vs. chandraja Kadamba & Ors.); (1995) 4
SCC 459 Rabindranath Mukherjee & Ors. Vs. Panchanan
Banerjee (Dead) by LRs & Ors.)
105. In Joyce Primrose Prestor (Mrs.) (Nee Vas) Vs. Vera Marie
Vas (Ms) and Others (supra), the court also noticed that there was
absolutely no cross examination on the various aspects stated by the
witness regarding the due execution and the attestation of the Will as
extracted hereinabove. It was held that the objectors had failed to
prove that there were any suspicious circumstances surrounding the
Will and there was no evidence to show that the plaintiff exercised
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.46

undue influence over the testatrix.
Before this court also there is nothing to establish any suspicious
circumstance in execution of the Will.
106. In view of the foregoing discussion, in my view, the Will dated
1st of January, 1989 (Exh. PW 6/1) in question satisfies the
requirement of Section 63 of the Succession Act as well as Sections
67-68 of the Evidence Act. The petitioner has discharged the onus on
him for proving that the Will was executed and attested by the
deceased in sound and disposing mind without any force, pressure or
influence and in accordance with law.
The issue no.1 framed on 2nd November, 2001 is therefore
answered in favour of the petitioner.
107. The valuation of the immovable property has been placed by the
Chief Revenue Controlling Authority on record who has valued the
immovable property at Rs.20,00,680/-. The petitioner has proved the
list of assets of the deceased from the office of the Deputy
Commissioner, South Delhi as Exh.PW-1/3.

The petitioner has

detailed several movable properties in Annexure – C and have been
valued at Rs.8,000,000/- which form part of the estate of the
deceased.

These valuations of the immovable and movable

properties are accepted.
In this view of the matter, this petition is allowed.
The petitioner is granted probate of the Will dated 1st January,
Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.47

1989 subject to payment of the requisite court fee in accordance with
law and furnishing personal bond with one surety to the satisfaction of
the Registrar General.
The petitioner shall be entitled to costs which are quantified at
Rs.60,000/- payable by the respondent nos.2, 3 and 5. Costs shall be
payable within four weeks from today.

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
November 12, 2007
aa

Probate Case No.25/2000

Page No.48

