IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
I.A. No. 12993/2006 in CS (OS) No. 2172/2006
Date of decision: 12th October, 2007
INDU JAIN
.... Plaintiff
through: Mr.Rajiv Nayar, Sr. Adv. with Mr. K. Datta,
Mr. Ashish Verma and Mr. Nitin Jain, Advs.
VERSUS
FORBES INCORPORATED
....Defendant
through: Mr. Soli J. Sorabjee, Sr. Adv. with
Ms. Malvika Rajkotia, Mr. Daniel Mathew,
Ms. Sushmita Dev, Ms. G. Gushwani,
Ms. Ardita RAi, Ms. Arpita Rai,
Ms. Rohini Sinha and Ms. Gargi Hazarika,
Advs. for the defendant nos. 7-11
Mr. Neeraj Kishan Kaul, Sr. Adv. with
Mr. Surendra Mann, Mr. Jannanjay Rai,
Mr. Sumeet Mehta, Ms. Anu Bagai and
Ms. K. Enatoli Sema, Advs. for the defendant
nos. 2-6
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J
1.

The plaintiff has raised interesting questions of law and facts

relating to entitlement to injunction on a claim of breach of her right
to privacy in the present application under Order 39 Rule 1 and 2 of
the Code of Civil Procedure praying for grant of an ad interim
injunction prohibiting the defendants from effecting publications
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

1

relating to the plaintiff in their publication or posting information
about her on their website.
2.

The suit has been filed against Forbes Incorporated, a company

registered in the U.S.A.

M/s Forbes Asia has been arrayed as

defendant no. 2 which is also a company having its registered office at
Singapore.

The defendant nos. 3 to 6 are the President and

Publisher, Editor, Contributing Editor and the Wealth List Editor
respectively of the defendant no. 2. It has been pointed out that
defendant no. 5 Ms. Naazneen Karmali, the Contributing Editor of
defendant no.2 and Ms. Luisa Kroll, Wealth List Editor of defendant
no. 2 have been in touch via e-mails with the plaintiff's
representatives who had been repeatedly instructed not to carry any
news article pertaining to the plaintiff. The defendant nos. 7 to 11 are
the President and Editor in-chief; Director; Chief Operating Officer;
President and Publisher; and the Publisher respectively of the
defendant no. 1.
3.

In order to appreciate the issues raised, it would be appropriate

to set out the facts on record leading upto the filing of the present
application. The plaintiff is the widow of Late Shri Ashok Kumar Jain
who was the erstwhile Chairman of Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd.
(hereinafter referred to as 'BCCL'). After his death in February, 1999,
the plaintiff was appointed as the Chairman of the company. Apart
from such appointment, the plaintiff is stated to be engaged in

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

2

various spiritual, social and philanthropic causes for a number of
years.
4.

It is necessary to notice a preliminary objection raised by the

defendant to the territorial jurisdiction of this court to entertain and
adjudicate upon the subject matter of the suit. This objection is
principally based on the fact that none of the defendants are residing
in or work for gain within the territorial jurisdiction of this court and
consequently, it has been urged that this court would not have
jurisdiction on the subject matter of the suit.
5.

I find that the plaint states that the publication of the

defendants which has been complained against in the suit has been
circulated in Delhi and also that the offending website is accessible in
Delhi.

Under Section 20(c) of the Code of Civil Procedure, the

jurisdiction of the court extends to where the cause of action, wholly
or in part, arises. Prima facie, it is not possible to return findings on
this issue which shall be decided with the suit.
6.

The plaintiff has urged that she learnt from certain members of

BCCL's corporate team that the defendant no.2 was planning to
publish an issue on Indian Billionaires and that the defendant was
proposing to include the plaintiff in such issue.
Mr. Gopal Mohan, General Manager (Corporate) of the Times
of India Group sent an E-mail dated 5th December, 2005 to the
defendant nos. 4 and 8 dated 5th December, 2005 raising an

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

3

objection to the promoters and shareholders of BCCL being featured
in the defendant's issue of the Indian billionaires.
It was objected that the information would be speculative in
nature; that it would disturb the shareholders' right to privacy; that
the promoters of BCCL are not interested in being featured; that
BCCL is a family run business and the control of the business rests
with the head of the family; that the promoters of BCCL have never
undertaken valuation of their assets or share holdings and
consequently, valuation of the wealth of the company or its promoters
would be fraught with inaccuracies verging on wealth speculation and
gossip; that there were security risks involved in assessing the wealth
of promoters and putting them in the public domain; and lastly the
promoters are particular about protecting their individual privacy
and treat themselves as ordinary Indian citizens.
7.

Despite these objections, Mr. Gopal Mohan also wrote to the

defendants that the magazine could go ahead and feature the
promotors of BCCL on any rich list. However, they reserved their
rights to defend themselves and seek damages.
8.

The defendants replied to this e-mail through Ms. Lynn

Oberlander, Editor Counsel by an e-mail of the same date i.e. 6th
December, 2005. This communication informed Mr. Gopal Mohan of
an 'upcoming issue of Forbes Asia' wherein individuals worth more
than 1 billion dollars would be included in the March 27, 2006 issue.

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

4

It also informed the addressee that the basis of the defendant's wealth
estimate was extensive research, interviews with experts and public
filings. In case of private companies, valuations were derived in part,
from the value of comparable public companies'. The defendants
denied that the estimates were speculative or only in the nature of
idle gossip.

It was also intimated that in order to preserve the

legitimacy of the reporting, individuals who deserve to be on the list
could not opt out. The defendant invited Mr. Gopal Mohan to review
any information which he would like to share to better refine the
defendants' analysis as also to discuss the BCCL valuation.

The

deadline for further information was also indicated inasmuch as the
e-mail informed Mr. Mohan that the issue was going to the printers
on the thursday of that week.
9.

This e-mail elicited a prompt reply from Mr. Gopal Mohan on

the 6th December, 2005 itself, to Ms. Luisa Kroll, defendant no. 6
and Ms. Oberlander reiterating that BCCL was a closely held
company which had never been listed in any study, survey or ranking
of rich list and that any attempt to value the company based on
comparable media business would be unfounded and unfair, and that
the BCCL or its promoters cannot be reduced to a statistical
compilation based on market estimates. Despite these objections,
information with regard to the BCCL and the plaintiff was thus
disclosed:-

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

5

“...With regard to the individual driving the
company, BCCL being a family run
business, Mrs. Indu Jain, who is the head
of the joint family, is the Chairman of the
company. Her two sons, Messrs. Samir and
Vineet Jain run the business in their respective
areas of interest and expertise, jointly working
towards the goals and objectives set by Mrs. Indu
Jain. All public honours and felicitation has
been always bestowed on Mrs. Indu Jain,
in business and in society. This is in keeping
with Indian social customs, where while the
younger members carry the business forward, it is
the heads of families that are in command.
Ownership of the business vests in Mrs.
Indu Jain apart from the stake held by a number
of investor companies, who are promoters within
Indian regulation.”
10.

(Emphasis supplied)
I find here that Mr. Gopal Mohan has noticed the methodology

adopted by the defendant without at all disputing the defendant's
version or method of valuation of individual wealth and confined the
plaintiffs' objection to issues of public safety, individual security and
privacy of the families in India. An emphasis was laid on threat to
individual security.
A specific request was made to the defendant to desist from
featuring the company and its share holders in the forthcoming rich
list. At the same time, Mr. Gopal Mohan wrote that in case the
defendant was going ahead to publish its findings, then “it should list
only the name of our Chairman, Mrs. Indu Jain, names of junior
members of her family should please not be listed as owners or coowners. This, however, is without prejudice to our right to privacy

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

6

and the right to verify the authenticity of your model and approach to
valuation.”
11.

It is important that despite this communication, neither BCCL

nor the plaintiff at this stage approached this court for seeking any
prohibitory relief of injunction against the publication of such list
featuring the promotors.
12.

It has become necessary to closely examine the contents of the

communications from the plaintiff in view of the vehement objection
taken on behalf of the plaintiff to the effect that she is not a share
holder of the BCCL and hence has no connection with it. This was the
graveman of the plaintiff's case before the court and long arguments
have been addressed on this issue. As a corollary it is essential to also
examine as to whether these communications which have been placed
on record and relied upon as pre-publication objections by her to the
defendants, can be so treated and their impact on the present case.
13.

All the communications which have been relied upon by the

plaintiff have been addressed by the General Manager (Corporate)
and other senior and responsible executives in the Times of India
Group which is owned and managed by BCCL of which the plaintiff is
the Chairman.

The communications and the e-mails just noted

hereinabove, clearly indicate to the defendant that in case it was
featuring a BCCL ownership in its rich list, it should not feature the
“company and its shareholders” and that it should list only the name

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

7

of the Chairman, Mrs. Indu Jain. The `right to privacy' which was
urged, was on behalf of Times of India Group.

Ms. Luisa Kroll,

defendant no. 6 by the e-mail of 7th December, 2005 provided the
information in respect of the plaintiff which the defendant was going
to include in their publication which was going to press on 8th
December, 2005. On behalf of the defendant, Ms. Lynn Oberlander,
Editorial Counsel confirmed to Mr. Gopal Mohan that the defendants
were planning on including the Jains in the list of wealthiest people
in India and that they would list Ms. Indu Jain as the head of the
family and the owner of the business.
14.

In answer to these communications, on 8th December, 2005,

Mr. Gopal Mohan addressed yet another extended e-mail to Ms. Lyan
Oberlander; Mr. Tim Ferguson, defendant no. 4; Mr. Stewart
Pinkerton, defendant no. 8; and Ms. Naazneen Karmali, defendant
no. 5, giving additional information on the Times Group which he felt
may be more relevant to the defendant's report. This e-mail runs into
several pages wherein Mr. Mohan extensively described the growth of
BCCL, its constituents, its interest as well as its
associates.

international

It was also indicated that as part of corporate social

responsibility of the group, the Times group supports and organizes
training and development programmes through its spiritual and
social arm, The Times Foundation etc. Several graphs and charts
were enclosed setting out the business interests of the group and their

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

8

development, its publications and its activities. While concluding,
Mr. Gopal Mohan again informed the defendant thus:“....Once again we request you to desist from
featuring us. However if you still go ahead and
publish your findings in recognition of your
lawful right to write on us, you should list
only the name of Mrs. Indu Jain. Names of
junior members of the family should not be listed as
owners/co-owners.
On our part we will continue to co-operate
with you so that there are no inaccuracies, factual or
otherwise, in the best interest of your publication as
well as in the interest of your readers.”
(Emphasis
added)
In fact, the correspondence from the officers of the Times of
India Group cited the growing circulation figures of its various
publications and activities and the growing profits from the various
activities undertaken by the BCCL group.
15.

In yet another e-mail of 8th December, 2005, Mr. Gopal Mohan

clarified

a few points to Ms. Luisa Kroll on the factual aspects

communicated by her. Other than a correction in the plaintiff's birth
date, no details with regard to the valuation or the wealth assessment
of the plaintiff were given.
Mr. Mohan wanted the plaintiff to be described not as a widow
but as a family matriarch and that the names of her sons should not
be mentioned.

The plaintiff at this point had clear knowledge that

the defendants were going to feature a rich list in which they planned
to list the plaintiff.
Mr. Gopal Mohan even advanced best wishes for the coming
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

9

issue of the defendants while exchanging pleasantries with the
defendant. Mr. Sorabjee, learned senior counsel has pointed out that
the comfort level of the plaintiff and Mr. Mohan with the publication
is apparent from the mode of address and the tenor of the
correspondence.
16.

Despite these communications, exercising care and caution, Ms.

Luisa Kroll addressed yet another e-mail on the 8th of December,
2005 to Mr. Gopal Mohan notifying the short bio-data of the plaintiff
available with the defendants so that he may have a chance to correct
errors, if any.
17.

Based on the information received in the above e-mails and the

method of calculation intimated by the defendants, the defendant
effected publication of an article on 26th December, 2005 in the
Forbes Asia publication which was titled as 'India's Forty Richest'.
This article mentioned that it was Forbes Asia's second annual list
of the 40 richest Indians. The methodology which was adopted by
the defendant in arriving at the net worth of the persons who featured
in this list was disclosed in the article in a block in capitals which
reads thus:“Methodology: Unlike Forbes millionaires list, this
ranking has been broadened to include family
fortunes for people with fortunes in publicly traded
companies, net worths were calculated using recent
market prices and exchange rates privately held
companies are valued by coupling estimates of
revenues or profits (or in some cases, company
provided numbers) to prevailing ratios for similar
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

10

18.

publicly traded companies.”
In this list, the plaintiff featured at Sr. No. 17 and the following

information was disclosed about her:-

19.

“17. Indu Jain - $ 1.7 billion
Matriarch of privately owned Bennett, Coleman &
Co., India's largest and most powerful media house,
run by sons Samir and Vineet. The family's
flagship holding, The Times of India, is the world's
largest circulated English daily newspaper, selling
more than 3.1 million copies a day. The company
also has joint ventures with the BBC and Reuters.”
The plaintiff did not seek any injunctive relief against the

defendants publishing this list even though the defendants had
clearly indicated their intention to do so in the afore-noticed prepublication communications. Even after the publication had been
effected, the plaintiff did not raise any kind of objection to either her
name being featured or the information which was published by the
defendants.

Nor infringement of right of privacy on grounds of

private information or peril to security was urged. No damages claim
was either made.
There is no objection or complaint against this publication even
in the plaint which has been filed before this court.
20.

Long after this publication, Ms. Naazneen Karmali, defendant

no. 5 addressed an e-mail on the 6th of February, 2006 to Mr. Gopal
Mohan informing him that the defendants were now working on the
up-coming `Global List of Billionaires' feature in which the plaintiff
would be featured as well.

The defendant no.5 disclosed certain

information and sought confirmation of the figures.
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

11

Further,

information with regard to the key developments in the Group since
November, 2005 as also bio-graphical details of the plaintiff were
sought.
21.

This e-mail received a reply dated 17th February, 2006

expressing reluctance of “Our Group or Ms. Indu Jain” to be covered.
Yet Mr. Gopal Mohan emphasised that respecting the journalistic
independence and privileges of the defendants, he was giving the
information which had been sought. He confirmed the figures which
had been indicated by the defendant and details of the key
development and the bio-graphical details of the plaintiff.
22.

Interestingly, there is no complaint to any part of the

publication effected on 26th December, 2005 by the defendants. A
classic instance of blowing hot and cold in the same breath, on the
one hand Mr. Gopal Mohan informs the defendants that they may
adopt the figures mentioned by the defendant; discloses further
information including facts relating to the training of the plaintiff in
the management of the family run large business empire, yet conveys
reluctance to be covered in the proposed publication.
23.

The plaint is replete with the contentions of the plaintiff that the

e-mails which have been filed on record were sent 'on her
instructions'. The e-mails which have been addressed to Mr. Gopal
Mohan are stated to have been received by the plaintiff. It therefore
has to be presumed and held that the plaintiff was clearly in the know

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

12

of things and fully aware of the entire correspondence being
exchanged by the senior executives of the BCCL with the defendants.
24.

The defendants thereafter effectuated a second publication

in the Forbes Asia on the 27th March, 2006 titled Billionairs Asia Pacific. In this issue, it has published a list of billionaires in
the Asia Pacific region which includes Australia, India, New Zealand,
China etc. The plaintiff, Ms. Indu Jain, featured at Sr. No. 317 and
her net worth (SBIL) was reflected as 2.4 billion dollars.
25.

Noteworthy is the fact that this list also provoked no objection

or protest from the plaintiff. No lis for either injunction or damages
was brought.
26.

On the 9th November, 2006, Ms. Naazneen Karmali, defendant

no. 5 addressed an e-mail to Mr. Gopal Mohan informing him that
the defendant's fact checker had been trying to reach Mr. Mohan for
the last week and was awaiting a response to e-mails sent by him. It
was also pointed out that though the facts relating to the plaintiff's
bio-data were checked when the previous list was published, yet since
the defendants were going to press that day, an early reply was
solicited. In this communication, information regarding the plaintiff
as available with the defendants was also disclosed.
27.

Mr. Gopal Mohan's reply of 12th November, 2006 was

repetitive. For the first time it was however, stated that in the earlier
issue the information attributing her net worth of 2.4 billion dollars

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

13

and her fortune was incorrect, that this figure does not bear
resemblance to the actual facts and that Ms. Indu Jain's security was
breached. Mr. Gopal Mohan called upon the defendant not to publish
anything about “Our Group or Ms. Indu Jain” since neither plaintiff
nor Mr. Gopal Mohan would like to such information or statement to
be covered in any publication. Asserting breach of privacy by such
publication, right was reserved by the plaintiff to defend and seek
damages in case publication of the information was effected.
28.

Taking note of the fact that Mr. Gopal Mohan did not respond

or give any information as to what according to the plaintiff or him
was her net worth, Ms. Luisa Kroll, defendant no. 6 addressed
another clarificatory e-mail dated 13th November, 2006.

It was

explained as to why information about her net worth was given as
inherited as the defendants were under the impression that she had
inherited her fortune and the defendants sought a feedback on their
valuations of the plaintiff's net worth. The defendant no. 6 informed
Mr. Gopal Mohan that the defendants had spoken with experts so as
to effectuate valuation of the media business and were feeling
comfortable with the figures and their assessment.

Specific

comments were asked from him.
29.

After exchanging this correspondence with the plaintiff's

representatives, the defendants effected a third publication titled
'India's Forty Richest' in the 27th November, 2006 issue of the

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

14

Forbes Asia. This publication stated that India's rising fortunes were
underscored by the increasing prosperity of its wealthiest citizens.
The defendants disclosed the methodology adopted for
assessing the fortune and had stated that ranking had been
broadened to include family fortunes. It was also indicated that the
privately held companies are valued by coupling estimates of
revenues or profits (or in some cases, company provided numbers) to
prevailing ratios for similar publicly traded companies.
30.

Based on the method so disclosed in the publication and to the

plaintiff's representatives, the plaintiff Ms. Indu Jain featured at
serial no. 15 in the list. The plaintiff has not objected to any aspect of
this publication other than the fact that her fortune was indicated at 3
billion dollars. Besides, the printed information, the defendants also
printed a picture of the plaintiff.
31.

Against this publication, on or about 22nd November, 2006 the

plaintiff filed the present suit seeking a relief of permanent
prohibitory

injunction

against

the

defendants

from

including/featuring the name of the plaintiff in any issue of their
magazine or on their website as the part of any survey conducted by
the defendants or as a next article or otherwise. The plaintiff also
sought a decree of permanent injunction restraining the defendants
from

using

or

publishing

information/data/document

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

in

any

manner

whatsoever

any

in their power and possession in

15

relation to the plaintiff and a direction to the defendants to withdraw
the name, details and photographs of the plaintiff from their website
and to withdraw the unsold copies of the 27th November, 2006
edition of the magazine which included the name and details of the
plaintiff.
defendants

A decree for mandatory injunction commanding the
to

deliver

up

to

the

plaintiff

all

information/data/documents that was with them regarding the
plaintiff was also prayed. So far as damages
were concerned, the plaintiff has prayed for a decree of token
damages in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendants jointly
and/or severally in the sum of Rs.21 lakhs with pendente lite future
interest at the rate of 18%.
32.

Alongwith plaint, the plaintiff also made the present application

under Order 39 Rule 1 & 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure praying for
grant of interim injunction against the defendants.

On hearing

counsel for the plaintiff and based on such material as was placed
before the court, by an order passed on 23rd November, 2006 an
exparte injunction restraining the defendants, their agents, assignees,
representatives from displaying the photographs and particulars of
the plaintiff on their website was passed.

The defendants were

further directed that they would desist from publishing the name of
the plaintiff in any further issue of any publication effected by them
or on their website.

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

The defendants have opposed grant and

16

continuation of this injunction. Both side have been heard at length
on this application.
33.

Mr. Rajiv Nayyar, learned senior counsel and Mr. Krishnendu

Datta, counsel for the plaintiff have placed the entitlement of the
plaintiff to the relief of injunction on the following submissions :(i)

The defendants have infringed the plaintiff's right to privacy,

which is implicit in the right to life and liberty guaranteed to the
citizens of this country by virtue of Article 21 of the Constitution of
India.
(ii)

The defendants have published matters relating to the plaintiff's

finances which fall within the realm of private matters without her
consent entitling her to an injunction.
(iii) The publications effected by the defendants attributing the net
worth to the plaintiff is false, fictitious and published in reckless
disregard of the truth hence reply to be injuncted against.
(iv) The defendant no. 1 being a foreign company is not entitled to
claim a fundamental right of freedom of press as enshrined under
Article 19 (1)(a) of the Constitution of India which is available to
citizens of India alone.
(v)

A person or a public figure is entitled to seek publicity about

some aspects of his/her life while restricting the same about personal
information. In the instant case information about wealth of the
plaintiff was personal to her and could not be imparted to the general

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

17

public.
(vi) The plaintiff is not the same as Bennett Coleman & Co. Limited
being a paid employee in her position as chairman and she has no
connection with the company even as a shareholder and as such she
cannot be identified with the Bennett Coleman & Co. Limited.
(vii) The publication of such private information by the defendants
impacts the security concerns of the plaintiff.
34.

On the other hand Mr. Soli Sorabjee, learned senior counsel

appearing for the defendant has urged that the entire suit claim is
based on a bald allegation that the defendants have breached the
right to privacy of the plaintiff. According to Mr. Sorabjee, such a
right is not an absolute right even to a private individual. In the case
of the plaintiff, it has been urged that the plaintiff is not a private
person and from the status and reputation enjoyed by her, she is
certainly a public person who has never shunned publicity. It is
urged that she is even widely photographed which photographs are
freely available in publications, on websites and the Times of India
photo gallery.
35.

It has been urged at great length by Mr. Sorabjee, learned

senior counsel appearing for the defendants, that in view of the
pronouncement of the Apex Court in (1994) 6 SCC 632 R.
Rajagopal & Anr. Vs. State of Tamil Nadu & Others, the right
to privacy though not expressly guaranteed, has been judicially

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

18

deduced from Article 21 as a fundamental right which right is
enforceable only against the State. Thus, the plaintiff cannot enforce
a fundamental right to privacy against the defendants who are private
individuals.
36.

It was next submitted that right to privacy is not absolute and is

necessarily to yield to the right of the public to know with regard to
persons who are newsworthy or public figures. The plaintiff being a
public personage, has in any case to that extent, waived her right to
privacy, if any.

In any event, it has been submitted that mentioning

of a persons' wealth or income is not invasion of privacy and hence, in
any case, will not entitle a person to protection thereof.
37.

Mr. Sorabjee, learned senior counsel submits that infraction of

right to privacy has to be tested on the touchstone of sensitivity of an
ordinary or reasonable person and does not extend to supersensitivity or agoraphobia.

The plaintiff has enjoyed extensive

publicity and is a Chairperson of the largest media conglomerate in
the country and hence cannot claim entitlement to seclusion in
respect of the matters on which the defendants have reported.
38.

The plaintiff through her agents and by her conduct, has

consented to the publications which have been effected by the
defendants and hence cannot seek prohibition in the nature of
injunction against further publication. Learned senior counsel has
contended that in any case, the conduct of the plaintiff in concealing

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

19

from this court the publication of the article by the defendants in
December, 2005 and its posting on the website of the Times of India
by itself would disentitle the plaintiff to any relief. A strong objection
has been raised also to the failure to disclose the mileage drawn by
the plaintiff from the defendants' publication in the articles in the
Times of India dated 16th November, 2006 as well as its analysis in
the Economic Times dated 18th November, 2006 which were also
effected by the plaintiff's business house.
39.

It is urged that in any case, it is not the plaintiff's case that the

publication has been effected maliciously or contains falsehood and
the only grievance is that the same is an inaccurate assessment of the
plaintiff's wealth. The defendants point out that their assessment is
based on material in the public domain on a formula which was
notified to the plaintiff through her agents and the plaintiff failed to
point out any inaccuracy or any other estimation and for this reason,
would be disentitled to any ad interim injunction.

For all these

reasons, it is submitted that the plaintiff is disentitled to the
imperative relief of injunction.
40.

In order to clearly set out the law and the principles on the

issues raised, the same are discussed in the following manner:I. Whether right to privacy is part of the fundamental freedoms
guaranteed under Article 21;
II.

Whether infringement of the fundamental right to privacy can

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

20

be enforced against a private citizen or body;
III.

Right to privacy: whether its infringement or invasion is

recognised as a tort;
IV.

Freedom of Press vis a vis right of an individual

against

invasion of privacy ;
V.

Whether publication can be prohibited; and principles

governing grant of injunction.
I.

Whether right to privacy is part of the fundamental

freedoms guaranteed under Article 21.
41.

There is no express provision in the Constitution of India

recognising this right in explicit terms.

However an expanded

meaning has been judicially given to personal liberty recognising
right to privacy. Such right to privacy finds initially asserted in India
against governmental invasion in two eventualities. The issue is no
longer res integra and has been clearly settled by the Apex Court. In
amongst the first cases on the subject AIR 1963 SC 1295 Kharak
Singh & Anr. Vs. State of U.P & Ors., the petitioner was put
under surveillance under Regulation 236 of the U.P. Police
Regulation which involved secret picketing of the house or
approaches to his house; domiciliary visits at night, periodical
inquiries by police officers into the repute, habits association, income
or occupation; reporting by police constables on the movement of the
person etc.

This regulation was challenged as violative of the

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

21

fundamental rights guaranteed to the petitioner.

A Seven Judge

Bench of Apex Court considered the

matter and by majority; held that the regulation was unobjectionable
except to the extent that it authorises domiciliary visits by police
officers.

This decision turned on the meaning and content of

`personal liberty' and `life' in Article
21. So far as right to privacy is concerned, the Court held thus :“17. We shall now proceed with the examination of
the width, scope and content of the expression
“personal liberty” in Art.21. Having regard to the
terms of Art.19(1)(d), we must take it that that
expression is used as not to include the right to move
about or rather of locomotion. The right to move
about being excluded its narrowest interpretation
would be that it comprehends nothing more than
freedom from physical restraint or freedom from
confinement within the bounds of a person; in other
words, freedom from arrest and detention, from false
imprisonment or wrongful confinement. We feel
unable to hold that the term was intended to bear
only this narrow interpretation but on the other hand
consider that “personal liberty” is used in the Article
as a compendious term to include within itself all the
varieties of rights which go to make up the “Personal
liberties” of man other than those dealt with in the
several clauses of Art. 19(1). In other words, while
Art.21 takes in and comprises the residue. We have
already extracted a passage from the judgment of
Field, J. in Munn v. Illinois, 94 US 113 at p. 142 where
the learned Judge pointed out that “life” in the 5th and
14th Amendments of the U.S. Constitution
corresponding to Art.21, means not merely the right
to the continuance of a person's animal existence, but
a right to the possession of each of his organs – his
arms and legs etc. We do not entertain any doubt
that the word “life” in Art. 21 bears the same
signification. Is then the word “personal liberty” to
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

22

42.

be construed as excluding from its purview an
invasion on the part of the police of the sanctity of a
man's home and an intrusion into his personal
security and his right to sleep which is the normal
comfort and a dire necessity for human existence
even as an animal? It might not be inappropriate to
refer here to the words of the preamble to the
Constitution that it is designed up “assure the dignity
of the individual” and therefore of those cherished
human values as the means of ensuring his full
development and evolution. We are referring to these
objectives of the framers merely to draw attention to
the concepts underlying the constitution which would
point to such vital words as “personal liberty” having
to be construed in a reasonable manner and to be
attributed that sense which would promote and
achieve those objections and by no means to stretch
the meaning of the phrase to sqaure with any preconceived notions or doctrinaire constitution
theories.
..................... We have no hesitation to saying that
were a State affirmatively to sanction such police
incursion into privacy it would run counter to the
guarantee of the Fourteenth Amendment”.
Murphy, J. considered that such invasion was against
“the very essence of a scheme of ordered liberty”.”
Following the judgment rendered in this case, in (1975) 2 SCC

148 Govind Vs. State of M.P. which was also a case of
surveillance under the M.P. Police Regulation, the Court elaborated
the right to privacy and held thus :
"22. We may now consider whether the State or
its officials have the authority in law to impose a
prior restraint upon publication of material
defamatory of the State or of the officials, as the
case may be? We think not. No law empowering
them to do so is brought to our notice. As
observed in New York Times v. United States,
popularly known as the Pentagon papers case,
“any system of prior restraints of (freedom of)
expression comes to this being a heavy
presumption against its constitutional validity”
and that in such cases, the Government “carries a
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

23

heavy burden of showing justification for the
imposition of such a restraint”.
We must
accordingly hold that no such prior restraint or
prohibition of publication can be imposed by the
respondents upon the proposed publication of the
alleged autobiography of “Auto Shankar” by the
petitioners. This cannot be done either by the
State or by its officials. In other words, neither
the Government nor the officials who apprehend
that they may be defamed, have the right to
impose a prior restraint upon the publication of
the alleged autobiography of Auto Shankar. The
remedy of public officials/public figures, if any,
will arise only after the publication and will be
governed by the principles indicated herein. ling
State interest test.
Privacy primarily concerns the individual. It
therefore relates to and overlaps with the concept
of liberty. The most serious advocate of privacy
must confess that there are serious problems of
defining the essence and scope of the right.
Privacy interest in autonomy must also be placed
in the context of other rights and values.
24. Any right to privacy must encompass and
protect the personal intimacies of the home, the
family, marriage, motherhood, procreation and
child rearing. This catalogue approach to the
question is obviously not as instructive as it does
not give analytical picture of the distinctive
characteristics of the right of privacy. Perhaps,
the only suggestion that can be offered as unifying
princile underlying the concept has been the
assertion that a claimed right must be a
fundamental right implicit in the concept of
ordered liberty.
25. Rights and freedoms of citizens are set forth
in the constitution in order to guarantee that the
individual, his personality and those things
stamped with his personality shall be free from
official interference except where a reasonable
basis for intrusion exists.
"Liberty against
government" a phrase coined by Professor Corwin
expresses this idea forcefully. In this sense, many
of the fundamental rights of citizens can be
described as contributing to the right to privacy.
26.
As Ely says : "There is nothing to prevent
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

24

43.

one from using the word 'privacy' to mean the
freedom to live one's life without governmental
interference. But the Court obviously does not so
use the term. Nor could it, for such a right is at
stake in every case": See "The Wages of Crying
Wolf : A comment on Roe v. Wade, 82 Yale
L.J.920, 932.
27. There are two possible theories for
protecting privacy of home. The first is that
activities in the home harm others only to the
extent that they cause offence resulting from the
mere thought that individuals might be engaging
in such activities and that such 'harm' is not
constitutionally protectible by the state. The
second is that individuals need a place of
sanctuary where they can be free from societal
control. The importance of such a sanctuary is
that individuals can drop the mask, desist for a
while from projecting on the world the image they
want to be accepted as themselves, an image that
may reflect the values of their peers rather than
the realities of their natures.
28. The right to privacy in any event will
necessarily have to go through a process of case
by case development. Therefore, even assuming
that the right to personal liberty, the right to move
freely throughout the territory of India and the
freedom of speech create an independent right of
privacy as an emanation from them which one can
characterize as a fundamental right, we do not
think that the right is absolute."
Right to privacy has been held by the Apex Court an essential

part of the fundamental freedoms under Article 21. The plaintiff has
placed extensive reliance on the pronouncement of the Apex Court
reported at (1997) 1 SCC 301 People's Union for Civil
Liberties v. UOI which was filed on allegations that the respondent
had violated the privacy of individuals by telephone tapping and the
right was sought to be enforced against the state. The court had held
that privacy was a human right and had made a reference to Article 17
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

25

of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1966 and
Article 12 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948.
44.

It was held that Article 17 of the International Covenant does

not go contrary to any part of a Municipal Law. Article 21 of the
Constitution of India has, therefore, to be interpreted in confirmity
with the International Law. The court also held that international law
was not confined to regulating relations between the state and that
today matters of social concern, such as health, education and the
economics apart from human rights fall within the ambit of
international regulations. In this context, it was held that freedom of
speech and expression guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a) of the
Constitution of India means the right to express one's convictions and
opinions freely by word of mouth, writing, printing, picture or in any
other manner. A person talking on a telephone is exercising his right
to such freedom of speech and expression and consequently,
telephone tapping, unless it comes within the ground of restrictions
under Article 19(2) would infract Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution
of India. The court also held that the right to privacy would certainly
include telephone conversation in the privacy of one's home or office
and consequently, telephone tapping, unless it is permitted under the
procedure established by law, would infract Article 21 of the
Constitution of India.
45.

In this case also, the right which was claimed and enforced was

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

26

a right to privacy claimed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India
against its infringement by the State or agency of the State. The
petitioner was not seeking infringement of such right against private
individuals and for this reason, would not apply to the facts and
circumstances of the instant case.
46.

So far as publication of information about a person is

concerned, the nature and extent of this right have been stated by the
Apex Court in (1994) 6 SCC 632 R. Rajagopal Vs. State of
Tamil Nadu & Ors. thus :"26. We may now summarise the broad principles
flowing from the above discussion:
(1) The right to privacy is implicit in the right to
life and liberty guaranteed to the citizens of this
country by Article 21. It is a “right to be let alone”.
A citizen has a right to safeguard the privacy of his
own, his family marriage, procreation, motherhood,
child-bearing and education among other matters.
None can publish anything concerning the above
matters without his consent – whether truthful or
otherwise and whether laudatory or critical. If he
does so, he would be violating the right to privacy of
the person concerned and would be liable in an
action for damages. Position may, however, be
different, if a person voluntarily thrusts himself into
controversy or voluntarily invites or raises a
controversy.
(2) The rule aforesaid is subject to the exception,
that any publication concerning the aforesaid
aspects becomes unobjectionable if such publication
is based upon public records including court
records. This is for the reason that once a matter
becomes a matter of public record, the right to
privacy no longer subsists and it becomes a
legitimate subject for comment by press and media
among others. We are, however, of the opinion that
in the interests of decency (Article 19(2)) an
exception must be carved out to this ru8le, viz., a
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

27

47.

female who is the victim of a sexual assault, kidnap,
abduction or a like offence should not further be
subjected to the indignity of her name and the
incident being publicised in press/media.
(3) There is yet another exception to the rule in (1)
above – indeed, this is not an exception but an
independent rule. In the case of public officials, it is
obvious, right to privacy, or for that matter, the
remedy of action for damages is simply not available
with respect to their acts and conduct relevant to the
discharge of their official duties. This is so even
where the publication is based upon facts and
statements which are not true, unless the official
establishes that the publication was made (by the
defendant) with reckless disregard for truth. In
such a case, it is not necessary for him to provide
that what he has written is true. Of course, where
the publication is proved to be false and actuated by
malice or personal animosity, the defendant would
have no defence and would be liable for damages. It
is equally obvious that in matters not relevant to the
discharge of his duties, the public officials enjoys the
same protection as any other citizen, as explained in
(1) and (2) above. It needs no reiteration that
judiciary, which is protected by the power to punish
for contempt of court and Parliament and
legislatures protected as their privileges are by
Article 105 and 104 respectively of the Constitution
of India, represent exceptions to this rule.
(4) So far as the Government, local authority and
other
organs
and
institutions
exercising
governmental power are concerned, they cannot
maintain a suit for damages for defaming them.
(5) Rules 3 and 4 do not, however, mean that
Officail Secrets Act, 1923, or any similar enactment
or provision having the force of law does not bind
the press or media.
(6) There is no law empowering the State or its
officials to prohibit, or to impose a prior restraint
upon the press/media."
It is noteworthy that a third exception has been noticed in para

18 of the judgment so far as public figures are concerned. In para 17,
commenting on decisions of the United States Supreme Court in

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

28

New York Times Vs. Sullivan referred to and followed in Time
Inc. Vs. Hill, it was noticed that there a prohibition on States'
power to award damages to public officials against critics of their
official conducts. In para 18, the Apex Court observed that:"The principle of the said decision has been held
applicable to “public figures” as well. This is for the
reason that public figures like public officials often
play an influential role in ordering society. It has
been held that as a class the public figures have, as
the public officials have, access to mass media
communication both to influence the policy and to
counter-criticism of their views and activities. On
this basis, it has been held that the citizen has a
legitimate and substantial interest in the conduct of
such persons and that the freedom of press extends
to engaging in uninhibited debate about the
involvement of public figures in public issues and
events."
Thus it is well settled that right to privacy is not expressly
guaranteed under the constitution.

Article 21 has been judicially

interpreted to include the same.

These principles would guide

adjudication in the present case.
II.

Whether infringement of the fundamental right to

privacy can be enforced against a private citizen or body.
48.

There is yet another aspect to the matter of a fundamental

rights' infringement. The plaintiff has asserted such right against the
defendants who are private citizens. The issue remains as to whether
the privacy rights as a fundamental right can be enforced against
private citizens and bodies. This question was succinctly answered by
the Apex Court in a five bench judgment reported at 1952 SCR 391

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

29

P.D. Shamdasini Vs. Central Bank of India, wherein the court
held thus:"3. We are of the opinion that the petitioner has
misconceived his remedy and the petition must fail
on a preliminary ground. Neither Article 19(1)(f)
nor Article 31(1) on its true construction was
intended to prevent wrongful individual
acts or to provide protection against
merely private conduct. Article 19 deals with
the "right to freedom" and by Clause (1) assures to
the citizen certain fundamental freedoms including
the freedom "to acquire, hold and dispose of
property" subject to the power of the State to
impose restrictions on the exercise of such rights to
the extent and on the grounds mentioned in Clauses
(2) to (6). The language and structure of
Article 19 and its setting in Part III of the
Constitution clearly show that the article
was intended to protect those freedoms
against State action other than in the
legitimate exercise of its power to regulate
private rights in the public interest.
Violation of rights of property by
individuals is not within the purview of the
article.
5.
....Even assuming that Clause (1) has to be
read and construed apart from Clause (2), it is clear
that it is a declaration of the fundamental right of
private property in the same negative form in which
Article 21 declares the fundamental right to life and
liberty. There is no express reference to the
State in Article 21.
But could it be
suggested on that account that, that article
was intended to afford protection to life
and personal liberty against violation by
private individuals? The words "except by
procedure established by law" plainly
exclude such a suggestion.
xxx xxx
7.
Nor does the legislative history of the article
lend any support to the petitioner's contention.
Section 299(1) of the Government of India Act,
1935, was never interpreted as prohibiting
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

30

49.

deprivation of property by private individuals. Its
restoration, therefore, in the same form in Article
31, after omission in the original draft Article 19,
could lead to no inference in support of the
petitioner's contention, which indeed
proceeds
on
the
fundamental
misconception that Article 19(1)(f) and
Article 31(1), which are great constitutional
safeguards against State aggression on
private property, are directed against
infringements by private individuals for
which remedies should be sought in the
ordinary law.
(Emphasis
supplied)"
In a subsequent judgment reported at AIR 1956 SC 108 Smt.

Vidya Verma through next friends R.V.S. Mani Vs. Dr.
Shiv Narain Verma, the Apex Court reiterated the principles laid
down in Shamdasini's case and held thus:"6. As the question that arises here has been
discussed at length in two earlier decisions of this
Court we need not examine the matter in any detail.
The fundamental right that is said to be infringed is
the one conferred by Article 21: the right to personal
liberty. In 'A.K. Gopalan v. State of Madras, AIR
1950 SC 27(A) four of the six learned Judges who
were in that case held that the word "law" in Article
21 referred to State-made law and not to law in the
abstract. They rejected the contention that this was
the same as the due process clause in the American
Constitution. One learned Judge dissented and one
expressed no opinion on this point. Patanjali Sastri,
J. (as he then was) said at p. 74 that as a ruleconditional safeguards are directed against the State
and its organs and that protection against violation
of rights by individuals must be sought in the
ordinary law; and S.R. Das, J. dealing with the
question of preventive detention said at pp. 120-121
that Article 21 protects a person against preventive
detention by the executive without the sanction of a
law made by the legislature.
7.
This principle was applied to articles 19(1)(f)
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

31

and 31(1) by a Bench of five Judges in P.D.
Shamdasani v. Central Bank of India ([1952] S.C.R.
391), who held that violation of rights of property by
a private individual is not within the purview of
these articles, therefore a person whose rights of
property are infringed by a private individual must
seek his remedy under the ordinary law and not
under Article 32.”
The Apex Court noticed that though Article 21 was not directly
involved in Shamsadasani's case (supra), however, it was placing
reliance on the aforenoticed observations in para 5 of the earlier
judgment and the Court further stated thus :

50.

"8. They held that the language of article 31(1)
was similar and decided that article 31(1) did not
apply to invasions of a right by a private individual
and consequently no writ under article 32 would lie
in such a case. For the same reasons we hold that
the present petition which is founded on article 21
does not lie under article 32. It is accordingly
dismissed."
Fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution would, in

the absence of specific constitutional provisions, be mainly
enforceable against the State.
51.

This view was reiterated by the Supreme Court in AIR 1976

SC 1207 Vijaya Laxmi Tripathi & Ors Vs. Managing
Committee of Working Women's Hostel & Ors. wherein
placing reliance on other previous judgments, the Court had held
thus :" 21 In view of the above, it has to be held that Article
21 cannot be enforced against a private person. The
fact that qua some of the Articles like 17, 23 and 24 it
has been held that they can be enforced against private
individuals also see Sukhdev Singh v. Bhagatram, AIR
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

32

52.

1975 SC 1331 (paragraph 95); People's Union for
Democratic Rights v. Union of India, AIR 1982 SC
1473 (paragraph 10); and Sanjit Roy v. State of
Rajasthan, AIR 1983 SC 328 (paragraphs 3 to 6), is not
sufficient in view of the clear decision in Vidya Verma's
case to hold that Article 21 can also be enforced against
a private person."
Thus, the fundamental rights in Part III of the Constitution of

India are normally enforced against State action or action by other
authorities who may come within the purview of Article 12 of the
Constitution. This principle was also reiterated by the Apex Court in
its pronouncement reported at 2005 (5) SCC 632 Zoroastrian
Co-operative Housing Society Ltd. Vs. District Registrar,
Co-operative Societies (Urban).
53.

However, the Constitutional scheme does provide certain rights

under Articles 17, 23 and 24 which are enforceable against private
individuals.
54.

My attention has been drawn to the pronouncement of the Apex

Court in (1982) 3 SCC 235 People's Union for Democratic
Right v. UOI wherein the court has succinctly laid down the
applicable principles .
In this case, the court was concerned with the issue of violation
of Article 23 of the Constitution of India. It was observed by the court
that the sweep of Article 23 was wide and unlimited and it strikes at
trafficking in human beings wherever they are found and begar and
other similar forms of forced labour wherever they are found. The
reason for encoraching this provision in the Chapter on fundamental
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

33

right is to be found in the social economic condition of the people at
the time when the Constitution was enacted and that Article 23 was
not limited in its application against the State but prohibited such
trafficking by anyone else as well.

Therefore, while holding that

many of the fundamental rights enacted in Part III operate as
limitations on the power of the State and impose negative obligations
on the State not to encroach on individual liberty and they are
enforceable only against the State, but there are certain fundamental
rights conferred by the Constitution which are enforceable against the
whole world and they are to be found inter alia in Articles 17, 23 and
24.
In the light of the foregoing discussion, there can be no manner
of doubt that fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution, in
the absence of specific constitutional provisions would be enforceable
only against the State.
55.

So far as the fundamental rights guaranteed under Article 19 to

an Indian citizen is concerned, Article 19(2) confers a limited powers
on the State to limit these fundamental freedoms.

This issue arose

for consideration in a case before the Bombay High Court wherein in
the judgment reported at AIR 2004 Bombay 143 Shree
Maheshwar

Hydel

Power

Corporation

Limited

v.

Chitroopa Palit & Anr., the Court examined the limits of exercise
of power under Article 19(2). In this case the appellants had sought

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

34

prohibitory relief against certain publications by the respondents who
set up a plea of their rights under Article 19 of the Constitution. In
this context, the court held thus :-

56.

"54. Article 19 is basically an article which
guarantees various freedoms to the Indian citizens
and those freedoms cannot be infringed upon by the
State or such authority, except as contemplated
under clause (2) of Article 19. That is to say, it is a
kind of fetter on the States power to limit those
freedoms. The State cannot limit those freedoms
except to the limited extent as contemplated under
Article 19(2). The above Article has nothing to do
with regard to the two private parties, in the sense,
the respondents cannot claim such an unfettered
right of freedom of speech and expression against the
Appellant Company. In this context, as has rightly
been pointed out by Mr. Vahanvati, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the case of P.D. Shamdasani v.
Central Bank of India Ltd., AIR 1952 SC 59 has
clearly held that the scope of freedom under Article
19 of the Constitution of India, is basically the
protection against the States action, whereby the
right should not be curtailed. Even if the State were
to curtail that right, they can do so only on those
limited grounds as specified in Article 19(2) of the
Constitution of India. In any event even under
Article 19(1)(a) citizen does not have a right to make
a defamation statement.
In this behalf, the Supreme Court had negatived the attempt to

enforce the fundamental right against a private person, in its
pronouncement reported at 1977 Crl.L.J 1190 Qadir Khan & Ors
Vs. New Kashmir All City Transport Drivers thus :“8. Again, in order to attract Article 19(1) the
dispute must not be between private individual but it
must be between an individual and the state. The
state must have infringed the right of an individual
guaranteed under Article 19(1). Right under this
article cannot be claimed against an individual.
Thus where the dispute is between two private
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

35

57.

persons regarding their respective right to hold
property there can be no question of invasion of
right under Article 19(1). In this view of the mine, I
am fortified by a decision of the Supreme Court in
“P.D. Shamdasani v. Central Bank of India reported
in 1952 SCR 391 : (AIR 1952 SC 59).”
From the constitutional scheme and a reading of the foregoing

pronouncements, it is apparent that in order to seek enforcement of a
fundamental right, the dispute must not be between two private
individuals but must be between an individual and the State.

Even

enforcement of the fundamental right of freedom of expression under
Article 19(1) has to be enforced against the State. It is well settled
that other than violation of Articles 17, 23 and 24 by private parties
other, disputes between two private parties cannot be urged to be an
invasion of a fundamental right.
III. Right to privacy: whether its infringement or invasion
is recognised as a tort.
58.

The law of torts was developed in England. Followers find its

application in India due to applicability of the English Common Law
that was followed before the commencement of the Constitution of
India. Even after the commencement of the Constitution, the law of
torts as developed by the English Common Law continued to be
applicable by virtue of Article 372 of the Constitution of India. India
thus still applies the British Common Law System of Tort, unless it
has been expressly repealed or there is a statutory provision dealing
on that aspect of law.

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

36

59.

Violation of privacy of an individual has not so far under such

explicit name, received clear recognition as a tort by the courts in the
United Kingdom. John G. Fleming in the Law of Torts points out that
the closest affinity to some aspect of the right of privacy is to be found
in the law of defamation.

In Wainwright Vs. Home Office

(2001) ECWA CIV 2081 (EASE) it has been noticed that the
English Common Law has not given and, strictly speaking, still does
not give any direct action for the invasion of privacy and rather in
such cases, the Court tends to provide a remedy for other causes of
action such as defamation, nuisance, breach of confidence and
copyright violation.
60.

So far as India is concerned, the right to privacy in relation to

the privacy of a house of apartments and easementary rights acquired
thereto has been the subject matter of consideration long before the
issues were noticed even in the United State of America. In ILR 10
All. 358 (at 388) Golak Prasad Vs. Radho, Sir John Edge
Kt, Chief Justice of the Allahabad High Court thus observed :“In my opinion the fact that there is no such
custom of privacy known to the law of England
can have no bearing on the question whether
there can be in India an usage or custom of
privacy valid in law. The condition of domestic
life in the 2 countries have from remote times
been essentially different and in my opinion, it is
owing to that difference in the conditions of
domestic life alone that a custom which appears
to me to be a perfectly reasonable one in India
should be unknown in England.”

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

37

The right to privacy so far as easmentary rights were concerned
had been recognised and upheld by various high courts across the
country.
61.

This customary right, however, has received expansive and

liberal interpretation as a concomitant of `personal liberty' and has
been read into Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
62.

In (1997) 1 SCC 301 People Union for Civil Liberties Vs.

Union of India, the Apex Court held that the right to privacy was a
part of the right to `life' and `personal liberty' enshrined under
Article 63. It was further clarified that once the facts in a given case
constitute the right to privacy, Article 21 becomes applicable and the
right cannot be curtailed except according to procedure established
by law.
64.

In the meantime, in England, by virtue of the European

Convention on Human Rights, 1998, even the limited recognition
under the common law ceased to exist inasmuch as the right was
incorporated as a fundamental freedom under Article 8 of this
Convention.
65.

From a reading of the several decisions on the subject, it

remains a moot issue as to whether infringement of a fundamental
right or any other right conferred by the Constitution is a tort on the
analogy of breach of statutory duty or a wrong under public law which
is sui generis, that is to say is a class in itself.

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

38

66.

The applicability of the right of privacy as a tort not being

applicable in England, would not be saved for application by virtue of
Article 372 of the Constitution of India even in the common law.
There is no dispute that there is no tort of privacy by statute at
present in India. Such a view has finds support in a single Bench
judgment of the Bombay High Court reported at 2003 (2)
Bom.C.R. 136 Manisha Koirala v. Shri Shasilal Nair.
67.

However such a view fails to take into consideration the law laid

down by the Apex Court reported at (1994) 6 SCC 632 R.
Rajagopal alias R.R.Gopal & Anr. Vs. State of Tamil Nadu
& Ors. In this behalf, the binding principles laid down by the court
in para 9 of the judgment deserves to be considered and read thus :9.
The right to privacy as an independent and
distinctive concept originated in the field of Tort
law, under which a new cause of action for damages
resulting from unlawful invasion of privacy was
recognised. This right has two aspects which are
but two faces of the same coin---(1) the general
law of privacy which affords a tort action for
damages resulting from an unlawful
invasion of privacy and (2) the constitutional
recognition given to the right to privacy which
protects personal privacy against unlawful
governmental invasion. The first aspect of this
right must be said to have been violated where, for
example, a person's name or likeness is used,
without his consent, for advertising - or nonadvertising --purposes or for that matter, his life
story is written -- whether laudatory or otherwise -and published without his consent as explained
hereinafter. In recent times, however, this right
has acquired a constitutional status."
IV. Freedom of Press vis a vis right of an individual against
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

39

invasion of privacy
68. The freedom of speech and expression is enshrined in the first
amendment to the American Constitution. Article 19 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, 1948 declares the freedom of press as
also Article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Right, 1966. Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights
1998 which has been noticed herein also recognises the right of
freedom of expression. However, this right under Article 19 of the
Constitution of India is not absolute and may be subject to reasonable
limitations as envisaged under Article 19 (2) of the Constitution of
India.
69.

The importance of freedom of Press in a democratic society has

been emphasised in several pronouncements of the Apex Court
including Indian Express Newspapers (Pvt.) Ltd. Vs. Union
of India 1959 SCR 12;/and (1985) 1 SCC 641 Indian Express
Newspapers (Pvt.) Ltd. Vs. Union of India.

In

Indian

Express Newspapers Pvt. Ltd. Vs. Union of India 1959 SCR
12, placing reliance on the judgment reported at Brij Bhushan Vs.
State of Delhi AIR (37) 1950 SC 129, the court held that the liberty of
press consists in allowing no previous restraint upon publication. In
State of Travancore, Cochin Vs. Bombay Co. Ltd. AIR (39)
1952

SC

366;

and

Chamarbaughwala

State

AIR

of

1957

Bombay
SC

699,

Vs.
the

R.M.D.
court

has

administered a caution against reliance on American and other cases.
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

40

70.

In the Indian Express Newspapers (Pvt.) Ltd. Vs.

Union of India 1959 SCR 12, Bhagwati J. observed that the
fundamental right to freedom of speech and expression enshrined in
our Constitution was based on the provisions of first amendment to
the American Constitution and hence, it would be legitimate and
proper to refer to the decisions of the Supreme Court of U.S.A. in
order to appreciate the true nature, scope and extent of the right.
71.

So far as principles in United States of America are concerned,

the United States Supreme Court has laid down the law that the
defence of suit is constitutionally required where the subject matter
of the publication is a public official or public figure. It is further
required that the detained public official or public figure must prove
not only that the publication is false, but that it was knowingly sold or
was circulated with reckless disregard for its falsity. It has been
similarly laid down that where the interest at issue is privacy rather
than reputation and the right claimed is to be free from the
publication of false or misleading information about one's affairs, the
target of the publication must prove knowing or reckless falsehood
where the materials published, although assertedly private, are
"matters of public interest"

(Ref.

New York Times Co. Vs.

Sullivan 376 US 254 ; Garrison Vs. Lousiana 379 US 64;
Curtis Publishing Co. Vs. Butts 388 US 130; Time, Inc. Vs.
Hill 385 US 374)

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

41

72.

A prayer for a prior injunction against a publication has to be

considered in the background of the impact of what is being
prohibited.

In this behalf, it would be apposite to refer to the

observations of Justice Brennan in Time Inc. Vs. Hill, 385 US
374, wherein the learned Judge observed thus:".....The guarantees for speech and press are not the
preserve of political expression or comment upon
public affairs, essential as those are to healthy
government. One need only pick up any newspaper
or magazine to comprehend the vast range of
published matter which exposes persons to pubic
view, both private citizens and public officials.
Exposure of the self to others in varying degrees is a
concomitant of life in a civilised community. The
risk of this exposure is an essential incident of life
in a society which places a preliminary value on
freedom of speech and of press. "Freedom of
discussion, if it would fulfill its historic function in
this nation, must embrace all issues about which
information is needed or appropriate to enable the
members of society to cope with the exigencies of
their period.
As James Madison said, "Some degree of abuse is
inseparable from the proper use of everything; and
in no instance is this more true than in that of the
press" 4 Elliot's Debates on the Federal
Constitution 571 (1876 ed.). We create a grave risk
of serious impairment of the indispensable service
of a free press in a free society if we saddle the press
with the impossible burden of verifying to a
certainty the facts associated in news articles with a
person's name, picture or portrait, particularly as
related to non-defamatory matter. Even negligence
would be a most elusive standard, especially when
the content of the speech itself affords no warning
of prospective harm to another through falsity. A
negligence test would place on the press the
intolerable burden of guessing how a jury might
assess the reasonableness of steps taken by it to
verify the accuracy of every reference to a name,
picture or portrait."
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

42

73.

(Emphasis supplied)
These principles remain binding and are applied by the courts

in testing the balance of convenience and equity in granting
injunction even on date. In United Kingdom, the House of Lords has
also held that it was of the highest public importance that a
governmental body should be open to uninhibited public criticism,
and a right to sue for defamation would place an undesirable fetter on
freedom of speech. Relying upon the public interest considerations
laid down by the US Supreme Court in New York Times Co. Vs.
Sullivan (supra), in its pronouncement reported at 1993 (1) All
ER 1011 Derbyshire County Council Vs. Times Newspaper
Ltd., it was held by the House of Lords in the United Kingdom, that
the "Chilling Effect" induced by the threat of civil action for libel is
very important and that there was no public interest favouring the
right of government organs to sue for libel. It was therefore held that
under common law, the local authority did not have the right to
maintain an action for damages for defamation.
74.

Mr. Soli J.Sorabjee, learned senior counsel for the defendant

has extensively relief upon the law on the subject in the United States
of America. Right to privacy undoubtedly finds its origin in American
Jurisprudence. As back as in 1980, Samuel D.Warren and Louis
D.Brandeis proposed a new tort formally recognising the invasion of
privacy in his article “The Right to Privacy' 4 HARV. L.REV. 193
(1890). In 1960, Dean William Prosser in 'Privacy' 48 Cal.L.Rev.383,
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

43

389 (1960) expanded the tort of privacy under four distinct causes of
action. The preponderance of judicial authority supports the view
that independently of the common right of property, contract,
reputation and physical integrity, there is a legal right or the right of
privacy, the invasion of which is a tort and gives rise to cause of
action (Ref.(62) AM American Jur.2D page 679(para3).
75.

The general tort law in the United States of America has been

detailed in a document called “The Restatement of Torts” issued by
the prestigious American Law Institute.

The Judges and States

recognise this Restatement as an influential guide to the law. In
1962, this organisation began a second round of the restatement and
the Second Restatement of Torts remains authoritative even today.
This Restatement has adopted four categories as the basis of tort of
invasion of privacy which include the follow:1.Section 652B-Intrusion Upon Seclusion
2.Section 652C-Appropriation of Name or Likeness
3.Section 652D-Publicity given to Private Life
4.Section 652E-Publicity Placing Person in False Light
76.

This restatement has been adopted and further expanded by

the various courts in the United States, wherein it has been
recognised that it is possible for privacy to be invaded bythe same act
or by a series of acts in two or more of the ways stated in Sections
652B to 652E. When this occurs, the plaintiff may maintain an action
for invasion of privacy upon any or all of the grounds available to
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

44

him. However, the right to privacy is a personal right and plaintiff
must show an invasion of this right before he/she can recover. It has
been created to protect the feelings and sensibilities of humans and
not to safeguard pecuniary interests.
77.

Some courts have taken the view that the right is predicated

upon the constitutuional guarantees of life, liberty and pursuit of
happiness. It has been said that the right to life embraces the right to
acquire existence, out of public gaze, that the right to liberty includes
the right choose between a public and a private career and that the
right to happiness entitles a person to freedom from the annoyances
of unwarranted publicity.(Ref.Kacedan, 12 Boston UL Rev.353).
According to this view, the constitutional guarantees of life and
liberty secures a right to live in seclusion or in the public gaze, as one
chooses. So long as one does not interfere with the rights of others, a
person can be no more compelled against his wishes to emerge from
his chosen life of privacy than he could be forced to retire into
privacy; and the immunity which one possesses against having one's
person exhibited in public also prohibits unwarranted publicity
concerning one's private affairs.
78.

The Second Restatement of Torts also sets out an important

distinction between an action for defamation and an action for
invasion of privacy. It states that an action for invasion of privacy
differs from a libel action in that, in the former, truth is not a defence

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

45

and it is not necessary to the cause of action to allege or prove special
damages. Unlike libel and slander, the gist of the cause in privacy
cases is not injury to the character or reputation, but direct wrongs of
a personal character resulting in injury to the feelings, without regard
to any effect which the publication may have on the standing of the
individual in the community. In 'right of privacy' cases the primary
damage is the mental distress from having been exposed to public
view, although injury to reputation may be an element bearing upon
such damage; the published matter need not be defamatory on its
face or otherwise, and might even be laudatory and still warrant
recovery.

However, although an action for invasion of privacy is

distinguishable from an action for libel, the same publication may
involve both libel and the invasion of the right of privacy, and causes
for both may be joined in the plaintiff's complaint, subject to the
qualification that the plaintiff is not entitled to recover twice for the
same elements of damage arising out of the same publication.
79.

An important issue which would be required to be determined

in every action asserting breach of the right of privacy is the standard
by which the right is to be measured. The Second Restatement of
Torts in this behalf has noticed and several judicial pronouncements
in the United States of America have also stated, that the right of
privacy is relative to the customs of the time and place and it is
determined by the norm of the ordinary man. The protection which

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

46

has to be afforded has to be restricted to ordinary or reasonable
sensibilities
agoraphobia.

and

does

not

extend

to

supersensitiveness

or

Thus, in weighing of interests, the oversensitive

must give way. (Dean Pound, 28 Harvard L. Rev.343, 363).

There

are some shocks, inconveniences, and annoyances which members of
society must absorb without right of redress, (Davis v. General
Finance & Thrift Corpn.80 Ga App 708, 57 SE2d 225) and right of
privacy is not a guarantee of hermitic seclusion (Bradley v. Cowles
Magazines, Inc. 26 III App 2d 331, 168 NE2d 64). It has been held
that some intrusion into one's private sphere are inevitable
concomitants of life in an industrial and densely populated society,
which the law does not seek to proscribe even if it were possible to do
so.
80.

The Second Restatement of Torts thus states these principles as

follows :“....liability for unreasonably and seriously
interfering with another's interest in not having his
affairs known to others exists only if the defendant's
conduct was such that he should have realised that it
would be offensive to persons of ordinary sensibilities,
and it is only where the intrusion has gone beyond the
limits of decency that liability accrues, which limits
are exceeded where intimate details of the life of one
who has never manifested a desire to have publicity
are exposed to the public.”
Therefore, in order to constitute an invasion of the right of
privacy, the act must be of such a nature as a reasonable man can see,

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

47

might and probably would cause mental distress and injury to anyone
possessed of ordinary feelings and intelligence, situated in like
circumstances as the complainant; and this may present the question
which is to be decided for the trier of fact.
81.

The American Jurisprudence has recognized that the right of

privacy is not absolute. The first limitation on this right was laid
down by Warren and Brandies in their aforenoticed article when they
noted that the right to privacy does not prohibit any
publication of matter which is of public and general
interest. This is more so where the plaintiff has become a public
personage and has, to that extent, waived the right, or in the ordinary
dissemination of the news, or in connection with the life of any
person in whom the public has a rightful interest or whether
information would be of public benefit.
82.

The principle thus is that the individual's right to privacy, must

in some instances, yield to certain paramount rights of the public
and, at some point, the public interest in obtaining information
becomes dominant over the individual's desire for privacy. (62 Am.
Jur. 2D page 700 para 16).

It is further noted that a proper

delimitation of the right to privacy consists in balancing the
conflicting interests that is the interest of the individual in privacy on
the one hand against the interests of the public in news and
information on the other.

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

48

83.

The phrase 'public or general interest' in this connection, has

been noted as not meaning mere curiosity.
84.

It has also been stated that equally so, the right to privacy like

other rights that rest in an individual may be waived by him and
consent to the invasion of one's right of privacy is a bar to a claim for
damages for such invasion. Such waiver maybe by express or implied
consent, or lost by a course of conduct which estops its assertion. A
waiver or relinquishment of this right or of some aspect thereof,
maybe implied from the conduct of the parties and the surrounding
circumstances. (Ref: 62 Am Jur 2nd page 703 para 18)
85.

It has been noticed that the courts recognize that an exception

to the right of privacy must exist in the form of a privilege to publish
articles about matters of public interest, at least where the report is
not published with knowledge of its falsity and is not so outrageous as
to offend public notions of decency. As a publisher is free to publish,
broadcast or film newsworthy events and persons even though such
action impinges on an individual's desire to be let alone. A person
who commits some act of great notoriety, or who, whether willingly
or not, becomes an actor in an occurrence of public or general
interest thereby relinquishes his privacy to the extent that his name
and picture may be published in connection with an account of an
event.
86.

In para 21 of 62 Am Jur 2d page 709, it has been stated that a

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

49

person who by his accomplishments, fame, or mode of life, or by
adopting a profession or calling which gives the pubic a legitimate
interest in his doings, affairs and character maybe said to have
become a public personage and he thereby relinquishes at least a part
of his right of privacy.
It would be instructive to notice the description rendered to the
expression as to what would be newsworthy in this text which states
thus :“...It would be extending the right of privacy too far to
say that the general public can be prohibited from
knowing the public appearance of great public
characters. Such characters may be said, of their own
volition, to have dedicated to the public the right of
any fair portrature of themselves. One who engages
in public affairs and public life to an extent which
draws the public interest upon him may be deemed to
have consented to the publication of his picture.
There may be a limited scrutiny of the 'private' life of
any person who has achieved, or has had thrust upon
him, the status of a 'public figure'. The right of
privacy does not protect one from having his name or
likeness appear in a newspaper when there is
legitimate public interest in his existence,
experiences, words, or acts, since in this respect such
use of the name or picture of a person is deemed
privileged.”
87. So far as to who would be the 'public' or 'newsworthy personage',
the American Jurisprudence notes that any person who engages in a
pursuit or occupation which calls for the approval or patronage of the
public submits his private life to examination to whom he addresses
his call, to the extent that may be necessary to determine whether it is
wise and proper to accord him the approval or patronage which he
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

50

seeks. (para 22 of 62 Amer.Jur. At page 711).
88.

There are also limits to the extent to which a public or a

newsworthy personage relinquishes or waives the right to privacy.
Even American Jurisprudence which has advocated the importance
of a free press much beyond the jurisprudence in other countries has
noticed in para 23 at page 713 thus :“23. Although one who becomes a public or
newsworthy personage relinquishes in par the right
of privacy which would be his under other
circumstances the existence of such a waiver carries
with it the right to invade the privacy of the
individual only to the extent legitimately necessary
and proper in dealing with the matter which give
rise to the waiver. That is to say, the waiver is
limited to those matters which maybe legitimately
necessary or appropriate for the information of the
public. Even in the case of a public officer or
candidate for public office the waiver of the right of
privacy does not extend to those matters and
transactions of private life which are wholly foreign
to and can throw no light upon the question of his
competency for the office or the propriety of having
it bestowed upon him.
The fact that a person is a public character or
legitimate subject of news comment does not justify
misleading publicity or misrepresentation. The
publication of court records may give rise to an
action for invasion of privacy where such
publication conveys the erroneous impression that
plaintiff had been committed for narcotic addiction
whereas she had voluntarily submitted to
treatment. It has generally been held that one who
has become a public figure does not thereby waive
the right not to have his name or picture used
without his consent for the purposes of advertising
or commercial exploitation. The fact that a person
is a public or newsworthy figure does not justify
fictionalisation of the news concerning such person
nor a lurid or indecent treatment of the facts.
Revelations may be so intimate and unwarranted
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

51

89.

even concerning a public figure as to outrage the
community's notion of decency, and may thus
constitute an invasion of privacy, although when
focused upon such public characters, truthful
comments upon dress, speech,habits, and the
ordinary aspects of personality, will not ordinarily
transgress the line delimiting the right of privacy.”
So far as India is concerned, these principles have been

succinctly stated by the Apex Court in R. Rajagopal Vs. State of
Tamil Nadu (Supra).
90.

However, the extents and limits within which the right to

privacy operates require consideration of the principles evolved in
England. The Common law, that is the courts of equity, have long
afforded protection against the wrongful use of private information
by means of the cause of action which became known as breach of
confidence. Such breach was restrained as a form unconscionable
conduct, akin to a breach of trust. The essentials of this cause of
action was that information given in confidence has been disclosed by
one person to another in circumstances 'importing an obligation of
confidence' even though no contract of non-disclosure existed. (Ref:
Coco Vs. AN Clark (Engineers) Ltd. 1969 RPC 41 at page 4748). Thus, initially, 'breach of confidence' was confidence arising out
of a confidential relationship.
91.

However, the law developed so as to impose a 'duty of confidence'

whenever a person receives information he knows or ought to know is fairly
and reasonably to be regarded as confidential. (Ref: (1988) 3 All ER 545
at page 658, A-G Vs. Guardian Newspapers Ltd.)
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

52

92.

Today, the essence of such a tort has been encapsulated as

misuse of private information, that is information about an
individual's private life.
It is equally well settled and widely recognised that the importance of
such a privacy lies at the heart of liberty in a modern state.

93.

The European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights

and Fundamental Freedom 1950 (Rome, 4 November 1950; TS 71
(1953); Cmd 8969) had a significant influence in this area of common
law. The provisions of Article 8, concerning respect for private and
family life, and Article 10, concerning freedom of expression and the
interaction of these two Articles, have led to identification of different
factors involving such issues. The common law which has developed,
has been in harmony with these Articles of the convention. (Ref:
(1999) 4 All ER 609 (at page 625) Reynolds Vs. Times
Newspapers Ltd., (2001) 2 AC 127 at 203-204).
94.

The European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights

and Fundamental Freedom 1950 incorporated Article 8 concerning
respect for private and family life and Article 10 concerning freedom
of expression. These Articles read as follows:“Article 8.
1.
Everyone has the right to respect for his
private and family life, his home and his
correspondence.
2.
There shall be no interference by a public
authority with the exercise of this right except such
as is in accordance with the law and is necessary in
a democratic society in the interests of national
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

53

95.

security, public safety or the economic well-being of
the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime,
for the protection of health or morals, or for the
protection of the rights and freedoms of others.
Article 10.
1,
Everyone has the right to freedom of
expression. This right shall include freedom to hold
opinions and to receive and impart information and
ideas without interference by public authority and
regardless of frontiers. This article shall not
prevent states from requiring the licensing of
broadcasting, television or cinema enterprises.
2.
The exercise of these freedoms, since it
carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be
subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions
or penalties as are prescribed by law and are
necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of
national security, territorial integrity or public
safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for
the protection of health or morals, for the
protection of the reputation or rights of others, for
preventing the disclosure of information received in
confidence, or for maintaining the authority and
impartiality of the judiciary.”
In United Kingdom, the Human Rights Act, 1998 encapsulated

in Section 6, a statutory mandate that the court is to act in a way not
incompatible with the convention.

In A Vs. B. (A company)

(2002) 2 All ER 545, it was held that Articles 8 and 10 of the
Convention had provided new parameters within which the court
would decide, in an action for breach of confidence whether a person
is entitled to have its privacy protected by the court or whether the
restriction of freedom of expression which such protection involves
cannot be justified.

The court's approach to the issues and the

applications raised had been modified because under Section 6 of this
enactment of 1998, the court, as a public authority, was required not

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

54

to act in a way which is incompatible with the convention right. It
was held by the court that the courts were able to achieve this by
absorbing “the rights which Articles 8 and 10 protect into the long
established action for breach of confidence. This involves giving a
new strength and breadth to the action so that it accommodates the
requirement of those Articles.”
In this judgment, it had further been laid down that the values
embodied in Articles 8 and 10 are as much applicable in disputes
between individual or between an individual and a non-governmental
body such as a newspaper as they are in disputes between individuals
and a public authority.
96.

The development of the law in England has accelerated by the

enactment of the Human Rights Act, 1998.
97.

The courts have recognised that the values enshrined in Articles

8 and 10 are now part of the cause of action for breach of confidence
and that they are as much applicable in disputes between individuals
or between an individual and a non-governmental body such as a
newspaper as they are in disputes between the individuals and a
public authority.

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

55

98.

The question then arises as to what would constitute invasion of

privacy or more specifically breach of confidence.

The Second

Restatement of Torts in the United States (1977) page 394 Article
652D, uses the formulation of disclosure of matter which would be
highly offensive to a reasonable person.
99.

In Australian Broadcasting Corp. Vs. Lenah Game

Meats Pty Ltd. (2001) 185 ALR 1 at 13 (para 42), Gleeson CJ
has used the widely quoted words having the same meaning when it
was stated that :

"This particular formulation should be used with

care, for two reasons. First, the 'highly offensive' phrase is suggestive
of a stricter test of private information than a reasonable expectation
of privacy.

Second, the 'highly offensive' formulation can all too

easily bring into account, when deciding whether the disclosed
information was private, considerations which go more properly to
issues to proportionality, for instance, the degree of intrusion into
private life, and the extent to which publication was a matter of
proper public concern. This could be a recipe for confusion."
100. In a question where involvement of an individual's right to
privacy vis a vis the rights claimed by the press are concerned, a
difficult issue of proportionality would arise which would involve
consideration of the degree of intrusion into private life and the
extent to which the publication was a matter of public interest and
concern.

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

56

101. Before this court, both sides have placed reliance on
observations of the five judges of the House of Lords in 2004 (2) All
England Report 995 Campbell Vs. MGN.

In this case, the

defendant's newspaper had published a number of articles about the
claimant who was a celebrated fashion model revealing that she was
a drug addict; that she was receiving treatment for her addiction; that
she was attending Narcotic Anonymous, a deaddiction centre; details
of the treatment and visual portrayal by means of photograph,
covertly taken, of the claimant leaving the meeting with this
organisation.
The claimant accepted that the newspaper had been entitled in
public interest to disclose the information that she was a drug addict
and was receiving treatment for her addiction, for the reason that she
had earlier falsely and publicly stated that, unlike many others in the
fashion business, she was not a drug addict.
102. The claimant made a claim for breach of confidence and breach
of the Data Protection Act, 1998 and sought compensation with
regard to the additional information and photographs which had
been published relating to her attendance at the centre. The trial
court had upheld the plaintiff's claim while the Court of Appeal
allowed the newspaper's appeal.
103. The House of Lords allowed the appeal of the plaintiff against
the appellate order while two learned Judges Lord Nicholl and Lord

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

57

Hoffmann dissented. The court laid down the clear parameters which
would facilitate hearing and guide adjudication on such claim made
on breach of confidence.
It was ultimately held that the details of the plaintiff's treatment
and therapy were private and no distinction could be drawn between
them and the details of a medical condition or its treatment. Such
private information imported a duty of confidence.

The public

disclosure by the newspaper of these intimate details of treatment
would impact the assurance of privacy given to all participants as an
essential part of the de-addiction therapy and exercise.

Such

disclosure would endanger the very therapy if the duty of confidence
which the participants owed each other was permitted to be breached
by making details thereof public. Disclosure of such details, when
examined by the test of a reasonable person who was in need of such
therapy would impact even other drug addicts who were trying to
benefit from the therapy on the assurance of anonymity who would
also find disclosure of the details distressing and highly offensive.
The court applied the test of proportionality to the conflicting interest
of the plaintiff's right to privacy, which was at the centre of the action
for breach of confidence, vis-a-vis the right of the media to impart
information to the public.

The right of the media to impart

information to the public had also to be balanced in its turn against
the respect that had to be given to personal and private life and

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

58

intimate details thereof. The court had to apply the test as to whether
publication of the material pursued a legitimate aim and whether the
benefits that would be achieved by publication were proportionate to
the harm that might be done by the interference with the right to
privacy. In the facts of the case, it was held that there were no
political or democratic values at stake, nor was there pressing any
social need identified for the publication of the details of the therapy.
Guided by the potential for disclosure of the information to cause
harm, it was held that there had been an infringement of the
plaintiff's right to privacy which could not be justified and that
publication of the details of the treatment as well as the photographs
was an invasion of that right for which she was held entitled to
damages.
104. This judicial pronouncement contains an all en-compassing
consideration of every aspect for breach of confidence and the
balancing of an individual's right to privacy as against media's right of
freedom of press.
105. In Wainwright Vs. Home Office 2003 (4) All ER 969,
the House of Lords has held that there was no general tort of invasion
of privacy in England. However, the right to privacy in the general
sense was one of the most important values, which underlines a
number of more specific causes of action, both at common law and
under various statutes. Specific causes of action available to a person

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

59

at common law include the equitable action for breach of confidence
which has long been recognised as capable of being used to protect
privacy.
106. The traditional action for breach of confidence could be used to
protect privacy in the sense of preserving the confidentiality of
personal information. It was not founded on the notion that such
information was by itself entitled to protection and related to the
equitable duty which arose out of the relationship of the parties with
the other. In para 46 of the pronouncement in Campbell Vs. MGN
(supra), Lord Hoffman has observed that there have been two
developments of the law of confidence, which were typical of the
capacity of the common law to adapt itself to the needs of
contemporary lives. The first development is generally associated
with the speech of Lord Goff of Chieviley in A-G Vs. Guardian
Newspapers Ltd. (No. 2) (1988) 3 All ER 545 at page 658659, wherein the following principle was formulated:"a duty of confidence arises when confidential
information comes to the knowledge of a person ...
in circumstances where he has notice, or is held to
have agreed, that the information is confidential,
with the effect that it would be just in all the
circumstances that he should be precluded from
disclosing the information to others."
107. This principle omitted the requirement of the prior confidential
relationship which was applied by the Court of Appeal in A Vs. B. (a
company) (2002) 2 All ER 545.

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

60

108. The second development of the law of confidence relates to the
acceptance of the privacy of personal information as something
worthy of protection in its own right which has been accepted also as
under the influence of domestic English Law and International
Human Rights Instrument.
109. Undoubtedly, the English Courts recognised that no preexisting relationship was required in order to establish a cause of
action for breach of confidentiality and that, an obligation of
confidence may arise from the nature of the material or may be
inferred from the circumstances in which it is obtained.
110. Thus, the artificiality of distinguishing between confidential
information obtained through the violation of a confidential
relationship and similar information obtained in some other way has
been recognised in privacy of personal information as something
worthy of protection in its own right has also been thereby recognised
and was applied by the Court of Appeal in A Vs. B. (A company)
(2002) 2 All ER 545.
111. It has also been stated by Sedley L.J., in his judgment in
Douglas Vs. Hello! Ltd. (2001) 2 All ER 289 at page 320
wherein he stated the new approach of the underlying values which
the law protects. Sedley L.J. has stated that instead of the cause of
action being based upon the duty of good faith applicable to
confidential personal information and trade secrets alike, it focuses

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

61

upon the protection of the human autonomy and dignity – the right
to control the dissemination of information about one's private life
and the right to the esteem and respect of other people.
112. The Judges in Campbell Vs. MGN (supra), recognised the fact
that the freedom of press and the common law right of the individual
to protect personal information reflect important civilised values.
However, neither can be given effect in full measure without
restricting the other. The right to privacy which would lie at the
epicentre of an action for breach of confidence has to be balanced
against the right of media to impart information to the public. As
against this, the right of the media to impart information to the public
has to be balanced against the respect that must be given to private
life.
113. While the importance of free media of communication in a
democracy cannot be sufficiently import emphasis, however, unlike
the United States of America, the courts in England and in this
country do not give the presumptive priority which is given to the
same in the United States of America.
114. The European Court of Human Rights in Jersild Vs.
Denmark (1995) 19 EHRR 1 (para 31 at page 25) held thus:"Whilst the press must not overstep the bounds set,
inter alia, in the interest of 'the protection of the
reputation and rights of others', it is nevertheless
incumbent on it to impart information and ideas of
public interest. Not only does the press have the
task of imparting such information and ideas: the
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

62

public also has a right to receive them. Were it
otherwise, the press would be unable to play its vital
role of 'public watchdog'."
115. The importance of free press having been emphasised and
recognised, the question which has been repeatedly raised before the
court is extent of the freedom available to the press to exercise its
discretion in the presentation of journalistic material. In the Jersild
case (supra), the applicant had urged that their freedom of expression
under Article 10 of the European Convention for the Protection of
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedom 1950 was infringed as
they were charged and convicted of committing offences resulting
from the choice of material that had been published. It was their
contention that they had a right to impart information and ideas of
public interest and it was the right of the public to receive such ideas.
In this context, the court had in para 31 at page 26 cautioned thus:"At the same time, the methods of objective and
balanced reporting may vary considerably,
depending among other things on the media in
question. It is not for this court, nor for the national
courts for that matter, to substitute their own views
for those of the press as to what technique of
reporting should be adopted by journalists. In this
context the court recalls that Article 10 protects not
only the substance of the ideas and information
expressed, but also the form in which they are
conveyed."
116. In this case, the court was required to strike a balance between
the conflicting rights of the press and the rights of the individual
inasmuch as any prohibition would interfere with the freedom to

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

63

disclose the information which had to be balanced against the claim
of the individual for confidentiality. The court had observed on the
scope of Article 10 of the Convention and had held that the same left
to the journalist to decide whether or not it was necessary to
reproduce the material to ensure credibility to the reporting. It was
observed that Article 10 protected the journalist's right to divulge
information on issues of general interest provided that they are acting
in good faith and on accurate basis and provide 'reliable and precise'
information in accordance with the ethics of journalism.
117. It is well settled by judicial pronouncements that the press must
not over-step certain limits especially those relating to the reputation
and rights of others and their need to prevent disclosure of
confidential information. At the same time, it is the duty of the press
to impart information and ideas on all matters of public interest and
serious public concern.

(Ref: (1999) 6 BHRC 599 Bladet

Tromso Vs. Norway)
118. In Douglas Vs. Hello! Ltd. (2001) 2 All ER 289 at page
322, the court had an occasion to consider right of free expression
under Article 10 which would be qualified by the rights of the
individual under Article 8. In the event of the conflict the balance
between these two Articles is determined and resolved primarily on
consideration of the proportionality principle.
119. It is equally well settled that the matter of presentation of

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

64

material which was legitimate to convey to the public without breach
of duty of confidence, is for the journalist to decide.

Choice of

language to convey information and ideas as to whether the printed
word is to be accompanied by photographs are editorial matters with
which courts do not normally interfere and recognising journalist's
requirement of the degree of free play and a reasonable margin of
appreciation in deciding as to what details are required to be included
in the article for reasons of credibility and legitimacy of the
publication would also be a pre-part of journalistic exercise.
However, the critical area is decision-making with regard to the
publication of material that is private to the individual which goes
beyond merely presentation of information and editing.
120. The potential for harm to result from the disclosure of the
information is an important factor which is to be taken into account
in assessment of the extent of restriction needed to protect an
individual's right to privacy.

Lord Hoffmann in his judgment in

Campbell Vs. MGN (supra) held that it was not sufficient to deprive
even a celebrity of his/her right to privacy. Undoubtedly, a celebrity's
right to privacy may be limited by the public interest in knowing
about certain traits of his/her personality and certain aspects of
his/her private life and the importance of the necessity to keep
certain details private could not be under valued. For this reason, it
was observed that there was no compelling need for the public to

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

65

know the name of the organisation that the claimant was attending
for her therapy or its details. It was noticed that being photographed
in a public street is taken to be one of the ordinary incidents of living
in a free community, the real issue was whether publicising the
content of the photograph would be offensive. The balance in such a
case has to be arrived at between the public right to information and
whether it would justify dissemination or publication of photograph
taken covertly and without authorisation. It was held that the text of
the publication could not be separated from the photographs and
their publication was effected to publish a story that would attract
interest rather than the wish to maintain credibility of the story.
Furthermore, the

photograph was not self-explanatory and the

additional element in the publication was more than enough to
outweigh the right to freedom of expression which the defendants
were asserting. Such publication of the details of the treatment and
also the photograph were held to be an

interference with the

plaintiff's right to live a private life. Baroness Hale of Richmond in a
separate judgment noted the fact that the agent of the plaintiff had
refused to participate with the newspaper about the publication.
121. So far as the information in respect of which right to privacy
could be asserted is concerned, the court has held that it could be
claimed in respect of information a person receiving knows or ought
to know that there is a reasonable expectation that the information in

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

66

question will be kept confidential [A Vs. B. (a company) (2002)
2 All ER 545].
122. In Campbell Vs. MGN supra, the House of Lords thus
noticed that the test refers to the sensibility of a reasonable person
placed in the situation of the subject of the disclosure than to its
recipients. Once the information is identified as 'private', the courts
are required to balance the claimant's interest in keeping the
information private against the countervailing interest of the
recipient in publishing it.
123. Baroness Hale expressed the view that when the two convention
rights as contained in Articles 8 and 10 are in play, the
proportionality of interfering with one has to be balanced against the
proportionality of restricting the other. On a consideration of the
facts of the case, it was held that neither the political and social life of
the community nor the intellectual, artistic or personal developments
of the individual are assisted by exposure to the intimate details of a
fashion model's private life. So far as the details of the treatment was
concerned, it was not necessary. Furthermore, the potential harm by
the publication of the photograph and the text may have impaired the
treatment and the therapy which was being taken by the plaintiff and
the others in the group required weight to be attached to these
considerations.
124. Lord Carswell had agreed with the reasons given by Lord

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

67

Hoffman and Baroness Hale and observed that the disclosure of the
treatment went beyond what could be considered peripheral to the
publication of the information that the plaintiff was a drug addict who
was

receiving

treatment

and

consequently,

was

capable

of

constituting breach of confidence. The defence and the motives of the
defendants in publishing the information which they claim to have
done in order to give a sympathetic treatment to the subject, was held
not to constitute a defence so far as the material relating to the details
of the treatment and the photograph was concerned. In balancing the
extent of distress to the plaintiff and the potential effect on the drug
therapy as against the freedom of press of the respondent, it was held
that the publication of the details about the therapy highlighted by
the photographs printed constituted an intrusion into the private
affairs of the plaintiff.
125. As against these views, Lord Nicholls of Birkenhead held that
on publication of the information would have robbed the legitimate
and sympathetic newspapers story of attendant detail which added
colour and conviction and that this information was published in
order to demonstrate the plaintiff's commitment to tackling her drug
problem. Lord Nicholls further held that the pictorial information in
the photograph also had nothing of an essentially private nature,
showed nothing untoward and conveyed no private information
beyond that discussed in the article. Consequently, according to him

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

68

the claimant must fail in the challenge.
126. Lord Hoffmann also held that the plaintiff was a public figure
who had made very public false statement about the matter in respect
of which even a public figure would ordinarily be entitled to privacy,
namely, her use of drugs. It was observed that a person may attract or
even seek publicity of some aspect of his/her life without creating any
public interest in the publication of public information about the
others. In the light of her falsehood, sufficient public interest in the
correction of the impression she had previously given. For this
reason, applying the test of necessity or proportionality, it was held
that it would be harsh to criticise the editor for “painting a somewhat
fuller picture in order to show her in a sympathetic light”. For this
reason, in the light of the fact that the main substance of the story
was conceded to have been justified, the details which were published
could not be said to be discreditable or embarrassing and that the
plaintiff could not insist upon too great a nicety of judgment in the
circumstantial detail with which the story is presented.
127. So far as the photograph was concerned, upon a consideration
of various judgments, Lord Hoffmann arrived at a conclusion that a
picture carried the message more strongly than anything in the text
alone, that the defendant's story was true and therefore, the decision
to publish the picture was within the margin of editorial judgment
and was something for which appropriate latitude should be allowed.

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

69

For this reason, Lord Hoffmann was of the view that the appeal
deserves to be rejected.
128. So far as truth of the essentials of a public story are concerned,
it is well settled that it is unreasonable to expect that in matters of
judgment any more than accuracy of reporting, newspapers will
always get it absolutely right.

In Reynolds Vs. Times

Newspapers Ltd. (1999) 4 All ER 609, it was held that to
require the newspaper to do so would tend to inhibit the publication
of facts which should, in the public interest, be made known.
129. Law on the issues raised in not as developed in this country as
in some other jurisdiction. Both sides have extensively relied on the
law as has evolved in USA and England. It may be noteworthy that
an extreme posture has been taken on both sides. While the plaintiff
has conceded that she is a public figure, however, an absolute
position has been taken that information relating to her income and
her financial standing is confidential and the respondents have no
right whatsoever to publish the same.
130. On the other hand, the defendants have taken up an absolute
position that the plaintiff is a public or a newsworthy figure and
consequently her right to privacy would get curtailed by the larger
right of the public with regard to information relating to her. It has
been contended that in any case, the information relating to finances
does not come within the domain of such information as would be

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

70

covered under any right to privacy of the plaintiff.
It has further been urged that looked at from any angle,
independent of the constitutionally recognised freedom of expression
as contained in Article 19 (1)(a) of the Constitution of India, the
defendants are required in the larger public interest to publish such
information about newsworthy persons which would be in
consonance with internationally well recognised principles that a free
press has to be encouraged. Therefore, even if the defendants, not
being Indian citizens, cannot assert a fundamental right to freedom of
speech, however a duty to inform the public has been urged. It is also
contended that the public has a right to knowledge which cannot be
curtailed by the plaintiff.
131. In this behalf, the defendants have placed the judgments of the
Court of Appeal in A v. B (a company & Anr.) reported at 2002
(EWCA Sciv) 337: (2002) 2 All ER 545. Strictly applied, this
judgment would be of little application to the case being considered
under the laws as applicable in this country inasmuch as this case was
concerned with the protection of the fundamental freedoms under
Articles 8 and 10 of the European Convention for the Protection of
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedom 1950 which are protected
by the courts in England by virtue of Section 12 and the Schedule 1 to
the Human Rights Act, 1998. However, the court had laid down
certain guidelines for the facilitation of courts while considering

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

71

claims of breach of right to privacy vis-a-vis the right of freedom of
press.
So far as the rights of a public figure was concerned, the court
noticed that :"a public figure was entitled to have his privacy
respected in appropriate circumstances, but should
recognise that because of his public position he had to
expect and accept that his or her actions would be more
closely scrutinised by the media. Conduct which, in the
case of a private individual, would not be the
appropriate subject of comment, could be the proper
subject of comment in the case of a public figure. Such
a person might be a legitimate subject of public
attention whether or not he had quoted publicity."
In this case, the court noticed that even though the claimant
had not courted publicity, someone in his position was inevitably a
figure in whom a section of the public and the media would be
interested.

Furthermore, the relationship of the sort that the

claimant had with others, disclosure whereof he was seeking an
injunction against, were not the categories of relationship which the
court should be astute to protect when the other parties to the
relationship did not want them to remain confidential.
132. In order to facilitate adjudication of the injunction application
by a claimant in cases relating to protection of the right to privacy,
the court had suggested certain guidelines.
(i) The fact that the injunction is being sought to protect privacy of
a claimant and if the injunction is not granted, the claimant may be
deprived of the only remedy which is of any value is a relevant
consideration. This has to be weighed against the defendant's right
of freedom of expression.
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

72

(ii) The injunction granted will interfere with the freedom of
expression of others in particular the freedom of the press is of
particular importance as the existence of a free press is in itself
desirable and so any interference with it has to be justified. This well
established common law principle is underlined by Section 12(4) of
the Human Rights Act, 1998 in England.
The justification is imperative inasmuch as the interference
with the press inevitably has some effect on the ability of the press to
perform its role in society. This position is irrespective of whether a
particular publication is desirable in the public interest.
133. The court also reiterated the principle that while the court is
required to have regard as to whether it would be in the public
interest for the material to be published, it does not mean that the
court would be justified in interfering with the freedom of press
where there is no identifiable special public interest in any particular
material being published. Regardless of the quality of the material
which it is intended to publish, prima facie the court should not
interfere with its publication. Any such interference with publication
must be justified.
134. So far as the question of whether there is an interest capable of
being the subject of a claim of privacy, it should not be allowed to be
the subject of detailed arguments. There must be some interest of
private nature which the claimant wishes to protect but usually the
answer to such question would be obvious and where it is not so, an
answer would be unnecessary. In such cases, the weaker the claim

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

73

for privacy, the more likely that the claim for privacy will be
outweighed by the claim based on freedom of expression.
135. The guidelines as to acts which are public and those which are
private in a difficult case is made clear by the observations of
Gleeson, CJ in

Australian Broadcasting Corp. Vs. Lenah

Game Meats Pty Ltd. (2001) 185 ALR 1 when such difficulty
was explained by him thus:“42. There is no bright line which can be drawn
between what is private and what is not. Use of the
term 'public' is often a convenient method of
contrast, but there is a large area in between what is
necessarily public and what is necessarily private.
An activity is not private simply because it is not
done in public. It does not suffice to make an act
private that, because it occurs on private property,
it has such measure of protection from the public
gaze as the characteristics of the property, the
nature of the activity, the locality, and the
disposition of the property owner combine to
afford. Certain kinds of information about a person,
such as information relating to health, personal
relationships, or finances, may be easy to identify as
private; as may certain kinds of activity, which a
reasonable
person,
applying
contemporary
standards of morals and behaviour, would
understand to be meant to be unobserved. The
requirement that disclosure or observation of
information or conduct would be highly offensive to
a reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities is in
many circumstances a useful practical test of what
is private.”
136. The fact that information has been obtained as a result of
unlawful activities does not mean that its publication should
necessarily be restrained by injunction on the grounds of breach of
confidence [Ref: Australian Broadcasting Corp. Vs. Lenah
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

74

Game Meats Pty Ltd. (2001) 185 ALR 1)]. Dependent on the
nature of the unlawful activity, there may be other remedies. On the
other hand, the fact that unlawful means have been used to obtain the
information could well be a compelling factor when it comes to
exercising discretion.
137. An important guideline laid down by the court in A Vs. B (a
company) (supra) as to the limitation on the right of privacy of a
public figure is to be found in guideline no. (xii) which reads thus:-

“(xii). Where an individual is a public figure he is
entitled to have his privacy respected in the
appropriate circumstances. A public figure is
entitled to a private life. The individual, however,
should recognise that because of his public position
he must expect and accept that his actions will be
more closely scrutinised by the media. Even trivial
facts relating to a public figure can be of great
interest to readers and other observers of the
media. Conduct which in the case of a private
individual would not be the appropriate subject of
comment can be the proper subject of comment in
the case of a public figure. The public figure may
hold a position where higher standards of conduct
can be rightly expected by the public. The public
figure may be a role model whose conduct could
well be emulated by others. He may set the fashion.
The higher the profile of the individual concerned
the more likely that this will be the position.
Whether you have courted publicity or not you may
be a legitimate subject of public attention. If you
have courted public attention then you have less
ground to object to the intrusion which follows. In
many of these situations it would be overstating the
position to say that there is a public interest in the
information being published. It would be more
accurate to say that the public have an
understandable and so a legitimate interest in being
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

75

told the information. If this is the situation then it
can be appropriately taken into account by a court
when deciding on which side of the line a case falls.
The courts must not ignore the fact that if
newspapers do not publish information which the
public are interested in, there will be fewer
newspapers published, which will not be in the
public interest. The same is true in relation to other
parts of the media.”
138. So far as the Courts in England are concerned, useful guidance
is provided by the Council of Europe Resolution 1165 of 1998 wherein
the expression public figure has been defined as the persons holding
public office and/or using public resources and, more broadly
speaking, all those who play a role in public life, whether in politics,
the economy, the arts, the social sphere, sport or in any other
domain.
139. So far as balancing of the respective interests of the parties are
concerned, guideline (xiii) laid down by the court in A Vs. B. (A
company) (Supra) should be read in extenso which reads thus:“(xiii). In drawing up a balance sheet between the
respective interests of the parties courts should not
act as censors or arbiters of taste. This is the task of
others.
If there is not a sufficient case for
restraining publication the fact that a more lurid
approach will be adopted by the publication than
the court would regard as acceptable is not relevant.
If the contents of the publication are untrue the law
of defamation provides prohibition. Whether the
publication will be attractive or unattractive should
not affect the result of an application if the
information is otherwise not the proper subject of
restraint.”
140. In this case, the court had emphasised the importance of a free

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

76

press and had also emphasised the necessity to exercise restraint so
far as grant of injunction is concerned.

The court endorsed the

approach of Hoffmann LJ, in R Vs. Central Independent
Television plc (1994) 3 All ER 641 at 652 wherein he had stated
thus:“.....publication may cause needless pain, distress
and damage to individuals or harm to other aspects
of the public interest. But a freedom which is
restricted to what judges think to be responsible or
in the public interest is no freedom. Freedom
means the right to publish things which
government and judges, however well motivated,
think should not be published. It means the right
to say things which 'right-thinking people' regard as
dangerous or irresponsible. This freedom is subject
only to clearly defined exceptions laid down by
common law or statute ....The principle that the
press is free from both government and judicial
control is more important than the particular case.”
141. So far as the balancing of conflicting rights is concerned, the
courts have repeatedly emphasised that where the balance may not
point clearly in either direction, interim relief to a claimant or
plaintiff seeking interim injunction in the nature of a prohibition of a
publication should be refused. There have also been instances where
the nature of information alone gave rise to the duty of confidence
regardless of the circumstances in which the information might come
to the knowledge of the person who might wish to publish it. It has
been repeatedly noticed in several pronouncements of the House of
Lords that the most dramatic use of the law of confidence to protect
privacy was in Venables Vs. News Group Newspapers Ltd.,
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

77

Tomson Vs. News Group Newspapers Ltd. (2001) 1 All ER
908. In this case Dame Elizebett Butler – Sloss P granted injunction
against the whole world restraining the disclosure of the new
identities and whereabouts of the boys convicted of killing James
Bulger, after they were released from prison. The President held that,
taking into account the European Convention, the law of confidence
could extend to cover the injunction sought and that the disclosure of
information in question might lead to grave, and possibly fatal
consequences for the claimant. This factor not merely rendered the
information confidential but outweighed the freedom of expression
that would otherwise have under-opined the right of the press to
publish the information.
142. The plaintiff has placed strong reliance on the pronouncement
of the Court of Appeal in Douglas & Ors. Vs. Hello! Ltd. & Ors.
(2005) 4 All ER 128.
publication

in

These proceedings arose out of the

England and Wales

by

Hello!

magazine

of

unauthorised photographs of Mr. Michael Douglas and Catherine
Zeta-Jones of the wedding reception in New York. Undoubtedly, as
soon as their engagement was announced in early 2000, there had
been interest in their marriage from the press.

The Douglases

decided to grant rights to one publisher to publish photographs of
their wedding. They accordingly granted such right by a contract to
the OK! magazine.

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

The contract between the parties contained

78

several clauses whereby the

Douglases retained the right to

scrutinise the photographs which could be published. One member of
the press infiltrated the reception which was closely protected and
surreptitiously took photographs for which he approached the Hello!
magazine.

Information with regard to the intention of Hello!

magazine to publish these unauthorisedly acquired photographs was
received by the

Douglases through the OK! magazine who

consequently filed an action seeking interlocutory injunction against
the publication of such photographs by the Hello! magazine.
In this case, though initially only injunctive relief had been
sought, however, as the interlocutory injunction was discharged, the
plaintiffs also sought damages. The court took the view that as per
the reasoning of the House of Lords in the Campbell case and the
reasoning of the European Court of Human Rights in Hanover Vs.
Germany, the conclusion which the Court of Appeal would have
reached would have been that the
unanswerable

case

for

contending

Douglases had virtually an
that

publication

of

the

unauthorised photographs would infringe their privacy. The Hello!
magazine had inter alia urged that the rights to the photographs
having been sold to OK! magazine, the information and the
photographs were in the public domain and that it was no longer
possible for the Douglases to assert a claim that the event at their
wedding was private or confidential. After a detailed consideration of

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

79

the various issues raised by the parties, the court inter alia held thus:"105. In general, however, once information is in the
public domain, it will no longer be confidential or
entitled to the protection of the law of confidence,
though this may not always be true: see Gilbert v.
Star Newspaper Co. Ltd. (1894) 51 TLR 4 and
Creation Records Ltd. v. News Group Newspapers
Ltd. (1997) EMLR 444 at 456. The same may
generally be true of private information of a
personal nature.
Once intimate personal
information about a celebrity's private lift has been
widely published it may serve no useful purpose to
prohibit further publication. The same will not
necessarily be true of photographs. In so far as a
photograph does more than convey information and
intrudes on privacy by enabling the viewer to focus
on intimate personal detail, there will be a fresh
intrusion of privacy when each additional viewer
sees the photograph and even when once who has
seen a previous publication of the photograph, is
confronted by a fresh publication of it. To take an
example, if a film star were photographed, with the
aid of a telephoto lens, lying naked by her private
swimming pool, we question whether widespread
publication of the photograph by a popular
newspaper would provide a defence to a legal
challenge to repeated publication on the ground that
the information was in the public domain. There is
thus a further important potential distinction
between the law relating to private information and
that relating to other types of confidential
information."
“254. Of course, even where a claimant has a very
strong case indeed for contending that publication
of information would infringe his privacy, there
may be good reasons for refusing an interlocutory
injunction. In the present case, however, we find it
difficult to see how it could be contended that the
public interest (as opposed to public curiosity)
could be involved over and above the general public
interest in a free press. Particularly so, as it was
clearly the intention of the Douglases and OK to
publish a large number of (much clearer)
photographs of the same event. The fact that the
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

80

Douglases can be fairly said to have 'traded' their
privacy to a substantial extent as a result of their
contract with OK! does not undermine the point
that publication of the unauthorised photographs
would infringe their privacy.
xxxx
xxxx
258. Of course, as recently emphasised by the
House of Lords in Cream Holdings Ltd. Vs.
Banerjee (2004) UKHL 44, (2004) 4 All ER 617,
(2004) 3 WLR 918, a claimant seeking an
interlocutory injunction restraining publication has
to satisfy a particularly high threshold test, in light
of Section 12(3) of the Human Rights Act, 1998.
However, with the benefit of the reasoning in
Campbell's case and Von Hannover v Germany, we
consider that this threshold test was in fact satisfied
by the Douglases when they sought the
interlocutory injunction in this case.
259. The Douglases had a very strong claim;
indeed, in the light of the two recent authorities to
which we have referred, we would have thought
that it was one which may well have been clear
enough to justify summary judgment in their
favour. The award of damages eventually made to
the Douglases, although unassailable in principle,
was not at a level which, when measured against
the effect of refusing them an interlocutory
injunction, can fairly be characterised as adequate
or satisfactory.
Only by the grant of an
interlocutory injunction could the Douglases' rights
have been satisfactorily protected. Further, the
interests of Hello! at the interlocutory stage, which
were essentially only financial, could have been
protected by an appropriate undertaking in
damages by the Douglases.”
143. It is noteworthy that this case is truly not a case of invasion of
privacy. Here the plaintiff and his wife had sold the rights in their
wedding to the O.K. Magazine and Hello! was seeking to use some
unauthorized photographs thereof to derive mileage out of the same.
Issues of contract arose for consideration before the court.

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

81

144. The boundaries of public interest render it difficult to define the
scope of legitimate private area of the life of a public figure. However,
some guidance is to be found from the judicial pronouncements
noticed hereinabove.
Mr. Rajiv Nayyar, learned senior counsel appearing for the
plaintiff has urged that matters relating to finances would be covered
under the expression 'among other matters', noticed by the Apex
Court in R. Rajagopal Vs. State of Tamil Nadu & Ors. On the other
hand, Mr. Soli Sorabjee, learned senior counsel for the defendants
has urged that 'among other matters' would include such matters
which are of a like nature to the personal matters specifically noted by
the Apex Court and that the finances of a Corporation or a corporate
group would not fall within the ambit of such matters.
145. Newsworthiness has been defined broadly to include not only
the matters of public policy, but any matter of public concern,
including the accomplishments, everyday lives and humanity
involvements of famous people. However, if the publicity is so
offensive as to constitute a sensational prying into private lives for its
own sake, it serves no legitimate public interest and is not deserving
of protection. (Ref: Lexsee 5F Supp. 2d 823 Bret Michaels Vs.
Internet Entertainment Group Inc. & Ors.)
146. The economic wealth accumulated by the corporate group and
its financial placement in society is certainly an accomplishment.

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

82

147. Mr. Soli Sorabjee, learned senior counsel for the defendants has
relied in this regard on 17 L Ed 2d page 456 Times Inc. Vs.
James J. Hill in support of his contention that the constitutional
protection of freedom speech and press precludes false reports of
matters of public interest in the absence of proof that the defendants
published the report with knowledge of its falsity or in reckless
disregard of the truth. The guarantees for speech and press are not
the preserve of political expression or comment on public affairs,
essential as those are to healthy government. One need only pick up
any newspaper or magazine to comprehend the vast range of
published matter which exposes persons to public view, both private
citizens and public officials. Exposure of the self to others in varying
degrees is a concomitant of life in a civilized community. The risk of
this exposure is an essential incident of life in a society which places a
primary value on freedom of speech and press.
However, false statements made with reckless disregard of the
truth do not enjoy the constitutional protection to freedom of speech
and press.
148. So far issues relating to finance are concerned, the judgment
rendered by the European Court of Human Rights on 21st January,
1999 in Application No. 29183/1995 Fressoz & Roire Vs. France make
interesting reading.
In this case, at the time of a trade unrest in the Peugeot Motor

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

83

Company, the Fressoz and Roire published an article giving details of
increase in the remuneration of the Company's Chairman and M.D.
and also reproduced the photocopies of his notices of assessment to
tax. The Chairman Mr. Calvet lodged a complaint claiming damages
complaining against the unlawful removal and possession of
confidential documents.
Mr. Fressoz and Mr. Roire were found guilty of handling
photocopies of Mr. Calvet's tax returns obtained through a breach of
professional confidence by an unidentified tax officials and were
sentenced to fines and damages.

They appealed to the Court of

Cassation on point of law and maintained that the tax assessment was
not covered by duty to preserve confidentiality but contained
information which was available to the public. It was held by the
Court of Cassation that the article was published during an industrial
dispute which was widely reported by the press at one of the major
French car manufacturers. The workers were seeking a pay rise which
the management was refusing and the article showed that the
company's Chairman had received large pay increases during the
period under consideration while at the same time opposing his
employees' claim for a rise. Thus, by making such a comparison
against that background, the article contributed to a public debate on
a matter of general interest. It was not intended to damage Mr.
Calvet's reputation but to contribute to the more general debate on a

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

84

topic that interested the public.

The court specifically held that

questions relating to the finances of public figures, such as heads of
major companies, do not concern their private life.
149. In this case, the issue related to disclosure of information which
was confidential as it was contained in the taxpayer's tax file. It was
held that it was lawful to disclose information about the taxpayer's
income. The question which was raised before the court was whether
publication of the document in which that information was to be
found could be justified under Article 10 of the European Convention
for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedom 1950.
The issue which was raised before the court was whether the objective
of preserving

fiscal confidentiality constituted a relevant and

sufficient justification for interference with the freedom of press
under Article 10.
The court was thus required to strike a balance between the
conflicting rights of the press and the rights of the individual
inasmuch as any prohibition would interfere with the freedom to
disclose the information which had to be balanced against the claim
of the individual for confidentiality. The court had observed on the
scope of Article 10 of the Convention and had held that the same left
to the journalist to decide whether or not it was necessary to
reproduce the material to ensure credibility to the reporting. It was
observed that Article 10 protected the journalist's right to divulge

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

85

information on issues of general interest provided that they are acting
in good faith and on accurate basis and provide 'reliable and precise'
information in accordance with the ethics of journalism.
150. In a judgment of the United States Court of Appeals for the
Sixth Circuit reported at 305 F. 3d 566 Philip D. Overstreet Vs.
Lexington

Fayette

UR-Ban

County

Government,

the

appellant had filed a suit complaining of infringement of infraction of
his right to privacy by the office employer requiring the employee to
list the addresses of the owners on record for all real estate in the
county in which the employee or a member of his immediate family
has an interest and connected information.

The appellant

complained that the information which was demanded amounted to
violation of the appellant's right to privacy. It was held that the
privacy interest one may have in one's personal finances and real
estate holdings is far afield from the intimate concerns involving
fundamental interest or an interest that is implicit in the concept of
ordered liberty.
It was held that even if the facts did implicate a fundamental
interest of Mr. Overstreet, the mandatory disclosure was justified by
a substantial, possibly compelling state interest which was the
Government's interest in deterring corruption and conflicts of
interest among the city officers and employees and enhancing public
confidence in the integrity of the Government. It was thus held that

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

86

even if the facts did implicate a fundamental interest of the plaintiff,
the plaintiff's right to privacy claim would fail because the same
would be outweighed by the public interest in the disclosure of his
personal information.
151.

Mr. Rajiv Nayar, learned senior counsel has relied on the

observations in Australian Boradcasting Corp. Vs. Lenah Game Meats
Pty. Ltd. wherein a reference to information relating to finance falling
in the private domain has been made. It is noteworthy that other
than such reference, there is no discussion of the same. There was
even no issue on this aspect in this case. Consequently such obiter
would have no binding force.
V.

Whether publication can be prohibited and principles

governing grant of injunction.
152. The Supreme Court had an occasion to consider a petition
wherein it was observed that a substantial question of law and public
importance on the fundamental right of the citizens regarding the
freedom of speech and expression under Article (19)(1)(a) of the
Constitution of India and the scope of freedom of press was involved.
In the judgment reported at (2007) 1 SCC 143 Ajay Goswami
Vs. UOI & Ors., a petition under Article 32 of the Constitution of
India was filed asserting that the freedom of speech and expression
enjoyed by the newspaper industry is not keeping balance with the
protection of children from harmful and disturbing material; and that

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

87

Article (19)(1)(a) guarantees freedom of speech and expression of the
individual as well as the Press. The submission was that while Article
19(1)(a) acknowledges that the press is free to express its ideas, but
on the same hand, the individual also has a right to their own space
and a right not to be exposed against their will to other's expression
of ideas and action. Several directions were sought on the plea that it
was necessary to protect vulnerable minors from indiscriminate
exposure to material having sexual content. In this behalf, the court
held that the commitment to freedom of expression demands that it
cannot be suppressed unless the situation created by allowing the
freedom are pressing and community interest is endangered.

In

order for the State to justify prohibition of a particular expression of
opinion, it must be able to show that this action was caused by
something more than a mere desire to avoid the discomfort and
unpleasantness that always accompany an unpopular view point. It
was further observed that the incident of shielding minors should not
be that the adult population is restricted to reading and seeing what is
fit only for children. There should be no suppression of speech and
expression in protecting children from harmful material.
153. Examining the material complained of, which were pictures
published by the respondent with the intent to inform readers of
current entertainment news from around the world and India, the
court noticed that the respondent's newspaper seeks to provide a

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

88

wholesome reading experience offering current affairs, sports,
politics as well as entertainment news to keep its readers abreast of
all the latest happenings in the world. The pictures that have been
published are not be viewed in isolation. Rather they have to be read
with the news report next to them. In the event that a particular news
item or picture offends any person, they may avail of remedies
available to them under the present legal framework. It was held that
any steps to ban publishing of such programmes would amount to
pre-judging the matter and further that any steps to ban publishing of
certain news pieces or pictures would fetter the independence of
press, which is one of the hallmarks of a democratic set up.
In this case, the court noticed that circulation of news was not
limited to the Times of India and Hindustan Times, the papers
objected to who were impleaded as respondents 3 and 4 and that any
hyper-sensitive person objecting to the material published by these
newspapers can subscribe to any other newspaper(s) of their choice,
which might not be against the standards of morality of the person
concerned.
154. Certain very pertinent and relevant observations were made by
the court in order to assess the standard which is to be adopted for
rendering judgment. It was held that the standard to be adopted for
assessing the material should be that of an ordinary man of common
sense and prudence and not an "out of ordinary or hyper-sensitive

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

89

man".

In this behalf, the principles laid down by the court are

extremely instructive and deserve to be noticed in extenso and read
thus:“71. The test for judging a work should be that of an
ordinary man of common sense and prudence and not an
“out of the ordinary or hypersensitive man”.
As
Hidayatullah, C.J. Remarked in K.A. Abbas: (SCC p.802,
para 49)
“If the depraved begins to see in these things
more than what an average person would, in
much the same way, as it is wrongly said, a
Frenchman sees a woman's legs in everything,
it cannot be helped.”
78. Be that as it may, the respondents are leading
newspapers in India and they have to respect the freedom
of speech and expression as is guaranteed by our
Constitution and in fact reaches out to its readers any
responsible and decent manner. ......... Times of India and
Hindustan Times are leading newspapers in Delhi having
substantial subscribers from all sections. It has been
made clear by learned counsel appearing for the leading
newspapers that it is not their intention to publish
photographs which cater to the prurient interest. As
already stated, they have an internal regulatory system to
ensure no objectionable photographs or matters get
published. We are able to see that Respondents 3 & 4 are
conscious of their responsibility towards children but at
the same time it would be inappropriate to deprive the
adult population of the entertainment which is well
within the acceptable levels of decency on the ground that
it may not be appropriate for the children. An imposition
of a blanket ban on the publication of certain
photographs and news items, etc. will lead to a situation
where the newspaper will be publishing material which
caters only to children and adolescents and the adults will
be deprived of reading their share of entertainment which
can be permissible under the normal norms of decency in
any society.
xxx

xxx

xxx

xxx

79. We are also of the view that a culture of
“responsible reading” should be inculcated among the
readers of any news article. No news item should be
viewed or read in isolation. It is necessary that a
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

90

publication must be judged as a whole and news items,
advertisements or passages should not be read without
the accompanying message that is purported to be
conveyed to the public. Also the members of the public
and readers should not look for meanings in a picture or
written article, which are not conceived to be conveyed
through the public or the news items.
80. We observe that, as decided by the U.S. Supreme
Court in United States v. Playboy Entertainment Group
Inc. that,
“in order for the State .... to justify prohibition
of a particular expression of opinion, it must be able
to show that its action was caused by something
more than a mere desire to avoid the discomfort and
unpleasantness that always accompany an unpopular
viewpoint”.
Therefore, in our view, in the present matter, the
petitioner has failed to establish his case clearly. The
petitioner only states that the pictures and the news
items that are published by Respondents 3 and 4 “leave
much for the thoughts of minors”.
81. Therefore, we believe that fertile imagination of
anybody, especially of minors should not be a matter that
should be agitated in the court of law. In addition we also
hold that news is not limited to Times of India and
Hindustan Times.
Any hypersensitive person can
subscribe to many other newspapers of their choice, which
might not be against the standards of morality of the
person concerned.”

155. In para 74 of Ajay Goswami's case (supra), the court has clearly
held that "in the event that a particular news item or picture offends
any person they may avail of the remedies available to them under
the present legal framework. Any steps to impose a blanket ban on
publishing of such photographs, in our opinion, would amount to
pre-judging the matter as has been held in Fraser Vs. Evans
(1969) 1 All ER 81.”
156. When an action seeking injunction and damages against
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

91

publication is brought, several defences including truth, justification,
fair comment, public interest are available to the defendant.
157. The effect of such plea has fallen for consideration in courts in
United States, UK, Australia etc. as also in a few cases in this country.
In this behalf, the observations of Lord Denning in (1969) 1 All ER
Fraser Vs. Evans, are both topical and instructive, wherein the
learned Judge has made observations on the effect of a plea of
justification taken by the defendant. The court observed thus:"...The Court will not restrain the publication of an
article, even though it is defamatory, when the
defendant says that he intends to justify it or to make
fair comment on a matter of public interest. That has
been established for many years since Bonnard Vs.
Perryman (1). The reason sometimes given is that the
defences of justification and fair comment are for the
jury, which is the constitutional Tribunal, and not for a
Judge; but a better reason is the importance in the
public interest that the truth should be out."

158. In a later judgment reported at (1982) All ER 701 Harakas
Vs. Baltic Mercantile and Shipping Exchange Ltd., Lord
Denning had held that "this court never grants an injunction in
respect of libel when it is said by the defendant that the words are
true and that he is going to justify them. So also, when an occasion is
protected by qualified privilege, this court never grants an injunction
to restrain a slander or libel, to prevent a person from exercising that
privilege, unless it is shown that what the defendant proposes to say
is known by him to be untrue so that it is clearly malicious. So long as
he proposes to say that he honestly believes to be true, no injunction
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

92

should be granted against him. That was made clear in Quartz Hill
Consolidated Gold Mining Co. Vs. Beal, (1882) 20 ChI 501.
Lord Denning has observed that this principle must be observed.
159. So far as the balance which is to be reached between the
freedom of press and the right to privacy of an individual is
concerned, when one is placed against the other, the question arises
as to what would be of supremacy. While considering the right of
freedom of expression and speech under Article (19)(1)(a), the Apex
Court has held that such right should not be suppressed unless the
situations created by allowing the freedom are pressing and the
community interest is endangered. The court had held that the two
interests cannot be balanced as if they are of equal weight. Regard
can usefully be made to the observations of the Apex Court in its
pronouncement reported at (1989) 2 SCC 574, S. Rangarajan
Vs. P. Jagajivan Ram, wherein the court has held thus:"41. 'When men differ in opinion, both sides ought
equally to have the advantage of being heard by the
public.' (Benjamin Franklin). If one is allowed to say
that policy of the Government is good, another is with
equal freedom entitled to say that it is bad. If one is
allowed to support the governmental scheme, the other
could as well say, that he will not support it. The
different views are allowed to be expressed by
proponents and opponent not because they are correct,
or valid but because there is freedom in this county for
expressing even differing views on any issue.
xxx
xxx
xxx
43. Brandies, J., in Whitney V. California propounded
probably the most attractive free speech theory:
"....that the greatest menace to freedom is an inert
people; that public discussion is a political duty; ....It is
hazardous to discourage thought, hope and imagination;
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

93

that the path of safety lies in the opportunity to discuss
freely supposed grievances and proposed remedies; and
that the fitting remedy for evil counsels is good ones."
44. What Archibald Cox said in his article though on
"First Amendment" is equally relevant here:
"Some propositions seem true or false beyond rational
debate. Some false and harmful, political and religious
doctrine gain wide public acceptance. Adolf Hitler's
brutal theory of a "master race" is sufficient example.
We tolerate such foolish and sometimes dangerous
appeals not because they may prove true but because
freedom of speech is indivisible. The liberty cannot be
denied to some ideas and saved for others. The reason is
plain enough: no man, no committee, and surely no
Government,
has
the
infinite
wisdom
and
disinterestedness accurately and unselfishly to separate
what is true from what is debatable, and both from what
is false. To license one to impose his truth upon
dissenters is to give the same licence to all others who
have, but fear to lose, power. The judgment that the
risks of suppression are greater than the harm done by
bad ideas rests upon faith in the ultimate good sense and
decency of free people.
45. The problem of defining the area of freedom of
expression when it appears to conflict with the various
social interests enumerated under Article 19(2) may
briefly be touched upon here. There does indeed have to
be a compromise between the interest of freedom of
expression and special interests. But we cannot
simply balance the two interests as if they are of
equal weight. Our commitment of freedom of
expression demands that it cannot be
suppressed unless the freedom are pressing and
the community interest is endangered. The
anticipated danger should not be remote,
conjectural or far-fetched.
It should have
proximate and direct nexus with the expression.
The expression of thought should be intrinsically
dangerous to the public interest. In other words,
the expression should be inseparably locked up with the
action contemplated like the equivalent of a 'spark in a
power keg'."

160. The issue of grant of injunction in a prayer made by a public
official against publishing matters without prior permission in a suit
for damages and injunction based on a plea of defamatory publication

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

94

has fallen for consideration before a Division Bench of the Madras
High Court.

In a judgment reported at (2006) 2 M.L.J. 689

entitled Rajagopal Vs. Ms. J. Jayalalitha & Another, placing
reliance on the afore-noticed pronouncements of the Apex Court; the
Supreme Court of the United States of America as well as of the
House of Lords, U.K., the court held that in a democratic set up, a
close and microscopic examination of private lives of public men is
the natural consequence of holding of public offices. What is good for
a private citizen who does not come within the public gaze may not be
true of a person holding a public office. What a person holding public
office does within the four walls of his house does not totally remain a
private matter. However, the scrutiny of public figures by media
should not also reach a stage where it amounts to harassment to the
public figures and their family members and they must be permitted
to live and lead their life in peace.

But the public gaze cannot be

avoided which is a necessary corollary of their holding public offices.
So far as the relief sought by the respondents that the
appellants should be asked to seek prior verification from the
respondents before publishing any articles and publish the denial, if
any, of the respondents was concerned, the Division Bench of Madras
High Court had observed that the Supreme Court in R. Rajagopal's
case (supra) had only indicated that the proof that the member of the
press or media acted after a reasonable verification of the facts was

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

95

sufficient and that it had also held that the citizen has a right to
safeguard the privacy of his own and other matters which were set
out therein and none can publish anything in reference to those
matters without his/her consent.
So far as a public official is concerned, the Division Bench held
that "if an article is purely relating to the personal life of a public
official, it would be necessary for the member of the press or media to
publish such article only after a reasonable verification of the facts."
It would thus be necessary for the member of the press and
media to publish such article only after a reasonable verification of
the facts. The position may, however, be, be different if a person
voluntarily thrust himself or herself into a controversy or voluntarily
invites or raises a controversy.
161. In this case, the Division Bench quashed an order of injunction
passed by the learned Single Judge and gave limited direction to the
appellant to the effect that whenever they propose to publish any
article purely concerning the personal life of the first or second
respondent or both, they shall forward their queries and/or gist of the
proposed article to the respondents who may respond to the same by
fax. In case of non-receipt of any response within a time frame, the
respondents were free to proceed to publish the article. So far as the
response of the respondents was concerned, the court observed that it
was expected of any reasonable member of the press to also indicate

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

96

the version of the official concerned.
162. Thus, so far as law in India is concerned, it is recognised that
the right to freedom of press even as recognised by the Constitution is
not an absolute and unfettered right. So far as the right to privacy is
concerned, the courts have recognised the distinction between a
private person and the public official or public figures.
163. The Division Bench of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay
in the case of Dr. Yashwant Trivedi Vs. Indian Express
Newspapers (Bombay) Pvt. Ltd. decided on 29th June, 1989 in
Appeal No.464/1989, had occasion to consider a claim for
interlocutory injunction against publication. In this judgment, the
Division Bench of High Court of Bombay was called upon to consider
a plea of justification raised by a defendant in a prayer for
interlocutory injunction against publication in a libel action. In this
judgment the Division Bench placed reliance on the pronouncement
in Harakas Vs. Baltic Mercantile & Shipping Exchange
(Supra) as also on a publication in the “Treatise on Libel and
Slender” by Gaitley, Eighth Edition and held that “the crux of the
matter is that when in a libel action at the interlocutory stage, the
defendant raises plea of justification and, as in this case, mentions
evidence by which he might substantiate his case, the court is unlikely
to grant an interlocutory injunction in favour of the plaintiff to
restrain further publication of the alleged libel”.

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

97

164. In the “Treatise of Libel and Slander” by Gaitley, Eighth
Edition, the principles on which a plea of justification for the
publication shall be considered, have been laid down thus:“1574. Justification: When the defendant swears that
he will be able to justify the words - unless the court is
satisfied that he will be able to do so. The validity of a
justification, if pleaded, is eminently a matter to be
determined by a verdict of a jury. When once a
defendant says that he is going to justify the words
complained of, there is an end of the case so far as an
interim injunction is concerned, although in a proper
case it may be that the court will intervene on the
ground of breach of confidence”.

165. In decision of the Bombay High Court reported in AIR 2004
Bombay 143 Shree Maheshwar Hydel Power Corporation
Vs. Chitroopa Palit & Anr., the court has noticed the distinction
in the principles of law as applicable in England and in India with
regard to grant of interlocutory reliefs in civil actions for liable. In
this behalf, the court noticed that in England, the principle of law was
that in an action for defamation in England, a mere plea of
justification of the publication by the defendant would be sufficient to
deny the plaintiff any interim relief.

In India, a mere plea of

justification would not sufficient for denial of the interim relief. The
defendants, apart from taking a plea of justification, would have to
show that the statements were made bona fide and were in public
interest, and, that the defendants had taken reasonable precaution to
ascertain truth, and that the statements were based on sufficient
material which would be tested for its veracity. Placing reliance on
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

98

earlier judicial pronouncements, it was held by the court that:“Therefore, In India, the court is very much entitled
to scrutinize the material tendered by the
defendants so as to test its veracity and to find out
whether the said statements were made bona fide
and that whether they were in public interest.
Therefore, in India, even at the interlocutory stage,
the Court is produced by the defendants for the plea
of justification, so as to test its veracity with regard
to the allegations, alleged to be defamatory.”
166. In this case, the court examined the allegations which had been
made and the material placed by the respondent on record and came
to a conclusion that all kinds of statements and imputations which
were in the nature of wild allegations, had been made and the tenor of
the expression in the press note showed that the same did not
indicate that the same had been made bona fide and in the larger
public interest. It was observed that if the respondents were keen
about making a statement in large public interest, there were means
and ways by which the same could have been communicated but not
by the use of the highly damaging expressions and that the
respondent had not taken a reasonable precaution of ascertaining the
truth about the publication.
In para 54 of the judgment the court had also held that the kind
of fetter on the States power to limit the freedom enshrined under
Article 19 as is contemplated under clause 2 of the same, is limited.
However, so far as two private parties as the appellant and the
respondents were concerned, the respondents could not claim such

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

99

an unfettered right of freedom of speech and expression against the
appellant company. In these circumstances, the court held that the
Bombay City Civil Court had misapplied the principle of law
inasmuch as it had denied injunction despite the finding that the
defendant had made statements which could not be fully justified and
they ought to have refrained from making the same. Consequently,
the refusal to grant injunction on the basis of the plea of justification
of the defendant was held to be erroneous and the High Court had
granted an interim injunction against the respondents restraining
them from making defamatory statements against the appellant
imputing financial irregularity and or dishonesty etc.
167. Some of the issues which have arisen before this court fell for
consideration before a Division Bench of this court.

In its

pronouncement reported at AIR 2002 Delhi 58 Khushwant
Singh & Anr. Vs. Maneka Gandhi, the Division Bench was called
upon to consider the legality of a pre-publication injunction order
passed by the learned Single Judge of this court. The respondent had
filed a suit for damages and injunction against the author, publisher
and distributor of the appellant;s biography. She was aggrieved by
recitals therein relating to her family, imputing actions and planted
words and sentences to the members of the respondents family and
stated derogatory comments about them. Invoking her right to
privacy, she also prayed for interlocutory restraint order against the

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

100

appellants

from

publishing,

circulating

or

selling

the

said

autobiography or any extract thereof. By an order dated 29th April,
1997, learned Single Judge confirmed the ex parte order passed on
16th December, 1995 restraining the appellants from publishing the
autobiography. This order was assailed before the Division Bench.
The court observed that the subject matter of the injuncted
publication was in the ambit of public domain in terms of there
having been prior reporting of matter in controversy and the
comments on the same. Furthermore, the court was not required to
examine the statements attributed to appellant no.1 on the
touchstone of defamation inasmuch as it was not the appropriate
stage. What the court was required to observe and which it did was
that the statements are not of such a nature as to grant injunction
even from publication of the material when the appellants are willing
to face the consequences in a trial in case the same are held to be
defamatory and the pleas of appellants of truth are analysed by the
trial court.
168. The Division Bench also observed that the scrutiny of public
figures by media is a natural consequence of holding of public office.
What is good for a private citizen who would not come within the
public gaze,

may not be true of a person holding public office.

However, it was reiterated that such scrutiny by media should not
reach the stage of harassment to the public figures and their family

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

101

members and that such public gaze could not be avoided which was a
necessary corollary of their holding public office.
169. The court also placed reliance on the observations in New York
Times Vs. United States (1971) 403 US 173 popularly known as
Pentagon case holding that it succinctly laid down the correct view to
the effect that in case of imposition of a prior restraint, there was a
heavy burden on the governmental authorities to show justification
for such restraint. The remedy was held to be by way of damages and
not an order of restraint on publication.
Interlocutory injunction was also denied to the plaintiff by the
Division Bench for the reason that prior publication had occurred
much prior to the filing of the suit and that the plaintiff had been
dilatory.
In this behalf, the court held thus:“65. This aspect of right of privacy analysed in view of
the conclusions of the Supreme Court as set forth in R.
Rajagopal's case (supra)fully support the argument
advanced by the learned counsel for the appellant. Thus
the observations strongly relied upon by Mr. Panjwani,
learned counsel for the respondent, on the first point
summarised by the Supreme Court cannot be read out of
the context. As explained hereinabove the concept of
consent, while dealing with the private lives of the
persons was made in respect of the claim for damages.
Not only this the Supreme Court further went on to
observe that the position would be different if a person
voluntarily thrusts himself into a controversy or
voluntarily invites or raises a controversy. Suffice it to
say that the respondent in fact at the relevant time drew
strength or at least kept quite when the controversy was
reported in the press. Issue of public record is not
material in the present case because the controversy
does not relate to the fact whether prior reporting of a
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

102

matter becomes public records, which in law it does not,
but that wide publicity and reporting having already
been given tot he matter in issue at the relevant stage of
time. The task , though difficult it may be, for persons
holding public office, cannot be summed up but to say
that such persons have to show greater tolerance for
comments and criticisms. One cannot but once again
rely on the observations of Cockburn C.J. In “Seymour v.
Butterworth' cited with approval in Kartar Singh's case
(supra) to the effect the persons holding public offices
must not be thin skinned in reference to the comments
made on them and even where they know that the
observations are underserved and unjust they must bear
with them and submit to be misunderstood for a time.
At times public figures have to ignore vulgar criticism
and abuses hurled against them and they must restrain
themselves from giving importance to the same by
prosecuting the person responsible for the same.
66. Be that as it may the respondent has already
chosen to claim damages and her claim is yet to be
adjudicated upon.
She will have remedy if the
statements are held to be vulgar and defamatory of her
and if the appellants fail to establish the defence of
truth.”

170. The Division Bench rejected the contention of the plaintiff that
if the statement relates to private lives of persons, nothing more is to
be said and the material must be injuncted from being published
unless it is with the consent of such person whom the subject matter
relates to, on the ground that such pre-censorship cannot be
countenanced in the scheme of our Constitutional framework. The
same reads thus:“67. We are unable to accept the contention advanced
on behalf of the respondent by Mr. Raj Panjwar that if
the statements relate to private lives of persons, nothing
more is to be said and the material must be injuncted
from being published unless it is with the consent of the
person whom the subject matter relates to. Such precensorship cannot be countenanced in the scheme of
our constitutional framework. There is also some force
in the submission of the learned counsel for the
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

103

appellant that the prior publication having occurred
much prior to the suit being file,d the principle denying
the relief for interlocutory injunction where the plaintiff
has been dilatory in making the application, as observed
in the Indian Express Newspaper's case (supra) would
also apply to the present case.”

171. Certain findings in the pronouncement which have a bearing on
the present case and also clearly laid down the applicable principles
which would be binding upon this court, deserve to be considered in
extenso and read thus:“68. As stated above, one aspect is very material a
categorical assertion of the author to stand by his
statement and claim to substantiate the same. In such a
situation interlocutory injunction restraining publication
should not be granted and we are in agreement with and
duly approve the views of the learned single Judge of this
Court in Sardar Charanjeet Singh's case(supra)
69. People have a right to hold a particular view and
express freely on the matter of public interest. There is no
doubt that even what may be the private lives of public
figures become matters of public interest. this is the
reason that when the controversy had erupted there was
such wide publicity to the same including in the two
editions of India Today. As observed in Silkin v.
Beaverbrook Newspapers Ltd. (supra), the test to be
applied in respect of public life is that the crank, the
enthusiast, may say what he honestly thinks just as much
as the reasonable man or woman who sits on a jury.
xxx xxx
71.
There is no doubt that there are two competing
interests to be balanced as submitted by the learned
counsel for the respondent, that of the author to write and
public and the right of an individual against invasion of
privacy and the threat of defamation. However, the
balancing of these rights would be considered at the stage
of the claim of damages for defamation rather than a
preventive action for injuncting of against the publication
itself.
xxx xxx
75. Writings and comments by authors, publishers
cannot be restricted to public interest as defined to
include what is good for the public. It must be used in the
connotation of what is of interest to the public as
submitted by the learned counsel for the appellant. For
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

104

the purposes of publication if it is to the interest to the
public it would suffice. the very fact that so much has
been written about the controversy in question and the
relationship between the respondent and her late motherin-law Smt. Indira Gandhi shows the interest which the
public had in the happenings though it related to matters
of private relationship between the two individuals. The
wide publicity in the two editions of India Today and the
incorporation of the controversies in the book by Ved
Mehta and Pupul Jaykar are testimony to the same. It is
difficult to segregate the private lite of the public figures
from their public life. It is the burden of holding a public
office.
76. The book has not yet been published. The claim for
injunction which was granted was based on the proposed
publication. We have now also had the benefit of reading
the chapter in controversy in full. We do not think it is a
matter where the author should be restrained from
publishing the same when he is willing to take the
consequences of any civil action for damages and is
standing by what he has written.”

172. On these observations, holding that there was no question of
any irreparable loss or injury since the respondent herself has also
claimed damages, which will be the remedy in case she is able to
establish defamation and the appellant is unable to defend the same
as per law, it was held that the well established principles way in
favour of the right of publication. The injunction granted by the
learned Single Judge was consequently vacated.
Thus, the principle laid down by the Division Bench takes the
extreme view that the remedy of a person aggrieved by publication
would be by way of damages and not an order of prior restrain
against publication.
173. From the above discussion, the following principles can be
culled out:CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

105

(I)

The right to privacy is not expressly guaranteed by Part III of

the Constitution of India but has been judicially deduced from Article
21 of the Constitution. (Ref. (1994) 6 SCC 632 R. Rajagopal & Anr. Vs.
State of Tamil Nadu & Ors.)
(II)

Fundamental rights cannot be enforced against private

individuals. Fundamental rights can be enforced only against the
State and not against the private individuals other than the rights
under Articles 17, 23 & 24.
III.

A citizen has a right to privacy of his own, his family, marriage,

procreation, motherhood, child-bearing and education among other
matters. None can publish anything concerning the above matters
without his consent – whether truthful or otherwise and whether
laudatory or critical.
(IV) The above rule is subject to the exception that any publication
concerning the afore-noticed aspects becomes unobjectionable if such
publication is based on public records.
(V)

Public or general interest in the matter published has to be

more than mere idle curiosity.
(VI) Public figures like public officials play an influential role in
ordering society. They have access to mass media communication
both to influence the policy and to counter-criticism of their views
and activities. The citizen has a legitimate and substantial interest in
the conduct of such persons and the freedom of press extends to

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

106

engaging

in uninhibited debate about the involvement of public

figures in public issues and events.

(Ref. (1994) 6 SCC 632 R.

Rajagopal & Anr. Vs. State of Tamil Nadu & Others Para 18)
(VII) Right to privacy that rests in an individual may be waived by
him by express or implied consent or lost by a course of conduct
which estops its assertions. Such implication may be deduced from
the conduct of the parties and the surrounding circumstances.
(VIII)

A public person or personage is one who by his standing,

accomplishment, fame, mode of life or by adopting a profession or
calling which gives the public a legitimate interest in his doings,
affairs and character has so become a public figure and thereby
relinquishes at least a part of his privacy.
(IX) The standard to be adopted for assessing as to whether the
published material infracts the right to privacy of any individual is
that of an ordinary man of common sense and prudence and not an
out of ordinary or hyper-sensitive man. (Ref. (2007) 1 SCC 143 Ajay
Goswami Vs. UOI & Ors.).
(X)

Even though in this country, the freedom of press does not have

presumptive priority as in some other jurisdictions including the
United States of America, however the importance of a free media of
communication to a healthy democracy has to receive sufficient
importance and emphasis.
(XI)

In evaluating a relief to be granted in respect of a

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

107

complaint against infraction of the right to privacy, the court has to
balance the rights of the persons complaining of infraction of right to
privacy against freedom of press and the right of public to disclosure
of newsworthy information.

Such consideration may entail the

interest of the community and the court has to balance the
proportionality

of

interfering

with

one

right

against

the

proportionality of impact by infraction of the other.
(XII) The publication has to be judged as a whole and news items,
advertisements and published matter cannot be read without the
accompanying message that is purported to be conveyed to public.
Pre-publication censorship may not be countenanced in the scheme
of the constitutional framework unless it is established that the
publication has been made with reckless disregard for truth,
publication shall not be normally prohibited. (Ref.: (2007) 1 SCC 143
Ajay Goswami Vs. UOI & Ors.; (1994) 6 SCC 632 R. Rajagopal &
Anr. Vs. State of Tamil Nadu & Others and AIR 2002 Delhi 58
Khushwant Singh & Anr. Vs. Maneka Gandhi).
(X)

So far as the inaccuracy or incorrectness of publication is

concerned, in case the same is established, damages are adequate
remedy.
174. The present case requires to be examined against these principles.

175. The plaint discloses that the plaintiff as the wife of late Shri
Ashok Kumar Jain the erstwhile chairman of the Bennett Coleman &

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

108

Co. Limited. Since his death in February, 1999, the plaintiff has been
appointed as the chairman of this company.

The plaintiff has

portrayed herself as a person engaged in spiritual, social and
philanthropic causes in addition to her business engagements.
176. So far as the activities of the Bennett Coleman & Co. Limited are
concerned the plaint discloses that the group publishes two financial
papers, one being the Economic Times with a circulation of 639,000
copies with a readership of over 1.1 million and printed from 11
locations. The plaintiff has also claimed that the Economic Times is
India's largest financial daily with more than 95% share of the
readership in the financial dailies market. The other financial paper
is the Financial Times published from Bangalore and New Delhi. The
plaint also states that the Bennett Coleman & Co. Limited is
publishing the Times of India which sells over 3.1 million copies a
day, has a readership of over 8 million and is printed from 13
locations across the country. The plaintiff has claimed that the Times
of India has more than 70% share of the English readership market
with a readership of 1.59 million readers.
177. Mr. Gopal Mohan had informed the defendants that the BBL is
in a magazine publishing joint venture with BCCL which publishes
titles as Femina, Filmfare, Top Gear that are extremely popular.
BCCL has entered into a joint venture with Reuters to pursue a TV
broadcasting business, which channel is likely to be launched shortly.

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

109

Westbridge recently picked up a 2.8% stake in BCCL's internet arm
i.e. Times Internet Ltd. BCCL has pioneered the FM radio business
in India. It has also set up the Entertainment Network (India) Ltd. in
which the Canadian Pension Fund had picked up a 19.5% stake. It
has been claimed that the group manages and marks educational,
entertainment and spiritual events and owns the franchise to select
India's contestants for Miss World, Miss Universe and Miss Asia
pageants and that the Filmfare Awards which are India's most
prestigious and coveted film awards, have been conducted by the
company for decades. It is also stated that as part of its corporate
social responsibility, the Times Group supports and organises
training and development programs through its spiritual and social
arm i.e. The Times Foundation. The Times Group is also involved in
educational institutions for the training of journalists and managers
(The Times School of Journalism and The Times School of
Marketing). Its publications also include Navbharat Times, Mumbai
Mirror and Economic Financial Times.
178. The defendants have pointed out that the public image that the
plaintiff has sought to build for herself is one of a spiritualist and a
Jain revival activist; an educationalist and a person devoted to the
cause of world peace. She projects simplicity and a close involvement
with art and culture. At the same time, she is the Chairperson of
BCCL and its publications i.e. newspapers, magazine, radio and

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

110

television enjoy the widest circulation and a dominant presence in
their respective areas in the country. The defendants have submitted
that Ms. Indu Jain is listed in the Great Women of India List on the
website known as India whereincity.com. The information relating to
the plaintiff is widely known and freely available from public records
like Registrar of Companies, Prospectus of Entertainment Network
(India) Ltd. and the website of the plaintiff's group and publication.
179. It is an admitted position that the plaintiff is a public and
newsworthy person. So far as publicity is concerned, the defendants
have placed before this court copy of extracts from the internet of the
'Parmarth Updates' which contain photographs of the plaintiff in the
company of Swami Chitanand Saraswatiji, Swami Dayanandji and
Shri Murli Manohar Joshi. The plaintiff has featured in an article on
the Harmony website of August, 2004 with her photographs in an
article titled 'I think I am Venus'. The plaintiff has also featured in an
article in 'Syncronist and Everyday in One' in March, 2006.

These

facts certainly indicate that the plaintiff is a well known public person
who is considered newsworthy.
180. The plaintiff's photographs are freely available in the web pages
of the India Times photo gallery in December, 2006 which include
her photographs with the President of India. Photographs of the
plaintiff with well known film personalities are also posted on the
website.

The plaintiff has also listed on the website of

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

111

Indiawhereincity.com in the list of the Women of India wherein both
her photographs and details have been given.
The photograph which have been published by the defendants
is the photograph taken at the India Today Conclave stated to be
owned by the Eye Press and posted on a Webside the plaintiff has not
shunned publicity and her photographs are widely published and
accessible on several sites on the internet.
181. The defendants have placed before this court the fact that the
plaintiff is a widely photographed person and that her photographs
are easily available on the Times of India website wherein her
photographs with several people including the President of India and
several other people of import have been published.

In this

background, it certainly cannot be contended that the plaintiff is not a
public person and that the public would not be interested in getting
information about her.
182. The plaintiff having herself promoted as a philanthropist as well
as the Chairperson of BCCL, India's leading media corporation, there
was no dispute that the plaintiff is a public person.
183. The defendant has claimed that it is a worldwide leader in
financial and investment news which periodically publishes various
listings including a list of the World's Richest Persons.
184. The defendant no. 1 has claimed that it is a ninety year old
organisation and is a reputed publisher of a leading publication of

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

112

worldwide recognition. It has been pointed out that the article which
the defendant published was serious and newsworthy journalism
which provided a portrait of the growing economic power of India to
the world. The publications of the defendant indicated as to where
growth was centred in terms of industry as well as its locale and how
the economic power and resources were distributed. According to the
defendant,

its

publications

make

valuable,

interesting

and

newsworthy comparisons to other growing economic powers as those
of China. The defendants have also pointed out that they have been
regularly reporting on capital accumulation and the wealthiest
individuals in the world.
185. The defendants have explained that they intended to provide a
portrait of the growing economic power of India.

Their analysis

displays centres of growth of industry and distribution of wealth
economic power and resources while two of the publications
(December, 2005 & November, 2006) are restricted to Indian
economic financial heavyweights, the third publication makes a
comparison to other growing economies as of China and other
countries in the region. The effort which was made by the defendants
was to report on capital accumulation, economic power and the
persons in whom the wealth is centered. It displays to the readers the
nature of business wherein economic wealth is centered. The defendants
have referred the plaintiff as a person who was at the helm of affairs of a

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

113

corporation that manages the largest selling English daily in the world. It is
certainly inconceivable with an analysis of the kind undertaken by the

defendants would not contain a consideration of the economic wealth
of such an important personage.
186. Before this court, the defendants have explained the nature of
the publication. It effectuates a technical analysis of official or public
data which generates economic interest, which in the instant case, is
urged to be impacting the economies of different countries.

The

thrust of the publication is to place before the public, the growing
wealth of India's corporate houses and business tycoons. Not only
the defendants but several other Indian publications including the
publications effectuated by the plaintiff's corporation have published
similar articles. In fact, the publications of the Benett Coleman group
have effectuated an analysis of the articles of the defendants and
posted them on their website, even noticing the favourable placement
of the plaintiff in the list published by the defendants in the context of
other business personalities. The information published also enables
the readers to evaluate the location of the economic strength in the
country.

In the context of the growing interest in the Indian

economy, as evidenced by the publications of the plaintiff as well as
the defendants, it has to be held that the assessment and the
publication of the defendants certainly generated public interest and
informed the public at large about the genuine concern relating to the

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

114

Indian economy.
187. The publications also disclosed that it has been publishing
annual list and a comparison is made with China which is the other
growing economy.
188. The fundamental question which remains to be considered is
whether the information relating to the wealth of a public person as
plaintiff herein is in the private domain.
189. The defendants have at length pointed out that the plaintiff had
in fact voluntarily provided information and material relied upon by
them in their publication and that the publication is based on either
material provided by the plaintiff herself or through her agents or as
such material as is freely available in the public domain. Information
on the plaintiff has been derived from easily accessible sources as
newspapers, magazines and the internet and from the prospectus of
the Entertainment Network (India) Limited which is the plaintiff's
own company and other public statements. From the documents
placed by the parties before this court, it would appear that the
defendant did take steps to verify and corroborate the information via
other public sources from the plaintiff's representatives.
The defendants have submitted that the methodology adopted
in arriving at the figures quoted in the articles was not only accurate
but fair and transparent about the way in which the listed business
leaders wealth was calculated.

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

115

190. Before this court, the defendants have pointed out that the
plaintiff's company had periodically announced its actual profit
figures for the years 2003, 2004 and 2005 at page 95 of the
Prospectus of Entertainment Network (India) Ltd. and at Rs. 5298.2
millions for the 2006 fiscal year ending July, 2005. An article on the
website of the Financial Times www.news.ft.com dated 28th
November, 2002 discloses group revenue and net profits of the
Benette Coleman group.
defendant

simply

Based on the disclosed formula, the

multiplied

this

number

by

the

accepted/conservative ratio for similar Indian companies.

The

defendants merely drew upon such readily and periodically available
information about the plaintiff from easily accessible sources as
newspapers, magazines and the internet and from the Prospectus of
Entertainment Network (India) Ltd, the plaintiff's own company and
other public statements by it.
The defendants have submitted that their simple analysis was
based on earnings/information readily available to the public which
had pointed out to the fact that the plaintiff was chairing the affairs of
the corporation which controlled and managed the largest selling
English daily in the world.
191. In the written statement, the defendant has pointed out that the
figures which were disclosed in the prospectus of the plaintiff's
company periodically disclosed by BCCL and the plaintiff's agents

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

116

voluntarily have merely been multiplied by the accepted/conservative
ratio for similar Indian media companies.

The applicable

ratio/multiplier was publically available and the method by which the
net worth was calculated was disclosed to the readers of the Forbes
magazine in all the articles printed by it.
Thus, the reports published by the defendants were really in the
nature of economic analysis of public data available by a company
and the report published thereon. In this behalf, the defendants had
clearly informed the plaintiff about the methodology adopted by it in the email dated 6th December, 2005. No objection was raised by the plaintiff to
the valuation and the publication effected based on similar methodology by
the defendant in the 26th December, 2005 issue. On the contrary, the

plaintiff or her agents have only further advanced information for
publication to the defendants who have acted upon the same.
192. the voluminous exchange of communications by way of e-mails
between the parties has been noticed in the beginning of this
judgment.

The publications also clearly indicated the manner in

which family fortunes were being assessed.
The information and details relied upon by the defendants were not
private nor were they so shrouded in secrecy as to be unavailable to the
defendants or any other person. The same related to information about a
person who is at the helm of the publication business.

193. This aspect of the matter is also requires to be considered
against the defendants communications to the plaintiff and
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

117

representatives that the figures arrived at were based on extensive
research, interviews with experts and public findings and in case of
private companies, such valuations were derived in part only, from
the value of comparable public companies.
It is noteworthy that in none of the communications on behalf
of the plaintiff, any correction or clarification was provided.
In the aforenoticed facts, it cannot be contended that the
defendants did not inform the plaintiff about the information which
was being published or the method adopted by them for arriving at
their assessment of the net worth.
194. The plaintiff's Group admittedly has several publications to its
credit including
Economic

Times

The Times of India, The Navbharat Times, The
etc.

The

Times

of

India

http://timesofindia.com/articleshow/1334366.cms.

has

a

website

This website

carried an article under the heading 'BCCL's Indu Jain on Forbes Asia
Rich List' dated December, 2005 wherein the plaintiff, Indu Jain is
mentioned as one of the forty richest. The news item displayed by the
plaintiff's website even acknowledges that BCCL is run by Ms. Jain's
sons Samir and Vineet.
This feature mentions that the Bennett Coleman's Chairman
Indu Jain is on the 17th position on the Forbes' Richest Indian List. It
specifically mentions that in the Top 20 Richest Indian list, Ms. Indu
Jain is ahead of the Videocon group's, Venugopal Dhoot and of the

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

118

Ranbaxy groups Malwinder Singh and Shivinder Singh. The website
also posted an analysis as to the original break up of the Indians who
features in the Article and noticed that the Indian ranking had been
broadened to include family fortunes.
This website had continued to display this article at the time of
filing of the present suit till such time when it was relied upon by the
defendant during the course of hearing in the present application.
195. In addition thereto, the defendants have pointed out that Times
of India Group itself had replicated the Forbes list in its publication
circulated as the Economic Times dated 18th November, 2006 under
the heading “India has now 36 billion $ babies”.
196. It has been vehemently contended by Mr. Rajiv Nayar learned
senior counsel that the plaintiff disclaims knowledge of the article
which was posted on the website of the Times of India or those which
appeared on the 16th November, 2006 in the Times of India and in
that 18th November, 2006 issue of the Economic Times on the
ground that she has no concern with the publications.
197. In the instant case apart from the correspondence noticed in
the earlier part of this judgment, certain vital admissions in the plaint
also supports the case set up by the defendants. The plaintiff has
claimed knowledge of the defendants publications through her
corporate staff. The plaintiff in para 8 of the plaint as referred to the
e-mails dated 6th December, 2005 sent by the General Manager

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

119

(Corporate) BCCL on her instructions to the defendant nos. 5 and 6
communicated that even if she is mentioned in any publication, it
must be in a professional capacity and no personal information about
her or her family may be mentioned. Again in para 10, the plaintiff as
stated that she has permitted the Bennett Coleman & Co. Limited to
furnish information relating to its various businesses in a gesture of
coordiality and goodwill. Reference is made to the 3 e-mails which
are dated 8th December, 2005 sent to defendant nos. 4, 5 and 6.
198. The plaintiff through her officers and agents had required the
defendant to only publish her name so far as the business of BCCL
was concerned. In all the e-mails, the business has been referred to
as a family run business; that the plaintiff was the head of the joint
family and the Chairman of the company. In the e-mail dated 6th
December, 2005, Mr. Gopal Mohan himself clearly wrote that
ownership of the business vests in Ms. Indu Jain apart from the
estate held by a number of investor companies who are promoters
within Indian regulation.
In the same e-mail, Mr. Gopal Mohan had specifically required
the defendant that the defendants to publish their findings and list
only the name of Ms. Indu Jain while names of her junior members of
the family should not be listed as owners or co-owners.
199. The entire correspondence on behalf of the plaintiff has been
undertaken by Mr. Gopal Mohan who has described himself as

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

120

General Manager (Corporate) of the Times of India Group giving his
address as Times of India's office.
Both these publications are those of the BCCL. in the plaint the
plaintiff has claimed that she gained knowledge of the defendants
publication from its corporate team.

The plaintiff has used the

services of the corporate staff of BCCL and she has used e-mails sent
by them as the mode of communication on her behalf. The plaintiff
has relied on all the letters written by Mr. Gopal Mohan. In the
plaint, it has been stated that these letters have been written on her
instructions. The replies of the defendants have been sent to the emails addresses wherefrom the letter been sent on behalf of the
plaintiff.
There is no dispute that these communications have been
received by the plaintiff. The plaintiff has written to the defendant
initially even before the publication had been effected by them in
December, 2005.
200. In this background, it is certainly not open to the plaintiff to
disassociate herself from the affairs of BCCL merely on the plea of not
being a shareholder or having had no concern or connection with the
BCCL. In their publication, the defendants have reflected her as the
matriarch of the family held business on her specific request.
201. The willingness initially expressed to publication of her name in
the list published by the plaintiff

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

121

can be presumed from the

communications addressed on her behalf.

Any person who was

strongly objecting to publication would not volunteer information of
any kind, recognize the defendant's “lawful right to write on her” or
acknowledge “journalistic independence and privileges” or the
“legitimate rights to publish the list” of the publisher or the “interest
of the readers”.
From the correspondence noticed above, it is also on record
that the plaintiff through her representatives had in fact volunteered
information and material to the defendant and confirmed the
correctness of the figures which the defendants had sought.
Certainly, it has to be prima facie held that the plaintiff had
acquiesced to the publication and would now be estopped from
alleging that the publication of the said information is in any manner
violative of her right to privacy.
202. The plaintiff has also objected to an article on the website of the
defendant putting their list of worthy people on the internet. The
plaint refers to these publications which have endorsed the articles
published by the defendants, substantially extracted them on their
website and prominently reproduced or analysed them in its own
publication. In this background, certainly, prima facie it cannot be
reasonably believed that the article posted on the website of the
Times of India's on 16th December, 2005 or the publications effected
by Times of India on 16th November, 2006 or by the Economic Times

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

122

18th November, 2006 were not known to her.
203. It has also been pointed out that the plaintiff's publications
have treated the defendant's articles as responsible reporting. This
prima facie estops the plaintiff from objecting to the defendants
publications as irresponsible, private or incorrect information. The
plaintiff would thus prima facie be precluded from seeking damages
and injunctive relief against the defendants.
204. Interestingly the list published by the defendants was replicated
by the Economic Times admittedly published by the Bennett Coleman
& Co. Limited in its issue dated 18th November, 2006 under the
heading “India Now Has 36 Billion – Dollar Babies”. These postings
on the web site and the publication effected by the plaintiff's own
publications are not only an unequivocal admission of the fact that
the information is newsworthy but also is an acceptance of the
correctness of the publication.
205. Public interest and newsworthiness of such features is
manifested by the publications pointed out by the defendants which
include an article published in the Business Standard in the month of
December, 2004 and again in the month of January, 2005 entitled as
Billionaire Club which features the sons of Mrs. Indu Jain and also
mentions her. The plaintiff has admittedly not objected to or taken
action against this publication.
206. The defendants have placed several other publications which

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

123

manifests the public interest in the economic analysis of the wealth of
the powerful. Amongst these publications are copies of the issue
dated 26th March, 2006 of the Times of India group and a publication
dated 23rd March, 2007 of the Asian Age.
207. So far as the veracity of the publications is concerned, there
would be substance in the defendant's contention that the defendants
exercised reasonable care and even made enquiries from the plaintiff.
Furthermore no objection was taken by the plaintiff to the December,
2005 issue or the March, 2006 issue of the defendant's publication.
No suit was filed nor grievance made thereupon. There is also force
in the defendant's submission that the very fact that the articles of the
defendants were reported on the website of the plaintiff's publication
itself lends support to the defendant's contention that the articles
were accurate as well as newsworthy.
The extract of the Times News network of March, 2006 and
November, 2006 commenting on the Forbes publication have been
placed before this court. The same is also supported by the article
published in issue dated 16th November, 2006 of the Times of India
and the Economic Times publication dated 18th November, 2006
which also extracts the article of the defendants.
208. It is well settled that in an action seeking grant of interlocutory
relief in a civil action for libel, the defendants, apart from taking a
plea of justification would have to show that the statements were bona fide,

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

124

were in public interest and that the defendants had taken reasonable
precaution to ascertain the truth and that the statements were based on
sufficient material which could be tested for its veracity.

209. In AIR 2004 (Bombay) 143 Shree Maheshwar Hydel
Power Corporation Ltd. Vs. Chitroopa Palit and Anr. the
court held that in India, the court was very much entitled to scrutinize
the material by the defendants so as to test its veracity and to find out
whether the statements were made bona fide and whether they were
in public interest even at the interlocutory stage.
210. The present case is not concerned with any allegations of malice or
defamation by the defendants. The plaintiff has urged plea simplictor that
the publication violates the right to privacy of the plaintiff.

211. In the light of these disclosures and the correspondence placed
before this court, it cannot be contended or prima facie held that the
defendants estimation was based on speculation or published with
knowledge of falsity or in reckless disregard of the truth so as to
satisfy the test laid down by the Apex Court in T.N. Rajgopal Vs. State
of Tamilnadu & Ors.
212. Examination of the plaint shows that apart from a bald
allegation that the defendants have breached the right of privacy of
the plaintiff, the plaint does not disclose such portion of the
publication or the personal information about the plaintiff which,
according to her, could not have been published. The plaintiff has
also not placed the irreparable loss or injury which has resulted to her
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

125

on account of this publication or could result to her by future
publication. Though at the time the application was first taken up for
hearing, the entire thrust of the plaintiff's case was based on security
risks to her, however, after the defendants placed before this court
the fact that the first publication was effected more than a year ago in
December, 2005 to which the plaintiff had not raised any objection
and posted on the website of the Times of India, this argument was
not advanced apart from a bare reference thereto.
The plaintiff does not render a word of explanation as to why
damages would not be an adequate remedy.
213. Even if the contention of the plaintiff that information relating
to wealth or finances was in the private domain and could not be
published were to be accepted, in my view the plaintiff would still not
succeed in securing a prohibitory injunction. As discussed above, it is
open to a person to waive such right. Consent to publication then
may be explicit or tacit.
214. There is one yet another important fact which would by itself
disentitle the plaintiff to any discretionary relief of injunction. The
first publication featuring the plaintiff was effectuated in December,
2005.

Each time the defendants have effected publication, apart

from their claimed research and investigations based on information
available in the public domain; the defendants have conducted
extensive correspondence with the representatives of the plaintiff.

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

126

No objection has been raised by the plaintiff to the publication which
was effected on 26th December, 2005.

This issue having been

published and circulated, no objection having been taken, it has to be
held that the plaintiff would have waived objections to the publication
by the defendants on the ground of breach or invasion of the
plaintiff's right to privacy.

This conclusion is fortified by the

endorsement of the defendants' feature by the plaintiff's publications.
215. Mr. Rajiv Nayar, learned senior counsel for the plaintiff, has
disputed knowledge of the 6th December, 2005 issue of the
defendants. In this behalf, I find that it is noteworthy that in the
communication addressed by the defendants to the plaintiff as back
as on 6th December, 2005, they had referred to both the December,
2005 issue as well as March, 2006 issue. The defendants also told the
Times of India Group that

in the defendant's assessment, the

plaintiff's net worth is over one billion dollars. There is no denial to
the receipt of this letter which was even replied to by the plaintiff.
216. There is thus force in

the defendants contentions that the

objections raised in the plaint are unwarranted and further that the
same unequivocally establish the plaintiff's acceptance that the
Forbes' articles were not only authentic but were clearly newsworthy.
217. Mr. Soli Sorabjee, learned senior counsel for the defendants has
pointed out that the list published by the defendants have included
several other persons who are managing corporations in different

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

127

areas of media.

The defendants in their written statement have

adverted to Rupert Murdoch of Fox; Michael Bloomberg of
Bloomberg; Kalanithi Maran of Sun Television; Subhash Chandra of
Zee Telefilms. The defendants have also pointed out the names of
several personages who have featured in the list published by the
defendants which have included personages as Kiran Shah Wallace and
others of status of economic standing. The submission is that none of these
persons have taken any objection to their listing or complaint with the
information which has been published was in the realm of private affairs.
The concerns of security expressed by the plaintiff have also not been

expressed or complained against by any other person.
218. Having regard to the various publications and documents
placed by the parties on record, it would appear that the plaintiff has
been widely sought after by the media as featured both in photo
features as well as textual publications.
Furthermore no complaint was made by the plaintiff when she
featured in the publication effected by the defendants in December,
2005 nor has any objection being taken by her against her own
publications which have replicated, commented, published and
circulated on the defendants features.
219. In fact, the Economic Times, a publication of the plaintiff's
corporation in November, 2006 has even published an analysis based
on the list of the defendants. It is pointed out that the wealth of the
businessman was not limited to domestic group only and that the
CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

128

survey result reflects the spate of Indian acquisitions abroad.

It

refers also to the fact that the latest annual listing of Forty Richest
Indians have increased from 27 last year to 36. The article in the
Economic Times also reflects the geographical distribution of richest
Indians as being led by Mumbai and Pune and notices that nine of the
super rich live in Delhi and one in Haryana.
220. In 29 L Ed 2d page 296 George A. Rosenbloom Vs.
Metromedia Inc., it was stated that if a matter is a subject of public
or general interest, it cannot suddenly become less so merely because
a private individual is involved or because in some sense, the
individual did not 'voluntarily' choose to become involved.

The

public's primary interest is in the event; the public focus is on the
conduct of the participant and the content, effect and significance of
the conduct, not the participant's prior anonymity or notoriety.
Thus, the test is as to whether the matter published involves the
interest of the community.

If it does, then, whether the person

involved is a famous large scale magazine distributor or a 'private'
business man running a corner news stand has no relevance in
ascertaining whether the public has interest in the issue.
221. The American Courts have repeatedly emphasised that public
figures and public officials may recover for the tort of intentional
infliction of emotional distress by reasons of publications only upon
showing, in addition that the publication contains a false statement of

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

129

fact which was made with 'actual malice' with knowledge, that the
statement was false or made with reckless disregard as to whether or
not it was true. (Ref: 99 L Ed 2d 41 Hustler Magazine and
Larry C. Flynt Vs. Jerry Falwell)
222. In a judgment dated 24th September, 2004 of the European
Court of Human Rights in Application No. 59320/2000 in the case of
Von Hannover Vs. Germany, the applicant, who was the eldest
daughter of Prince Rainier III of Monaco had complained against
publication of photographs in different magazines.

As she failed to

get relief, the applicant submitted that the German court's decision
had infringed her right to respect for her private and family life
guaranteed by Article 8 of the European Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedom. The court
observed that what had to be balanced was protection of private life
against freedom of expression, which necessitated an examination of
the contribution made by photos or articles in the press to a debate
of general interest.
In this case, it was held that the photographs made no such
contributions since the applicant exercised no official function and
the photographs and articles related exclusively to her private life.
It was also held that the public does not have a legitimate interest in
knowing where the applicant is and how she behaves generally in a private
life even if she appears in places that cannot always be described as

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

130

secluded and that she is well known to the public.

223. It is the test of such ordinary man which has to be applied to the
instant case. Furthermore, no case of either malice or irreparable
damage has been made out in the plaint or the application. The
plaintiff has stipulated that in case any reference is to be made in the
defendant's publication to her business house, the same must refer to
her alone.

She has been extensively photographed and her

photographs appear in several publications and are freely available
on the website maintained by her own publication. The plaintiff has
also given extensive interviews and in fact, has been the subject
matter of several journalistic features. On her own showing, she is
the chairperson of India's leading media house. The information
which has been furnished at the instance of the plaintiff in the several
communications placed on record manifests the claims made by the
plaintiff herself in this behalf.
224. A publication has to be judged as a whole. No news item or
passage can be read without the accompanying message. Certainly, a
financial assessment cannot be read dehors the basis of the same as is
indicated by the publisher. In the instant case, the defendants have
indicated the manner in which the figures have been arrived at by
them. The same methodology has been applied to all other business
houses, persons and `family fortunes' who are featured in the list.
The defendants have corresponded extensively with the plaintiff or

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

131

persons representing her. The plaintiff was fully aware of the lists
which were being printed by the defendants. At no point of time, it
was ever indicated as to what would according to her was the correct
figure which they could publish.
225. In this background there is certainly force in the contention of
the defendants that the relief sought by way of the present application
must fail on the ground that the plaintiff fails to meet the test of
sensibilities of an ordinary man of common sense and prudence and
not an out of ordinary or hypersensitive man as succinctly laid down
by the Apex Court in Ajay Goswami Vs. UOI & Ors. (Supra).
226. Before this court, the plaintiff has admitted that she is a public
person and her accomplishments widely acknowledged by both, the
media and the public at large.

Having received such publicity over

all these years, it is not open to the plaintiff to claim seclusion from
an analysis of the nature undertaken by the defendants.
227. In this behalf, reference can usefully be made to the
pronouncement of the Courts of Appeals of New York reported at 23
NY 2d 341 Estate of Ernest Hemingway et all Vs. Random
House, wherein it was held that once a person has sought publicity
to her status by writing articles for the popular magazines dealing
with her husand and events in their lives together, she cannot at her
whim withdraw the events of his life from public scrutiny.
Suppression of Material facts:-

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

132

228. In the letter of the defendants dated 6th December, 2005 which
has been placed before this court, the defendants have referred to
both the publications effected in December, 2005 as well as March,
2006.

The defendants clearly notified the plaintiff of their

assessment of the plaintiff's wealth.
The plaintiff's submission to the effect that she was not aware of
the publication is clearly and factually incorrect. This is corroborated
by the fact that the plaintiff's publication analysed the articles of the
defendants and posted the analysis not only in the newspapers but
also on the website of the Times of India.
229. As noticed hereinabove, the plaintiff has used the services of the
corporate staff of the Bennett & Coleman group. She has endorsed
the communications sent as e-mails to the defendants by the
members of the corporate staff.

The plaintiff has dis-claimed

knowledge of the defendant's article posted on the website also. In
this background it is not possible to reasonably accept that the
plaintiff was unaware of the articles dated 16th November, 2006
published in the Times of India and 18th November, 2006 published
in the Economic Times. The plaintiff has complained in respect of
the defendants publication which they have averred is not even
circulated through regular agents in this country. The plaintiff is also
aggrieved by the list which features on the defendants' website. For
the same reason, the plaintiff is reasonably expected to know the fact

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

133

that the website of the Bennett Coleman group was drawing mileage
out of the fact that the plaintiff had featured in the elite list of Forbes
and that she was the ahead of several other business tycoons.
230. In this background, the failure of the plaintiff to even advert to
issue of the defendants dated 26th December, 2005 showing India's
Forty Richest; her failure to place before this court the extract of the
website of the Times of India and the Bennett Coleman group; and
failture to place the article dated 26th December, 2005

in the

defendant's publication of the World's billionaire list amounts to a
deliberate suppression of a material facts. It was equally necessary
for the plaintiff to place before this court the complete facts, including
the analysis of the defendant's publication and the articles which
were published by the newspapers and journals of the Bennett
Coleman group and also on its website.

The plaintiff has thus,

suppressed material facts which, in my view, were necessary for the
complete and effective adjudication of the objection of the defendants
to the publication in its November, 2006 issue.
231. It has been repeatedly held that a party concealing the material
facts would be required to be non-suited. In the instant case, this
court was persuaded to grant an interim injunction on grounds of the
urgency which had been set up on the plea that the defendants were
effecting publications which were portraying the plaintiff in a wrong
light despite the objections of the plaintiff. It was concealed from this

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

134

court that the plaintiff has raised no objection to the defendant's
publication as back as on 26th December, 2005 and the fact that
mileage had been drawn by the business Group which she chairs
therefrom. Certainly, this court may have taken a different view in
case these facts had been placed before this court.
232. So far as the objections of the plaintiff regarding the
publications in November, 2006 is concerned, it is apparent that the
plaintiff has clearly required the defendants to reflect only her name
in any reference to the Bennett Coleman group. No objections were
raised when the plaintiff caused to be sent a communication dated 5th
December, 2005 to the defendants informing them that the control of
the business rests with the head of the family. This was reiterated in
the email of 7th December, 2005 wherein it was mentioned that all
public honours and felicitations have always been bestowed on Ms.
Indu Jain in business and society. Hereby it was also informed that
the ownership of business vests in the plaintiff apart from the shares
held by some investors. Even here, the defendants were told that if
they were publishing their findings then only the name of Ms. Indu
Jain should be listed and names of her junior members in the family
should not be listed as owners or co-owners. On 26th December,
2005, detailed information is provided by the defendants in
recognition of the defendants' lawful right to write on the Bennett
Coleman group. The plaintiff again informed the defendants that

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

135

they should list the name of Ms. Indu Jain and that the plaintiff
would co-operate with the defendants so that there are no
inaccuracies factually or otherwise in the best interest of publication.
It is noteworthy that in the e-mail of 8th December, 2005, there is a
clear admission of knowledge with regard to the upcoming issue of the
defendants when it extended best wishes to the defendants for the same.

233. The only grievance of the plaintiff so far as infringement of its
right to privacy is concerned, is based on the plea that the publication
attributes a wrong figure as the wealth of the plaintiff. Apart from the
formula of calculation being mentioned on the publications and also
to family fortunes, the defendants had carefully informed the plaintiff
of the method being adopted by them. No objection of any kind was
raised to the methodology adopted by the defendants in the
December, 2005 issue. On the contrary, the defendant's publication
was highlighted on the website of the plaintiff's group as also in the
articles published in its national dailies.
In the email of 17th February, 2006, the plaintiff informed the
defendants that it may adopt the Benett Coleman's 2005 revenue and
net profit figures as mentioned by the defendants in their mails.
In this background, it certainly cannot be contended or held
that the defendants did not exercise due care or have effected
publication in reckless disregard of the truth. The plaintiff was fully
aware of the nature of the publication of the defendants. Despite

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

136

repeated specific queries no information was disclosed of what
according to the plaintiff would be the correct figure. It is noteworthy
that the plaintiffs has made out a case that her net worth has been
incorrectly published. On the contrary, the clear representation to
the defendants was that in case they were including the Benett
Coleman group a family holding, only the name of the plaintiff should
be highlighted. The defendants also have carefully indicated that they
were including the family fortunes. For all these reasons, the
submission that the plaintiff must be treated as an individual and not
the same as the Benett Coleman group when examined against the
detailed communications and correspondence conducted by the
plaintiff or on her behalf is wholly misconceived.
Even otherwise, so far as publication of wrong information is
concerned, it is well settled that the plaintiff would have the remedy
in damages.
234. The plaintiff has denied suppression and urged that even if it is
to be held that she has suppressed facts, then she could be disentitled
to relief only if the suppression was of a material fact whereas the
facts relied upon by the defendants are not material for adjudication
of the issues raised by the plaintiff. In this behalf, the plaintiff has
placed reliance on 2004 (7) SCC 166 SJS Business Enterprises
Pvt. Ltd. Vs. State of Bihar & Ors. In this case, the court was of
the view that the writ petition filed by the petitioner was maintainable

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

137

even if it had filed an earlier suit. Consequently, the suppression of
the fact that the suit had been filed earlier would not be a material
fact.
In the instant case, the plaintiff has sought an imperative relief
of injunction against the defendants on the plea that the defendants
are effectuating a publication shortly which would infract upon the
right to privacy of the plaintiff.
In this background, the fact that the defendants had earlier published
similar articles is certainly a material fact which would impact grant or
denial of relief to the plaintiff on its present application.

235. There is no disclosure of damage or irreparable loss or injury by
the plaintiff either in the pleadings or in the submissions made before
this court. The plaint does not make any complaint in respect of the
first publication effected by the defendant in December, 2005 which
according to the defendants, is the basis for their later computations.
In answer to paras 21 and 24 of the written statement wherein the
defendants disclosed the basis of their assessment, the plaintiff does
not say that the information which was published was false but that it
was private. In the facts noticed above, in my view the plaintiff has
failed to make out a case that publication effected by the defendants
would be covered within the protection which is afforded to a
person's right to privacy. The plaintiff as Chairperson of the largest
media house in the country, has been the subject matter of

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

138

considerable publications. Public interest in financial assessment of
persons of standing and repute is evidenced from the several articles
and features effected not only by the defendants but also by the
plaintiff's publications and other newspapers and journals in the
country. Financial standing of the plaintiff and her media house is
certainly of public interest. It is well settled that with consent, even
matters which are in the private domain, can be made public. This
court has arrived on prima facie finding that the conduct of the
plaintiff tantamounts to consent to the publication. It is pointed out
that interest of the public which would override any individual
considerations in prohibiting the publication and the same would
guide adjudication in the present application.
236. The principles governing grant of injunctions are well settled.
The plaintiff is entitled to make out a prima facie case which requires
consideration. Furthermore, a case of irreparable loss and damage in
case injunction is not granted, has to be made out. The plaintiff is
also required to establish that balance of convenience, interest of
justice and equity are in its favour in order to entitle an applicant to
exercise of discretion in its favour.
237. The plaintiff before this court has failed to indicate the
irreparable loss or damage which has resulted or would result from
the publications complained of. No equitable considerations have
also been placed before this court.

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

139

On the other hand, there is

adequate material on the record of this court which would indicate
that there is substantial public interest generated in the analysis of
the type undertaken by the defendants. The same has been replicated
in publications of the plaintiff's business house as well and portions
thereof posted even on its website. The material factor which would
have a bearing on the instant case, is the fact that the first publication
was effected as back as in December, 2005 in respect of which the
plaintiff makes no grievance. Injunctive relief is to be premised on
the urgency displayed in the damage which may result to a party from
a threatened action. In the given facts, there is nothing to show
balance of convenience or interest of equity in favour of the plaintiff.
Conduct of a party is another factor which has a material bearing on
considerations of equitable relief. Before this court, there is gross
concealment of material facts which would also disentitle the plaintiff
to exercise of any discretion in her favour.
In view of the above, I find no merit in the application which is
dismissed with costs.
Inasmuch as material facts which have bearing on the issues
raised were not placed before the court, I am of the view that the
plaintiff deserves to be burdened with punitive costs which are
quantified at Rs.60,000/-. The costs shall be equally apportioned
between the defendants, the Delhi High Court Legal Services
Committee and the Delhi High Court Bar Association Lawyers

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

140

Welfare Fund. The costs shall be deposited within a period of two
weeks from today.
(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
October 12, 2007
SD

CS(OS) No. 2172/2006

141

