IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.21386/2005
Date of decision: 13th February, 2006
MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF DELHI .. Petitioner
through: Ms. Geeta Mehrotra, Adv.,
Advocate
VERSUS
SHRI RAMESH CHAND
... Respondent
through: Ms. Pramod Gupta,
Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
GITA MITTAL, J. (Oral)
1.

By way of this writ petition, the petitioner has assailed an

Award dated 25th September, 2004 whereby it was held by the
industrial adjudicator that the petitioner was entitled to be
regularised in the post of wireman grade I w.e.f. 1st April, 1980 in
the pay scale of Rs.260-400 and is entitled to the pay scales as
have been revised by the petitioner from time to time. This award
has been assailed by the petitioner primarily on the ground that in

W.P. (C) No.21386/2005

Page 1 of 8

the acceptance letter which is stated to have been executed by the
respondent/workman when he was offered regularisation, the
respondent has mentioned the post as `wireman grade II'.
2.

On the other hand, learned counsel appearing for the

respondent has drawn this court's attention to the seniority list of
muster roll employees prepared and issued by the MCD which has
been proved before the industrial adjudicator, wherein the
respondent/workman has been reflected as having been appointed
as wireman grade I on 15th March, 1975 (Page 127 record of the
industrial adjudicator).
3.

It is also pointed out that in a list, which is stated to have

been issued of muster roll appointments upto 31st December, 1998
(at page 143 of the record), the respondent/workman has been
shown as having been appointed as a wireman grade II on 26th
August, 1974. An employee Shri Om Pal Singh was appointed as
wireman grade II on 15th December, 1975. Shri Om Pal Singh had
also sought industrial adjudication and regularisation as wireman
grade I and this adjudication had culminated in an award dated
25th January, 2001 whereby he was directed to be regularised as
wireman grade I w.e.f. 1st April, 1980 under the regularisation
policy of the M.C.D. by an industrial award passed on 3rd May,
W.P. (C) No.21386/2005

Page 2 of 8

2002. Admittedly, Shri Om Pal Singh is shown as junior to the
present respondent/workman and the industrial award in favour
of this workman stands implemented and he stands regularised as
a Wireman grade I.

The Award dated 25th September, 2004

assailed by the M.C.D. in this writ petition is identical to the Award
dated 25th January, 2001 passed in favour of Shri Om Pal Singh. A
submission has been made that there is no warrant for
interference with the impugned award in view of these facts which
stand admitted by the M.C.D.
4.

So far as the regularisation policy of the M.C.D. is concerned,

the same was the subject matter of adjudication by this court.
Vide a judgment dated 4th February, 1987 passed in WP (C)
No.1373/1980, this court had directed the M.C.D. to effect point to
point regularisation of employees who were on the muster roll of
the Corporation.

The court had issued further directions with

regard to the placement in the seniority list of the muster roll
employees who were regularised in terms of the policy vis a vis the
employees who were regularly inducted.
5.

The M.C.D. had duly implemented the directions issued by

this court in the judgment dated 4th February, 1987 and it was in
these circumstances that the orders with regard to regularisation
W.P. (C) No.21386/2005

Page 3 of 8

of several employees were passed.
6.

In view of the submissions made by learned counsel for the

petitioner, the record of the industrial adjudicator was also called
for and has been brought. It has come in the evidence which was
led by the M.C.D. that as per the statement made by its witness
that a person had to be regularised on the post on which he was
appointed on muster roll. This stand was in obvious conflict with
the directions made by this court in the judgment passed on 14th
February, 2005 and the policy of the M.C.D. This witness of the
M.C.D. was not in a position to deny the documents which had
been proved on record by the workman.
7.

I find that apart from the seniority list of the petitioner

showing the petitioner as a wireman grade I w.e.f. 15th March, 1975
(Exh. WW2/6 at page 127), the respondent/workman had also
proved on record the letter of appointment issued by the M.C.D.
dated 26th April, 1988 (Exh. WW1/1 at page 84 of the record of the
industrial adjudicator) whereby the respondent/workman was
informed that he was being regularised as workman grade - I,
w.e.f. 1st April, 1980. Further, the oral deposition of the workman
could not also be challenged by the management at all in the crossexamination.

The lists prepared by the MCD reflect the

W.P. (C) No.21386/2005

Page 4 of 8

respondent as having been appointed as wireman grade I as back
as on 15th March, 1975. The witness of the management could not
deny these documents.

The MCD was admittedly required to

effect point to point regularisation which was meant that the
workman was to be regularised in the post in which he was
working. In these circumstances, the findings of the industrial
adjudication that the respondent workman had been working as
wireman grade I and had been regularised by the M.C.D. in this
position w.e.f. 1st April, 1980, cannot be assailed on any legally
tenable ground.
8.

The MCD did not dispute that persons who were appointed

as Wiremen Grade II on the muster roll after the petitioner, and
were thus junior to the respondent, as Shri Om Pal, stand
regularised as Wireman Grade I.
The petitioner has rightly not disputed its documents which
stand proved before the industrial adjudicator. The M.C.D. itself
issued the order regularising the workman in service which was
accepted by the workman. In the background of this documentary
evidence, the workman having mentioned `II' instead of `I' on his
letter would lose significance. The workman could have accepted
only what was offered.
W.P. (C) No.21386/2005

Page 5 of 8

8.

Even otherwise, the jurisdiction of this court to examine

findings of fact is extremely restricted as has been held by the
Apex Court in the judgment reported in AIR 2000 SC 1508
entitled Indian Oversees Bank Vs. I.O.B., Staff Canteen
Workers' Union & Another wherein it was held thus:18.
Mr. S. Ravindra Bhat, learned counsel
appearing for the workmen, invited our attention
to the factual findings recorded by the Tribunal,
which had its approval of the Division Bench
noticed by us supra, and vehemently contended
that the learned single Judge committed a grave
error
in
undertaking
for
himself
the
reappreciation of facts as though exercising an
appellate jurisdiction, even ignoring certain vital
aspect of facts and belittling the relevance and
importance of portions of evidence strongly relied
upon by the Industrial Tribunal in support of the
factual findings recorded by it and that the
Division Bench rightly interfered with his order
for valid and justifying reasons. According to the
learned counsel, the order under appeal does not
call for any interference, in view of the principles
laid down by this Court in in the various
judgments notice above – the decision in the
question being always one ultimately depending
upon the peculiar facts of each case and
categorically found in this case in favour of the
workmen by the fact-finding authority.
19. The learned single Judge seems to have
undertaken an exercise, impermissible for him in
exercising
writ jurisdiction,
by
liberally
reappreciating the evidence and drawing
conclusions of his own on pure questions of fact,
unmindful, though aware fully, that he is not
W.P. (C) No.21386/2005

Page 6 of 8

exercising any appellate jurisdiction over the
awards passed by a Tribunal, presided over by a
Judicial Officer. The findings of fact recorded by a
fact-finding authority duly constituted for the
purpose and which ordinarily should be
considered to have become final, cannot be
disturbed for the mere reason of having been
based on materials or evidence not sufficient or
credible in the opinion of the writ Court to
warrant those findings at any rate, as long as they
are based upon some material which are relevant
for the purpose or even on the ground that there is
yet another view which can be reasonably and
possibly one taken. The Division Bench was not
only justified but well merited in its criticism of
the order of the learned single Judge and in
ordering restoration of the Award of the Tribunal.
On being taken through the findings of the
Industrial Tribunal as well as the order of the
learned single Judge and the judgment of the
Division Bench, we are of the view that the
Industrial Tribunal had overwhelming materials
which constituted ample and sufficient basis for
recording its findings recorded seem to be
unexceptionable. The only course, therefore,
open to the writ Judge was to find out the
satisfaction or otherwise of the relevant criteria
laid down by this Court, before sustaining the
claim of the canteen workmen, on the facts found
and recorded by the fact-finding authority and not
embark upon an exercise of re-assessing the
evidence and arriving at findings of ones own,
altogether giving a complete go-bye even to the
facts specifically found by the Tribunal below.”
10.

I had earlier an occasion to examine similar issues at the

instance of the M.C.D. in W.P. (C) No.2876/2003 entitled M.C.D.
Vs. Fakir Chand wherein also the policy of regularisation has been

W.P. (C) No.21386/2005

Page 7 of 8

considered at length.
11.

For all the foregoing reasons, I find no reason to interfere

with the findings of the industrial adjudicator for the award dated
25th September, 2004.
This writ petition is, accordingly, dismissed.
There shall be no orders as to costs.

GITA MITTAL, J
FEBRUARY 13, 2006
aa

W.P. (C) No.21386/2005

Page 8 of 8

