IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
IA Nos. 7732/2007 & 8291/2007 in CIVIL SUIT
(OS) NO.1253/2007
Judgmen t reserved on : 30th July,
2007
Date of decision :August 13,
2007
Dr. B.K. Modi

... Plaintiff
through: Dr. A.M. Singhvi, Sr. Adv.
with Mr. P.K. Bansal, Mr. Ashu Kansal
and Mr. A. Khaitan, Advocates
VERSUS

M/s Modi Rubber Ltd. & Ors.
.... Defendants
through: Mr. Parag Tripathi, Sr. Adv.
with Mr. Ajay K. Jain,
Mr. A. Mukherjee, Advocates
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1.
2.
3.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the Judgment?
Yes
To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
Whether the judgment should be reported in
the Digest?
Yes

GITA MITTAL, J.
IA No. 7732/2007 (Under Order 39 Rules 1 & 2)
1.

By this order, I propose to dispose of IA No.7732/2007 filed by

the plaintiff under Order 39 Rules 1 & 2 and IA No.8291/2007 filed
by the defendant no.1 under Order 7 Rule 11.
2.

The plaintiff has filed the present suit in respect of the affairs of

the Modi Rubber Limited, a company promoted by the Modi Group
which has been incorporated as a public limited company in the year
1971.

The plaintiff was placed in-charge of setting up a tyre

manufacturing plant in collaboration with a German company and
that the company had achieved a leadership position in the Indian
1

tyre industries. However, on account of differences between the two
groups of Modi family, a family division was effected in the year 1989
which culminated in a memorandum of understanding dated 24th
January, 1989. As a result, Modi Rubber Limited fell to the share of a
group of Modi family reflected as group `B' in the memorandum of
understanding. The plaintiff Dr. B.K. Modi and the defendant no. 2
are both members of Group B. This company, thus, came into joint
management and control of Mr. V.K. Modi, defendant no.2 herein
and Dr. B.K. Modi, the present plaintiff.
3.

It has been urged that on account of inter se disputes between

the members of the Group `B' and the stand taken by the financial
institutions, the company faced a crunch of working capital. The
financial institutions which held shareholding to the extent of over
50% one time, later reduced to 44%, took over the management of the
company w.e.f. March, 2002.
As such the net worth of the defendant no.1 company grossly
eroded a reference so filed before the Board of Industrial & Financial
Reconstruction under the provisions of Sick Industrial Companies
(Special Provisions) Act, 1985. It was registered as case no.153/2004.
There is no dispute that the company was declared sick and an
operating agency was appointed to prepare a rehabilitation scheme
for the revival of the company.

Proceedings in this behalf are

pending even on date.
4.

The suit has been necessitated inasmuch as hostility arose

between the plaintiff and the other directors on the Board of the
company. The plaintiff contends that he has assailed certain collusive

2

actions of the other directors and the financial institutions. Extensive
submissions on the ground of this animosity has been placed by
either side before this court.
5.

The plaintiff has urged that he is deeply concerned with the

affairs of the company. However, on account of business interests, he
travels abroad extensively. It has been urged that it was a standard
practice of the Board of Directors of the defendant no.1 to grant leave
of absence to any director who was absent without any formal request
by him to that effect. On account of inability to attend the meetings,
the plaintiff had orally sought leave of absence which was held by the
Board of Directors on 23rd January, 2007 and 12th May, 2007. At
the same time, the plaintiff has placed reliance on correspondence
written by him or on his behalf to the defendant no.1 informing the
defendant no.1 that he was not in a position to attend the meeting of
the Board of Directors which was scheduled on 10th March, 2007 and
had requested for appointment of his son Mr. Dilip Modi as an
alternate director. According to the plaintiff, such leave of absence
was granted to the plaintiff and rejection of his requests was never
communicated to him. The plaintiff places reliance on the manner in
which the minutes of the meeting have been recorded to urge that the
plaintiff has not defaulted in attending any of the meetings.
6.

The plaintiff also urges that by virtue of Article 100 of the

Article of Association, the plaintiff is a permanent director of the
defendant no. 1 and not liable to retire.
7.

In this background, the plaintiff has challenged the action of the

Board of Directors and the resolution which was passed on 12th May,

3

2007 to the effect that the plaintiff has failed to attend three
consecutive meetings of the Board of Directors and consequently by
operation of the provisions of Section 283(1)(g) of the Companies
Act, had vacated his office as director. As per the plaint such fact was
revealed to the plaintiff when the defendants served a copy of an
application enclosing the purported resolution dated 12th May, 2007
on his counsel. This application was filed by the BIFR seeking its
permission for alteration and composition of the Board of Directors
of the defendant no.1 on the ground of disqualification of the plaintiff
in terms of Section 283(1)(g) of the Companies Act.

Hence the

plaintiff has filed the present suit inter alia assailing the resolution of
the Board of Directors dated 12th May, 2007 and a declaration that
he continues to be a director.
8.

Alongwith the suit the plaintiff has filed the present application

under Order 39 of the Code of Civil Procedure seeking an interim
order of stay of this resolution of 12th of May, 2007 and
consequential relief.
9.

Extensive arguments have been made by both sides placing

their respective contentions and I have been taken through the entire
record. The entire issue centres around the three meetings held by
the Board of Directors of the defendant no. 1 on 23rd January, 2007,
10th March, 2007 and 12th May, 2007 and issues relating to the
notice thereof; whether leave of absence had been sought by the
plaintiff, consideration of such request, if any, and the resolutions
passed by the board in these meetings.
10.

In support of its case, the plaintiff has contended oral requests

4

for leave of absence for the meetings held on 23rd January, 2007 and
12th of May, 2007. He places reliance on written communications of
3rd of March, 2007. In this view of the matter it may be appropriate
to consider the correspondence relating to the meeting of the Board
of Directors of the plaintiff held on 10th of March, 2007.
11.

It is noteworthy that so far as the meeting dated 10th March,

2007 is concerned, the defendant no. 1 has placed before this court a
letter dated 3rd March, 2007 written by Mr. Atul Prakash to Mr.
S.Bhardwaj, Deputy Company Secretary refererring to the notice of
the meeting of the board of directors scheduled to be held on 10th
March, 2007. In this letter of 3rd of March, 2007 he has stated that
'Dr. Modi has advised that he shall be travelling and wants to appoint
alternate director to attend the said board meeting'. Mr. Prakash also
conveyed that the name of the alternate director shall be conveyed
shortly and requested Mr. S. Bhardwaj to 'kindly show this to the
chairman and inform us accordingly'.
12.

It appears that no information was addressed by Mr. S.

Bhardwaj to the plaintiff thereafter and no action was taken on this
letter.
13.

Mr. Atul Prakash thereafter appears to have addressed a letter

dated 9th March, 2007 again to Dr. S. Bhardwaj as Deputy Company
Secretary of the defendant no. 1 enclosing a letter dated 6th March,
2007 of the plaintiff proposing the appointment of his son Shri Dilip
Modi as an alternate director. It is noteworthy that copy of this letter
also appears to have been sent to all the directors of the defendant no.
1.

The plaintiff's letter dated 6th March, 2007 informed the

5

defendant no. 1 that on account of business interests requiring the
plaintiff to extensively travel and spend a larger part of the financial
year outside India, the plaintiff had been granted NRI status by the
Government of India. In view of his frequent visits to abroad, he was
unable to attend the meetings of the board of the defendant no. 1 on a
regular basis and consequently proposed the name of his son Shri
Dilip Modi for appointment as his alternate director in the
"forthcoming meeting of the board of directors of Modi Rubber
Limited scheduled to be convened on 10th March, 2007".

In

addition, the plaintiff had submitted that Shri Dilip Modi would be
able to attend the meetings of the board of directors of Modi Rubber
Limited whenever he was unable to attend the meetings which would
ensure proper representation of the plaintiff's interest in the
defendant no. 1. A legal opinion which was obtained with regard to
the request for appointment of Shri Dilip Modi as an alternate
director was also placed by the plaintiff for consideration by the
board of directors.

This opinion notices that the queriest would

necessarily stay out of India for a period of over six months.
Thus, the defendant no. 1 had been put to notice that the
plaintiff was a non-resident Indian and abroad for a major part of the
year.
14.

The board of directors in its meetings on each occasion wrote

that the next meeting of the board of directors may be fixed by the
chairman after ascertaining the convenience of the directors of the
company.
There is nothing on record to show that the convenience of the

6

directors including that of the plaintiff was ever sought.
15.

Apart from these documents which were placed before the

board, it appears that the defendant no. 1 solicited another opinion
dated 9th March, 2007 which was also placed before the board of
directors. This opinion noticed that no specification as to the period
of absence from the state was indicated in the communication from
the plaintiff which consequently would not be enough to enable the
board to appoint an alternate director since the law specified the
period of three months as being essential. It was also opinioned that
the appointment of Mr. Dilip Modi as an alternate director to Mr. B.
K. Modi would be construed as a violation of the specific directions of
the BIFR and the provisions of the Companies Act.
16.

On these considerations, it appears that in the meeting dated

10th March, 2007 the board of directors decided not to accede to the
request of the plaintiff for appointment of an alternate director.
17.

The resolution which has been placed before this court also

records that the plaintiff was an NRI since August 2001 and that no
alternate director was either requested or appointed during this
period. So far as Agenda No. I was concerned, the Board merely
noted that the plaintiff was not present.
18.

Apart from the decision with regard to the plaintiff's absence on

the meetings, the plaintiff has assailed the decision taken by the
board of the defendant no. 1 on his request for appointment of
alternate director as being malafide and illegal.
19.

The defendant no. 1 has heavily relied on the prohibitions

imposed by the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction

7

(BIFR for short) in case no. 153/2004 regarding Modi Rubber
Limited. It has been urged that on 17th May, 2006 the board had
specifically directed that the board of directors of the defendant no. 1
would not be changed.

The submission is that consequently

permitting the alternate director would amount to a change in the
board of directors. Copy of the order dated 17th May, 2006 has been
placed before this court. It appears that on 17th May, 2006, the
board of Industrial and Financial Reconstruction held that the
company had become a sick industrial company as on 31st March,
2003 in terms of Section 31 of the Sick Industries Companies Act and
declared it so. In exercise of the powers under Section 17(3) of Sick
Industries Act, the BIFR appointed IDBI as an operating agency with
directions to prepare a revival scheme for the defendant no. 1 if
feasible.

The operating agency was directed to keep in view the

provisions of Section 18 of the statute and guidelines which were
enclosed with the order while carrying on the exercise.

These

guidelines contained a prohibition which reads thus :"17. The promoter/guarantors should not change
their shareholding pattern nor alienate/encumber or
dispose of their shares in the company in any manner
without the specific permission of the Board. The
company will not change their accounting year and
accounting policies and also will not change any of
their Directors or make any changes in their BOD
without the specific permission of the Board."
(Emphasis supplied)
20.

On 5th September, 2006, the board was required to consider

objections with regard to transfer of the shareholding of the financial
institutes to one or the other of the promoters groups. On a
consideration of the various objections, the board while rejecting
8

objections relating to transfer of the shareholding of financial
institutions to the defendant no. 2, issued further directions which
included :"20 (iii).
In view of the apprehensions expressed
today and as agreed by the FIs, there will be no
change
in the constitution of MRL's BOD till
sanction of a scheme for its rehabilitation. BIFR will
also consider appointing Special Directors on the
BOD.”
21.

An objection had been taken that transfer of the shareholding of

the financial institutions to defendant no. 2 was in violation of the
orders of the BIFR. However the board had observed that the order
prohibiting dilution of shareholding in the company by the promoters
was sealing an escape route for the promoters and that change in
holding pattern was possible with the permission of BIFR. The board
observed that the financial institutions were neither promoters nor
guarantors and their investments represented public money which
had been locked up in the company for years without any returns.
Consequently approval was given to either of the promoter groups to
acquire major shareholding through purchase of the share hold by
the financial institutions in the company.
22.

It is well settled that an alternate director can be appointed only

by the Board of directors of the company under Section 313 of the
Companies Act. Such appointment can be made if the board is
authorised by the articles or by the company in a general meeting to
make such an appointment.
23.

The directors may request for appointment of an alternate

director to act for him during his absence for a period of not less than
three months from this date in which the meetings of the board are
9

ordinarily held.

As per the Guide To The Companies Act, by A

Ramaiyaa 15 Ed. 2001 (at page 2762), it is stated that if an alternate
director is appointed only by a resolution of the board of directors,
the absence of the original director from the meetings of the board
will not entail vacation of his office as required by Section 283 (1)(g),
as it is presumed in such case that leave of absence has been given by
the board.
24.

In the instant case, there is no dispute that the memorandum of

articles of association of the defendant no. 1 empowered the board to
appoint an alternate director and specific powers in this behalf was
conferred.
25.

There is no dispute from the side of the defendants that the

plaintiff is a non-resident Indian.
26.

The definition of non-resident Indian is to be found in the

Income-tax Act, the relevant provision whereof reads thus :“Section 6. For the purposes of this Act (1) An individual is said to be resident in India in
any previous year, if he (a) is in India in that year for a period or periods
amounting in all to one hundred and eighty-two
days or more; or
(b) ....
(c) having within the four years preceding that
year been in India for a period or periods amounting
in all to three hundred and sixty-five days or more,
is in India for a period or periods amounting in all to
sixty days or more in that year.
(Explanation – In the case of an individual, (a) being a citizen of India, who leaves India in
any previous year (as a member of the crew of an
Indian ship as defined in clause (18) of Section 3 of
the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (44 of 1958), or]
for the purposes of employment outside India, the
provisions of sub-clause (c) shall apply in relation to
that year as if for the words “sixty days”, occurring
therein, the words “one hundred and eighty-two
days” had been substituted;
10

(b) being a citizen of India, or a person of Indian
origin within the meaning of Explanation to clause
(e) of section 115C, who, being outside India, comes
on a visit to India in any previous year, the
provisions of sub-clause (c) shall apply in relation to
that year as if for the words “sixty days”, occurring
therein, the words “one hundred and [eighty-two]
days” had been substituted.]
(2) A Hindu undivided family, firm or other
association of persons is said to be resident in India
in any previous year in every case except where
during that year the control and management of its
affairs is situated wholly outside India.
(3) A company is said to be resident in India in
any previous year, if(i) it is an Indian company; or
(ii) during that year, the control and management
of its affairs is situated wholly in India.
(4) Every other person is said to be resident in
India in any previous year in every case, except
where during that year the control and management
of his affairs is situated wholly outside India.
(5) If a person is resident in India in a previous
year relevant to an assessment year in respect of any
source of income, he shall be deemed to be resident
in India in the previous year relevant the assessment
year in respect of each of his other sources of
income.
[(6) A person is said to be “not ordinarily resident”
in India in any previous year if such person is (a) an individual who has been a non-resident in
India in nine out of the ten previous years preceding
that year, or has during the seven previous years
preceding that year been in India for a period of, or
periods amounting in all to, seven hundred and
twenty-nine days or less; or
(b) a Hindu, undivided family whose manager has
been a non-resident in India in nine out of the ten
previous years preceding that year, or has during the
seven previous years preceding that year been in
India for a period of, or periods amounting in all to,
seven hundred and twenty-nine days or less.]”
27.

An alternate director is clearly a person who is to represent the

original director in a meeting which he cannot attend.

Even

assuming that the board of the directors of the defendant no. 1 was
within its rights to reject the request for appointment of an alternate

11

director, however it cannot be disputed that the defendant no. 1 was
clearly informed about the inability of the plaintiff to attend this
meeting. Therefore even if the prayer for appointment of an alternate
director had to be rejected, in all fairness, the plaintiff having
manifested his concern and wanting to be represented in the board
meeting had informed about his inability to attend the meeting. By
the letter dated 3rd March, 2007, it had been requested that such
request be brought to the notice of the chairman and the plaintiff be
informed.
The defendants did not communicate any doubts to the plaintiff
on his request at any time prior to the meeting.
28.

It has been strenuously argued on behalf of the defendant no. 1

that it had received no request for grant of leave of absence from the
plaintiff in respect of the meeting on 10th March, 2007.

Such

submissions flows only from the fact that the specific words that
'leave of absence be granted' are not to be found in the letters dated
3rd March, 2007, 6th March, 2007 and 9th March, 2007 which were
sent by the plaintiff or Mr. Atul Prakash. Thus, the core question
which arises before this court is the manner in which the
communications for and on behalf of Mr. B.K. Modi have to be
construed.
29.

This submission deserves to be examined against the manner in

which the defendant no. 1 has conducted itself and has recorded the
minutes of the meetings dated 23rd January, 2007; 10th March, 2007
and 12th May, 2007 in comparison to the past. In the minutes,
against Agenda no. 1 and 10th March, 2007, regarding grant of leave

12

of absence to the directors in attending the meeting, for the minutes
of the meetings held on 23rd January, 2007 it was recorded that Dr.
B.K. Modi, director did not attend the meeting. Prima facie, there is
certainly force in the submission of Dr. A.M. Singhvi, learned senior
counsel that this record is merely a statement of fact and does not
amount to rejection or grant of a leave of absence.
30.

On behalf of the plaintiff, it has been submitted at great length

that in the meetings of the Board of Directors, leave of absence was
granted automatically in a routine manner without there being any
formal request, oral or written, for the same.

According to the

plaintiff, the board of directors of the defendant no. 1 granted leave of
absence against even oral request.
31.

The plaintiff has cited 18 instances between January of 2002

and January of 2006 in support of this submission. According to the
plaintiff, he has himself been the beneficiary of such a practice
inasmuch as, on one occasion the plaintiff was unable to attend five
consecutive meetings but no action was taken against the plaintiff
and leave of absence was granted to the plaintiff on each of such
occasion. In this background it has been urged that the action of the
defendant no. 1 in disqualifying the plaintiff as director of the
company was wholly malafide and fraudulent inasmuch as the
plaintiff was entitled in law to rely upon continuation of the practice.
32.

In any case, no resolution objecting or refusing leave to the

plaintiff in terms of the practice was passed in the meeting held on
23rd January, 2007 and 10th March, 2007. The leave if refused was
required to be unequivocally so recorded. The plaintiff has submitted

13

that no rejection having been communicated to the plaintiff, he has
proceeded on the footing that leave of absence was automatically
granted and had arranged its affairs accordingly.
33.

The defendant no. 1 has objected to these assertions of the

plaintiff urging that leave of absence is only granted or considered
upon a specific oral/written communication.
34.

As specific instances were being pointed, consequently the

defendants had been called upon to place the details with regard to
the nature of the request received for grant of leave of absence over
this period. The defendant no. 1 was also required to place before this
court all documents as would support its contentions inasmuch as the
same were in its power and possession.
35.

The defendant no. 1 first filed an affidavit of dated 28th July,

2007 submitting that on checking up the records of the past five
years, there was no written request for grant of leave of absence by
the plaintiff and that the same was made orally by the plaintiff
through his office to the deputy company secretary of the Modi
Rubber Limited namely Dr. S. Bhardwaj.
36.

A second affidavit of Dr. S. Bhardwaj has been filed by the

defendant no. 1 which is dated 30th July, 2007. In this affidavit, Dr.
S. Bhardwaj has deposed that out of 30 meetings of the board of
directors of the defendant no. 1 between 25th January, 2002 till 12th
May, 2007, the plaintiff had sought leave of absence in writing only
for the meeting held on 24th November, 2006. By a letter dated 17th
November, 2003 he sought leave of absence in writing and requested
the board to allow Shri Om Prakash Dani to attend the meeting as an

14

observer in his behalf. Such leave of absence was granted to the
plaintiff and in the meeting held on 24th November, 2003, Shri Om
Prakash Dani was permitted to attend the same as an observer.
37.

The defendant no. 1 also admits in this affidavit that on a

request of Dr. B.K. Modi meeting of the board of directors was
postponed from 2nd December, 2003 to 6th December, 2003. This
being the only other occasion when a request for leave of absence was
received by email from Shri S.K. Chanana, a nominee director,
through his personal secretary in respect of the meeting which was
held on 12th May, 2007.
Thus, according to the defendant's own showing the plaintiff
had only put in written a request for grant of leave of absence twice
and on all other occasions the request was oral.
38.

From the affidavits filed by the defendant no. 1 and submissions

on its behalf which have been placed before this court, it appears that
for a period of almost ten years, the defendant no. 1 in routine has
been processing oral requests for grant of leave. Only on about three
occasions, formal communications for leave of absence has been
submitted to or processed by the defendant no. 1.
39.

The defendant no. 1 has failed to place any formal manner in

which the request was to be made by a director seeking leave or was
actually made. There is nothing on record even to indicate as to the
person to whom such request were made and by whom. It is
noteworthy that perusal of the minutes of the board of directors do
not indicate or suggest even remotely as to the manner in which or
the person to whom the requests for grant of leave which were

15

considered had been made or whether, having regard to the
composition of the board, leave was granted in routine to any director
who was absent.
40.

Dr. A.M. Singhvi, learned senior counsel for the plaintiff

contends that the plaintiff and the other promoter director Mr. B.K.
Modi, defendant no. 2 were closely related.

Both sides have

emphasised that the remaining directors on the board were nominees
of the financial institutions or of the BIFR. Thus, it is evident from
the documents placed by both sides before this court that
technicalities were not being adhered to in the company.
None of the minutes of the meetings indicate whether the
request is made orally or in writing. The defendant no. 1 has also not
placed any record as to the manner in which the request is made
whether oral or in writing and the person to whom it is
communicated. Such requests have been not only accepted but have
been granted by the board of directors of the defendant no. 1.
41.

As against such casual manner of making requests, the

defendant no. 1 had before it a written communication from the
plaintiff dated 6th March, 2007 and those for and on his behalf made
by Shri Atul Prakash in his letter of 3rd March, 2007 that the plaintiff
was not in a position to attend the meeting on 10th March, 2007.
In this background, the defendant no. 1 cannot be heard to
contend that the defendant no. 1 was not informed that the plaintiff
was not in a position to attend the meeting.
42.

The communications which have been placed on record in my

view have to be meaningfully considered. It cannot at all be held even

16

for a moment that the board of directors of the defendant no. 1 had
prescribed a particular form or required a formal request in a
particular manner to be made by it. The very practice which was
followed by it for over a decade evidenced by the pleadings and the
affidavits which have been placed before this court negates such a
view.
43.

If the notings in the minutes that 'Dr. B.K. Modi did not attend'

are to be treated as a rejection of the request for leave, then certainly
it has to be held that by the letters dated 3rd March, 2007 and 6th
March, 2007 the plaintiff had intimated inability to attend and
impliededly sought leave of absence.
44.

In the instant case, Mr. Atul Prakash had called for an

intimation from the defendant no. 1 when he addressed the first
communication with regard to the inability of the plaintiff to attend
the meeting. He had informed the defendant no. 1 of the fact that the
plaintiff was not in town. A notice of the meeting on 10th March,
2007 was given merely two days before the meeting. The notice was
given to the plaintiff not at his address but was sent to Mr. Atul
Prakash for forwarding to the plaintiff.

Before this court, the

defendant no. 1 has itself challenged the authority of Mr. Atul
Prakash to act for and on behalf of the plaintiff. Other than the
communication of the date of the meeting a bare two days before it
was scheduled, there is nothing on record to show that the plaintiff
had knowledge of the agendas or had received the copy of the notice.
Certainly this was not strict compliance of the statutory requirement.
45.

The defendant no. 1 has itself submitted in the affiavit dated

17

30th of July, 2007 that on a prior occasion, at the request of the
plaintiff, it had also changed the date of meeting. In the instant case,
despite specific decision that the chairman would fix the next meeting
with the consent of all board members and despite knowledge that
the plaintiff was abroad, meetings were set up and notice thereof was
given even two days before the scheduled meeting. So far as the
meting on 10th of March, 2007, in the given facts, nothing precluded
defendant no. 1 from specifically granting leave of absence to the
plaintiff in case it was to act bonafide.
46.

The minutes of 10th March, 2007 do not refer to the

communication received from the petitioner dated 3rd March, 2007.
They refer to the letter dated 6th March, 2007 not the letter dated 3rd
March, 2007.
47.

The plaintiff contends that oral requests were made on his

behalf for grant of leave of absence for the meetings held on 23rd
January, 2007 and 12th May, 2007. On behalf of the defendant no. 1,
this fact is disputed.

This also by itself becomes a triable issue.

However the practice which has been followed within the defendant
no. 1 to the effect that there was no formal method of seeking or
granting leave of absence and admittedly, the same was being granted
mostly on oral requests would lend support to the contention of the
plaintiff that leave of absence had been sought.
48.

Undoubtedly, the parties would be required to lead evidence on

this issue during the trial and a final view would be taken on
assimilating the same.
49.

The minutes which have been maintained by the company do

18

not reflect the manner in which such a request has been received on
any occasion or the person(s) to whom they were made. There is
neither prescribed procedure nor prescribed authority as to whom
the request is to be conveyed.
50.

So far as the nature of absence which would invite the

consequence of Section 283 (1)(g), is concerned, it has been
repeatedly held that absence has to be wilful and deliberate. In this
behalf, learned counsel for plaintiff has drawn my attention to the
pronouncement of the Division Bench of this Court reported in AIR
1969 Delhi 295 entitled Shri V.P.Singh Vs. Chairman,
Metropolitan Council of Delhi and Others. Placing reliance on
a pronouncement in (1901) 1 Chancellery Division 728 in re London
and Northern Bank; it was held that such an interpretation would
have the support of inherent reasonableness.

It would be useful to

consider the statement in Halsbury's Laws of England, Third Edition
Volume 6, at page 320, foot note (b) which was also relied upon in
this pronouncement of the Division Bench where it was stated thus :“(b) As to the meaning of absenting himself,
see Mc.Connell's claim, (1901) 1 Ch D Mack's
claim, (1900) WN 114; these cases show that the
absence must be voluntary and not accidental.
The absence dates from the first meeting which the
director fails to attend (Mc.Connel's Claim, (1901)
1 Ch D 728 supra; re London and Northern Bank,
Mack's Claim, (1900) WN 114 (Supra);”
Thirteenth Edition, while dealing with schedule I,
Article 88, which provides that “the office of
director shall be vacated if the director ...............(f)
shall for more than six months have been absent
without permission of the directors from meetings
of the directors held during that period”. At page
882 it is said --“Para (f) of this article is new in Table A. Where
articles provided that a director's office should be
vacated in case he absented himself from directors'
19

meetings for a certain period, `absenting himself'
was held to mean being absent voluntarily or
deliberately (Mack's Claim, (1900) WN 114). The
period of absence does not begin to run until a
meeting has been held which he ought to attend,
(McConnell's Claim, (1901) 1 Ch D 728).”
51.

It is trite that in order to invite the consequences under Section

283(1)(g), it is only when the directors did not attend the meetings
deliberately for a continuous period of three months that they
automatically vacate the office of the director of the company (Ref.
(1988) 1 Company Law Journal 109 (MP) (at page 121)
Parmanand Choudhary & Ors. Vs. Smt. Shukla Devi
Mishra & Ors.
52.

So far as the contention of the plaintiffs to the effect that leave

of absence was granted in routine if the director was not present
without any formal request, I find that the Company Law Board has
occasion to consider a similar contention. In its judgment reported at
(2001) 4 Com.L.J. 421 entitled Sardar Ajit Singh Vs. T.S.Enterprises
wherein the Company Law Board has observed that in family
companies, leave of absence is normally given without oral and
written request and it appears that the same was a practice in the
Company before the Board. For this reason, the Company Law Board
had rejected the decision of the Board of Directors that the
petitioner's had vacated the office on the ground that the petitioners
had not attended meetings without leave of absence.
53.

The plaintiffs have placed reliance on the fact that for this

reason Agenda-I of the minutes of every minute of the Board of
Directors reads “To grant leave of absence to the directors not

20

attending the meetings, if any”.

Copies of several such minutes

wherein it has been recorded by the Board that such leave was
granted to none, have been placed before the Court. According to the
plaintiff, this was because of the nature of the constitution of the
Board and for the reason that no formal request for leave was
necessary and it was given in routine and as an established practice.
On the other hand, Mr. Tripathi, learned senior counsel for the
defendant no. 1 submits that this was only a standard format.
54.

The matter can be examined from another perspective.
Before this court, even though the defendants were interacting

with Mr. Atul Prakash alone on behalf of the plaintiff, when the
matter was listed on 13th July, 2007, an objection was taken on
behalf of the defendants to his signing and verifying the plaint and
instituting the suit on the plea that he was not authorised. The power
of attorney dated 15th of May, 2006 placed on record by the plaintiff
was also objected to.
55.

On 13th July, 2007, the defendant no. 9 filed IA NO. 8291/2007

under Order 7 Rule 11 asserting that Shri Atul Prakash did not have a
valid power of attorney executed by the plaintiff and that the plaint
did not disclose that Shri Atul Prakash had stated facts which were
within his own knowledge or those which were upon information
received or obtained from others. In this background, the plaintiff
filed an application being IA No.(unnumbered)/2007 under Order 6
Rule 17 of the Code of Civil Procedure seeking leave to place the
plaint signed and verified by the plaintiff with his accompanying
affidavit on record.

This application under Order 6 Rule 17 was

21

allowed by this court on 20th July, 2007.
56.

Thus, while the stand of the defendant no. 1 before this court is

that Mr. Atul Prakash

had no authority to act on behalf of the

plaintiff, the defendant no. 1 has however itself placed copies of inter
office communications dated 22nd January, 2007 forwarding copy of
the agenda items for the board meeting which was to be held on 23rd
January, 2007.

Another communication dated 7th March, 2007

addressed by Mr. S. Bhardwaj, Deputy Company Secretary of the
defendant no. 1 to Mr. Atul Prakash has been placed on record. This
communication relates to the board meeting which was to be held on
7th March, 2007 and refers to a telephonic conversation purportedly
between Mr. S. Bhardwaj and Shri Atul Prakash. The defendant no. 1
forwarded the detailed agenda alongwith the draft rehabilitation
scheme of Modi Rubber Limited for the board meeting which was
scheduled to be held on 10th March, 2007 for onward submission to
Mr. B.K. Modi by Mr. Atul Prakash.
57.

The notice of the meeting of the Board of Directors of the

defendant no. 1 to be held on 23rd January, 2007 was issued only on
22nd January, 2007 by the defendant no. 1. The plaintiff has pointed
out that this period was certainly insufficient to enable the plaintiff to
be personally present at the meeting.

This notice was also not

communicated to the address of the plaintiff in India but to Mr. Atul
Prakash at Noida and has been placed by the defendant on record.
58.

If a technical view, which has been propounded by the

defendant no. 1, were to be taken, then it is to be seen that Section
286 of the Companies Act, 1956 postulates that notice of every

22

meeting of the Board of directors of a company shall be given in
writing to every director for the time being in India, and at his usual
address in India to every other director.

In the above facts, it

certainly cannot be contended that notice was served upon the
plaintiff at his address in accordance with law.
59.

In case the objections of the defendants with regard to the

authority of Mr. Atul Prakash to act on behalf of the plaintiff were
sustained, it would have to be held that the notice of the meetings was
also not validly served upon the plaintiff for the reason that they were
served on a person not authorised by him.
60.

It has then been urged that the plaintiff has admitted

knowledge of the scheduling of the meetings.

This may be so.

However, the plaintiff has urged that the defendants knew that the
plaintiff was a non-resident Indian and may be abroad and
deliberately did not take his convenience and did not serve sufficient
or adequate notice upon him thereby wilfully preventing the plaintiff
from attending the Board meeting. Consequently, in any case, the
plaintiff cannot be penalised for not being present at such meetings
for which he did not have proper or adequate notice.
61.

In this background, all the circumstances placed before this

court suggest force in the submissions made on behalf of the plaintiff
that leave of absence had been sought. Certainly, it has to be held
that the plaintiff has made out a prima facie case which requires
examination.
62.

In any case, nothing much would turn on this in view of the

findings which have been recorded so far as the meeting dated 10th

23

March, 2007 is concerned when the defendants had been put to
notice about the inability of the plaintiff to attend the meeting.
63.

Discretionary powers in the company administration are in the

nature of fiduciary powers and must, for that reason, be exercised in
good faith.

In (1981) 51 Company Cases 743 Needle

Industries (India) Limited Vs. Needle Industries Newey
(India) Holding Limited, it was further observed that malafides
vitiate the exercise of such discretion.
64.

While considering the prayer of the plaintiff for grant of an

interim injunction, it has to be seen as to whether the defendant has
rejected the prayer of the plaintiff for malafide reasons, as in such
eventuality the act of the defendant cannot be sustained. There is no
dispute that the plaintiff who is admittedly a director of the defendant
no. 1 could pray for appointment of the alternate director.

The

defendants were aware that in case the plaintiff's alternate director is
not appointed, the plaintiff may cease to be a director due to his
inability to attend the meetings of the board which are held in Delhi.
The plaintiff did disclose reason for his inability to and put the
defendants specifically to notice that he could not attend the meeting
on 10th March, 2007.
65.

In 1989 (66) Company Cases 363, 369, Delhi D. Ross

Porter Vs. Pioneer Seed Company Limited, this court had held
that where 40% interest of an Indian company belonged to a US
Company which had for watching of its interest upon a director who,
being not able to attend, requested the directors to accept an
alternate director in his place and the directors per-functorily refused

24

his request, this court held that they had no right to do so and the
question of the appointment of an alternate, must be considered
fairly in the interest of the company and its shareholders. Where the
refusal to appoint the alternate director is for malafide reasons, it was
held that the court will compel the appointment of an alternate
director.
66.

So far as the validity of the reasons given by the defendant for

refusing to appoint the alternate director are concerned, the same
would require to be considered after evidence is led in the matter.
However even if the prayer for alternate director was to be rejected,
in all fairness, the reasons for the absence having been brought to the
notice of the board, and in the light of the past practice there is no
good reason for not treating the same as a request for grant of leave
of absence. The defendant is yet to establish the manner as to the
nature of the requests for leave of absence which were granted.
67.

Mr. Prag Tripathi, learned senior counsel for the defendant no.

1 has urged at great length that the plaintiff is responsible for the
situation which has been urged and consequently is disentitled to any
relief of injunction. He places reliance on the pronouncement of the
Apex Court in 1995 5 SCC 545 Gujrat Bottling Company
Limited & Ors. Vs. Coca Cola Company & Ors. In support of
this submission, the defendant no. 1 has cited the following instances
attributable to the plaintiff in the proceedings before the Board for
Industrial & Financial Reconstruction in their written statement,
reply as well as in the course of oral submissions:(i)

After confirming in April, 2006 that the plaintiff has no

25

objection if the entire shareholding held by the financial institutions
were offered to the defendant no. 2, the plaintiff changed his mind on
3rd July, 2006 and informed the financial institutions on 3rd July,
2006 that he has not given a 'no objection' for sale of their shares to
Shri V.K. Modi. He also informed the financial institutions that he
was willing to improve the offer for purchase of the shares held by the
financial institutions.
This substantially delayed the transfer of the shares of the
financial institutions to the prejudice of the defendant no. 1 company.
On 7th July, 2006, the financial institutions invited two bids for the
purchase of the shareholding from the plaintiff as well as the
defendant no. 2 who participated and submitted their bids. The bid
of defendant no. 2 was higher than that of the plaintiff.
Consequently, on 9th July, 2007 the financial institutions accepted
the bid of Shri V.K. Modi who deposited 20% of the bid amount of
Rs.22 lakhs on 26th July, 2007.
After losing such bid, the plaintiff introduced one Modi Rubber
Shramik Sangh (MRSS) to stall completion of the transaction. On
27th July, 2007 this Sangh filed Writ Petition(Civil) No. 1198586/2006 in this court and obtained a stay on 1st August, 2006.
It is contended that utilising the shield of MRSS, the plaintiff
got filed applications before the BIFR inter alia praying for a restraint
against change in the shareholding pattern of the defendant no.
1/appointment of new operating agency/appointment of independent
directors. By an order dated 5th September, 2006 the BIFR rejected
the application of MRSS. The plaintiff filed two appeals being Appeal

26

No. 251/2006 and Appeal No. 254/2006 against the order dated 5th
September, 2006 and against the order dated 17th May, 2006 while a
third Appeal was filed by MRSS being Appeal No. 257/2006 against
the order dated 5th September, 2006. By an order dated 17th May,
2006, the BIFR declared the defendant no. 1 as a sick industry.
These appeals were dismissed by an order dated 22nd November,
2006

by

the

Appellate

Authority

Industrial

&

Financial

Reconstruction.
(ii)

The plaintiff appointed a security agency namely Jupiter

Administrative and Security Services (JASA for brevity) at the factory
premises of the defendant no. 1 which did not cooperate with it and
did not provide access to the factory premises compelling the board
of directors of the defendant no. 1 to appoint a new security agency.
Because of the obstructions caused by JASA, the defendant no. 1 was
constrained to file an application under Section 29 of the Sick
Industries Special Provisions Companies Act before the BIFR on 1st
February, 2007. On 8th February, 2007 defendant no. 1 took police
assistance for the purposes of engress into the factory premises at
Modi Puram however JASA alongwith Mr. V.K. Trehan and Mr. Modi
(all employees of Dr. B.K. Modi) created such a situation that the

27

police apprehending disappearance of public travelling and arrested
both of them and sealed the factory under Section 155 of the CrPC.
(iii) The plaintiff caused certain proceedings to be filed before the
Allahabad High Court which was entitled Shri V.P. Dani Vs. Sh V.K.
Trehan, wherein an order of status quo was passed on 7 th March,
2006. Shri O.P. Dani represents the plaintiff before the BIFR. Shri
V.K. Trehan is an employee in a company owned and controlled by
the plaintiff. The defendant no. 1 was not made a party to the writ
petition filed in Allahabad High Court.
In these circumstances, the BIFR could not pass any order on
the application under Section 29 of SICA filed by the defendant no. 1
in its hearing on 13th March, 2007.
In the light of such conduct on 15th March, 2007, Shri D.P. Dani
was terminated from service of the defendant no. 1.
The High Court of Judicature at Allahabad allowed the
application of defendant no. 1 for impleadment and vacation of the
stay on 24th April, 2007.
68.

It has been stated that as Dr. Modi did not attend the board

meetings held on 23rd January, 2007, 10th March, 2007 and 12th May,
2007 and consequently by operation of the mandate of Section
283(1)(g) of the Companies Act, 1956, the office of Dr. B.K. Modi as a
director stands automatically vacated.
69.

In terms of the resolution of the board of directors, an

application to this effect was filed before the BIFR on 7th June, 2007.
The defendant no. 1 also brought on record the appointment of
the defendant no. 2 as the managing director of the company.

28

In its reply filed on 4th July, 2007, the plaintiff stated that no
proper notice of the meetings of the board was served upon him.
70.

It is urged on behalf of the defendant no. 1 that the plaintiff is

pursuing two remedies at the same time. The submission is that in
the hearing before the BIFR on 5th July, 2007, time was sought to file
a reply to the defendant's application dated 7th June, 2007 whereby
the defendant no. 1 had informed the BIFR about the vacation of the
office of the plaintiff. Instead of filing the reply, the plaintiff filed the
present suit for injunction on 12th July, 2007.

According to the

defendant no. 1, the BIFR has reserved orders on its application on
17th July, 2007.
71.

It is noteworthy that in the Gujarat Bottling case (supra), the

Apex Court was concerned with the enforcement of a negative
covenant in an agreement between the Gujarat Bottling Company
(GBC for brevity) and the Coca Cola Company. This company had
entered into an agreement with the Gujarat Bottling Company on 20 th
September, 1993 whereby Coca Cola permitted and authorised GBC
upon terms contained in the agreement to deliver, sell and distribute
beverages under the trademarks Gold Spot, Thums Up, Maza and
Limca.

Para 19 of this agreement contained a negative covenant

whereby GBC had agreed not to manufacture bottle, sell, deal with or
otherwise be concerned with the products, beverages or any other
brand or trademark/trade names during the subsistence of the
agreement including the period of one years notice as contemplated
in para 21 of the agreement.
On disputes relating to additional investments in marketing

29

arrangements etc arising between the parties, the respondent nos. 2,
3 and 4 and his family members and associates. Pursuant to their
shareholding in respondent no. 1, appellant nos. 2 to 5 who were
closely associated and connected or affiliated to subsidiaries of Pepsi,
respondent no. 6. In this manner, Pepsi acquired control over GBC.
GBC gave a notice to Coca Cola under clause 7 of the second
agreement entered into between the notice in 1994, terminating the
same.
Coca Cola filed a Suit no. 495/2005 in the Bombay High Court
seeking various reliefs. The court granted relief partly restraining
GBC from manufacturing, selling or dealing with products, beverages
or brand of any trademark owned by respondent nos. 5 and 6 or
anyone else other than Coca Cola. Appeals were filed by both GBC
and Coca Cola which was disposed of by the Division Bench on 31 st
March, 1995 granting a modified injunction restricting the same to
plants of GBC at Ahmedabad and Rajkot.

This judgment of the

Division Bench was assailed before the Apex Court inter alia on the
ground that Coca Cola could be compensated for the loss caused to it
in the event of it succeeding in the suit. It was urged that on the other
hand, the plants and workmen at Ahmedabad and Rajkot would
remain idle which may lead to closure of the GBC.
In this background the court held that this complaint was being
actually made by the Pepsi through the mouth of the appellants
including GBC. It was observed that Pepsi took a deliberate decision
to take over GBC with full knowledge of the agreement of 1993 and it
did so to paralyse the operations of Coca Cola in that region and

30

promote its own product.

The court held that consequently Pepsi

must suffer the consequences of the failure of its efforts in the light of
the negative covenant contained in para 40. It was in these facts that
the court observed that, since the relief of injunction was wholly
equitable in nature, the party invoking the jurisdiction of the court
has to show that he himself was not at fault and that he himself was
not responsible for bringing about the state of things complained of
and that he was not unfair or inequitable in his dealings with the
parties against whom he was seeking relief. His conduct should be
fair and honest.
72.

In the instant case, there are two aspects to the matter. One is

the working of the plaintiff and the actions he may have taken with
regard to different decisions taken by the BIFR, the defendant no. 1
or otherwise. The second is the conduct leading to his suffering the
consequences provided under Section 283 (1) (g) of the Companies
Act, 1956. It is well settled that Section 283 (1) (g) is concerned only
with wilful and deliberate absence from the meetings of the board of
directors of the company and nothing else.

The conduct of the

director would have been relevant if there were allegations that the
plaintiff was not attending the meetings because he was disinterested
in the affairs of the company.
73.

The defendant no. 1 has made detailed submissions to urge that

the plaintiff is disruptive and is not concerned with the well being of
the company. It is not the case of the defendants that the plaintiff is
disinterested or unconcerned with the affairs of the defendant no. 1.
It is not even the case of the defendants that the plaintiff was not

31

interested in attending the meetings.
74.

The plaintiff places reliance on article 100 of the articles of the

company to urge that he was a permanent director. It has further
been urged on his behalf that even though the tenure of the director
came to an end by virtue of operation of Section 155 and 156 and
Article 93 of the Articles of Association, however, in consonance with
the spirit of article 100, the plaintiff and Shri V.K. Modi, defendant
no. 1 were immediately thereafter reappointed as directors in the
company so that their continuation on the board was affirmed.
75.

It is evident from the foregoing facts that acrimonious litigation

with regard to the control and the management of the defendant no. 1
is on going. Detailed submissions in this behalf have been placed
before this court by both parties. Undoubtedly, the presence of the
plaintiff on the board of directors of the defendant no. 1 was a source
of inconvenience to the other side.
Therefore, in my view, these submissions would not be relevant
for the purposes of testing the validity of the contentions so far as the
three meetings in question are concerned.
76.

It has been urged on behalf of the plaintiff that these assertions

certainly evidence the intention of the defendants to somehow or the
other get rid of the plaintiff inasmuch as they are protesting against
steps taken by the plaintiff to protect his interests as well as what the
plaintiff believes to be the interests of the company. The plaintiff has
sought to distance himself from the MRSS and has denied allegations
of collusion.
77.

The defendant no. 1 has raised an issue that on account of

32

operation of Section 283(1)(g), the plaintiff ceases to be a director.
The plaintiff has raised an issue as to the validity of the action of the
board of directors of the defendant no. 1 and has contended that in
the light of the admitted documents, it cannot be held that the
plaintiff was deliberately or wilfully absenting himself from any of the
meetings of the board of directors. In this view of the matter, if the
defendant no. 1 was disbelieved even in respect of one out of the three
meetings the consequences would be that the plaintiff would not have
earned the disqualification under Section 283(1)(g) of the Companies
Act, 1956.
78.
a

In my view the entire submission of the defendant no. 1 rests on
pre-supposition

that

the

defendant

has

incurred

such

disqualification and consequently has ceased to be a director. Such a
consequence would follow only if this court were to come to a prima
facie conclusion that the plaintiff had earned the disqualification.
79.

In the instant case, the plaintiff was admittedly holding 17.29%

and claiming 1.84% held by Modicom that is 19.13% shareholding as
per the articles of association. As per the articles of association as per
article 100, the plaintiff is a permanent director of the defendant no.1.
In Suit No. 2694/1998 The defendant no. 2 has urged that defendant
no. 1 was a non-retiring director as per article 100 and the defendant
no. 1 company is under the joint management and control of the
plaintiff and Mr. V.K. Modi. The removal of the plaintiff from the
board of directors would undoubtedly have drastic consequences so
far as decision making in respect of the management of defendant no.
1 was concerned.

In this view of the matter, the plaintiff

33

has

certainly made out the triable case.
80.

An objection has been taken to the maintainability of the suit.

It is urged that the jurisdiction of the civil court is barred on account
of the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 or

of the Sick

Industries Act.
In support of this submission, Mr. Prag Tripathi, learned senior
counsel appearing for the defendant no. 1 has placed reliance on the
pronouncement of a Full Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High Court
reported in 2002 108 Company Cases 494 K. Venkat Rao Vs.
Rockwell (India) Limited & Ors. In this case, the court was
concerned with the issue as to whether an application filed by a
director of the company before the Company Judge challenging a
notice in terms whereof his shares were directed to be forfeited and
he was directed to vacate the office, can be entertained by the court.
In this case, the petitioner was declared to have ceased to be a
director of the respondent company with effect from 21st July, 2001 in
terms of Section 283 (1)(f) of the Companies Act, 1956 on the ground
that he had failed to deposit the call money of the shares.

The

petitioner had filed a company petition praying that the company
court declare the notices issued by the company to the petitioner as
illegal and ultraviries of the statutory provisions as well as the articles
of association of the company.
The question which was raised before the Full Bench was that
having regard to the definition of 'court' as contained in Section 2
(11) and also the provisions contained in Section 10 of the Companies
Act, 1956, an application before the company judge would be

34

maintainable despite the fact that the civil court may also have the
jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the dispute. It was argued before the
court that the company court is also a civil court and that if a right
can be adjudicated in a civil court, the same can also be adjudicated
upon by a company court. This issue was answered by the Full Bnech
thus :"In our opinion, section 2(11) read with section
10 of the Act must be construed so as to give it a
purposeful meaning.
Section 283(1)(f) creates a statutory liability
under the Companies Act which is not contemplated
under a common law. A statutory right or a statutory
disqualification created under a special statute in our
considered opinion leaves no manner of doubt that an
application in relation thereto would lie before a
company court. Automatic cessation of office of
director of a company has a direct nexus with the
function of the company itself. It is not a case where
the court is required to deal with a transaction by and
between a company and the third party. We are
therefore of the opinion that company court has the
requisite jurisdiction to entertain the application. As
at presently advised, we need not go into the question
as to whether the jurisdiction of the civil court is
ousted or not."
81.

The question raised before the Full Bench in K. Venkat Rao

(supra) does not arise in the instant case inasmuch as the petitioner
has invoked the jurisdiction of the civil court which is being objected
to by the defendant no. 1. So far as the issue as to whether the civil
court would have the jurisdiction to entertain a suit and grant the
interim relief of injunction in respect of enforcement of rights
conferred on him under the Companies Act, 1956 is concerned, the
same was never an issue before the Full Bench in the aforenoticed
judgment.
82.

This issue has been squarely answered by a Division Bench of

35

the High Court of Kerala in 2000 (2) Company Law Journal 84
Dr. T.M. Paul Vs. City Hospital Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. In this case,
the court was concerned with a civil suit field by the plaintiffs who
had complained that the managing director and some of the directors
of the defendant company, who did not have the backing of the
majority, had conducted themselves in such manner as to tilt the
scales and create a majority for themselves.

The plaintiff had

complained of acts affecting their individual membership rights as
well as corporate membership rights and of fraud in the conduct of
the meeting of the board of directors. There was an allegation that
with regard to a meeting held on 18th August, 1992, the same was
without proper or adequate notice to the second plaintiff and the
other plaintiffs. Other decisions were also challenged. In this case,
the question which was raised at the instance of the defendants was
as to whether in these facts, the remedies sought for by the plaintiffs
by way of declaration and injunction in the civil suits could be
granted by the civil court or whether appropriate remedy available to
the plaintiffs was to approach the company law board and that the
suits were barred by the provisions of Section 397 and 398 of the
Companies Act.
83.

Several judicial pronouncements were considered by the court.

It was observed that under Section 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure,
civil courts have jurisdiction to try all suits of a civil nature except
those of which cognizance by the civil court is either expressly or
impliedly excluded.

The rule of construction being that every

presumption should be made in favour of the existence rather than

36

the exclusion of jurisdiction of the civil courts and that such exclusion
should not be readily inferred.
84.

These observations were based on the pronouncement of the

Supreme Court in AIR 1969 SC 78 Dhulabhai Vs. State of M.P.
wherein the following principles were laid down :“(1). Where the statute gives finality tot he orders
of the special tribunals, the civil court's jurisdiction must
be held to be excluded, if there is adequate3 remedy to
do what the civil courts would normally do in a suit.
Such a provision, however, does not exclude those cases
where the provisions of the particular Act have not been
complied with or the statutory tribunal has not acted in
conformity with the fundamental principles of judicial
procedure.
(2). Where there is an express bar of jurisdiction of
the court, an examination of the scheme of the particular
Act to find the adequacy or the sufficiency of the
remedies provided may be relevant, but is not decisive
to sustain the jurisdiction of the civil court. Where there
is no express exclusion, the examination remedies and
the scheme of the particular Act to find out the
intendment becomes necessary and the result of the
inquiry may be decisive. In the latter case, it is
necessary if the statute creates a special right or liability
and provides for the determination of the right or
liability and further lays down that all questions about
the said right or liability shall be determined by the
Tribunals so constituted, and whether remedies
normally associated with action in civil courts are
prescribed by the said statute or not.......
An exclusion of the jurisdiction of the civil court is
not readily to be inferred unless the conditions above set
out apply.”
85.

So far as the principles regarding implied exclusion of

jurisdiction are concerned, in AIR 1988 SC 752 (at 756) Raja
Ram Kumar Bhargava Vs. UOI, the principles were laid down
by the Apex Court thus :“Generally
speaking,
the
broad
guiding
considerations are that wherever a light, not preexisting in common law, is created by a statute and
that statute itself provided a machinery for the
enforcement of the right, both the right and the
37

remedy having been created uno flatu and a finality
is intended to the result of the statutory proceedings,
then, even in the absence of an exclusionary
provision, the civil courts' jurisdiction is impliedly
barred. If, however, a right pre-existing in common
law is recognised by the statute and a new statutory
remedy for its enforcement provided, without
expressly excluding the civil courts' jurisdiction, then
both the common law and the statutory remedies
might become concurrent remedies leaving open an
element of election to the persons of inherence.”
86.

The Apex Court has also on occasion considered the jurisdiction

of civil court regarding industrial disputes in its pronouncement
reported at AIR 1975 SC 2238 Premier Automobiles Ltd. V.
K.S. Wadke, the court had held thus :“If the dispute is not an industrial dispute, nor
does it relate to enforcement of any other right under
the Act, the remedy lies only in the civil court. If the
dispute is an industrial dispute arising out of a right
or liability under the general common law and not
under the Industrial Disputes Act, the jurisdiction of
the civil court is alternative, leaving it to the election
of the suitor concerned to choose his remedy..... But if
an industrial dispute relates to the enforcement of a
right or an obligation created under the Act, then the
only remedy available to the suitor is to get an
adjudication under the Act.”
87.

Again in AIR 1980 SC 16 S.K. Konda Vs. Pigment Cakes

and Chemicals Manufacturing Co. (P) Ltd., the Apex Court
held that a suit filed by workman for a declaration that the
termination of his service was illegal and for reinstatement and in the
alternative

for

compensation

for

wrongful

termination

was

maintainable and the civil court could award compensation though it
could not decree reinstatement.
It has been held that the jurisdiction of the civil court is
impliedly excluded so far as the relief of reinstatement of a workman
with back wages is concerned in AIR 1990 SC 255 Jitendra Nath
38

Biswa Vs. Empire of India and Ceylon Tea Co. The Apex
Court considered its earlier decisions and summarised the applicable
principles in its pronouncements in AIR 1995 SC 1715 Rajasthan
S.R.T. Corporatioin Vs. Krishna Kant.
88.

After consideration of all these judicial pronouncements, the

Division Bench in Dr. T.M. Paul (supra) has concluded thus :"15. From the decisions of the Supreme Court
noticed above, it is clear that when there is no express
provision excluding the jurisdiction of the civil courts,
such exclusion can be implied only in cases where the
right itself is created and the machinery for the
enforcement of that right is also provided by the
statute. If the right is traceable to general law of
contract or it is a common law right, it can be enforced
through the civil court even though the forum under
the statute also will have jurisdiction to enforce that
right.
Even the decision in Rajasthan S.R.T.
Corporation v. Krishna Kant AIR 1995 SC 1715, where
the policy of law emerging from the Industrial
Disputes Act and its sister enactments is taken note of
and the advantages in approaching the forums like the
Industrial Tribunal or the Labour Court are noticed
and resort to such forums is directed, the jurisdiction
of the civil courts is recognised and the decrees and
orders passed by courts are saved."
89.

Thus upon a consideration of the issues raised by the parties

and the rights asserted by the plaintiff, the Division Bench of the
Kerala High Court placed reliance on a pronouncement of the Gujarat
High Court reported at (1964) 1 Company Law Journal 326 : (1964)
34 Company Cases 777 (Guj): AIR 1965 Guj 96 Mohanlal
Ganpatram Vs. Sayaji Jubilee Cotton and Jute Mills Co.
Ltd. It was held by the Gujarat High Court that the remedy under
Section 397 and 398 is of a preventive nature. The same is intended
to bring an end to oppression and mis-management on the part of the
controlling shareholders and not to allow its continuance to the

39

detriment of the aggrieved shareholders or the company.

It was

further held that the remedy is not intended to enable the aggrieved
shareholders to set at naught what has already been done by the
controlling shareholders in the management of the company and that
the sections did not confer any power on the court (now the Company
Law Board) to set aside or interfere with past or concluded
transactions between the company and third parties which are no
longer continuing wrongs.
90.

The defendant before this court has placed reliance on the

pronouncement in Foss Vs. Harbottle (1843) 2 Hare 461. In
this case, the minority shareholders had alleged that the company
had a claim for damages against some of the directors for reasons of
their fraudulent acts. At the general meeting, the majority resolved
that no action need be taken against them.

The minority

shareholders took legal proceedings against the directors to compel
them to make good the loss caused to the company. This suit was
dismissed on the ground that the acts of directors were capable of
confirmation by the majority of the members and that the courts are
not interferred. It was held that it was for the majority to decide what
was for the benefit of the company. That was the action on behalf of
the company itself, which could not find approval from the majority
of the shareholders.
91.

No such issue arises in the instant case and this pronouncement

has no application to the instant case.
92.

So far as the specific issue of a suit for declaration against the

company complaining of a wrong to an individual member of the

40

Company before a civil court is concerned, I find that the Companies
Act, 1956 does not bar the jurisdiction of the civil court in relation to
the allegations of such director or member.

This issue fell for

consideration before a learned Single Judge of this court. In the
decision reported at ILR 1985 (2) Delhi 459 M/s Maharaja
Exports & Anr. Vs. Apparels Exports Promotion Council, it
was held that such a suit would be maintainable :"12. The objection of the defendants is that as
the disputes raised in the suit fall within the purview of
the Company Court jurisdiction the present suit for
declaration is not maintainable.
This objection
appears to have been raised only for the sake of raising
an objection. Section 10 of the Companies Act defines
the jurisdiction of the court to entertain the suits in
such like matters. The definition of the 'court' in clause
(II) of Section 2 and Section 10 of the Companies Act,
1956, dealing with jurisdiction of courts, read together
enables the shareholders to decide as to which court
they should approach for remedy in respect of a
particular matter. This provision does not purport to
invest the Company Court with the jurisdiction over
every matter arising under the Act. In view of the
elaborate provisions contained in the 1956 Act in
regard to management and conduct of a company's
affairs, including even important internal matters of
administration, the scope for interference by the civil
court may have become more limited, but the power
has not at all been taken away. It has been rightly
observed in a case reported as R. Prakasam V. Sree
Narayana Dharma Paripalana Yogem; 1980 Company
Cases page 611(2) that except in cases where the
Companies Act, 1956 confers jurisdiction on the
Company Court or some other authority like the
Central Government or the Company Law Board,
either expressly or by implication, all other disputes
pertaining to a company are to be resolved through a
forum of Civil Court when the dispute are kept on
being resolved by them. Where wrong is done to an
individual member, he can insist by recourse to a civil
suit, on "strict observance of the legal rules, statutory
provisions and provisions in the memorandum and
articles of association which cannot be waived by a
bare majority of share holders". Similar view was
taken in a judgment reported as Panipat Woollen and
General Mills Company Ltd. and another v. P.L.
41

Kaushik and others; 1969 Company Cases 349(3).
While interpreting the provisions of Section 9 of the
Code of Civil Procedure viz-a-viz the Companies Act
during the course of the judgment it was observed as
under :
"under Section 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure
1908, Civil Courts have jurisdiction to try all suits of a
civil nature excepting suits of which their cognizance is
expressly or impliedly barred. Unlike some statutes,
the Companies Act does not contain any express
provision barring the jurisdiction of the ordinary civil
courts in matters covered by the provisions of the Act.
In certain cases like winding up of companies the
jurisdiction of Civil Courts is impliedly barred.
Where a person objects to the election of Director
and claims a decree for declaration that he was one of
the directors, there is no provision which bares the
Civil Courts either expressly or by implication from
trying such a suit."
93.

In 1998 (91) Company Cases 31 K.Radhakrishnan Vs.

Thirumani Asphalts and Felts Pvt. Ltd. & Ors., it was
specifically held that the enactment of a special statute like the
Companies Act does not have the effect of barring the jurisdiction of
the civil court unless the statute expressly prohibits the jurisdiction
of the civil court in relation to all matters arising under the statute or
the scheme of the statute is such that such prohibition is necessarily
to be implied. There is no provision in the Act expressly barring the
jurisdiction of the civil court with respect to all matters arising under
the Act. The bar of jurisdiction is implied and is in respect of some
matters only. Neither section 2(11) nor section 10 of the Companies
Act creates jurisdiction with respect to all matters arising under the
Act concerning a company whose registered office is located within
the jurisdiction of the company court. The jurisdiction of the court is
to be ascertained from the other substantive provisions of the Act.
The exclusive jurisdiction of the company court is therefore limited to

42

matters which are required by the other provisions of the Act to be
dealt with by the court.
94.

Section 283 of the Companies Act sets out the circumstances on

the occurrence of which the office of a director shall become vacant.
The section does not contemplate any application being made to the
company court either to declare that the office has been vacated or to
declare that the office has not been vacated. The company court
cannot, therefore, entertain a petition to declare that the petitioner
continues to be a director and that he has not vacated the office.
95.

A similar question was raised before the High Court of

Judicature

at

Bombay.

In

the

judgment

reported

at

MANU/MH/0488/1992 : 1992 (3) Bombay CR 310 Santosh
Poddar & Anr. Vs. Kamalkumar Poddar and Ors., the court
placed reliance on earlier pronouncements reported in Rao Saheb
Manilal Gangaram Sindore V. Messers Western India Theatres Ltd.,
reported in LXIV Bom. L.R. At page 532, B. Prakasam V. Sree
Narayana Dharma Paripalana Yojana, reported in 50 Company Cases
611, Kerela High Court, Panipat Woollen and General Mills Co. Ltd. v.
Kaushik reported in (1969) 39 Company Cases 249, Thiruyalluvar
Valanmai Kashagar (P) Ltd. v. M.K. Seethai Achi reported in 64
Company Cases page 304, Bhulabhai V. State of Madhya Pradesh &
Anr., reported in AIR 1969 SC 70 and concluded thus :"21. From the provisions of the Companies Act
we do not find anything by which we can infer that
the jurisdiction of the Civil Court is ousted. The very
fact that section 2(11) is part of the definition clause
under the Companies Act under which a Court is
defined to mean the court as prescribed under section
10, clearly shows that whenever the term "the Court' is
used in any section of the Companies Act, the term
43

'Court' will have to be interpreted with reference to
Section 10. these sections will have no application
where any general civil suit is filed. The definition
clause is attracted only when resort is had to a
proceeding under the Companies Act under a section
which prescribes resort to a Court.
Under the
companies Act powers are conferred not only on
Courts but also on other authorities like the Company
Law Board, the Central Government and the Registrar.
Where a power is vested by the Act in a Court, that
Court has to be ascertained with reference to section
10. Beyond so specifying the court competent to deal
with such a matter, section 10 cannot be construed as

44

investing the company court with jurisdiction over
every matter which may arise in respect of a company
or as divesting Civil Courts of their jurisdiction.
22. In the present case although the irregularities in
holding meetings or the holding or cessation of the
office of a Director may have to be decided with
reference to the Companies Act, that Act has not
prescribed a forum where such a relief can be sought.
In the absence of such prescription, the ordinary Civil
Courts are competent to deal with such disputes.
Hence the present suits were correctly filed originally
in the city civil court."
96.

In the instant case, the plaintiffs have complained of acts

effecting their individual membership as well as corporate
membership.

There are allegations that the meetings were held

without proper or adequate notice to the plaintiff and the plaintiff has
also challenged the decisions of the defendant in its meetings.

It is

well settled that vacation of an office is automatic and comes into
effect instanti by operation of Section 283(1)(g). No opportunity of
being heard is also required to be given. (Ref; 1986 3 Company Law
Journal 234 Shekhar Mehra Vs. Kilpst Pvt. Ltd. & Ors.)
The reliefs sought for by the plaintiff can be granted only by the
civil courts. No provision of the Sick Industries Companies (Special
Provisions) Act 1985 has been pointed out which prohibits
maintainability of such a case.
In this background and in the light of the principles noticed
hereinabove, it is not possible to accept the submission that the
jurisdiction of this court is barred.
97.

Therefore, there is no force in the contentions of the defendants

that the present civil suit is barred.
98.

The plaintiff has complained that the purported board

resolution dated 12th May, 2007 which was placed before the BIFR
45

was never communicated to the plaintiff and that the entire exercise
undertaken by the defendants reeks of fraud and mala fide intention
of the defendants. It is pointed out that the entire intention of the
defendants was to oust the plaintiff from the management of the
defendant no. 1
99.

Mr. Prag Tripathi, learned senior counsel appearing for the

defendant, vehemently urged that the Board of Directors of the
respondent no.1 consists of six directors other than the plaintiff and
the defendant no.2 who are independent directors having no interest
in the company and that the decision on Section 283 of the
Companies Act which was taken by the Board on 12th May, 2007 was
by such independent directors.
100. In this behalf, it would be necessary to consider Clause 3-A.4 of
the Share Purchase Agreement dated 18th January, 2007 entered into
between the defendant no.2 and the financial institutions.

By this

agreement defendant no. 2 acquired the 44% shareholding held by
the financial institutions in the defendant no. 1.
As per this stipulation, it was agreed between the financial
institutions as sellers that in so far as they had any nominee directors
on the board of defendant no. 1 and/or to the extent that they are not
prejudiced thereby, they would support the claim of the rehabilitation
of the company proposed by Mr. V.K. Modi (defendant no.2 herein)
as a company scheme and also provide all reasonable support to the
defendant nos.1 & 2 in implementing any order or scheme of the
BIFR and/or delegation of management authority pursuant to such
orders or scheme or in the day to day operations of the company and

46

all applications and orders may be sought by the defendant nos.1 & 2
from the BIFR or any other authorities/court or tribunal in relation to
any change in the composition of the Board or the constitutional
document of the company.
In view of this mandate of the agreement between the
defendant no.2 and the financial institution, the aspect of the
independence of the nominee directors of the company would
certainly undergo a drastic change.
101. The defendants have taken an objection that the plaintiff
deserves to be disbelieved for the reason that he has taken no action
since the meeting dated 23rd January, 2007. This submission has
been answered by the plaintiff submitting that the plaintiff had no
cause of action inasmuch as the plaintiff was led into believing that
his request for grant of leave stood granted in the meetings dated
23rd January, 2007, 10th March, 2007 and 12th May, 2007. The
plaintiff has based his entire cause of action in bringing the present
suit on the receipt of the application filed by the defendants before
the BIFR. It has been urged that on no occasion prior hitherto in
identical circumstances, did the defendants treat the plaintiff as
having deliberately not attended the meeting or that leave of absence
had been refused to him. The minutes of the meetings held on 23rd
January, 2007 and 10th March, 2007 also do not reflect so.
102. Mr. A.S. Chadha, learned senior counsel appearing for the
defendant no.3, has objected that the plaintiff has not assailed the
decisions in the meetings and consequently, is disentitled to any
interim relief. In the instant case, the plaintiff has asserted that he

47

had sought leave of absence for attending the three meetings from the
respondents which was granted to it. It has been also urged that the
plaintiff's absence in identical circumstances and from the meetings
was not deliberate.

Based thereon, the plaintiff has sought a

declaration that the resolution passed by the Board of Directors of the
defendant no.1 on 12th May, 2007 in so far as it removed the plaintiff
as a director of the company, was illegal, null and void ab initio. The
plaintiff has also sought a declaration that the plaintiff continues to
be a director of the defendant no.1 In the plaint as framed, the
inquiry into whether the plaintiff had requested for leave of absence
is inherent and would be an issue for the purposes of adjudication of
this prayer for declarations. In this background, it cannot be urged
that the prayers in the application are beyond the suit.
103. So far as the present application is concerned, this court by way
of this application, the plaintiff has sought only a restraint against the
operation of the resolution dated 12th May, 2007 and also a restraint
against the defendants from interfering or obstructing the plaintiff
from acting as a director of the defendant no.1. This court is required
to consider the application based on the well settled principles
governing grant of interim injunction. The submissions made would
require to be tested on the anvil of whether the plaintiff has made out
a prima facie case which would require adjudication of its claims and
whether any irreparable loss and damage would enure to the plaintiff
if interim protection was not granted. Certainly, considerations of
balance of convenience, interest of justice and equity would be also
guide adjudication.

48

104. I have found that prima facie, the plaintiff has placed admitted
written communications which indicate that the plaintiff had
informed the defendants of his inability to attend the meeting and
found that in this background, it cannot be contended that the
absence of the plaintiff in the meeting on 10th March, 2007 could be
held to be deliberate or willful. So far as the other meetings are
concerned, the plaintiff has urged that it had made an oral request for
grant of leave of absence in identical circumstances and as per past
practice by the minutes of earlier meetings wherein leave of absence
has been granted which do not indicate any manner of making or
granting of the leave of absence to the director. In the aforenoticed
background, it certainly has to be held that the plaintiff has made out
a prima facie case for grant of ad interim injunction. The plaintiff is
seeking to exercise his rights as a director of the company.

The

defendant no.2 has admitted that the management of the defendant
no1. was in the hands of the plaintiff as well as the defendant no.2.
The plaintiff has been a director of the company for several long years
and is holding more than 17.29% of shareholding. The plaintiff also
claims shareholdings to the tune of 1.84% which was held by
Modicom is pending transfer to him and that as a result, he would
have 19.13% shareholding in the company.

It further cannot be

contended that grave and irreparable loss would not result to him in
case if he is prevented from exercising his powers and rights as a
director of the company. In the facts of the given case, it has to be
held that the balance of convenience, interest of justice and equity are
also in favour of the plaintiff.

49

105. In this background, it is directed that there shall be a stay of the
operation of the resolution passed by the Board of Directors on 12th
May, 2007 to the extent that it removes the plaintiff as the director of
the defendant no.1.
All consequences in law as a result shall follow in favour of the
plaintiff.
This application is allowed in the above terms.
IA No. 8291/2007(U/O 7 Rule 11 of the CPC)
106. This application was filed by the defendant no. 1 objecting to
the power of attorney filed by the plaintiff and urging that the plaint
was not signed and verified in accordance with law. In difference to
these objections, the plaintiff had filed an application under Order 6
Rule 17 of the Code of Civil Procedure and sought leave to place the
plaint duly signed and verified by the plaintiff himself

and

his

accompanying affidavit. This application was allowed on 20th July,
2007 .
In view of the orders on 20th July, 2007, this application is
rendered infructuous and is dismissed as such.

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
August 13, 2007
kr

50

