IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 17708/2004
Da te of decision : 13th January, 2005
Tarun Goel

... Petitioner
through Mr. V.K.Tandon, Advocate
VERSUS

G.G.S.Indraprastha University & Ors.
...Respondents
through Mr.G.D.Goel with
Ms.Sumita Dass,Advocates
for respondent no.1.
Mr.Manoj Goel with Mr.S.Roy
and Mr.W.Shafiq, Advocates for
respondent no.3.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.
With the consent of the parties the present writ petition
is taken up for disposal.
2.

This writ petition has been filed by a student, inter alia

impugning the order dated 22nd September, 2004 passed by the
Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University (hereinafter referred
to as 'the University-respondent no.1') whereby the order

1

WP(C) 17708/2004

permitting

migration

International

of

Management

the

petitioner

from

School-respondent

Jagannath

no.2

to

the

Vivekananda Institute of Professional Studies-respondent no.3 has
been cancelled.
3.

The petitioner in the instant case passed an entrance

examination conducted by the University-respondent no.1 in the
year 2003 and was admitted to its Bachelor of Journalism and
Mass Communication Course(BJMC). The petitioner was assigned
the respondent no.2 institute where he attended classes for the
first and second semester and successfully passed examinations
pertaining to these semesters scoring 74% marks. Inasmuch as the
petitioner was having to commute a long distance from his
Paschim Vihar residence to the respondent no.2 located in the
Vasant Kunj, the petitioner contends that a large amount of
valuable time was wasted in commuting, effecting his academic
performance and health. In these circumstances, the petitioner
considered migration in the same course to another institute
affiliated to the respondent university, running the same course.
4.

The respondent no.3 was located near the petitioner's

place of residence and was offering the same course.
It

is

submitted

that
2

the

petitioner

had

gained

WP(C) 17708/2004

information that Monika Bhatia, a student enrolled with
respondent no.3 in the same course was interested in migrating to
the respondent no.2 institute. The ordinance relating to migration
of students also has a provision for mutual migration of students in
the

same

programme/discipline.

Therefore,

the

petitioner

alongwith Monika Bhatia made an application to the respondent
no.1 university seeking mutual migration.
5.

The respondents 2 & 3 had no objection whatsoever to

the proposed migration and both had duly endorsed the same by
certificates issued to the petitioner in this behalf. The application
of the petitioner was received by the respondent on 26th August,
2004. It is submitted that vide an order made on 31 st August, 2004
the respondent no.1 had allowed the migration of the petitioner to
the 3rd semester of the course from the respondent no.2 institute to
the respondent no.3 institute.
6.

Pursuant to the directions of the respondent no.1, the

petitioner duly deposited his fees with the respondent no.3 on 6th
September, 2004 and duly started attending classes in this
institute. The petitioner appeared in the mid-term examination
also conducted by respondent no.3 with effect from 15th
September, 2004 to 20th September, 2004.
3

WP(C) 17708/2004

To the utter shock of the petitioner on or around 9th
October, 2004, he received a letter dated 22nd September, 2004
peremptorily informing him that his migration from respondent
no.2 to respondent no.3 was cancelled on the ground that
migration of the petitioner was approved on the basis of the
mutual migration with Monika Bhatia who was now not interested
in her migration. The petitioner was directed to continue studies
in 3rd semester of the course at the respondent no.2 with
immediate effect.
7.

Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner filed the present

writ petition seeking quashing of the letter dated 22nd September,
2004 and also seeking interim directions to permit the petitioner
to continue with the course being undertaken by him with the
respondent no.3 and to take initial examinations.
Interim orders to this effect were made on 16th
November, 2004 and the petitioner has continued to attend classes
with respondent no.3 under the protection thereof.
8.

It is noteworthy that respondents 2 & 3 have not

contested the writ petition. Only respondent no.1 opposed the
same.

The stand taken in the counter affidavit has been

vehemently pressed during the course of hearing as well. It is
4

WP(C) 17708/2004

contended on behalf of the respondent no.1 that the application
seeking migration was a joint application made by the petitioner
alongwith Monika Bhatia and that the migration was permitted to
the petitioner purely on considerations of mutuality.

It is

contended that though the letter allowing migration from
respondent no.2 to respondent no.3 was duly issued, however the
letter of migration of Monika Bhatia from respondent no.2 to
respondent no.3 institute was not issued on account of a letter
dated 10th September, 2004 received from respondent no.2. It is
submitted that the matter was re-examined and the respondent
no.2 was informed that it was a case of mutual migration and in
these circumstances the petitioner was relieved by the respondent
no.2.

However Monika Bhatia subsequently decided not get

relieved from respondent no.3 and in the light of these changed
situations the case of mutual transfer and migration of the
petitioner was cancelled.
9.

I have considered the rival contentions of the parties

based on the material on record. It would be useful to consider the
parameters within which migration is permissible as per the
ordinance relating to the respondent no.1-University. The relevant
provisions read as hereunder:5

WP(C) 17708/2004

“REVISED ORDINANCE
MIGRATION OF STUDENTS”

RELATING

TO

1. No migration shall be allowed from other
universities/colleges to the University Schools of
studies.
University maintained colleges or
affiliated institutions i.e no inter-university
migration shall be allowed in normal
circumstances. It can be allowed in special
circumstances by the Vice-Chancellor, on the
recommendations
of
a
Sub-Committee,
comprising of three members of Academic
Council, constituted by the Vice-Chancellor.
2. Migration (inter-se) from the University
Schools of Studies, maintained institutions or
affiliated
institutions
shall,
however
be
considered as under:(a) No migration shall be allowed during first year
of studies except on extreme compassionate
grounds, with the prior approval of Academic
Council.
(b) Migration from University School of Studies to
University maintained institutions or affiliated
institutions and vice-versa or from one institution
to
another
institution
in
the
same
programme/discipline in the second year/third
semester can be considered in respect of following
cases:(i) (a) Mutual migration of the student(s)
in the same programme/discipline may be
allowed when 'No Objection' is conveyed
by both the Deans/Directors/Principals,
concerned of the University School of
Studies/respective
institutions,
as
applicable.
Such migration shall be
allowed with the approval of the Registrar
of the University.
6

WP(C) 17708/2004

(b) In case applicants seeking migration from
affiliated institutions to University School of
Studies are more than the vacancies available,
migration will be allowed on the basis of merit.
(ii)
Under
genuine
circumstances
migration of the students from University
School of Studies to another institution
and vice-versa or from one institution to
another
institution
in
the
same
programme/discipline may be allowed
provided that the 'No Objection Certificate'
is issued by the University School of
Studies/institution where he or she is
studying in the previous semester and also
vacancy exists in the institution/University
School of Studies where he or she is
seeking migration. Such migration shall
be allowed only with the prior approval of
Vice-Chancellor.

10.

(iii) In case of migration of the student from one
affiliated institution to another institution, the fee
shall remain unchanged. However, in case of
migration from affiliated institutions to
University Schools of Studies, the candidate is
required to pay the fee as prescribed in the
University Schools of Studies for the same
programme/discipline.”
Perusal of the aforestated provisions shows that mutual

migration of student(s) in the programme/discipline is allowed
when no objection is conveyed by the authorities of the institutions
with the approval of the Registrar of the University. An additional
provision has been made for migration of students from one
institution to another under genuine circumstances provided that a
7

WP(C) 17708/2004

no objection certificate is issued by the institution wherefrom
migration is sought and vacancy exists in the institution to which
the student is seeking migration. Such migration can be allowed
only with the prior approval of the Vice-Chancellor.
11.

Undoubtedly in the instant case a joint application was

made by the two students for interchange of their institutes.
Respondent no.2 gave a no objection in granting admission to
Monika Bhatia vide certificate dated 25th August, 2004 while
respondent no.3 gave it no objection to grant of admission on
migration to the petitioner vide his letter dated 2oth August, 2004.
12.

It is important to notice that the respondent no.3 in its

letter to the respondent no.1-University, in addition to giving its no
objection also notified the University to the following effect:“His request for migration to our
institute can be considered against Gaurav
Wadhwa, Roll No.90/BJ(MC)/ VIPS/2003 who
has left our Institute.”
Writ large in the face of this communication is the
suggestion of the respondent no.3 to even accommodate

the

petitioner and grant admission to him against the resultant
vacancy on account of Gaurav Wadhwa having left the course and
the institute.

8

WP(C) 17708/2004

13.

The respondent no.1 considered the request of the

petitioner and permitted his migration and conveyed the same vide
their letter dated 31st August, 2004 which reads as hereunder”“As
per the provisions of the University
ordinance relating to migration of students, the
Vice-Chancellor is pleased to allow the migration
of Tarun Goel in the 3rd semester of BJ(MC)
programme at the Vivekananda Institute of
professional
Studies,
from
Jagannath
International Management School, Vasant Kunj.
His/Her Enrolment Number will be as under:
UniversityEnrolmentNo:108/BJMC/VIPS/
2003
He/She is required to pay the requisite fee of
second year at the Vivekananda Institute of
Professional Studies, for the session 2004-2005
latest by 8th September, 2004.”
This communication made by the Registrar of the
respondent no.1 merely conveyed the decision taken by the ViceChancellor of the University to permit the petitioner to migrate to
the respondent no.3.
14.

Bare perusal of the communications lends support to the

argument made on behalf of the petitioner that the respondent
no.1 did not treat the application of the petitioner as a mutual
exchange or arrangement for mutual migration of two students
doing the same course in two institutes but treated the same as a
request made for migration under genuine circumstances,
9

WP(C) 17708/2004

discretion in respect whereof was vested with the Vice-Chancellor.
The order in the instant case in favour of the petitioner was passed
by the Vice-Chancellor as communicated in the letter dated 31st
August, 2004.
15.

Based on the direction made the petitioner acted upon

the same and duly deposited the requisite fees and commenced
classes and also took examinations at the respondent no.3
institute.
16.

The plea on behalf of the respondent that the application

for migration was on behalf of two students and was in the nature
of mutual exchange is also to be noticed for the purposes of
rejection inasmuch as, admittedly whereas directions were issued
by the Vice-Chancellor to the petitioner to join the course, he was
duly awarded a roll number and directed to pay fees, no such order
in this behalf appears to have been made in favour of Monika
Bhatia.
17.

The stand taken by the respondent no.1 is also not

supported by the communication dated 12th October, 2004
addressed by Monika Bhatia to it. Copy of this communication has
been placed on record. It is stated therein by her that when she
(Monika Bhatia) was not given the permission to migrate as had
10

WP(C) 17708/2004

been given to the petitioner on 31st August, 2004, she had
contacted the Registrar of the respondent no.1-University who
denied migration to her stating that the present petitioner had
been given migration against the vacant seat of Gaurav Wadhwa
who had left respondent no.3 in the first semester. As she was not
given permission to migrate she proceeded to deposit the fes for
the third semester in the respondent no.3. She is stated to have
attended classes and taken examinations.

Having borne such

expenses and having continued with the course and much time
having elapsed, it was not suitable for her to migrate and for this
reason she had no option but to continue with the course with the
respondent no.3.
18.

There is no rebuttal to this letter from Monica Bhatia on

the part of the respondents. No letter to Monika Bhatia permitting
her to migrate from respondent no.3 to respondent no.2 has been
pleaded or placed on the record of this case. Even the order dated
31st August, 2004 does not reflect any consideration of mutual
exchange for effecting the migration. The order passed by the
Vice-Chancellor is clear , unequivocal and explicit in its direction
permitting the petitioner to migrate to respondent no.3 and in
requiring him to make payment of the charges. Even the new roll
11

WP(C) 17708/2004

number was communicated in the said communication. Force is
lent to the submission made on behalf of the petitioner that the
petitioner's migration was permitted by the Vice-Chancellor in
exercise of his powers under clause 2(ii) of the ordinance
concerned with migration which has been reproduced in extenso
here-in-above.

The power of permitting migration on mutual

interchange between students doing the same course in two
different institutes is vested with the Registrar. This was not done
in the instant case.
19.

I also find force in the contention of the petitioner that

an order having been made in his favour which was duly acted
upon by him and steps taken in pursuance thereof, the order
cancelling the permission could not have been made by an
authority lower than the authority granting permission to the
petitioner.

The impugned order dated 22nd September, 2004

appears to have been passed by the Registrar who in the facts and
circumstances of the present case and in view of the applicable
provisions of the ordinance had no authority or jurisdiction to do
so.
Admittedly the impugned order has been passed without
even issuance of a notice to show cause to the petitioner who has
12

WP(C) 17708/2004

thereby also been denied an opportunity to represent against the
proposed action of cancellation of the permission to migrate. As
such the order is bad also for violation of principles of natural
justice and cannot be sustained for this reason as well.
20.

Examining the matter from yet another angle, the

respondents 2 & 3 have not

contested the claim of the writ

petitioner in the present proceedings. The petitioner joined the
course pursuant to the orders dated 31st August, 2004 and
undertook classes and

examinations in the course in the

respondent no.3. A student is entitled to pursue his academic
career in an environment of stability and certainty. There is no
reason whatsoever, let alone sufficient reason in law, to direct
displacement of the petitioner when there is no element of
prejudice to the respondents nor assertion of loss to public interest
or to the cause of academic excellence in the facts and
circumstances of the present case.
21.

In this view of the matter the writ petition is allowed.

The impugned order dated 22nd September, 2004 passed by the
respondent is hereby quashed. The petitioner shall be allowed to
pursue the Bachelor of Journalism and Mass Communication
Course(BJMC) with the respondent no.3 institute in accordance
13

WP(C) 17708/2004

with law.
22.

There will be no order as to costs.

GITA MITTAL, J.
13th January, 2005
JK

14

WP(C) 17708/2004

