REPORTABLE

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.2338/2001
Date of decision: 13th May, 2005
MANJIT SINGH SAWHNEY
... Petitioner
through: Mr. Kuljeet Rawal,
Advocate
VERSUS
UNION OF INDIA & ORS. ... Respondents
through: Ms. Purnima Sethi,
Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in
the Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

By way of the present petition, the petitioner is

seeking payment of Rs.1,18,275.00 with interest on account of
WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 1 of 42

compensation for the injuries and loss suffered by him in the
1984 riots.
The 31st of October, 1984 saw the unfurling of a saga
of terror let lose by barbaric mobs indulging in a spate and orgy
of violence directed against a specific community after the
killing of late Prime Minister Smt. Indira Gandhi. The agony of
the people effected would have known no bounds in as much as
there are allegations and instances to the effect that the
protectors of life, society and property completely failed in
discharge of their duty to protect and, if did not actually
perpetrate the crimes, acted in their promotion and tacit support
to the unruly mobs.
Noticing the turmoil, tragedy and loss suffered by
mankind, Anil Dev Singh, J in his judgment reported at 1996 III
AD Delhi 333 entitled Bhajan Kaur Vs. Delhi Administration,
commented thus:“5. The case demonstrates how innocent lives
were snuffed out by barbaric mobs indulging in an
orgy of violence after the brutal killing of Smt.
WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 2 of 42

Indira Gandhi. It is not difficult to visualise the
terror, pain and the suffering which must have
struck the affected people not at the hands of beasts
but fellow beings belonging to the same mother
land to which the dead belonged. Bemoaning the
loss of the near ones, how they would have
preferred beast to human beings for company and
must have yearned for a place free of marauding
crowds-yearned for a place where fear would not
enter-yearned for a situation described in the
following words of Gurudev Rabindra Nath
Tagore:-

2.

“I f I were the soil, if I were the water,
If I were the grass or fruit or flower,
If I were to roam about the earth with
beasts and birds,
there would be nothing to fear,
In never-ending ties wherever I go,
it will be the limitless me.”
One does not have to go far back in the memory lane

and most of us can recollect the horror and agony suffered by
every right thinking citizen of this country as to what was being
experienced. The agony of those who actually underwent the
experience and dejection at the failure of the state machinery to
ensure the life and liberty constitutionally granted to them,
cannot be expressed in words.

Till date, cases relating to

prosecution of persons accused of involvement in the riots
WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 3 of 42

which occurred are pending in courts.
There has been little success at bringing the guilty to
book and this has only compounded the hopelessness in the
minds of victims.
4.

Article 21 of the Constitution of India guarantees as a

fundamental right to every citizen of this country personal
liberty which is fundamental to the functioning of our
democracy. The very Preamble ensures liberty, equality and
fraternity to the citizens of India, promise of which the nation is
reminded each time communal violence and riots erupt.
Undoubtedly, the state is obligated to ensure that the rights of
individuals or group of persons under Article 21 of the
Constitution of India are not and cannot be violated.
5.

As noticed in the afore-stated judgment, it is the

bounden duty and responsibility of the state to secure and
safeguard life and liberty of an individual from mob or violence.
That these riots occurred on account of laxity and indifference
of the administration in enforcing law and order cannot be
WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 4 of 42

doubted. If expeditious and timely action is taken effectively
and efficiently, undoubtedly such riots can be prevented or
curtailed. The state is enjoined to implement the expressed will
and give full effect to the constitutional promises. The message
to those guilty must be clear and unequivocal that their actions
would not be tolerated and that they would be strictly dealt with.
Simultaneously, the state cannot ignore its duty in ensuring the
creation of civilised values and behaviour.
6.

Noticing the sweep of Article 21, the Apex Court in

the judgment reported at JT 1996 (1) SC 163 entitled the
National Human Rights Commission Vs. State of Arunachal
Pradesh & Another held thus:“9.
The sweep of Article 21 is wide and far
reaching. Article 21 is not to be restricted to the
violation of right to life and liberty committed by
the State alone. That right is also to be protected
and safeguarded by the State from being violated
or interfered with by private individuals. In
National Human Rights Commission v. State of
Arunachal Pradesh & another, JT 1996 (1) S.C.
163, the Supreme Court held that the State is
bound to protect the life and liberty of every
person and it cannot permit any body or group of
WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 5 of 42

persons to threaten it. The Supreme Court in this
regard held as follows:“We are a country governed by the
Rule of Law. Our constitution confers
certain rights on citizens. Every person
is entitled to equality before the law
and equal protection of the laws. So
also, no person can be deprived of his
life or personal liberty except according
to procedure established by law. Thus
the State is bound to protect the life and
liberty of every human being, be he a
citizen or otherwise, and it cannot
permit any body or group of persons,
e.g., the AAPSU, to threaten the
Chakmas to leave the State, failing
which they would be forced to do so.
No State Government worth the name
can tolerate such threats by one group
of persons to another group of persons;
it is duty bound to protect the
threatened group from such assaults
and if it fails to do so, it will fail to
perform its Constitutional as well as
statutory obligations. Those giving
such threats would be liable to be dealt
with in accordance with law. The State
Government must act impartially and
carry out its legal obligations to
safeguard the life, health and well
being of Chakmas residing in the State
would being inhibited by local politics.
Besides, by refusing to forward their
applications the Chakmas are denied
WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 6 of 42

rights, Constitutional and statutory, to
be considered for being registered as
citizens of India.”
“10. Article 21 is the Nation's commitment to
bring every individual or group of persons within
its protective fold. This Nation belongs to
members of all the communities. They are equal
members of the Indian society. Equality before
law and equal protection of laws is ensured to
them by Article 14 of the Constitution to them.
None is to be favoured or discredited. The
conduct of any person or group of persons has to
be controlled by the State for the lofty purpose
enshrined in Article 21 of the Constitution. It is
the duty of the State to create a climate where the
cleavage between members of the society
belonging to different faiths, caste and creed are
eradicated. The State must act in time so that the
precious lives of the people are not destroyed or
threatened. Otherwise, Article 21 will remain a
paper guarantee. Time is long overdue for
adopting measures that have more than a
hortatory effect in enforcing Article 21 of the
Constitution. The State cannot adopt a “do
nothing attitude”. Like disease prevention, the
State must take every precaution, measure and
initiative to prevent terrorem populi of the
magnitude represented by 1984 riots and in the
event of an cut-break of riots it must act swiftly
to curb the same and not allow precious time to
slip by, as any inaction or passivity on its part
can result in loss of precious life and liberty of
individuals amounting to violatin and negation
Article 21 of the Constitution. The State has to
WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 7 of 42

enforce minimum standards of civilized
behaviour of its citizens so that the life, liberty,
dignity and worth of an individual is protected
and preserved and is not jeopardised or
endangered. If it is not able to do all that then it
cannot escape the liability to pay adequate
compensation to the family of the person killed
during riots as his or her life has been
extinguished in clear violation of Article 21 of
the Constitution which mandates that life cannot
be taken away except according to the procedure
established by law.
7.

It is noteworthy that the Bhajan Kaur case (Supra) had

been filed by a widow of a 1984 riots victim whose husband
Shri Narain Singh lost his life on 1st November, 1984 in the riots
which took place after the assassination of Smt. Indira Gandhi.
According to Bhajan Kaur, on the fateful days, her husband was
travelling by the Bombay-Firozpur Janta Express train.
According to FIR No.355 dated 1st November, 1984 lodged at
Police Station New Delhi Railway Station, around 12.30 noon,
the train stopped at Tuglakabad Railway Station where 300-350
villagers surrounded it. They pulled up 25-26 passengers from
the train and killed them. The persons killed included Narain

WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 8 of 42

Singh, son of Jawahar Singh who was a resident of Village
Bhalajala Tehsil Taran, Distt. Amritsar, Punjab. Smt. Bhajan
Kaur had impugned the action of the Delhi Administration in
awarding ex gratia compensation of Rs.20,000/- to her by means
of a cheque on the ground that the same was too meagre and
deserved to be enhanced. It is noteworthy that the writ petition
was filed in 1996 after the riots which had occurred in 1984.
8.

I may notice here that in the instant case, the petitioner

is admittedly a victim who has stated that he has suffered at the
hands of mob who pulled him out of the train at the same
Railway Station Tuglakabad near Delhi on 2nd November, 1984
(This is one day after Bhajan Kaur's husband Shri Narain Singh
was pulled out by the mob at the same spot). Callous disregard
and failure to discharge its constitutional obligation on the part
of the state is writ large from the fact that even two days after
the commencement of riots on 31st October, 1984 and despite
having full knowledge of the sensitive spot, no action was taken
by the state to discharge its prime duty of ensuring security to its
WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 9 of 42

citizens. The train of the present petitioner was stopped at the
same Railway Station at Tuglakabad. The passengers of one
community are stated to have been pulled out of the
compartment at the same spot. Seven of them are stated to have
been killed while the petitioner escaped death only because he
was so badly battered that the mob believed that he had also
expired.
9.

The complete breakdown of the state machinery is

evident from the fact that as in the present case, even in Bhajan
Kaur's case, the FIR relating to her husband was not lodged by
the local police where the incident occurred at the Tuglakabad,
but was lodged at the New Delhi Railway Station.
10.

The stand of the respondents in the instant case is to

the effect that because there is no F.I.R. and no documentary
proof of the incident or of the injuries suffered by the petitioner,
he could not be given any further compensation other than the
meagre policy amount of Rs.2,000/- sent to him on the 2nd June,
1986.
WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 10 of 42

11.

I may notice that Smt. Bhajan Kaur was paid the ex

gratia amount of Rs.20,000/- pursuant to the same policy of the
State Government whereby it had been decided to pay
Rs.20,000/- in the case of death, and Rs.2,000/- in the case of
injury

suffered

on

account

of

the

afore-stated

riots.

Commenting on the adequacy of the compensation which had
been decided to be paid by the state, Anil Dev Singh, J in
Bhajan Kaur's case stated that “18.
It cannot be denied that the State
recognised the factum of death of the
petitioner's husband during the riots and it was
in recognition thereof that the financial
assistance in the form of compensation of
Rs.20,000/- was given to the petitioner. The
compensation to a widow or the family of a
person who lost his life during the riots is highly
inadequate. It is mockery of compensation for a
riot victim. When a wife loses her husband,
children their father, parents their son in a riot, it
amounts to a cruel joke to give Rs.20,000/- as
financial aid to the family of a deceased. This
paltry sum of Rs.20,000/- cannot by any
standard be the tower of their hope and strength.
The very offer of such a sum would aggravate
the pain and suffering, rather than reducing the
same. The time when the blow is fresh, it is
then that the family should receive adequate
WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 11 of 42

financial aid or compensation to tide over
immediate financial crisis and look to the future
with a glimmer of hope. It is true that life of an
individual cannot be compensated by payment
of money, but at the same time it relieves
financial strain and alleviates the sufferings of
the victims and their families. Financial aid of
Rs.20,000/- as a measure of immediate relief is,
as already stated, grossly inadequate and is far
from being just, fair and reasonable. It is no
victory for the victim.
xxx

xxx xxx

xxx

25.
Though the aforesaid cases do not
pertain to riots, but broadly the quantum of
compensation or financial aid for the loss of a
near one can be ascertained therefrom. The
decisions show that the judicial trend is to award
substantial compensation for illegal extinction
or deprivation of life and liberty. The loss of
life in jail at the hands of inmates or jail
authorities and loss of life outside the jail at the
hands of functionaries of the State or rioters
bring the same tragic results for the families of
the victims. Therefore, no distinction can be
made for the purpose of grant of compensation
in the aforesaid situations. Thus, the principles
for grant of compensation or financial aid to the
families of the victims whose lives are taken
away without due process of law should be the
same.
26. Having regard to the aforesaid discussion
and decisions it appears to me that the ex gratia
WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 12 of 42

payment made to the petitioner and families of
the riot victims of 1984 is unrealistic and does
not equip them to lead a life of dignity and
proper human existence, and to be able to live
an adequate human life to satisfy human wants if all human wants cannot be satisfied, they
should be satisfied so far as possible and at least
to the extent of decent human minimum. The
State is duty bound to adopt a realistic approach
in keeping with the spirit of Article 21 of the
Constitution. The State should be mindful of
the fact that in cases where liberty of individuals
was curtailed illegally the Supreme Court
awarded Rs.50,000/- as compensation to them
with a right to prosecute their claims for further
compensation in appropriate proceedings.
27.
Here we are concerned with illegal
extinction of life by mobs which put into
execution their plans openly in public places
and in full gaze of the authorities. It was not
something done clandestinely for which the
State could plead ignorance. At least in the
capital of the country the State has requisite
resources to prevent the riots. It cannot afford
to ignore even a small indication or sign of a
likely flare up of communal tension, and at the
stage itself it has to respond by educating the
masses and deploying adequate police or para
military forces to diffuse the situation. The
Report of Justice R.N. Misra Commission of
Inquiry refers to the passivity, callousness and
indifference of the police of Delhi in the matter
of controlling the situation during the 1984
riots. In this regard, the Commission observed
WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 13 of 42

as follows:“On the other hand, as held earlier,
the evidence fits into the position that when the
incidents started taking place nd the police
remained passive, leading to the generation of
feeling that if Sikhs were harassed no action
would be taken, the situation fast deteriorated
and the anti-social got into the fray and gave the
lead after taking over the situation..........(Page
30 of the report)
There is abundant evidence before the
Commission that the Police on the whole did not
behave properly and failed to act as a
professional force. Telephone No.100 which is
meant for notifying for police assistance did not
respond at all during that period. The police
stations when contacted on telephone ordinarily
did not respond and if there was any response it
was a plea of inability to assist. The behaviour
of most policemen was shabby in the sense that
they allowed people to be killed, houses to be
burnt, property to be looted, ladies
to
be
dragged and misbehaved with in their very
presence. Their plea was that they were a few
and could not meet the unruly armed mob
usually of hundreds or thousands. Some senior
police officers had taken the stand that the
community was in a frenzy and to meet the cruel
mob greater strength of force was necessary.
Obviously, the police could not expect that their
number had to be equal to that of the miscreants.
A professional police force by its expertise,
experience and training was expected to meet
WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 14 of 42

any challenge and was not to seek cover under
an umbrella of excuses based upon instructions
in archaic Police Rules. Has any hero been
heard of opening his scriptures when he
suddenly meets a challenge to his
life...........(Pages 22 & 34 of the report)
There is evidence which the
Commission cannot ignore that on several
occasions when fire tenders started moving to
places of arson on receiving intimation, the
mobs blocked the passage and held them up or
forced them to return. On several occasions this
was done in the presence of the police. It is
well-known that fire tenders have precedence of
movement on the roads for they move to answer
an emergency, yet the police did not attempt to
clear the way.
Several instances have come to be
narrated where police personnel in uniform were
found marching behind, or mingled in the
crowd. Since they did not make any attempt to
stop the mob from indulging in criminal acts, an
interference has been drawn that they were part
of the mob and had the common intention and
purpose.
Some instances, though few in
number, have also been noticed where
policemen in uniform have participated in
looting ...................... (Page 37 of the report)
The Commission has found that the
police at Delhi showed total passivity and
callous indifference when called upon to
perform its duty.”
WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 15 of 42

28.
While considering the question of
grant of compensation or ex-gratia payment to
the petitioner and families of the victims killed
during the riots, all the aforesaid aspects have to
be kept in view. It is also noteworthy that the
Supreme Court awarded Rs.1 lakh to Rs.7.5
lakhs for illegal curtailment of life as indicated
in the aforesaid decisions. Therefore, obviously
the compensation or ex gratia payment as a
measure of immediate relief to the victim's
family should be more than Rs.50,000/- and
between Rs.1 lakh and Rs.7.5 lakhs.
29.
It has been brought to my notice by
Mr. Adarsh Goel, learned counsel for the
respondent-Govt. Of NCT of Delhi, that widows
of riot victims are being paid Rs.1,000/- per
month as pension.
Learned counsel has
produced on record a copy of letter
No.F.9(38)/R-1/DC/88/648 dated May 17, 1996,
from, the Deputy Director (Relief-1), Office of
the Deputy Commissioner, Delhi, to the Desk
Officer, Ministry of Home Affairs, Govt. of
India, North Block, New Delhi, along with
report regarding progress of relief and
rehabilitation measures in regard to riot victims
of 1984. According to the report, 195 widows
are getting pension. Be that as it may, the
financial assistance of Rs.20,000/- which was to
ameliorate the immediate effect and the long
term effect of the killing of an earning hand,
was highly inadequate and unfair.
30.
WP (C) No.2338/2001

Having

regard

to

the

aforesaid

page 16 of 42

discussion and also keeping in view the
decisions of the Supreme Court I am of the
opinion that the petitioner should have been
paid at least a sum of Rs.2 lakhs as
compensation. Since the petitioner has already
been paid a sum of Rs.20,000/- the respondent is
directed to pay a sum of Rs.1,80,000/- to the
petitioner with interest from October 1984 to the
date of payment, which is quantified at Rs.1.50
lakhs. The respondent will make the payment of
Rs.3.30 lakhs to the petitioner within one
month.
31.
This direction to pay enhanced
compensation would be applicable to similar
cases in order to secure parity and to alleviate
the sufferings of the families of the victims who
lost their lives during the Delhi riots of 1984.
Accordingly, it is directed that the widows
&families of the victims who lost their lives in
the 1984 Delhi riots be paid a sum of Rs.3.50
lakhs (Rs. 2 lakhs with interest quantified at
Rs.1.50 lakhs). The payment would be made to
them by the respondent after adjusting the
amount, if any, paid to them as ex gratia grnat of
compensation. It will also be open to the Govt.
of N.C.T. of Delhi and the Union of India to
consider the grant of compensation over and
above the aforesaid amount depending upon the
circumstances of the families of the riots victim.
I would also direct the State to constitute a
Committee to disburse the amount of
compensation quantified as above to the
families of those who were killed in riots after
their proper identification. I order accordingly.
WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 17 of 42

The exercise should be completed within a
period of four months. The State and the Union,
as the case may be, will be well advised to
locate the responsibility for the riots whenever
and wherever they occur and the persons held
responsible for the same should be made to pay
compensation and the law should provide for
confiscation of their properties so as to secure
payment of compensation out of the assets so
confiscated. In case it is found that an official
or officials of the State did not act in time or
were indifferent to mob violence, they should
also be required to make reparations to the
victims and face disciplinary proceedings.”
12.

I may notice that despite the directions of this court in

Bhajan Kaur's case, there is nothing forthcoming with regard to
the fixation and location of responsibility for the riots or for
confiscation of property so as to secure payment of
compensation.
13.

The present case is concerned not with the death of the

victim but relates to the injuries suffered by the victim. The
petitioner is stated to have been pulled out of the railway coach,
beaten and left on the track. He has submitted that he was
picked up from the track by the Army Authorities who brought

WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 18 of 42

him to New Delhi Railway Station where a Cell had been
created for riot victims. He was taken to Lok Nayak Jai Prakash
Hospital and given an indoor ticket bearing CR No.209537. The
petitioner has submitted that he was not travelling alone and he
had a sister who was travelling with him. He was extremely
concerned about her fate after he had been thrown out of the
train and brought to the hospital. In these circumstances, he got
himself discharged from the hospital and went to look for his
sister.
14.

The respondents have unfairly sought to draw

advantage from the fact that the petitioner did not remain
admitted in hospital.

It has been contended that he suffered

hardly any injury in as much as he was able to leave the hospital.
To say the least, such a stand, apart from being only
insensitive, is completely unrealistic. Normal human conduct
would show the terror in the mind of the victim who had
narrowly escaped death and seen his co-passengers being beaten
to death. The machinery of the State having failed in its duty to
WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 19 of 42

protect, there would be a feeling of distrust and insecurity in a
state run institution. The petitioner would obviously have been
deeply concerned about the welfare and well being of his sister
who had also been travelling in train with him but was not in the
hospital. It is, therefore, to be expected that any right thinking
person would seek to leave the hospital at the earliest in order to
ensure the welfare and well being of his kith and kin.

Concern

for his missing sister outweighed all concerns of his own
injuries and the petitioner ignored his wounds while getting his
discharge from the Hospital. The petitioner has contended that
so grave was the trauma and insecurity experienced by them,
that the petitioner and his sister left for Punjab to the security of
their home at the first available opportunity. The stitches which
had been put at the L.N.J.P. Hospital were got removed in
Punjab and the document in this behalf has been placed on
record.
The respondents have placed no material before this
court with regard to the extent of damage, death toll, the
WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 20 of 42

numbers of the injured in the incident in which the petitioner
was injured. Even records relating to the petitioner have not
been placed before me even though the same would be in their
power and possession.
15.

I find that the issue of compensation on account of

contravention of human rights and fundamental freedoms has
fallen for consideration before the Apex Court in several
judgments. The legal principles which are applicable in such
cases are well settled. It has been held that the protection which
is guaranteed in the Constitution is an acknowledged remedy for
enforcement and protection of such rights. It is settled law that
such a claim based on strict liability made by resorting to a
Constitutional remedy provided for enforcement of the
fundamental rights, is distinct from and in addition to the
remedy in private law for damages for the attack resulting from
the contravention of fundamental rights.

The defence of

sovereign immunity being inapplicable and alien to the concept
of guarantee of fundamental rights, there can be no question of
WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 21 of 42

such a defence being available to such constitutional remedy. It
is this principle which justifies award of monetary compensation
for contravention of fundamental rights guaranteed by the
Constitution when that is the only practicable mode of redress
available for the contravention made by the State or its servants
in the purported exercise of their power and enforcement of the
fundamental right is claimed by resorting to the remedy in
public law under the Constitution by recourse to Articles 32 and
226 of the Constitution. This view was taken by the Apex Court
in the judgment reported at AIR 1993 SC 1960 entitled Smt.
Nilabati Behara alies Lalita Behura Vs. State of Orissa &
Others; Khatri (II) Vs. State of Bihar 1981 (1) SCC 627 (also
AIR 1981 SC 928) and Khatri (IV) Vs. State of Bihar (1981) 2
SCC 493 (AIR 1981 SC 1068).
The Apex Court had observed that the court is not
helpless to grant relief in the case of violation of the rights to
life and personal liberty, and it should be prepared to forge new
tools and devices for the purpose of vindicating these precious
WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 22 of 42

fundamental rights. It was also indicated that the procedure
suitable in the facts of the case must be adopted for conducting
the inquiry needed to ascertain the necessary facts, for granting
the relief as the available mode of redress, for enforcement of
the guaranteed fundamental rights.
16.

In Union Carbide Corporation Vs. UOI reported at

1991 (4) SCC 584 (AIR 1992 S.C. 248), the Apex Court
observed that we have to develop our own law and find what is
necessary to construct a new principle of liability to deal with
the unusual situation which has arisen and which is likely to
arise in future. There is no such reason why we should hesitate
to evolve such principle of liability.
17.

In the Nelabati Behura case (Supra), the court

observed as under:“19.
We respectfully concur with
the view that the court is not helpless and the
wide powers given to this Court by Art.32,
which itself is a fundamental right, imposes a
constitutional obligation on this Court to forge
such new tools, which may be necessary for
doing complete justice and enforcing the
WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 23 of 42

18.

fundamental rights guaranteed in the
Constitution, which enables the award of
monetary compensation in appropriate cases,
where that is the only mode of redress available.
The power available to this Court under Art.142
is also an enabling provision in this behalf. The
contrary view would not merely render the court
powerless and the constitutional guarantee a
mirage, but may, in certain situations, be an
incentive to extinguish life, if for the extreme
contravention the court is powerless to grant any
relief against the State, except by punishment of
the wrongdoer for the resulting offence, and
recovery of damages under private law, by the
ordinary process.
If the guarantee that
deprivation of life and personal liberty cannot be
made except in accordance with law is to be real,
the enforcement of the right in case of every
contravention must also be possible in the
constitutional scheme, the mode of redress being
that which is appropriate in the facts of each
case. This remedy in public law has to be more
readily available when invoked by the havenots,
who are not possessed of the wherewithal for
enforcement of their rights in private law, even
though its exercise is to be tempered by judicial
restraint to avoid circumvention of private law
remedies were more appropriate.”
I may also notice the observation of Dr. A.S. Anand, J

(as his lordship then was) in his concurring judgment in Smt.
Nilabati Behura case (Supra) where it was observed as under:“33. The public law proceedings serve a
WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 24 of 42

different purpose than the private law
proceedings.
The relief of monetary
compensation, as exemplary damages, in
proceedings under Article 32 by this Court or
under Article 226 by the High Courts, for
established infringement of the indefeasible right
guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution
is a remedy available in public law and is based
on the strict liability for contravention of the
guaranteed basic and indefeasible rights of the
citizen. The purpose of public law is not only to
civilize public power but also to assure the
citizen that they live under a legal system which
aims to protect their interests and preserve their
rights. Therefore, when t he court moulds the
relief by granting “compensation” in proceedings
under Article 32 or 226 of the Constitution
seeking
enforcement or protection
of
fundamental rights, it does so under the public
law by way of penalising the wrongdoer and
fixing the liability for the public wrong on the
State which has failed in its public duty to
protect the fundamental rights of the citizen.
The payment of compensation in such cases is
not to be understood, as it is generally
understood in a civil action for damages under
the private law but in the broader sense of
providing relief by an order of making `monetary
amends' under the public law for the wrong done
due to breach of public duty of not protecting the
fundamental rights of the citizen.
The
compensation is in the nature of `exemplary
damages' awarded against the wrongdoer for the
breach of its public law duty and is independent
of claim compensation under the private law in
WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 25 of 42

an action based on tort, through a suit instituted
in a court of competent jurisdiction or/and
prosecute t he offender under the penal law.
34.
This Court and the High Courts, being
the protectors of the civil liberties of the citizen,
have not only the power and jurisdiction but also
an obligation to grant relief in exercise of its
jurisdiction under Articles 32 and 226 of the
Constitution to the victim or the heir of the
victim whose fundamental rights under Article
21 of the Constitution of India are established to
have been flagrantly infringed by calling upon
the State to repair the damage done by its
officers to the fundamental rights of the citizen,
notwithstanding the right of the citizen to the
remedy by way of a civil suit or criminal
proceedings. The State, of course, has the right
to be indemnified by and take such action as may
be available to it against the wrongdoer in
accordance with law – through appropriate
proceedings. Of course, relief in exercise of the
power under Article 32 or 226 would be granted
only once it is established that there has been an
infringement of the fundamental rights of the
citizen and no other form of appropriate
redressal by the court in the facts and
circumstances of the case is possible. The
decision of this Court in the line of cases starting
with Rudul Sah v. State of Bihar, (1983) 3 SCR
508 : (AIR 1983 SC 1086). granted monetary
relief to the victims for deprivation of their
fundamental rights in proceedings through
petitions filed under Article 32 or 226 of the
Constitution of India, notwithstanding the rights
WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 26 of 42

available under the civil law to the aggrieved
party where the courts found that grant of such
relief was warranted. It is sound policy to punish
the wrongdoer and it is in that spirit that the
courts have moulded the relief by granting
compensation to the victims in exercise of their
writ jurisdiction. In doing so the courts take into
account not only the interest of the applicant and
the respondent but also the interests of the public
as a whole with a view to ensure that public
bodies or officials do not act unlawfully and do
perform their public duties properly particularly
where the fundamental rights of a citizen under
Article 21 is concerned. Law is in the process of
development and the process necessitates
developing separate public law procedures as
also public law principles. It may be necessary
to identify the situations to which separate
proceedings and principles apply and the courts
have to act firmly but with a certain amount of
circumspection
and
self-restraint,
lest
proceedings under Article 32 or 226 are misused
as a disguised substitute for civil action in
private law. Some of those situations have been
identified by this Court in the cases referred to
by Brother Verma, J.”

WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 27 of 42

19.

I may also appropriately refer to the observation of the

Division Bench of this court in the judgment reported at 2001
(1) JCC Delhi 57 entitled Govt. of NCT of Delhi Vs. Shri
Nasiruddin (Father of deceased Mohd. Yasin) to the following
effect:“16. This view finds support from the decisions
of the Apex Court in the Bhagalpur Blinding
cases : Khatri (II) vs. State of Bihar (1981) 1
SCC 627 and Khatri (IV) v. State of Bihar (1981)
2 SCC 493 wherein it was said that the court is
not helpless to grant be relied on exclusively to
arrive at a reasonable estimate of just
compensation for mush pertains to the realms of
hypothesis, and in that region arithmetic is a
good servant but a bad master and therefore, an
award should be of a round sum rather than one
actually computed. (Per Lort Ruttan J, in Bal v.
Kraft 1967 ACJ 235 Supreme Court of British
Columbia, Canada).
The following broad
principles govern the grant of damages:(i)
There should not be any
negligence on the part of the claimant
himself.
(ii)
There should not be any
improper conduct on the part of the
claimant himself.
(iii)
WP (C) No.2338/2001

The claimant should have
page 28 of 42

taken all the reasonable action to
maintain the loss on injury sustained
by him.
(iv)
The acts of the claimant
should be lawful, just and reasonable.
(v)
The amount of damages
should not exceed the loss sustained by
him, and damages may be minimized if
own conduct has resulted contributory
negligence, or has rendered some of
the damages too remote or has
constituted a failure to mitigate the
damages, either by not taking such
steps to reduce the original loss or to
avert further loss.
xxx

xxx

xxx

21.
It is true that perfect compensation is
hardly possible and money cannot renew a
physiqu frame that has been battered and
shattered, as stated by Lord Morris in West v.
Shephard (1964) AC 326. Justice requires that it
should be equal in value, although not alike in
kind. Object of providing compensation is to
place claimant as far as possible in the same
position financially, as he was before accident.
Broadly speaking, in the case of death basis of
compensation is loss of pecuniary benefits to the
dependants of the deceased which includes
pecuniary loss, expenses, etc. and loss to the
estate. Object is to mitigate hardship that has
been caused to the legal representative due to
WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 29 of 42

20.

suddent demise of the deceased in the accident.
Compensation awarded should not be inadequate
and should neither be unreasonable, excessive,
nor deficient. There can be no exact uniform
rule for measuring the damage. It cannot be
arrived at by precise mathematical calculation,
but amount, recoverable depends on broad facts
and circumstances of each case. It should
neither be punitive against whom claim is
decreed nor it should be a source of profit of the
person in whose favour it is awarded. Upjohn
L.J. In Charter House Credit v. Tolly; (1963) 2
QB 683 remarked, “ the assessment of damages
has never been an exact science, it is essentially
practical”.
The award of monetary relief to the victim for

deprivation of fundamental right is to be guided by the aforestated principle requiring the state to make monetary amends
under public law for the wrong done due to breach of the public
duty of not protecting the fundamental rights of the citizens.
This computation is not guided by any strict arithmetical
formula and it has to be borne in mind that money cannot
remove the trauma and the battering suffered by a victim.
21.

It is noteworthy that it would be impossible to recover

from the terror which was generated against the community to

WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 30 of 42

which the petitioner belonged in 1984. The mark left by such
riots and the insecurity generated as a result in the minds of
those who suffered at the hands of the marauding mobs may
perhaps never get obliterated. The pain of seeing loved ones
being killed before the eyes of the surviving victims may
perhaps never be extinguished and undoubtedly the feeling of
anger against the state which failed to take any action for the
protection and preservation of life, limb and property of the riot
victims shall never cease.
22.

In the judgment reported at 2001 (2) SCALE 495

entitled S.S. Ahluwalia Vs. UOI, dealing with 1984 riots in
different states, it was held by the Apex Court that what holds
true for loss of life would equally applies to loss of limbs.
23.

Admittedly, on the 5th July, 1996, this court

pronounced in Bhajan Kaur's case to the effect that the
compensation in the death cases of Rs.20,000/- was highly
inadequate and unfair. The court was pleased to enhance the
compensation payable to the survivors where there had been a
WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 31 of 42

death, to the extent of Rs.2,00,000/- and was pleased to direct
payment of interest from October, 1984 to the date of payment.
The interest at the time of pronouncement of the judgment on 6th
July, 1996 was quantified at Rs.1,50,000/-.
24.

Undoubtedly, keeping in view the directions made by

the court in the matter relating to a death on account of riots, and
the observations of the court, in all fairness, the state should
have examined all cases where it had paid compensation in
respect of injuries as well.
25.

The petitioner was deprived of copies of the records

relating to his own injuries on the ground that the same was a
medico legal case.
I find that the petitioner lodged his claim with the
respondents for the first time on 8th November, 1984. This was
followed by a legal notice on 19th November, 1984. He has
made a claim with the Deputy Commissioner on 28th November,
1985 on the prescribed proforma and has also submitted a list of
his articles.

The petitioner has also sent reminders on 14th

WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 32 of 42

August, 1985, 8th November, 1985, 28th November, 1985, 10th
December, 1985 and 17th November, 2000. The petitioner did
his best to obtain copies of the records from the Lok Nayak Jai
Prakash Hospital. However, he received a letter dated 3rd July,
1986 from the Medical Officer Incharge at the Lok Nayak Jai
Prakash Narain Hospital to the following effect:-

26.

“With reference to your letter No. dated 13.12.85
on the subject noted above, it is to be informed
that the information can be given to you being a
Medico Legal Case. The particulars of injuries
etc. will be intimated to the Commissioner of
Relief, Tis Hazari, Delhi as and when the Court
of law desires.”
This court has already held that the compensation

given as ex gratia by the state to the victims of the riots in 1984
is highly inadequate.
27.

There is no warrant for disbelieving the petitioner as

stated that his belongings were also lost in the riots. Perusal of
the list shows that the same consists of personal items etc. small
amount of cash, suitcase containing his cloths valued at hardly
Rs.2,000/- wrist watch of Rs.225/- gold ring of Rs.800/- cash in

WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 33 of 42

pocket Rs.4800/- cash in other pockets at Rs.225/- and
compensation for injuries and treatment of Rs.10,000/- only.
General damages on account of shock and agony of
Rs.1,00,000/- have been claimed.
The petitioner has submitted that in reply to the letter
from the respondents dated 14th August, 1985 telling him that his
claim was not in a proper form, he has submitted the claim in the
proper format to the respondents on 8th November, 1985 and no
heed was paid to repeated representations.
28.

It has been pointed out that the respondents accepted

that the petitioner was a victim of riots and paid him the policy
amount of Rs.2,000/- by cheque.
In these circumstances, I have no manner of doubt that
the amount of Rs.2,000/- which was paid to the petitioner on
account of the ex gratia for the injuries etc. suffered by him on
account of riots, is grossly inadequate.
29.

The respondents have sought to explain their action on

the ground that they had made payment as per the policy and
WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 34 of 42

that the petitioner accepted the same. Much issue was made to
urge that the injuries suffered by the petitioner were only minor
which fact, according to the respondents, evidenced by his
release from the hospital at the same day. The respondents have
vehemently contended that the petition suffers from unexplained
delay and laches and that the respondents did not have any
records relating to the case of the petitioner.

It has been

contended that the writ petition deserves to be dismissed on this
ground alone.
30.

This court has entertained Bhajan Kaur's petition in

1996 and held in the decision rendered on 5th July, 1996 that the
decision of the respondents to pay Rs.20,000/- in a death case in
the same riots was inadequate. There is nothing on record to
show that the respondents have complied with the directions
given in that case. The findings and directions of the court were
clear and unambiguous. The respondents had a duty to enforce
the same. Having failed to do so, the State cannot be permitted
to avoid its liability to the petitioner on the ground of laches.
WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 35 of 42

It is to be noticed that the respondents failed to even
acknowledge the petitioner's representations let alone address
the same.
31.

It is to be borne in mind that the injuries were suffered

at Delhi by the petitioner who was a resident of Punjab. An
unruly, marauding mob was permitted to stop the train in which
the petitioner was travelling and pulled out passengers from a
train and battered them to death. Despite the demise of Ms.
Indira Gandhi on 31st October, 1984 and full knowledge of the
fact that riots had commenced in Delhi, the State failed to take
action either on 31st October, 2004 or on 1st or 2nd November,
2004. The nature of the violence and the frenzy of the mob is
borne from the fact that no police complaints even have been
lodged at the place of the incident.

Bhajan Kaur lost her

husband on 1st November, 2004 at the same spot where the
petitioner suffered the injury the next day.
The petitioner was denied the equal protection of law
by the machinery of the State as was constitutionally guaranteed
WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 36 of 42

to the petitioner under Article 21.
32.

The respondents accepted their liability to compensate

the petitioner as well as the genuineness of his claim, and made
payment of Rs.2000/- to him.
The petitioner has explained the delay in approaching
this court by pointing out that he has been repeatedly
representing to the respondents. His applications have not been
adjudicated upon till date and admittedly the respondents have
paid only an ex gratia amount.

The petitioner submits that

despite request even to the hospital for medical records, the
same has not been given.
33.

I find that the petitioner had addressed a letter dated

21st December, 2000 to the Registrar of this court based whereon
this court had directed the same to be registered as Public
Interest Litigation bearing No.1982/2001.
34.

Perusal of the order sheet shows that on account of

failure to file the counter affidavit, this court had closed the right
of the respondents to file the counter affidavit. Development
WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 37 of 42

Commissioner (Relief Grant) was directed to remain personally
present and had appeared only on 14th December, 2004. The
counter affidavit was permitted to be filed only subject to
payment of costs.
There was no counter affidavit forthcoming on record
even on 21st March, 2005 when the petition was taken up for
hearing.

An undated, unsigned copy of the respondents

response has been handed over in court during the course of
hearing.
Such is the position emanating even in response to
court orders.
35.

In the judgment reported at AIR 1967 S.C. 1272

entitled Chandra Bhushan & Anr. Vs. The Deputy Director
of Consolidation, Uttar Pradesh (Regional) Lucknow and
Ors., the Apex Court held that there are no statutory rules
prescribing a period for preferring a writ petition. Delay and
laches was merely a rule of practice and cannot prescribe a
binding rule of limitation, which rule may only indicate how the
WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 38 of 42

discretion would be exercised by the court in determining
whether having regard to the circumstances of the case, the
applicant has been guilty of laches or undue delay.
It has been held by the Apex Court that delay by itself
may not defeat the claim for relief unless the position of the
other party had been so altered which cannot be retracted on
account of lapse of time or inaction of the other parties.
A delayed petition will be rejected also if ground of
relief puts an undue hardship in any manner by reason of the
delay in approaching the High Court for the relief by the party.
Reference in this regard can be made to (1999) 4 SCC 450
entitled Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd. & Another
Vs Dolly Das.
36.

Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the

instant case, there is no reason to hold that the writ petition
suffers from delay and laches.

37.

Keeping in view the entire conspectus of facts and the

WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 39 of 42

nature of claim made on behalf of the petitioner and the conduct
of the respondents in 1984 and thereafter, I am of the view that
the ex gratia amount of Rs.2,000/- is by no means adequate
compensation for the failure to protect the limb and property of
the petitioner. The petitioner has submitted that he has been an
advocate by profession. On account of extreme trauma suffered
by him, he has not been able to recoup his profession and
suffered a lot.
There is no reason to disbelieve such statement.
Different individuals may react differently in the same situation.
There can possibly be no scale to measure the depth of the
emotional wounds and trauma as a result of undergoing the
experiences of the petitioner. He bore the brunt of the attack by
the mob and barely escaped death. Scars so left may never heal.
38.

Keeping in view the amount awarded by this court in

Bhajan Kaur case for the loss of life, in my view, the petitioner
ought to be compensated by a sum of Rs.75,000/- for the injuries
suffered by him and deprivation of his property on account of
WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 40 of 42

the riots on 2nd November, 2004.
Since the petitioner has already been paid a sum of
Rs.2,000/-, the respondents is directed to pay a sum of
Rs.73,000/- to the petitioner with interest from October, 1984 to
the date of payment. The interest is quantified at Rs.50,000/-.
The respondents will, therefore, make payment of Rs.1,23,000/to the petitioner within one month.
39.

This court in the judgment dated 5th July, 1996

reported at 1996 III AD Delhi 333 entitled Bhajan Kaur Vs.
Delhi Administration, directed the respondents to pay the
enhanced compensation awarded to all similar cases.

In order

to secure parity to all persons who suffered injuries, the
respondents shall pay the enhanced compensation awarded
herein to all such persons to whom the respondents had
disbursed the amount of Rs.2,000/- as ex gratia on account of
the injuries received in the 1984 riots.
40.

The petitioner shall be entitled to costs of the present

proceedings which are quantified at Rs.11,000/-.
WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 41 of 42

This writ petition is allowed in the above terms.

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
May 13th, 2005
aa

WP (C) No.2338/2001

page 42 of 42

