IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
IA Nos. 66/2006, 67/2006 and 2455/2006 in CS(OS) No.
1256/2005
Judgment reserved on: October 5,
2006
Dat e of decision: December 13, 2006
MR. B. RATH
.... Plaintiff
through: Mr. C. Kumar, Adv.
VERSUS
MR. DAVID BALL & ORS.
.... Defendants
through: Mr. Parag P. Tripathi, Sr. Adv. with
Ms. Neelima Tripathi, Ms. Taru Gupta &
Mr. Deepesh Aneja, Adv. for the
defendant nos.1, 2, 3 & 3a
Mr. Siddharth Yadav, Adv. for the
defendant no.4
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J
1.

By this order, I propose to dispose of three applications

filed by defendants under Order 1 Rule 10 read with Order 7 Rule
11 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. I.A. No. 66/2006 has been
filed on behalf of defendant no. 1; I.A. No. 67/2006 has been filed
on behalf of defendant nos. 3 and 3 (a); and I.A. No. 2455/2006
CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 1 of 41

has been filed by the defendant no. 4.

In as much as the

applications raise similar questions of law and fact as to whether
the plaint discloses any cause of action against these defendants,
which is to be decided on perusal of the plaint, these applications
are being taken up together.
2.

For the purposes of this application, it is necessary to

examine the case laid down by the plaintiff in the plaint. The
present suit has been filed seeking damages of Rs. 1 crore. The
plaintiff contends that he is a software engineer and had been the
Vice President – Marketing & Services of the UEC SAIL
Information Technology Ltd., defendant no. 2 in this case, from
15th March, 1997 upto the 13th November, 2003. A few months
before the termination of his services, the plaintiff was promoted
to the post of Sr. Vice President of the defendant no. 2. The
plaintiff has contended that in view of his qualifications and his
services, he was looking forward to an active career with the
defendant no. 2 for the next eight years as he was only 52 years old
at the time of issuance of the promotion letter.
3.

The suit has been necessitated as, all of a sudden, by a

one-line letter dated 13th November, 2003, Mr. David Ball, the
defendant no. 1 being the then Chief Executive Officer of the
CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 2 of 41

defendant no. 2, even though he had no power or authority to do
so, terminated the services of the plaintiff.

The plaintiff has

alleged irreparable damage to his career and standing in society
and has assailed the termination of his services as being illegal and
having a debilitating impact on his career in terms of loss of
opportunity and reputation.
4.

On this basis, the present suit has been filed seeking

damages of Rs. 1 crore for these actions. Apart from Mr. David
Ball who has been arrayed as defendant no. 1 and also 1 (a), the
plaintiff has arrayed UEC SAIL Information Technology Ltd. as
defendant no. 2; the President, USX Engineers & Consultants Inc.
as defendant no.3; the President, UEC Technologies LLC as
defendant no. 3(a); and the Chairman of Steel Authority of India
Ltd. as defendant no. 4.
5.

In the plaint, it is urged that the defendant no. 2 is a

joint venture company, incorporated in 1995 under the Companies
Act, 1956. It is submitted that a Promoters Agreement dated 10th
November, 1994 was entered into between the USX Engineers &
Consultants Inc., USA (UEC) and the Steel Authority of India Ltd.
(SAIL) at Delhi. As a result of this Promoters Agreement dated
10th November, 1994, M/s UEC SAIL Information Technology Ltd.
CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 3 of 41

(defendant no. 2 herein) was incorporated.

M/s UEC

Technologies LLC has become the successor in interest of the USX
Engineers & Consultants Inc., USA (defendant no. 3) herein and is
arrayed as defendant no. 3 (a) before this court.
6.

It is asserted that in terms of clause 6.1 of the Promoters

Agreement dated 10th November, 1994, M/s USX Engineers &
Consultants Inc., the defendant no. 3 was to nominate three
directors to the Board of Directors of the defendant no. 3 while the
Steel Authority of India Ltd., the defendant no. 4 was required to
nominate two directors to the Board.
7.

The plaintiff has further alleged that upon incorporation

of the defendant no. 2, as per clause 5.1.1 of the Promoters
Agreement, he was an employee of the Steel Authority of India, the
defendant no. 4 who was working as its General Manager in the E8 grade and that he was originally assigned to the UEC SAIL
Information Technology Ltd. as part of the 'Core Group'. Upon
incorporation of such joint venture, the plaintiff was one of the
senior most personnel originally assigned to the joint venture by
SAIL.
On allegations that the plaintiff was made a sacrificial
lamb on account of a power struggle between the USX Engineers &
CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 4 of 41

Consultants Inc. and the Steel Authority of India Ltd., the plaintiff
has therefore challenged the termination of his services as being
illegal and without authority and hence the claim for damages has
been made.
8.

The plaintiff has arrayed as defendants the afore-noticed

parties in the suit and has sought the following prayers:“(a)
pass a decree of damages for Rs.
1,00,00,000/- along with pendente lite and future
interest at the rate of 12% from the date of
institution of the suit till the date of realisation
thereof in favour of the plaintiff and against the
defendants on account of harm done in terms of
loss of opportunity and loss of reputation to the
plaintiff;
(b) award costs to the plaintiff; and

9.

(c) pass such other and further orders as are fit
and proper in the circumstances of the case.”
Mr. Chandan Kumar, learned counsel appearing for the

plaintiff has submitted that the defendant nos. 3, 3 (a) and 4 were
responsible for the effective implementation of the joint venture
dated 10th November, 1994. It is contended that defendant no. 3
(a) i.e. M/s UEC Technologies LLC is the successor in interest of
M/s USX Engineers & Consultants Inc. and is equally liable for
any illegality in the working of the joint venture, that is the
defendant no. 2.

CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 5 of 41

10.

Mr. Chandan Kumar, learned counsel appearing for the

plaintiff has urged that the plaintiff is required only to disclose
cause of action.

For the purposes of consideration of an

application under Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, it is not necessary for the plaintiff to establish that it had a
cause of action. It has been urged that the defendant no.1 has
issued a letter dated 13th November, 2003 illegally terminating the
services of the plaintiff in the defendant no. 2/company.
It has been submitted by learned counsel, that the
plaintiff has specifically alleged that the defendant no. 2 had no
authority to issue the letter of termination and that allegations to
this effect have been made in paras 2, 7, 9 and 10 of the plaint
which read thus:“2. That the defendant no. 2 is a Joint Venture
Company incorporated in 1995 under the
Companies Act, 1956. That this is a product of the
Promoters Agreement dated 10.11.1994 between
USX Engineers & Consultants Inc., USA (UEC)
and the Steel Authority of India Ltd. (SAIL)
executed in Delhi. USX Engineers & Consultants
Inc, USA (UEC) and the Steel Authority of India
Ltd. (SAIL) arrayed herein as the defendant nos. 3
and 4 respectively. Of late, as per the reply dated
7.2.2005 received from UEC Technologies LLC, it
has become the successor in interest of USX
Engineers & Consultants Inc, USA. That due to
this UEC Technologies LLC have been arrayed as
defendant no. 3 (a). That defendant no. 1 was the
CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 6 of 41

Chief Executive Officer of the defendant no. 2 as
on 13.11.2003 who had signed the said illegal
termination of service letter.
xxxx

xxxx

xxxx

7. That in the context, all of a sudden by his one
line letter dated 13.11.2003, defendant no. 1, being
the then CEO of the defendant no. 2, even when
he had absolutely no powers under eight the JV
Agreement, or under the Articles and
Memorandum of Association or under any
delegation of such power by the Board of
Directors, or even under the applicable HR policy
of the defendant no. 2, terminated the services of
the plaintiff with immediate effect.
xxxx

xxxx

xxxx

9. That this illegal communication was protested
against by the plaintiff by his letter dated
20.11.2003 addressed to the Chairman of the
defendant no. 2. That this was duly received by
the said Chairman. By his letter dated 27.11.2003,
addressed to Mr. C.J. Navetta, Director, being
representative of the Defendant no. 3 on the
Board of Directors of the defendant no. 2, he
called this communication illegal and without
authority as defendant no. 1 had no authority to
terminate. That in spite of this, none of the
aforesaid three defendants being defendant nos.
2-4 took any step to redeem the situation. Nor
was any communication issued to the plaintiff
from either of the three defendants.
10. That this state of affairs continued for almost
a year. During this period, the defendant no. 2
did not even offer salary due and the terminal
benefits to the plaintiff. The same has till date
been not given. That as during this period the
defendant nos. 1 and 2 were neither withdrawing
CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 7 of 41

the said letter nor were releasing the money held
under terminal benefits and the plaintiff could not
have sustained without searching for new
engagements, he was forced to take up other
engagement. As on today, the plaintiff has no
job.”
11.

Reliance has been placed on the pronouncement of the

Apex Court reported in 1992 (2) SCC 524 entitled Ramesh
Hirachand Kundanmal Vs. Municipal Corporation of
Greater Bombay & Ors. and judgments of this court reported
in 88 (2000) DLT 769 Inspiration Clothes & U Vs. Colby
International Limited; 125 (2005) DLT 717 Anjum Nath
Vs. British Airways PLC & Ors.; and 125 (2005) DLT 543
Balbir Singh Vs. Government of NCT of Delhi & Ors.
(para 11).
12.

On the other hand, Mr. Parag P. Tripathi, learned senior

counsel appearing for defendant no. 1 has vehemently urged that
the plaintiff has claimed employment with the defendant no. 2 and
termination of such contract of service. Since defendant no. 2 was
a company, the actions on its behalf had to be taken by human
agencies. The defendant no. 1 has only issued the letter for and on
behalf of the defendant no. 2 and for such act, he cannot be
impleaded as a party in the present suit for damages. It is further

CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 8 of 41

urged that the plaint contains no allegations against defendant
nos. 3 & 3a and no relief has sought against them.
13.

In support of these submissions, learned senior counsel

appearing for defendant no. 1 has placed reliance on the
pronouncements of this court reported in 2006 (86) DRJ 374
Ajit Singh Vs. Ramesh Vohra & Anr. (para 9 and 11);
2006 III AD (Delhi) 141 Arunesh Punetha Vs. Boston
Scientific Corporation & Ors. (para 19); and 2001 VI AD
(Delhi)

457

TBWA

Anthem

Private

Ltd.

Vs.

Mr.

Madhukar Kamath & Anr. (para 4 and 8).
14.

Having heard learned counsel for the parties and given

my thoughtful consideration to the issues raised in regard to Order
7 Rule 11 of the CPC, I find that a plaint which does not disclose
any cause of action against the defendant is required to be rejected
against such a party. The court is also adequately empowered to
add or delete a party to the suit who is neither a necessary or a
proper party at any stage.
15.

Before examining the law on the subject, it is necessary

to notice some essential facts. On a bare perusal of the plaint, the
admitted position which emerges is that the plaintiff was an
employee of the defendant no.2 and is aggrieved by the action of
CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 9 of 41

termination of his services by the UEC SAIL Information
Technology Ltd. The plaintiff contends that this joint venture
company has been incorporated in 1995 under the provisions of
the Companies Act, 1956. Consequently, in terms of Section 3 of
this enactment, the defendant no. 2 is a legal entity which is
capable of suing and being sued. There is also no dispute, as is
also evident from the array of parties in the plaint, that Mr. David
Ball, defendant no. 1 has been arrayed in the capacity of his being
the Chief Executive Officer of the defendant no. 2 and for the
reason of his having issued the letter of termination of services of
the plaintiff.
16.

The defendant no. 3 i.e. M/s USX Engineers &

Consultants Inc. is the erstwhile M/s UEC Technologies LLC.
However, upon the incorporation of the defendant no. 2 i.e. M/s
UEC SAIL Information Technology Ltd. as a company under the
Companies Act, 1956, the joint venture was required to run under
these statutory provisions and is an independent legal entity.
So far as the defendant nos. 3, 3 (a) and 4 are concerned,
in fact they have no connection with the act of termination of
services of the plaintiff and also no allegations have been made in
the plaint against these defendants.
CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 10 of 41

Defendant nos. 3, 3 (a) and 4 certainly cannot be held
responsible for the functioning of the defendant no. 2.
17.

Perusal of the plaint further shows that it is not the Steel

Authority of India Ltd. who has been impleaded as a partydefendant but the Chairman of this Corporation has been
impleaded as defendant no. 4. During the course of arguments, it
was admitted by Mr. Chandan Kumar, learned counsel for the
plaintiff that defendant no. 4 was impleaded only as a 'proforma
party'.
Only one fact has been asserted in order to maintain the
suit against the defendant no. 4.
It has been urged that a letter dated 27th November,
2003 was written by Mr. S.C.K. Patne, Chairman of USIT &
Director (Tech) SAIL to Mr. C.J. Navetta, Director USIT
requesting that before the letter dated 13th November, 2003 was
given effect to, the issue should be discussed in the next board
meeting.
This letter has been written by a person who is director
in the defendant-joint venture. The letter has not been written by
or on behalf of the Steel Authority of India Ltd.
However, in any case, as noticed above, the Steel
CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 11 of 41

Authority of India Ltd. is not even a party to the present suit. Any
letter written by any official who was an employee of either the
Steel Authority of India Ltd. or of the joint venture cannot be held
against the Chairman of the Steel Authority of India, who has been
impleaded as defendant no. 4.
18.

Even assuming that such a communication was binding

on the defendant no. 4, this communication would be at best
documentary evidence in support of the case of the plaintiff who
has claimed illegality in the termination of his services. Certainly,
every person who maybe a witness in a case cannot be made a
party to the litigation and is not a necessary or proper party in a
suit.
19.

In this behalf, reference can be usefully made to a

pronouncement of the Apex Court in 1992 (2) SCC 524 entitled
Ramesh

Hirachand

Kundanmal

Vs.

Municipal

Corporation of Greater Bombay & Ors., wherein the Apex
Court laid down the law thus:“14. The person to be joined must be one whose
presence is necessary as a party. What makes a
person a necessary party is not merely that he has
relevant evidence to give on some of the questions
involved; that would only make him a necessary
witness. It is not merely that he has an interest in
the correct solution of some question involved
CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 12 of 41

20.

and has thought of relevant arguments to
advance.
The only reason which makes it
necessary to make a person a party to an action is
so that he should be bound by the result of the
action and the question to be settled, therefore,
must be a question in the action which cannot be
effectually and completely settled unless he is a
party. The line has been drawn on a wider
construction of the rule between the direct
interest or the legal interest and commercial
interest. It is, therefore, necessary that the person
must be directly or legally interested in the action
in the answer i.e. he can say that the litigation
may lead to a result which will affect him legally
that is by curtailing his legal rights.”
It is trite that only such person is to be impleaded as a

party to a suit for a proceeding who is directly and legally
interested in the dispute involved. This would include a person
whose presence before the court may be necessary to enable the
court to effectually and completely adjudicate upon and settle all
the questions involved in the suit.

It is necessary that in the

absence of such person, the court would not be able to decide all
the issues and disputes involved in the suit finally and completely.
A party who is not directly interested in the issue but is only
indirectly effected cannot be added as a defendant in the suit. It is
necessary that a person must be directly and legally interested in
the dispute involved.

A person cannot be impleaded simply

because he would be effected by the final decision in the suit. (Ref:

CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 13 of 41

2001 (7) AD Delhi 1060 HBL Ltd. Vs. Union of India)
21.

The statutory provision of Order 1 Rule 10 (2) of the

Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 permits the court, at any stage of
proceeding, either upon or without the application of either party,
order that the name of any party improperly joined whether as
plaintiff or defendant, to struck out. The court is also empowered
to direct any person who ought to have been joined whether as
plaintiff or defendant or whose presence before the court may be
necessary in order to enable the court to effectually and completely
adjudicate upon and settle all the questions involved in the suit, to
be added as a party.
22.

In 1995 (3) SCC 147 Anil Kumar Singh Vs.

Shivnath Mishra, the court held that to bring a person as a
party-defendant is not a substantive right but one of procedure and
the court has discretion in its proper exercise. The object of the
rule is to bring on record all the persons who are parties to the
dispute relating to the subject-matter so that the dispute may be
determined in their presence at the same time without any
protraction,

inconvenience

and

to

avoid

multiplicity

of

proceedings.
The court further held that a person may be added as a
CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 14 of 41

party-defendant to the suit though no relief may be claimed
against him/her provided his/her presence is necessary for a
complete and final decision on the question involved in the suit.
Such a person is only a proper party as distinguished from a
necessary party.
23.

Two tests have been laid down by the Supreme Court for

determining the question as to who is a necessary party. In this
behalf, in (2005) 6 SCC 733 Kasturi Vs. Iyyamperumal, the
court set down the principles thus:“7. In our view, a bare reading of this provision,
namely, second part of Order 1 Rule 10 sub-rule
(2) CPC would clearly show that the necessary
parties in a suit for specific performance of a
contract for sale are the parties to the contract or
if they are dead, their legal representatives as also
a person who had purchased the contracted
property from the vendor. In equity as well as in
law, the contract constitutes rights and also
regulates the liabilities of the parties. A purchaser
is a necessary party as he would be affected if he
had purchased with or without notice of the
contract, but a person who claims adversely to the
claim of a vendor is, however, not a necessary
party. From the above, it is now clear that two
tests are to be satisfied for determining the
question who is a necessary party. Tests are – (1)
there must be a right to some relief against such
party in respect of the controversies involved in
the proceedings; (2) no effective decree can be
passed in the absence of such party.”
P.

In the present matter, another aspect has been raised by

CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 15 of 41

the defendants which needs to be examined. It has been urged
that the plaint is liable to be rejected for the reason it discloses no
cause of action against them. The legislature has incorporated this
ground for rejection of the plaint in Rule 11 of Order 7 of the Code
of Civil Procedure. However, the statute has not defined the 'cause
of action'.
24.
same

So far as to what would constitute cause of action, the
has

fallen

for

consideration

in

several

judicial

pronouncements. It has been held that 'cause of action' means
every fact, which, if traversed, it would be necessary for the
plaintiff to prove in order to support his right to a judgment of the
court. In other words, it is that bundle of facts which is necessary
for the plaintiff to prove in order to succeed in the suit. (Ref:
(1994) 6 SCC 322 Bloom Dekor Ltd. Vs. Subhash
Himatlal Desai).
The expression 'cause of action' has acquired a judicially
settled meaning.

In (2001) 2 SCC 294: AIR 2001 SC 416

Rajasthan High Court Advocates' Association Vs. Union
of India, it was held that in the restricted sense, cause of action
means the circumstances forming the infraction of the right or the
immediate occasion for the action. In the wider sense, it means the
CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 16 of 41

necessary conditions for the maintenance of the suit, including not
only the infraction of the right, but the infraction coupled with the
right itself. Compendiously, the expression means every fact which
it would be necessary for the plaintiff to prove, if traversed, in order
to support his right to the judgment of the court. Every fact which
is necessary to be proved, as distinguished from every piece of
evidence which is necessary to prove each fact, comprises 'cause of
action'.
Thus 'cause of action' means every fact which it is
necessary for the plaintiff to establish to support a right or obtain a
judgment. (Ref: (1998) 6 SCC 514 Sadanandan Bhadran
Vs. Madhavan Sunil Kumar).
Accrual of cause of action has been related to the vesting
of territorial jurisdiction of the court. This aspect has raised some
interesting issues.
25.

In a judgment reported in AIR 1985 SC 1289 State of

Rajasthan

Vs.

Swalika

Properties,

certain

properties

belonging to a company which had its registered office in Calcutta
were sought to be acquired in Jaipur and the notice under Section
52 of the Rajasthan Urban Improvement were served upon the
company at Calcutta. Basing its right to maintain the writ petition
CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 17 of 41

at Calcutta High Court, it had been contended that service of the
notice within the territorial jurisdiction of the Calcutta High Court
empowered that court to exercise jurisdiction in the matter. The
Apex Court held that the entire cause of action for challenging the
acquisition of the land under Section 152 of the Rajasthan Urban
Improvement Act had arisen within the territorial jurisdiction of
the Rajasthan High Court. The factum of service of the notice at
Calcutta was held unnecessary for grant of an appropriate writ,
order or direction under Article 226 of the Constitution for
quashing the notice issued by the Rajasthan Government. It was
thus held that the High Court at Calcutta had no jurisdiction to
entertain the writ petition.
26.

The law on this aspect has been authoritatively laid

down by the Apex Court when it had occasion to examine this
question further in its judgment reported at AIR 2002 SC 126
entitled Union of India vs Adani Export Ltd. & Ors.
wherein it was held thus :“17.
It is seen from the above that in order
to confer jurisdiction on a High Court to
entertain a writ petition or a special civil
application as in this case, the High Court must
be satisfied from the entire facts pleaded in
support of the cause of action that those facts do
constitute a cause so as to empower the court to
CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 18 of 41

decide a dispute which has, at least in-part,
arisen within its jurisdiction. It is clear from the
above judgment that each and every fact
pleaded by the respondents in their application
does not ipso facto lead to the conclusion that
those facts gives rise to a cause of action within
the court's territorial jurisdiction unless those
facts pleaded are such which have a nexus or
relevance with the lis that is involved in the
case. Facts which have no bearing with the lis
or the dispute involved in the case, do not give
rise to a cause of action so as to confer
territorial jurisdiction on the court concerned.
If we apply this principle then we see that none
of the facts pleaded in Paragraph 16 of the
petition, in our opinion, fall into the category of
bundle of facts which would constitute a cause
of action giving rise to a dispute which could
confer territorial jurisdiction on the courts at
Ahmadabad.”
27.

Placing reliance on the pronouncement of the Apex

Court in the State of Rajasthan (supra) and the Adani Export
matter in its judgment reported at (2004) 9 SCC 786 National
Textile Corporation Ltd. & Ors. Vs Haribox Swalram &
Ors., the Apex Court elucidated the applicable principles:“12.1.
As discussed earlier, the mere fact
that the writ petitioner carries on business at
Calcutta or that the reply to the correspondence
made by it was received at Calcutta is not an
integral part of the cause of action and,
therefore, the Calcutta High Court had no
jurisdiction to entertain the writ petition and
the view to the contrary taken by the Division
Bench cannot be sustained. In view of the
above finding, the writ petition is liable to be
CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 19 of 41

dismissed.”
In this case as the parties had litigated upto the Apex
Court. In order to put an end to the litigation, the Supreme Court
however examined the matter on merits as well.
28.

In a recent judgment reported at (2004) 6 SCC 254

Kusum Ingots & Alloys Ltd. vs Union of India & Anr. the
Apex Court has considered this issue further and held thus :“26.
The view taken by this Court in U.P.
Rashtriya Chini Mill Adhikari Parishad that the
situs of issue of an order or notification by the
Government would come within the meaning of
the expression “cases arising” in clause 14 of the
(Amalgamation) Order is not a correct view of
law for the reason hereafter stated and to that
extent the said decision is overruled. In fact, a
legislation, it is trite, is not confined to a statute
enacted by Parliament or the legislature of a
State, which would include delegated legislation
and subordinate legislation or an executive order
made by the Union of India, State or any other
statutory authority. In a case where the field is
not covered by any statutory rule, executive
instructions issued in this behalf shall also come
within the purview thereof. Situs of office of
Parliament, legislature of a State or authorities
empowered to make subordinate legislation
would not by itself constitute any cause of action
or cases arising. In other words, framing of a
statute, statutory rule or issue of an executive
order or instruction would not confer
jurisdiction upon a court only because of the
situs of the office of the maker thereof.”
29.

This principle finds application in the rationale and

CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 20 of 41

reasoning of the Apex Court in the Adani Export matter. Thus,
there may be some facts which may constitute a cause of action
whereby the High Court would be enabled and empowered to
decide the disputes. Yet, each and every such fact pleaded by a
party does not by itself lead to the conclusion that the court would
have the territorial jurisdiction to entertain the writ petition. It is
only such facts which have a nexus or relevance with the issues
raised in the

litigation which vest the court with territorial

jurisdiction. Thus, though an agreement may have been executed
within the territorial jurisdiction of the court, however in order to
decide the issue of territorial jurisdiction in cases where the
extraordinary jurisdiction of the High Court has been invoked
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, it has to be seen
whether the execution of the agreement is such an integral part of
the facts relating to the litigation and dispute that consideration of
such fact is absolutely imperative and essential for deciding the
disputes involved in the case.
30.

A similar question had fallen for consideration before

this court in a judgment reported at (2004) 73 DRJ 104
Callipers Naigai Ltd. & Ors. vs Government of NCT of
Delhi & Ors. and it was held as under :CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 21 of 41

“8.
In this particular case, we have to
examine, therefore, what is the actual grievance
of the petitioner. The petitioners, in view of
Section 3 (3) of the said Act, cannot have any
grievance with regard to the issuance of notices
dated 02.07.1998 because these have been
issued merely in compliance of the recovery
certificate received by the respondent no. 2 from
the Haryana Financial Corporation at
Chandigarh. The respondent no. 2 had no
option in the matter. He was not in any manner
enjoined with any duty to examine the
correctness or otherwise of the recovery
certificate issued under Section 3 (2) of the said
Act. The issuance of the recovery certificate is
conclusive proof of the matters stated therein.
In fact, the actual cause of action is in respect of
the recovery certificate which is the causa
causea and it is well-known that causa causea
est causa causati (the cause of a cause is the
cause of the thing cause) and the cause of the
cause is to be considered as the cause of the
effect also (see: Black's Law Dictionary 6th
Edition, p.220). Thus, the recovery notices are
nothing but the effect and the cause, in point of
fact, is the issuance of the recovery certificate.
In other words, the recovery certificate is the
causa sine qua non (a necessary or inevitable
cause); a cause without which the effect in
question could not have happened (see: Black's
Law Dictionary 6th Ediction, p.221. Sans the
recovery certificate, the recovery notices could
not have been issued. Thus, it is clear that the
recovery notices dated 02.07.1998 cannot be set
aside without the recovery certificate dated
21.10.1998 also being set aside. The recovery
notices have no life of their own and must
necessarily depend for their sustenance on the
existence of the recovery certificate and the
cause of action for which arose entirely in
Chandigarh. The recovery notices do not form
CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 22 of 41

an integral part of the cause of action. Thus,
this court does not have territorial jurisdiction
to entertain the present writ petition.
9.
In the aforesaid decision, which
clearly dealt with a similar situation, it was held
that recovery notices such as the one impugned
herein do not form an integral part of the cause
of action and, therefore, this court would not
have territorial jurisdiction to entertain the writ
petition challenging the recovery notice. I see
no reason to depart from this view. The lis is
with PICUP. Consequently the cause of action is
qua PICUP. Unfortunately that has entirely
arisen outside the territorial jurisdiction of this
court. The issuance of the recovery notice has
no relevance with this lis that is involved in the
case. It is the result of a purely ministerial act
on the part of Respondent No. 1 who cannot be
faulted for acting in the manner he did. The
stature required him to do so. He had no
discretion in the matter. He had no lis to
decide. The recovery notice is merely an effect
and not the cause. It is the cause which confers
jurisdiction and not the effect. Then, the answer
to question No. 2 is that the mere issuance of the
impugned recovery notice at Delhi does not
clothe this court with the territorial jurisdiction
to entertain this petition.”
31.

In (1996) 3 SCC 443 South East Asia Shipping

Co. Ltd. Vs. Nav Bharat Enterprises (P) Ltd., it was held
that the cause of action is a bundle of facts which taken with the
law applicable to them, gives the plaintiff a right to claim against
the defendant.
The present applications have to be examined from the
CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 23 of 41

principles laid down in these binding judicial precedents.
32.

My attention has been drawn to the pronouncement of

this court reported in 2006 (86) DRJ 374 Ajit Singh Vs.
Ramesh Vohra & Anr., wherein the court held that for the
purposes of consideration of the issues as to whether the plaint
discloses any cause of action or not, all the pleadings in the plaint
have to be treated as correct and the defence has not to be looked
into. The court emphasised the principle that the plaint had to be
read meaningfully.
It is trite that every case has to be examined in the light
of the facts averred in plaint by the plaintiff and no absolute
principles governing such consideration can possibly be laid down.
Rejection of a plaint is undoubtedly a serious matter in
as much as it would terminate the proceedings before the court
and consequently have serious repercussions on the rights of the
parties. The same cannot be had recourse to lightly and requires a
serious construction of the plaint and the documents relied upon
by the plaintiff.
33.

For this reason, the courts have emphasised that the

pleadings have to be meaningfully read. In this behalf, it would be
instructive to advert to the pronouncement reported in AIR 1984
CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 24 of 41

Punjab & Haryana 126 Harnam Singh Vs. Surjit Singh.
34.

The distinction between 'a plaint disclosing no cause of

action' on the one hand and 'the plaintiff having no cause of action'
on the other have to be borne in mind. The principles which
would guide the court in this consideration were elaborately laid
down in a pronouncement of this court reported at 88 (2000)
DLT 769 Inspiration Clothes & U Vs. Colby International
Limited. It was held thus:“10. Having considered the submissions made at
the Bar and gone through the impugned order, we
are of the view that learned Single Judge
proceeded on erroneous assumption that he was
entitled to go into the merits of the controversy
that whether the plaintiff had any cause of action
against the defendant or not or that whether the
plaintiff's suit against the defendant was or was
not maintainable.
Such an approach is
erroneous. The plea of the defendant that there is
no cause of action does not amount to the plea
that the plaint does not disclose any cause of
action. A distinction must always be drawn
between a plea that plaint does not disclose a
cause of action and the plea that the plaintiff has
no cause of action to sue. The grounds on which
the plaint can be rejected are enumerated in
Clauses (a) to (d) of Rule 11 of Order 7, CPC. The
first ground on which plaint can be rejected is
that it does not disclose a cause of action. While
considering the prayer to reject the plaint on
ground (a) of Order 7, Rule 11, CPC that the plaint
discloses no cause of action, which is essentially a
demurrer, the defendant must be taken to admit
for the sake of argument that the allegations of
CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 25 of 41

the plaintiff in the plaint are true in manner and
form. The power to reject the plaint on this can
be exercised only if the Court come to the
conclusion that even if all the allegations are
taken to be proved, the plaintiff would not be
entitled to any relief whatsoever. A distinction
must, always be drawn between a case where the
plaint on the face of it discloses no cause of action
and another in which after considering the entire
material on the record the Court come to the
conclusion that there is no cause of action. In the
first case the plaint can be rejected but in the
latter case the plaint cannot be rejected. The suit
has to be dismissed. Learned Single Judge
adopted the second approach. This was not the
stage where the Court was expected to enter into
this controversy that whether there was a cause of
action to the plaintiff against the defendant or
not. No doubt that where the plaint is based on a
document, the Court will be entitled to consider
the said document also and ascertain if a cause of
action is disclosed in the plaint, but validity of the
document cannot be considered at this stage. To
enable a Court to reject a plaint on the ground
that it does not disclose a cause of action, it
should look at the plaint and documents
accompanying the plaint only and nothing else.
The Court, however, cannot look at the defence of
the defendant or the documents relied upon by
the defendant. See D. Ramchandran Vs. R.V
Janakiraman & Ors. (1999) 3 SCC 267=II (1999)
SLT 484=II (1999) CLT 109 (SC). Learned Single
Judge fell in error in placing reliance upon the
material supplied by the defendant, which alone
is sufficient to set aside the impugned order.
Learned Single Judge instead of proceeding to
reject the plaint dismissed the suit, which
approach is also erroneous.
The effect of
dismissal of suit is altogether different and
distinct from the effect of rejection of the plaint.
In case plaint is rejected under Order 7 Rule 11,
CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 26 of 41

CPC, filing of a fresh plaint in respect of the same
cause of action is specifically, permitted under
Rule 13 of Order 7, CPC. Altogether different
consequence follows in the event of dismissal of
suit, which has the effect of precluding the
plaintiff to file a fresh suit on the same cause of
action. Rejection of plaint takes away the very
basis of the suit rendering as if there was no suit
at all or that no suit was instituted. Order of
dismissal of suit while recognising the existence
of a suit indicates its termination. While deciding
the application under Order 7 Rule 11 of the CPC,
learned Single Judge ought not and could not
have dismissed the suit. Even in the decision of
the Supreme Court in T. Anvandandam's case
(supra), relied upon by learned counsel for the
appellant, it was held that if on a meaningful –
not formal – reading of the plaint it is manifestly
vexatious and meritless, in the sense of not
disclosing a clear right to sue, the Trial Court
should exercise his power under Order 7 Rule 11,
CPC taking care to see that the ground mentioned
therein is fulfilled. In order to fulfil that ground
bare allegation made in the plaint and the
documents filed therewith were required to be
looked into which in the instant case clearly
disclosed at least a cause of action against the
defendant that defendant was liable for damages
for its acts of omission and commission. It would
be an altogether different situation that the
plaintiff might not ultimately succeed in
obtaining a decree against the defendant or that
Court might come to the conclusion that suit
would not be maintainable against the defendant
and that plaintiff had a cause of action only
against defendant's principal and its parent unit
in Hong Kong, but such aspect could not have
been gone into at this stage. Three paragraphs of
the plaint quoted above in our view do clearly
disclose cause of action for the plaintiff to claim
damages.”
CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 27 of 41

35.

In this behalf, it would be useful to refer to the

pronouncement of the Apex Court reported in AIR 1996 SC
2140 State of Orissa Vs. Klockner and Company and
Ors., wherein the court laid down the principles thus:“From the discussion in the order it appears that
the learned trial judge has not maintained the
distinction between the plea that there was no
cause of action for the suit and the plea that the
plaint does not disclose a cause of action. No
specific reason or ground is stated in the order in
support of the finding that the plaint is to be
rejected under Order 7 Rule 11 (a). From the
averments in the plaint, it is clear that the
plaintiff has pleaded a cause of action for filing
the suit seeking the reliefs stated in it. That is not
to say that the plaintiff has cause of action to file
the suit for the reliefs sought that question is to be
determined on the basis of materials (other than
the plaint) which may be produced by the parties
at appropriate stage in the suit. For the limited
purpose of determining the question whether the
suit is to be wiped out under Order 7, Rule 11 (1)
or not the averments in the plaint are only to be
looked into. The position noted above is also
clear from the petitioner filed by defendant no. 1
under Order 7, Rule 11 in which the thrust of the
case pleaded is that on the stipulations in the
agreement of 20.4.1982 the plaintiff is not
entitled to file a suit seeking any of the reliefs
stated in the plaint.”
36.

Again, in 1987 Supp. SCC 563 Samar Singh Vs.

Kedar Nath, the court held that:“132.
CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

It is trite that a party should not be
page 28 of 41

unnecessarily harassed in a suit. An order
refusing the reject a plaint will finally determine
his right in terms of Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code of
Civil Procedure.
133. The idea underlying Order 7 Rule 11 (a) is
that when no cause of action is disclosed, the
courts will not unnecessarily protract the hearing
of a suit. Having regard to the changes in the
legislative policy as adumbrated by the
amendments carried out in the Code of Civil
Procedure, the court would interpret the
provisions in such a manner so as to save
expenses, achieve expedition and avoid the
court's resources being used up on cases which
will serve no useful purpose. A litigation which is
in the opinion of the court is doomed to fail would
not further be allowed to be used as a device to
harass a litigant. (See Azhar Hussain Vs. Rajiv
Gandhi 1986 Supp. SCC 315 at pp. 324-325).
xxxx

xxxx

xxxx

139. Whether a plaint discloses a cause of action
or not is essentially a question of fact. But
whether it does or does not must be found out
from reading the plaint itself. For the said
purpose the averments made in the plaint in their
entirety must be held to be correct. The test is as
to whether if the averments made in the plaint are
taken to be correct in their entirety, a decree
would be passed.
140. A cause of action is a bundle of acts which
are required to be pleaded and proved for the
purpose of obtaining relief claimed in the suit.
For the aforementioned purpose, the material
facts are required to be stated but not the
evidence except in certain cases where the
pleading reliefs on any misrepresentation, fraud,
breach of trust, wilful default or undue influence.”
CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 29 of 41

37.

The principles which would guide the court while

exercising its power under Order 7 Rule 11 of the CPC have been
widely laid down by the Apex Court in (2006) 3 SCC 100
Mayor (H.K) Ltd. Vs. Owners & Parties, Vessel M.V.
Fortune Express, wherein the court laid down the applicable
law stating as hereunder:“11. Under Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code, the court
has jurisdiction to reject the plaint where it does
not disclose a cause of action, where the relief
claimed is undervalued and the valuation is not
corrected within the time as fixed by the court,
where insufficient court fee is paid and the
additional court fee is not supplied within the
period given by the court, and where the suit
appears from the statement in the plaint to be
barred by any law. Rejection of the plaint in
exercise of the powers under Order 7 Rule 11 of
the Code would be on consideration of the
principles laid down by this court.
In T.
Arivanandam Vs. T.V. Satyapal, this court has
held that if on a meaningful, not formal reading
of the plaint it is manifestly vexatious, and
meritless, in the sense of not disclosing a clear
right to sue, the court should exercise its power
under Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code taking care to
see that the ground mentioned therein is fulfilled.
In Roop Lal Sathi Vs. Nachhattar Singh Gill, this
court has held that where the plaint discloses no
cause of action, it is obligatory upon the court to
reject the plaint as a whole under Order 7 Rule 11
of the Code, but the rule does not justify the
rejection of any particular portion of a plaint.
Therefore, the High Court therein could not act
under Order 7 Rule 11 (a) of the Code for striking
down certain paragraphs in the absence of
CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 30 of 41

anything to show that the averments in those
paragraphs are either unnecessary, frivolous or
vexatious, or that they are such as may tend to
prejudice, embarrass or delay the fair trial of the
case, or constitute an abuse of the process of the
court. In ITC Ltd. Vs. Debts Recovery Appellate
Tribunal, it was held that the basic question to be
decided while dealing with an application filed by
the defendant under Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code
is to find out whether the real cause of action has
been set out in the plaint or something illusory
has been projected in the plaint with a view to get
out of the said provision. In Saleem Bhai Vs.
State of Maharashtra, this court has held that the
trial court can exercise its powers under Order 7
Rule 11 of the Code at any stage of the suit before
registering the plaint or after issuing summons to
the defendant at any time before the conclusion
of the trial and for the said purpose the
averments in the plaint are germane and the
pleas taken by the defendant in the written
statement would be wholly irrelevant at that
stage. In Popat and Kotecha Property Vs. State
Bank of India Staff Assn., this court has culled
out the legal ambit of Rule 11 of the Order 7 of the
Code in these words: (SCC p. 516, para 19)
“19.
There
cannot
be
any
compartmentalisation,
dissection,
segregation and inversions of the language
of various paragraphs in the plaint. If such
a course is adopted it would run counter to
the cardinal canon of interpretation
according to which a pleading has to be
read as a whole to ascertain its true import.
It is not permissible to cull out a sentence
or a passage and to read it out of the context
in isolation. Although it is the substance
and not merely the form that has to be
looked into, the pleading has to be
construed as it stands without addition or
subtraction of words or change of its
CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 31 of 41

apparent grammatical sense. The intention
of the party concerned is to be gathered
primarily from the tenor and terms of his
pleadings taken as a whole. At the same
time it should be borne in mind that no
pedantic approach should be adopted to
defeat
justice
on
hair-splitting
technicalities.”
12. From the aforesaid, it is apparent that the
plaint cannot be rejected on the basis of the
allegations made by the defendant in his written
statement or in an application for rejection of the
plaint. The court has to read the entire plaint as a
whole to find out whether it discloses a cause of
action and if it does, then the plaint cannot be
rejected by the court exercising the powers under
Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code. Essentially, whether
the plaint discloses a cause of action, is a question
of fact which has to be gathered on the basis of
the averments made in the plaint in its entirety
taking those averments to be correct. A cause of
action is a bundle of facts which are required to be
proved for obtaining relief and for the said
purpose, the material facts are required to be
stated but not the evidence except in certain cases
where the pleadings relied on are in regard to
misrepresentation, fraud, wilful default, undue
influence or of the same nature. So long as the
plaint discloses some cause of action which
requires determination by the court, the mere fact
that in the opinion of the Judge the plaintiff may
not succeed cannot be a ground for rejection of
the plaint.”
38.

In the pronouncement of this court reported in 2006

III AD (Delhi) 141 Arunesh Punetha Vs. Boston Scientific
Corporation & Ors., this court had an occasion to consider an

CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 32 of 41

application under Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure
filed in the suit challenging termination of service by the
defendants and it was held that the plaintiff disclosed privity of
contract only with the defendant no. 3 which gave rise to rights
and obligations between the parties.

In this behalf, the court

noticed thus:“17........The admission of the plaintiff that all the
defendants are corporate bodies and have their
separate independent entity being companies
duly incorporated, would further show that
merely on vague averment and without
expression of a definite cause of action, the
plaintiff cannot be permitted to expose the said
defendants to vague and purposeless litigation.
Except the defendants who are his employers and
against whom some definite averments have been
made, constitute a proper cause of action which of
course the plaintiff would have to prove during
the course of trial.”
39.

Therefore, it is only such facts which would give rise to a

legitimate claim or relief in favour of the plaintiff and against the
defendants which would give it a right to file and maintain a suit
against such a party. The plaintiff has to prima facie show that he
has an actionable remedy in law on the facts stated in the plaint
read in conjunction with the documents.
40.

As noticed above, the consequences of rejection of the

plaint on the ground that it does not disclose any cause of action in
CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 33 of 41

respect of a particular defendant would be drastic and the plaintiff
would be deprived of its right to seek adjudication of its claim
against such defendant.
These applications have to be examined in the light of
the principles noticed hereinabove.
41.

I find that there is not a single allegation against the

Chairman of the

Steel Authority of India Ltd. who has been

impleaded as defendant no. 4. He also has no nexus or connection
with the transaction by which the plaintiff is aggrieved. No relief
can be granted against him. The plaintiff has also not claimed any
employment with or any right, title or interest in or against the
Steel Authority of India. On the contrary, in para 11 of the plaint,
the plaintiff admits that he had 'past employment' with the Steel
Authority of India.

No relief has been prayed for or granted.

There can therefore be no dispute that the plaint does not disclose
any cause of action against the defendant no. 4.
Consequently, I.A. No. 2455/2006 filed by defendant
no. 4 seeking deletion of his name from the array of parties
deserves to be allowed.
Defendant no. 4 is accordingly directed to be deleted
from the array of parties in the present suit.
CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 34 of 41

42.

I now propose to consider I.A. No. 67/2006 filed by

defendant nos. 3 and 3(a). I further find that the only reason for
arraying the defendant nos. 3 and 3 (a) as party in the suit has
been on the ground that M/s USX Engineers & Consultants Inc.
had entered into the Promoters Agreement dated 10th November,
1994 with SAIL which had resulted in the formation of the joint
venture company M/s UEC SAIL Information Technology Ltd.,
defendant no. 2. which was incorporated in 1995.
A close examination of the plaint shows that the plaintiff
has averred that the joint venture company i.e. the defendant no. 2
is bound by the stipulations contained in the agreement dated 10th
November, 1994. This would certainly not be sufficient ground to
array this firm as a party in a claim for damages based on a plea
that the services of the plaintiff have been illegally terminated.
43.

Perusal of the plaint shows that the plaintiff has arrayed

the President of USX Engineers & Consultants Inc. and the
President of its successor in interest, UEC Technologies LLC, as
party-defendants.
Certainly, an authority or official in a Corporation
cannot be held liable or responsible for actions attributable to or
which may bind the Corporation unless there were certain
CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 35 of 41

personal allegations against them.

There is no act attributable to

or so stated anywhere in the plaint against the defendant nos. 3
and 3 (a). No cause of action is disclosed in the plaint against
these persons.

In view of the legal principles noticed above,

consequently, it has to be held that the defendant nos. 3 and 3 (a)
are also neither necessary nor proper parties in the present
litigation.
Consequently, I.A. No. 67/2006 filed by defendant nos.
3 and 3 (a) also deserves to be allowed.
Defendant nos. 3 and 3 (a) are also directed to be
deleted from the array of parties in the present suit and the plaint
against them is rejected.
44.

It is now necessary to consider I.A No. 66/2006 which

has been filed by defendant no. 1 Mr. David Ball who is stated to be
the Chief Executive Officer of the defendant no. 2 herein.
45.

From the above, it is apparent that every fact pleaded

does not give rise to a cause of action in favour of the plaintiff and
against the defendant.

The act of issuance of the letter of

termination is certainly attributable to the defendant no. 2.
However, admittedly the plaintiff was an employee of the
defendant no. 2 and was not employed by the defendant no. 1.
CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 36 of 41

46.

The entire claim in the plaint rests on the challenge to

the issuance, contents and impact of the letter dated 13th
November, 2003. The contents of this letter dated 13th November,
2003 have been reproduced in the plaint which reads thus:“Dear Mr. Rath,
This is to inform you that, effective immediately,
your services to USIT are no longer required as
per paragraph 4 of your Appointment Letter
dated 15th March, 1997.
You will be paid two months salary in lieu of two
months notice.”
47.

There is no dispute that this letter has been issued by the

defendant no. 1 in his capacity as Chief Executive Officer of the
defendant no. 2 and is a letter of termination of service.
By such letter, the services of the plaintiff with the
defendant no. 2 were stated to be as not required and
consequently, the contract of service came to an end.
48.

In the instant case, undoubtedly, the defendant no. 1 has

written a letter dated 13th November, 2003 as the CEO of the
defendant no. 2. However, the plaintiff has urged in the plaint that
this letter was without authority and in violation of the terms of
the joint venture dated 10th November, 1994.
On such pleas, the relief of damages has been sought

CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 37 of 41

against all the defendants. The issue raised in the plaint would
require a consideration of the aspect as to whether the letter had
been issued with or without authority on behalf of the defendant
no. 2. If the termination of services of the plaintiff was without
authority, the consequences thereof would be that the termination
would stand invalidated.
On such finding being returned in favour of the plaintiff,
so far as its claim against the defendant no. 2 is concerned, in view
of the principles of the Specific Relief Act, 1963, the plaintiff may
not be entitled to reinstatement into service but certainly the claim
of damages may ultimately be found justified.
49.

The plaintiff has urged that the defendant no. 1 has acted

without authority in issuing the letter. On the assertions made in
the plaint, it has been urged on behalf of the plaintiff by such
illegal actions that the defendant no. 1 would have contributed to
the damages suffered on account of the wrongful termination of
his services. Certainly on an examination of the plaint and the
communications placed before this court, therefore it cannot be
stated at this stage that the plaint does not disclose any cause of
action against the defendant no. 1.
So far as the submission that the defendant no. 1 was
CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 38 of 41

only the human agency acting for and on behalf of defendant no. 2
is concerned, in my view, such a plea is really in the nature of the
defence of the defendant no. 1 to the suit filed by the plaintiff. It is
well settled that such a plea cannot be examined at this stage.
50.

Defendant nos. 1 and 2 would be required to show that

the letter of termination of services of the plaintiff was issued with
its authority and was as per the provisions which were applicable
with regard to the service of the plaintiff.
51.

In 125 (2005) DLT 717 Anjum Nath Vs. British

Airways PLC & Ors., the plaintiff had filed the suit seeking a
decree against the defendants for the sum of Rs. 55 lakhs and a
declaration that he was entitled to the benefits under the Indian
Early Retirement Scheme.

The plaintiff had arrayed several

persons as parties who filed applications under Order 7 Rule 11 of
the CPC contending that the plaint does not disclose any cause of
action against them as they were only superior officers in the
organisation and consequently no liability for acts of the
organisation could be fastened upon them.
It was held by the court that the plaintiff had urged a
plea that these officers had deliberately misled her and given
assurances to her and consequently had contributed to the alleged
CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 39 of 41

damages suffered. In the facts and circumstances of the case, the
court held upon consideration of the averments made that it could
not be held that the plaint did not disclose any cause of action
against such persons. Whether the plaintiff ultimately succeeded
against them or not would be decided after evidence and
adjudication and not merely on the pleas urged by the plaintiff in
the plaint.
52.

In the light of the pleadings laid by the plaintiff against

the defendant no. 1 herein before this court, the plaintiff has stated
that he was made a sacrificial lamb in a power struggle between
the defendant no. 2 i.e M/s UEC SAIL Information Technology
Ltd. and defendant no. 4 i.e. Steel Authority of India Ltd. and that
the defendant no. 1 Mr. David Ball has issued the letter of
termination of service without any authority, resulting in loss and
damages to it. The plaintiff has claimed loss of reputation for such
act on the part of defendant no. 1. Whether such act was with or
without authority and whether the act of the defendant no. 1 in
issuing such letter of termination of services of the plaintiff vests
any personal liability against the defendant no. 1 are the matters
which would require to be ultimately adjudicated upon after the
parties lead evidence. However, looked against the legal position
CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 40 of 41

set down hereinabove, it cannot be held that the plaintiff has not
made out such case against the defendant no. 1 which requires
examination.
Looked at from any angle, it cannot be held at this stage
that the plaint does

not disclose any cause of action against

defendant no. 1.
53.

In this view of the matter, so far as maintainability of

suit against defendant no. 1 is concerned, it cannot be held that
Mr. David Ball is not a necessary and proper party to the present
suit or that the plaint does not disclose any cause of action against
him.

The plaintiff is entitled an opportunity to prove its case

against the defendant no. 1. This defendant would have the right
to lead to establish its defence in accordance with law.
Consequently,

I.A. No. 66/2006 filed on behalf of

defendant no. 1 is hereby dismissed.
There shall be no order as to costs.

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
December 13, 2006
SD

CS (OS) No. 1256/2005

page 41 of 41

