IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
IA 7907/2005 in CS(OS) No. 1379/2005
Date of Decision : 14th September,
2007
M/S HYUNDAI CORPORATION
.. Plaintiff
Through : Ms. Pratibha M. Singh and
Mr. Alok Kumar, Advocates
Versus
RAJMAL GANNA

.. Defendant

Through : Mr. H.S. Phoolka, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Siddarth Shankar Ray,
Advocates
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J
1.

By this order I propose to dispose of IA No. 7907/2005 filed by

the plaintiff under the provisions of Order 39 Rule 1 and 2 of the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908 seeking an injunction against the defendant
prohibiting it from using the trade mark Hyundai in respect of which
the plaintiff has asserted exclusive propriety rights.
2.

M/s Hyundai Corporation is stated to be a corporation which is

incorporated under the laws of Korea having its head office at Korea
with liaison offices in various countries including India. The Hyundai

CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 1

Corporation, plaintiff herein claims to belong to the internationally
famous Hyundai group of companies. Some of the other group
companies include the Hyundai Heavy Industries Limited, Hyundai
Motor Company, Hyundai Engineering & Construction Company
Limited.

It is contended that several of the Hyundai group

companies are actively working in the Indian market and are engaged
in the sale of various consumer products falling under various classes
under the established trademark Hyundai.

Apart from its

manufacturing activities, it is contended that the Hyundai Group of
companies is also engaged in the marketing of various goods
including plant and machinery, steel, chemicals, electrical and
electronic product, ship, resource development information and tele
communications etc by the trademark and name of Hyundai since
1976-77.
3.

Apart from the above goods and products, the plaintiff and its

associate group companies in India are stated to be carrying on its
business with the trade name/trademark Hyundai in respect of motor
vehicles, semi conductors, electronics and home appliances and
various other goods in classes 7, 9, 11 and 12 besides other items and
sectors.

On account of the effort, networking promotional work,

technical expertise and quality of goods, the plaintiffs have asserted
long and continuous use of the trade mark and claimed that the same
have acquired a trans border reputation. Hyundai as associated with
the products of the plaintiff has acquired distinctiveness. Based on
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 2

the plaintiffs sales-turnover in billions of rupees and expenditure of
huge amounts on publicity and advertisement of its trade mark
Hyundai, the plaintiffs claim tremendous reputation and goodwill
attached with its products under this trademark in India as well as in
other parts of the world.
4.

So far as the word Hyundai is concerned, the plaintiff has

contended that the same is a transliteration of a Chinese and Henkul
word which in these languages means the 'present generation'. The
plaintiff corporation and its associate group companies are allegedly
using the trademark Hyundai since 1976. The plaintiff has pointed
out that the word Hyundai has no obvious meaning and cannot be
identically copied. This word being an invented word and on account
of its association with the quality products of the plaintiff, is entitled
to the highest degree of protection. This mark was registered as a
trademark in the name of a Hyundai group of company in the
republic of Korea in the year 1977. The trade mark HYUNDAI has
also been registered in large number of countries across the world.
5.

So far as its Indian registration is concerned, the plaintiff has

claimed registration of the trademark Hyundai in international
classes 7, 9, 11 and 12 in favour of the companies which form part of
the Hyundai group of companies. These registrations are stated to be
valid and subsisting even on date.

Particulars of the status of

registration in several countries all over the world has been placed
before the court.
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 3

6.

The suit has been necessitated as according to the plaintiff, it

received information in the month of March-April, 2005 about the
defendant's illegal trade activities of sale of such goods including
televisions, antennas etc which are included in classes 9 and 11 and
are the same as that of the plaintiff using the trademark 'Hyundai'.
The plaintiff submits that as per its information, the same were being
sold at various places through various channels in different parts of
India in a clandestine manner. The defendant is alleged to have
dishonestly and with malafide intention adopted not only an identical
trade mark Hyundai for its products but is also stated to have
adopted the boxes, pouches, cartons of Hyundai for its goods which
include televisions, cables, audio, video, cable TVs, calculators,
machines, stabilizers, installation of lighting, heating, cooking,
refrigeration, ventilation etc. which are the goods covered in class 9
and 11 of the Trademark Act, 1999. The plaintiff has alleged
infringement of its registered trade mark Hyundai and its copyright
in the artistic work in the pouches, tins, boxes, cartons contending
that the defendant was fully aware about the goodwill and reputation
of the products and of the registered mark of the plaintiff.

The

submission is that the actions of the defendant are malafide and
fraudulent with a view to create deception and confusion in the public
at large; to trade upon the goodwill and trans border reputation of the
plaintiff and to pass off bad quality goods as that of the quality
products of the plaintiff to the unwary class of purchasers. The acts
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 4

of the defendants were further revealed when a publication of the
mark of the defendant was effected in the trademark journal and a
search report of the trademark registry was

conducted by the

plaintiff. In these circumstances, the plaintiff has sought a decree for
a perpetual injunction restraining infringement of the registered
trademark Hyundai and for passing off its goods by the defendants as
those of the plaintiff. A further order for rendition of accounts as to
ascertain the profits earned by the defendant by use of the trade mark
Hyundai has been sought and an order for delivery of all infringing
goods

bearing

the

trade

mark

Hyundai

which

have

been

manufactured by the defendant including advertising and publicity.
7.

Alongwith the suit, the plaintiff has filed the present application

under Order 39 Rule 1 and 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
praying for an interim injunction from manufacturing, selling,
offering for sale, advertising directly and indirectly dealing in goods
bearing the trade mark "HYUNDAI" as and/or any other trade mark,
as may be identical with and/or deceptively and confusingly similar
to plaintiff's registered and well known trade mark "HYUNDAI" so as
to pass off or enable others to pass off the defendant goods/product
and/or

business

and/or

service

as

and

for

the

goods/products/business and service of the plaintiff and/or some
way connected with the plaintiff. The plaintiff has also prayed for an
order for recovery/withdrawal of the infringing goods from any third
party/parties to whom the defendant or any of them have/has passed
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 5

for commercial purpose.
8.

This application has been vehemently opposed on behalf of the

defendant who has contended that so far as the registered trademark
which has been detailed in the plaint is concerned, they are not in
favour of the plaintiff corporation and that the plaint fails to disclose
any legal relationship between the plaintiff and the companies in
whose favour the trademarks have been granted.

It is further

submitted that the registration of the trademark is in respect of goods
which are not being manufactured by the defendant.
9.

Mr. H.S. Phoolka learned senior counsel for the defendant

submits that the defendant is using the trademark Hyundai since
1999 and that advertisement in the trademark journal in respect of
its application for registration of the trademark Hyundai was
published as back as on 1st December, 2005. The defendant has
further asserted prior use of the trademark Hyundai over the specific
goods which are being manufactured by it and on this basis, it is
contended that the plaintiff cannot injunct the defendant from using
the trademark in respect of the goods which are being manufactured
by the defendants on grounds of being a prior user.
10.

In support of these submissions, learned senior counsel has

placed reliance on the judicial pronouncements reported at 98 (2002)
DLT 359 entitled Haryana Milk Food Limited vs. Chambal Dairy
Products ; 2002 (25) PTC 438(Del) M/s Caterpillar Inc v. Mehtab
Ahmed & Ors.; AIR 1996 SC 2275 Vishnu Das Trading as Vishnu Das
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 6

Kishan Das v Vazir Sultan Tobacco Company Limited ; 2003 (26)
PTC 1 Honda Motor Co. Ltd. V. Charanjeet Singh & Ors.; 1962 (2)
SCR 211 London Rubber Co. Ltd. v. Durex Products; 1988 PTC (18)
759 Relaxo Rubber Ltd. & Anr. V. Aman Cable Industries & Anr. And
133 (2006) DLT 34 Creative Travels Pvt. LTd. V. Creative Tours and
Travels Pvt. LTd.; 2006 (32) PTC 275 Asia Pacific Breweries Ltd. V.
Superior Industries Limited. ; 1998 V AD(Delhi) 453 Metro Plastic
Industries (Regd.) v. M/s Galazi Footwear.
11.

The defendant has urged that the registration certificate

pertaining to the registrations of the trademark Hyundai which have
been placed on record by the plaintiff are in favour of M/s Hyundai
Electronics Industries Co. which is the registered owner of the
trademark.

Several advertisements published in the trademark

journal also show applications by this concern alone. The defendant
points out that in India, the plaintiff is neither manufacturing nor
selling any product under the trademark 'Hyundai'. It also does not
own any exclusive propriety rights in respect of the trademark
Hyundai. There is no registration of any trademark in the name of
any of the companies who have been named in the plaint and
consequently the plaintiff has no case for violation and/or
infringement of trademark against the defendant.
So far as the defendant is concerned, Mr. H.S. Phoolka, learned
senior counsel has placed before the court that the defendant made
an application on 12th August, 1999 for registration of the trademark
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 7

Hyundai in respect of goods which fall under class 11.
Mr. Phoolka, learned senior counsel has urged that so far as the
registrations are concerned, the plaintiff had no registration of the
trademark in its favour prior to the filing of the suit. It is further
submitted that the reliance placed on the registration in favour of
other companies under the umbrella of the Hyundai group of
companies does not create any exclusive propriety right in favour of
the plaintiff and consequently the case of the plaintiff so far as
infringement of the trademark is concerned, has to fail.
12.

So far as the relief based on allegations of dishonest passing off

by the defendant is concerned, learned senior counsel appearing for
the defendants has submitted that the same could have been
established by positive facts and documents. It is contended that
there are neither any pleadings nor have any documents been placed
on the record which could support the bald averments of dishonest
and deceptive passing off on the part of the defendants of its goods as
those of the plaintiff.
13.

Mr. H.S. Phoolka, learned senior counsel for the defendant has

objected that as per the plaint, the plaintiff is maintaining only a
liaison office in Delhi and consequently the provisions of Section 134
of the Trademark Act, 1957 are neither attracted nor are satisfied.
Consequently, this court does not have the territorial jurisdiction to
entertain and adjudicate upon the subject matter of the suit.
14.

Detailed submissions have been made on law and fact by both

CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 8

sides and they have carefully read the pleadings as well as drawn my
attention to all the documents which are on record. There is no
dispute that the trademark in question is identical.
15.

So far as the defendant's claim of prior user is concerned, I find

that before this court, the plaintiff has placed an advertisement dated
1st April, 1979 in the trademark journal of an application made by the
Hyundai Motor Company.

This application was made by this

company on the 9th September, 1977 seeking the registration of the
trademark on a proposed to use basis in respect of vehicles and
apparatus for locomotion included in class 12. Another photocopy of
an extract of the trademark journal number 782 dated 1st September,
1982 has been placed before this court. In this issue of the trademark
journal, the application of M/s Hyundai Motor Company dated 9th
September, 1977 for use of the Hyundai-Pony trademark in respect of
vehicles, apparatus has been advertised. My attention has also been
drawn to the extract in the trademark journal no. 982 dated 1st May,
199

0 wherein the application of Hyundai Electronics Industries

Limited dated 21st June, 1985 for registration of the trademark
Hyundai in respect of computer systems, TCBSMD, agitisers, semiconductor chips and other products in class 9 was advertised.
16.

Mr. H.S. Phoolka, learned senior counsel for the defendant has

drawn my attention to several advertisements which appeared to
have been issued and circulated by the defendant in newspapers in
the Kanadda language in Karnataka. It has been urged that from
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 9

these advertisements which date back to 25th October, 1999, the
defendant has adequately established that it is the prior user in
respect of the trademark Hyundai in India.
17.

On the other hand, Mrs. Pratibha Singh, learned counsel

representing the plaintiff has pointed out that perusal of these
advertisements would show that the defendant has advertised
televisions, antennas which include receivers and polorama dishes.
In an advertisement dated 8th October, 1999, the defendant has
stated that it is 'introducing' the Hyundai black and white televisions
and had solicited dealership inquiries.

All these facts clearly

established that the advertisements were published before the
defendant had introduced any products or had commenced sales of
any products under the trademark Hyundai. Other advertisements
dated 10th October, 1999 are also to the same effect.
18.

It has also been pointed out that in some of the recent

advertisements, the defendants had advertised sale of televisions
under the trademarks "Samson", "Sonic" and "Santron". It has been
urged that the trademark adopted by the defendant "Samson" is
deceptively similar to the renowned trademark 'Samsung'; the
trademark 'Sonic' is similar to the internationally well known
trademark 'Sony' while 'Santron' is similar to the trademark 'Santro'.
According to learned counsel for the plaintiff, this establishes beyond
any doubt the dishonest intention of the defendant to capitalize on
internationally renowned trademarks which are enjoying tremendous
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 10

reputation and are household names in the products which are
manufactured and sold under such mark.
19.

The plaintiff has disputed receipt of a letter dated 15th

February, 2005 which has been placed by the defendant on record.
This communication is addressed to Hyundai Electronics India
Limited and as per the courier receipt has been sent to Noida. By this
letter, it was urged on behalf of the defendant that it had informed
the Hyundai Electronics India Limited that it was the authorized
trademark owner of the Hyundai brand and that it had been making
and selling under such brand name for many years.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the plaintiff has urged
that no such letter was received by the plaintiff. It is also urged that
from the letter dated 1st September, 2004 addressed by the
defendant to the Registrar of Trademarks, the defendant had stated
that it required a registration certificate "in order to take legal action
against the infringers". According to Mrs. Singh, learned counsel for
the plaintiff, by such communication, the defendant admits the
uniqueness and distinctiveness of the trademark Hyundai.
20.

From a letter dated 26th September, 2000 which has been

placed by the defendant on record and addressed by it to the Deputy
Commissioner, of Commercial Taxes, Hubli, the contention of the
plaintiff that the defendant was not trading or dealing till recently in
these goods is evidenced inasmuch as even in this communication the
defendant has requested the Deputy Commissioner to include the
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 11

items which are "to be dealt by us". The items include purchaser of
TV accessories, tubes, TV kits etc for assembling, manufacturing,
resale, dish antenna, cable wires etc for sale and consumption;
computer hardware, accessories computers stationeries, printers,
UPS, Stabilizers etc for resale.
21.

The advertisement which has appeared in the trademark

journal in the issue dated 17th January, 2005 also shows that the
application for registration made by the defendant has been made
"on a proposed to be used basis". Therefore, the defendant's claim of
long prior user is certainly not borne out from its application which
was advertised in 2005 or the other documents filed by it.
22.

I find from this application that the same is not restricted in

terms of geographical boundaries whereas the trademark is proposed
to be used in respect of goods sold by the defendant and consequently
the defendant has sought registration of the trademark on a proposed
national user of the same. The products in respect of which the
defendant has stated that it would be using this trademark include
"installations for lighting, heating, steam generating, cooking,
refrigerating, drying, ventilating".
23.

The plaintiff has also placed before this court the opposition

filed by it with the trademark registry opposing the application for
registration of the trademark filed by the defendant. The present
plaintiff Hyundai Corporation has filed the opposition dated 21st
July, 2005. It has been pointed out that the mark Hyundai consists
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 12

of a transliteration of Chinese and Henkul

characters meaning

"present generation". The plaintiff has contended in its opposition
that it is using the trademark Hyundai in India since 30th March,
1983 and the application of the Hyundai Corporation bearing no.
1317825 for goods in classes 2, 3, 4, 8, 10, 13, 14, 15, 18 , 19, 20, 21,
23, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30-35, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41 and 42 was pending
registration.
24.

Before this court, the plaintiff has placed a brochure of its

several activities and its involvement in the manufacture, sale and
distribution of goods under the trademark and trade name and style
"Hyundai". The list of the major products which are manufactured by
the plaintiff includes all the products in respect of which the
defendant is seeking registration of its trademark.
25.

Before this court, the plaintiff has filed an application being IA

11479/2006 praying for taking three registration certificates in favour
of the plaintiff which are dated 1st and 6th December, 2005 on
record. The application was filed after service of advance copy on
learned counsel for the defendant as back as on 15th April, 2006.
26.

Learned senior counsel appearing for the defendant has been

heard on this application and on the certificates which have been
placed along with by the plaintiff before this court.
27.

It appears that during the pendency of the present suit and as

pointed out by the defendant, the plaintiff has been granted its
applications dated 26th August, 2002 for registration of Hyundai in
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 13

respect of goods in class 7 by the certificate dated 1st December, 2005
which includes the following :
"WASHING
MACHINES
DISH
WASHERS,
MACHINES
FOR
DISPENSING
AND
MANUFACTURING BEVERAGES MACHINES FOR
PREPARING POPCORNS, GRINDING MACHINES,
ELECTRIC MIXING CUM GRIDNING MACHINES
FOR KITCHEN USE, FOOD PROCESSORS AND
HAIR DRYERS, SEWING MACHINES, ELECTRIC
MOTORS,
PUMPS,
DIESEL
ENGINES,
INCUBATORS,
AGRICULTURAL
DRYERS,
DRYING MACHINES, SPRAY GUNS FOR PAINTS,
ELECTRIC GENERATORS, MIXERS AND JUICERS
AND ALL BEING GOODS INCLUDED IN CLASS 07"
This registration is effective with effect from 26th August, 2002.
28.

Similarly, the Registrar of Trademark has issued a certificate

dated 6th December, 2005 granting registration of the trademark
Hyundai to the plaintiff Hyundai Corporation in respect of goods in
class 9 which include the following :
"SCIENTIFIC,
NAUTICAL,
SURVEYING,
ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS APPARATUS
AND INSTRUMENTS (INCLUDING WIRELESS),
PHOTOGRAPHIC,
CINEMATOGRAPHIC,
OPTICAL,
WEIGHING,
MEASUIRNG,
SIGNALING, CHECKING (SUPERVISION), LIFESAVING AND TEACHING APPARATUS AND
INSTRUMENTS, COIN OR COUNTER-FREED
APPARATUS, TALKING MACHINES, CASH
REGISTERS, CALCULATING MACHINES, FIREEXTINGUISHING APPARATUS, AUDIO SYSTEMS,
TV(COLOR, BLACK & WHITE), VCD, DVD
PLAYERS, DVR, FACSIMILE M/C, MOBILE
PHONES,
(CDMA/GSM),
TELEPHONE
INSTRUMENTS,
COMPUTERS
AND
PERIPHERALS,
PDP,
CAMERA
AND
CAMCORDERS ALL BEING GOODS INCLUDED IN
CLASS 09"

CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 14

29.

A third certificate dated 1st December, 2005 has been placed on

record of registration of the trademark 'Hyundai' in respect of other
goods under Class 11.
It is noteworthy that the copy of the certificates placed on
record by the plaintiff shows that these registrations are effective
from 26th August, 2002.
30.

Thus, the objection on behalf of the defendant to the effect that

the plaintiff is placing reliance on registrations of trademark in the
name of other firms requires to be considered from another angle. So
far as the suit as laid before the court is concerned, the plaintiff had
complained of infringement of the registered trade mark which stood
in the name of the group companies. The plaintiff had also sought a
relief against the defendant in respect of its complaint of dishoenst
passing off by the defendant. In view of the pendency of the suit,
certain facts and events have occurred which would have a material
bearing on the case. This is the subsequent fact of registration of the
trademark indifferent classes in favour of the plaintiff.
31.

So far as facts which have occurred subsequent to the filing of

this suit are concerned, it has been repeatedly held by the Apex Court
that in appropriate cases, the courts must have regard to events as
they present themselves at the time when it is hearing the
proceedings before it and mould the relief in the light of these events.
(Ref : AIR 1981 SC 1711 Hasmat Rai & Anr. Vs. Raghunath Prasad;
AIR 1985 SC 207 M/s Variety Emporium Vs. R.M. Mohammed
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 15

Ibrahim Naina; AIR 1991 SC 1760 Gulab Bai Vs. Nalin Narsi Vohra &
Ors.
32.

The principles in this behalf have been authoritatively laid

down by the Apex Court in AIR 1992 SC 700 Ramesh Kumar
Vs. Kesho Ram wherein the court has held that :“4.
The normal rule is that in any litigation
the rights and obligations of the parties are
adjudicated upon as they obtain at the
commencement of the lis. But this is subject to
an exception. Wherever subsequent events of
fact or law which have a material bearing on the
entitlement of the parties to relief or on aspects
which bear on the moulding of the relief occur,
the court is not precluded from taking a
'cautious cognizance' of the subsequent changes
of fact and law to mould the relief. Xxx
6.
The submissions of learned counsel are
only partly correct. While it is true that a
distinction must be made between pleading and
proof, the further submissions that these must
necessarily be in two successive sequential
stages need not always be so and particularly
when dealing with pleas of subsequent events
in appeals and revisions. If the allegations of
facts made in support of such a plea are denied
then alone the question of their proof in an
appropriate way arises. If those allegations of
facts are admitted, there is no need to prove
what is admitted or must be deemed to be
admitted. There can be admissions by nontraverse. The High Court proceeded to accept
the allegations as proved presumably in view of
the fact that appellant's learned counsel did not
even appear, let alone challenge the allegations.
But there might also be cases in which, having
regard to the nature of the circumstances, the
Court may insist upon proof independently of
such admission by non-travers.
When subsequent events are pleaded in
the course of an appeal or proceedings of
revision, the Court may, having regard to the
nature of the allegations of fact on which the
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 16

plea is based, permit evidence to be adduced by
means of affidavits as envisaged in Rule 1 of
Order 19, CPC. The Court may also treat any
affidavit filed in support of the pleadings itself
as one under the said provision and call upon
the opposite side to traverse it. The Court, if it
finds that having regard to the nature of the
allegations, it is necessary to record oral
evidence tested by oral cross examination, may
have recourse to that procedure. It may record
the evidence itself or remit the matter for an
enquiry and evidence. All these depend upon
the factual and situational differences
characterising a particular case and the nature
of the plea raised. There can be no hard and
fast rule governing the matter. The procedure
is not to be burdened with technicalities.”
33.

Therefore subsequent relevant factos are required to be taken

into consideration. These principles have been reiterated in 2006
(7)

SCC

470

M.

Meenakhsi

&

Ors.

Vs.

Metadin

Agarwal(Dead) By LRs & Ors.; AIR 2005 SC 1274:2004 (8)
SCC 490 Pratap Rai Tanwani & Anr. Vs. Uttam Chand &
Anr.
34.

In (2004) 11 SCC 168 Shipping Corporation of India

Vs. Machado Bros. & Ors., the court held that if by a subsequent
event, the original proceeding had become infructuous, ex debito
justitiae, it will be the duty of the court to take such action as is
necessary in the interest of justice which include disposing of the
infructuous litigation.

For this purpose it would be open to the

parties concerned even to make an application under Section 151 of
the Code fo Civil Procedure to bring such subsequent facts to the
notice of the court.
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 17

35.

In 2004 (77) DRJ 434 Tee Cee Hosiery Works Vs.

Grover Sons, the defendant had pleaded against grant of an
injunction

in

favour

of

the

plaintiff

restraining

the

defendant/appellant from using the trade mark 'splash'. Pending
appeal, the appellant/defendant became owner of the registered
trademark 'splash'. In view of the subsequent fact of registration, it
was held that the injunction order against the appellant deserve to be
set aside.
36.

In view of the manner in which the courts have permitted

subsequent facts to be placed on record, it would appear that the
courts have not strictly and always required such subsequent facts to
be based on amendment of pleadings.

In the case in hand, the

plaintiff had brought the case on a plea of infringement of registered
trademark but based on registrations in the names of Group
companies.
Now, the plaintiff in its own name has acquired proprietory
rights by virtue of registration of the trademark in its own name in
different classes effective from dates much prior to the filing of the
suit.
37.

In the reply filed by the defendants to the application for

injunction of the plaintiff, it has been admitted that the plaintiff
applied for registration of the trademark in respect of its goods on
26th August, 2002 which was published in journal no. 1328(S-V). It
has been submitted that the plaintiff has been issued registration
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 18

certificate dated 1st December, 2005 in respect of goods in classes 7
and 11 and trademark registration certificate dated 6th December,
2005 for goods in class 9.
38.

Mr. Phoolka, learned senior counsel submits that the trademark

Hyundai stands registered in India in favour of M/s Hyundai Motor
Company which is a member of the group companies of the Hyundai
group of companies detailed in the plaint. Hyundai Motor company
is mentioned in para 3 of the plaint and the registration of its trade
mark where so stated.

Hyundai Motor Company has made an

application as back as on 9th September, 1977 to the Trademark
Registry for registration of the trademark Hyundai in class 12 on a
proposed to be used basis. This trademark and the details of the
application of M/s Hyundai Motor Company were advertised in the
trademark journal as back as on 1st April, 1979.
39.

I find that the defendant has made applications to the

Intellectual Property Appellate Board for removal of the trademark
Hyundai which was registered in the name of the plaintiff by the
Registrar of Trademarks which are pending. In this petition, the
defendant has admitted that Hyundai is used by the Hyundai
Electronics India Limited which is the registered proprietor of the
trademark 'Hyundai' in class 9. It is also stated therein that the
defendant had seen advertisements of the Hyundai Electronics India
Limited stating that they were dealing with TV, cables, audio and
video tapes etc.
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

There is also admission of the registration of the
page 19

trademark Hyundai in the name of the Hyundai Corporation the
plaintiff herein. The Rectification Petition filed by the defendant is
however dated 3rd May, 2006 long after filing of the present case.
40.

By virtue of IA No. 11479/2006, the plaintiff has prayed for

considering the registration which is the subsequent facts for the
purposes of adjudication on his application under Order 39 Rule 1
and 2 of Code of Civil Procedure. Counsel for the parties have been
heard on this aspect of registration. The learned senior counsel for
the defendant has opposed the grant of injunction on several pleas of
his hearing. In the light of the principles laid down by the Apex Court
as noted hereinabove, it is evident that the fact of registration of the
trademarks in favour of the plaintiff is admitted. Further inasmuch
as counsels for the defendant has been heard on this application there
would be no legal impediment even considering the facts stated in the
application for the purposes of the present application.
41.

Mr. H.S. Phoolka, learned senior counsel for the defendant has

urged that the plaintiff is disentitled to relief on the ground of delay
in bringing the suit. He places reliance on 133(2006) DLT 34
Creative Travels Pvt. Ltd. Vs. Creative Tours & Travels Pvt.
Ltd.

In this case, injunction was refused to the plaintiff as it had

delayed taking action for restraint against the defendant for a period
of 25 years. In these circumstances, the court was of the view that if
the plea of the plaintiff is accepted, it would amount to a civil death of
the defendant in as much as the defendant has built up a reputation
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 20

and was doing a huge business of Rs.100 crores without any objection
by the plaintiff.
42.

In 2004 (28) PTC 121 (SC) Midas Hygiene Industries

Pvt .Ltd. & Anr. Vs. Sudhir Bhatia and Ors., the Apex Court
has held that the law on the subject is well settled.

In cases of

infringement either of trademark or copyright, normally an
injunction must follow.

Mere delay in bringing action is not

sufficient to defeat grant of injunction in such cases which also
becomes necessary, if it prima facie appears that the adoption of the
mark itself was dishonest.
43.

This Court has occasion to consider such an objection based on

delay on the part of the plaintiff which would disentitle it to the grant
of relief in favour of the plaintiff. In the pronouncement reported at
AIR 1990 Delhi 19 entitled Hindustan Pencils Pvt. Ltd. VS.
India Stationery Products Co., it was held that if the defendants
act fraudulently with the knowledge that he is violating the plaintiff's
rights, then in that case, even if there is an inordinate delay on the
part of the plaintiff in taking action against the defendant, the relief of
injunction is not denied. It is only an honest and long concurrent use
by the defendant and inordinate delay and laches on the part of the
plaintiff, which may defeat the claim of damages or rendition of
accounts, but the relief of injunction should not be refused.

The

court emphasised that the interest of the general public, which is the
third party in such cases, has to be kept in mind.
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 21

44.

Mrs. Pratibha Singh, learned counsel appearing for the plaintiff

has pointed out that the defendant had made an application to the
Trademark Registry dated 12th August, 1999 for registration of the
trademark Hyundai on a "proposed to be used" basis.

This

application by the defendant was not restricted by any geographical
boundaries. The application of the defendant remained pending with
the Trademark Registry and was advertised only on 17th January,
2005. The journal was made available to the public only in April,
2005. The plaintiff gained knowledge of the defendant having made
such application only on or around the 17th January, 2005. The
plaintiff not only filed its opposition to the application made by the
defendant but also filed the present suit in September, 2005. It is
urged that in these facts, there was possibly no delay inasmuch as the
plaintiff had to take steps and conduct a search of the trademark
registry and to obtain some information about the activities of the
defendant.

It is pointed out that from the search report, it was

revealed that the defendant's application was advertised in goods in
class 9.
45.

Thus in the instant case where even according to the defendant,

there is no long prior use by the defendant. In this case, as noticed
above, it is well settled that delay would not defeat an action for
infringement of trademark.
46.

In the facts noticed hereinabove, it certainly cannot be held that

there is delay in bringing the suit. The defendants application was
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 22

advertised shortly before the suit based on a claim in respect of
dishonest passing off and infringement of trademarks by the
defendant . The registration of the trademark during the pendency of
the suit based on applications pending at the time of its filing give
further cause to the plaintiff. The principles laid down in the binding
precedents noticed above certainly leave no option but to reject this
objection of the defendant.
47.

Courts have held that "the fundamental principles, which

govern the law relating to infringement are the same as those govern
the law of passing off". Action for passing off is brought by a user of
the trademark when the trademark is not registered.

The fact

remains that the plaintiff alleged that it had suffered on account of
similar goods being passed off by the defendants deceptively as that
of the plaintiff. Action for infringement on the same principle lies if
the trademark is registered. That being so, then to say cause of action
to maintain a suit for infringement when suit for passing off is still
pending is different, is not correct.

Even if an amendment

application was brought, the courts have held that the same would
require to be favourably considered, as separate suits would lead to a
multiplicity of proceedings between the parties, which should be
avoided. In this behalf, the court placed reliance on the principles
laid down in 1967 (2) Madras Law Journal 468 A Abdul
Karim Sahib v. A Shanmugha Mugaliar and 1984 PTC 54
Anglo Dutch Colour and Varnishing Works Limited v.
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 23

Indian Trading House.
48.

Mr. H.S.Phoolka, learned senior Counsel appearing for the

defendant has urged at great length that the defendant is not trading
or manufacturing in goods which have any similarity with the goods
of the plaintiff. I have noticed hereinabove the amended provision of
Section 29 of the Trademark Act.

Statutory recognition has been

given to similarity or identity of the trademark irrespective of the
field or the product in which the plaintiff and the defendant may be
trading.
49.

This court's attention has been drawn also to the amendment

which has been effected in the Trademark Act. It is pointed out that
Section 29 of the Trademark Act was substantially amended and the
amended provisions took effect and were notified in September,
2003. It would be useful to consider the relevant extract of Section
29 of the statute. It reads thus :“29. Infringement of registered trademarks:
xxxx
xxxx
xxxx
(2) A registered trademark is infringed by a person
who, not being a registered proprietor or a person
using by way of permitted use, uses in the course of
trade, a mark which because of(a) its identity with the registered trade mark and
the similarity of the goods or services covered by
such registered trade mark; or
(b) its similarity to the registered trade mark and
the identity or similarity of the goods or services
covered by such registered trade mark; or
(c) its identity with the registered trade mark and
the identity of the goods or services covered by such
registered trade mark,
is likely to cause confusion on the part of the public,
or which is likely to have an association with the
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 24

registered trade mark.
(3) In any case falling under clause (c) of subsection (2), the court shall presume that it is likely
to cause confusion on the part of the public.”
Therefore, in view of the amended provisions of the statute
upon the existence of the similarity of goods and similarity of
trademark, there is a statutory presumption of deception under
Section 29(3).
50.

In the instant case, there is no dispute that the trademarks are

identical. The plaintiff has prima facie made out the similarity of the
goods as well. Consequently, the presumption under Section 29 (3)
would follow.
51.

I find that the plaintiff has claimed that it is working as an

umbrella company and several companies have been incorporated
who all work as associates and a group of companies under the
trademark and trade name Hyundai. The documents in support of
this submission including the brochure of the plaintiff have been
placed on record.
52.

So far as an action of passing of was concerned, in order to

decide the question of deceptive similarity of the trademark, the
principles were laid down by the Apex Court in (2001) 5 SCC 73
Cadila Healthcare Ltd. V. Cadila Pharmaceuticals Ltd.
wherein the issue was a comparison of the marks 'Falicigo' and
'Falcitab' being deceptively similar. The court laid down the
principles thus :-

CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 25

"42. Broadly stated in an action for passing off on
the basis of unregistered trademark generally for
deciding the question of deceptive similarity, the
following factors to be considered:(a) The nature of the marks i.e. whether the
marks are word marks or label marks or composite
marks, i.e. both words and label works.
(b) The degree of resembleness between the
marks, phonetically similar and hence similar in
idea.
(c) The nature of the goods in respect of which
they are used as trade marks.
(d) The similarity in the nature, character and
performance of the goods of the rival traders.
(e) The class of purchasers who are likely to buy
the goods bearing the marks they require, on their
education and intelligence and a degree of care they
are likely to exercise in purchasing and/or using the
goods.
(f) The mode of purchasing the goods or placing
orders for the goods, and
(g) Any other surrounding circumstances which
may be relevant in the extent of dissimilarity
between the competing marks"
53.

On these principles it is now necessary to deal with the

principal objection on behalf of the defendant that the plaint is
hopelessly deficient so far as making out a case for either
infringement of trademark or action against the defendant for
deceptive passing of its goods as those of the plaintiffs.

The

defendant has pointed out that the plaint gives no figures of the sale
or details of any promotional expenditure which it may be incurring.
In this behalf reliance is placed by the defendant on pronouncement
of this Court reported at 1998 V AD (Delhi) 453 Metro Plastic
Industries (Regd.) Vs. M/s. Galaxy Footwear.

This case

arose under the Designs Act, 1911 and the plaintiff claimed

CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 26

registration of its design.

The suit was a composite one and

combined the prayer for injunction. A further prayer was contained
in respect of passing off by the defendant and rendition of accounts.
The defendant had claimed prior published design and the Court had
found that in this case, that another concern was using the trademark
in respect of which the plaintiff had complained in the plaint.
Consequently, it was held that the plaintiff had failed to make out a
prima facie case.
54.

In the plaint filed, the plaintiff has placed reliance on the

registration of Hyundai in the name of the concerns which form the
Hyundai Group of Companies.

So far as the word Hyundai is

concerned, the defendant's claim that the plaintiff cannot claim any
exclusive propriety right in this behalf is misplaced.
55.

So far as the principles of law are involved, the same have

evolved over the years to include reputation which transcends
physical boundaries by virtue of the reputation which is carried by the
travellers i.e. by word of mouth as well as by advertisements and
movement of goods.
56.

In this behalf, it would be also useful to refer to another

pronouncement on the same issue wherein the court recognized the
fact that goodwill in a trademark today is not limited to a particular
country as it transcends all physical boundaries and spreads the
world over.

Before goods are transported from one country to

another, the goodwill and reputation of the trademark travels and
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 27

same acquires an extremely high reputation even before the goods
are made available in the other countries.

Advertisements in

newspapers, periodicals, magazines, the electronic media and even
on the internet today have resulted in such spread of goodwill and
reputation.

This was recongnised in judicial pronouncement

rendered in Kelvin Klein Inc. Vs. International Apparels
Syndicate reported in 1996 PTC 16 at page 293.
57.

It would be useful also to consider the principles which were

laid down by a Division Bench of this Court in AIR 1995 Delhi 300
N.R. Dongre & Ors. v. Whirlpool Corporation & Anr., the
court exhaustively considered the principles of trans-border
reputation and held thus :“14. The knowledge and awareness of a trademark
in respect of the goods of a trader is not necessarily
restricted only to the people of the country where
such goods are freely available but the knowledge
and awareness of the same reaches even the shores
of those countries where the goods have not been
marketed. When a product is launched and hits the
market in one country, the cognizance of the same
is also taken by the people in other countries almost
at the same time by getting acquainted with it
through advertisements in newspapers, magazines,
television. video films. cinema etc. even though
there may not be availability of the product in those
countries because of import restrictions or other
factors. In today's world it cannot he said that a
product and the trade mark under which it is sold
abroad, does not have a reputation or goodwill in
countries where it is not available. The knowledge
and awareness of it and its critical evaluation &
appraisal travels beyond the confines of the
geographical area in which it is sold. This has been
made possible by development of communication
systems which transmit & disseminate the
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 28

information as soon as it is sent or beamed from
one place to another. Satellite Television is a major
contributor of the information explosion.
Dissemination of knowledge of a trade mark in
respect of a product through advertisement in
media amounts to use. of the trade mark whether or
not the advertisement is coupled with the actual
existence of the product in the market.”
58.

This judgment was assailed before the Apex Court which upheld

the judgment of the Division Bench in its judgment which has been
reported at (1996) 5 SCC 714 N.R. Dongre & Ors. V.
Whirlpool Corporation & Anr. and it would be topical and
instructive also to consider the observations of the Apex Court. The
appellant who was the defendant before this court had opposed the
application for injunction of the plaintiff in respect of the trademark
'Whirlpool' in respect of its goods. The respondent had brought a suit
alleging global presence, international and national reputation and
also registration of this trademark in several countries.

The

respondent's trademark in India had lapsed on account of failure to
get the same renewed at one point of time. The court held that the
respondents had established long prior user of the trademark
'Whirlpool', trans-border reputation and goodwill extending to India
to the use of that name; prior registration of the name even in India,
no reliable evidence of the appellants having marketed their washing
machines for any considerable length of time prior to grant of the
interlocutory application and irreparable loss and injury to the
respondents-plaintiff by the acts of the defendants. It was also held

CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 29

that there was no plausible explanation offered by the appellants for
recently adopting the trademark Whirlpool which was supportive of
the plea of unfair trading activity in an attempt to obtain economic
benefit of the reputation established by the plaintiff-respondents
whose name was associated with the trademark Whirlpool. The court
also found support for the finding in favour of the respondents on
account of its conduct in opposing the appellant's application for
registration of the trademark as soon as it was notified and persisting
with the same by filing an appeal against the registrar's order and
also a petition for cancellation and removal of the trademark
registration issued and by filing the suit without delay.
59.

Trans-border or the international reputation acquired by a

trademark has been held to justify an injunction in this country even
though the plaintiff had not entered the Indian market so far.
60.

In this behalf, it would be useful to notice the findings of the

Apex Court in 2004 (28) PTC 585 (SC) Milment Optho
Industries & Ors. V. Allergan Incorporation wherein the court
laid down the principles thus :"10. In the present case, the marks are the same,
they are in respect of pharmaceutical products. The
mere fact that the Respondents have not been using
the mark in India would be irrelevant if they were
first in the world market. The Division Bench had
relied upon material which prima-facie shows that
the Respondents product was advertised before the
Appellants entered the field. On the basis of that
material the Division Bench has concluded that the
Respondents were first to adopt the mark. If that be
so then no fault can be found with the conclusion
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 30

drawn by the Division Bench."
The Court held that in the present time, particularly in the field
of medicines, the businesses are often of international character and
that it was the duty of the court to ensure that public interest is in no
way imperiled. It was to be borne in mind that nowadays, goods are
widely advertised in newspapers, periodicals, magazines and other
media which is available in the country. This results in a product
acquiring a world wide reputation.
The exception which was however drawn by the court was that
such multi-national corporations, who have no intention of coming to
India or introducing the product in India should not be allowed to
throttle an Indian company by not permitting to sell the product in
India, if the Indian company has genuinely adopted the mark and
developed the product and is first in the market. Thus, it is only an
honest prior user which may be excepted to the general rule.
It is certainly not so in the instant case wherein the defendant is
not the prior user and has certainly attempted to encash on the
reputation and goodwill acquired by the plaintiff.
61.

It is noteworthy that in Milment Optho Industries(supra), the

respondents trademark was not even registered with the Registrar of
Trademarks in India.
62.

An argument similar to that of the defendants in this case of

prior user of the trademark in India by the defendant was rejected by
this court in the judgment reported at 2006 (32) PTC 133 (Del.)
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 31

Austin Nichols & Company & Anr. vs Arvind Behl & Anr.
The court noticed the defendant's contention that the plaintiff did not
have a presence in India prior to the defendant entering the Indian
market. In this case, applying the law laid down by the Apex Court in
N. R. Dongre & Ors. v. Whirlpool Corporation & Anr., the court held
thus :"41. Applying the law laid down by the Supreme
Court to the facts of the present case, it must be
held that,
`Blenders Pride' whisky manufactured by the
Plaintiffs had a worldwide reputation, being
available for sale in a large number of countries
since 1973 onwards. It cannot be said that the
product was unknown in India. The predecessor in
interest of the Plaintiffs had an intention of directly
exploiting the Indian market. In fact, they had
applied for permission from the Government of
India to manufacture `Blenders Pride' whisky,
which was granted, and they have been
manufacturing `Blenders Pride' whisky in India
since 1995.
The Plaintiffs are not using their worldwide
reputation to throttle an Indian company by not
permitting it to sell a particular product in India.
The plaintiffs are only trying to defend their
worldwide reputation in `Blenders Pride' whisky.
On the contrary, it appears from the material
on record that the Defendants manufactured
`Blenders Pride' whisky for a couple of months in
1993-94 only so as to be the first to enter the Indian
market, and thereby gain an advantage over the
Plaintiffs, and perhaps prevent them from
manufacturing `Blenders Pride' whisky in India.
The admitted position is that after March,
1994, the Defendants did not manufacture
`Blenders Pride' whisky till some time in 2005, that
is, for a period of almost eleven years. Without
commenting on this conduct of the Defendants, I
have no doubt that the conduct of the Plaintiffs has
been completely bona fide and that their actions
are only intended to protect and prevent damage to
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 32

their reputation.
The plaintiffs were the first in the world
market with `Blenders Pride' whisky and as held by
the Supreme Court, even if they were not
manufacturing `Blenders Pride' whisky in India, it
would be irrelevant, although such a situation has
not arisen in the present case because the Plaintiffs
are in fact manufacturing `Blenders Pride' whisky
in India.
47. In view of the above decisions and because of
the huge advances made in information and
communication technology over the years, I think it
is too late for the Defendants to seriously urge that
the regular sale of a product in one or more foreign
countries would be unknown to persons living in
India. I would, therefore, hold that the Plaintiffs
having come out with `Blenders Pride' whisky first
in the international market were first past the post;
even though the Defendants were the first do so in
India. The fact that the product of the Plaintiffs
was not manufactured or sold in India from
1973(when it first entered the market) till 1995
when it became freely available in India, is of no
consequence."
63.

It has been strongly urged on behalf of the defendants, that the

plaintiff has not placed any material on record either to show
worldwide registrations of the plaintiff in different countries or their
voluminous sales in or outside India or extensive advertisements in
Indian or foreign magazines and that no case for grant of injunction
on the basis of trans-border reputation was made out. In this behalf
reliance was placed on the pronouncement of the Apex Court in
2006 (32) PTC 275 Asia Pacific Breweries Ltd. Vs. Superior
Industries Ltd.

I find that this judgment was rendered on the

facts of this particular case.
64.

It is today well settled that international and world wide

CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 33

reputation are indicators of the goodwill attached to a trademark.
Courts have repeatedly accepted promotional activity in India as one
of the factors which evidences the reputation of the plaintiffs
products being sold under such trademark.
65.

In the instant case the plaintiff has not only placed reliance on

its international reputation but also on the fact that its trademarks
are registered in India. The plaintiff has placed the particulars and
advertisements of the companies which form part of the group for
registration of trademark since 1979.
It is an established business practice that companies and
corporations work as a conglomoration of smaller group companies
which are called sister concerns. The plaintiff has pointed out the
various companies who are functioning under its umbrella who are
legitimately permitted and are using the trademark and trade name
Hyundai as part of their business. The defendants have vehemently
disputed the factum of the presence of the plaintiff in India but does
not dispute the global presence and reputation of these companies.
Several registrations of the trademark Hyundai in the names of the
various constituents of the Hyundai Group companies all over the
world have been detailed in the plaint and in the application. These
registrations pertain to periods which are several decades prior to
that claimed by the defendant. There is no dispute to the global
presence of the plaintiff in diverse products and that the trademark
Hyundai is globally recognized as being associated with the plaintiff.
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 34

In the light of the principles laid down in Milment Optho Industries
(supra), it is the world wide priority which would be relevant.

The

plaintiff has prima facie established that the group is manufacturing
and trading under the trademark in question much prior to the
defendant. Therefore, in the light of the principles laid down by the
Supreme Court in the binding judicial pronouncements noticed
hereinabove, the very global presence and global reputation of the
plaintiff and the goodwill which is associated with its trademark
Hyundai would itself justify a prohibitory order against the
defendants subject to certain other conditions noticed herein being
satisfied.
66.

Mrs. Pratibha Singh, learned counsel for the plaintiff, has

placed reliance on 2003 (26) PTC 208 (Bom) 1 Pizza Hut
International LLC etc. Vs. Pizza Hut India Limited also in
support of her contention that Hyundai is a well known mark and is
entitled to protection.
67.

Reliance has been placed on 2002 (25) PTC 438 entitled

Caterpillar Inc. Vs. Mehtab Ahmed & Ors. (para 13).

In this

case the comparison was between the trademarks "Caterpillar" and
"Cat".

The Court noticed the different words which are used as

trademark and categorized them in respect of which the proprietary
rights could be claimed. The principles laid down by the Court were
both topical and instructive and read thus :
"9.

There are two propositions that crop up for

CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 35

determination. Firstly whether the trade marks CAT
and Caterpillar which are the names of the animals
can be monopolized by any person and secondly
whether the plaintiff is required to proved and show
the user of the mark by way of sale of its goods in
the country where it seeks action for passing off.
10. The words or marks can broadly be divided
into six categories. The first category of words is
"generic". These words have dictionary meaning
and are neither specific nor special. These words
belong to genus. Generic name is name of genus
which names the species. Such words are neither
brand names nor have any protection by a registered
trade mark.
The words which are directly
descriptive or quality of goods belong to second
category. Such words are adjective expressing
quality or attribute of an article or goods. These are
neither patented nor proprietary names. These
words are in common parlance known as laudatory
epithets.
11. Third category is that of directly descriptive
words. These words describe the character or the
quality or attribute of the goods or articles but
without an element of laudation. The words of
second and third category if used as a mark acquire
secondly meaning on account of constant and long
user. Fourth category is of `indirectly descriptive
words'. These words are those which have indirect
or remote reference to the nature or quality of
goods. The element of directness is wanting in these
words. Such words can be used as a mark or
trademark irrespective of the fact whether they
acquire secondary meaning or not.
12. Words which are fanciful or arbitrarily applied
to goods and do not have either direct or remote
reference to the nature or quality of goods fall within
fifth category. The words belonging to categories
two, three and five if used in relation to a particular
goods can be protected if attempt is made to pass
them off by way of deceptive similarity either in look
or sound.
13. The last category is of "invented words". No
meaning is attached to these words. These are
composed by imagination and are designed for the
first time. These words demonstrate or display
effort or skill of imagination, faculty or power of
inventing. These words are invented in relation to a
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 36

particular good.
Such words are inherently
distinctive and therefore have to be protected in any
case.
These words are designed or contrived
through imagination for the first time wherein
ability as well as flight or effort of imagination is
displayed.
14. As regards marks or trademarks falling within
categories 2 to 5 namely `directly descriptive words
having laudatory epithets, `directly descriptive
words without laudatory epithets, indirectly
descriptive words and words not being descriptive
have also to be protected as some of them over a
period acquire secondary meaning while others due
to prior and consistent use denote source and origin
and if any attempt is made to either mutilate them
or simulate them such an attempt amounts to
passing off as it demonstrates element of
malafidenss for cashing upon the reputation and
goodwill of such marks. Likelihood of confusion as
to source or origin of a particular good sold under a
particular trade mark broadly amounts to an act of
passing off."
68.

In this case, the court held that the mark of the plaintiff was

synonymous with quality of high degree and adoption of its name
alongwith distinctive and unique characteristics of style by the
defendant's projects, propensity to trade or cash upon goodwill and
reputation of the plaintiff's trade mark, which was nothing but piracy
of the trade name against which the plaintiff was entitled to
protection.

The Court further considered the objection raised as to

requirement of a plaintiff to prove and show the user of the mark by
way of sale of its goods in the country where it seeks action for
passing off. Placing reliance on an earlier pronouncement rendered
in 2002 (25) PTC 29, Solian Ink Vs. Doctor & Co., the Court
held that mere advertisement in the other country i.e. the country

CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 37

where injunction is sought, is sufficient if the trademark has
established its reputation and goodwill in the country of its origin and
the countries where it is registered.

It is not necessary that the

association of the plaintiff's mark with its goods should be known in
the country other than its origin or to every person in the area where
it is known at best. In this behalf, it was again observed that in the
modern world, advertisements in the newspapers travelled beyond
the country where the party is engaged in business through overseas
editions or otherwise. Mobility has rendered international awareness
of the commodities and reputation travels faster than man.

The

same principle was laid down by the Apex Court in N.R. Dongre Vs.
Whirlpool (supra.).
69.

So far as the pronouncement of the Apex Court in AIR 1996

SC 2275 Vishnu Das Trading as Vishnudas Kishandas Vs.
Vazir Sultan Tobacco Co. Ltd. is concerned, this case relates to
an issue of rectification and does not raise any issue of infringement
of trademark or passing off.

In 1997 (6) SCC 35 Tube

Investments of India Ltd. Vs. Trade Industries, Rajasthan,
the Apex Court held that decision rendered in Vishnu Dass Trading
(supra) dealt with rectification of registration of a trademark and had
no bearing to the case in hand, which related to infringment of
trademark. On the same principle, the pronouncement in the Vishnu
Dass Trading (supra) would have no application to the instant case.
70.

Mr. Phoolka, learned Senior Counsel for the defendant has also

CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 38

placed reliance on the pronouncement in 1998 (18) PTC 759
entitled Relaxo Rubber Ltd. & Anr. Vs. Aman Cable
Industries & Anr. In this case, the Court had been of the view that
the trademark Relaxo was used by the plaintiff with regard to shoes
while the defendant was using the same for manufacture of tubes and
pipes.

The Court also held that the two companies were engaged in

different fields and the goods are not sold from the same counter or
in the same shape and that there was generally no likelihood of
causing deception or confusion or mistake in the minds of customers.
Furthermore the word `Relaxo' have been derived from the word
`Relax' and was not an invented word.

For all these reasons the

injunction was denied to the plaintiff.
This case is materially distinguishable on facts from the instant
case.
71.

From a consideration of the record and the submissions before

this court, I find that there is no dispute that the word Hyundai is not
a word of common use and that the same consists of a transliteration
of Chinese and Henkul characters meaning "present generation", use
whereof was commenced by the Hyundai group in the year 1976 in
Korea. Hyundai is admittedly neither generic nor descriptive. It is
not to be found in common use in India that the plaintiff is associated
with the same and has been using the same as its trademark for a
considerable period.
72.

The defendant has not even attempted to give an explanation as

CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 39

to how it came to conceptualise or use the word Hyundai in either its
pleading or the reply to the application. There is nothing to show that
the defendant has any connection with Korea. On the other hand the
plaintiff has placed material before this court which prima facie
shows extensive world wide registrations of the trademark in the
name of the plaintiff and its group concerns.

The Courts have

increasingly relied upon the reputation which is acquired by a
trademark and a trade name and have also taken notice of the fact
that more and more business houses are working as corporations
having a umbrella corporation under which smaller companies are
incorporated so as to deal with specific projects and goods in diverse
areas of manufacture and service. The purpose is to maximize profit
and also for reasons of fiscal policies and savings . The same also
enables the Corporations to effectively and efficiently develop its
activities.
73.

In view of provisions of Section 29, noticed above and the

binding principles laid down in judicial precedents, it is not necessary
for the products of the parties to be similar.
74.

Any discussion on the issue raised in the present would be

incomplete without noticing the specific principles laid down by the
Apex Court with regard to the considerations which have to be
weighed by the Court in adjudicating an application for injunction.
The court is also required to weigh the facts in the balance of
comparative hardship to the parties.
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

In (2004) 6 SCC 145

page 40

entitled Satyam Infoway Ltd. Vs. Sifynet Solutions Pvt.
Ltd., the Court was concerned with a prayer for injunction on
account of the use of word `Siffy' by the respondent.

It was

contended by the appellant that the same was similar to `Sify' which
was a coined word which form part of the domain name of the
appellant.

The plaintiff had claimed intellectual property rights in

the domain name in this case. In this case, the Court noticed that
there was clearly an overlap of identical or similar services of the two
parties. Furthermore the case was not of a bonafide current use by
the respondent where the right to use the word was co-equal.

The

explanation given by the respondent for the choice of the word `Siffy'
was doubtful.

This coupled with the reputation of the appellant

persuaded the court to reach the rational conclusion that the
respondent was seeking to cash in on the appellant's reputation as a
provider of service on the internet.

On these observations, it was

held that the appellant was entitled to ad-interim injunction. In the
light of the foregoing discussion, I am not prepared to deny the adinterim relief sought by the plaintiff on the ground and objections
which have been urged by the defendant.
75.

Before this Court, from the material which has been placed by

the parties on record, I prima facie find that both parties are dealing
with similar goods, which include TVs, dish antenna, cables etc.

The

plaintiff has, after the filing of the suit, also been granted the
registration of the trademark `Hyundai' in the same class and for the
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 41

same goods as are being traded by the defendant under the
trademark `Hyundai'. In my view, therefore, the objection urged on
behalf of the defendant at the distinction sought to be drawn and the
opposition to the application of the plaintiff on the ground that the
defendant is manufacturing and trading in goods other than goods
manufactured by the plaintiff is of no consequence.
76.

So far as passing off action is concerned, it is well settled that it

is not material as to whether the plaintiff and the defendant are
trading in the same field or trading in different products. In 2003
(26) PTC 1 entitled Honda Motors Company Ltd. Vs.
Charanjit Singh & Ors., the plaintiff had brought, the action for
infringement of trademark as well as of passing off. The defendant
urged that it was engaged in the manufacture of cookers and was
trading under the trademark HONDA in respect of its goods. It was
submitted that therefore the plaintiff which was manufacturing motor
vehicles was not prejudiced. However, the Court held that thus :"42. In the present case the plaintiff's mark HONDA
has acquired a global goodwill and reputation. Its
reputation is for quality products. The name of
HONDA is associated with the plaintiff's especially in
the field of automobiles and power equipments on
account of their superior quality and high standard.
The plaintiffs business or products under the trade
mark HONDA has acquired such goodwill and
reputation that it has become distinctive of its
products and the defendants user this mark for their
product "Pressure Cooker" tends to mislead the public
to believe that the defendants business an goods are
that of the plaintiffs. Such user by the defendants has
also diluted and debased the goodwill and reputation
of the plaintiff."
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 42

77.

Interestingly, the defendant in this case had also given an

explanation as to why it adopted the name HONDA. The same was
considered thus in this judgment: "45. Further contention of the defendants is that
the trade mark HONDA is common to trade and
common surname. The defendant has filed an
affidavit to the effect that the name of his uncle is S.
Honda Singh. However, no documentary evidence
produced by the defendants in this respect to show
that the alleged S. Honda Singh ws the uncle of
defendant no. 1. The affidavit of defendant no. 1 in
this respect nothing but a self-serving document.
Such an affidavit cannot take place of cogent
documentary evidence. Two persons with the
surname have been shown as members of APAA. It
does not establish that the mark HONDA has
become a commonsurname. The defendants have
also placed on record a few pages of the telephone
directory of the year 1999 published by MTNL,
Delhi, which gives some names with HONDA
surname but in the given facts and circumstances of
this case no weightage can be given to the same.
From the entire record the trade mark HONDA
does not appear to be a common name in India as
submitted by learned counsel for the plaintiff. It is
possible that since the plaintiff's trade mark is in
existence for the last more than years in more than
140 countries of the world there is a possibility that
few persons have adopted and used the name
HONDA in temptation. Even the said fact does give
any legal right to use the same in relation to
merchandise goods. As a matter of fact, it is borne
out from the record that HONDA is not a dictionary
word. It is pertinent to note that it is not only the
trade mark of the plaintiff but it is also, part of
corporate name. The word “HONDA” in fact
appears to be in invented word unusual and having
no meaning.”
To the same effect are the principles laid down in 1998 (18)
PTC 47 Aktiebolaget Volvo Vs. Volvo Steels Limited and
2002 (24) PTC 121 (SC) Mahendra & Mahendra Vs.
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 43

Mahindra & Mahindra.
78.

So far as the objection of the defendant on the ground that the

present suit is delayed is concerned, the same submission has fallen
for consideration before the Apex Court. It would useful to refer to
some of the decided cases on this issue.
79.

It now becomes necessary to deal with the objections taken by

the defendant on the grounds of this Court not having the territorial
jurisdiction, to entertain and adjudicate upon the subject matter of
the present suit. It has been contended that the defendant is neither
personally working for gain nor carrying on business within the
jurisdiction of this Court.

It is further submitted that the activities

complained of by the plaintiff allegedly had occurred outside the
territorial boundaries of Delhi.

Mr.H.S.Phoolka, learned Senior

Counsel appearing for the defendants has strongly urged that the
plaintiff has made a submission that it is maintaining a liaison office
at Delhi and has got the suit in Delhi on this sole ground. Placing
reliance on the pronouncement of this Court in 98 (2002) DLT 359
Haryana Milk Food Ltd. Vs. Chambel Dairy Products, it is
urged that from the perusal of the plaint itself, it is apparent that no
part of the cause of action has arisen at Delhi and consequently, the
plaint deserves to be rejected. Learned senior counsel has urged that
the maintenance of a liaison office at Delhi would not entitled the
plaintiff to maintain the suit in as much as the liaison office does not
amount the plaintiff to carrying on business at Delhi.
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 44

80.

In this behalf, learned counsel for the plaintiff has pointed out

that the plaintiff is working internationally and apart from
manufacture is dealing in trading. It is further urged that the
defendant/plaintiff has not restricted its application for registration
of trademark by any physical boundary or territory. There is nothing
on the record, either in the pleadings of the defendant or in the
documents filed by it to show that it was restricting its operation in
any manner to outside Delhi.

Consequently, the plaintiff has

reasonable and strong apprehension that the defendant would sell its
products even at Delhi.

It has been urged that the courts have

repeatedly held that in a trademark infringement and passing off
action, the plaintiff is entitled to bring his suit for injunction upon
apprehension of and reasonable expectation of such a breach and
deception on the part of the defendant. The plaintiff is not required
to wait for the threat to be completed or implemented.
81.

From an examination of the evolution of law and the applicable

principles so far as cases relating to infringement of trademark and
complaints of deceptive passing off of the products of the defendants
as those of the plaintiff or being associated with the plaintiff are
concerned, increasingly it has been held that it is the interests of the
public at large and the extent of the deception which would result in
the minds of public and the confusion which shall enure in the minds
of the consuming public, which merits protection. Injunctions have
increasingly been granted for reasons of the difficulty and the
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 45

problems which would result in case such dishonest, deceiving and
malafide activities were not injuncted. It is for this reason that the
exceptions to the normal law laying down the parameters and extent
of territorial jurisdiction of the court have been statutorily provided
in Section 62 of the Copyright Act, 1957 and Section 134 of the
Trademark Act, 1999. I am therefore of the view that such
apprehension having been expressed by the plaintiff and evidenced
by the aforenoticed action of the defendant, there would, prima facie,
be no bar with regard to the maintainability of the suit at Delhi.
82.

A similar question on jurisdiction arose before the Apex Court

in the case of Exphar SA Vs. Eupharma Laboratories Ltd.
2004 (28) PSTC 251 (SC). The court held that when an objection
to jurisdiction is raised by way of a demurrer and not at the trial, the
objection must proceed on the basis that the facts are pleaded by the
initiator of the impugned proceedings are true.
In this case the court was concerned with Section 62(2) of the
Copyright Act, 1957.
A similar provision was introduced as Section 134(2) in the
Trademarks Act, 1999 which would require to be applied on the same
basis.
83.

Ms. Pratibha Singh, learned counsel appearing for the plaintiff

has placed reliance on the pronouncement of the Apex Court in the
case reported in 2006 (32) PTC 1 (SC) entitled Dhodha House
and Patel Field Marshal Industries Vs. S.K .Maingi & P. M.
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 46

Diesel Ltd.

In this case, the Court observed that in view of the

explanation appended to Section 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, a corporation would be deemed to be carrying on business inter
alia at a place it has a subordinate office. In the instant case, the
plaintiff has stated that it is maintaining an office at Delhi and it is
not merely urged that it is only selling goods at Delhi.
Noteworthy is the consideration by the Apex Court of the
impact of the legislative intent.

In this behalf the Court observed

thus :"47. A cause of action in a given case both under
the 1957 Act as also under the 1958 Act may be
overlapping to some extent.
The territorial
jurisdiction conferred upon the court in terms of the
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure
indisputably shall apply to a suit or proceeding
under the 1957 Act as also the 1958 Act. Sub-section
(2) of Section 62 of the 1957 Act provides for an
additional Forum. Such additional Forum was
provided so as to enable the author to file a suit who
may not otherwise be in a position to file a suit at
different places where his copyright was violated.
The parliament while enacting the Trade and
Merchandise Marks Act in the year 1958 was aware
of the provisions of the 1957 Act. It still did not
choose to make a similar provision therein. Such an
omission may be held to be a conscious action on the
part of the Parliament.
The intention of the
Parliament in not providing for an additional Forum
in relation to the violation of the 1958 Act is,
therefore, clear and explicit. The Parliament while
enacting the Trade Marks Act, 1999 provided for
such an additional Forum by enacting sub-section
(2) of Section 134 of the Trade Marks Act. The court
shall not, it is well settled, readily presume the
existence of jurisdiction of a court which was not
conferred by the statute. For the purpose of
attracting the jurisdiction of a court in terms of Subsection (2) of Section 62 of the 1957 Act, the
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 47

conditions precedent specified therein must be
fulfilled, the requisites wherefor are that the plaintiff
must actually and voluntarily reside to carry on
business or personally work for gain."
84.

Furthermore

the Division

Bench of this court in its

pronouncement in Dhodha House (supra) has held that Section 34 of
the Trademarks Act provides an additional forum, over and above the
forum, provided by the provisions of Section 20 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908.
In

2003(26)

PTC

239

Lalli

Enterprises

Vs.

Karamchand & Sons, the Court noticed that an objection to the
maintainability of a case on territorial jurisdiction in a given case
required evidence to be led.
85.

In 1983 PTC 207 Jawahar Engineering Company Vs.

Jawahar Engineers P. Ltd., a Division Bench of this court held
that a mere application by a defendant to register a trade mark in
Delhi would be sufficient to confer jurisdiction upon the court. The
court held that “once the plaintiffs have learnt that the defendants
have applied for registration of trade mark in Delhi, they can claim an
injunction to prevent any sale of the infringing product in Delhi. In
this sense, the Court will have jurisdiction whether any sale in Delhi
has taken place or not”.

The court further held that “when an

injunction is sought, it is not necessary that the threat should have
become a reality before the injunction and it can even be sought for a
threat that is still to materialise.” This case was cited with approval

CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 48

by another Division Bench of the Delhi High Court in 1998 PTC 260
P.M. Diesels Ltd. Vs. Patel Field Marshal Industries.
86.

It is noteworthy that the P.M. Diesel case was considered and

distinguished from the Jawahar Engineering case by the Supreme
Court in Dhodha House Vs. S.K. Maingi and Patel Field Marshal
Industries Vs. P.M. Diesel Ltd.
87.

In this behalf it would be used to consider the pronouncement

of this court reported at 127 (2006) DLT 783 Pfizer Products,
Inc. Vs. Rajesh Chopra while considering the decision of the
Supreme Court decision in the Dhodha House case observed that “the
decision in the Jawahar Engineering (supra) was not disapproved by
the Supreme Court.” It was held that ratio laid down by the Supreme
Court “does not militate against what has been held in Jawahar
Engineering (supra).”

This court observed that therefore, the

arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the defendants are
not tenable and I find that the decision in the case of Jawahar
Engineering (supra) covers the present case which has not been
unsettled by the Supreme Court in Dhodha House (supra)”.
88.

In Pfizer Products Inc. Vs. Rajesh Chopra & Ors.(supra) it was

observed that 'a threat of selling the offending goods in Delhi would
in itself confer jurisdiction in the courts in Delhi to entertain a suit
claiming an injunction in respect thereof'. It was also held in para 12
that 'assuming that whatever is stated in the plaint is correct, one
would have to also assume that the threat or the intention of the
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 49

defendants to sell and offer for sale the offending goods in Delhi is
also correct. Therefore, if the threat exists then this court would
certainly have jurisdiction to entertain the present suit'.
89.

It is therefore trite that while considering whether the

jurisdiction lies with a court, the cause of action arising even under
the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act is fully governed by the
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure on the basis of which the
cause of action, either wholly or in part should arise in the place
where the plaintiffs reside or, to entertain a suit the court should have
jurisdiction at that place.
90.

It is noteworthy that in Tata Oil Mills Co. Ltd. Vs. Gajra's

Monochem Ltd., 1988 (1) Arbitration Law Reporter 1,
Justice M.K. Chawla of the Delhi High Court also described Section
62(2) of the Copyright Act, 1957 as an exception to the CPC. The
court held that 'it is enough if the plaintiff actually resides or works
for gain within the jurisdiction of the court which is approached and
it is not necessary for his residence to be a permanent one or his
registered office being situated at a different place'.
91.

In Nirex Industries P. Ltd. Vs. Man Chand Footwear

Industries 1984 PTC 97, Justice B.N. Kirpal of the Delhi High
Court upheld the jurisdiction under Section 62(2) of the Copyright
Act, 1957 on the facts that the plaintiff was carrying on business in
Delhi. It was also observed that no prove sale of goods, there is no
requirement for even producing evidence of such sale.
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 50

The plaintiff has made a positive assertion that it is maintaining
a liaison office at Delhi. The address of the office has been disclosed
in the plaint and the suit has been filed by the General Manager of
such office of the plaintiff at Delhi. It is well settled that at this stage,
such plea of the defendant and objection relating to jurisdiction
requires to be tested on demurer. From the assertions in the plaint,
it cannot be held that the plaintiff is not maintaining any office and
not carrying on its business at Delhi.
92.

Before this Court, the plea of the plaintiff that it is maintaining

a liaison office at Delhi which is challenged by the defendant. The
question of territorial jurisdiction is a mixed question of law and fact.
Without anything more and evidence in the matter it cannot be held
against the plaintiff that there is no such office. The defendant would
have the right to contest the plaintiff's claim in cross examination and
to lead evidence in support of such objection. In any case, at this
stage such objection has to be decided on demurrer.
93.

As noticed above, the application of the defendant for

registration of the trademark is not restricted to a particular area.
The plaintiff has thus reasonable apprehension and threat of sales in
Delhi by the defendant as well.
Further, in the light of the foregoing discussion, I, prima facie
find that this Court would have the territorial jurisdiction to entertain
and adjudicate upon the subject matter of the present case.
Needless to say, it would be open to the defendant to press an
CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 51

issue on this objection and lead evidence on the same in the trial of
the suit.
For all the foregoing reasons, I am of the view that the present
application deserves to be granted.
Accordingly, the defendant/its proprietor/partners/servants,
agents, stockists, assigns and representatives and all others acting for
and on its behalf are restrained from manufacturing, selling, offering
for sale, advertising directly and indirectly dealing in goods bearing
the trade mark "HYUNDAI" as and/or any other trademark, as may
be identical with and/or deceptively and confusingly similar to
plaintiff's registered and well known trade mark "HYUNDAI" so as to
pass

off

or

enable

others

to

pass

off

the

defendant

goods/products/business and service of the plaintiff and/or some
way connected with the plaintiff.

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
September 14, 2007
kr/rds

CS(OS) No. 1379/2005

page 52

