IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
IA No. 14436/2006 & IA No. 558/2007 in CS(OS)
No.2395/2006
Judgment reserved on : 16th May,
2007
Dat e of decision: September 14, 2007
M/s Frankfinn Aviation Services Pvt. Ltd.
... Plaintiff
through: Mr. J.R. Midha and Mr. Ajit Niar,
Advocates
VERSUS
B.C. Gupta
.... Defendant
through: Mr. V.P. Singh, Sr. Adv. with
Mr. Dinkar Singh, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J
1.

In a suit filed by the Frankfinn Aviation Services Limited seeking

a prayer that its facility and use agreement dated 5th January, 2005
continues to subsist and bind the parties, the plaintiff has filed this
application being IA No. 14436/2006 under Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 of
the Code of Civil Procedure praying for a relief of interim prohibitory
injunction and sought the following prayer:“It is, therefore, most respectfully prayed that this
Hon'ble Court may be pleased to pass an ad-interim
ex parte injunction restraining the defendant
interfering/obstructing usage
of the stationary
Airbus 300 by the plaintiff in terms of the lease
agreement dated 5th January, 2005 during the
pendency of the suit.”
CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 1 of 36

2.

The matter came up before this court for hearing on 22nd

December, 2006 when the following interim order of injunction was
passed.
"IA No. 14436/2006
Notice, returnable on 3.6.2007.
Subject to the service upon the defendants not
later than 29.12.2006 and upto the next date of
hearing, the plaintiff is permitted to use and access
without hindrance Air bus A-300 parked at Sector-8,
Dwarka, Opposite CRPF Camp.
The provisions of Order XXXIX Rule 3 CPC be
complied with within three days.
Dasti."
3.

The defendant has objected to the grant of the injunction and

filed IA No. 558/2007 under Order 39 Rule 4 of the Code of Civil
Procedure.

Consequently, parties have been heard on both these

applications.
4.

So far as the material facts are concerned, I find that there is no

material dispute so far as the documentation is concerned. The parties
are at variance over the construction to be placed on them. It appears
that by an agreement dated 5th January, 2005 executed by Shri
Bahadur Chand Gupta as sole proprietor of M/s Aviation (India) Pvt.
Ltd. and Mr. Shoba Ram Gupta on the one hand with M/s Frankfinn
Institute of Air Hostess Training (a unit of Frankfinn Aviation Services
Pvt. Ltd.), the plaintiff was given the right of commercial use of the
fuselage of the MSN 111 Air Bus 300 B to EXVT EFW (hereinafter
referred to as the air bus) placed on the land being Block A, Sector 8,
opposite CRPF Camp Owari New Delhi-75 (at Khasra No. 4/13, Village

CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 2 of 36

Bagd admeasuring 550 sq. yards).
5.

Mrs. Bhateri Devi, mother of Shri Bahadur Chand Gupta, joint

owner of these premises has signed the agreement as a consenting
party.

This agreement was entered into to enable the plaintiff to

provide basic cabin crew/cabin crew training for aspiring air hostesses
and flight stewards. Some of the material terms of this agreement
which have given rise to these disputes deserve to be considered in
extenso and read thus :-

"A. SUBJECT OF LEASE :
i.
That the lessor has given to the lessee the
lease hold rights in the Airbus for the agreed period
alongwith other facilities co-related to the same at the
said premises.
B. LEASE PERIOD :
i.
That the lease period shall be for a period
of two years i.e. commencing from 01.01.2005 to
31.12.2006. The lease shall be renewed thereafter at
the option of the lessee.
ii.
That the lease period is in terms of 1550
hours in a year which is equated as commencing from
12 noon to 6 pm on a day for 5 days in a week i.e.
Monday to Friday, excluding national holidays. In the
event the lessee wishes to increase the hours then the
lessee shall be entitled for the enhancement of the
hours to the extent of 20% i.e. additional 310 hours on
the same rate of lease amount per hour.
xxxx
D. REFUNDABLE AMOUNTS:
i.
That the LESSEE has paid a total amount
of Rs.10,11,000/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs Eleven Thousand
Only) as interest free refundable security deposit i.e.
Rs. 10 lacs vide Cheque no. 000279, dated 23/11/2004
drawn on UTI Bank Ltd., & Rs.11,000/- as Cash
before the date of signing of this LEASE agreement.
The LESSOR shall be liable to pay the said refundable
security unconditionally to the LESSEE upon the
termination of this LEASE agreement.
ii.
That the LESSOR shall refund the security
deposit back to the LESSEE, in full upon termination
CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 3 of 36

of this LEASE agreement.
iii. That the lessor shall refund the security
and excess lease amount that shall be accountable
towards the lessee in the event the agreement cannot
be operated due to disability of the lessor of
whatsoever nature by the lessee during the tenure of
the present agreement."
6.

In terms of clause F of the agreement, the defendant had

covented to allow the plaintiff the usage of all facilities that are
connected to the air bus in imparting the basic cabin crew/cabin crew
training during the training hours that were agreed to be from 12 noon
to 6 p.m. from monday to friday.

The defendant had agreed to

maintain cleanliness and hygiene at the premises; provide adequate
steps for escape chutes/slides and ditching demonstration with
requisite pond and cushion at the premises; permit the plaintiff to
make use of the first built up cabin on the premises admeasuring 8 X
10 feet as the room allotted to the lessee for its use, disposal,
storage/management of its belongings and staff required during the
lease period for the basic cabin crew/cabin crew training for all days in
a week including Sunday; provide the facility of drinking water and
toilets for the students to be maintained and cleaned by the defendant;
provide the left hand side wall on the entrance gate for advertisement
and promotion of the trade name logo and address of the plaintiff and
permit putting up a hoarding; maintain cafeteria/stall/canteen
provide eatable lunch/snacks etc to the students; permit the plaintiff
to carry out promotional activities.
7.

The defendant was also responsible for the maintenance

CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 4 of 36

activities at the premises in terms of clause G. By virtue of clause J,
the defendant and his family members were prohibited from entering
into any competitive and/or similar activities
As those of the defendant from the plaintiff from the premises
and/or any other premises or in the air bus.
8.

The obligations of the plaintiff were detailed in clause L. Both

parties have placed heavy emphasis on the stipulations contained in
clause L (viii), (x), (xi), (xv) and (xvi) which read thus :"L. OBLIGATIONS OF THE LESSOR:
(viii). That if in the total lease period the requisite
hours are not utilised on account of lessor's disability
for any reason, whatsoever then the remaining hours
shall be compensated to the lessee by addition of the
equivalent lease period. However, if the lessee is not
able to utilise the requisite hours by the end of 18
months, the remaining hours shall be compensated
to the lessee by addition of equivalent hours to be
utilised within the lease period with mutual
convenience.
(x). That the lessor shall adjust or refund in favour
of the lessee the lease amount that is received in
excess, in the event the activities in the premises and
the Airbus are suspended due to disability on the
part of lessor for whatsoever reason.
(xi). That the lessor shall adjust or refund in favour
of the lessee the rent that is received in excess, in the
event the activities in the premises and the Airbus is
suspended for whatsoever reason due to the
disability of the lessor. The lessor shall give first
option to the lessee to restart its lease agreement for
the remaining period under the present agreement.
(xv). The lessor shall maintain a log book of hours to
be utilised daily by the lessee with entries of time in
and time out to have a record that not more than the
Designated Time Period has been utilised by the
lessee and shall get it signed by lessee's authorized
staff(s) on daily basis. The lessee having entered
into the premises with its students and having
CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 5 of 36

signed the log book then that shall be treated as
having utilized 6 (six) hours of the day even if same
number of hours are not properly utilised. In the
event if the lessee wants to utilize additional hours
that shall be allowed by the lessor, if Airbus is
available accordingly.
(xvi). That in the eventuality the operation of the
present agreement is stopped due to disability on
the part of lessor for whatsoever reason for a
particular period then the left out period shall be
added thereafter in favour of the lessee.”
9.

The defendant has placed reliance on the stipulations in the

agreement that it was to station its staff at the premises in terms of
clause m (ii) which reads thus :“M. OBLIGATIONS OF THE LESSEE:
(ii). That the lessee shall be responsible to have its
staff stationed at the premises half an hour before the
start of the training hours on each day for inspection
of the high standard of cleanliness and sanitation at
the premises and in the Airbus maintained by the
lessor.”
10.

The suit of the plaintiff is premised on the renewal clause in the

agreement contained in clause N which stipulates as follows :“N. RENEWAL OF LEASE:
i. That the lessee shall exercise its option of renewal
of the present lease two months prior to the
termination of the present lease by the efflux of time
i.e. On or before 31.10.2006. The lessee shall
exercise its option of renewal of lease by intimating
the lessor through written communication. Upon
such renewal the lessor shall increase 20%
enhancement in the bi-annual lease amount.”
11.

On the other hand, the defendant places reliance on clause P in

the agreement which stipulates that in case of breach of the present
agreement by the defendant shall entitle the plaintiff to claim

CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 6 of 36

unconditional damages which is hereto agreed to as Rs.4.68 crores
(Rupees Four Crore Sixty Eight Lacs) i.e. thrice the amount of the total
lease amount payable under the present agreement by the lessee to the
lessor and vice-versa.
12.

Pursuant to this agreement, the plaintiff entered upon the

premises on 29th June, 2005.

The plaintiff has submitted that it

exercised its option of a renewal of the agreement in terms of clause n
and sent a letter dated 19th October, 2006 requesting the defendant to
extend the agreement by addition of the equivalent lease period as the
air bus was provided for training and the plaintiff was entitled to such
extension by virtue of clause B (iii) and clause l (viii). The plaintiff also
requested the defendant for furnishing log books to enable it to
calculate further loss of hours. The defendant was also notified by the
plaintiff by this communication that it was confirming exercise of the
plaintiff's option to renew the lease for another period of two years
from expiry of the additional equivalent lease period and that in terms
of clause N (i), the monthly rent would be increased by 20%. In
furtherance of this letter, the plaintiff also claims to have delivered
cheques for the enhanced lease rent to the defendant on 19th October,
2006.
13.

By a letter dated 27th October, 2006, the plaintiff informed the

defendant that it was treating the agreement as renewed and that it
was going ahead with all schedules and commitments.
14.

The suit has been filed by the plaintiff who submits that it

received a letter dated 18th December, 2006 from the defendant
CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 7 of 36

informing it that it was not possible to extend the lease agreement and
to provide the plaintiff with the aircraft fuselage for training activities.
Two reasons given in this letter were, firstly, that the air hostess
training was not permissible in the premises and in view of the orders
of sealing passed by the Apex Court, it was more appropriate to stop
the crew training activities, and secondly that maintenance cost of the
aircraft fuselage was very high and this was not feasible on the amount
being received from the plaintiff.

Thus, the clause period would not

be enclosed.
The defendant also disputed the date of handing over of the
possession of the aircraft and stated that before the commencement of
the agreement on 24th November, 2004, the defendant had called a
press conference in the fuselage and that trainees were being sent from
24th November, 2004 apart from the media coverage and admission
interviews. According to the defendant, the plaintiff also was getting
the painting of the aircraft done and that the defendant was utilising
the aircraft for 24 hours a day. The defendant also claimed huge
amount from the plaintiff for the reason that the plaintiff had painted
its logo on both sides of the fuselage in variation of the agreement and
consequently the defendant claimed that it was entitled to
advertisement rental. In this background, the defendant notified the
plaintiff that it was unable to extend the agreement and requested it to
stop using the same with effect from 1st January, 2007.
15.

The defendant had sent a reply dated 20th December, 2006

informing the plaintiff that inasmuch as the agreement postulated that
CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 8 of 36

the plaintiff alone had the option to renew the agreement and that the
plaintiff had exercised such option by the communication dated 19th
October, 2006, therefore the refusal to renew by the plaintiff was
illegal. The suit was filed immediately thereafter on 21st December,
2006 on the averment that the plaintiff had paid the rent payable by it
up to April, 2007 and contending that the action of the defendant was
contrary to both law and facts.
16.

According to the plaintiff, the defendant had no right to refuse

the renewal under the terms of the agreement. The submission is that
the right to extension was unilateral.
17.

The plaintiff has also urged that balance of convenience, interest

of justice and equity are in favour of the plaintiff and against the
defendant. It is further urged that the agreement in question related
to utilisation of the airbus and other allied facilities by the plaintiff.
The

air

bus

was

not an ordinary

article

of short

period

arrangement/agreement according to it was communicated to it by the
defendant by the letter of 26th December, 2006. It has been urged that
compensation in such a case can never be an adequate remedy and an
injunction must follow. According to the plaintiff, no other aircraft
(fuselage) is available in the country and that an injunction must
follow in all such cases. In this behalf, reliance is placed on ILR 1981
(II) Delhi 775 UOI Vs. Commercial Metal. The plaintiff has urged that
the aircraft fuselage is not an ordinary article of commerce but has
'commercial uniqueness/distinctiveness' and consequently the plaintiff
would be entitled to the relief of specific performance in respect of
CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 9 of 36

such a contract.

For this reason, it is urged that the prohibition

contained in Section 14 of the Specific Relief Act would not operate.
Reliance is placed by the plaintiff in support of this submission on
Chitty on contracts 29th Edition 2004 Volume 1 (para 27 – 014) at page
1527; (1974) 1 All. E.R. 954 S. Petroleum Limited Vs. V.I.P.
Petroleum Limited; AIR 1996 Calcutta 67 Vij Minerals Pvt.
Ltd. Vs. V.C.D.; AIR 1998 MP 271 J.C. New Vs. Ed. P.N.; AIR
950 PC 90 Bank of India Vs. Janset JI AH; Chonoy Vs.
Company AIR 1985 All. 265 UPSC Board Vs. Ram Babu Pd. ;
2006 (126) DLT 504 Atlas Interactive (India) Pvt. Ltd. Vs.
BSNL; 1927 (1) KB 649 Behnke Vs. Bede Shipping Company
Limited; 1983 (2) LB 509 The (Oro Chief) and has also cited Farns
Worth on contracts (iii) 2nd Ed. Para 12.1 at page 151. It has been urged
that so far as ships aircraft logo are concerned, the contracts relating to
them are unique and provision of actual damages over breach would
not prohibit grant of an injunction which has to follow as a matter of
course. (Ref AIR 1979 SC 1241 (para 10).
The plaintiff urges that denial of the interim relief would
tantamount to dismissal of the suit and in the light of the principles
laid down in (2004) 4 SCC 697 (para 12) Devraj Vs. State of
Maharashtra & Ors., the injunction in favour of the plaintiff is
liable to be confirmed.
Mr. J.R. Midha, learned counsel appearing for the plaintiff has
also placed the instances of similar facility use agreement for the use of
theaters, class rooms equipped with it in educational institutions etc.
CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 10 of 36

In this behalf reliance has been placed on para 24 in the case of
Metropolitan Sports Facilities Commission Vs. Minnesota
Twins Partnership, 638 N.W. 2D 214; 2002 Minn. App.
LEXIS 91, the court of appeals of minnesota dealt with the Facility
use agreement and the injunction.
Lastly it has been urged that the conduct of the defendant has
been such as to cause irreparable loss and injury to the plaintiff and
which disentitles the defendant to exercise of discretion in its favour.
The plaintiff has prayed that its application being IA No. 5113/2007 for
the deposit of the lease amount be granted and, subject to an
undertaking of the defendant to restore the facility, the same may be
released to the plaintiff.
18.

Mr. V.P. Singh, learned senior counsel for the defendant, has

urged the principal challenge to grant of injunction to the plaintiff
based on the provisions of the Specific Relief Act, 1963.

The

submission is that the agreement in the instant case is determinable
and consequently by virtue of Section 14(1) (c)(d) of this statute, such
contract cannot be specifically enforced. Consequently no injunction
thereof can be issued under Section 41 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963.
Reliance is placed on AIR 2000 Del 450 Rajasthan Breweries
Ltd. Vs. Stroh Brewery Company. Learned senior counsel for
the defendant places reliance on AIR 2004 SC 2103 C.M. Beena &
Anr. Vs. P.N. Ramachandra Rao; AIR 1988 SC 184 Khalil
Ahmed

Bashir

Ahmed

Vs.

Tufflhussein

Samasbhai

Sarangpurwala; AIR 1959 SC 1262 Associated Hotels of
CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 11 of 36

India Ltd. Vs. R.N. Kapoor; AIR 2004 SC 4289 Mahendra
Saree Emporium Vs. G.V. Srinivasa Murthy.
It has been urged that the plaintiff has placed reliance on the
agreement as if it was intended to create a lease which required
compulsory registration. In this regard reliance is placed on 1997 (1)
Bom C.R. 234 The East India Hotels Ltd. Vs. Syndicate Bank.
Mr. Singh, learned senior counsel has urged at length that the
defendant has validly revoked the agreement vide the letter dated 19th
December, 2006.
19.

I have heard learned counsel for the parties. There is no dispute

by the plaintiff that the agreement contract between the parties was for
leasing out the airbus which is not immovable property. The whole
case of the plaintiff rests on its communication dated 19th October,
2006 which according to the plaintiff in terms of clause n of the
agreement dated 5th January, 2005. The plaintiff has submitted that
clause 9 permitted it to exercise option of renewal on or before 31st
October, 2006 and that the plaintiff having exercised the option within
such period, nothing further remained to be done and the lease
between the parties stood renewed.
20.

In view of the submissions of the plaintiff, there is no dispute

that the plaintiff is claiming rights of facility and use in the aircraft
fuselage and an agreement in respect thereof would not require
registration and appropriate stamp duty.
21.

I find that the plaintiff has laid three fold submissions before this

court. Its first contention is that having regard o the nature of the
CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 12 of 36

renewal clause as contained in clause N of the agreement between the
parties, the plaintiff being the lessee had absolute right to exercise the
option for renewal. In this behalf, reliance has been placed on 1989
Supp. (1) SCC 487 Provash Chandra Dalui Vs. Biswanath
Banerjee & Anr. and AIR 1997 SC 412 Gajraj Singh etc. Vs.
The State Transport Appellate Tribunal & Ors.
It has been contended that the option to extend is given
absolutely to the plaintiff under the agreement and such extension
requires only a unilateral act upon the part of the plaintiff. It is not
dependent upon the consent of the defendant.

In support of this

submission, reliance has been placed on the judicial pronouncements
reported at AIR 2004 SC 32 State of U.P. & Ors. Vs. Lalji
Tandon(Dead); 123 (2005) DLT 154 (DB) Aggarwal & Modi
Enterprises (Cinema Project) Pvt. Ltd. Vs. New Delhi
Municipal Council; 107 (2003) DLT 373 Bal Sahyog Vs. UOI
& Anr. and (1960) 1 All ER 668 Baker Vs. Merckel.
22.

It is necessary to notice the basic and inherent distinction

between the cases relied upon in support of this contention and the
facts of the instant case.

These precedents cited by the plaintiff

related to contracts of immovable property and renewals/extension
clauses in relation thereto. The instant case, even according to the
plaintiff, is not relating to any immovable property but to moveable
property. In the written submissions which have also been filed, the
plaintiff has clearly contended that the parties entered into a contract
for leasing the fuselage of the air bus, which is moveable property, to
CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 13 of 36

the plaintiff for its exclusive use alongwith other facilities correlated
thereto.
In this view of the matter, the judicial pronouncements relied
upon by the plaintiff with regard to contracts relating to immoveable
property would have no bearing on the matters in issue except to a
limited extent of guiding adjudication on the manner, an option to
renew an agreement is to be exercised and impact thereof.
23.

In Provash Chandra Dalui & Anr. Vs. Biswanath

Banerjee & Anr., 1989 Supp. (1) SCC 487, the Apex Court
considered the distinction between extension of a lease and its
renewal.

Placing reliance on the dictionary meaning of these

expressions, the court emphasized that every contract is to be
construed with reference to its object and the whole of its term. The
whole context must be considered to ascertain the intention of the
parties.
24.

In Gajraj Singh Vs. The State Transport Appellate

Tribunal & Ors., AIR 1997 SC 412, the Apex Court was concerned
with renewal of a transport permit under the Motor Vehicles Act. The
principles which were laid down by the court in these judicial
pronouncements would thus have no bearing on the facts of the instant
case.
25.

The plaintiff has placed strong reliance on the terms of clause N.

This covenant between the parties itself postulated a unilateral act on
the part of the lessee to exercise the option of renewal of the lease. The
lessee is required to exercise such option of renewal by intimating the
CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 14 of 36

lesser through a written communication two months prior to the
termination of the present lease by efflux of time, that is on or before
the 31st October, 2006.
26.

Such issue with regard to renewal of a lease of immoveable

property arose for consideration before the Apex Court which has
authoritatively pronounced the applicable principles in AIR 2004 SC
32 State of U.P. & Ors. Vs. Lalji Tandon(Dead). The Apex
Court considered the entire law on the subject.
The court placed reliance on the principles laid down in (1960)
1 All ER 668 Baker Vs. Merckel wherein it had been laid down
that where a covenant for renewal exists, its exercise is, of course, a
unilateral act of the lessee and the consent of the lessor is unnecessary.
In para 13 of this pronouncement, the court noticed the difference
between the extension of a lase and a renewal clause in a lease.
The court noticed with approval the principles laid down by the
Andhra Pradesh Division Bench in AIR 1981 Andhra Pradesh 328
Syed Jaleel Zane Vs. P. Venkata Murlidhar & Ors which were
to the following effect :“(i) In India, the law does not prohibit a perpetual
lease; clear and unambiguous language would be
required to infer such a lease, if the language is
ambiguous the Court would opt for the interpretation
negating the plea of the perpetual lease;
(ii) To find an answer to the question whether a
covenant for renewal contained in the lease deed
construed properly and in its real context, entitles the
tenant to continue as long as he chooses by exercising
the option of renewal at the end of each successive
period of 5 years subject to the same terms and
conditions depends on the deed of lease being read as a
whole and an effort made to ascertain the intention of
CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 15 of 36

the parties while entering into the contract. No single
clause or term should be read in isolation so as to defeat
other clauses. The interpretation must be reasonable,
harmonious and be deduced from the language of the
document.
(iii) The Court always leans against a perpetual
renewal and hence where there is a clause for renewal
subject to the same terms and conditions, it would be
construed as giving a right to renewal for the same
period as the period of the original lease, but not a right
to second or third renewal and so on unless of course,
the language is clear and unambiguous.”
The court has also noticed with approval the principles culled out
by the Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court in State for India in
council Vs. Ah Forbes the following principles on a consideration of
several English decisions on the subject:“(1) A lease, which creates a tenancy for a term of
years, may yet confer on the lessee an option of
renewal.
(2) If the lease does not State by whom the option is
exercisable, it is exercisable (as between the lessor and
lessee) by the lessee only, that is to say, a covenant for
renewal, if informally expressed, is enforced only in
favour of the lessee.
(3) The option is exercisable not merely by the lessee
personally but also by his representative-in-interest.
(4) If the option does not State the terms of renewal,
the new lease will be for the same period and on the
same terms as the original lease, in respect of all the
essential conditions thereof, except as to the covenant
for renewal itself.
(5) There is no sort of legal presumption against a
right of perpetual renewal. The burden of strict proof
is imposed upon a person claiming such a right. It
should not be inferred from any equivocal expressions
which may fairly be capable of being otherwise
interpreted. The intention in that behalf should be
clearly shown: otherwise, the agreement is satisfied
and exhausted by a single renewal.
(6) A covenant for renewal runs with the land.
(7) The position of a lessee, who has been always
ready and willing to accept a renewal on proper terms,
is the same in equity as if a proper lease had been
granted. Where the covenant for renewal was still
CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 16 of 36

specifically enforceable at the commencement of a suit
for ejectment against the lessee, the position of the
lessee in equity is the same as if it had been specifically
enforced.”
27.

In Aggarwal & Modi Enterprises (Cinema Project) Pvt.

Ltd. Vs. New Delhi Municipal Council 123 (2005) DLT 154
(DB), a Division Bench of this court had occasion to consider the issue
relating to renewal of a lease and the following principles were culled
out upon an extensive consideration of the entire law on the subject :“(a). In India, a lease may be in perpetuity and the
law, either the Transfer of Property Act or the general
law abhors a lease in perpetuity., If there is a
covenant for renewal in the lease agreement, lessee
can exercise his right unilaterally for extension of
lease, for which consent of lessor is not necessary.
(b) Where the principal lease executed between the
parties containing a covenant for renewal, is renewed
in accordance with the said covenant, whether the
renewed lease shall also contain similar clause for
renewal depends on the facts and circumstances of
each case, regard being had to the intention of the
parties as displayed in the original covenant for
renewal and the surrounding circumstances.
(c) There is difference between an extension of lease
in accordance with the covenant in that regard
contained in the principal lease and renewal of lease.
In the case of extension it is not necessary to have a
fresh deed of lease executed. However, option for
renewal consistently with the covenant for renewal
has to be exercised consistently with the terms thereof
and, if exercised, a fresh deed of lease shall have to be
executed between the parties.
(d) Failing the execution of fresh deed of lease,
another lease for a fixed terms shall not come into
existence though the principal lease in spite of the
expiry of the term thereof may continue by holding
over for year by year or month by month, as the case
may be.
(e) If the language in the lease deed is ambiguous,
the Court would opt for an interpretation negating the
plea of the perpetual lease. Where there is a clause for
renewal subject to the same terms and conditions, it
would be construed as giving a right to renewal for
CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 17 of 36

the same period as the period of the original lease but
not a right to second or third renewal and so on
unless, of course, the language is clear and
unambiguous. While ascertaining the intention of the
parties in this behalf, lease deed has to be read as a
whole.”
28.

In the light of the aforenoticed principles, though the present

case relates to an agreement in respect of a moveable property, the
principles which would govern the manner in which a party would
exercise the renewal option in respect of a lease for immoveable
property as laid down in the aforenoticed judgments, would guide
adjudication herein as well.

Clause N of the agreement dated 5th

January, 2005 contained a renewal option which was available to the
lesses that is the plaintiff herein. Such option was to be exercised in
writing on or before 31st October, 2006. Upon such renewal, there was
a requirement to increase by 20% the bi-annual lease amount. It is not
disputed that the plaintiff exercised such option on 27th October, 2006.
Having regard to the nature of the contract between the parties
an absolute option to renew the lease was vested in the plaintiff which
was not dependant on the consent of the defendant.

The plaintiff has

admittedly communicated its intention and exercised the option on
26th October, 2006, the stipulated last date. Therefore, there can be
no dispute to the fact that the plaintiff has exercised the option in
terms of the renewal clause.
The agreement would stand renewed immediately on the
plaintiff having communicated exercise of the option in terms of clause
N prior to 31st October, 2006.

CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 18 of 36

29.

An objection has been taken by the defendant that the plaintiff is

disentitled to any injunction inasmuch as the agreement between the
parties postulated compensation in terms of money and consequently
clause P provide for damages. Therefore in terms of Section 14(a) of
the Specific Relief Act, 1963 which provides that such contract where
compensation in money is an adequate relief, shall not be specifically
enforced.

It has further been urged that the agreement dated 5th

January, 2005 is determinable in nature and consequently in view of
Section 14(d) of the Specific Relief Act, 1963, the same cannot be
enforced. Placing reliance on the provisions of Section 14, it has been
urged that for these reasons, the agreement is incapable of being
specifically enforced, no injunction can be granted.
30.

On the other hand, the plaintiff has placed reliance on the

explanation to Section 10 and have urged that the property in question
is not an ordinary article of commerce and, in addition, is of special
value or interest to the plaintiff.

It has also been urged that the

fuselage of the aircraft is an item which is not easily obtainable in the
market and consequently, in the light of explanation ii(b) to Section
10, the contract between the parties falls within the exception to the
prohibitions under Section 14(a) and (d). It is urged that for this
reason, the plaintiff would be entitled not only to specific performance
of the contract but also to the relief of injunction. It has also been
urged that the damages stipulated under the agreement do not provide
adequate relief to the plaintiff.
31.

My attention has been drawn to the judgment of the English

CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 19 of 36

courts reported at (1974) 1 All ER 954 Sky Petroleum Limited
Vs. VIP Petroleum Limited.

This case related to a contract

between the parties whereby the plaintiff had agreed that for a
minimum period of 10 years, it would buy all the petrol and diesel fuel
that was needed for its filling station from the defendant. When the
defendant terminated the contract in November, 1973, the plaintiff
brought an action for breach of the terms and sought an interlocutory
injunction restraining the defendant from withdrawing such supplies.
The court considered the trade evidence laid before it and found that
the plaintiff company would have little prospects of finding any
alternative source of supply for petrol and diesel fuel needed for its
filling stations. The defendant also expressed willingness to continue
to supply subject to certain prices. The court was of the view that, on
the evidence laid before it, there was serious danger that unless the
court interferes, the plaintiff company would be forced out of business
and consequently granted an injunction to restore the formal position
under the contract until the rights and wrongs of the parties can be
tried out. Even though this case related to supply of fuel, the court
departed from the general rule to preserve the position under the
contract. It is noteworthy that the defendant had taken a plea that it
was entitled to terminate and that the plaintiff company was in the
wrong. The defendant also objected that the court refuses specific
performance of a contract to sell and purchase chattels not specific or
ascertained. This submision was based on the proposition that under
the ordinary contract for sale of non-specific goods, damages are a
CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 20 of 36

sufficient remedy and that this was lacking in the circumstances of the
present case.
32.

Before this court reliance has been placed on pronouncements of

different High Courts wherein the courts have held several articles of
commerce as being impregnated and stamped with the quality of
commercial uniqueness. At this stage, it would be useful to consider
the statutory provisions of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 in extenso
which reads thus :“10.
Cases in which specific performance of
contract enforceable- Except as otherwise provided in
this Chapter, the specific performance of any contract may,
in the discretion of th e court, be enforced(a) When there exists no standard for ascertaining
actual damage caused by the non-performance of
the act agreed to be done; or
(b) when the act agreed to be done is such that
compensation in money for its non-performance
would not afford adequate relief.
Explanation.- Unless and until the contrary is proved, the
court shall presume(i) that the breach of a contract to transfer
immovable property cannot be adequately relieved
by compensation in money; and
(ii) that the breach of a contract to transfer
movable property can be so relieved except in the
following cases:(a) where the property is not an ordinary
article of commerce, or is of special value or
interest to the plaintiff, or consists of goods
which are not easily obtainable in the market;
(b) where the property is held by the
defendant as the agent or trustee of the
plaintiff.”
33.

This provision has fallen for consideration in several cases. In a

pronouncement of the Calcutta High Court in AIR 1996 Calcutta 67
Vijaya Minerals Pvt. Ltd. Vs. Bikash ChandrA Deb wherein
the defendant attempted to render nugatory a contract for sale of
CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 21 of 36

manganese and iron ores and excavated and received for delivery expit
mouth on the ground of inadequacy of consideration and that the same
was an unconscionable bargain. The court observed that manganese
and iron ores are available only in certain areas where such mines are
located and consequently it could not be said that they were ordinary
articles of commerce. Consequently, a decree for specific performance
could be passed. It was also noticed that the contract contained a
negative covenant that the ores from mines would not be sold to
anyone except the buyer under the agreement which contract would
bind the other party as well and consequently the question of balance
of convenience and whether damages would be adequate would
become immaterial.
In AIR 1999 Madhya Pradesh 271 Jabalpur Cable
Network Vs. E.S.P.N. Software India Pvt. Ltd. & Ors., the
court held that the transmission signals which were being transmitted
were not ordinary article of commerce and were of special value to the
appellant as they were goods which were not easily available in the
market.
34.

Again in AIR 1950 Privy Council 90 Bank of India Ltd. &

Ors. Vs. Jansetji A. H. Chenoy & M/s Chenoy & Company, it
was held that having regard to the nature of the company and the
limited market for its shares, damages would not be an adequate
remedy for non-performance on the part of the seller, of a contract to
sell the shares.
35.

I find that coal ash was held to be a type of property which is not

CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 22 of 36

easily available in the market. It is a waste product which is available
only when a coal fired boiler is used. Therefore bulk supply of coal ash
is available only when there is a thermal power station. It is therefore
not an easily or ordinarily available item for sale or purchase. It was so
held in AIR 1985 Allahabad 265 U.P. State Electricity Board,
Lucknow Vs. Ram Barai Prasad & Anr. The court held that
clause (ii) (a) of the explanation to Section 10 of the Specific Relief Act,
1963 was fully attracted in the case of a contract relating to sale and
purchase of coal ash and consequently upon a breach of a contract to
transfer the coal ash, it was held that the plaintiff could not be
adequately compensated in terms of money to relieve such breach.
Therefore, Section 41 of the Statute would not be a bar to seeking relief
of injunction in the present case.
36.

In Atlas Interactive (India) Pvt. Ltd. Vs. Bharat

Sanchar Nigam Limited & Anr. 126 (2006) DLT 504, the
petitioner had entered into a franchise agreement with the respondent
no. 1 for providing broad band services on T.V., the existing copper
network of the respondent no. 1 in different places. In this case, the
court noticed the submission that even though the contract may be
determinable in nature, however since it was for setting up a unique
project for which the petitioner had procured tailor made equipment
which could not be utilised anywhere else, specific performance may
be ordered. Undoubtedly, in this case the contract was between a
private party and the respondent no. 1 which was held to be an
instrumentality of the state and consequently the respondents were
CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 23 of 36

required to ensure that their actions were not arbitrary and were
reasonable.
The court also held that the breach of contract to transfer these
goods cannot be relief of payment of money in lieu thereof and that
there could be no standard of ascertaining the loss caused to the
appellant by not displaying the live programmes of the Star Sports
channel.

In these circumstances, it was held that such a contract

would be specifically enforceable under Section 10 of the Specific
Relief Act, 1963 and read with explanation (ii) (a) thereof.

Even

otherwise, it was held to be covered by Section 10 (b) of the Act.
In these circumstances, an injunction restraining the respondent
no. 1 from terminating the agreement between the parties was granted.
37.

In the instant case, the court is concerned with the fuselage of an

aircraft. In support of its contention that such an article is required to
be considered as a unique and not easily procurable item, reliance has
also been placed on the

pronouncement in Behnke Vs. Bede

Shipping Company Limited (1927) 1 K.B. 649. The court held
that there was adequate evidence before it that the ship was peculiar
and of practically unique value to the plaintiff and consequently the
plaintiff would be entitled to a decree of specific performance in
respect of his contract for purchase of the same from the defendant.
In the Partrederiet Oro Chief And Levantes Maritime
Corporation (1983) 2 Lloyd's

Law Reports page 509, the

court was also concerned with the cancellation of a contract for sale of
a ship. The owners cancelled the contract and sold the vessel to the
CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 24 of 36

second owners. In this case, it was held that the question which arose
for consideration was as to whether the chattel to be sold, can or
cannot be readily replaced by the purchase of a similar chattel in the
market. If it cannot, there would be at least a prima facie case for
specific performance.
38.

Strong reliance has been placed by the plaintiff on the

pronouncement of this court reported at 126 (2006) DLT 504
Atlas Interactive (India) Pvt. Ltd. Vs. BSNL to urge that even a
contract which may be determinable could not be treated as an
ordinary commercial contract and regard had to be had to the nature
of the contract. It was argued that in a contract involving a unique
project requiring tailormade equipment, injunction would follow as a
matter of course. Perusal of this judgment shows that the same would
have no application to the matter in issue.

In para 12 of the

pronouncement, the court referred to the several judgments of this
court and affirmed a principle that contracts which are determinable
in nature cannot be specifically enforced and injunctions cannot be
granted to prevent breach of such contracts.

However, the court

clearly drew a distinction between 'private commercial contracts' and
'contracts of private parties with governmental authorities'. In this
regard, the court had observed that the principle that injunctions
cannot be granted to prevent a breach of terminable contracts apply to
'private commercial contracts' as held in the Rajasthan Breweries case.
The court however observed having regard to the fact that one of the
contracting parties, the defendant no. 1 was an instrumentality of the
CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 25 of 36

state and must act in a fair, just and equitable manner and that the
freedom which is available to a private party in private contracts, in
respect of the performance of contractual obligations, is not available
to the state or its instrumentalities in the same manner because every
action of the state has to be just, fair and devoid of arbitrariness. In
para 14, it was observed that the petitioner could be ousted from the
contract only for sufficient and good reasons. Furthermore the court
considered the fact that in case heavy damages were imposed by the
arbitral tribunal finally, the respondent no. 1 would have the risk of
paying

such

heavy

damages

since

respondent

no.1

is

an

instrumentality of the state and that risk of payment of such heavy
damages should not be taken lightly as public money has to be
protected with utmost care and concern. In this behalf in para 15, it
was observed that hazardous and adventurous pleas should not be
taken when public money is at stake. It was in this background that
the court came to a conclusion that since the project under the
agreement was unique and the equipment created tailormade for
respondent no. 1 and since respondent no. 1 is an instrumentality of
the state, it has no right to act arbitrarily and unreasonably. The court
was of the view that highhandedness appear to be on the part of the
state and consequently having regard to Section 10 (ii) a of the Act,
injunction was considered to be the appropriate remedy.

The

respondent no. 1, by its conduct, allowed the petitioner to invest more
and more funds in the project and thereby drove the petitioner to a
situation where it would not only suffer huge financial loss but loss of
CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 26 of 36

trade, reputation and goodwill also which may not be compensated in
terms of money.
39.

My attention has been drawn to the words of E.

Allan

Farnsworth in his text on Contracts in Volume 3 in Section 12.5 who
has observed that the modern trend of law is clearly in favour of
extension of specific relief at the expense of the traditional primacy of
damages. It has been further observed that specific performance may
be granted after there has been a breach of contract by either nonperformance or repudiation.

At page 167, the learned author has

stated that the court will not, however, grant an injunction unless the
remedy in damages would be inadequate and that a provision for
liquidated damages would not preclude the grant of specific
performance or an injunction instead of or in addition to the award of
such damages.
40.

On this subject, this text in respect of contracts relating to sale of

goods throw valuable light on the issues before this court . In this
context, the author has observed thus :“The traditional attitude toward contracts for the sale
of goods is quite the opposite of the attitude toward
contracts for the sale of land. In a market economy it
was supposed that, with rare, exceptions for such
“unique” items as heirlooms and objects of art,
substantially similar goods were available elsewhere.
The trend, however, has been to relax this restriction on
the availability of specific performance.
The
commentary to the Uniform Commercial Code explains
that it “seeks to further a more liberal attitude than
some courts have shown in connection with the specific
performance of contracts of sale” and that it introduces
“a new concept of what are 'unique' goods” with a test of
uniqueness that “must be made in terms of the total
situation which characterizes the contract.” It asserts
CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 27 of 36

that the buyer's “inability to cover is strong evidence” of
the propriety of granting specific performance and that
“where the unavailability of a market price is caused by
a scarcity of goods of the type involved, a good case is
normally made for specific performance under this
Article.” But the text of the Code is more circumspect
stating only, “Specific performance may be decreed
where the goods are unique or in other proper
circumstances. The Code does not reject the adequacy
test, and specific performance remains the exception
rather than the rule under contracts for the sale of
goods. If the seller fails to deliver the goods, the typical
buyer must still content itself with money as a
substitute.”
41.

The purpose of stipulation of an amount on account of damages

in a contract has been explained in AIR 1979 SC 1241 Prakash
Chandra Vs. Angadlal & Ors. In para 10, the Apex Court has held
that perusal of the terms of the contract would indicate that the
stipulation of damages was made only for the purposes of securing
performance of the contract and not for the purposes of giving an
option of paying money in lieu of specific performance. Even if a sum
has been named in the contract for sale as an amount to be paid in case
of a breach, the appellant is entitled in law to the enforcement of the
agreement.
42.

In the instant case, the plaintiff has pointed out that the damages

mentioned in clause P of the agreement relate to compensation for
breach of the non-compete clause mentioned in clause J and have no
bearing on the non-extension of the agreement or the period thereof.
However, in case this court arrives at a conclusion that the contract
relates to goods or services which are unique and irreplaceable, then
provision of liquidated damages in the contract would not prohibit the

CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 28 of 36

grant of specific performance or injunction.
43.

The undisputed facts before this court are that the parties had

entered into a facility and use agreement on 5th January, 2005 for a
period of two years commencing from 1st January, 2005 till 31st
December, 2006. In clause N of this agreement, the plaintiff had the
unilateral right to seek renewal of the lease which was exercised by the
plaintiff by its letter of 27th October, 2006 . Such option having been
exercised, nothing further remained to be done by the plaintiff except
that the lessor was required to effectuate a 20% enhancement in the
bi-annual lease amount. This amount has also been tendered by the
plaintiff alongwith his letter of 27th October, 2006 .
44.

The plaintiff has pointed out that it had notified the defendant

that the agreement between the parties having been renewed, it was
going ahead with its schedule. Several steps appear to have been
taken by the plaintiff on the basis of this renewal.
45.

The plaintiff has placed reliance on communications dated 4th

January, 2006, 14th February, 2006, 14th September, 2006 and 10th
October, 2006 wherein the plaintiff had been pointing out to certain
difficulties being faced on account of failure of the defendants to abide
by the terms of the contract.
46.

The plaintiff also places reliance on clause B (iii) and L (viii) of

the agreement dated 5th January, 2005 whereby loss of hours due to
the airbus being provided late was to be added to the lease period. The
plaintiff has submitted that despite requests to the defendant to make
available the log books for completion of this period, the same have
CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 29 of 36

not been furnished and have not even been placed before this court.
The plaintiff sent a reminder of the letter dated 19th October, 2006 to
the defendant on 27th October, 2006 whereby the defendants were
clearly informed that the agreement was being treated as renewed and
the plaintiff was going ahead with all arrangements and commitments
in continuity of the agreement dated 5th January, 2005.
47.

The plaintiff has placed reliance on lease deeds entered into by it

in respect of the premises which were to be used as hostels for its
trainees for the purposes of training on the aircraft fuselage in
question for the extended period.
48.

It is an admitted position that the defendant for the first time

wrote to the plaintiff only on 18th December, 2006 informing it that
the agreement cannot be extended or renewed and raising other
demands.
49.

In the reply dated 20th December, 2006, the plaintiff clearly

informed the defendant that it had exercised its option in view of the
term in the contract and that the defendant had no option to refuse to
renew or extend the lease. It was further pointed out that the plaintiff
had spent crores of rupees in the electronic and print media to
advertise availability of the airbus A-300 training facility.

This

training stood promised to thousands of its students in 65 centres
across India. The plaintiff had also made the same representation in
all its promotional materials including the prospectus, brochures,
pamphlets etc pointing out with regard to availability of such training
after due notice to the defendant.
CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 30 of 36

50.

The copy of the brochures printed by the plaintiff placed before

this court contains its course content which includes training inside a
leased real airbus A-300. The plaintiff has stated in its brochures that
it is the only institute in the world to have such a facility.
51.

It thus appears that the course and training imparted by the

plaintiff contains training inside the airbus A-300 as its integral part
which has to be

essentially undergone by each student in order to

obtain the qualification of BTEC Higher National Certificate awarded
by EDEXCEL of the United Kingdom.

Thus, refusal to renew the

contract would jeopardise the career of thousand of students as well as
their future prospects and lead to litigations.
52.

The plaintiff has set up a case that this airbus fuselage is the only

fuselage available anywhere in India and no other fuselage would be
available. This position is not disputed by the defendants. Certainly
this facility would certainly fall within the definition of not being the
ordinary article of commerce and being of special value and interest to
the plaintiff falling within the expression of such unique item in
explanation to (ii) (a) of Section 10 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963.
53.

In this background, it cannot be disputed that the plaintiff has

made out a prima facie case for grant of ad interim protection and that
award of damages would not be a complete or adequate remedy or
relief. Several young trainees have opted to do the course conducted
by the plaintiff in the above factual background and there is no reason
at this stage to disbelieve the plaintiff's contention that it has expended
substantial funding on the same. Certainly there is substance in the
CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 31 of 36

plaintiff's apprehension that it would be exposed to civil as well as
criminal liabilities for not providing such training which would ruin
the reputation and business of the plaintiff. The plaintiff is acted in
good faith and would certainly suffer irreparable loss and damage in
case interim protection is not granted. Undoubtedly, denial of the
interim relief may cause a situation to emerge whereby the main suit
itself may be rendered infructuous. Such considerations have weighed
with the courts in granting ad-interim protections.
54.

My attention has been drawn to pronouncements reported at

AIR 2005 Calcutta 274 Kalidas Sadhu Vs. Sushil Kumar
Agarwal;

(2004)

4

SCC

697

Deoraj

Vs.

State

of

Maharashtra & Ors.; 638 N.W.2d 214; 2002 Minn. App.
LEXIS 91 Metropolitan Sports Facilities Commission Vs.
Minnesota Twins Partnership in support of the submission that
the facility use agreement was a special type of commercial
relationship in which an unhindered and absolute right to use the
aircraft fuselage was created in favour of the plaintiff. Based on such
right, the plaintiff had established its business on huge expenditure
and investments and created third party rights as well. Such contract
was clearly distinguishable from ordinary commercial agreements
involving mere sale and purchase of goods or services. I find that in
Metropolitan Sports Facilities Commission, the court was concerned
with an agreement to use a stadium in favour of the plaintiff. The
court granted an injunction in favour of the plaintiff which was upheld
by the appellate court.
CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 32 of 36

55.

So far as stipulations as to time giving an option for renewal are

concerned, in AIR 1969 SC 405 Caltex (India) Ltd. Vs.
Bhagwan Devi Marodia, it was held that at common law
stipulations as to time in a contract giving an option for renewal of a
lease of land were considered to be of the essence of the contract even
if they were not expressed to be so and were construed as conditions
precedent. Equity followed the common law rule in respect of such
contracts and did not regard the stipulation as to time not being of the
essence of the bargain, the reason being that a renewal of a lease is a
privilege and if the tenant wishes to claim the privilege he must be so
strictly within the time limited for the purpose. A lessee not having
exercised the option of renewal within the time limited by the clause is
not therefore entitled to a renewal. Where no time is however, fixed
for the purpose, an application for renewal for the lease may be made
within a reasonable time before the expiry of the term. However a
delay on the part of the lessee to apply for renewal arising by mere
neglect on his part and which could have been avoided by reasonable
diligence will not entitle a lessee to claim renewal.
56.

Undoubtedly, injunctive relief based on a contract would require

to be co-extensive with the terms of the contract. In the instant case,
the plaintiff has set up a case of it having exercised the option to renew
the agreement with the defendant in terms thereof. The original
agreement was for a period of two years which as per clause B(i) was to
be in force from 1st January, 2005 to 31st December, 2006.

The

plaintiff was required to exercise the renewal option before 31 st of
CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 33 of 36

October, 2006 in terms of Clause N which it did. A reminder was also
admittedly sent on 27th of October, 2006. The period after renewal
would run from 1st January, 2007 till 31st December, 2009.
57.

Deprivation of this fuselage for effectuating its training

programme would as a result jeopardise the training imparted by the
plaintiff and clause irreparable loss and damage to its business. It has
been pointed out that the same would render the trainees illegible for
the prescribed certification from the institute in the United Kingdom.
58.

The plaintiff has sought to urge that the airbus is a thing attached

to the earth which would require to be treated as immovable property.
In the light of the view which this court has taken, at this stage it is not
necessary to decide on this issue which is left open for consideration
after evidence is recorded in the matter.
59.

In view of the stand of the defendant before this court, it is

necessary to examine the case law relied upon by the plaintiff in
support of its submission that the agreement dated 5th January, 2005
is a license agreement and not a lease.

In the view I have taken

renders it unnecessary to consider the submission of the plaintiff with
regard to fuselage being attached to the ground and the consequences
thereof. This aspect may arise for consideration at the time of final
adjudication of the claims of the parties. For the same reason, the
judicial precedents on the issue that a lease agreement in respect of
immoveable property require registration are irrelevant for the
purpose of consideration of the present application.
60.

It may be noticed that the conduct of the defendant in not

CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 34 of 36

making available the log books and not even disclosing the same on
the record of the case and its belated response to the letter dated 19
October, 2006 and the reminder dated 27th October, 2006 of the
defendant shows that the defendant has not acted bonafide.
61.

In view of the above, I am of the view that the plaintiff has made

out a prima facie case for grant of injunction. Balance of convenience,
interest of justice and equity are clearly in favour of the plaintiff who
has exercised the option to renew the agreement between the parties
in the manner envisaged in clause N of the agreement dated 5th
January, 2005.
However the plaintiff cannot be granted any interim relief
without compliance of the stipulation to make payment to the
defendant of the contracted amount.
Consequently, this application is allowed subject to payment of
the enhanced amount by the plaintiff to the defendant with effect from
1st January, 2007 in terms of clause N of the agreement dated 5th
January, 2005. The arrears in terms of the orders passed today shall
be paid to the defendant within a period of four weeks from today. The
month by month payment shall be paid to the defendant on or before
the 10th day of each English calender month.
IA No. 14436/2006 is allowed and the defendant is restrained
from interfering or obstructing usage of the stationery airbus by the
plaintiff on the terms and conditions stipulated in the agreement dated
5th January, 2005 till 31st December, 2009 or the date of final
adjudication in the suit, whichever is earlier.
CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 35 of 36

As a consequence, IA No. 558/2007 shall stand dismissed.

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
September 14, 2007
kr

CS(OS) No. 2395/2006

page 36 of 36

