REPORABLE
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
RFA 34/2003
Date of decision : 15th October, 2004
Smt. Raj Rani Gupta
... Appellant
through Mr.P.N.Bhardwaj, Advocate
VERSUS
MCD & others
.... Respondents
through Mr.Subhash C.Sharma, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE JUSTICE DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Yes
Digest?
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.
Smt. Raj Rani Gupta and Shri Gurdip Singh Madhok brought
a suit for perpetual injunction, praying for restraining the Municipal
Corporation of Delhi, defendant no.1, by a decree of perpetual injunction
from demolishing any part of the structures existing on the properties
situated at khasra no.452, village Khirkee, Tehsil Mehrauli, New
Delhi(hereinafter referred to as the “suit land”). The plaintiff further

RFA No.34/2003

1 of 12

prayed for decree of perpetual injunction against the DDA, arrayed as
defendant no.2, for restraining it from dispossessing the plaintiffs from
the afore-stated suit land.

The claim of the plaintiffs was based on the

plea that they were entered as a Bhoomidars in the Revenue Record; they
had constructed a residential dwelling unit on the suit land in the year
1988 and were living therein since then; that suddenly on 5th March,
1990 some officials of the defendants came to the site and started
demolishing properties in the village in the vicinity of the plaintiffs and
threatened to demolish the plaintiffs' property and dispossess them
without any notice under Section 343 of the Delhi Municipal Corporation
Act and without notice to show cause under the Delhi Development Act.
The plaintiffs challenged the authority and the jurisdiction of the
defendants to do so alleging that the suit land did not belong to either of
the defendants. The plaintiffs also challenged the jurisdiction of the two
statutory authorities and applicability of the Delhi Municipal Corporation
Act, 1957 on the plea that M.C.D. was not providing civic amenities to
them and of the Delhi Development Authority that the land did not fall in
the development area of the DDA.
2.

Based on these allegations the suit came to be filed on the

original side of this Court on 7th March, 1990. By an ex parte order of

RFA No.34/2003

2 of 12

injunction dated 8th March, 1990, the learned Single Judge directed
maintenance of status quo in respect of property in the suit till further
orders.
3.

It appears that as a result of the amendment to Section 5 Sub-

Section 2 of the Delhi High Court Act 1966 as amended by the Delhi
High Court(Amendment) Act, 1991, on account of the valuation of the
reliefs sought sought in the plaint in the present case being below Rs.5
lacs, the case was transferred to the District Court, Delhi.
4.

It is noteworthy that plaintiff No.2 Shri Gurdip Singh Madhok

expired during the pendency of the case. The plaintiff no.1 Smt. Raj
Rani Gupta filed an application under Order 22 Rule 2 CPC for deleting
his name and to proceed with the suit as the sole plaintiff. The learned
trial judge dismissed this application vide order dated 12th August, 2002
holding that the right to sue does not survive with the plaintiff no.1.
5.

On the same date, the learned trial judge framed two

preliminary issues which are as hereunder:“1. whether the present suit of the plaintiffs is not
maintainable in the present form? OPD
6.

2. Relief.”
The matter proceeded for arguments on these two issues and

resulted in the judgment and decree dated 4th October, 2002 whereby the

RFA No.34/2003

3 of 12

learned trial court found against the plaintiffs on the preliminary issue
no.1. Consequently, the suit of the plaintiff came to be dismissed. This
judgment and decree has been impugned by Smt. Raj Rani Gupta,
plaintiff No.1 before us in the present appeal.
7.

Though the order framing the issue does not reflect as to the

nature or ground on which the maintainability of the suit was being
objected to, however the basis of the objections can be discerned from
the impugned judgment and decree. It appears that the learned trial court
was concerned with the pronouncement of the Supreme Court of India in
the case titled Shiv Kumar Chadha Vs. MCD reported at 1993 Vol.3 SCC
161. In this case, the bar contained in Section 347-E of the Delhi
Municipal Corporation Act whereby the jurisdiction of the civil court to
entertain any suit application or other proceedings in respect of any order
or notice appealable under Section 343 or Section 347-B is curtailed, was
under judicial scrutiny before the Supreme Court.

After a detailed

discussion and examination of several pronouncements, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court had held as hereunder:“28. According to us, it cannot be urged that the provisions
of the Act have created any right or liability and for
enforcement thereof remedy has been provided under
the Act itself. The Act purports to regulate the
common law right of the citizens to erect or construct
buildings of their choice. This right existed since time
RFA No.34/2003

4 of 12

immemorial.
But with the urbanisation and
development of the concept of planned city,
regulations, restrictions, on such common law right
have been imposed. But as the provisions of the Act
intend to regulate and restrict a common law right,
and not any right or liability created under the Act
itself, it cannot be said that the right and the remedy
have been given uno flatu e.g. “in the same breath”.
Most of the cases of this Court referred to above
related to statutes creating rights or liabilities and
providing remedies at the same time. As such the
principles enunciated therein, shall not be fully
applicable in the present case. In spite of the bar
prescribed under sub-sections (4) and (5) of Section
343 and Section 347-E of the Corporation Act over the
power of the courts, under certain special
circumstances, the court can examine, whether the
dispute falls within the ambit of the Act. But once the
court is satisfied that either the provisions of the Act
are not applicable to the building in question or the
basic procedural requirements which are vital in
nature, have not been followed, it shall have
jurisdiction, to enquire and investigate while
protecting the common law rights of the citizens. Can
a court hold a suit to be not maintainable, although
along with the plaint materials are produced to show
that the building in question is not within the
Corporation limits, or that the constructions were made
prior to coming into force of the relevant provisions of
the Act? We are conscious of the fact that persons
who make unauthorised constructions by contravening
and violating the building bye-laws or regulations
often run to courts, with pleas mentioned above,
specially that no notice was issued or served on them,
before the Corporation has ordered the demolition of
the constructions.
29. It is well known that in most of the cities building
regulations and bye-laws have been framed, still it has
been discovered that constructions have been made
RFA No.34/2003

5 of 12

without any sanction or in contravention of the
sanctioned plan, and such constructions have
continued without any intervention. There cannot be
two opinions that the regulations or bye-laws in
respect of buildings, are meant to serve the public
interest. But at the same time it cannot be held that in
all circumstances, the authorities entrusted with the
demolition of unauthorised constructions, have
exclusive power, to the absolute exclusion of the
power of the court. In some special cases where
“jurisdictional error” on the part of the Corporation is
established, a suit shall be maintainable. According to
us :
(1) The court should not ordinarily entertain
a suit in connection with the proceedings initiated for
demolition, by the Commissioner, in terms of Section
343(1) of the Corporation Act. The court should direct
the persons aggrieved to pursue the remedy before the
appellate tribunal and then before the administrator in
accordance with the provisions of the said Act.

8.

(2)The court should entertain a suit
questioning the validity of an order passed under
Section 343 of the Act, only if the court is of prima
facie opinion that the order is nullity in the eyes of law
because of any “jurisdictional error” in exercise of the
power by the Commissioner or that the order is outside
the Act.”
(emphasis supplied)
The law laid down by the Supreme Court was followed by this

Court in the judgments reported at 77(1999) DLT 5 entitled Manohar Lal
Chatrath and another vs. Municipal Corporation of Delhi; 1995 II
AD(Delhi) 573 entitled ANZ Grindlays Bank Plc. vs. Commissioner,
MCD and in the judgment reported at 2001 III AD Delhi 911 entitled
Prabhu Dayal Vs. MCD & Another. We are bound by the dicta of the
RFA No.34/2003

6 of 12

Supreme Court. We also respectfully agree with and the aforestated
pronouncements of this Court.
9.

No doubt it has been held that the appellate forum under the

DMC is an alternative and efficacious remedy which puts a specific bar
on the civil court to entertain certain categories of suits, however such
remedy is not an absolute prohibition to civil suits of every nature. It is
necessary for a court to examine as to whether a plaint laid before it
along with materials produced on record falls within the mischief which
has been sought to be remedied in the categories laid down by the
Supreme Court of India.

10.

The present case appears to be a classic instance of the

suit referred to by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India

where

constructions are raised without any intervention or compliance of
legal provisions. Protection of court is sought by injunction in order
to perpetuate the illegality.

The trial court records have been

produced before us and we have been taken through the same with
assistance of the learned counsel for the parties. We find that the
plaint is in a cyclostyled proforma with the names of the plaintiff
and the khasra number where the property is stated to have been
situated filled in.
RFA No.34/2003

There is no document supporting any of the
7 of 12

contentions raised by the plaintiff filed alongwith the plaint.

No

material, showing that the jurisdiction of the defendants was ousted,
is forthcoming on record. The plaintiff has filed a single photo copy
of a property tax to receipt in order to support its claim of
occupation. The reliance on a receipt purportedly issued by the
Municipal Corporation of Delhi itself tantamounts to an admission
of the defendant no.1-MCD having jurisdiction over the suit
property. Even this receipt does not show the extent of construction,
if any. Construction raised only in accordance with law can be
protected further. There is not even a whisper in the plaint of the
manner in which the plaintiff acquired title or possession over the
suit property nor any document placed on record. A photo copy of
the document purporting to be a khasra girdawari has been filed.
This photo copy does not show the year to which it relates nor
supports the contentions of the plaintiffs that they were in
possession as owner or that any construction existed on the suit
property or its legality. Bald assertions of title, possession and prior
construction unsupported by any material whatsoever are of no
consequence in the eyes of law. Similarly bald pleas of alleged
RFA No.34/2003

8 of 12

illegalities on the part of the statutory authorities are of no avail to a
plaintiff inasmuch as, following the pronouncement in Shiv
Kumar(supra), the court is required to scrutinise and examine the
material as well as the pleas raised in order to see prima facie
sustainability of the contentions made by the plaintiff.
11.

We may test also the pleas raised on behalf of the

defendant as the suit would fail on this count as well. The MCD has
stated on record that it had proposed no action in the year 1990 and
that it has issued a show cause notice in the year 1995. From this
plea, it is also apparent that the plaintiff has no cause of action for
bringing the suit in the year 1990 and was merely putting up a bogey
of proposed demolition action on the part of the MCD. Despite the
plea of the MCD of having issued a show cause notice and
proceeded in accordance with law in the year 1995, the plaintiff does
not appear to have taken any action in respect of the same before the
Appellate Tribunal. This action was obviously after the filing of the
suit and as such is not subject matter of the plaint. The plaintiff has
not impugned this action in any appropriate proceedings.
12.

In the instant case the plaintiff has failed to make out a

RFA No.34/2003

9 of 12

prima facie case in support of its claim. It has placed no material on
record to oust the jurisdiction of MCD or the DDA. There is no
material whatsoever placed on record to show existence of
construction. The plaintiff has neither averred nor placed on record
any material also to prima facie show, let alone conclusively
establish, the validity or legality or the extent of its construction. We
may also notice that it is settled law that, in any event, relief of
injunction shall not be issued merely on the making out of a legal
point. [(Re: AIR 1997 SC 1326(para 10) Ramniklal N. Bhutta Vs.
State of Maharashtra)].
13.

An objection as to the maintainability of a pleading, which

does not require examination of depositions is in the nature of a
demurrer. Such objection relates to the form and a substance of the
pleading, is apparent on its face and does not require any further material
to be looked at. It relates to an objection in a point of law. In order to
decide such a plea it assumes as true the facts lodged by the other party
and declares that those facts are not sufficient to raise the legal inference
or to afford ground of relief, for which the other party contends. A
demurrer merely declares that that party's own allegations are insufficient
to support the contention which it puts forward. Such objections include
RFA No.34/2003

10 of 12

defendants' objection that opponents pleading disclose no cause of action
or grounds or defence as the case may be. ( Re: Halsbury's Law of
England IIIrd Edn. Vol.30 page 17 para 35); 1969(3) All ER 1537.
14.

In the instant case the question which was raised by the

learned trial judge as a preliminary issue was not in the nature of a mere
objection in law raised by the other party. In view of the dictum of the
Supreme Court of India in Shiv Kumar Chadha's case, the court is
required to scrutinise not only the plaint but also the materials produced
with it

in order to arrive at a conclusion as to whether or not the

jurisdiction of the Civil Court was barred. For this reason we have
examined the entire material placed before the learned trial judge for the
purposes of adjudication of the issue raised.

15.

So far as the plea of the defendant that the land was not

the subject matter of acquisition inasmuch as the acquisition resorted
to Delhi Administration had been quashed by the Division bench of
this Court in respect of 13 villages including village Khirki is
concerned, we may point out that the same is now the subject matter
of authoritative pronouncements of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of
India in the cases reported at 2000(7) SCC 296 entitled Delhi
Administration Vs. Gurdip Singh Uban. The plaintiff has not
RFA No.34/2003

11 of 12

contended that it had objected to the proposed acquisition and,
therefore, does not fall within the exclusion provided by the
Supreme Court of India in the afore stated case.

We have

commented on this aspect of the matter in view of the authoritative
pronouncements by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India on this
aspect by which we are bound.
16.

Therefore, we are unable to agree with the contentions

made by the learned counsel for the appellant. We find no merit in
the appeal which is hereby dismissed.

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE

October 15, 2004
JK

RFA No.34/2003

DR.MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA
JUDGE

12 of 12

