REPORTABLE
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
RFA NO.484/2004
Date of decision : 15th October, 2004
Prabhu Dayal

... Appellant
through Mr.Sudhir Nandrajog
with Ms.Toetini Bosue, Advocate
VERSUS

Roop Kumar & others

.... Respondents
through Mr.R.S.Endlaw, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE JUSTICE DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Yes
Digest?
GITA MITTAL, J.

1.

This appeal is directed against the judgment and decree

dated 6th February, 1991 passed by the learned Additional District
Judge, Delhi in Suit No.60/2001 ( Old Suit No.19/1991) decreeing
the suit filed by the respondent No.1.
2.

One Roop Kumar(respondent no.1 herein) brought a suit

RFA 484/2004

1 of 23

for

permanent

and

mandatory

injunction

against

Prabhu

Dayal(appellant herein). The appellant and respondent nos.2 to 7
(arrayed as defendant nos. 2 to 7 in the suit) were sons and daughters
of late Shri Kapoor Chand. Plaintiff averred that his father Kapoor
Chand was a tenant in shop no.7707-07, Dharam Pura Lodge, Clock
Tower, Subji Mandi, Delhi(hereinafter referred to as the 'suit
property') for the last 40 to 55 years. They carried on business
originally of cycle tyres and repairs and laterly sold juice. They
were lastly doing the business of cotton in the name of Sharma
Cotton Cording and Flour Mills. Shri Kapoor Chand died inter state
on 12th November, 1990 and his brother Vasudev died a bachelor on
25th November, 1990. According to the plaintiff Shri Vasudev some
time lived in the shop and sometimes with the plaintiff. The plaintiff
claimed that he had executed a Will dated 22nd November, 1990
bequeathing his entire movable and immovable properties in favour
of the plaintiff.
3.

According to the plaintiff, defendant no.1-Prabhu Dayal

was an employee of Shri Vasudev in the business carried on in the
shops in dispute.
RFA 484/2004

Since the business of making quilts etc. was
2 of 23

carried out late into the night the defendant no.1(appellant herein)
sometimes was permitted to reside in the shops. On demise of both
Shri Kapoor Chand and Shri Vasudev the plaintiff had requested to
Shri Prabhu Dayal, defendant no.1 that his services were no longer
required and asked him to leave the shop in dispute. Defendant no.1
requested for permission to stay till he made alternative
arrangements but later turned dishonest.
4.

As the licence of the defendant no.1 had been terminated,

the plaintiff brought the suit seeking the following prayers:“The plaintiff prays that this Hon'ble Court be
pleased to pass a decree in favor of the plaintiff and
against the defendant no. 1.
i)
for permanent injunction restraining the
defendant no. 1 from entering the shops no. 770607, Dharam Pura Lodge Clock Tower, Subjzi
Mandi, Delhi; or in the alternative for mandatory
injunction commanding and directing the defendant
no. 1 to vacate the said shops no. 7706-07 Dharam
Pura Lodge Clock Tower, Subzi Mandi Delhi,
and/or
ii)
for permanent injunction restraining the
defendant no. 1 from dealing in any manner
whatsoever or disposing off or appropriating to
himself any of the assets or properties of Shri Vasu
Dev alias Vasu Dev detailed in para 5 of the plaint;
and/or
RFA 484/2004

3 of 23

iii)
grant permission to the plaintiff under
order 2 Rule 2 C.P.C. As per para 14 hereinabove.
iv)
award costs of the suit to the plaintiff
against the defendant no. 1; and/or

5.

v)
grant such other and further relief as may
be deemed fit and proper in the facts and
circumstances of the case.”
Defendants 2 to 7, brothers and sisters of the plaintiff

admitted the claim of the plaintiff. They sought permission to visit
the shops in dispute and to safeguard their interest in the business
and make inspections. Defendant no.8 i.e. the WAKF Board also
filed a written statement setting up a case that only Shri Vasudev
Sharma was a tenant in the shops in dispute and that the tenancy
rights could not have been willed away by any person.
6.

In the instant matter we are concerned only with the rights

of the defendant no.1 to occupy the shop in question. The defendant
no.1 in its written statement set up following claim:“Preliminary Objections
That the defendant no.1 has been serving late Shri
Vasudev Sharma and used to take care of him
during his lifetime. In addition to this, the
defendant no.1 has been doing business in
partnership with late Shri Vasudev Sharma under
the name and style of M/s Sharma Prabhu Dayal &
RFA 484/2004

4 of 23

Co. vide deed of partnership dated 12.11.1990
commenced orally in the year 1980 by investing
capital of about Rupees one lakh in equal shares
which was subsequently reduced in writing. The
answering defendant was authorised to operate the
bank account of of the partnership business. The
actual business was being run by the answering
defendant while late Shri Vasudev Sharma was a
sleeping partner and used to supervise the work
asper convenience of his health. He had no issue.
After the death of late Shri Vasudev Sharma, the
answering defendant is the sole proprietor of the
business known as Sharma Prabhu Dayal & Co.
Earlier it was under the name of Sharma Flour
Mills & Cotton cording Machine in the premises
in dispute comprising of shop no.7706-07
Dharampur Lodge, Ghanta Ghar, Subzi Mandi,
Delhi. The defendants no.2 to 7 late Kapoor
Chand, father of the plaintiff or the plaintiff never
remained in possession nor has any right, title or
interest or concern either in the premises in dispute
or in the business or in the assets. The plaintiff
has obtained ex-parte injunction order by making
willful false statements in the plaint and
suppressing the truth from this Hon'ble Court.
On merits
Para 4 is wrong and denied. The defendant no.4
has been doing business in partnership since 1980
which terms were reduced in writing vide
partnership deed dated 26.10.90 by investing a
capital of about Rs. one lakh in equal shares on the
machinery, tools and other assets. After the death
of late Vasudev Sharma the entire assets and
liabilities have devolved upon the answering
defendant who has become the sole proprietor of
the concern M/s Sharma Prabhudayal & Co.”
RFA 484/2004

5 of 23

7.

The defendant no.1 had, therefore, set up a plea of being

an heir by testamentary disposition as well as the surviving partner
of late Shri Vasudev and claimed exclusive possession of the suit
property. He pleaded that the suit for mandatory injunction of the
plaintiff were incompetent.

The partnership dated 26th October,

1990 was set up by the defendant no.1 besides the Will dated 31st
August, 1989 in his favour.
8.

The matter proceeded to trial on the following issues

framed on 24th March, 2003:“1.
Whether the deceased Vasu Dev had
executed any will dated 22.11.1990, as
propounded by the plaintiff? If So, whether the
said Will was validly executed in sound
disposing state of mind?
2.
Whether the plaintiff has no locus
standi to file the present suit?
3.
Whether the suit has not been
properly valued for the purpose of court fee and
jurisdiction?
4.
Whether the defendant no. 1 has
inherited the tenancy right as alleged in para 8
of the written statement?
5.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the
relief as claimed?”
RFA 484/2004

6 of 23

9.

The plaintiff appeared in the witness box himself and

examined two witnesses in support of the Will dated 22 nd November,
1990. The defendant had filed his affidavit which was tendered in
evidence by him. The defendant was subjected to an extensive
cross-examination on his deposition on affidavit.
10.

After examination of the entire evidence on record, the

learned trial judge returned findings on all issues in favour of the
respondent no.1 and decreed the suit of the plaintiff vide judgment
and decree dated 27th July, 2004. This judgment has been impugned
before us principally on two contentions which are as follows:(i) The plaintiff's plea of the defendant no.1 being
an employee of late Shri Vasudev was based on no
evidence.
(ii) irrespective of the plea set up by the defendant
no.1 as to the nature of his possession i.e. either as
the surviving partner of the partnership firm or as
heir of late Shri Vasudev under the Will in his
favour which was Exhibit DW-1/DA dated 26th
October, 1990,the defendant no.1 was in settled
possession of the suit property and could be evicted
only by a decree of the court only in a suit for
possession. No suit for mandatory injunction
directing the defendant no.1 to vacate the suit
property could lie. The judgment and decree was
liable to be set aside for this ground alone.
11.

We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have

RFA 484/2004

7 of 23

been taken through the entire record. We may right at the inception
deal with the two Wills set up respectively by the plaintiff and
defendant no.1. During the course of arguments we were informed
that both the parties had filed petitions seeking probates of the
respective Wills (plaintiff's will dated 20th February, 1990 and
defendant's Will dated 31st August, 1989) in their favour. Both the
Wills were disbelieved by the Probate Court and the Probate
Petitions dismissed. These adjudications were not further impugned
and have attained finality. As such we are not required to return a
finding on the testamentary dispositions allegedly made by late Shri
Vasudev.
12.

We may now deal with the two contentions aforestated,

the first relating to the nature of relationship of defendant no.1 to
late Shri Vasudev.
13.

We find that the learned trial judge has found that the

defendant no.1 was an employee of late Shri Vasudev Sharma at the
shop.

It has been brought on record that defendant no.1. was

running the shop during the life time of Shri Vasudev Sharma with
his permission.
RFA 484/2004

On the death of Shri Vasudev Sharma the
8 of 23

permission to run the shop came to an end. The defendant no.1 in
para 3 of his written statement reproduced hereinabove has admitted
that he was serving late Shri Vasudev Sharma and used to take care
of him during his life time. In his cross-examination,the defendant
no.1 had stated that when he came to the shop initially he was only
12 years of age. It is the admitted case of the defendant no.1 that he
obtained access to the suit property only by virtue of his service with
late Shri Vasudev Shrma. It is in answer to the case of the plaintiff
that defendant no.1 tried to set up a case of title under the Will dated
31st August, 1989. The defendant took up a further plea that he was
occupying the premises as a partner of late Shri Vasudev Sharma
under an oral partnership in the year 1980 which was adduced into
writing on 26th October, 1980. The defendant no.1 claimed that this
partnership deed was attested by the Notary Public on 12th
November, 1990.
14.

This partnership deed in original was produced on record

before the learned trial judge as Exhibit DW-1/A.

We have

scrutinised this document as the same is contended to be a forged
and fabricated document on the part of the defendant no.1
RFA 484/2004

9 of 23

Examination of this document would show that it does not bear the
signatures of late Shri Vasudev Sharma on all the pages. The stamp
paper does not appear to have been purchased in the name of either
of the partners. The defendant no.1 appears to have signed only the
last page of the deed. Pages 1 and 2 are not signed by him. Page
no.2 of the deed is not signed by either Vasudev Sharma or by the
defendant no.1. Furthermore there is no explanation forthcoming
from the side of the defendant no.1 as to the delay in attestation and
notarisation of the partnership deed. It has come in the crossexamination of the defendant no.1 that Kapoor Chand who was real
brother of Vasudev Sharma had expired on 12th November, 1990 and
further that Shri Vasudev Sharma himself had been in and out of
hospitals on account of ill health since 14thNovember, 1990. The
typing appearing at pages 1 and 2 of the partnership deed was
different from each other. The partnership deed appears to have bear
the signatures of two attesting witnesses. Neither of these witnesses
nor the Notary Public was produced in evidence. From the crossexamination of the defendant no.1, it appears that Shri Mahavir
Prasad was a witness to both the alleged partnership deed as well as
RFA 484/2004

10 of 23

to the Will dated 31st August, 1989 propounded by the defendant
no.1. This witness was disbelieved by the probate court and perhaps
for this reason he was not produced in the witness box.
15.

The partnership set up by the defendant no.1 is to be

disbelieved also for the reason that he set up a false plea of having
invested capital of Rs. one lac in equal shares alongwith Shri
Vasudev Sharma in the partnership business in the year 1980. Upon
cross examination the defendant no.1 retracted and admitted that he
had not invested any amount whatsoever.

The defendant no.1

attempted to set up a case that he had been told by Shri Vasudev that
the defendant no.1 had capital in the business on account of his
working at the shops. The defendant no.1 could not produce an iota
of evidence in support of having any aspect of the partnership
having been given effect to. We have, therefore, no hesitation in
agreeing with the trial court that the alleged partnership deserved to
be disbelieved.
16.

In any case, the material fact in the instant case is the fact

that the defendant no.1 did not set up any plea that he came into the
possession of the suit property by virtue of the partnership deed. We
RFA 484/2004

11 of 23

may appropriately set out the few material terms of even the
partnership deed as set up by the defendant no.1, which are as
under:“1. That the party of the first part Sh. Vasdev
Sharma is the tenant in the premises shop no.7706
and 7707, Dharampura Lodge, Ghanta Ghar
Chowk, Subzi Mandi, Delhi and the rent of
Rs.26.24 p. only that is at the rate of Rs.13.12p.
Only per shop respectively for the last more than
40 years and the tenancy will continue will the
party of first part and the party of the second part
will have to do nothing with the tenancy.
However the possession will be a joined
possession. The party of the first part will being
old in firm person and agreed to be a sleeping
partner, and as agreed to just sitting the shop and
superwise the work as per convenience to his
health.
8. That on the death of any of the partners/parties
the survived party shall continued the business in
thename of the firm. In case of the death of first
party of all the capital, goods, machinery and tools
and extra with all the money in the account of the
firm the second party are is legal heirs will
possession own everything and can the business
with the consent of the landlord. Because the first
party has got no issue and alone. He has been
looked after and served very nicely by the second
party and his children.”
17.

Therefore, even as per the case set up by the defendant

no.1 he has no right to the tenancy or to occupy the suit property. In
RFA 484/2004

12 of 23

any event, as per the document relied upon by the defendant no.1,
the partnership stood dissolved upon the death of Shri Vasudev on
28th of November, 1990.
18.

In this background it is necessary to examine the nature of

possession of the defendant no.1 and protection, if any, available to
him in law.
19.

The expression “possession” fell for consideration in

judgment reported at 1994(30) DRJ 597 entitled Shri Sham Lal Vs.
Rajinder Kumar and others. It was held as under:“13.Possession is flexible term and is not
necessarily restricted to mere actual possession
of the property. The legal conception of
possession may be in various forms. The two
elements of possession are the corpus and the
animus.
A person though in physical
possession may not be in possession in the eye
of law, if the animus be lacking. On the
contrary, to be in possession, it is not necessary
that one must be in actual physical contact. To
gain the complete idea of possession, one must
consider
(i)
the person possessing,
(ii)
the things possessed and,
(iii)
the person excluded from
possession.
A man may hold an object without
claiming any interest therein for himself. A
servant though holding an object, holds it for
his master. He has, therefore, merely custody
RFA 484/2004

13 of 23

20.

of the thing and not the possession which
would always be with the master though the
master may not be in actual contact of the thing.
It is in this light in which the concept of
possession has to be understood in the context
of a servant and a master.”
It is settled law that possession of a servant is possession

of the real owner. The defendant no.1 having been an employee of
late Shri Vasudev Sharma cannot be said to be having any interest in
the suit property. Such occupation by a servant does not entitle him
to exclude his master and the person having the rights in the
property from his possession or exercising right to possess the suit
property.
21.

We are unable to hold that the defendant no.1 was in such

settled possession as would entitle him to exclude his master from
enjoying or claiming possession of the property or as would entitle
to compel the master from sitting away from his own property. The
defendant no.1 was permtited entry into the suit property only
because he was a servant of late Shri Vasudev when he was 12 years
of age. The defendant no.1 has failed to disclose the time or the
manner in which he came into exclusive possession even. As such
we would agree with the learned trial judge that the defendant was
RFA 484/2004

14 of 23

merely in unauthorised occupation of the premises inasmuch as the
licence of the defendant no.1 stood terminated upon the death of
Shri Vasudev on 25th November, 1990 and again when the plaintiff
asked the defendant no.1 to vacate the suit premises.
22.

The Will relied upon by the defendant no.1 stands

disbelieved and rejected by the probate court. We are bound by the
findings recorded by the probate court which have attained finality.
It is thus apparent that the defendant no.1 had no right or entitlement
to occupy the suit premises on account of succession under a
testamentary dispossession by late Shri Vasudev Sharma. We have
already found that the defendant no.1 had no right whatsoever to
occupy the premises by virtue of the partnership dated 26th October,
1990.
23.

In support of the objection to the maintainability of the

plea defendant no.1 has relied upon a judgment reported at AIR
1964 J&K 99 entitled Milka Singh and others vs. Diana to contend
that the suit was not maintainable.

Counsel for the appellant

contended that even if the plea of termination of licence of the
defendant no.1 was accepted, the defendant no.1 did not become an
RFA 484/2004

15 of 23

unauthorised occupant and the plaintiff was bound to have filed a
suit for possession which would be covered under Section 7(v) of
the Court Fee Act, 1870. The suit in the instant case being a suit for
mandatory injunction on which court fee had been affixed in
accordance with Section 7(iv)(d) of the Court Fee Act, 1870 was not
competent and was liable to be dismissed.
24.

In order to test this plea, which is to be examined in the

light of our finding that the defendant no.1 was a mere licencee
which stood terminated on the death of Shri Vasudev Sharma we
may advert to the valuation given by the plaintiff in the plaint:“13.
That the valuation of the suit for the purposes of Court fee
and jurisdiction is as under :
Relief

Value for
C/fee

1. for the relief of
permanent injunction
restraining the
defendant no.1 from
entering the said
shops
130/-

Value for
jurisdiction

130/-

Court
fee paid

Rs.13/-

In the alternative for
Mandatory injunction
directing the defendant
no.1 to vacate the
RFA 484/2004

16 of 23

said shops

25000/-

2. for permanent
injunction restraining
the defendant no.1
from dealing with or
appropriating any of
the assets proeprty of
Shri Vasu Dev including
the Goods lying in the
said shops and FDRs in
the Subzi Mandi Branch
of Punjab National Bank,
Delhi
130/25.

25000/-

Rs.2100/-

130/-

Rs.13/_____________
Rs.2126/-”
In its written statement the defendant no.1had set up a

vague plea that the suit was not valued appropriately for the purpose
of Court Fee and jurisdiction and in reply to para 13 stated as
under:“13. Para 13 is incorrect and denied. The suit is not
property valued for the purposes of the Court fee
and jurisdiction.”
26.

It was also held by the Division Bench of the Jammu &

Kashmir High Court in Milka Singh's case(supra) that a mere license
does not create any estate or interest in the property to which it
relates; it only makes an act lawful which without it would be
unlawful and thus the status of a licensee is essentially different
RFA 484/2004

17 of 23

from that of a trespasser or a tenant.

It was further held that

possession of a licensee is not a judicial possession but only an
occupation with the permission of the licenser and while the actual
occupation remains with the licensee, the control or possession of
the property is with the licenser through his licensee.
27.

Counsel for the respondent has placed reliance on the

judgment reported at AIR 1985 SC 857 entitled Sant Lal Jain vs.
Avtar Singh wherein the Supreme Court affirmed the principles of
law laid down in AIR 1964 J&K 99. It was held that the Supreme
Court has held that a licensee is always a licensee and it is not open
to him, during the subsistence of the licence or in the suit for
recovery possession of the property instituted after the revocation of
the licence to set up title to the property in himself or anyone else. It
was held that it is his plain duty to surrender possession of the
property as a licensee and seek his remedy separately in case he has
acquired title to the property subsequently through some other
person. The facts of said case are similar to the facts of the case in
hand.

In the said case the defendant/respondent took from the

appellant on licence for one year under a deed dated 10th December,
RFA 484/2004

18 of 23

1969 the suit shed for carrying on the work of repair of motors,
tractors etc. and as he did not vacate the same after the expiry of the
period his licence was terminated after which a suit was filed on
15th February, 1973 for

mandatory injunction directing him to

vacate the premises. The respondent opposed the suit contending
that the appellant sublet to him a plot of land in 1966-67 and he had
raised a new construction thereon and was carrying on workshop
business therein since then and the relationship between the parties
was that of landlord and tenant and that the suit for mandatory
injunction was not maintainable. The Supreme Court in the said
decision referred to the decision of the Jammu & Kashmir High
Court in the case of Milka Singh (supra) wherein it was observed
that the principle that once a licensee always a licensee would apply
to all kinds of licences and that it cannot be said that the moment the
licence is terminated, the licensee's possession becomes that of a
trespasser.

After having held thus, in para 7 of the said judgment,

it was held by the Supreme Court as under:“7.
In the present case it has not been
shown to us that the appellant had come to the
court with the suit for mandatory injunction after
RFA 484/2004

19 of 23

28.

any considerable delay which will disentitle him
to the discretionary relief. Even if there was
some delay, we think that in a case of this kind
attempt should be made to avoid multiplicity of
suits and the licensor should not be driven to file
another round of suit with all the attendant delay,
trouble and expense. The suit is in effect one for
possession though couched in the form of a suit
for mandatory injunction as what would be given
to the plaintiff in case he succeeds in possession
of the property to which he may be found to be
entitled. Therefore, we are of the opinion that the
appellant should not be denied relief merely
because he had couched the plaint in the form of
a suit for mandatory injunction”.
In para 8 of the said judgment the Supreme Court held

thus:
“8.
The respondent was a licensee, and
he must be deemed to be always a licensee. It
is not open to him, during the subsistence of
the licence or in the suit for recovery of
possession of the property instituted after the
revocation of the licence to set up title to the
property in himself or anyone else. It is his
plaint duty to surrender possession of the
property as a licensee and seek his remedy
separately in case he has acquired title to the
property subsequently through some other
person. He need not do so if he has acquired
title to the property from the licensor or
from someone else lawfully claiming under
him in which case there would be clear
merger. The respondent has not surrendered
possession of the property to the appellant
even after the termination of the licence and
RFA 484/2004

20 of 23

29.

the institution of the suit. The appellant is,
therefore, entitled to recover possession of
the property. We accordingly allow the
appeal with costs throughout and direct the
respondent to deliver possession of the
property to the appellant forthwith failing
which it will be open to the appellant to
execute the decree and obtain possession”.
The Supreme Court further held that where a licensor

approaches the court for injunction within a reasonable time after the
license is terminated he is entitled to the injunction. It was also
affirmed that in the event the licensor causes huge delay, the court
may refuse the discretion to grant an injunction on the ground the
licensor had not been diligent and in that case the licensor will have
to bring a suit for possession which will be governed by Section 7(v)
of the Court Fee Act.
30.

Learned counsel for the plaintiff/respondent no.1 has also

relied on a judgment of learned single judge of this Court reported at
(46) 1992 DLT 173 wherein it was held that license to occupy a
property having been revoked the plaintiff was entitled to file and
maintain a suit for mandatory injunction.

We are in respectful

agreement with the views expressed by the learned single judge.
31.

It appears Shri Vasudev expired on the 28th of November,

RFA 484/2004

21 of 23

1990. The suit was admittedly filed on or about 5th February, 1991.
In the instant case the plaintiff in its plaint has stated as hereunder:-

32.

“That the cause of action for the suit accrued to
the plaintiff against the defendant no.1 when the
licence of the defendant no.1 stood terminated
upon the death of Shri Vasu Dev on 25.11.1990
and again on or about the month of December,
1990 when the plaintiff asked the defendant no.1
to vacate/leave the said shops and also on
30.1.1991, 31.1.1991 and 2.2.1991 as stated in
para 7 hereinabove. The suit is being filed
immediately and no relief claimed in the suit
barred by time. No relief has been claimed
against defendants no.2 to 7.”
We do not find that there was any unreasonable or undue

delay in filing the suit for injunction dis-entitling the plaintiff to
maintain the suit and or such unreasonable delay after termination of
the licence as would require a plaintiff to bring a suit for possession.
33.

It is also submitted by learned counsel for the plaintiff that

the only distinction in bringing a suit for possession vis-a-vis the suit for
mandatory injunction relates to the court fee payable on the plaint. So far
as a suit for injunction is concerned the plaintiff is given liberty to value
the suit under Section 7(iv) (d) of the Court Fees Act according to the
amount at which the relief sought is valued in the plaint.
34.

It is urged on behalf of the plaintiff that in the instant case the

RFA 484/2004

22 of 23

plaintiff was seeking injunction with regard to tenancy rights.

The

property was admittedly rented premises. The rental for the suit premises
was merely Rs.24/- per month. According to learned counsel, such a case
would be valued in accordance with Section 7(xi)(cc) according to the
amount or rent which would be payable for the year next before the date
or presenting the plaint. We are not expressing any opinion on this
aspect as we have held that suit as framed was competent.
35.

In this view of the afore stated discussion we find no merit in

the Appeal which is hereby dismissed.

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
October15, 2004
JK

RFA 484/2004

DR.MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA
JUDGE

23 of 23

