IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Writ Petition (C) No.1183/2006
Date of decision:

15th November, 2007

SHRI MUNNA LAL
... Petitioner
through Ms. Deepali Gupta, Advocate
VERSUS

MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF DELHI & ORS. .... Respondents
through Mr. S.C. Sharma, Advocate for
the respondent no.1.
Ms. Archna Gaur, Adv. for the
respondent no.2.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1.Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the Judgment?
2.To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3.Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
GITA MITTAL, J (Oral)
1.

This writ petition has been filed by Mr. Munna Lal on the

claim that he was running a tea stall from shop no.14, Bagichi
Madho Das, Petti Market, Lal Quila, Delhi since 1972.

The

petitioner claims to have applied for squatting licence in the
year 1992 as per the scheme of the MCD. Reliance is placed on
two receipts which are dated 13th March, 1981 and 6th January,
2004 showing certain payments having been effected by the
petitioner to the MCD.
2.

Based on these documents, the petitioner has contended

WP (C) No.1183/2006

Page No.1

that the petitioner was validly carrying on his business of
running the tea stall from the site in question. The grievance of
the petitioner is that in 2004, the petitioner was forced to
vacate the premises on mis-representation and threats from the
Archaeological Survey of India while other squatters were
permitted to continue. The petitioner has contended that one
Mr. Sharma, respondent no.4 herein, was permitted to occupy
the spot which was occupied by the petitioner and is carrying
on business even on date.
3.

Both the MCD arrayed as respondent no.1 herein and the

Archaeological Survey of India arrayed as respondent nos.2 & 3
herein, have filed counter affidavits opposing the writ petition.
According to the Archaeological Survey of India, the Red Fort is
a monument of national importance and has been declared as a
“Protected Monument” under the provisions of the Ancient
Monuments & Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958. The
area adjacent to the Red Fort which is owned by the MCD, was
handed over to the Archaeological Survey of India for care and
maintenance after a detailed survey. The copy of the handing
over and taking over report dated 22nd October, 2002 has been
placed on record. According to the respondent nos.2 & 3, the
area was handed over to it by the MCD after removal of
encroachments and that the entire area has been beautified as
a prelude to the Red Fort being declared as a World Heritage

WP (C) No.1183/2006

Page No.2

Monument by UNESCO.
4.

Reliance is placed on the directions dated 12th July, 2006

passed in WP (C) No.18878/2005 entitled Zamir Hussain Vs.
MCD wherein the court had disposed of a similar petition
holding that no person was permitted to squat/hawk in the area.
5.

It is the contention of the MCD as well that no person has

been permitted or allotted any teh bazari or hawking licence in
the area. The MCD disputes that any licence has been granted
to the respondent no.4 or that the respondent no.4 is carrying
on any business of cycle/rickshaw repair under the trade name
`OM' at the site in question.
6.

The MCD has also denied the receipt of the application of

the petitioner for issuance of squatting licence (tehbazari). It
has also been contended that the petitioner has not been found
in the name of registered tehbazari holders as per the
pronouncement of the Apex Court in Gainda Ram & Ors. Vs.
MCD & Ors. (1998) 1 SCC 188 & Gainda Ram & Ors. Vs.
MCD, Town Hall & Ors. (1993) 3 SCC 178 and that no
tehbazari was allotted to the petitioner either by Zonal
Committee or by Justice R.C. Chopra Committee. The MCD also
points out that as per the policy recognised by the Apex Court
in the writ petition filed by Janta Hawkers Welfare Committee,
the policy period thereunder was w.e.f. 10th May, 2001 to 27th
August, 2001 and that no application was entertained which

WP (C) No.1183/2006

Page No.3

was not on the prescribed format of Rs.10/- issued by the MCD
and that the petitioner had not applied under such policy.

It

has therefore been contended that the petitioner has no right
whatsoever to maintain the present writ petition.
7.

It is well settled that so far as the grant of tehbazari or

hawking licence is concerned,

the matter is no longer res

integra and has been settled by the Apex Court in judgments in
several writ petitions.

The petitioner was admittedly not

considered eligible and granted the tehbazari rights as per the
scheme approved by the MCD in Gainda Ram & Ors. (Supra). It
is also noteworthy that in a recent National Policy on Urban
Street Vendors which was approved by the Apex Court in its
judgments reported at 2007 (8) SCALE 334 and in (1989) 4
SCC 155 & (1992) 2 SCC 458 both entitled Sudhir Madan
Vs. MCD, it has been contended that all rights of street
vendors would be considered in terms of this policy and the
pronouncements of the Apex Court.
8.

Ms. Deepali Gupta, learned counsel for the petitioner, has

submitted that in view of the facts relating to the business
which was carried on by the petitioner and which commenced
as back as in the year 1972, he has been wrongfully deprived of
even consideration for the licence despite his having submitted
the application and having made payments as noticed above.
She places reliance on the direction of the Division Bench in

WP (C) No.1183/2006

Page No.4

2005 V AD (Delhi) 38 entitled MCD & Anr. Vs. Naresh
Kumar & Ors. to urge that the petitioner has a right to be
considered and an opportunity to satisfy the authorities that he
has a valid claim de hors the claim which was before the Apex
Court in Gainda Ram & Ors. (Supra) & Saudan Singh (Supra).
9.

In view of the above, inasmuch as the respondents have

contended that they have not allotted any site to the
respondent no.4, the petitioner would not be entitled to the
relief as prayed in prayers (a), (b) & (c) of the writ petition.
However, so far as the claim of the petitioner in prayer (d) for
hawking/squatting space in any other area is concerned, the
same was required to abide by the applicable policy framed by
the MCD as noticed hereinabove. Certainly, the petitioner could
be entitled to consideration of his rights and claim even in
accordance with the principles laid down by this court in
Division Bench of this court in MCD & Anr. Vs. Naresh Kumar &
Ors. (Supra).
Accordingly, this writ petition is allowed with the direction
to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner herein
on production of relevant material and to decide his entitlement
in accordance with the National Policy on Urban Street Vendors,
2004 which has been approved by the Apex Court in Sudhir
Madan & Ors. Vs. MCD & Ors.(Surpa).
The petitioner shall be at liberty to place all such

WP (C) No.1183/2006

Page No.5

documents and material before the MCD within a period of four
weeks from today.

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
November 15, 2007
aa

WP (C) No.1183/2006

Page No.6

