IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.4490/2005
Date of decision: 16th February, 2006
KANODIA HOSIERY MILLS
...
Petitioner
through: Mr. Anil, Advocate with Mr.
Deepak
Sinha, Advocate
VERSUS
SATVIR SINGH & ANOTHER
...
Respondents
through: Mr. Mohd. Yasin, Advocate with
Mr. D.K. Ahlawat, Advocate for
Respondent No.1/Workman
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?
GITA MITTAL, J. (Oral)
1.
By this petition, the petitioner has impugned an order dated
21st September, 2004 passed by the industrial adjudicator closing
its right to further cross-examine the workman witness as well as
the order dated 8th February, 2005 passed by the labour court
dismissing the application filed by the petitioner on 21st
September, 2004 seeking recall of the order closing its right to
WP (C) No.4490/2005

Page 1 of 8

further cross-examine the workman.
2.

Learned counsel for the respondent/workman contends that

the matter is extremely short and in order to obviate any further
delay in the matter, he does not wish to file any reply. A request is
jointly made by the parties that the writ petition be itself heard
and decided. Accordingly, with the consent of the parties, the
matter is taken up for disposal.
3.

It appears that the respondent/workman was aggrieved by

the termination of his services by the present petitioner and had
complained against the same to the labour authorities. A dispute
at his instance was referred for adjudication to the labour court by
the appropriate authorities which has been pending since 1997.
There is no dispute so far as the proceedings before the industrial
adjudicator is concerned. The petitioner has placed a true copy
thereof before this court. It would appear that the matter was
pending for the evidence of the workman since 23rd August, 1999,
which was adjourned for one reason or another from time to time.
On 17th August, 2004, the authorised representative of the
petitioner management partially cross-examined the workman
witness who had earlier tendered his evidence by way of the
affidavit. The matter was thereafter adjourned for further crossWP (C) No.4490/2005

Page 2 of 8

examination to 10th September, 2004 and again to 21st September,
2004.
4.

On the 21st September, 2004, it appears that when the

matter was called out, learned counsel for the petitioner could not
appear and, in these circumstances, the right to further crossexamine the workman-witness was closed by the industrial
adjudicator.

The case was adjourned for evidence of the

management.
5.

The petitioner, however, filed an application on the very

same date before the labour court seeking recall of the order dated
24th September, 2004. It was pointed out that an employee of the
petitioner had been sent to the court to request that the matter be
awaited in as much as the learned counsel, who was appearing for
the petitioner, was held up in another court.

However, the

authorised representative of the petitioner, despite best efforts,
could not reach the court in time on account of a traffic jam and
reached the court only at 12.30 p.m.

By this time, the order

closing the right to further cross-examination of the workman
witness had already been passed. The application mentions that
though the employee of the petitioner, who had been assigned to
remain present in the matter when the same was called out, was in
WP (C) No.4490/2005

Page 3 of 8

the court room but had failed to make a request to the learned
labour court and had merely kept standing due to lack of
knowledge of court procedures. It was, therefore, requested in the
application that the management be given one further opportunity
to cross-examine the witness in the interest of justice. This
application appears to have been supported by an affidavit of the
counsel who was authorised representative of the management in
the case as well as by that of the sole proprietor of the petitioner.
6.

This application was dismissed by the learned labour court

vide an order passed on 8th February, 2005 primarily on account
of the matter pending for trial since 1997 and the delay which had
occurred before the cross-examination of the workman had
commenced. The labour court was of the view that the petitioner
had adopted dilatory tactics and that on an earlier occasion also,
on account of his failure to appear, evidence of the workman had
been closed. Therefore, vide the order passed on 8th February,
2005, the application was dismissed with costs of Rs.1,000/-.
7.

It is noteworthy that the petitioner yet again filed an

application seeking review of the order passed on 8th February,
2005

submitting

that

it

had

not

been

given

sufficient

opportunities for cross-examination of the workman and had,
WP (C) No.4490/2005

Page 4 of 8

therefore, contended that the order passed on 8th February, 2005
suffered from jurisdictional error. This application was dismissed
by the labour courrt by another order passed on 28 th February,
2005 holding that it had no legal power and did not have the
jurisdiction to review its order passed by it on merits.
8.

I have heard learned counsel for the parties.

The writ

petition was filed and came up for hearing on 14th March, 2005
when further proceedings in the industrial adjudication before the
labour court were directed to be stayed.
9.

No further proceedings have, therefore, taken place in the

matter.

Admittedly the matter remains at the same position

where it was on 21st September, 2004 when the right to further
cross-examine the workman by the management was closed.
Learned counsel for the respondent/workman has submitted that
the delay in adjudication is causing extreme hardship to the
workman who is on the verge of penury and had been litigating for
a long period since 1997.

However, in as much as the

management had commenced to cross-examine the workman on
17th August, 2004 and that further delay in the adjudication would
work against the workman, he submitted that subject to the
workman being compensated by adequate costs, one last and final
WP (C) No.4490/2005

Page 5 of 8

opportunity may be given to the petitioner. It is submitted that
the petitioner should be bound by the statement that it would not
seek any further adjournment on the date which may be given by
the industrial adjudicator for the purpose of cross-examination of
the workman witness. Learned counsel for the petitioner further
submits that if the workman had not produced any further
evidence in view of the fact that the petitioner had been precluded
from cross-examination of its witness. It is contended that in case
the petitioner is given one opportunity to cross-examine the
workman witness already examined, liberty may also be given to
the respondent to produce any further evidence which it may feel
necessary in accordance with law.
10.

Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that his client has

no objection if such a course is adopted. He further submits that
the petitioner shall ensure that no adjournments are taken either
for cross-examination of the workman or any other witness he
may produce as well as for leading evidence which the
management may seek to lead in defence of the claim which has
been filed against it.
11.

In view of the respective contentions of the parties and

having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, even
WP (C) No.4490/2005

Page 6 of 8

though it is well settled that preoccupation in another court of
counsel/authorised representative is not sufficient ground for
condonation of default in appearance, in view of the statement by
the parties and strictly in the facts and circumstances of the
present case, having regard to the fact that cross-examination of
the workman witness was partially effected on the previous date in
order to meet the ends of justice and to obviate any further delay,
this writ petition is allowed.
The order dated 21st September, 2004 and 8th February,
2005 are hereby set aside and quashed.
12.

It is directed that the parties shall appear before the

industrial adjudicator on 1st March, 2005, which I am informed is
the date otherwise fixed in the matter. The Industrial adjudicator
shall appoint a day for further cross-examination of the workman
witness. Liberty is given to the respondent/workman to produce
further evidence in accordance with law if deemed necessary
before the labour court. The labour court shall proceed in the
matter in accordance with law.
The petitioner shall file an undertaking in this court within
one week from today that it shall abide by the statement made in
court today and shall ensure that there are no delays in
WP (C) No.4490/2005

Page 7 of 8

adjudication of the industrial dispute which is pending before the
labour court.
The petitioner shall also make payment of Rs.10,000/- as
costs to the respondent/workman before the Labour Court on 1st
March, 2005 as a condition for permission to cross-examine the
witnesses on behalf of the workman.
This writ petition and the CM No.3215/2005 stand allowed
in the above terms.

GITA MITTAL, J
FEBRUARY 16, 2006
aa

WP (C) No.4490/2005

Page 8 of 8

