IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.2932/1992
Judgment Reserved on 30th August, 2005
Date of decision: 16th September, 2005
Chando Devi

... Petitioner
through Mr.Sanjay Ghose, Advocate
VERSUS

P.O. Labour Court etc.
through NEMO

... Respondent

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment? No
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? No
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest? No
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

The petitioner impugns an award dated 16th September,

1991 made against her holding that the termination of the
petitioner bona fide and justified. It is contended that the
petitioner was appointed on 15th May, 1975 with the Flood Control
& DRG(Mechanical Division) of the Delhi Administration as daily
wager beldar i.e. the unskilled worker in the pay scale of Rs.70-85
with usual allowances vide order dated 15th May, 1975 which was
later revised to Rs.196-232 with usual allowances with effect from
:1:

WP(C) 2932/1992

1st January, 1975 and that there were no complaints against her.
The petitioner was asked to furnish an affidavit giving her correct
age.
2.

The petitioner is stated to have an unblemished and

uninterrupted

record of service

to her credit till her

unceremonious discharge on 15th October, 1976.

The cause of

termination is that she is alleged to have submitted an affidavit on
7th May, 1974 duly attested by

a Magistrate wherein she has

affirmed her date of birth as 2nd April, 1950.
Based on a complaint alleged to have received by the
respondent, the petitioner was directed to appear for medical
examination and was found fit by the doctors.

However the

doctors recorded that though as per her own statement she was 25
years of age. However she appears to be 35 years of age.
3.

Another memo dated 23rd July, 1976 has been placed on

record requiring the petitioner to appear again for the medical
examination before the Staff Surgeon of the Irwin Hospital on 26th
July, 1976. This communication specifically records that the Anti
Corruption Department of Delhi Administration was investigating
a complaint and had desired that the age of Chando Devi, the
petitioner herein should be clearly indicated. The respondents had
:2:

WP(C) 2932/1992

requested the Staff Surgeon to take x-ray of the petitioner's chest
and to sent the medical report to the authority specified in the
communication. It appears that her 2nd medical examination was
conducted on 28th July, 1976 when it was opined that though
according to her own statement she claimed that she was only 30
years of age, but by appearance she appears to be of about 36
years.
4.

On the basis of such medical reports based on the

petitioner's appearance the respondents have claimed that the
petitioner was guilty of serious misconduct of having deliberately
misrepresented her date of birth and her age and consequently
was removed from service by an order of termination dated 15 th
October, 1976. This communication purported to give one month's
notice served on the petitioner.
5.

Aggrieved by the action of the respondents, the

petitioner made a claim seeking entitlement of reinstatement with
continuity of service and full back wages. As the matter could not
be resolved in conciliation proceedings, vide an order dated 23th
November, 1984, the following dispute was referred for
adjudication to the Labour Court:“Whether the services of Smt. Chando Devi have
:3:

WP(C) 2932/1992

been terminated by the management illegally and
or unjustifiably and if so to what relief is she
entitled and what directions are necessary in this
respect?”
6.

The petitioner filed her claim to which the respondents

filed a reply disputing the contentions of the petitioner. According
to the respondents the petitioner was appointed as an unskilled
worker against a temporary work charge post and that same was
liable for termination without notice at the discretion of the
appointing authority. However the respondents have specifically
averred as hereafter:“xxxxxxxx
3. Admitted that there was no complaint about
her work, but she misled the office by giving
wrong information about her age.
xxxxxxxx
7. Admitted to the extend that her services were
terminated after giving one month's notice by the
department as per the requirement/condition of
employment. On the basis of the medical report
department found her guilty of serious misconduct of deliberately concealing the facts in
regard to her age, and deposing wrongly in her
affidavit just to get employment as an unskilled
worker on W/Ch. Estt.
8. Department has taken the lenient view by
terminating her services after one month notice
being a lady otherwise for furnishing a false
information on oath in an affidavit before a
Magistrate and concealment of facts, suppression
of information entails more severe punishment.
It is denied that the workman was dismissed or
:4:

WP(C) 2932/1992

removed from service. One month's notice was
served upon her. Her services were terminated
on account of furnishing false information and
concealment of facts. The termination was not
based on mere suspicions. The medical report
and her own contradictory statement proved it
beyond doubt that she deliberately concealed the
facts about her age just to gt an employment in
the department. The appointing authority was
competent to terminate the service of such
temporary work charged employee without
assigning any reason. As required under the rules
in the instant case one month notice was served
to Smt. Chando Devi.
The termination order of Smt. Chando Devi were
neither discriminate nor hostile. The service of
Smt. Chando Devi ex-official was terminated after
giving her one month notice by the appointing
authority due to her disqualification for the
appointment in the department. Both the facts
that the concealed her age by giving wrong
affidavit and the medical report about her age
according to which she was over age were
disqualification on her employment in the
department. Her services were terminated on the
grounds of deposing falsely while furnishing an
affidavit on oath before the Magistrate stating
therein that her date of birth is 2.4.1950.”
7.

The Labour Court had proceeded to record evidence

when the petitioner had stepped into the witness box.

She

specifically deposed that there was no complaint of any kind
against the services rendered by her and that she was not given
any opportunity of being heard prior to termination of her services
and that she was an illiterate lady. It was further stated that no
:5:

WP(C) 2932/1992

amount was paid or offered to the petitioner at the time of
termination nor any notice pay or service compensation was
offered or paid to her and that she remained unemployed since her
services were terminated. The petitioner deposed to the effect that
her parents were not alive on the date of making of the statement
and that she was told her age by her mother. It was however
claimed that several juniors to the petitioner remained employed.
Since the petitioner was not aware of the cause of her termination
she denied any knowledge thereof.
8.

The witnesses of the respondents have proved the

employment of the petitioner. MW-2 Mr.R.K.Mandhar accepted
that he was in-charge of the workshop where the petitioner was
working and that she was removed in June, 1978. He later stated
that the petitioner was removed from service after a year or 1 ½
year from the date of her employment and that she was employed
in June, 1975 to the extent that he remembered.
9.

The Labour Court passed an award dated 16th

September, 1991 rejecting the claims of the petitioner.
considering

After

the evidence of the witnesses on behalf of the

respondent, the Labour Court arrived at a conclusion that the
petitioner's age was about 35-36 years at the time of her
:6:

WP(C) 2932/1992

appointment and that she was beyond the eligibility age of 18 to 25
years for the job to which she has been engaged. It was held that
as per the report of the medical examination the petitioner was not
less than 35 years of age at the time of medical examination and,
therefore, the petitioner was over age on the date when she
entered into the job with the respondents.

The learned court

further held that any service obtained by deceitful means or
fraudulent representation would not fall within the ambit of
service as defined in Section 2(oo) of the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947 and that the petitioner's services were brought to an end by a
simple order of discharge against her. The same being bona fide,
no domestic inquiry was required to be conducted.

For these

reasons, the Labour Court gave a finding that the discharge order
was bona fide and the action was not intended to be punitive. No
illegality having been committed, it was held that the order of
termination could not be vitiated.

The reference was answered

against the workman.
10.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued at length

that the award proceeded on the basis as if reference related to
claim of regularization being made by industrial worker whereas
the only issue before the Labour Court was only as to whether the
:7:

WP(C) 2932/1992

's termination of the petitioner's service was valid and legal.
Learned counsel has also drawn my attention to the provisions of
Section 25 F, G & H which would govern the petitioner's rights and
has submitted that Section 25J contains a non-obstante clause.
The petitioner having worked more than 240 days, it is argued, it
was incumbent upon the respondent to comply with Section 25F
which, according to the petitioner, has not been complied with. As
per Section 25G, an employer has to follow the principles of last in
first out and effecting retrenchments and by virtue of Section 25H,
the respondent was bound to offer re-employment to a workman
whose services were illegally terminated. Based on these statutory
provisions the petitioner urges that non-compliance of Section 25F
renders the given action of the respondents in terminating her
services illegal. It is contended that in the instant case there can
be no manner of doubt that the termination was stigmatic and that
a proper departmental inquiry had to be held and principles of
natural justice required strict compliance.
11.

So far as the eligibility age for the

purpose of

engagement is concerned, learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner has pointed out that the applicants had to be between 15
to 25 years of age which in the case of SC/ST candidates was
:8:

WP(C) 2932/1992

relaxable by 5 years bringing the eligibility age to 30 years. The
petitioner has claimed to be such a candidate and, therefore, could
have been appointed at the age of 30 years.
12.

On a query put to the learned counsel for the petitioner

it is pointed out that the petitioner claimed her date of birth as 2nd
April, 1950 and that there is no material whatsoever for holding
that the petitioner was older merely on visual appearance.
13.

I find that in the instant case, the services of the

petitioner have not been terminated without there being any
allegations made against the petitioner.

On the contrary the

respondents have stated that on the basis of the medical report,
the petitioner was found guilty of serious misconduct of
deliberately concealing the facts in regard to her age and making a
wrongful deposition in her favour. It has been alleged that the
petitioner misled the respondents and that she concealed her age
by giving a wrong affidavit. The action in terminating the services
of the petitioner has been described as being the “minimum barest
departmental action taken being a lady otherwise the penalty
would have been duly put to her”. I, therefore, find force in the
submissions made by the learned counsel for the petitioner that
the present case was not a case of discharge simplicitor but the
:9:

WP(C) 2932/1992

order was made an act penalising the petitioner for the alleged
misconduct i.e. filing of false affidavit with regard to her date of
birth. Looked at from any angle it cannot be contended that prior
to passing of the termination order, the petitioner was entitled to
an appropriate notice to explain her position on the allegations
against her and also to produce such evidence and material as was
available in respect of the allegations made by the petitioner. On
this ground alone the award dated 16th September, 1991 cannot be
sustained. The respondents have failed to abide by and comply
with the principles of natural justice which they were bound to do
so. The petitioner has clearly stated that she was illiterate and that
her mother had told her about her date of birth. The social milieu
in which the petitioner is placed, there is no reason to disbelieve
her statement. I would, therefore, agree with learned counsel for
the petitioner that in the circumstances in which the petitioner was
placed, it is

almost impossible for records of birth being

maintained. Assuming that the petitioner was borne on the date
claimed by her, the respondents cannot be permitted to fix a date
to her based on no material whatsoever.
14.

The only scientific method for age determination is to be

found in x-ray of bones and ossification parameter which have to
:10:

WP(C) 2932/1992

be scrutinized by forensic experts.

Based on such material,

assumptions are drawn with regard to the age of a person.
Request for a technical evaluation was contained in the letter
dated 28th July, 1976(Annexure-R-2) which was ignored. In the
instant case no such test has been undertaken.
15.

It is necessary to note that no x-ray appears to have been

conducted, nor is alleged to have been conducted. There is no
report of such investigation in either the entire medical record
placed before this Court or in the counter affidavit which has been
closely perused. Therefore, there would be no ossification record
or report to enable a scientific assessment of the real age of the
petitioner. No ossification record or expert opinion by a forensic
expert has been obtained which would have taken the matter out
of the pale of controversy.
16.

On bare physical appearance, age assessments have

been drawn.

These assessments are based on no scientific

material and are not of any forensic expert.

The assessment

completely ignores the strata and background of the petitioner
where the toils of mere existence and struggle to eke out a living
must necessarily take their toll and impact physical appearance.
Bereft of any scientific inputs, such assessments are unworthy of
:11:

WP(C) 2932/1992

judicial credence and deserve to be rejected.
17.

The petitioner has stated that she is an illiterate lady and

that information with regard to her date of birth was based on the
information given by her mother. Information with regard to her
age has been received by the petitioner orally from her mother.
There is nothing on record which can pursuade me to disbelieve
the petitioner on such statement.
18.

The witness of the respondent MW-2 Mr.R.K.Mandhar

has clearly stated that the petitioner was removed from service in
July, 1978 after a year or 15 months from the date of her
appointment. The date of birth of the petyitioner is stated to be
June, 1975.
19.

The respondents were duly served with the notice in the

present case and even filed a counter affidavit. Thereafter without
any reason or justification, the respondents stopped appearing.
Despite the matter having been deferred to await the appearance
of the respondents they opted not to appear before this Court.
Accordingly the arguments of the petitioner were heard and the
record of the instant case carefully perused.
20.

In this view of the matter I am of the considered view

that in the facts of this case, the respondents nursing doubts about
:12:

WP(C) 2932/1992

the statement of the petitioner, the respondents ought to have
given her an opportunity to show cause prior to arriving at any
firm conclusion of misrepresentation by her.

Only then their

action could be held to be in accordance with law with regard to
the termination of the services of the petitioner. I find that the
same is not based on any cogent and reliable evidence.
21.

The petitioner has also not been put to notice and has

not been given any opportunity to represent her side of the case
prior to passing the order of termination. For all the foregoing
reasons the writ petition is allowed and the Award dated 16th
September, 1991 is hereby quashed.
22.

In the instant case the services of the petitioner were

terminated

vide an order passed on 15th October, 1976.

The

reference was made vide an order dated 23rd November, 1984. The
petitioner has been in this court since 1992 for a period of more
than 12 years and litigating for more than 20 years. The matter is,
therefore, remanded to the Labour Court No.II for fresh
consideration passing an Award in accordance with law.

The

parties shall appear before the Labour Court on 3rd October, 2005
for appropriate directions. It is expected that the matter shall be
disposed of within a period of three months keeping in view the
:13:

WP(C) 2932/1992

long duration of the disputes.

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
16th September, 2005 JK

:14:

WP(C) 2932/1992

