IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
ARBITRATION PETITION 22/2006
Dat e of decision: 17th July, 2006.
M/S GE COUNTRYWIDE CONSUMER
FINANCIAL SERVICES LTD.
... Petitioner
through Mr. Sanjeev Ralli, Adv.
VERSUS
SHRI PRABHAKAR KISHAN KHANDARE & Anr.
.... Respondents
through Mr. Jatin Zaveri, Adv.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J(Oral).
1.

This petition was filed under the provisions of Section 11(5)

of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 for appointment of an
arbitrator. In the petition, in para 7 of the petition, the petitioner
has stated thus :
“(X) That as per Item No. (18) of the Schedule to
the loan agreement (ANNEXURE “A-2”) the place
of arbitration is New Delhi. The notice of demand
as well as the notice nominating the Sole
Arbitrator were issued from Delhi. Therefore, this
ARB.P. 22/2006

page 1 of 34

Hon'ble Court has territorial jurisdiction to
entertain this application.”
Alongwith the petition, a photocopy of the agreement has
been filed by the plaintiff which is supported by a schedule
purportedly signed by both parties to the present petition.
2.

It is to be noted that this petition was originally filed before

the Additional District Judge, Delhi where it remained pending
from 23rd September, 2005 till 7th December, 2005. By an order
made by the learned Additional District Judge on 7th December,
2005, having regard to the Constitutional Bench pronouncement
of the Apex Court in (2005) 8 SCC 618 S.B.P. & Co. v. Patel
Engineering Ltd., the matter was transferred for adjudication to
this court. The respondents had been served with the notices in
the matter and had been compelled to contest the petition in the
district courts.
3.

The respondents have filed a reply before this court opposing

the application.

It has been pointed out that prior to the

invocation of the jurisdiction of this court at Delhi, the petitioner
had filed an Arbitration Petition No. 529/2004 before the High
Court of Judicature at Bombay under Section 9 of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, 1996 in respect of the disputes and
differences which are the subject matter of the present case. In
ARB.P. 22/2006

page 2 of 34

this petition also reliance was placed on the agreement dated 2nd
January, 2003 and the arbitration clause which is relied upon by
the petitioner before
this court. It is pointed out by the respondent that the petitioner
concealed the factum of the filing of the petition at Mumbai which
was a relevant and material fact in the proceedings before this
court.

Additionally, the respondent has pointed out that the

petitioner has committed fraud and forgery and has made
insertions in the agreement dated 2nd January, 2003.

It is

pointed out that the petitioner had placed reliance on a copy of the
agreement dated 2nd January, 2003 wherein several columns
including column 18 in the schedule were blank. Thus, there was
no place for arbitration agreed upon or fixed in the agreement
dated 2nd January, 2003 which had been actually entered into
between the parties. For this reason because the agreement dated
2nd January, 2003 was signed and executed between the parties at
Mumbai, the petitioner had invoked the jurisdiction of the High
Court at Mumbai by way of the petition under Section 9 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 in 2004 at Mumbai.
4.

The respondents has taken a strong objection to the conduct

of the petitioner inasmuch as before this court, the very agreement
ARB.P. 22/2006

page 3 of 34

which was relied upon and filed before this court contains
interpolations. So far as the place of arbitration is concerned, it is
pointed out that the petitioner has inserted “New Delhi” in column
18 in the copy of the agreement which has been placed before this
court and has been relied on in the present proceedings.
5.

Learned counsel for the petitioner today makes an oral

request that in view of the objections taken by the respondent with
regard to the territorial jurisdiction of this court and having regard
to the fact that the agreement was actually made and executed at
Mumbai, he has instructions to withdraw the present petition with
liberty to take appropriate action in respect to the cause of action
and subject matter thereof. This request is vehemently opposed by
the respondents. It is contended that the prayer is malafide and
legally impermissible and deserves to be rejected.
6.

Having heard learned counsel for the parties, the oral

request to withdraw the petitioner with leave to file appropriate
proceedings on the same subject matter has to be tested on the
basis of the applicable law and the record of the present case.
7.

There are two aspects to the present matter. One is the act of

interpolations in the agreement dated 2nd January, 2003 which has
been relied upon by the petitioner. The second aspect relates to
ARB.P. 22/2006

page 4 of 34

the failure to mention the particulars of the arbitration petition no.
529/2004 which was filed by this very petitioner in the High Court
of Judicature at Mumbai.
So far as the second aspect is concerned, it cannot be
contended that the same is not a material fact. The very fact of the
petitioner in having invoked the jurisdiction of the High Court of
Judicature at Mumbai, would have put the courts at Delhi to notice
with regard to the lack of territorial jurisdiction of the Courts at
Delhi.

Not only was the petitioner required to give the full

particulars and details thereof, but the petitioner was also required
to place the facts relating to the proceeding and the result thereof
before this court.
8.

A stand has been taken in the rejoinder filed by the

petitioner which is dated 2nd June, 2006 to the effect that this
petition no. 529/2004 was withdrawn with liberty to file a fresh
one and that the withdrawl of the petition does not have a bearing
on the maintainability of the present petition.
9.

I am afraid this is not so. The concealment by the petitioner

in the facts which have come to light now is deliberate and is
intended to prevent the courts at Delhi from gaining knowledge
with regard to the jurisdictional bar has stipulated under Section
ARB.P. 22/2006

page 5 of 34

20 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
10.

It is also evident that the petitioner has indulged in judicial

adventurism. It has failed to get any relief before the High Court
at Mumbai. For this reason, the petition was withdrawn from that
court and the present petition has been filed seeking another relief
and remedy.

Such concealment of material facts and judicial

adventurism has been repeatedly deprecated by the Apex Court.
In this behalf, useful reference can be made to the observations of
the Apex Court on such conduct of parties. In AIR 1980 SC 946
the Advocate General, State of Bihar vs Madhya
Pradesh Khair Industries, the court had occasion to consider
the conduct of the respondents and noticed that the respondents
began the game of filing an application under Article 226 of the
Constitution in the Calcutta High Court, whereas in normal course
one would expect such an application to be filed in the Patna High
Court within whose jurisdiction the subject matter of the dispute
was situate.

Justifiable prima facie inference from this

circumstance was drawn that the application was not bonafide but
intended to harass and oppress the opposite parties.

The

respondents had proceeded further. Application after application
was filed before the learned Single Judge, everyone designed to
ARB.P. 22/2006

page 6 of 34

circumvent, defeat or nullify the effect of orders of the Division
Benches of the Calcutta High Court and the Patna High Court.
11.

By the manner in which first respondent was filing repeated

applications and procuring orders from a learned Single Judge of
the High Court instead of filing as many appeals to the Division
Bench, the State of Bihar filed an application for committing the
respondents for contempt of court alleging that by their conduct,
the respondents were obstructing the administration of justice and
interfering with the due process of judicial proceedings in the
Patna High Court. This application was found by the High Court
of Patna to be beyond limitation and consequently was not
considered. In the appeal before the Apex Court, the court held
thus :“7. xxx But, on the other hand, it may be
necessary to punish as a contempt, a course of
conduct which abuses and makes a mockery of the
judicial process and which thus extends its
pernicious influence beyond the parties to the
action and affects the interest of the public in the
administration of justice. The public have an
interest, an abiding and a real interest, and a vital
stake in the effective and orderly administration of
justice, because, unless justice is so administered,
there is the peril of all rights and liberties
perishing. The Court has the duty of protecting the
interest of the public in the due administration of
justice and, so, it is entrusted with the power to
commit for Contempt of Court, not in order to
ARB.P. 22/2006

page 7 of 34

protect the dignity of the Court against insult or
injury as the expression “Contempt of Court” may
seem to suggest, but, to protect and to vindicate the
right of the public that the administration of justice
shall not be prevented, prejudiced, obstructed or
interfered with. “It is a mode of vindicating the
majesty of law, in its active manifestation against
obstruction and outrage”. Per Frank Furter, J. in
Offutt v. U.S. (1954) 348 US 11.
“The law should not be seen to sit by limply,
while those who defy it go free, and those who seek
its protection lose hope”. Per Judge, Curtis-Raleigh
quoted in Jennison v. Baker (1972) 1 All ER 997 at
p. 1006
8.
In Halsbury's Laws of England, (4th Edn.,
Vol. 9, Paragraph 38), there is a brief discussion of
when abuse of the process of the Court may be a
punishable contempt. It is said :
“38. Abuse of process in general.
The Court has power to punish as
contempt any misuse of the court's
process. Thus the forging or altering of
court documents and other deceits of like
kind are punishable as serious contempts.
Similarly, deceiving the court or the
court's
officers
by
deliberately
suppressing a fact, or giving false facts,
may be a punishable contempt.
Certain acts of a lesser nature may
also constitute an abuse of process as, for
instance, initiating or carrying on
proceedings which are wanting in bona
fides or which are frivolous, vexatious, or
oppressive. In such cases the court has
extensive alternative powers to prevent an
abuse of its process by striking out or
staying proceedings or by prohibiting the
taking of further proceedings without
leave. Where the court, by exercising its
statutory powers, its powers under rules
of court, or its inherent jurisdiction, can
ARB.P. 22/2006

page 8 of 34

12.

give an adequate remedy, it will not in
general punish the abuse as a contempt of
court. On the other hand, where an
irregularity or misuse of process amounts
to an offence against justice, extending its
influence beyond the parties to the action,
it may be punished as a contempt.”
The court held that the filing of the application by the

respondent was an abuse of the process of court calculated to
obstruct the due course of judicial proceedings and administration
of justice and was therefore criminal contempt of court.
13.

Similar conduct on the part of Skipper Construction

Company arose for consideration before the Apex Court in JT
1995 2 SC 391 Delhi Development Authority v. Skipper
Construction & Anr. In this case, a writ petition filed by the
Skipper Construction Company Private Limited being CPW No.
2371/1989 was decided by a judgment of the Delhi High Court on
14th January, 1991. The Special Leave Petition assailing the same
being SLPC No. 186/1991 was dismissed by the Supreme Court on
25th January, 1993 thereby confirming the judgment of the Delhi
High Court. The Skipper Construction Company Private Limited
after the dismissal of the Special Leave Petition thereafter filed a
suit being suit no. 770/1993 practically for the same relief which
form the subject matter of the earlier writ petition CWP No.

ARB.P. 22/2006

page 9 of 34

2371/1989.

The Apex Court was called upon to consider the

conduct of this company. In its judgment reported at JT 1995 2
SC

391

Delhi

Development

Authority

v.

Skipper

Construction & Anr., the court held thus :“51. Yet, the prayers, above stated, are made in
the suit. The only semblance of defence that is
put forth is the suit came to be filed armed with
the legal advice. WE are afraid such a plea is
worthless. As stated above, in the case of a
criminal contempt, the intention or motive is
irrelevant. Therefore, even assuming bona fide
the contemners thought they could file the suit
because it was “legally opined” that the writ was
not a substitute, the so-called bona fides are
totally irrelevant.
52. The filing of the suit No. 770 of 1993 is
nothing but a wilful action on the part of the
contemners to underline the dignity of this
Court and the majesty of law. The conduct of the
contemners tends to bring the authority and
administration of law into disrespect or even
disregard. It equally tends to interfere with or
prejudice the litigants during the litigation.
Abuse of the process of court calculated to
hamper the due course of judicial proceeding or
the orderly administration of justice is a
contempt of court. In Advocate General, State
of Bihar v. Madhya Pradesh Khair Industries
1980(3) SCC 311 at page 315, this court
observed;
“while we are conscious that every abuse of
the process of court may not necessarily amount
to contempt to court, abuse of the process of the
court calculated to hamper the due course of a
judicial proceeding or the orderly administration
of justice, we must say, is a contempt of court. It
may be that certain minor abuses of the process
ARB.P. 22/2006

page 10 of 34

of the court may be suitably dealt with as
between the parties, by striking out pleadings
under the provisions of order 6, rule 16 or in
some other manner. But, on the other hand, it
may be necessary to punish as a contempt, a
course of conduct which abuses and makes a
mockery of the judicial process and which thus
extends its pernicious influence beyond the
parties to the action and effects the interest of
the public in the administration of justice.”
55. Thus, we are clearly of the opinion that the
contemners are guilty of criminal contempt as
defined under Section 2(c) of the Act.
67. Before parting with this case, we may add:
Judiciary is the bed rock and
handmaid of orderly life and civilised society. If
the people would lose faith in justice imparted
by the highest court of the land, woe to be to
orderly life. The fragment of civilised society
would get broken up and crumble down.”
14.

A Division Bench of this Court in 71 (1998) DLT 1(DB)

Satish Khosla v. M/s Eli Lilly Ranbaxy Ltd. & Anr. was
called upon to consider the conduct of the respondent who though,
disclosed bare particulars of an earlier suit but failed to reveal to
the court when he filed a second suit the fact that he had failed to
get interim relief which he was seeking in the second suit on an
earlier occasion. The Division Bench on such conduct observed
thus :“11. xxx In the application for ad-interim
injunction filed alongwith the said suit the
respondent, after making a grievance about the
appellant having permitted use of the lawn to the
ARB.P. 22/2006

page 11 of 34

outsiders for marriages and other functions which
resulted in obstructions to the free and
unrestricted access and approach to the cottage,
did not mention anything about the Court having
not granted any stay in favour of the respondent.
14. Was it not obligatory on the part of the
respondent to disclose to the Court that in an
earlier suit filed by it, the Court had not granted
any stay in its favour and if on such a disclosure
having been made the Court still granted stay in
favour of the respondent, it could be said that the
respondent had not concealed any material fact
from the Court? But not mentioning anything
about the Court having not granted any stay in
similar circumstances in favour of the respondent
in the earlier suit, it appears to us that the
respondent had not only concealed material facts
from the Court but had also tried to over-reach the
Court. Being unsuccessful in obtaining stay in Suit
No. 3064/96, it was not permissible to the
respondent to file the subsequent suit and seek the
same relief which had not been granted to it in the
earlier suit.
16. .......In our opinion, it was obligatory upon the
respondent to disclose to the Court that in the
application filed in the earlier suit a similar relief
had been claimed, however, the Court had not
granted the said relief. In our view, if these facts
were before the Court on February 6, 1997 when
the second suit came up for hearing before it, may
be Hon'ble the Single Judge was persuaded not to
grant any ex parte stay in favour of the respondent.
Moreover, in a suit for specific performance of an
agreement to register the agreement of lease, it
appears to us that the plaintiff could not claim an
injunction which had already been claimed in Suit
No. 3064/96. We are, therefore, of the opinion
that the respondent has not come to the Court with
clean hands and has also suppressed material facts
from the Court with a view to gain advantage in the
ARB.P. 22/2006

page 12 of 34

second suit. This in our view is clearly over
reaching the Court.
21. We are of the view that an attempt has been
made by the respondent to over-reach the Court
and the respondents have played fraud upon the
Court as well as upon the opposite party and is
thus clearly guilty of contempt. Respondents
cannot be heard in the case unless it purges itself
of the contempt so committed and in our view it
can only be if we non-suit the respondents in Suit
No. 261/97. While, therefore, we do not propose to
take action against the respondent for contempt
except to issue a warning to respondent no. 2 to be
more careful in future, we direct the dismissal of
the suit (being Suit No. 261/97) itself. While,
therefore, allowing this appeal, we dismiss Suit No.
261/97 and dispose of the contempt petition in the
above terms.”
(emphasis supplied)
15.

Before this court, the intention of the petitioner in his act of

concealment of the material fact of having invoked the jurisdiction
of the courts at Mumbai and also effecting interpolations and
thereby forgery in the agreement dated 2nd January, 2003 is to
harass and oppress the respondent against whom it had set up a
monetary claim into defending a litigation in a court which had no
jurisdiction. A fraudulent claim has been made before the courts
at Delhi that the courts at Delhi had jurisdiction and therefore the
prayer seeking reference of the dispute is a completely false and
vexatious claim.
16.

The Apex Court upon receipt of such a claim has repeatedly

ARB.P. 22/2006

page 13 of 34

laid down the stringent parameters which are to be followed by the
courts while considering such petitions. In AIR 1977 SC 2421 T.
Arivandandam v. T.V. Satyapal & Anr., the court laid down
the principles thus :“5. We have not the slightest hesitation in
condemning the petitioner for the gross abuse of
the process of the court repeatedly and
unrepentently resorted to. From the statement
of the facts found in the judgment of the High
Court, it is perfectly plain that the suit now
pending before the First Munsif's Court
Bangalore, is a flagrant misuse of the mercies of
the law in receiving plaints. The learned Munsif
must remember that if on a meaningful – not
formal – reading of the plaint it is manifestly
vexatious, and meritless, in the sense of not
disclosing a clear right to sue, O.VII R. 11, C.P.C.
Taking care to see that the ground mentioned
therein is fulfilled. And, if clear drafting has
created the illusion of a cause of action, nip it in
the bud at the first hearing by examining the
party searchingly under O. X. C.P.C. An activist
Judge is the answer to irresponsible law suits.
The trial courts would insist imperatively on
examining the party at the first hearing so that
bogus litigation can be shot down at the earliest
stage. The Penal Code is also resourceful
enough to meet such men, and must be
triggered against them. In this case, the learned
Judge to his cost realised what George Bernard
Shaw remarked on the assassination of
Mahatma Gandhi.
“It is dangerous to be too good.”
6.
The trial Court in this case will remind
itself of S. 35-A, C.P.C. and take deterrent action
if it is satisfied that the litigation was inspired by
vexatious motives and altogether groundless. In
ARB.P. 22/2006

page 14 of 34

any view, that suit has no survival value and
should be disposed of forthwith after giving an
immediate hearing to the parties concerned.
7.
We regret the infliction of the ordeal upon
the learned Judge of the High Court by a callous
party. We more than regret the circumstance
that the party concerned has been able to prevail
upon one lawyer or the other to present to the
court a case which was disingenuous or worse.
It may be a valuable contribution to the cause of
justice if counsel screen wholly fraudulent and
frivolous litigation refusing to be beguiled by
dubious clients. And remembering that an
advocate is an officer of justice he owes it to
society not to collaborate in shady actions. the
Bar Council of India, we hope will activate this
obligation. We are constrained to make these
observations and hope that the cooperation of
the Bar will be readily forthcoming to the Bench
for spending judicial time on worthwhile
disputes and avoiding the distraction of sham
litigation such as the one we are disposing of.
Another moral of this unrighteous chain
litigation is the gullible grant of ex parte orders
tempts gamblers in litigation in to easy courts.
A judge who succumbs to ex parte pressure in
unmerited cases helps devalue the judicial
process. We must appreciate Shir Ramasesh for
his young candour and correct advocacy.”
17.

It is also necessary to notice the observations of the Apex

Court while considering another act of fraudulent concealment of
the material facts and filing of fraudulent litigation.

In the

pronouncement reported at 2000(4) SCALE 692 Rajappa
Hanamantha Ranoji v. Sri Mahadev Channabasappa &
Ors., the Apex Court held that such tendency deserves to be taken
ARB.P. 22/2006

page 15 of 34

serious note of and curbed by passing appropriate orders
including imposition of exemplary costs. In this behalf , the court
observed thus :“12. The appellant had admittedly
knowledge of the eviction petition filed by
respondent no. 1 against his brother
respondent no. 1(sic). On the facts of the
case, it was over simplification for the first
appellate court to observe that what
transpired between the appellant and his
brother was of no consequence in so far as
the appellant is concerned. It is evident that
the appellant was set-up by his brother after
having lost in the eviction petition upto
High Court and the suit was filed in the year
1976 during the pendency of the execution
proceedings of the eviction order. We fail to
understand what appellant was doing from
1968 upto 1976. The net result of all this
has been that despite lapse of nearly 30
years since filing of the eviction petition,
respondent no. 1 was unable to recover the
possession and that is despite the
respondent no. 1 having succeeded up to
High Court in the eviction case nearly a
quarter century ago. For the aforesaid
reasons we dismiss the appeal with costs.
13. It is distressing to note that many
unscrupulous litigants in order to
circumvent orders of Courts adopt dubious
ways and take recourse to ingenious
methods including filing of fraudulent
litigation to defeat the orders of Courts.
Such tendency deserves to be taken serious
notices of and curbed by passing
appropriate orders and issuing necessary
directions
including
imposition
of
exemplary costs. As noticed, despite
ARB.P. 22/2006

page 16 of 34

eviction order having become final nearly a
quarter century ago, respondent no. 1 still
could not enjoy the benefit of the said order
and get possession because of the filing of
the present suit by the brother of the person
who had suffered the eviction order. Under
these circumstances, we quantify the costs
payable by the appellant to respondent no. 1
at Rs.25,000/-”

It had thus been mandated that it is the duty of the court to
nip such litigation and practice in the bud and to ensure that the
stream of justice is kept clear and unpolluted.
18.

So far as the forging of documents so as to gain any kind of

advantage is concerned, the Apex Court has deprecated such
conduct in the most stringent terms. In AIR 1994 SC 853 :
(1994) 1 SCC 1 S.P. Chengalvaraya Naidu (Dead) By
LRS. v. Jagannath (Dead) By LRS. and others, the court
held thus :21
“5. The High Court, in our view, fell into
patent error. The short question before the High
court was whether in the facts and circumstances
of this case, Jagannath obtained the preliminary
decree by playing fraud on the court. The High
Court, however, went haywire and made
observations which are wholly perverse. We do
not agree with the High Court that “there is no
legal duty cast upon the plaintiff to come to court
with a true case and prove it by true evidence”.
The principle of “finality of litigation” cannot be
ARB.P. 22/2006

page 17 of 34

pressed to the extent of such an absurdity that it
becomes an engine of fraud in the hands of
dishonest litigants. The courts of law are meant
for imparting justice between the parties. One
who comes to the court, must come with clean
hands. We are constrained to say that more
often than not, process of the court is being
abused. Property-grabbers, tax-evaders, bankloan-dodgers and other unscrupulous persons
from all walks of life find the court-process a
convenient lever to retain the illegal-gains
indefinitely. We have no hesitation to say that a
person, who's case is based on falsehood, has no
right to approach the court.
He can be
summarily thrown out at any stage of the
litigation.
6.
The facts of the present case leave no
manner of doubt that Jagannath obtained the
preliminary decree by playing fraud on the court.
A fraud is an act of deliberate deception with the
design of securing something by taking unfair
advantage of another. It is a deception in order
to gain by another's loss. It is a cheating
intended to get an advantage. Jagannath was
working as a clerk with Chunilal Sowcar. He
purchased the property in the court auction on
behalf of Chunilal Sowcar. He had, on his own
violation, executed the registered release deed
(Ex. B-15) in favour of Chunilal Sowcar regarding
the property in dispute. He knew that the
appellants had paid the total decretal amount to
his master Chunilal Sowcar. Without disclosing
all these facts, he filed the suit for the partition of
the property on the ground that he had
purchased the property on his own behalf and
not on behalf of Chunilal Sowcar.
Nonproduction and even non-mentioning of the
release deed at the trial is tantamount to playing
fraud on the court. We do not agree with the
observations of the High Court that the
appellants-defendants
could
have
easily
ARB.P. 22/2006

page 18 of 34

produced the certified registered copy of Ex.B-15
and non-suited the plaintiff. A litigant, who
approaches the court, is bound to produce all the
documents executed by him which are relevant
to the litigation. If he withholds a vital document
in order to gain advantage on the other side then
he would be guilty of playing fraud on the court
as well as on the oppose party.”
(emphasis supplied)
19.

On this aspect, in (2003) 8 SCC 319 Ram Chandra

Singh v. Savitri Devi & Ors., the court held that an act of
fraud requires to be viewed extremely seriously. The court has laid
down the principle that a collusion or conspiracy with a view to
deprive the rights of the other in relation to immovable property
would render the transaction void ab initio.

The court

categorically held that fraud and deception are synonyms.
“23. An act of fraud on court is always viewed
seriously. A collusion or conspiracy with a
view to deprive the rights of the others in
relation to a property would render the
transaction void ab initio.
Fraud and
deception are synonymous.”
20.

The action in forging and fabricating a document which is

filed in court with the motive of deceiving or defrauding the court
has been held to be interfering with the administration of justice
and amounting to contempt of court.

In (1995) 1 SCC 421

Chandra Shashi v. Anil Kumar Verma, the court observed

ARB.P. 22/2006

page 19 of 34

thus :“1. The stream of administration of
justice has to remain unpolluted so that purity of
court's atmosphere may give vitality to all the
organs of the State.
Polluters of judicial
firmament are, therefore, required to be well
taken care of to maintain the sublimity of court's
environment; so also to enable it to administer
justice fairly and to the satisfaction of all
concerned.
2.
Anyone who takes recourse to fraud,
deflects the course of judicial proceedings, or if
anything is done with oblique motive, the same
interferes with the administration of justice. Such
persons are required to be properly dealt with,
not only to punish them for the wrong done, but
also to deter others from indulging in similar acts
which shake the faith of people in the system of
administration of justice.
xxxx xxxx xxxx
5.
The real question is whether filing of the
aforesaid forged and fabricated document
amounts to contempt. According to Shri Ganguli,
appearing for Anil Kumar, this does not. Let it be
seen whether the contention advanced by Shri
Ganguli is tenable.
7.
There being no decision of this Court (or for
that matter of any High Court) to our knowledge
on this point, the same is required to be examined
as a matter of first principle.
Contempt
jurisdiction has been conferred on superior courts
not only to preserve the majesty of law by taking
appropriate action against one howsoever high he
may be, if he violates court's order, but also to
keep the stream of justice clear and pure (which
was highlighted more than two and half centuries
ARB.P. 22/2006

page 20 of 34

ago by Lord Hardwickes, L.C. in St. James's
Evening Post case) so that the parties who
approach the courts to receive justice do not have
to wade through dirty and polluted water before
entering their temples. The purpose of contempt
jurisdiction was summarised as below b Lord
Morris in Attorney General Vs. Times
Newspapers Ltd.
“In an ordered community courts are
established for the pacific settlement of disputes
and for the maintenance of law and order. In the
general interests of the community it is
imperative that the authority of the courts should
not be imperilled and that recourse to them
should not be subject to unjustifiable
interference.
When
such
unjustifiable
interference is suppressed it is not because those
charged with the responsibilities of administering
justice are concerned for their own dignity: it is
because the very structure of ordered life is at risk
if the recognised courts of the land are so flouted
that their authority wanes and is supplanted.”
8.
To enable the courts to ward off unjustified
interference in their working, those who indulge
in immoral acts like perjury, prevarication and
motivated falsehoods have to be appropriately
dealt with, without which it would not be possible
for any court to administer justice in the true
sense and to the satisfaction of those who
approach it in the hope that truth would
ultimately prevail. People would have faith in
courts when they would find that 'Satyameva
jayate' (truth alone triumphs) is an achievable
aim there; or 'Yato Dharmstato Jaya' (it is virtue
which ends in victory) is not only inscribed in
emblem but really happens in the portals of
courts.
12. In the Privy Council case titled Moses
Amado Taylor, Re which was on appeal from the
ARB.P. 22/2006

page 21 of 34

Supreme Court of Sierra Leone, what had
happened was that the appellant, a barrister, who
had enrolled as solicitor of the Supreme Court of
the said Colony, applied to the Acting Chief
Justice for a warrant settlement, despite his
owing some money to his client. This prayer was
rejected. Subsequently, an application was made
to one of the police magistrates for a warrant for
the arrest of the same person upon a criminal
charge of assault and a warrant was issued
accordingly. As the Acting Chief Justice had
earlier refused the warrant, the Supreme Court
felt that the entire proceeding initiated by the
appellant was an abuse to the process of justice
and it was held that the appellant, by initiating
the criminal proceedings, was influenced by the
intention of defying the Acting Chief Justice who
refused the civil warrant of arrest; and being of
this view the appellant was held guilty of
contempt and his name was ordered to be
removed from the roll of barristers and solicitors
of the Supreme Court in question, apart from
being fined. On appeal being preferred to the
Privy Council, it was held that as the evidence did
not show any intent to defraud on the part of the
appellant no contempt was committed; at the
most he had committed an irregularity for which
some
pecuniary
penalty
was
adequate
punishment. The importance of this case for our
purpose is that had the Privy Council felt satisfied
about intent to defraud, the appeal would have
been dismissed and the view taken by the
Supreme Court of Sierra Leone that the appellant
was guilty of contempt would have been upheld.
What emerges from this decision is that if a
person does anything to defraud the court,he
commits is contempt.
14. The legal position thus is that if the
publication be with intent to deceive the court or
one made with an intention to defraud, the same
ARB.P. 22/2006

page 22 of 34

would be contempt, as it would interfere with
administration of justice. It would, in any case,
tend to interfere with the same. This would
definitely be so if a fabricated document is filed
with aforesaid mens rea. In the case at hand the
fabricated document was apparently to deceive
the court; the intention to defraud is writ large.
Anil Kumar is, therefore, guilty of contempt.”

21.

In a Division Bench pronouncement in 1988 RLR 481

Vinod Kumar Gambhir v. Power Finance Corporation,
the court held that abuse of legal process deserves dismissal of the
petition with exemplary costs. In this case costs of Rs.50,000/was imposed on a petitioner who made false averments against
counsel and sought to abandon responsibility for the cause done
and the pleadings filed by the counsel on his behalf.
22.

Perusal of the photocopy of the agreement placed before the

court at Mumbai and this court would show that columns
11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19 and 20 are all blank in the agreement
which was filed at Mumbai. In the photocopy of the agreement
placed before this court finds that all these columns have been
filled up. It would be useful to notice the same in extenso :-

ARB.P. 22/2006

page 23 of 34

Column No.

Entry in
Entry in copy filed
agreement filed at in present case
Mumbai

11. Current
Dishonour charges
Rs.
for each
dishonour of a PDC

Blank

1000/-

12. Current swap
Charges Rs.
per PDC exchanged

Blank

500/-

13. Amount
Blank
mentioned in Clause
[4.1] of the
Agreement

----

14. Number of EMIs Blank
mentioned in Clause
[4.1] of the
agreement

----

15. Current Prepayment charges

80/-

Blank

16. Period
Blank
mentioned in Clause
[5.4(ix)] of the
Agreement [ ] days

----

17. Purpose of the
Loan

Blank

BUSINESS

18. Place of
Arbitration

Blank

NEW DELHI

19. Agreement
subject to exclusive
jurisdiction of the
Courts at

Blank

----

ARB.P. 22/2006

page 24 of 34

Column No.

Entry in
Entry in copy filed
agreement filed at in present case
Mumbai

20. Address of the
Blank
Company for the
purposes mentioned
in Clause [12] of the
Agreement

4A, Link Road, New
Delhi

In the replication filed to the respondent's reply, there is no
semblance of regret with regard to the acts done on the part of the
petitioner. In this behalf, so far as the allegation of forgery on the
part of the petitioner are concerned, it has been stated thus :“2.
That para 2 of the reply affidavit is
incorrect and denied. It is vehemently denied that
the present application filed under section 11(5) of
the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (“the
Act”) is not maintainable. Petition referred to in
para 2 of the Reply Affidavit was filed under
Section 9 of the Act and not under Section 11(5) of
the Act as alleged. the said Petition bearing no.
529/2004 was withdrawn with liberty to file a
fresh one. The scope of the said petition and relief
claimed therein were totally different from the
scope of the present petition and the relief claimed
herein. Withdrawal of the said petition under
Section 9 does not have any bearing on the
maintainability of the present petition filed under
Section 11 of the Act.”
23.

At this stage it becomes necessary to consider the effect of

the request made on behalf of the petitioner to withdraw this
petition with liberty to file a fresh petition on the same subject
ARB.P. 22/2006

page 25 of 34

matter and cause of action. It has been submitted on behalf of the
petitioner that in view of the objection taken by the respondent,
the petitioner may be permitted to withdraw this petition. In the
pronouncements noticed by this court hereinabove, it has been
repeatedly held that it is the duty of the court to nip in the bud the
malaise of forgery and fraud on the part of the litigant. In AIR
1994 SC 853, the Apex Court has categorically held that such
litigation deserves to be dismissed. The prayer seeking leave to
withdraw the suit is only a mala fide attempt to avoid the legal
consequences of the act of interpolation committed by the
plaintiff. While it is well settled that a plaintiff or a petitioner who
has filed the petition cannot be compelled to sustain or persist
with the litigation which he has commenced.

However in

permitting such litigant to withdraw the case at his ipsi dixit, in
view of the principles laid in the aforenoticed judgments, the court
would be failing in discharging its legal duty in furtherance of the
larger cause of enforcing the rule of law and ensuring that the
streams of justice are kept pure and unpolluted.

The

consequences of an order dismissing the petition is not to compel
the plaintiff or petitioner to persist with litigation that he does not
want to pursue. The court cannot permit a litigant to, at his whim
ARB.P. 22/2006

page 26 of 34

and fancy, bring and institute litigation perpetuating acts of
forgery and fraud and on discovery of such legal acts, permit him
to withdraw the same without any illegal consequences ensuing
therefrom.
24.

The petitioner has admittedly filed the present case placing

reliance

on

a

photocopy

where

it

has

effected

several

interpolations noticed above. There is interpolation so far as place
of arbitration is concerned. This interpolation has been obviously
effected with the intent of conferring territorial jurisdiction to
entertain and adjudicate upon the subject matter of the petition on
this court which the court otherwise did not have. The petitioner
has contended that even if this interpolation was made, it was not
made with the intention of defeating any rights on the merits of
the disputes of the respondent. In my view, the fraud of a party on
the court would be much worse than fraud on the party. While
fraud on an individual affects only the individual, fraud on judicial
process and the court pollutes the entire administration of justice.
The same has undoubtedly much graver and far reaching
consequences than fraud on an individual.

The court has held

that forging or altering of courts documents and other deceits of
like kind are punishable as serious contempts. Fraud on court was
ARB.P. 22/2006

page 27 of 34

considered and dealt with by the Apex Court in Ram Chandra
Singh v. Savitri Devi & Ors.(supra) and Chandra Shashi v. Anil
Kumar Verma (supra) wherein it was held that anyone who takes
recourse to fraud, deflects the course of judicial proceedings and
thereby interferes with the administration of justice. The Apex
Court specifically held that such persons are required to be
properly dealt with. They are not only to be punished for the
wrong done but also so as to deter others from indulging in similar
acts which shake the faith of people in the system of
administration of justice.
25.

In the instant case, the petition was filed in the District

Courts on or around 23rd September, 2005. The respondents were
served with the summons. In view of the pronouncement of the
Apex Court in S.B.P. & Co. vs Patel Engineering Ltd. (2005) 8 SCC
618, it was directed by the Additional District Judge that the
matter is to be tried by the High Court. Consequently, the matter
was transferred to the High Court and has been repeatedly listed
before the court. The respondent has been constrained therefore
to contest the matter in the District Courts as well as before this
court. The petitioner was put to notice of the objections taken by
the respondent
ARB.P. 22/2006

However, there was not a semblance of
page 28 of 34

compunction or regret for the interpolation and the fraud which
was practiced. The petitioner filed the rejoinder admitting that it
had effected the interpolation and brought the matter to the stage
of final adjudication.
The petitioner placed reliance on an agreement and invoked
the jurisdiction of the High Court of Mumbai. Thereafter it has
been submitted by the petitioner that that petition was withdrawn.
It is apparent that the entire conduct of the petitioner was to
compel the respondents to litigate within the jurisdiction of this
court fully knowing that the respondents reside and work for gain
at Mumbai. The petitioner is residing and working for gain as per
its address given in the array of parties at Delhi. The petitioner is
also fully conscious of the fact that except for the interpolation by
it, no part of the cause of action has arisen within the jurisdiction
of this court and this court does not have the territorial jurisdiction
to entertain the present petition.
26.

The petitioner has also concealed the fact of having filed a

petition under Section 9 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
1996 at Mumbai.

This certainly amounts to concealment of a

material fact in the circumstances noticed above.

The entire

conduct of the petitioner in the present matter is therefore
ARB.P. 22/2006

page 29 of 34

reprehensible and deserves to be condemned in the most stringent
terms.
27.

From a distillation of the principles laid down by the Apex

Court in the binding and authoritative pronouncements noted
hereinabove, it is well settled that the action of a party who uses
forged and fabricated documents amounts to contempt. It is also
well settled that such conduct is not only to be deprecated in the
most stringent terms but requires to be nipped in the bud. In
Advocate General, State of Bihar vs Madhya Pradesh Khair
Industries case (supra), the court held that apart from the power
to punish for misuse of the courts process, the court has extensive
alternative powers to prevent the abuse of process by striking out
or staying proceedings or by prohibiting taking of further
proceedings without leave. In S.P. Chengalvaraya Naidu (Dead)
By LRS. v. Jagannath (Dead) By LRS others AIR 1994 SC 853, the
court has held that more often than any process of the court is
being abused and is utilised as a convenient lever to retain illegal
gains indefinitely. It was held that a person whose case is based
on falsehood has no right to approach the court and deserves to be
summarily thrown out at any stage of the litigation.
28.

Before this court, at the stage of final argument, realising

ARB.P. 22/2006

page 30 of 34

that the game was up, a totally malafide request is made seeking
leave to withdraw the petition with leave to file a fresh petition. It
is well settled that a party has to approach the court with clean
hands. Grant of liberty to file a petition is in the discretion of the
court. Leave can be given only to sue a fresh cause of action only
in circumstances mentioned in sub-rule 3 of rule 1 of Order 23.
The court has to be satisfied that the suit shall fail on account of a
formal defect or there are sufficient grounds for allowing the
plaintiff to institute a fresh suit for the subject matter of the suit.
Undoubtedly, a petition which is brought fraudulently and by
forgery and which is rendered not maintainable for the reason of
the same, cannot be considered to be a case of a petition failing by
reason of a formal defect. Certainly no ground has been laid for
permitting the plaintiff to file a fresh suit on the subject matter.
Only an oral request is made. In the instant case, the petition is a
gross abuse of judicial process and in the light of the principles
laid down by the Apex Court, the petitioner cannot be permitted to
withdraw the petition with leave to file a fresh one on the basis of a
forged and fabricated agreement.
In this behalf, reference is invited to the pronouncement of
the Division Bench of this court in 110 (2004) DLT 186 Indian
ARB.P. 22/2006

page 31 of 34

Steel & Wire Products vs. The B.I.F.R. & Ors. and AIR
2000 SC 2132 K.S. Bhoopathy & Ors. vs Kokila & Ors. In
(2004) 6 SCC 299 N.K. Prasada vs Government of India
& Ors., the court had occasion to consider a case where the High
Court did not absolve the petitioner of his responsibility in the
matter of filing a writ petition which was a gross abuse of the
process and then seeking leave to withdraw the writ petition. The
Supreme Court noticed the lenient view taken by the High court in
dismissing the writ petition with a severe warning to the petitioner
to be careful and not to play games with the judicial process.
It has to be held that the request for withdrawl and for leave
to sue on the same cause of action and subject matter is dishonest
and malafide and cannot be granted.
29.

In view of the aforenoticed principles, the petitioner cannot

be permitted to withdraw the petition in the face of its conduct
which has been brought to the notice of the court and this petition
deserves to be only dismissed.
30.

The matter however cannot rest here.

It is apparent that

the petitioner has caused the respondents to incur heavy expenses
and to contest litigation in a city where they do not reside or work
for gain. The petition was filed in the district courts wherein it was
ARB.P. 22/2006

page 32 of 34

contested by the respondents and thereafter in the jurisdiction of
this court.

Having regard to the entire conspectus and facts

noticed above, in my view, punitive and exemplary costs deserve to
be imposed on the petitioner for its conduct in effecting the
interpolations in the agreement and placing reliance on the same
before this court as well as in compelling the respondents to
contest litigation which it knew was not maintainable within the
jurisdiction of this court. The petitioner also deliberately and mala
fide concealed a material facts while filing the present petition.
The petitioner has deliberately wasted precious court time with
impunity and without remorse. Therefore, whether dismissal or
withdrawl, the petitioner cannot be permitted to get away without
compensation to the respondents and the justice system.

The

matter has been listed before this court on several dates and
before the District Courts before that. Such conduct has not only
to be condemned but it is necessary to impose such costs as would
deter the petitioner and others like it from resorting to such
tactics.
Therefore, while dismissing the petition I hereby impose
punitive and exemplary costs on the petitioner of Rs.1,20,000/The petitioner shall apportion the costs which have been awarded
ARB.P. 22/2006

page 33 of 34

equally between the respondents, the Delhi High Court Lawyers'
Social Security & Welfare Fund and the National Legal Aid Fund
(NALSA). The costs shall be deposited by the petitioner within
four weeks. Proof of deposit of the costs shall be placed before this
court.
List this matter for reporting compliance and consideration
of any further action if is to be taken so far as the conduct of the
petitioner aforenoticed which has been placed before this court is
concerned, on 21st August, 2006.
Intimation of the costs imposed and the direction to deposit
the same be sent to the Delhi High Court Lawyers' Social Security
& Welfare Fund and the National Legal Aid Fund (NALSA).

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
July 17, 2006
kr

ARB.P. 22/2006

page 34 of 34

