1

*

RFA No.584/2003

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

RFA No. 584/2003
SANJEEV KUMAR

..... Appellant
Through: Mr. J.C. Mahindroo, Adv. with
Appellant in person.
versus

LATA PRABHA

..... Respondent
Through: Mr. S. Mendiratta, Adv. with
Respondent in person.

CORAM:
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
ORDER
17.09.2004

%

We have met the parties along with their counsel. Father of
both appellant and respondent are also present. They have considered
the matter at length and have arrived on agreed terms for settlement of all
their disputes relating to divorce, maintenance, stridhan, alimony as well
as the present litigation and complaints made inter se the parties. The
parties have agreed to resolve their disputes on the following terms:
(i)

The appellant shall pay a total sum of

Rs.3,20,000/- to the respondent in full and final settlement of

RFA No.584/2003

2

all her claims. On receipt of the amount of Rs.3,20,000/-, all
claims of the respondent against the appellant and family on
account of maintenance, permanent alimony & stridhan and
property including under the decree under challenge shall
stand fully and finally satisfied.
(ii)

The parties shall seek dissolution of their

marriage by a decree of divorce by mutual consent under the
provisions of Section 13-B of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1956.
A joint petition under Section 13(B)(1) of the said Act
signed by both parties supported by affidavits shall be filed
before the District Judge, Delhi on or before 21st September,
2004.
(iii)

The Appellant and his relatives shall file a

petition seeking quashing of proceedings arising out of
F.I.R. No.117/2000 registered by Police Station Gokul Puri,
Delhi. The petition seeking quashing of the foregoing shall
be filed in this Court.

The respondent shall make a

statement in these proceedings that she has no objection to
the quashing of the proceedings subject to receipt of the full
amount agreed to, as afore-stated, and grant of decree of

3

RFA No.584/2003

divorce by mutual consent and dissolution of marriage.
(iv)

The amount of Rs.3,20,000/- shall be paid by the

appellant to the respondent in the following manner:(a)
The amount of Rs.1,20,000/- shall be
paid by bank draft/cash at the time of signing of the first
motion under Section 13-B (1) of the Hindu Marriage Act,
1956 and receipt of this amount, duly signed by the respondent,
shall be filed along with the petition being the first motion
under Section 13-B (1) of the H.M.A. Act, 1956.
(b)
The balance amount of Rs.2,00,000/shall be deposited in this Court and shall be kept in two
fixed deposit receipts each for Rs.1,00,000/- in the name of
the respondent herein for a period of six months each. It is
agreed between the parties that the respondent shall be
entitled to the amount of Rs.1,00,000/- at the time of grant of
dissolution of the parties' marriage by the decree of divorce
after the proceedings under Section 13-B (2) of the Hindu
Marriage Act, 1956.
One fixed deposit receipt of
Rs.1,00,000/- with all benefits thereon shall be handed over
to the respondent at the time of making her statement in
these proceedings.
The second fixed deposit with all benefits thereon
shall be handed over the respondent at the time of recording
of her no objection and quashing of the criminal proceedings
as afore-stated.
(v)
Both the parties give a solemn undertaking to this
Court that they shall abide by the terms mutually agreed
upon by them, as afore-stated which undertaking is taken on
record and accepted. The respondent has agreed that she
shall not proceed with the criminal prosecution pending the

4

RFA No.584/2003

completion of all the steps in the present agreement.
We are satisfied that the above settlement has been entered
voluntarily by the parties. We accept the undertakings given by both the
parties and direct that they shall remain bound by the same as well as by
the terms of the settlement aforestated.
In case the respondent does not comply with the agreement
afore-stated and any of the stages afore-stated is left incomplete on
account of any default on her part, in such event the respondent shall not
be entitled to the amount of Rs.2,00,000/- or the two fixed deposit
receipts. Upon such default, the appellant shall be entitled to the fixed
deposit receipt(s) and encashment thereof along with all benefits of
interest etc. accrued thereon. The respondent shall also be liable to
return the amount received by her on account of the present settlement.
Keeping in view the nature of the controversy and interests of
justice, it is directed that the appellant shall be liable to make payment of
the maintenance awarded at the rate of Rs.1,000/- per month from the
date of the filing of the first motion till the passing of a decree of divorce.
It is clarified that in case there is any default on the part of the
respondent in joining the proceedings or making the statement required
to be made under Section 13 B (2) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1956, the

5

RFA No.584/2003

appellant shall not be liable to make the payment of such amount. The
order of maintenance shall cease upon passing of the decree of divorce
subject to the aforestated condition.
Time is sought on behalf of the parties to take steps in terms
of the afore-stated settlement. Accordingly, the matter is adjourned to
14th October, 2004.
A copy of this order be given dasti to the counsel for the
parties under the signatures of the Court Master.

MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, J

GITA MITTAL, J
September 17, 2004
aa

