IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.17468/2004
Miss Sunint Kaur

... Petitioner
through Mr.Inderjit Singh &
Mr. Kulbhushan, Advocates
VERSUS

Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha
University & Anr.
... Respondents
through Mr.G.D.Goel & Mr.
Sanjiv Goel, Advocates for
respondent no.1.
Mr.H.S.Phoolka, Senior
Advocate & Mr.Jasmeet
Singh for respondent no.2.
AND
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.17470/2004
Mr. Taranver Singh Bajaj

... Petitioner
through Mr.Inderjit Singh &
Mr. Kulbhushan, Advocats

VERSUS
Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha
University & Anr.
... Respondents
through Mr.G.D.Goel & Mr.
Sanjiv Goel, Advocates for
respondent no.1.
Mr.H.S.Phoolka, Senior
Advocate & Mr.Jasmeet
Singh for respondent no.2.
Da te of decision: 17th February, 2005
WP(C) 17468 & 17470/2004

page 1 of page 33

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.
The petitioners in these petitions are aggrieved by the
action of the Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha Universityrespondent no.1 in refusing to approve their admission to courses
being conducted by the Guru Teg Bahadur Institute of Technologyrespondent no.2 in its management/minority quota. Inasmuch as
the facts giving rise to the petitions and the issues raised in the two
writ petitions are similar, both the writ petitions are being
disposed of by this common judgment.
2.

There is no dispute so far as the factual matrix is

concerned.

The Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University

respondent no.1 had issued a Bulletin of Information for
admission to the various courses being conducted under its aegis
by different recognised institutes in Delhi.

This Bulletin of

Information sets out the courses for which admissions were
available as well as the eligibility conditions for admission and the

WP(C) 17468 & 17470/2004

page 2 of page 33

manner in which admissions would be granted.
3.

As per the scheme of admissions notified in the Bulletin,

the respondent no.1 was required to conduct a Common Entrance
Test(hereinafter referred to as the 'CET') for admission to the
various courses being conducted by it and to draw up a common
merit list. According to the Bulletin of Information, out of the total
number of seats assigned to it in a course the respondent no.1 was
required to fill up 50% of the sanctioned intake from such merit
list.
4.

The respondent no. 2 is stated to be a self-financing

'minority status institution'.

Clause 7.2 of the Bulletin for

Information sets out that so far as institutes granted minority
education institutes status is concerned, reservation for the
minority community is provided. In such minority institutes, 50%
of the total seats are reserved for the particular community to be
filled by the management from the common entrance test in these
institutions which have been granted minority status in such
management quota.
5.

The instant writ petitions are concerned with admissions

for the academic year 2004 of candidates in such management
quota in the respondent no. 2 institute which has been conferred
WP(C) 17468 & 17470/2004

page 3 of page 33

minority status. As per Chapter 16 of the Bulletin for Information,
a student seeking admission for a management seat was required
to submit an additional application in the prescribed form III to
the concerned institute alongwith a process fee of Rs.200/- by 15th
July, 2004. The admission against these seats was to be made at
the institute level on merit as per the rank obtained by the
candidate in the CET 2004 conducted by the university.
It is clearly stated that respondent no.2 was to complete
the admissions against these management seats and forward a
copy of the same as well as the merit list of the students to the
university by 23rd August, 2004.

The last date was extended

subsequently to 31st August, 2004 and later, further to 10th
September, 2004.
As per the scheme notified in the Bulletin, merit is the
sole basis for admitting students and, therefore, the

students

seeking admission under the management quota were also
required to take the CET 2004.
6.

The respondent no.2 has been allocated a total of 60

seats in each of the courses in question namely Bachelor of
Technology (Information Technology) and Bachelor of Technology
(Computer Science and Engineering) Courses.
WP(C) 17468 & 17470/2004

page 4 of page 33

According to the Bulletin of Information, therefore only
30 seats in each course could be filled up by the respondent no.1
university whereas 30 seats were left for allocation and admission
as management seats to the respondent no.2 institute.
7.

In accordance with the scheme notified, applications

were made by the petitioners and they participated in the CET
2004 which was held on 30th May, 2004.

The result of the

examination was declared on 11th June, 2004. Ms Sunint Kaur
(petitioner in WP(C) no.17468/2004) secured merit rank 8435
whereas

Mr

Taranver

Singh

Bajaj(petitioner

in

WP(C)

No.17470/2004) secured merit rank 5842. Both the petitioners in
the two writ petitions participated in the first round of counselling
but were not admitted on merit.

It was pointed out that the

petitioners did not participate in the second round of counselling
which was held from 23rd to 28th August, 2004.
8.

It appears that there were certain drop outs from

candidates who were admitted by the respondent no.1 university in
the courses of Bachelor of Technology (Information Technology)
and Bachelor of Technology (Computer Science and Engineering)
and seats in these disciplines fell vacant after their allocation to
candidates by the respondent no.1-University.
WP(C) 17468 & 17470/2004

page 5 of page 33

9.

Ms Sunint Kaur petitioner in WP(C) 17468/2004 was

seeking admission to the Bachelor of Technology (Information
Technology) whereas Mr. Taranveer Singh Bajaj was seeking
admission to Bachelor of Technology (Computer Science and
Engineering).
On 31st August, 2004, the respondent no.2 granted
admission in the respective courses to the two petitioners against
the seats which were within the quota allocation of the respondent
no.1 university and had fallen vacant on account of the students
who were allocated the same having dropped out of the courses.
These seats have been adverted to as the 'drop out seats' by the
parties.
10.

Counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the total

number of seats allocated in the two courses being pursued by the
petitioners has not varied despite admission of the petitioners.
According to the counsel for the petitioners, the petitioners were
shown the conditions mentioned in para 18.8 of the Bulletin of
Information at the time of their admission which merely states
that admissions are provisional and that admission would be
cancelled summarily if it was found at any stage that the candidate
had furnished false or incorrect information in the application
WP(C) 17468 & 17470/2004

page 6 of page 33

form or at the time of counselling/admission. According to the
learned counsel for the petitioners, undertakings were taken from
the petitioners which were stated to be required so as to comply
with para 18.8 of the Bulletin of Information. It is also submitted
that the petitioner was admitted because the respondent no.1
university was permitting institutes to fill up the vacancies
rendered on account of drop outs from the university allocation.
According to the petitioner, the respondent no.2 admitted the
petitioners knowingly without notifying to the petitioners that they
were being admitted against drop outs from the university
allocated students.
Counsel for the petitioners contends that the petitioners
were admitted to the courses and are pursuing the same even on
date. To the utter shock of the petitioners they received letters
dated 30th September, 2004 from the respondent no.2 stating that
as the respondent no.1 was objecting to the admission of the
petitioners, it would be difficult for the Institute to allow the
petitioners to continue in it. The petitioners sent representations
against this to the respondent no.2 dated 18th October, 2004.
Against this the respondent no.2 addressed a letter dated 18th
October, 2004 stating that the respondent no.1 had not approved
WP(C) 17468 & 17470/2004

page 7 of page 33

the admissions of the petitioners. The petitioners submit that if
they are required to discontinue the course they will lose an
academic year. These communications have been impugned in the
present petition. It is submitted that on equitable considerations
Courts have been requiring universities and institutes even to
create additional seats in support of the interests of the students.
Reliance has been placed on the judgment recorded at 106(2003)
DLT 235 entitled Smt. Tarawati Vs. SCERT and others in support
of this submission.
11.

This claim of the petitioners is vehemently repudiated

by the respondents.

According to the respondent no.2, the

petitioners were low in merit and were aware that they could not
get admission in the courses on merit in the second counselling.
These candidates were also aware of the fact that there was no
vacancy in the management quota and that the 30 seats wherein
admission by the respondent no.2 was permissible as per the
Bulletin of Information, stood fully allocated and filled up.
12.

As the respondent no.2 could not have made admissions

to such quota beyond 30 seats, the respondent no.2 contends that
it had informed the petitioners of the position.

In these

circumstances, both the petitioners and their guardians had
WP(C) 17468 & 17470/2004

page 8 of page 33

submitted undertakings. The undertakings given by the petitioners
and their guardians were voluntary and hand written.

The

petitioners were aware that such undertakings were not taken
from the other candidates.
13.

Respondent no.2 submits that even with the admission

of the petitioners, the total number of admissions to its institute in
the courses has remained at 60 which is the total number of
allotted seats and, therefore, it committed no violation of any legal
requirement. It submits that the list of admissions was duly sent to
the respondent no.2 on 31st August, 2004 wherein the admissions
granted to the petitioners were clearly mentioned as being against
the university drop outs. According to the respondent no.2, in
these circumstances, the petitioners were put to notice and only
given provisional admission subject to the approval of the
respondent no.1 university.
The respondent no.1 did not approve the admissions of
the petitioners and objected to the same. As such the petitioners
were notified of the same on 30th September, 2004 and on 18th
October, 2004. The reason for requiring the petitioners to discontinue the courses in the respondent no.2 was informed to the
petitioners vide letters dated 30th September, 2004 as well as 18th
WP(C) 17468 & 17470/2004

page 9 of page 33

October, 2004. Respondent no.2 further submits that it has acted
bona fide and assistance was also rendered to the petitioners by
giving details of other colleges where admissions were still open in
September and October, 2004. Counsel for the respondent no.2
has contended that it has to abide by the directions of respondent
no.1 university and has no option in the matter.
14.

The University arrayed as respondent no.1

has

vehemently objected to the manner in which the petitioners have
been admitted. It is submitted on behalf of respondent no.1 that
the admissions granted to the petitioners do not suffer from mere
irregularities but are wholly illegal and are in violation of the law
laid down by the Supreme Court of India as well as by this Court.
Referring to the Bulletin of Information, it is contended
that the respondent no.2 had no authority whatsoever to make
admissions to any seats beyond 50% of the management quota
which was restricted to 30 seats only. No exception thereto is
permissible. It is, therefore, contended that admission to a 31st
candidate against the management/minority quota is illegal.
Placing reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court
of India reported at JT 2002(9) SC 1 entitled TMA Pai Foundation
and others vs. State of Karnataka and others and 2003(6) SCC 697
WP(C) 17468 & 17470/2004

page 10 of page 33

entitled Islamic Academy of Education vs. State of Karnataka it is
submitted that Apex Court had directed that the management of a
minority education institution can make admissions only to 50%
of the total seats. The respondent no.2 had admittedly filled up 30
seats out of the total 60 seats available in the course and as such
could not have legally admitted the petitioners against the 31st seat
in the course.
15.

It is further submitted that the practice of having

endless and repeated counselling was deprecated by the Supreme
Court of India in the judgment reported as 2003(3) SCC 366
entitled Neelu Arora vs. UOI. It was categorically held in this case
that there can be no admission to a course after second
counselling.
16.

So far as courses conducted by the respondent no.1 are

concerned, this court vide judgment dated 27th September, 2004 in
WP(C) 14451/2004 entitled Maharaja Agarsain Institute of
Technology vs. Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University of
Delhi and others held that there can be no admission after the
second counselling. The judgment rendered in the writ petition
was impugned before the Division Bench in the LPA 952/2004
entitled Maharaja Agarsain Institute of Technology vs. Guru
WP(C) 17468 & 17470/2004

page 11 of page 33

Gobind Singh Indraprastha Univertisy and was affirmed in the
said Appeal vide judgment of the Division Bench dated 16th
November, 2004.
17.

It is submitted that in view of the settled position in law,

the admission made in favour of the two petitioners cannot be
sustained for any reason and that no equitable considerations
could over ride the settled position in law.
18.

I have given considered thought to the

contentions

made on behalf of all the parties. The spirit and intendment of the
admission process entailing a centralised combined entrance test
which is conducted by an authority for admission to different
disciplines conducted in different institutes under that authority
has come up for consideration in several cases. Admissions are
effected in this manner today for admitting candidates to almost
all professional courses including medicine, engineering, law and
other technical courses where all India level examinations for
lakhs of students seeking admissions to hundreds of institutes are
conducted.

The practice of physically calling a candidate and

requiring him/her to opt for a course and institute in what is
termed as “counselling” has been found effective in ensuring that
the most meritorious candidate is being offered the first option for
WP(C) 17468 & 17470/2004

page 12 of page 33

a chosen course and that almost all seats are filled up at the
earliest.
Prior to limits being imposed on the number of
counsellings, it was seen that insistence on offers being made in
the order of merit for every seat that fell vacant for any reason
including candidates dropping out a course, lead to endless
counsellings and admission procedures not coming to an end
despite commencement of academic courses.
19.

The requirement of strictly adhering to the merit

position in the entrance exam and attaining finality to admissions
is thus required to be given precedence while examining any
matter seeking admissions to courses where admission is granted
based on a Central Entrance Test and counselling.
20.

It appears that so far as the respondent no.1 is

concerned, pursuant to directions of the Supreme Court in the
Islamic Academic case(supra), the Govt. of NCT of Delhi passed an
order formulating certain policy guidelines on admission and
reservation

of

courses/institutes

seat

covering

affiliated

to

the
the

AICTE

Guru

approved

Gobind

Singh

Indraprastha University for the academic year 2004-2005 which
were circulated to all concerned on 10th February, 2004. This
WP(C) 17468 & 17470/2004

page 13 of page 33

circular has been handed over in court during the course of
hearing.

These guidelines have been noticed by the Division

Bench of this Court in the aforestated judgment in the case of
Maharaja Agarsain Institute of Technology (supra) delivered on
16th November, 2004 in the following terms:“8. Pursuant to the directions of the Supreme
Court, in the Islamic Academy case, guidelines
were formulated by the Directorate and made
known to all concerned on 10.02.2004. The
relevant portions of that order (hereafter called
'impugned order') are extracted below:
“A. ADMISSION
GGSIP University shall conduct the
Common Entrance Test(CETs) for all
AICTE
approved
Degree
level
Programmes offered at its affiliated
Institutes and shall also conduct
admissions in respect of Delhi seats i.e.
85% of the sanctioned intake except for
BHMCT for which 15% of all India seats
shall also be filled up by the GGSIP
University. The merit of students in the
CET shall be the criteria for admission.
GGSIP University shall ensure that the
CET is conducted in a just and
transparent manner and the admission
of the candidates is done on the basis of
their rank and merit.
Appropriate
counselling upto to two rounds, as per
the current practice, shall be provided by
the university in a manner so that seats
in different professional Institutes are
filled up through a fair, just and
transparent manner. The schedule of
counselling be so arranged as to
WP(C) 17468 & 17470/2004

page 14 of page 33

minimize the possibility of drop outs.
The drop out seats subsequent to
second counselling shall not be
filled up by the University or by the
concerned
Institute
in
any
programme.
Xxxx

xxxxxxxx xxxxxxxx xxx

The admission from the merit list of the
Common Entrance Test in various
courses/affiliated Institutes will be
published on the website of the
University. A copy of the same is also to
be displayed on the Notice Board of the
University for the information of the
candidates.
The affiliated Institutions will not
be authorized to make any
admission after the cut off date
fixed by the University for the
purpose is announced. The seats
remaining vacant subsequent to
this cut off date will remain
vacant.....”
(emphasis supplied)”
21.

It is, therefore, abundantly clear that neither the

university-respondent no.1 nor the institutes including the
respondent no.2 had any authority whatsoever to make any
admissions to the drop out seats subsequent to second counselling.
The respondent no.2 was also precluded from effecting any
admissions after the cut off date fixed by the respondent no.1.
Seats remaining vacant subsequent to the second counselling and
WP(C) 17468 & 17470/2004

page 15 of page 33

the cut off date were required to be left vacant. The respondents
were specifically notified in the letter dated 10th February, 2004
that drop out seats subsequent to second counselling shall not be
filled up by either the university or by the concerned institute in
any programme.
22.

The

judgment

rendered in Writ Petition (Civil)

14451/2004 filed by Maharaja Agarsain Institute of Technology
impugning the prohibition imposed by the respondents in
admitting students to drop out seats clearly supports the
submissions made on behalf of respondent no.1.
23.

It would be useful to refer to the further observations of

the Division Bench made in the decision dated 16th November,
2004 in LPA 952/2004 entitled Maharaja Agarsain Institute of
Tec2hnology vs. Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University
which are to the following effect:“31. In the absence of a basic challenge to the
procedure itself, how does a challenge to one of
the conditions, namely, prohibition from filling
up of vacant seats after second counselling have
to be viewed. That condition is again to a cut off
date or point. Similar cut off dates or points in
time have been indicated in the scheme such as
the date of the entrance examination; the date on
which the results are published; the period within
which first counselling was held and the period
within which the second counselling was held.
WP(C) 17468 & 17470/2004

page 16 of page 33

Lastly and perhaps importantly, the date on
which classes for the course are to commence has
also been indicated by the University. If one were
to view prohibition from filling up of seats after
second counselling as a restriction, even the dates
within which the first and second rounds of
counselling were held would also for similar
reasons be open to scrutiny. However, they have
not been challenged.
35. It would thus be clear that the scheme of
counselling itself has been looked upon as a
equitable and reasonable one among the available
procedures for admission of students in various
institutions.
36. In Dr. Naveen Jamval's case(supra), the
Allahabad High Court while setting aside the
direction of a learned Single Judge, who had
required one further round of counselling after
the last round of counselling prescribe,
commented on the undesirability of that course
by stating that it would virtually set a chain
reaction in motion whereby candidates
participating in the second round of counselling
would like to participate in third round of
counselling that would further lead to vacancy of
certain seats and in turn lead to the demand of a
fourth round of counselling ultimately delaying
the admission process and also disturbing the
entire academic schedule. This decision was
upheld by the Supreme Court in Arvind Kumar
Kenkane case(supra) with the following
observation:
“It is clear that once an option is
exercised by a candidate on the basis of
which he is allotted the subject and
thereafter that candidate is allowed to
participate in subsequent counselling
and his seat becomes vacant, the
WP(C) 17468 & 17470/2004

page 17 of page 33

process of counselling will be endless
and, as apprehended by the High Court,
it may not be possible to complete the
academic course within the stipulated
period.”
Similar observations have been reiterated in the
judgment reported as Neelu Arora (supra) where
it is also held that the admission procedure
should ensure that broad equality will have to be
achieved when insisting upon mathematical
exactitude.
37. If one keeps above observations in mind, it
would be apparent that the system of counselling
itself is designed to maximize allocation of seats
in various institutions. However, that cannot
imply that the process is endless; it has a definite
terminus quo in point of time. In the present
case, the date of commencement of classes was
02.08.2004. In spite of this, the second round of
counselling was envisaged and that terminated
on 28.08.2004. This fact is essential while
considering the challenge to the reasonableness
of the impugned condition. It shows that outer
limit of acceptability of a student's absence from
class after they commenced in the first term was
about four weeks.
38. Another aspect of the matter is that the
prohibition from filling vacant seats after the
second counselling, appears to be dictated by
certain policy considerations. The permissibility
of a further round would mean that there would
be further drop outs from other institutions
leading to complaints by them and uncertainty in
the admission process, as described in the
judgment quoted above. Such an uncertainty at
the commencement of the academic year itself, in
our opinion, is unacceptable.

WP(C) 17468 & 17470/2004

page 18 of page 33

39. Learned counsel for the appellant is right
when he submits that the decisions dealing with
counselling essentially relate to medical college
admissions in the 15% all India quota. Yet that by
itself does not detract from the logic dictated in
not having any further admission procedure after
the second counselling.
Furthermore, the
observations of the Supreme Court are a sequal to
the admission processes which were introduced
by the Courts mandate.
This process of
admission through counselling has been in place
for over 10 years. Whenever there have been
challenges or distortions in the scheme, the
Supreme Court has dealt with it. The present
scheme has to the extent of adoption of the
system of counselling, modelled itself on that
procedure. We, therefore, find nothing arbitrary
or unreasonable so as to warrant interference
with the scheme.
The impugned condition
contained in the order dated 10.02.2004 is
therefore valid.”
24.

Furthermore the prohibition to effecting admissions was

duly notified by the administration in the communication dated
10th February, 2004. The law in this behalf has been laid down in
the Single Bench judgment dated 27th September, 2004 affirmed
by the Division Bench in the judgment dated 16th November, 2004
in the case of Maharaja Agarsain Institute of Technology (supra)
and the law laid down by the Supreme Court of India by which I
am bound.
25.

In view of the settled position in law that the respondent

no.2 had no authority or jurisdiction to effect any admissions to
WP(C) 17468 & 17470/2004

page 19 of page 33

vacancies created on account of drop outs against the university
allocations and also had no authority to effect any admissions after
the second counselling, I have no hesitation in holding that the two
petitioners could not have been admitted by the respondent no.2
to the respective courses.
26.

The

fixation/restriction

of

quota

for

institute/

management allocation and reservation has a laudable objective
behind it. It is prescribed in order to attain a balance between
what

may

sometimes

considerations

be

including

conflicting
those

of

interests.
social

Several
upliftment,

encouragement to management to set up institutes, improvement
of available facilities and the need to ensure that merit is not
ignored so as to achieve academic excellence have weighed with
the courts and the authorities while laying down parameters. The
Supreme Court has examined this issue at length in TA Pai's case
& Islamic Academic of Education (supra). Based on the law laid
down, the appropriate Government and the respondent no.1 has
put restrictions on the authority of the respondent no.2 to effect
admissions to more than 50% of the allocated seats.
27.

The Apex Court had occasion also to examine the issue

relating to mid-session admissions on the ground of vacancies to
WP(C) 17468 & 17470/2004

page 20 of page 33

courses remaining unfilled. In the judgment reported at (2002) 7
SCC 258 entitled Medical Council of India vs. Madhu Singh &
Others, the court observed as under :“22.
It is to be noted that if any student is
admitted after commencement of the course it
would be against the intended objections of fixing
a time schedule. Inf act, as the factual position
goes to show, the inevitable result is increase in
the number of seats for the next session to
accommodate the students who are admitted after
commencement of the course for the relevant
session. Though, it was pleaded by learned
counsel for Respondent 1 that with the object of
preventing loss to the national exchequer such
admissions should be permitted, we are of the
view that the same cannot be a ground to permit
midstream admissions which would be against the
spirit of governing statutes. His suggestion that
extra classes can be taken is also not acceptable.
The time schedule is fixed by taking into
consideration the capacity of the student to study
and the appropriate spacing of classes. The
students also need rest and the continuous taking
of classes with the object of fulfilling the requisite
number of days would be harmful to the students'
physical and mental capacity to study. In fact
such a session was held to be grossly
inappropriate in Dr. Dinesh Kumar case.
23.
There is, however, a necessity for
specifically providing the time schedule for the
course and fixing the period during which
admissions can take place, making it clear that no
admission can be granted after the scheduled
date, which essentially should be the date for
commencement of the course.
In conclusion
(i)
there is no scope for
admitting students midstream as that would be
WP(C) 17468 & 17470/2004

page 21 of page 33

against the very spirit of statutes governing
medical education;
(ii)
even if seats are unfilled that
cannot be a ground for making mid-session
admissions;
(iii)
there cannot be telescoping of
unfilled seats of one year with permitted seats of
the subsequent year;
xxxxxx xxxxxxxx
24.
The High Court was obviously in error
in directing mid-session admission.
The
impugned order is, therefore, set aside. But as
was earlier directed by this Court, the admission
of Respondent 1 would not be affected by allowing
the appeal.”
28.

This position was again emphasised in the judgment

reported at (2003) 3 SCC 366 entitled Neelu Arora vs. UOI &
Others, when the court directed that even if seats are unfilled, that
cannot be a ground for making mid-session admissions.

The

scheme which has been notified must be adhered to and there can
be no additional counselling.
The principles laid down in the aforestated judgments
would be binding upon me and would guide the adjudication on
the issues raised in the present writ petition.
29.

The admissions of the petitioners were effected on 31st

August, 2004 after the second counselling came to an end on 28 th
August, 2004. In view of the position in law, there is possibility of

WP(C) 17468 & 17470/2004

page 22 of page 33

candidates of the particular community who had achieved a higher
position in rank than the petitioners who may have desired to seek
admissions to the courses but did not do so on account of the
prohibition upon the respondent no.2 in effecting the admissions
after its 50% quota was filled up or after the second counselling. It
was contended that the petitioners alone are entitled to the
admission as only they have come to court.
30.

Such questions fell for consideration before a Full Bench

of this Court which conclusively decided the matter so far as
medical admissions were concerned in the judgment reported at
DRJ 1992(24) DRJ 408 A 1993 Del 40 entitled Sandhya Kabra
vs. University of Delhi and others.
31.

The Full Bench considered scheme of admissions which

was similar to the one at issue, filing up of vacancies and the
requirement of effecting admissions on merit. Even the rights of a
candidate being more meritorious than a petitioner but had failed
to seek admission or agitate its claims in a writ petition was
considered by the Full Bench which held as under:“40.
Before concluding in regard to
Sandhya Kabra's case, it is pertinent to refer to
the observations of the Supreme Court in the case
of Dr. Ajay Pradhan v. State of U.P., 1988 (4)
S.C.C. 514 explaining the nature of the course and
WP(C) 17468 & 17470/2004

page 23 of page 33

while holding that there was no right to admission
to a seat falling vacant in the midst or towards the
end of the academic year. It was observed by the
Supreme Court as follows :“10.
As per the Regulations
framed by the Medical Council of India,
the PG course in MD/MS is a three
years' course including one year's house
job. This is followed by a two years'
degree course. The two years' degree
course in a medical college is prescribed
by the Medical Council of India is a
period of intensive training. A postgraduate student has not only to write a
dissertation or thesis under the
supervision of the Professor or
Associate Professor who is his guide,
but has also to take part in seminars,
group discussions, clinical meetings
besides attending classes. There is also
emphasis on in-service training not on
didactic lectures.
The in-service
training requires the student to be a
resident in the campus and he has the
graded
responsibility
in
the
management and treatment of patients
entrusted to his care. For this purpose,
adequate number of posts of clinical
residents or tutors are created. The
period also includes adequate training
in the basis sciences of Anatomy,
Physiology, Bio-Chemistry, Bio-Physics,
Pharmacology and Pathology in all
aspects relevant to the speciality
concerned. He is also required to
participate in the teaching and training
programmes
of
under-graduate
students or interns in their subjects.
The examination for the PG course in
MD/MS consist of (i) thesis or
dissertation, (ii) written papers, (iii)
WP(C) 17468 & 17470/2004

page 24 of page 33

clinical, oral and practical examination.
There are four theory papers for the
post-graduate degree examination, of
which one has to be on Applied Basic
Sciences. The clinical examination is
aimed at eliciting the knowledges of the
student to undertake independent work
as a Specialist. The oral and practical
examinations are meant to test his
knowledge on investigative procedures,
techniques and other aspects of the
specialty. The syllabus prescribed by
the Medical Council of India for the PG
course in MD/MS as also the studentteacher ration of 1:1 virtually negate the
right of admission to a seat falling
vacant in the midst of or towards the
end of the academic year to which it
pertains.”
41.
One other contention raised by Sh.
Mariaputham, on behalf of the respondent, was
that the petitioner in any case cannot be allowed
change of subject for the simple reason that there
are candidates in the merit list who are senior to
her and had also opted for the same subjects
namely, M.D.(Paediatrics) and M.D.(Medicine).
In this connection the learned Counsel relied
upon the decision of the Supreme Court in the
case of State of Kerala v. T.P. Roshana, 1979 (1)
S.C.C. 572. This case was concerned with
admission to Medical Colleges and at page 589, t
was observed by the Supreme Court that the
selection of the students to whom relief was to be
given was not to be confined to those who have
moved the Supreme Court or the High Court
because “The measure is academic excellence, not
mitigative persistence It will be thrown open to
the first 30, strictly according to merit measured
by marks secured.
42.
This was followed by the Supreme
WP(C) 17468 & 17470/2004

page 25 of page 33

Court in the case of Arti Sapru v. State of J & K,
1981 (2) S.C.C. 484. While granting admissions
to Medical Colleges the State was directed to fill
up the seats on the basis of open merit and the
relief was not confined to the petitioners therein.
43.
Again in Punjab Engineering College v.
Sanjay Gulati, 1983 (3) S.C.C. 517, the Supreme
Court was concerned with admissions to
Engineering College. The question which arose
was whether 16 writ petitioners were to be
granted admission to the 16 available seats or
were the admissions to be made according to
merit. It was observed by the Supreme Court that
“we are unable to accept the submission made by
the petitioners that they should be preferred for
admission irrespective of merit.
The
circumstances that they filed writ petitions in the
High Court, other similarly aggrieved did not, will
not justify the granting of admission to them by
ignoring those others who were higher up in the
merit list.”
In arriving at the aforesaid
conclusion, the Court followed its earlier
decisions in the case of State of Kerala v. T.P.
Roshana (supra) and the case of Ajay Hasia v.
K.M. Sehravardi, 1981 (1) S.C.C. 722 and Arti
Sapru'scase (supra).
47.
The decision of a Single Judge of the
Madras High Court in the case of R. Manjunath
v. Indian Institute of Technology, A.I.R. 1987
Madras 22 and of the Punjab & Haryana High
Court in Sumedha Kalia v. State of Haryana,
A.I.R. 1990 Punjab & Haryana 238 where relief
was granted to the petitioners and not the
candidates who had a higher merit undoubtedly
support the contention of Mr. Swatanter Kumar
but, in our opinion, they do not lay the correct
law. The said decisions of the two single judges
do not refer to the observations of the Supreme
Court in the case of T.P. Roshana (supra), Arti
Sapru (supra) and Punjab Engineering College
vs Sanjay Gulati (supra).”
WP(C) 17468 & 17470/2004

page 26 of page 33

Therefore the present petitioners cannot possibly steal a
march over any candidate more meritorious than they, even if
admissions were permissible, which I have already held, were not.
32.

It is an admitted position before me that the petitioners

admission is in excess of the limits of the permissible management
quota of 30 seats and for this reason also the admissions cannot be
sustained.
33.

It has been vehemently contended before me that the

petitioners have pursued the course since 31st August, 2004. In
case the orders dated 30th September, 2004 and 18th October,
2004 issued to them are not quashed the petitioners shall lose
entire academic year. It has been submitted that the petitioners
were not put to notice in respect of the aforestated legal position
and that the respondent no.2 ought to have notified them at the
earliest. It is further submitted that no reasons for issuance of the
aforestated communications are to be found in the two
communications which are liable to be quashed for this reason
alone and that for all the foregoing reasons, on equitable
considerations the petitioners ought to be permitted to continue
with the course.
34.

I find that the petitioners and their guardians gave an

WP(C) 17468 & 17470/2004

page 27 of page 33

unequivocal and unconditional undertaking clearly mentioning
that their admission is provisional and is subject to approval of the
respondent no.1 university.
The undertaking given by the petitioners and guardians
was to the following effect:“
UNDERTAKING
I have been informed and I accept that this
admission is provisional subject to the approval of
the GGSIP University. I fully understand its
implications.
Candidate
SUNINT KAUR

Guardian
GURBIR SINGH
WITNESS”

“
UNDERTAKING
I have been informed and I accept that this
admission is provisional subject to the approval of
the GGSIP University. I fully understand its
implications.
Candidate
T.S. BAJAJ

Guardian
(K.S. BHATIA)
WITNESS”

The undertaking reproduced above sets out clearly that
the petitioners and his/her guardian fully understood the
implications of the admission at the time of giving the
undertaking.

It is not possible, therefore, to believe that the

petitioners were not aware of the true position with regard to their
admissions. I also have no reason to believe that the undertaking
WP(C) 17468 & 17470/2004

page 28 of page 33

was given for compliance of para 18.8 of the Bulletin of
Information.

The undertakings were taken only from the

petitioners and not from any other student.
35.
enforced.

The scheme of admission clearly envisages merit is to be
Strict restrictions on the number of seats to which

admissions could be effected under the management quota have
been laid down in order to obviate any compromise with
considerations of merit.

Admittedly, the merit position was also

not enforced when granting admissions to the petitioners.
36.

Judicial discretion in matters relating to admissions

specially to technical professional courses, cannot be guided by
equitable considerations alone.

The parameters within which

judicial discretion has to be exercised have been laid down by the
Apex Court. The court is precluded from permitting candidates
from pursuing courses and taking examinations if their claim to
such entitlement is based on admissions to courses being effected
in violation of legal requirements. It has been so held in (i) 1984
(1) SCC 307 entitled Krishna Priya Ganguly & Ors. vs University
of Lacknow & Ors.; (ii) 1986 (2) SCC 667 entitled A.P. Christians
Medical Educational Society vs Government of Andhra Pradesh
& Anr. and (iii) 1998 (5) SCC 377 entitled CBSE & Anr vs P.C.
WP(C) 17468 & 17470/2004

page 29 of page 33

Sunil Kumar & Ors.
In the judgment reported as AIR 1986 SC 1490
entitled A.P. Christian Medical Society vs. Govt. of Andhra
Pradesh, the Apex Court held that the Court would not be justified
in issuing directions to the University to protect the interest of
such students who had been admitted to the college in clear
transgression of the provisions of the University Act and
requirements thereunder. The Court observed as under;
“We cannot by our fiat direct the University to
disobey the statute to which it owes its existence
and the regulations made by the University itself.
We cannot imagine anything more destructive of
the rule of law than a direction by the court to
disobey the laws. The case of the medical college
started by the Daru-Salam Trust appears to stand
on a different footing as we find from the record
placed before us that permission had been
granted by the State Government to the Trust to
start the medical college and on that account, the
University had granted provisional affiliation. We
also find that the Medical Council of India took
strong and serious exception to the grant of
provisional affiliation whereupon the University
withdrew the affiliation granted to the college.
We are unable to treat what the University did in
the case of the Daru-Salam Medical College as a
precedent in the present case to direct the
University to do something which it is forbidden
from doing by the University Act and the
regulations of the University.”

WP(C) 17468 & 17470/2004

page 30 of page 33

37.

So far as court orders directing admissions of students,

permitting students to undergo courses and take examinations in
violation of the statutes and the rules is concerned, the Apex Court
has deprecated passing of even interim orders on equitable
considerations inasmuch as there could be no question of granting
final relief in matters where such issues arise for consideration and
hence interim relief for such purposes ought not to be granted. It
would be useful to refer to the decision of the Apex Court in the
judgment reported at 1984 (1) SCC 307 entitled Krishna Priya
Ganguly & Ors. vs University of Lucknow & Ors. where the court
had observed as under:“17.
xxxxxxxx
The High Court could not
have given a go-by to the rules framed by
Admission Committee.
It was a matter for
decision of the academic body and since the
academic body had applied for the rules in a bona
fide manner to all the students equally, there was
no jurisdiction whatsoever on the part of the High
Court to interfere with the internal working of an
academic institution concerned with imparting
higher education in the field of post-graduate
course in medicine. xxxxxx
25.
The High Court could not
device its own criterion for admission. Since the
academic body has made the marks obtained in
M.B.B.S. examination the criterion, admission
had to be made by such a criterion. The High
Court could not have introduced its own notions
in such an academic matter. The High Court was
not competent to do so and had no jurisdiction to
WP(C) 17468 & 17470/2004

page 31 of page 33

import its own ideology.”
So far as other courses as the present are concerned the
principles laid down would also guide the issues raised.
38.

In view of such legal position, I am unable to hold in

favour of the petitioners. The Bulletin for Information which is
relied upon by the petitioners itself sets out the number of seats to
which the respondent no.2 could have effected admissions. The
petitioners did not participate in the second counselling knowing
their merit position. Admission has been taken by them on 31st
August, 2004.

The admission was in violation of the specific

guidelines circulated on the 10th February, 2004.
39.

For all the foregoing reasons, even if it were permissible,

which it is not, considerations of equity shall not override legal
prohibition. According to respondent no.2 it had informed the
petitioners about other colleges where they could have obtained
admissions

on

30th

September,

2004

and

even

in

the

communication dated 18th October, 2004 but they opted not to do
so. The petitioners knew the position, both in fact and in law. Yet
they took a chance and therefore cannot be permitted to assert any
equitable considerations in their favour.
40.

The judgment reported at 106(2003) DLT 235 entitled

WP(C) 17468 & 17470/2004

page 32 of page 33

Smt. Tarawati vs. SCERT and others relied upon by the petitioners
has no bearing on the issues raised in the present matter. The
scheme for admissions in the instant case itself has fallen for
consideration before this Court and pronouncements made on the
issue by which I am bound.
41.

In this view of the matter I find no merit in these writ

petitions which are hereby dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.
GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
17th February, 2005
JK

WP(C) 17468 & 17470/2004

page 33 of page 33

