IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
CONTEMPT CAS (C) NO. 580/2003
Dat e of decision: May 17, 2006
DR. PRASHANTA PADMANABHA AMIN
Petitioner
through Mr. K.R. Nagraj, Advocate

...

VERSUS
R.N. SHEETAL WAD.
.... Respondent
through Mr. Maninder singh with
Mr. Sunil Fernandis, Mr. G. Mishra and
Mr. Kirtiman Singh, Advocates for
respondent/MCI
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.
By this contempt petition, the petitioner is complaining
of disobedience of the order dated 12th April, 2002 passed by this
court disposing of Writ Petition (Civil) No.2787/98 in the
following terms:“Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that
the only surviving question in this writ petition is
with regard to the petitioner not coming within
the eligibility criteria for admission to the under
:1:

CCP 580/203

graduate medical course as he has not obtained
50% at the 10+2 level. Learned counsel for the
petitioner submits that the matter is no longer res
integra and has been covered by the judgment of
the Supreme Court in Medical Council of India vs.
Indian Doctors from Russia Welfare Associations
and others reported at 2002(2) SCALE 521.
Learned counsel has drawn my
attention to para 5-b which recognises the various
categories of persons, who had not been granted
provisional registration for the deficiencies
pointed out therein. The said para reads as
under:
“(b) Those who did not fulfil the minimum
eligibility criteria for joining medical course laid
down by MCI at the time of their admission in the
medical institutions abroad, particularly in the
erstwhile States of USSR; and”
The Supreme Court has taken note of the
guidelines placed by the Government of India.
The case would be covered by guidelines A-II,
which is as under:“where students who did not meet the minimum
admission norms of MCI for joining under
graduate medical course, were admitted to
foreign institutes recognised by MCI, this
irregularity be condoned. In other words, the
degrees of such students be treated as eligible for
registration with MCI.”
Counsel for the respondent Mr.Rahul
Singh states that the respondent would abide by
the aforesaid judgment and guide lines as laid by
the Central Government before the Court.
MCI shall process the case of the
petitioner for registration in terms of the above
judgment and guide lines within four weeks from
today.
:2:

CCP 580/203

2.

Writ petition stands disposed of in the
above terms.”
(emphasis supplied)
This writ petition had been filed by the petitioner

against the Medical Council of India through its Secretary and the
Registrar of the Karnataka Medical Council.
3.

From the perusal of the order, it is evident that on a

statement made by the counsel for the Medical Council of India
(respondent no.1 in the writ petition) who had stated that the
respondent would abide by the judgment of the Apex Court
reported at 2002(2)SCALE 521 (also reported at (2002) 3 SCC
696), the court directed that the Medical Council of India should
process the case of the petitioner for registration in terms of the
judgment and the guidelines within four weeks of the passing of
the order. The writ petition was disposed of in the above terms.
4.

The jurisdiction of the court while considering a petition

under the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 is restricted. However in
the instant case, the respondent has urged pleas relating to merits
of the matter and raised issues which were never placed before any
court prior hitherto and it has therefore become necessary to
consider these issues.
5.

So far as the basic facts relating to the education of
:3:

CCP 580/203

the petitioner

are

concerned, there

is

no

dispute.

The

petitioner is an Indian citizen who had qualified his class Xth
examination from

the Maharashtra State Board of Secondary

Education in the Ist Division in the year 1980. He also qualified in
his class 11 examination scoring 60% marks wherein he had taken
English, Marathi, Mathematics, Physics, Chemistry and Biology as
his subjects in the Sangameshwara College, Sholapur.
6.

So far as his class 12th examination is concerned, the

petitioner has contended that he was a victim of the Cholera
epidemic in the city of Sholapur in February - March, 1982 which
impacted his performance in the examination which he took in
March, 1982 and he could not clear the Marathi language and
Mathematics exams.
7.

In 1981 the petitioner applied under the Indo-Soviet

Cultural Exchange Scheme seeking to pursue medical education in
USSR.

The petitioner has pointed out that according to the

applicable rules in USSR at the relevant time, any Russian or
foreign student who has completed 10 years of schooling was
eligible to get entry to the medical course directly on the basis of
the marks secured and interview.

If the foreign student had

completed 10 years of schooling outside the USSR, he had to
:4:

CCP 580/203

undergo one year's preparatory school course offering the
following subjects:
(i)Russian Language; (ii) History; (iii) Physics (iv) Chemistry; (v)
Biology and (vi) Mathematics
After successfully qualifying in the preparatory course
alone he would be given admission to the medical course. If the
foreign student had not completed ten years of schooling in India
he had to join the Russian school to complete ten years schooling
and thereafter stake his claim for the medical course.
8.

Therefore, according to the applicable rules, the

petitioner has contended that he was eligible for admission to the
medical school in erstwhile USSR as he had already completed 11
years of schooling and was so admitted in the preparatory school
under the Veravan University.

The petitioner qualified the

preparatory school course in the required subjects in the USSR
with 85% marks. Thereafter he was subjected to an interview and
selected for the medical course in the Veravan University. The
petitioner therefore had not only passed his pre medical course of
one year but had obtained distinction. He was admitted to the
medical course at the Tashkent State Medical Institute.

The

degree awarded by this institute known as the MD Physician is a
:5:

CCP 580/203

duly recognised medical qualification under Schedule III, part II of
the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 as per Section(13)(3) of the
enactment.
The petitioner has submitted that he was selected under
the Indo Soviet Cultural Exchange Programme and was given a
monthly stipend of 90 roubles by the USSR Government and 250
Deutsche Marks by the Indian Embassy.
9.

The course consisted of an in-house internship in the

final year before completion of the course.

It was only on

successful completion of this internship that the medical degree is
conferred by the university. The petitioner had therefore
completed internship also of one year prior to award of the degree.
10.

The petitioner points out that at the relevant time in the

1980's when the petitioner was seeking admission to the medical
course, even in India there was no Common Entrance Test System.
Entry to the medical course was only on the basis of the marks
scored in the qualifying examination.
11.

The petitioner was awarded the title of Doctor of

Medicine and was given the degree of MD Physician by the
University in 1990 and thereafter he applied for registration to the
Karnataka Medical Council on 13th March, 1991. The Karnataka
:6:

CCP 580/203

Medical Council thereupon wrote to the Medical Council of India
informing it about the petitioner's claim for registration.

The

petitioner has contended that he did further internship between
17th June and 20th October, 1991.
12.

The Directorate of Medical Education, Bangalore vide its

letter dated 12th June, 1991 at the instance of the Medical Council
of India, required the petitioner to undergo further training as an
intern. He was informed that he has to do internship for one year
to get permanent registration after award of his degree. In terms
of this requirement the petitioner completed one year internship
again from 1991 to 1992 at the Second Tashkent State Medical
Institute, Tashkent, Uzbekistan.
13.

In addition to complying with the directive of the

Medical Council, the petitioner also did his post graduation course
in the Moscow Medical Stomatological Institute, USSR and
defended his PhD thesis at the Moscow Regional Research Clinical
Institute. On 15th January, 1996 upon successful completion of the
curriculum and course, he was consequently also awarded the
Doctor of Philosophy title in Orthpeadics and Formertology.
14.

The petitioner has contended that the Ph.d (Doctor of

Philosophy) degree of the Moscow Medical Stomatological
:7:

CCP 580/203

Institute obtained by the petitioner is also duly recognised under
the Medical Council of India Act under its Schedule and is
considered equivalent to the postgraduate medical qualification.
15.

Therefore,

the

petitioner

applied

for

permanent

registration on 7th February, 1996 with his additional qualification
and completion of the further internship as required by the
medical council after the award of his graduate degree.

The

petitioner asserted his claim fortified with the additional Ph.d
qualification also obtained by him.
16.

However by a letter dated 25th September, 1996 of the

Medical Council of India, the petitioner was for the first time
denied registration on the ground he had not passed the higher
secondary examination with 50% aggregate marks for fulfilling its
eligibility criteria for entrance to the admission course in India.
The petitioner contends that in order to obviate any further
objection, even though he was not required to do so as he fulfilled
the eligibility criteria for admission to the USSR medical courses,
the petitioner still appeared in the higher secondary examination
in October 1996 and successfully completed the papers which he
had not qualified earlier.
17.

It appears that the Medical Council of India had taken
:8:

CCP 580/203

an executive decision on the 17th September, 1997 prohibiting
certain candidates from enrolment on the medical register despite
possessing the recognised medical qualifications. This decision
was in the following terms:“a) The students who complete their medical
degree course of less than 6 years duration from
institutions in erstwhile USSR shall not be eligible
for registration because of the fact that the
duration of MD(Physician) course is 6 years, after
one year preparatory/language course.
b) The students completing successfully total six
years clinical MD(Physician) course in an MCI
recognised institute i.e obtaining recognised
MD(Physician) degree on or after 1.7.97 shall
have to undergo one year internship after
obtaining the qualification. Such candidates only
shall be eligible for permanent registration u/s
13(3) of the MCI Act, 1956 provided they meet the
other criteria of the Council laid down with regard
to admission for undergraduate medical course.
c) The students who were initially admitted in an
institution not recognised by the MCI and later on
migrated and obtained the degree from
recognised medical institutions in erstwhile USSR
will not be eligible for any kind of registration of
India.”
18.

Several persons who had obtained recognised medical

qualifications from the universities in the erstwhile USSR, had
successfully challenged these directives in writ petitions before
Single Bench of this court.
:9:

The Division Bench upheld the
CCP 580/203

judgment of the Single Bench. The matter was ultimately carried
to the Supreme Court in a Special Leave Petition by the Medical
Council of India.
19.

On 22nd April, 1998, the Medical Council of India

informed the petitioner that as he had failed to secure 50% marks
at the 10+2 school level in India prior to his admission to the
medical course, his application for registration had not been
agreed to and that such eligibility criteria could not be relaxed.
20.

According to the petitioner, being an OBC candidate,

even as per the Regulations framed by the Medical Council of
India, the candidate was required to have twelve years of schooling
with only 40% marks in the case of SC/ST/OBC candidates for
admissions to medical institutes in India.

So far as general

candidates were concerned, they required 50% marks to be
eligible.
The petitioner had secured 47.3% marks in Physics,
Biology & Chemistry. If English was considered, the petitioner's
average came to 49.2% marks. Therefore, it is submitted that the
petitioner had completed twelve years of schooling and had the
requisite percentage of marks for his OBC candidature even as per
the MCI requirements in India.
: 10 :

CCP 580/203

21.

In these circumstances, on 12th May, 1998 the petitioner

was constrained to file the Writ Petition(C) 2787/98 seeking the
following prayers:“a) an appropriate writ or writs quashing the
impugned order dated 22.04.1998 issued by the
respondent no.1 as being illegal and violative of
the fundamental rights of the petitioner; and
b) issue an appropriate writ in the nature of
mandamus or any other writ directing the
respondent 1 and 2 to give permanent registration
to the petitioner by entering his name in the State
Medical Register as well as the Indian Medical
Register;”
22.

In view of the directions of the Apex Court, when the

writ petition (Civil) No. 2787/1998 filed by the petitioner came up
for hearing on 12th April, 2002, as noticed before, a statement was
made by learned counsel for the Medical Council of India that the
MCI could abide by the judgment and guidelines laid by the Apex
Court.

Based on the judgment of the Apex Court and the

statement made on behalf of the respondent, this court granted the
writ petition and issued a mandamus

directing the MCI to

process the case of the petitioner for registration in terms of the
judgment and guidelines within four weeks.
23.

It is noteworthy that the counsel for the petitioner had

placed clear reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court more
: 11 :

CCP 580/203

specifically on para 6(A)(ii) claiming condonation of the deficiency
of not meeting the minimum admission norms of the MCI as were
applicable to candidates in India.

This eligibility criterion

consisted of both i.e. not possessing twelve years of schooling as
well as not securing 50% or the stipulated percentage of marks in
the class 12th examination. These deficiencies were covered under
the expression “minimum admission norms of MCI for joining
undergraduate medical course” and were required to be condoned.
This was the understanding even of the Medical Council of India
and no objection was taken on 12th April, 2002 when the matter
was taken up for consideration. Thus the MCI also had clearly
accepted the fact that the petitioner would be covered under the
judgment of the Apex Court and would be entitled to the benefit of
the condonation.
24.

The mandamus issued by the court was accepted by the

Medical Council of India.

No appeal thereto was filed.

No

application seeking any variation, modification or clarification of
the directions made by the court have been filed till date. The
directions and the order made by this court on 12th April, 2002
clearly attained finality.
25.

The petitioner has made a grievance that despite the
: 12 :

CCP 580/203

clear directions of the Apex Court to either accept or refuse
applications for registration within 15 days, the Medical Council of
India issued a letter to the petitioner only after 21 days of the
passing of the order on 12th April, 2002. On 3rd May, 2002, the
petitioner was directed to furnish all documents afresh even
though these had been submitted earlier.
26.

The directions of the Apex Court were explicit requiring

the Medical Council of India to either accept or reject applications
within 15 days. This court permitted the respondent the period of
four weeks with effect from 12th April, 2002 to process the
application of the petitioner for registration in terms of the
judgment of the Apex Court.

The respondent accepted the

directions made by this court. Instead of strictly complying with
the time bound stipulations on 19th June, 2002 and issuing a
permanent registration certificate, the respondent issued a
provisional registration certificate purporting to be issued under
Section 25(2) of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956.
certificate contained the following stipulations :
“1.
The
provisional
registration
certificate is valid for 12 months only. the
holder shall be entitled to practice medicine in
the approved institution for the purpose of such
training and for no other purpose.
: 13 :

CCP 580/203

This

2.
The certificate is to be surrendered in
origin at the time of Final Registration.
3.
(M) & (F) indicates (Male) and
(Female) respectively.”
27.

The petitioner had immediately objected to the action of

the Medical Council of India on receipt of the certificate by his
letter dated 26th June, 2002 requesting for issuance of a
permanent registration. However, it has been stated before the
court that apprehensive of losing the opportunity offered even on
this certificate, the petitioner immediately joined the Wenlock
District Hospital, Mangalore for again undergoing a further
internship for a period of one year. The petitioner completed this
period of internship from 16th July, 2002 till 16th July, 2003 and
armed with the certificate of completion of this internship again
approached the Medical Council of India for issuing him the
regular registration. As his request fell on deaf ears, the petitioner
was constrained to issue a legal notice dated 21st August, 2003
calling upon the respondent to issue a permanent registration
certificate and informing the respondent that action for initiation
of proceedings under the Contempt of Court Act would be initiated
on a failure to issue the regular registration certificate alongwith a

: 14 :

CCP 580/203

claim of damages. Aggrieved by the failure of the respondent to
abide by the directions made by this court on 12th April, 2002 or to
pay any heed to the request and notice issued at the instance of the
petitioner, the petitioner has filed the present petition on or
around the 15th October, 2003 praying for initiation of contempt
proceedings against the respondent, who was the then Secretary of
the Medical Council of India for wilful and deliberate disobedience
of the orders of this court dated 12th April, 2002 and for
appropriate punishment.

The petitioner has also prayed for

damages to be awarded at the rate of Rs.5 lakh per year after 12th
April, 2002 with costs of the proceedings.
28.

The respondent has appeared in answer to the notice to

show cause and has vehemently opposed the petition.

It is

contended by Mr. Maninder Singh, learned counsel appearing for
the respondent that having issued the provisional registration
certificate on 17th June, 2002, the respondent had complied with
the directions made by this court.
29.

The principle defence to the present petition is based on

certain instances relating to other candidates, who approached the
Apex Court after the passing of the judgment dated 8.3.2002
reported at 2002 (2) SCALE 521.
: 15 :

The defence taken by the
CCP 580/203

respondent can be briefly enumerated hereunder:(i) the respondent has placed reliance on an application filed by
one Sanjay Kumar seeking clarification from the Apex Court in IA
9-10/2002 filed in CA 2779/2000 entitled Medical Council of
India

vs. Indian Doctors from Russia Welfare Association and

another. According to the respondent this applicant's application
was dismissed by the Apex Court on 22nd October, 2002.
(ii) It is further submitted on behalf of the respondent that in any
case, the case of one Jharna Roy who had approached the Apex
Court by a contempt petition was pending and as such the Medical
Council of India

was required to await the decision of the Apex

Court in the contempt petition filed by Jharna Roy
(iii) that the present contempt petition was filed on 15th October,
2003 after expiry of more than 1 year and 4 months from the date
of issuance of the provisional registration certificate on 19th June,
2002. In view of the pronouncement of the Apex Court in AIR
2001 SC 2763 Pallav Seth vs. Custodian and others, the contempt
petition which is filed after expiry of one year is not maintainable.
(iv)

Several other persons similarly placed as the petitioner

as one Rahul Singla, Jharna Roy all filed petitions seeking
invocation of contempt proceedings against the Medical Council of
: 16 :

CCP 580/203

India which were dismissed by the Apex Court and for this reason
as well the petitioner's petition has to be dismissed.
(v) the Medical Council of India

has itself sought clarification

from the Apex Court, as according to the Medical Council of India,
the order dated 8th March, 2002 related to those candidates who
had actually passed the 10+2 examination but with less than 50%
marks. This explanation of the Medical Council of India

was

accepted by the Apex Court in the order dated 21st November,
2003 when the contempt petition filed by Jharna Roy was
dismissed.
30.

On behalf of the respondent reliance is also placed on an

opinion dated 17th August, 2003 claimed to have been received by
the Medical Council of India

from a Senior Advocate for taking

appropriate action in the light of the judgment of the Apex Court.
31.

The respondent in its reply has also placed reliance on

the amendment effected to the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956
whereby Section 13(4)(A) and 13(4)(B) which have been
incorporated with effect from 3rd September, 2001.
32.

Having considered the rival contentions and having

perused the available record, it is to be noticed that the Apex Court
considered the matter from every possible angle before finally
: 17 :

CCP 580/203

making the order dated 8th March, 2002. The Central Government
laid before the court several disabilities of persons who had
obtained medical qualifications from universities in erstwhile
USSR which included, inter alia, that amongst the persons seeking
registration were ; (i) those students who had obtained degrees
where the total duration of study in recognised institutions was
less than 6 years i.e. where part of the study had been undergone
in unrecognised institutions; (ii) students who did not meet the
minimum admission norms of Medical Council of India for joining
under graduate medical courses in India, were admitted to foreign
institutes recognised by the Medical Council of India; (iii) students
who have taken admission abroad prior to 15th March, 2002 and
are required to qualify the screening test for the registration as per
the provisions of the Screening Test Regulations, 2002; (iv)
categories noted at serial number 1 and 2 above and whose entire
period of study has been in a medical college not recognised by the
Medical Council of India.
33.

After fully considering the matter, the court granted

approval to the guidelines which were placed before it by the
Government .

These guidelines clearly provided that where

students who did not meet the minimum admissions norms of the
: 18 :

CCP 580/203

Medical Council of India for under graduate medical course were
admitted to foreign institutes recognised by the Medical Council of
India, this irregularity would be condoned.

It was specifically

directed that in other words, the degrees of such students would be
treated as eligible for registration.

The pronouncement of the

Apex Court dated 8th March, 2002 is reported in (2002) 3 SCC 696
entitled Medical Council of India vs Indian Doctors From Russia
Welfare Associations.
In this behalf, the Apex Court directed thus :
“6.
In order to regulate the grant of
registration to such persons who have
completed their degree abroad prior to 15-32001, the following guidelines are placed
before this Court by the Government of
India:
(A)
The case of all persons
who applied for registration to MCI prior to
15-3-2001 shall be dealt with according to
the provisions of the Act as existing prior to
the
commencement
of
the
IMC
(Amendment) Act, 2001 subject to the
following :
(i)
Those students who
obtained degrees where the total duration of
study in recognised institutions is less than
six years (i.e. Where a part of the study has
been in unrecognised institutions, or the
total length of study in a recognised
institution is short of six years), shall be
granted registration by MCI provided that
the period of shortfall is covered by them by
way of additional internship over and above
: 19 :

CCP 580/203

the regular internship of one year. In other
words, for such categories of students, the
total duration of study in a recognised
institution plus the internship, would be
seven years, which is the requirement even
otherwise.
(ii)
Where students who did
not meet the minimum admission norms of
MCI for joining undergraduate medical
course, were admitted to foreign institutes
recognised by MCI, this irregularity be
condoned. In other words, the degrees of
such students be treated as eligible for
registration with MCI.
(B)
All students who have
taken admission abroad prior to 15-3-2002
and are required to qualify the screening
test for their registration as per the
provisions
of
the
Screening
Test
Regulations, 2002 shall be allowed to
appear in the screening test even if they also
come in the categories of circumstances
contained in (A)(ii) above, as the relaxation
contained therein would also be applicable
in their case. In other words, any person at
present undergoing medical education
abroad, who did not conform to the
minimum eligibility requirements for
joining an undergraduate medical course in
India laid down by MCI, seeking provisional
or permanent registration on or after 15-32002 shall be permitted to appear in the
screening test in relaxation of this
requirement provided he had taken
admission in an institute recognised by
MCI. This relaxation shall be available to
only those students who had taken
admission abroad prior to 15-3-2002. From
15-3-2002 and onwards all students are
required to first obtain an Eligibility
Certificate from MCI before proceeding
: 20 :

CCP 580/203

abroad for studies in Medicine.
(C)
The categories of students not
covered in (A)(i) and (ii) above and whose
entire period of study has been in a medical
college not recognised by MCI, will be
allowed to appear in the screening test for
the purpose of their registration provided
they fulfil all the conditions laid down in the
IMC (Amendment) Act, 2001. In other
words, the qualification obtained by them
must be a qualification recognised for
enrolment as medical practitioner in the
country in which the institution awarding
the same is situated and they must be
fulfilling
the
minimum
eligibility
qualification laid down by MCI for taking
admission in an undergraduate medical
course in India. They shall not be entitled to
any relaxation.
7.
In the special features and
circumstances arising in these cases, it is
unnecessary to consider the various
contentions urged on behalf of the parties
but we propose to dispose of these matters
by approving the guidelines set forth above
in exercise of powers under Article 142 of
the Constitution and these guidelines will be
applicable to all such persons who are
similarly situate, whether they are parties
before this Court or not. In respect of those
who have already applied for registration to
MCI, the same shall be granted or refused
within a period of 15 days from today in
terms of this order. On grant of such
registration, the students shall undergo the
internship or the housemanship, if needed.
It is made clear that these guidelines
approved by us are by way of a one-time
measure. Future cases will be governed by
the revised Regulations framed by MCI as
approved by the Government.
: 21 :

CCP 580/203

8.
The orders of the High Courts
shall stand displaced by this order and these
appeals shall stand disposed of accordingly.
Any proceeding pending in any High Court
relating to these matters shall stand
withdrawn to this Court and disposed of in
the same terms as aforesaid.”
34.

The directions of the Apex Court were explicit and

unambiguous and incapable of any further interpretation. The
court had put its seal of imprimatur on the guidelines formulated
by the Government and the Medical Council of India and placed
before it. So far as candidates who were not meeting the minimum
admission norms of MCI for joining undergraduate medical
courses in India and were admitted to foreign institutes recognised
by MCI, the recommendation that this irregularity be condoned
and the degrees of such students be treated as eligible for
registration stood approved by the court.
35.

It having been so clearly held and directed, there was no

option regarding grant of registration available with the Medical
Council of India

in respect of the candidates who suffered from

this disability.
36.

It would be noteworthy to examine the existing statutory

position at the time when the petitioner had returned to India with

: 22 :

CCP 580/203

the medical qualification. In this behalf, Section 13 which provides
for recognition of medical qualification granted by a medical
institution abroad and Section 15 governing the right of persons
possessing qualifications in the Schedule to be enrolled are
relevant. In order to appreciate the issue raised in the present
petition the same deserves to be noticed in extenso and reads as
hereunder:“13.
xxx
xxx
13(3).
The
medical
qualifications
granted by medical institutions outside
India before such date as the Central
Government may by notification in the
Official Gazzette, specify which are
included in Part II of the Third Schedule
shall also be recognised medical
qualifictions for the purposes of this Act,
but no person possessing any such
qualification shall be entitled to enrolment
on any State Medical Register unless he is
a citizen of India and has undergone such
practical training after obtaining that
qualification as maybe required by the
rules or regulations in force in the country
granting the qualfication, or if he has not
undergone any practical training in that
country, he has undergone any practical
training in that country, he has undergone
such practical training as maybe
prescribed.
xxxx
xxxx
15(1).
Subject to the other provisions
contained in this Act, the medical
qualifications included in the Schedule
shall be sufficient qualification for
: 23 :

CCP 580/203

enrolment on any State Medical Register.
xxx
xxx
23.
Registration in the Indian
Medical Register - The Registrar of the
Council may, on receipt of the report of
registration of a person in a State Medical
Register or on application made in the
prescribed manner by any such person,
enter his name in the Indian Medical
Register.”
37.

It is well settled that only if a person is enrolled with

either the State Medical Council or the Medical Council of India,
he is eligible to practice in the field of medicine in this country.
38.

So far as the amendment to the Medical Council of India

Act is concerned, it is admitted that the same came into effect on
3rd September, 2001. The Indian Medical Council Amendment Act
passed by the legislature on 3rd September, 2001 permitted the
following amendments to be incorporated:“2. In the Indian Medical Council Act,
1956(hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act),
in section 13--(a) in sub-section (3), after the words “granted by
medical institutions outside India”, the words
“before such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
specify” shall be inserted:
(b) in sub-section (4), the following provision and
Explanation shall be inserted at the end, namely:Provided that after the commencement of the
Indian Medical Council(Amendment) Act, 2001,
: 24 :

CCP 580/203

no such amendment shall be made in Part II of
the Third Schedule to include any primary
medical qualification granted by any medical
institution outside India:
Provided further that nothing contained in the
first proviso shall apply to inclusion in Part II of
the Third Schedule any primary medical
qualification granted by any medical institution
outside India to any person whose name is
entered in the Indian medical Register.
Explanation---For the purposes of this subsection, “primary medical qualification” means
any minimum qualification sufficient for
enrolment on any State Medical Register or for
entering the name in the Indian Medical Register:
( c ) after sub-section (4), the following subsections shall be inserted, namely:“(4A) A person who is a citizen of India and
obtains medical qualification granted by any
medical institution in any country outside India
recognised for enrolment as medical practitioner
in that country after such date as may be specified
by the Central Government under sub-section (3),
shall not be entitled to be enrolled on any Medical
Register maintained by a State Medical Council or
to have his name entered in the Indian Medical
Register unless he qualifies the screening test in
India prescribed for such purpose and such
foreign medical qualification after such person
qualifies the same screening test shall be deemed
to be the recognised medical qualification for the
purposes of this Act for that person.
(4B) A person who is a citizen of India shall not
after such date as may be specified by the Central
Government under sub-section (3), be eligible to
get admission to obtain medical qualification
granted by any medical institution in any foreign
: 25 :

CCP 580/203

country without obtaining an eligibility certificate
issued to him by the Council and in case any such
person obtains such qualification without
obtaining such eligibility certificate, he shall not
be eligible to appear in the screening test referred
to in sub-section (4A):
Provided that an Indian citizen who has acquired
the medical qualification from foreign medical
institution or has obtained admission in foreign
medical institution before the commencement of
the Indian medical Council(Amendment) Act,
2001 shall not be required to obtain eligibility
certificate under this sub-section but, if he is
qualified for admission to any medical course for
recognised medical qualification in any medical
institution in India, he shall be required to qualify
only the screening test prescribed for enrolment
on any State Medical Register or for entering his
name in the Indian Medical Register.
(4C) Nothing contained in sub-sections (4B) shall
apply to the medical qualifications referred to in
section 14 for the purposes of that section.”
39.

The legislature did not intend this enactment to be

retrospective. Therefore the requirement of the compliance with
the explanation to sub-Section (4) of Section 13 of the Medical
Council of India

with regard to the issuance of an eligibility

certificate by the Medical Council of India before admission and
qualification of the screening test after obtaining the medical
qualification by the candidate coming back with the medical
qualification from abroad would apply to candidates who were so
: 26 :

CCP 580/203

seeking admission or registration after 3rd September, 2001.
40.

Admittedly the petitioner had completed his medical

qualification in the year 1991 and the requirements of this
statutory

amendment could not be made applicable to the

petitioner. The case of the petitioner has to be examined in the
light of the then applicable statute and regulations. The same
required a person to be a citizen of India having a recognised
medical qualification and having completed internship in terms of
the rules of the country where he was granted by recognised
medical qualification.
41.

I find that the petitioner has placed before this court the

counter affidavit of the Medical Council of India
No. 2787/1998.

filed in WP(C)

I find that the opposition to the petitioner's

registration in the present proceedings is on the pleas which were
never taken before this court in the writ proceedings and possibly
cannot be permitted to be taken at this stage.
42.

Coming to the instances cited by the respondent as a

defence to the present petition, in the counter affidavit filed before
this Court, it is stated by the respondent that “the case of the
Medical Council of India was that the relaxation/concession
extended by the Hon'ble Supreme Court through its judgment
: 27 :

CCP 580/203

dated 8th March, 2002 is only for individuals with one disability
and that the same are not available to a candidate whose case falls
with “more than one category of disabilities.”
43.

The distinction between Sanjay Kumar's case and the

present petitioner is admitted thereby by the respondent himself
as the petitioner admittedly falls within the only one disability
noticed by the Apex Court in para 6A(ii). To the same effect, are
the cases cited of Nityanand Ghosh(Civil Contempt No.489490/2002 in CA 2804-2805/2005 and Dr. Sanjiv Kumar
Bansal(Contempt Petition No.335/2002).
44.

So far as Manish Aggarwal, applicant in contempt

petition no.339/2002 in TP(C)103/2002, is concerned, the
Medical Council of India

had pointed out that the candidate had

not submitted his original 10+2 certificate and his case could not
be processed inasmuch as the Medical Council of India

had

received large number of applications where either the 10+2
certificate or in some cases even the medical degree certificates
had been found to be fake and fabricated.
It is pointed out that in these circumstances the court
had dismissed the petition on 21st November, 2003.
45.

It is noteworthy that in all the aforestated cases, the
: 28 :

CCP 580/203

respondent has not placed the pleadings before the Apex Court or
the orders passed

by the Supreme Court before this Court.

However the objection made by the Medical Council of India

in

respect of Manish Aggarwal has not been raised in the case of the
present petitioner.
46.

At this stage it is necessary to notice the petition filed by

one Rahul Singla being CCP 309/2003 in CA 2779/2000. In this
case, Rahul Singla had complained of failure of the Medical
Council of India to comply with the directions of the Apex Court
in its judgment given on 8th March, 2002. In its counter affidavit
the respondent stated thus:“13. It is submitted that in accordance with the
opinion of the learned senior Advocate, the office
of the Council by a communication dated
20.10.2003, a copy whereof is annexed as
Annexure R-5, had required the petitioner to
submit the information that he having not passed
the 10+2 standard and had obtained 39.2% marks
in the 11th standard, had disclosed this fact to the
University concerned and he was still granted
admission by the said University in the medicine
course. No response had been received from the
petitioner.”
Vide an order passed on 16th February, 2004, the Apex
Court held that no case for contempt is made out in these cases
and the proceedings were accordingly dropped.

: 29 :

In this case the

CCP 580/203

Medical Council had stated that it was still examining the papers.
47.

One Dr. Jharna Roy had made a complaint in similar

circumstances and had filed contempt petition no.26/2003 in CA
2779/2000. Dr. Jharna Roy, it is contended, did not fulfil the
minimum eligibility criteria.
48.

The Medical Council of India filed a counter affidavit in

these proceeding, which has been placed on the record of the
present case. Learned counsel for the respondent has strongly
relied upon this affidavit. I find that in this affidavit the Medical
Council of India had itself stated in paras 14 and 15 as follows:“14. The MCI is initiating steps for considering
and deciding all pending applications in
accordance with the opinion rendered to it by the
learned senior counsel. This process will be
completed as expeditiously as possible. The MCI
is also duty bound to carry out all such directions
which may be issued by this Hon'ble Court. The
MCI would also require the petitioner to establish
that the requirement of passing higher
secondary/senior secondary 10+2 examination
was not a requirement in the University where the
petitioner had taken admission and this fact of
the petitioner not passing this school examination
had been disclosed to the University and despite
such a disclosure the University had granted
admission to the petitioner.
15. That the MCI shall take necessary steps to
complete the process in relation to the petitioner
without taking any undue time.”
: 30 :

CCP 580/203

49.

It was upon consideration of this deposition by the

Medical Council of India that it was processing the application for
registration that vide an order passed on 21st November, 2003, the
court recorded that no case for contempt was made out in these
cases and the proceedings were dropped.
50.

From a perusal of the available record, I find that Sanjay

Kumar who filed the IA 9-10/2002 in CA 227/2000 was
admittedly suffering from more than one disability and his case
had admittedly fallen in the disabilities noticed in para 6A(i) and
6A(ii) as noticed in the judgment.
51.

At this stage, it is necessary to examine the opinion of

the learned senior counsel which the Medical Council of India
claimed to have relied upon. No copy thereof has been placed on
record only some extracts have been reproduced in their counter
affidavit dated 11th February, 2004. The Medical Council of India
has stated that it has received an opinion of a learned senior
Advocate dated 17th August, 2003 with reference to the category of
those candidates who did not pass the senior secondary
examination prior to their admission to the medical courses. It
has been stated that the following advice had been rendered by the
counsel:: 31 :

CCP 580/203

“...................7) In my opinion, in all such matters
as were the subject matter of the Central
Government guidelines and therefore the subject
matter of the judgment of the Supreme Court, the
Querist must strictly abide by the judgment of the
Supreme Court, irrespective of any provision in
its Regulations, since the Court had expressly
stated that it was approving the guidelines in
exercise of powers under Article 142 of the
Constitution.
8) The problem that arose in the Supreme Court
was in relation to students, who had studied in
unrecognised colleges for a substantial part of the
term or had undergone compressed courses--lesser than the course prescribed. There was also
certain students who did not meet the minimum
admission norms in respect of which the Court
had observed as under:
'(ii) where students who did not meet the
minimum admission norms of MCI for joining
undergraduate medical course, were admitted to
foreign institutes recognised by MCI, this
irregularity be condoned. In other words, the
degrees of such students be treated as eligible for
registration with MCI.'
9) In my opinion, a distinction will have to be
made between those students who did not have
biology in their 10th standard and others who have
not passed '10+2' examination at all or who have
passed '10+2' from unrecognised Boards or
obtained fake certificates.
The minimum
admission
norms
of
MCI
for
joining
undergraduate course, in my opinion, should
really be understood as pertaining to the subjects
in the 10+2 examination and the requirements as
to the subjects etc. Any deficiencies in this regard
would have to be condoned. However, the basic
underlying premise is that a student has studied
: 32 :

CCP 580/203

in a college from where he has obtained a degree.
To get admission into a college, a student has to
finish his 'schooling'. In India, the school passing
examination is 10+2 and not the 10th Standard. A
student, who has not passed the 10th, is not
considered as having finished his scholastic
education in India.
A student with a fake
certificate also stands on the same footing.
10) I do not read the observations of the Supreme
Court as enabling those who have not even passed
their School Examination but somehow managed
to get admission in Russian institutions to enroll
as Doctors. It is important to note that the
defence of the students has always been that the
marks requirement of Russian Universities are
more liberal than the stringent standards
prescribed in India and that the duration of their
courses were reduced by increasing the studying
hours etc. It has never been contended that the
students who had not even passed schools were
eligible to study in colleges and obtain degrees. It
would appear that a student who has not passed
10+2 has secured admission in a graduation
course, it would not only be by misrepresentation
to such institution.
The students have not
established that there is any under graduate
course that can be pursued by those who have not
even passed 10+2 Board examination.
11) Therefore, in my opinion, the MCI would be
within its right to reject the request of those
students for enrolment unless they are able to
show from the Rules of their Universities from
whom they have obtained degrees that passing
school was not a requirement for admission to
that University, that they had disclosed to the
Universities that they had not passed schools and
despite this the Universities had granted them
admission.

: 33 :

CCP 580/203

12) If it is established that the Universities had
knowingly admitted students who had not even
passed
school, then, in my opinion, the Querist should
grant them provisional registration, at the same
time making an appropriate application to the
Supreme Court for modification of its orders, and
making it clear that the registration is being
granted subject to orders of the Supreme Court.
If however they are unable to show that the
University admitted them knowing that they had
not passed school, the Querist would be entitled
to question the validity of their degrees
themselves, and for this the Querist could directly
(or through the Government of India) contact the
University and find out the correct status of this
degree. It bears emphasis that the Supreme Court
order proceeds on the premise that these students
have valid degrees duly obtained in accordance
with the rules and regulations applicable to the
institutions that have conferred these degrees--the condonation given was from deficiencies in
compliance with the MCI regulations.........”
52.

It is also necessary to comment on the reliance placed by

the respondent on the opinion which it has received from its
counsel. In para 19 of the counter affidavit, without placing before
the court the query which was referred to learned senior counsel
for opinion, the respondent have extracted a few paragraphs
running from paras 7 to 12 of an opinion dated 17th August, 2003.
While it is settled legal position that an opinion of an advocate
would not in any manner permit the respondent to vary a clear
: 34 :

CCP 580/203

direction of the Apex Court or an order passed by this court, the
reliance on such opinion is clearly misconceived since it has been
cited without any reference to the context in which it was
rendered. It is not the respondent's case that the statement by its
counsel before this court on 12th April, 2002 or the directions made
by the court based thereon were the subject matter of the query to
the learned senior counsel.
53.

In Bhagwan Singh vs State of Rajasthan (1983)

1 Crl. LJ 477, it was held that the state functionaries cannot
disobey the court order on the pretext of taking opinion from law
officers or by filing appeals unless they obtain a stay order from
the Appellate Court.
54.

It is to be noted that the recognised institutions in the

erstwhile USSR had required 10 years of schooling without any
requirement that the candidate should have passed out of a school.
This has been pointed out by the petitioner. The admission to the
course is related to number of years of schooling. Even in the
opinion relied upon by the respondent it has been noticed that the
candidate would be entitled to grant of the request for enrolment if
they were able to show from the rules of their universities from
whom they have obtained the degrees that passing school was not
: 35 :

CCP 580/203

a requirement for admission to that university, that they had
disclosed to the universities that they had not passed schools and
despite this the universities had granted them admissions.
55.

The Medical Council of India, it appears has filed an

application dated 22nd January, 2003 before the Supreme Court in
CA No. 2779/2000 which was registered as IA No. 2003 seeking a
clarification as to whether the category of candidates mentioned in
para 17 of the application would also be entitled for getting the
benefit of the concessions/relaxation as per the judgment of the
Court dated 8th March, 2002. Para 17 of this application reads
thus:“17. That the applicant Medical Council of India
most humbly and respectfully submits that it is
approaching this Hon'ble Court by the present
application for seeking a clarification that
whether the candidates who
(i)did not undergo the Senior Secondary
education after passing 10th examination and
took the admission on 10th standard basis;
(ii)did not have the science subjects, namely,
physics, chemistry and biology at all the 10+2
stage i.e. those subjects such as agriculture,
history, economics, home science, pharmacy
etc.(other than those candidates who passed
the 10+2 with physics, chemistry, biology but
did not obtain 50% marks);
(iii)did not have biology at all at 10+2 i.e. (other
than those candidates who had biology at their
10+2 level but were not able to obtain 50%
: 36 :

CCP 580/203

marks).
(iv)Have submitted their 10+2 certificates to MCI
but which have been found either from
unrecognised boards or fake certificates.”
56.

On 4th April, 2003, the Apex Court rejected this

application on the ground that the same was wholly unnecessary.
57.

The respondent accepted this position when they filed

their affidavits in Civil Contempt Petition No.26/2002 filed by Dr.
Jharna Roy on 29th August, 2003.
58.

The respondent has relied on its assertions made in

Jharna Roy's case when it has filed the affidavit in Rahul Singla's
matter.
59.

In these circumstances it was the case of the Medical

Council of India itself that if the candidate satisfied the
requirement of the 10 years schooling period of the university
wherefrom it had obtained the recognised medical qualification,
the Medical Council of India

would have no option but to grant

the registration.
60.

The Medical Council of India has admittedly granted

provisional registration to the petitioner even while it was
contesting these applications. The opinion of the learned senior
counsel relied upon by the Medical Council of India

: 37 :

CCP 580/203

also

stipulated that the candidate was required to have satisfied this
requirement. The directions of the Apex Court with regard to
condonation of the eligibility requirement of the Medical Council
of India for admission to the medical courses in India would have
to be condoned in respect of the candidates who were covered by
the judgment dated 8th March, 2002.
61.

There is no dispute that the petitioner is also so covered.

The Medical Council of India had made a statement to this effect
on 12th April, 2002 in W.P.(C) No.2787/1998 when a statement
was made that the respondent would abide by the judgment dated
8th March, 2002 of the Supreme Court and the guidelines laid by
the Central Government before the court.
62.

As I have noticed hereinabove, the directions made by

the Apex Court on 8th March, 2002 are clear, explicit,
unconditional and unequivocal.
63.

There can be no dispute with the proposition urged by

Mr. Maninder Singh, learned counsel for the respondent that by
application of doctrine of merger, the subordinate forum's decision
merges in the decision of the appellate or revisional forum,
modifying, reversing or affirming the decision of the subordinate
forum (Re : Kunhayammed & Others Vs. State of Kerala & Anr
: 38 :

CCP 580/203

(2000) 6 SCC 359).
It is well settled that its applicability has to be
determined keeping in view the nature of the jurisdiction exercised
by the superior forum and the contempt or subject matter of the
challenge.
64.

An order passed by the court has to be read as it exists.

No party can possibly add or substract therefrom or place a
construction on the intention of the court based on its defence. So
far as dismissal of a petition by a non-speaking order is concerned,
it has been held by the Apex Court that the dismissal of even a
special leave petition in limine by a non-speaking order does not
justify any inference that by necessary implication, the contentions
raised in the special leave petition on the merits of the case have
been rejected. The court has considered the practice of the Apex
Court to entertain petitions and grant leave under Section 136 of
the Constitution only in such cases where substantial questions of
law of general or public importance are involved and consequently
in this behalf has held that dismissal of the special leave petition
by a non-speaking order would not operate as a bar against the
appellant raising the challenge by resort to proceedings before the
High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. In this
: 39 :

CCP 580/203

behalf, reliance can be usefully placed on the pronouncement
reported at AIR 1986 SC 1780 Indian Oil Corporation
Limited vs State of Bihar & Ors.
65.

In JT 1995 (9) SC 112

Yogendra Narain

Chowdhury & Ors. vs. UOI & Ors., the court further
recognised the well settled principle of law that even the dismissal
of a special leave petition in limine without assigning reasons does
not operate as res judicata.
66.

In 1989 (1) SCC 101 MCD vs. Gurnam Kaur, the

Supreme Court held thus :“11..
xxx So far as the order shows, no
argument was addressed to the court on the
question whether or not any direction could
properly be made compelling the Municipal
Corporation to construct a stall at the pitching
site of a pavement squatter. Professor P.J.
Fitzgerald, editor of the Salmond on
Jurisprudence, 12th edn. explains the concept
of sub silentio at p. 153 in these words :
A decision passes sub silentio, in the
technical sense that has come to be attached
to that phrase, when the particular point of
law involved in the decision is not perceived
by the court or present to its mind. The court
may consciously decide in favour of one party
because of point A, which it considers and
pronounces upon. It may be shown, however,
that logically the court should not have
decided in favour of the particular party
unless it also decided point B in his favour;
but point B was not argued or considered by
: 40 :

CCP 580/203

the court. In such circumstances, although
point B was logically involved in the facts and
although the case had a specific outcome, the
decision is not an authority on point B. Point
B is said to pass sub silentio.
12.
In Gerard v. Worth of Paris Ltd.
(k)., the only point argued was on the question
of priority of the claimant's debt, and, on this
argument being heard, the court granted the
order. No consideration was given to the
question whether a garnishee order could
properly be made on an account standing in
the name of the liquidator. When, therefore,
this very point was argued in a subsequent
case before the Court of Appeal in Lancaster
Motor Co. (London) Ltd. v. Bremith Ltd., the
court held itself not bound by its previous
decision. Sir Wilfrid Greene, M.R., said that
he could not help thinking that the point now
raised had been deliberately passed sub
silentio by counsel in order that the point of
substance might be decided. He went on to
say that the point had to be decided by the
earlier court before it could make the order
which it did ; nevertheless, since it was
decided “without argument, without reference
to the crucial words of the rule, and without
any citation of authority”, it was not binding
and would not be followed. Precedents sub
silentio and without argument are of no
moment. This rule has ever since been
followed. One of the chief reasons for the
doctrine of precedent is that a matter that has
once been fully argued and decided should not
be allowed to be reopened. The weight
accorded to dicta varies with the type of
dictum. Mere casual expressions carry no
weather at all. Not every passing expression
of a judge, however eminent, can be treated as
an ex cathedra statement, having the weight
of authority.”
: 41 :

CCP 580/203

67.

It is settled law that a judgment has to be construed in

the facts and contentions which were raised before the court (Ref :
2004 VII AD(SC) 109 U.P. Coop. Central Union vs. U.P. Sugar
Mills; JT 2002 (1) SC 485 Haryana Financial Corporation vs.
Jagdamba Oil Mils & Another. It would be useful to advert to the
principles laid down by the Apex Court in the Haryana State
Financial Corporation case (supra) wherein the court held thus :
“19.
Courts should not place reliance on
decisions without discussing as to how the
factual situation fits in with the fact situation of
the decision on which reliance is placed.
Observations of Courts are not to be read as
Euclid's theorems nor as provisions of the
statute. These observations must be read in the
context in which they appear. Judgments of
courts are not to be construed as statues. To
interpret words, phrases and provisions of a
statute, it may become necessary for judges to
embark into lengthy discussions but the
discussion is meant to explain and not to define.
Judges interpret statutes, they do not interpret
judgments. They interpret words of statutes,
their words are not to be interpreted as statutes.
In London Graving Dock Co.Ltd. v. Horton
[1951 AC 737 at P.761], Lord Mac Dermot
observed :
“The matter cannot, of course, be
settled merely by treating the
ipsissima vertra of Willes, J. As though
they were part of an Act of Parliament
and
applying
the
rules
of
interpretation appropriate thereto.
This is not to detract from the great
: 42 :

CCP 580/203

weight to be given to the language
actually used by that
most
distinguished judge.”
In Home Office v.Dorset Yacht Co. (1970 (2) All
ER 294) Lord Reid said, “ Lord Atkin's
speech........ is not to be treated as if it was a
statute definition. It will require qualification
in new circumstances.” Megarry, J. In (1971) 1
WLR 1062 observed : “One must not, of course,
construe even a reserved judgment of even
Russell L.J. As if it were an Act of Parliament.”
And, in Herrington v.British Railways Board,
[(1972) 2 WLR 537] Lord Morris said :“There is always peril in treating the words of a
speech or judgment as though they are words in
a legislative enactment, and it is to be
remembered that judicial utterances made in
the setting of the facts of a particular case.”
Circumstantial flexibility, one additional or
different fact may make a world of difference
between conclusions in two cases. Disposal of
cases by blindly placing reliance on a decision is
not proper.”

Therefore, drawing from the principles laid down by the
Apex Court, the respondent cannot be possibly heard to contend
that the dismissal of the contempt petition in respect of other
students whose cases rested on their peculiar facts, would in any
way preclude the petitioner from agitating his case by way of the
present

proceedings

or

would

: 43 :

in

any

way

impact

CCP 580/203

the

maintainability or sustainability of the present proceedings against
the present respondent.
68.

In any event, there is one fundamental distinction

between the present case and all the cases which have been cited
before this court as a defence by the respondent. The petitioner in
the instant case had sought adjudication of his claim by way of
W.P.(C) No. 2787/1998.

After a careful consideration of the

matter, a statement was made on behalf of the Medical Council of
India in these proceedings on 12th April, 2002 based whereon this
court issued a mandamus to the Medical Council of India. The
Medical Council of India accepted this position and issued a
registration certificated on 19th June, 2002, albeit, a provisional
one.
The other candidates cited by the respondents had not
sought adjudication and there were no statement or orders as the
order dated 12th April, 2002 in their favour.
69.

The guidelines were placed by the Central Government

of India before the Supreme Court which had taken into
consideration every aspect of the matter including the disability
relating to lack of the qualification or ineligibilty for admission to
medical institution under the MCI norms. So far as the present
: 44 :

CCP 580/203

petitioner is concerned, the respondent accepted and admitted
that the petitioner was entitled to the condonation of the disability
in terms of the directions dated 8th March, 2002 of the Supreme
Court of India when they made the statement on 12th April, 2002.
Furthermore in acceptance of the same, the respondent issued the
provisional certificate to the petitioner on 17th June, 2002 which
entitled the petitioner to practice medicine in an approved
institution for the purpose of such training. The respondent had
made a clear representation to the petitioner that the certificate
was to be surrendered in original at the time of “final
registration”.

Therefore, inherent on even the provisional

certificate which was issued to the petitioner was a stipulation that
upon completion of the 12 years period, the petitioner would be
given the final registration. The representation to the petitioner
on the part of the respondent was clear and explicit.
70.

Inasmuch as the petitioner has vehemently contended

that this action on the part of the respondent was unfair and was
violative of the order passed by the Supreme Court as well as by
this court on 12th April, 2002, it becomes necessary to comment on
the same. Undoubtedly, the directions of the Apex Court were
clear and unambiguous. This court had granted the respondent,
: 45 :

CCP 580/203

the period of four weeks to process the application of the
petitioner for registration without any further ado. There was no
objection with regard to the lack of necessary internship on the
part of the petitioner by the respondent. The only disability urged
was with regard to the lack of the eligibility qualification for
admission to institutions in India at the time the petitioner joined
his course in USSR. This disability was required to be condoned
and the respondent had accepted this position.

In my view,

therefore, the respondent had no option but to process the case for
permanent registration in accordance with law and could not have
issued only the provisional registration depriving the petitioner of
his right to practice at this stage.
However, be that as it may, the respondent issued the
provisional certificate with the clear stipulation that the petitioner
would have to surrender the same at the time of final registration.
Thereby, they held out the assurance to the petitioner of his
entitlement to the final registration. Apprehensive of his plight as
he had been denied even provisional registration for a period of
almost 12 years after completion of his medical course and anxious
to join practice, the petitioner though protested, but accepted the
dictate of the respondent and even completed the training which
: 46 :

CCP 580/203

he was required to do by virtue of the provisional registration.
Having so completed the same, nothing further remain to be done.
The respondent were bound to have issued the permanent
registration to the petitioner forthwith.
71.

It is interesting to notice that the respondent have not

issued a single letter to the petitioner after 19th June, 2002 denying
him the permanent registration or rejecting his application for the
same. The petitioner has claimed that he has approached them in
person as well as by his written communications and even a legal
notice dated 21st August, 2003.

Let alone a rejection, the

respondent have deprived the petitioner of even a reply thereto.
Even prior thereto, as back as on 26th June, 2002, the petitioner
had objected to the issuance of the provisional certificate. Even in
response to this letter, no objection was raised by the respondent
who by their silence required the petitioner to abide by the
stipulations on the provisional certificate.
72.

As I have already noticed above, a mandamus was issued

to the respondent which it accepted and according to it, purported
to comply. It is the respondent's case before this court that having
issued the provisional registration certificate, it had complied with
the directions made by this court and consequently has so
: 47 :

CCP 580/203

defended its action. The directions made by the court stand even
on date and no variation or modification thereof has been sought
by the respondent. For this reason alone the reliance placed on
the instances of other candidates or the legal opinion is wholly
misconceived and unfortunate. The Medical Council of India is a
statutory authority vested with a solemn responsibility towards the
medical performance and discharge of its statutory functions and
public law obligations. It is expected to comply with directions
made by court.
73.

The direction of the Apex Court to the effect that the

disability of students who did not meet the minimum admission
norms of the MCI for joining undergraduate medical courses and
were admitted to foreign institutes recognised by the MCI would
be treated as eligible for registration with MCI was clear and
explicit.

So far as “the

minimum admission norms” are

concerned, they were not restricted to persons who did not pass
the 10+2 examination or possession of a minimum of 50% of
marks. It is necessary to bear in mind that the guidelines were
framed by the Central Government and placed before the Supreme
Court and it is not open to the Medical Council of India to carve
out categories thereunder. The respondent accepted this position
: 48 :

CCP 580/203

when it made the statement before this court on 12th April, 2002.
The respondent also acted pursuant to the mandamus issued by
this court and issued the provisional registration to the petitioner
with the representation that the same would require to be
surrendered at the time of final registration after twelve months.
The respondent have not passed any order rejecting the
application of the petitioner.
74.

It is noteworthy that the issue of the provisional

registration certificate was never the purport of the direction of the
courts. The Supreme Court had clearly directed that the degree of
the students would be treated as eligible for registration with the
Medical Council of India. Before this court, it had been stated on
behalf of the Medical Council of India that the counsel would abide
by the judgment and direction of the Supreme Court and the writ
petition was disposed of on 12th April, 2002 with clear time bound
directions to the respondent to process the application of the
petitioner. The application of the petitioner was for permanent
registration. This has not been decided till date.
75.

In this view of the matter, the principles laid down by

the Apex Court in 1996(6) SCC 291 J.S. Parihar vs. Ganpat Duggar
& Ors.; (1997) 1 SCC 258 Vijay Singh, Secretary Home vs. Mittan
: 49 :

CCP 580/203

Lal Hindoliya and (2000) 10 SCC 285 Lalith Mathur vs. L.
Maheswara Rao would not apply to the instant case.
In all the cases before the Apex Court, the authorities
had taken a firm view and passed orders on the applications or
issues as directed. The contempt proceedings were based on these
final orders passed by the authorities.

It was in these

circumstances held that the final orders gave rise to a subsequent
and fresh cause of action necessitating fresh challenge by an
independent petition and not by way of contempt proceedings.
The respondent before this case has admittedly not
made any final order on the petitioner's application for permanent
registration till date.
76.

Before this court, it is not the respondent's contention

that they were not aware of the proceedings and the orders passed
by the Supreme Court of India or this court on 12th April, 2002. It
is apparent that the Medical Council of India have moved by
issuance of the letter on 3rd May, 2002 only in purported
compliance thereof and have issued the provisional certificate as a
result. While issuing the provisional certificate on 19th June, 2002,
the respondent held out the assurance and promise to the
petitioner and maintained his entitlement to the permanent
: 50 :

CCP 580/203

registration even when they wrote on the certificate that the
original provisional certificate would required to be rendered at
the time of issuance of the permanent registration. No rejection of
the application of the petitioner has been communicated to him till
date. On the contrary, the respondent have merely prevaricated
on the issue and kept the petitioner dangling without any firm
answer to him. This position was maintained even at the time the
petitioner filed the contempt petition. The petitioner cannot be
faulted for being apprehensive and reluctant and knock at the
doors of this court by way of initiation of contempt proceedings
when he was finally able to atleast procure a provisional
registration with the representation that after completion of the
twelve months training period and surrender of the provisional
certificate, he would get the final registration.
77.

In these circumstances, it does not lie in the mouth of

the respondent to contend that the contempt petition filed by the
petitioner is belated or is barred by limitation. The respondent
having persuaded the petitioner to abide by its directive and to
undergo the training before issuance of the final certificate cannot
possibly be heard to say that the petitioner was negligent or
sleeping over its right. In this behalf, it would be useful to notice
: 51 :

CCP 580/203

the observations of the Apex Court in its pronouncement reported
at AIR 2001 SC 2763 Pallav Sheth vs. Custodian & Ors.,
wherein the court held thus :
“ 41.
One of the principles underlying the
law of limitation is that a litigant must act
diligently and not sleep over its rights. In this
background such an interpretation should be
placed on Section 20 of the Act which does not
lead to an anomalous result causing hardship to
the party who may have acted with utmost
diligence and because of the inaction on the
part of the Court a contemner cannot be made
to suffer.
Interpreting the section in the
manner canvassed by Mr. Venugopal would
mean that the Court would be rendered
powerless to punish even though it may be fully
convinced of the blatant nature of a contempt
having been committed and the same having
been brought to the notice of the Court soon
after the committal of the contempt and within
the period of one year of the same. Section 20,
therefore, has to be construed in a manner
which would avoid such an anomaly and
hardship both as regards the litigant as also by
placing a pointless fetter on the part of the
Court to punish for its contempt.
An
interpretation of Section 20, like the one
canvassed by the Appellant, which would
render the constitutional power of the Courts
nugatory in taking action for contempt even in
cases of gross contempt, successfully hidden for
a period of one year by practicing fraud by the
contemner would render Section 20 as liable to
be regarded as being in conflict with Art. 129
and/or Art. 215. Such a rigid interpretation
must therefore, be avoided.
xxx
xxx

: 52 :

CCP 580/203

44.
Action for contempt is divisible into
two categories, namely, that initiated suo motu
by the Court and that instituted otherwise than
one the Court's own motion. The mode of
initiation in each case would necessarily be
different. While in the case of suo motu
proceedings, it is the Court itself which must
initiate by issuing a notice. In other cases
initiation can only be by a party filing an
application. In our opinion, therefore, the
proper construction to be placed on Section 20
must be that action must be initiated, either by
filing of an application or by the Court issuing
notice suo motu, within a period of one year
from the date on which the contempt is alleged
to have been committed.”
78.

After noticing the facts of the case, the court recorded

that from the record, it was disclosed that the custodian received
information of the appellant having committed contempt only
after a receipt of a letter from the income tax authorities and
initiated the contempt proceedings thereafter. Recognising the
principles laid down in Section 17 of the Limitation Act, the court
held that the period of limitation would commence from the date
the information with regard to the contempt having been
committed was revealed to the parties. In this behalf, in Pallav
Sheth's case, the court observed thus :“ 47.
Section 17 of the Limitation Act,
inter alia, provides that where, in the case of
any suit or application for which a period of
limitation is prescribed by the Act, the
: 53 :

CCP 580/203

knowledge is prescribed by the Act, the
knowledge of the right or title on which a suit
or application is founded is concealed by the
fraud of the defendant or his agent (Section
17(1)(b)) or where any document necessary to
establish the right of the plaintiff or applicant
has been fraudulently concealed from him
(Section 17(1)(b)), the period of limitation
shall not begin to run until the plaintiff or
applicant has discovered the fraud or the
mistake or could, with reasonable diligence,
have discovered it; or in the case of a
concealed document, until the plaintiff or the
applicant first had the means of producing
the concealed document or compelling its
production.
These provisions embody
fundamental principles of justice and equity,
viz., that a party should not be penalised for
failing to adopt legal proceedings when the
facts or material necessary for him to do so
have been wilfully concealed from him and
also that a party who has acted fraudulently
should not gain the benefit of limitation
running in his favour by virtue of such fraud.”
79.

The principles laid down by the Apex Court in Pallav

Sheth's case were relied upon in a later pronouncement of the apex
Court reported at 2004 1 SCC 360 Bank of Baroda vs
Sadruddin Hasandaya & Anr. wherein the court held thus :“11.
One of the pleas taken in the reply
filed by the respondent is that they had given
the undertaking before the Bombay High
Court on 5-10-1999 but he present petition for
initiating contempt proceedings against them
was filed after more than one year in May
2001 and consequently, the same was barred
by limitation by virtue of Section 20 of the
: 54 :

CCP 580/203

Contempt of Courts Act. In this connection it
may be noticed that the petitioners are not
party to Summary Suit No.4571 of 1996 which
was instituted by Oman International Bank,
SAOD in the Bombay High Court wherein the
respondent entered into a settlement and
gave an undertaking in the consent terms on
5-10-1999. Normally, a person who is not a
party to the suit or proceedings can get no
knowledge of the affidavits or documents filed
therein. It is categorically stated in para 14 of
the present petition that in January 2001 the
petitioners learnt about the consent decree
passed in the case of Oman International
Bank during the course of execution
proceedings before the Debts Recovery
Tribunal, when steps were taken to attach the
aforesaid three properties. The material to
show that the petitioners had got knowledge
of the consent terms filed by the respondent
in the Bombay High Court at any time prior
thereto. The petitioners filed the present
application within five months of getting
knowledge of the undertaking given by the
respondent in the aforesaid case. In such a
situation, the proceedings initiated against
the respondent cannot be held to be barred by
limitation in view of the law laid down by this
Court in Pallav Sheth v. Custodian, SCC paras
44 and 47, wherein it has been held that the
period of limitation in a case like the present
one has to be counted from the date of
knowledge.”
80.

Upon an examination of the facts of the instant case in

the light of the principles laid down by the Apex Court, I have no
manner of doubt that the respondent had itself caused the
petitioner to believe that the permanent registration would be
: 55 :

CCP 580/203

issued upon expiry of the twelve months period of the provisional
registration and further the application of the petitioner has not
been rejected by any communication to the petitioner even till date
from the respondent. Therefore, it cannot be contended that the
present proceedings would be hit or would be barred on account of
the same having been initiated beyond the period of one year from
the date of commission of the contempt.
81.

I find that the defence taken by the respondent is not

only self contradictory but is also malafide. On the one hand, the
respondent has purported to set up and has made longdrawn
arguments on the issue that the petitioner is not entitled to the
condonation of the disability as provided in the order of the Apex
Court dated 8th March, 2002, at the same time, the respondent is
urging that it has issued the provisional certification and has
thereby complied by the directives of the courts.
82.

It is apparent from the record of the present case that

the respondent had no doubt with regard to the entitlement of the
petitioner to the grant of registration and the benefit of the order
dated 8th March, 2002 of the Apex Court when it made the
statement before the court on 12th April, 2002.

It is equally

apparent that no doubt existed even when the provisional
: 56 :

CCP 580/203

registration certificate was issued on 19th June, 2002.

All the

reasons have been discussed herein have been carved out in the
counter affidavit filed in answer to the notice to show cause issued
by this court.
83.

The respondent has relied upon the pronouncements of

the learned Single Judge in 109 (2004) DLT 404 Dr. Namit
Bhargava vs. Medical Council of India; 2004 I AD (Delhi) 465
Brijesh Ranjan vs. Medical Council of India and the decision dated
25th January, 2005 passed by the Division Bench in LPA No. 181 of
2004 Brijesh Ranjan vs. Medical Council of India.
Both Namit Bhargava and Brijesh Ranjan suffered from
two disabilities and apart from not fulfilling admission eligibility
norms in India had studied in unrecognised medical institutions.
This is not so in the instant case. In any case the petitioner's writ
petition stood decided on 12th April, 2002.
84.

The issue before the Apex Court in (2005) 1 SCC 48

Anand Kumar Singh & Ors. vs. UOI related to the cut off date for
screening test while in 2003 VI AD(Delhi) 421 Dr. Birender Singh
Thind vs UOI, the petitioner was seeking recognition of a
qualification acquired by him. Neither of these issues arise for
consideration in the present case.
: 57 :

These binding judicial
CCP 580/203

pronouncements relied upon by the petitioner therefore also do
not have a bearing on the case in hand.
85.

The power under the Contempt of Court Act, 1971 is

exercised in order to achieve a three fold purpose. It is well settled
that law does not command in vain. The courts are empowered
and required to implement and enforce orders passed in exercise
of its jurisdiction. The jurisdiction under the Contempt of Court
Act empowers the court to impose punishment to uphold the
majesty and dignity of law without any detraction from the power
to enforce compliance with the orders passed by the court. In a
given case, the court would be appropriately empowered to even
compensate the person who suffers from the contumacious
conduct of the contemnor by adequate damages.
86.

Every action of a statutory authority has to reflect

fairness. Non-compliance of an order passed by the court has two
extremely serious consequences. Firstly it results in interference
with the administration and course of justice.

Secondly, it

deprives the beneficiary of an order of the court of the benefits
thereunder.
When such non-compliance is culpable and suffers from
unexplained delays and is coupled with the intention on the part of
: 58 :

CCP 580/203

the contemnor to frustrate the orders passed by the court, the
same is certainly a matter of grave concern and deserves to be
strictly dealt with. It is so in the instant case.
87.

The Medical Council of India has claimed that it has

granted provisional registration to the petitioner. The petitioner
abided by the directives of the Medical Council of India. According
to the respondent thereupon nothing remained before the Medical
Council of India to grant the petitioner registration.
88.

It is noteworthy that in its entire pleadings before this

Court, the Medical Council of India has not been able to point out
a single reason as to why the petitioner ought not to have been
granted the permanent registration. The direction made by this
court pursuant to the statement on behalf of the Medical Council
of India on 12th April, 2002 required consideration of the
application of the petitioner in terms of the directions of the Apex
Court. Time bound directions had been given. The Apex Court in
para 7 of the reported judgment had directed the Medical Council
of India

that “in respect of those who have already applied for

registration to Medical Council of India

the same shall be

granted or refused within a period of 15 days from today in terms
of this order.”
: 59 :

CCP 580/203

89.

The petitioner had admittedly applied for registration in

the year 1991. This court extended the period given by the Apex
Court by four weeks. The petitioner was entitled to condonation in
terms of the guidelines 6A(ii) placed by the Medical Council of
India before the Apex Court which was approved by the judgment
dated 8th March, 2002.
90.

Therefore, in my view, the respondent has failed to grant

the condonation to which the petitioner was entitled in terms of
para 6A(ii) of the guidelines approved by the Apex Court in
2002(3)SCC 696 within the period as granted by this Court. I have
no hesitation in holding that the respondent has contumaciously,
wilfully and deliberately violated the directions made in the order
dated 12th April, 2002 and has thereby committed contempt of
court.
91.

Admittedly the petitioner was granted provisional

registration by the Medical Council of India. This could only be if
he satisfied the requirements thereof. The petitioner has placed
the documents required by the Medical Council of India before it.
No objection thereto has been raised by the Medical Council of
India till date. No objection in respect of the same has been raised
in the counter affidavit or even in the submissions, even if it could
: 60 :

CCP 580/203

be raised. After grant of the provisional registration, the petitioner
has done another period of internship with the Wenlock District
Hospital.

A certificate dated 24.7.2003 issued by the District

Surgeon and Superintendent of this Hospital which is located in
Mangalore and run by the Government of Karantaka has been
placed on record. This is not disputed by the respondent. The
petitioner has admittedly satisfied the conditions of even the
provisional registration. The respondent admits knowledge of the
order dated 12th April, 2002.
92.

Having so held, it is necessary to note that there is

neither repentance not a bonafide attempt to purge the contempt
on the part of the respondent even during the pendency of the
present matter. Such conduct undermines the authority of the
court and undoubtedly disturbs the confidence of a citizen in the
effectiveness of its orders. The power to punish for contempt is to
be found in Section 12 of the Contempt of Court Act, 1971.
On the question of sentence, in its judgment reported at
2004 1 SCC 360 Bank of Baroda vs Sadruddin
Hasandaya & Anr., the Supreme Court has observed thus :-

“16.

Coming to the question of sentence,
: 61 :

CCP 580/203

we are conscious of the fact that the power to
punish for contempt must always be exercised
consciously, wisely and with circumspection. At
the same time, the court should act with
seriousness and severity where justice is
jeopardized by a grossly contemptuous act of a
party. If the judiciary is to perform its duties
and functions effectively and true to the spirit
with which they are sacredly entrusted, the
dignity and authority of the courts have to be
respected and protected at all costs. Otherwise,
the very cornerstone of our constitutional
scheme will give way and with it will disappear
the rule of law and the civilized life in the society
(see Vinay Chandra Mishra). The present
petition was heard on 27-8-2003 when we
enquired whether the respondent would be
willing to deposit the amount. Learned counsel
for the respondent sought time and the case was
adjourned to 23-9-2003 and then to 14-10-2003
for the respondent reiterated the problems of
the respondent in depositing the amount and so
the matter was heard on merits. The position
remains that though under the consent decree
passed by the Court on 28-7-1999, the
respondent had to deposit the first instalment
on or before 1-11-1999 and the last instalment by
1-8-2001, but they have not deposited or paid
even a single penny. In these circumstances, we
are of the opinion that there is no occasion for
showing any leniency in the matter of
punishment.
17.
We, accordingly, hold that the
respondent have committed contempt of court
for which they are sentenced to undergo four
months' imprisonment. It is, however, directed
that after they have undergone 15 days'
imprisonment, they shall be released on shortterm bail for a period of three months on their
furnishing bail bonds etc. to the satisfaction of
: 62 :

CCP 580/203

the Registrar, Bombay High Court. If during this
period of three months, they deposit the entire
amount in terms of the consent decree dated 287-1999, the sentence of four months'
imprisonment imposed upon them shall be
reduced to the period already undergone, failing
which they will undergo the balance period of
imprisonment.”
93.

In 1995 Crl. Law Journal 2179 (at page 2183,

2184) Sunil Kumar Ghose vs State of West Bengal, it was
held that in a contempt application, the court was competent to
issue necessary, further and consequential directions for enforcing
its orders.

In this case, the court directed the contemnor to

comply with the directions given in the judgment of the Supreme
Court within three weeks from the date of passing of the order.
94.

Law confers a discretion on this court so far as

punishment for contempt of court is concerned. Having regard to
the facts and circumstances of the case, before considering the
quantum of sentence to be imposed on the respondent, I am of the
view that in the interests of justice hearing on the same be
deferred.

I

hereby

give

one

opportunity

to

the

respondent/contemnor to mitigate or purge the contempt
committed by complying with the directions made by this court on
12th April, 2002 within a period of four weeks from today.

: 63 :

CCP 580/203

95.

At this stage, it is necessary to note the other prayers

made in the petition. It has been pointed out that on account of
the delay in granting the registration to the petitioner, he has
enured heavy financial loss and the petitioner deserves to be
compensated by compensatory costs.
96.

Undoubtedly the petitioner possessed a recognised

medical qualification which was granted to him as back as in 1991
and he made the application for registration to the respondent.
However, on account of the stand of the Medical Council of India
on which final directions were made only on 8th March, 2002 by
the Apex Court, the period prior thereto has to be ignored.
However, the Apex Court had granted time bound directions and
granted a period of 15 days only to the Medical Council of India to
act in terms of its judgment. This court vide the order passed on
12th April, 2002 gave a period of four weeks to the respondent to
ensure compliance with the directions passed by the Apex Court
and to process the case for registration of the petitioner in terms
of the judgment and guidelines within four weeks. The respondent
upon

such

consideration,

instead

of

granting

permanent

registration granted only provisional registration to the petitioner
and has till date not granted him the permanent registration. The
: 64 :

CCP 580/203

petitioner has also contended that even if the stand of the
respondent was to be sustained, then, even as per the respondent
he became entitled to permanent registration with effect from
completion of 12 months from the date of the provisional
registration on 17th June, 2002. This period of one year came to an
end on 17th June, 2003.
97.

No tenable circumstances have been laid before this

Court by the respondent to justify the failure to grant the
permanent registration to the petitioner thereafter.
98.

It is an admitted position that the petitioner cannot

practice as a doctor without his permanent registration.

The

respondent had required the petitioner to an additional year of
internship after grant of his degree which he had completed in the
USSR despite the directions of the Apex Court, he has completed a
further year of internship in India as well.

His applications and

requests to the respondent have fallen on deaf ears and remain
pending unreplied. The respondent have filed a counter affidavit
on 11th February, 2004 taking every plea possible despite a
conscious statement made on 12th April, 2002. The matter has
remained pending in this court since October, 2003. Despite the
directions dated 8th March, 2002 of the Apex Court and the order
: 65 :

CCP 580/203

dated 12th April, 2002, the petitioner has been denied registration.
Even though provisional registration was granted, which according
to the respondent, is in purported compliance of the orders dated
12th April, 2002, the respondent has contradictorily and
contumaciously urged that the petitioner is not entitled to
registration. The petitioner has been prevented from earning his
livelihood and undoubtedly has suffered immense humiliation and
deprivation on account of these actions on the respondent.
99.

In 1994 II AD(Delhi) 544 Dr. Ravinder Kumar

Mathur vs. Delhi Administration, a Division Bench of this
Court was concerned with delay on the part of the authorities in
processing an application for study leave in respect of a doctor who
was granted admission to the post graduate course by the Delhi
University. In view of the delay in processing the application on
the part of his employers, the petitioner was being denied
admission by the university. The court in these circumstances,
when approached by way of a writ petition under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India seeking issuance of a mandamus, held that in
view of the delay the petitioner could not be given admission.
However in view of the manner in which the respondent had
proceeded the court and held thus :: 66 :

CCP 580/203

“7.
xxx It will, therefore, appear to us
that the officers of the Delhi Administration
slept over the application of the petitioner all
this period without any reason causing
irreparable loss and damage to the petitioner.
In these circumstances, we propose to
recompensate the petitioner by imposing
heavy cost by way of damages on Delhi
Administration and its officers. This cost we
tentatively quantify at Rs. one lakh though it
does appear to us that this will be a poor
consolation to the petitioner, but we cannot
help otherwise. In ordering this we draw
strength from the decision of the Supreme
Court
in
Lucknow
Development
Authority v. M.K. Gupta, 1994 (IV) AD
S.C.(C) 469. Before we impose cost on the
officers of the Delhi Administration who dealt
with the file, we require the Secretary
(Medical), Delhi Administration, to produce in
this court relevant file and also file an affidavit
giving names of all the officers who dealt with
the file at various stages till permission was
finally granted to the petitioner.”
100.

The respondent did not comply with the court

directions. Instead, a review petition being RA 5262/1996 was
filed in the writ petition seeking modification of the judgment
dated 8th April, 1994. This review petition was accompanied by
CM 5763/1996 seeking condonation of delay.

The respondent

thereby sought to justify and defend the action of their officials in
failing to process the application. In these circumstances, after a
detailed consideration of the matter, by judgment dated 12th

: 67 :

CCP 580/203

February, 1999 the Hon'ble Bench awarded a further sum of Rs.
five lakhs to the petitioner as damages. This judgment of the
Division Bench is reported at 1999 III AD(Delhi) 833 entitled
Dr. Ravinder Kumar Mathur vs Union of India.
101.

The petitioner has contended that he has been deprived

of practice and earning his livelihood even as per the case set up by
the petitioner.

The petitioner has therefore prayed for awarding

damages at the rate of Rs.5 lakhs per year after 12th April, 2002.
102.

In Dr. Ravinder Kumar Mathur (supra) the Division

Bench imposed heavy cost by way of damages. Having regard to
the entire facts and circumstances, I am of the view that the
petitioner may also deserves to be paid such costs and also costs of
the present litigation.

Accordingly, it is directed that this issue

shall be also heard on the next date and would be quantified on
the next date of hearing.
103.

As I have found the respondent guilty of contempt of

court, the respondent is called upon to address the court on the
issue of quantum of sentence.
List the matter for hearing on sentence and punitive
costs on 3rd July, 2006.

: 68 :

CCP 580/203

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
May 17, 2006
JK

: 69 :

CCP 580/203

