IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 14719-20/2005
Dat e of decision:February 17th, 2005
SH. PANKAJ DAHIYA & ANR.
... Petitioner
through Ms. Suman Kapoor, Advocate
VERSUS
NCT OF DELHI & ORS.
.... Respondents
through Mr. V.K. Diwan with
Mr. Nishant Diwan, Advocates for
respondents no. 1 to 4
Mr. Anurag Mathur, Advocate for
respondent no. 5
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

By these petitions filed under Article 226 of the

Constitution of India the petitioners have sought the following
prayers :“1.
To forward answer Books/sheets of
Mid-semester and End semester of Theory-I
W.P.(C) 14719-20/2005

page 1 of page 22

2.

paper (Eigth semester) of both the Petitioners for
re-examining the answer and revaluation and
rechecking, to an independent authority either
I.I.T. or any other independent and Neutral
Authority.
2.
Forward answer Book/Sheet of Midsemester and End semester of Theory-II paper
(Eighth semester) of Petitioner no. 2 for reexamining the answers and revaluation and
rechecking of the answer Book, to be forwarded to
an independent authority either I.I.T. or any
other independent and Neutral Authority.
3.
To forward the answer Book/Sheet of
PR.I in Automobile Engineering of (Eighth
Semester) of petitioner no. 1 for re-examining the
answers of written Test of PR.I and revaluation
and rechecking of the answer Book, to be
forwarded to an independent authority either
I.I.T. or any other independent and Neutral
Authority.
4.
To conduct viva-test of PR.I. In
(Automobile Engineering) of Eighth Semester of
Petitioner no. 1, from an Independent Authority
preferably I.I.T.
5.
To conduct fair evaluation of internal,
written
and
Viva-voice
and
practicalI(Automobile
Engg.) of Eighth semester of
Petitioners by the Respondent Authorities and to
issue consolidated mark sheet to be Petitioners,
declaring the rules of Respondent Ultra-Virus the
law.”
The writ petition has been filed on the premise that the

petitioners were admitted to the Delhi College of Engineering in
July, 2000 to the Bachelor of Engineering in Mechanical
Engineering. The admitted position is that the course of the
petitioners was divided into eight semesters with exams being

W.P.(C) 14719-20/2005

page 2 of page 22

conducted at the end of each six monthly semester. However,
there is material divergence on the pleas set up by the petitioners
and by the respondents with regard to their academic record.
Whereas the petitioners contend that they have maintained a very
good academic record throughout their seven semesters as well as
a good performance in extra-curricular activities, the same is
vehemently disputed on the part of the respondents.
3.

According to the petitioner no. 1, he was selected as

President of the Student Council of the Delhi College of
Engineering and also worked in student welfare and remained a
member of the Council.

He claims that he was declared as

successful trainee during the academic training with Maruti Udyog
Limited

through

campus

selection

while

undergoing

his

engineering course. The petitioner has also claimed that he had
cleared the theory paper of Automobiles in the 8th semester i.e. the
theory 2 paper.
According to the petitioner no. 1 because he qualified the
theory test and interview conducted by M/s Maruti Udyog
Limited, got placement with this company and was appointed as a
graduate engineer trainee where he was selected with Maruti
Udyog Limited in which he is working since 4th June, 2004.
W.P.(C) 14719-20/2005

page 3 of page 22

4.

The petitioner no. 2 has based his claim on the plea that

he was one of the most efficient participants who participated in
manufacturing a formula car of his own design and model while
undergoing the engineering course. The petitioner no. 2 submits
that he was also part of the team which visited foreign countries
twice representing new achievements of the Delhi College of
Engineering. It is claimed that he is an active member of defianz
racing and was serving the team as the team coordinator. The
petitioner no. 2 claims that he was the recipient of the Best
Endeavour Award in the year 2003 in an international event. He
claims that he was responsible for organising the personality
development programme in the Delhi College of Engineering for
the last two years and that he had successfully qualified all seven
semesters conducted by the Delhi College of Engineering in his
Bachelor of Engineering course without any back papers. The
petitioner no. 2 claims to have got widespread coverage about his
project in various newspapers, magazines and news channels for
the last two years and that he was successfully working as a
graduate engineer trainee in a British company namely M/s D.S.
Evans.
5.

Both petitioners had reached the eighth semester which

W.P.(C) 14719-20/2005

page 4 of page 22

was the last semester of the course in the year 2004 and if they
had passed all the examinations, they would have qualified with
the bachelor degree in mechanical engineering by June, 2004. It
has been brought to my notice that the eighth semester in the
course consists of a total of three theory papers, one practical
paper, one project and one last training (i.e. winter). As such the
petitioners were to undertake a total of six papers in their 8 th
semester.
Both petitioners have contended that they appeared in
all the papers and performed very well and were sure that they
would secure good marks in the papers with first position as they
had appeared with full preparation.
6.

However, to the shock of the petitioners, upon

announcement of result, both of them were declared unsuccessful
in the Theory-1 paper.

The petitioner no. 2 was declared

unsuccessful even in the theory-2 paper. The petitioners submit
that they had attempted and answered all questions correctly as
they were having good knowledges in the subject. Reliance has
been placed on their claimed previous academic record as well as
on their devotion towards studies. According to the petitioners
even students who were having very little knowledge about the
W.P.(C) 14719-20/2005

page 5 of page 22

subject had cleared the Theory-1 and Theory-2 papers. Petitioners
have based their claim for entitlement to the degree on the plea
that they were meritorious students who were placed with
companies of reputation as graduate engineer trainees with effect
from June, 2004.
7.

The petitioner no. 1 has raised a plea of mala fide against

Professor Naveen Kumar arrayed as respondent no. 3 herein on
the ground that the petitioners were wrongfully refused admit
cards to appear in the last semester. Petitioner no. 1 submits that
he had appeared in the practical test for his 8th semester held on 5th
May, 2004 which consisted of a written portion and a viva voce.
According to petitioner no. 1, after he had taken the written
portion of the practical test, he was not permitted to take the viva
voce by respondent no. 3.
Thereafter, the petitioners were supposed to get their
admit cards on 7th May, 2004 for appearing in the university
theory examinations but the same was refused to the petitioner no.
1.
8.

According to the petitioner no. 1, he had moved a writ

petition bearing writ petition no. 7271/2004 entitled Pankaj
Dahiya vs Government of NCT of Delhi before this court for
W.P.(C) 14719-20/2005

page 6 of page 22

issuance of an admit card and for conducting a fair evaluation of
the written paper as well as conducting his viva voce which had
been refused according to him on 5th May, 2004.
However, it transpires that the petitioner had been
expelled from the college.

This Hon'ble Court directed the

petitioner no. 1 to tender an apology before the Principal and
College Authorities of the Delhi College of Engineering for his
activities. Upon tendering an unconditional apology before the
college authorities, Principal and professors of the college, the
authorities agreed to give the admit card to the petitioner subject
to withdrawal of the writ petition by the petitioner no. 1.
Accordingly, the writ petition was withdrawn on 12th May, 2004.
Thereafter, the petitioners were issued the admit cards
and were permitted to appear in the 8th semester examination held
in May to June, 2004.
9.

Upon declaration of the result which was as afore

recorded, both the petitioners applied for rechecking/revaluation
on 28th July, 2004 and again sought re-examination of their
unsuccessful papers by an independent authority vide a
representation dated 2nd August, 2004. As the respondents did not
agree to the request made by the petitioners, the petitioners have
W.P.(C) 14719-20/2005

page 7 of page 22

filed the present writ petition seeking the directions set out above.
10.

The

respondents

have

vehemently

disputed

the

allegations made against them and have stated that the petitioners
did not have the professed academic record. It is pointed out that
the petitioners had failed in the earlier papers as well and that the
conduct of the petitioner no. 1 had also not been good inasmuch as
he is alleged to have been involved in fraudulently opening a bank
account in the name of the College Cultural Council wherein
sponsorship cheques were deposited and the amount was
fraudulently withdrawn. It is further pointed out that the case in
this behalf is pending with the Delhi police for investigations. The
respondents have further pointed out that the petitioner no. 1 had
been elected as the president of the students council with the
union of the Delhi College of Engineering. However, on account of
misconduct, he was debarred from presidentship with effect from
7th November, 2003.
The respondents pointed out that the programme
undertaken with the Maruti Udyog Limited was part of the
curriculum and there was no special merit involved in the
petitioner participating in the same.

Other students had also

undertaken the same training programme and were granted
W.P.(C) 14719-20/2005

page 8 of page 22

certificates which are duly issued to students by the organisation.
So far as his academic record is concerned the petitioner no. 1 is
stated to have earlier also failed in the Practical 4 of the second
semester which had been held in May/June, 2001 and again in the
Theory-5 of the sixth semester examination held in May/June,
2003.
11.

So far as the petitioner no. 2 is concerned, he is also

stated to be part of a team of 16 students which developed the
formula racing car and according to the respondents, his academic
record is also not good.

According to the respondents, the

petitioner no. 2 has passed one paper of the 2nd semester and two
papers of the 3rd semester in second attempt. 12. The
respondents point out that there was no mala fide in refusing to
give the admit card inasmuch as the petitioner no. 1 was expelled
from the college on disciplinary grounds and were debarred from
appearing in the examination of the college which was to be held
from May, 2004. However, the petitioner was allowed to appear
in the same after he tendered a written apology referred to by the
petitioners.
13.

It has been pointed out that examinations are held by

the Delhi University. So far as the rechecking of the papers is
W.P.(C) 14719-20/2005

page 9 of page 22

concerned, it is submitted that rechecking is carried out according
to the rules of the Delhi University. There is no provision in the
rules for rechecking of practical papers and rechecking is
permissible for theory papers only.

It is submitted that

unsuccessful candidates are allowed to reappear in the failed
papers as and when the examination for such papers are held as
per the scheme of examination applicable the to BE course of the
University.
The candidate is required to pass the theory and
practical examinations separately.
With regard to the scheme of examination, the
respondents have pointed out that the Committee of Courses and
Studies in each department appoints the Evaluation Review
Committee(ERC). There is a set procedure for evaluation of marks
which is dealt with the Evaluation Review Committee (ERC)
pertaining to the course in question. One of the functions of this
ERC is to “recommend appointment of paper setters/examiners of
various examinations”.

Dissatisfied candidate are required to

apply for rechecking to the Delhi University.
14.

The respondents contend that there was no mala fide

against the petitioners and that they were permitted to take the
W.P.(C) 14719-20/2005

page 10 of page 22

examinations without hindrance and their answer sheets were
evaluated fairly. It is submitted that the rechecking or evaluation
has to be dealt with by the Evaluation Review Committee in
accordance with the rules of the Delhi University and therefore,
the prayer of the petitioner seeking the evaluation by an
independent authority being contrary to the applicable rules of the
Delhi University, cannot be granted.
So far as the prayer with regard to holding of the
practical examination is concerned, it is pointed out that
rechecking of practicals is not permissible under the rules as the
same would tantamount to re-conduct of the viva voce which is not
permissible.

According to the respondents, rechecking of the

practicals is not permissible as the practical examination is based
jointly on the conduct of the given practical and oral(viva voce)
examination which is conducted in the presence of a panel of
examiners. It has been submitted that the unsuccessful candidates
are allowed to reappear in the papers in which they have failed and
the examination for such papers are held as per the scheme of
examination applicable to the BE courses of the university.
15.

Learned counsel appearing for the parties have dealt at

length on the aforestated issues and have taken me through the
W.P.(C) 14719-20/2005

page 11 of page 22

record of the case. I find that the writ petition was first listed
before this court on 10th September, 2004 and while issuing notice
to the respondents to show cause, this court had directed the
respondent no. 2 to produce in court the Theory Paper-1 and
Practical Paper-1 of the petitioner no. 1. The respondents were
also directed to produce Theory Papers 1 and 2 of the petitioner
no. 2 relating to the exams of the Eighth(end) semester on the next
date of hearing.
16.

Accordingly,

the

respondents

have

produced

the

aforestated papers before this court on the 28th September, 2004
when the following order was recorded :“28.09.2004
Present : Ms. Suman Kapoor for the petitioner.
Mr. V.K. Dewan for respondents no.1
to 4
Mr. Anurag Mathur for respondent
no. 5.
WP(C) NO. 14719-20/2004 & CM
10511/2004
Pursuant to order dated 10th
September, 2004, counsel for the respondents no.
1 to 4 has produced four answer sheets of
petitioners 1 and 2 relating to the Exams of
Eighth (End) Semester. Perusal of the answer
sheets shows that one of the answer sheets has
not been evaluated.
In these circumstances, it
would be proper that all the answer sheets re reexamined/re-evaluated. Ordered accordingly.
The
Dean,
Faculty
of
W.P.(C) 14719-20/2005

page 12 of page 22

Technology, Delhi University, is directed to assign
the answer sheets to Netaji Subhash Chand
Institute of Technology for re-examination/reevaluation with a direction that senior-most
professor of that institute shall re-examine/reevaluate the answer sheets. This process shall be
completed within four weeks. The result of the
re-evaluation shall be placed before this court o or
before the next. The answer sheets produced in
Court have been placed in a sealed cover and
returned to counsel for the respondents 1 to 4 for
the aforesaid purpose.
List on 3rd November, 2004.
A copy of the order be sent to the Dean,
Faculty of Technology, Delhi University for
compliance.
Dasti to counsel for the parties.
Sd/C.K. MAHAJAN, J
September 28, 2004”
17.

Thereafter, the respondents had taken steps for getting

the answer sheets of the petitioner re-examined/revaluated in
terms of the order dated 28th September, 2004. The same were
produced in court in sealed cover and were so produced on the 3rd
November, 2004 when orders with regard to holding of the viva
voce test of the petitioner no. 1 were passed.
In terms of the order passed, the respondents have also
conducted the viva voce test of the petitioner no. 1 in the paper of
automotive engineering and combustion examination on the 30th
W.P.(C) 14719-20/2005

page 13 of page 22

September, 2004. The result of the same has been handed over in
court in a sealed cover as was directed on the 2nd December, 2004.
18.

The respondents have also placed before me the original

mark sheets duly evaluated by the professors of the Netaji Subhash
Chand Institute of Technology in sealed cover as directed. The
original answer sheets of the two petitioners have also been
perused by me.
19.

I have considered the records of the case as well as the

original records placed before me.

In order to appreciate the

performance of the petitioners, strong reliance has been placed on
their past academic records. The same is not only misconceived
but also misplaced as it appears that both the petitioners have
earlier also failed in different papers. The petitioner no. 1 has
failed earlier in Practical-4 of the second semester examination
held in May/June, 2001 and again in Theory-5 of the sixth
semester held in May/June, 2003. Similarly, the petitioner no. 2
is stated to have failed in Theory-4 of the second semester
examination held in May/June, 2001 and again in Theory-1 and
Theory-5

of

the

third

semester

examination

held

in

November/December, 2001. The petitioner no. 2 is stated to have
passed one paper of the second semester and two papers of the
W.P.(C) 14719-20/2005

page 14 of page 22

third semester in the second attempt. Therefore, so far as the past
academic record is concerned, it cannot be said that the petitioners
were consistently students of merit and therefore, the result scored
by them in the final semester deserved to be rejected on this
ground alone.
20.

The petitioners have rested their case on bald allegations

of mala fides without any specifics in the pleadings or any material
on record. The respondents have justified the action taken by
them against the petitioners on account of the conduct of the
petitioners.

The petitioners themselves have referred to the

proceedings in civil writ no. 7271/2004 entitled Pankaj Dahiya vs
Government of NCT of Delhi wherein the petitioners no. 1 was
directed to tender apology before the authorities of the Delhi
College of Engineering. It is only on account of the apology having
been accepted that the petitioner was granted the admit card.
Without any specific allegation, the petitioners have merely sought
to assert as an innuendo that there might have been partiality in
checking of the eighth semester papers.
Even this suggestion is wholly unjustified inasmuch as
the petitioners admittedly had not passed in more than one paper
and there is not a whisper of an allegation in terms of the
W.P.(C) 14719-20/2005

page 15 of page 22

particulars of the persons responsible for having failed them in the
respective papers.

In these circumstances the allegations of

possible partiality are found to be wholly unsubstantiated and
devoid of merit.
21.
of

Every academic institution has its own rules for conduct
examinations,

rechecking

and

revaluation

of

results.

Respondent no. 1 also has such rules in place. There is no
challenge to the scheme of examination or the rules relating to
either the examination or rechecking/revaluation in the instant
petition.

In order to ensure academic discipline, it is necessary

that such rules are strictly adhered to and are not permitted to be
violated.
22.

I find that in the instant case, orders were made in

favour of the petitioners on the 28th September, 2004 with regard
to revaluation and re-examination of their answer sheets in the
papers in which the petitioners have failed. This revaluation was
to be done by the senior most professors of the Netaji Subhash
Chand Institute of Technology. Similarly, directions for holding
the viva voce of the petitioner in the practical examination in
which he said he was not permitted to participate on the 5th May,
2004 was directed to be conducted on the 2nd December, 2004.
W.P.(C) 14719-20/2005

page 16 of page 22

Undoubtedly, these orders were as an exception and made in the
facts and circumstances of the present case. The original records,
the result of the fresh viva voce examination as well as the
rechecked answer sheets have been placed before me in sealed
cover.
23.

Perusal of the answer sheet shows that the respondent

no. 1 had concealed the marks given by the original examiner by
placing the same with black sticker/tape over them so that the
same was not visible to any person before sending the answer
sheets for the rechecking in terms of the order passed by this
court.

The revaluator has put his assessment on a fresh

coversheet. There is no allegation of bias or mala fide against the
examiners who have conducted the rechecking of the theory paper
or the viva voce of the petitioner no. 1.
24.

I find that in the industrial engineering paper, out of a

total of 100 marks, whereas the petitioner no. 1 had originally
scored a total of 29 marks i.e. 12 in the theory paper and 17 in the
internal assessment.
N.K.

Tewari

of

Technology(former

Upon revaluation by Emeritus Professor

the

Netaji

Professor

Subhash
&

Head,

Chand
Mech.

Institute

of

Engineering

Department of IIT, Delhi), the petitioner no. 1 has scored only 28
W.P.(C) 14719-20/2005

page 17 of page 22

marks i.e. 11 in the theory and 17 in the internal assessment.
Theory
Paper

Internal
Assessment

Original
Marks

12

17

29

Marks
on
Revaluat
ion

11

17

28

25.

Total

Similarly, the respondents were directed to conduct a

fresh viva voce of the petitioner in the practical examination of
automotive engineering/combustion engine.

Out of the total

marks of 100 in this practical, 70 marks are earmarked for the
practical examination and 30 marks towards the internal
assessment. Originally, the petitioner no. 1 had scored 16 marks in
the practical paper and 5 marks in the internal assessment. Upon
the revaluation by Professor S.K. Sinha of the Netaji Subhash
Institute of Technology, the petitioner scored only 15 marks in the
practical paper and five marks in the internal assessment.
It is noteworthy that in the viva voce of the petitioner
held on 30th December, 2004, the petitioner scored only 10 marks
out of 40. This viva voce test was conducted by Dr. Surjit Angra,
Readers of the Mechanical Engineering Department, NIT,
Kurukshetra as the External Examiner and Prof. S. Maji and Shri
W.P.(C) 14719-20/2005

page 18 of page 22

R.K. Singh as the internal examiners.
26.

Similarly, the papers of the petitioner no. 2 have also

been revaluated as directed by the court. In the paper of industrial
engineering out of the maximum of 100 marks, the petitioner no. 2
had originally scored a total of 28 marks i.e. he was awarded 15
marks in the theory paper and 13 in the internal assessment.
Upon rechecking there was decrease in the marks
awarded to him. The papers was revaluated in terms of the order
of this court by the aforestated professor of the Netaji Subhash
Institute of Technology when the petitioner has been awarded a
total of 26.5 marks. The petitioner no. 2 was awarded 13.5 marks
in the theory paper and 13 in the internal assessment.
In his paper of metrology, the petitioner no. 2 originally
scored a total of 21 marks out of 100 i.e. 12 marks in the theory
paper and 9 marks in the internal assessment.
Upon rechecking by the respondent as per their rules the
petitioner's marks increased to only 23 when he was found to have
scored 14 marks in the theory paper and 9 in the internal
assessment.
Upon revaluation in terms of the order of this court by
the professor of the Netaji Subhash Chand Institute of Technology,
W.P.(C) 14719-20/2005

page 19 of page 22

the petitioner no. 2 has scored 26 marks out of 100 i.e. 17 marks in
the theory paper and 9 in the internal assessment.
27.

In view of the aforestated position, the final result of the

petitioners despite revaluations has remained unchanged and they
are found to have failed in the papers even upon revaluation of
their papers by outside experts and even a fresh viva voce.
There is yet another reason why the prayers made in the
writ petition with regard to the practical examination could not
have been granted. The petitioners in the earlier writ petition
being Writ Petition(Civil) No. 7271/2004 the petitioner had, inter
alia, made the following prayers :“3.
To direct the Respondent No. 2 to take
VIVA test in addition to practical held on 5.5.04.
4.
To direct the Respondents to
do fair evaluation of the written/practical and
VIVA-Voice examination with respect to whole of
the Eighth Semester for B.E. Degree Course.”
Admittedly such prayer was not granted. Therefore the
present writ petition seeking the same prayer could not have been
filed. However pursuant to the interim orders made, the
respondents have even conducted the fresh viva voce. The result
of the petitioners despite revaluation by outside experts has
remained the same.
W.P.(C) 14719-20/2005

page 20 of page 22

28.

I have no reason to hold that there was any mala fide on

the part of the respondents in either conducting of theory and
practical examination or their assessment by the examiners of the
respondents.

The petitioners have been found to have failed

miserably in the papers even upon revaluation of the mark sheets.
The allegations made by the petitioners are against the Faculty
members or the respondents are bereft of any substance and are
devoid of merit. I have no hesitation in holding that the answer
sheets of the petitioners had been evaluated fairly as per a genuine
assessment by the examiners of the respondents.
29.

The respondents have stated that the unsuccessful

candidates are allowed to reappear in the paper in which they have
failed as and when the examination for such papers are held as per
the scheme of examination applicable to BE Courses of the
university. Consequently, the petitioners will be able to take the
examination in accordance with the applicable rules in the papers
in which they have failed.
30.

This writ petition is, therefore, dismissed.

The

petitioners shall be at liberty to take examination in the papers in
which they have failed in the next examination conducted by the
respondents in accordance with the applicable statutory provision.
W.P.(C) 14719-20/2005

page 21 of page 22

In case there has been any delay in complying with any procedural
requirement on account of the pendency of the present writ
petition, the respondents shall permit the petitioners to complete
the same within a period of two weeks from the date of passing of
the judgment in the instant case.
This writ petition is dismissed.
The respondents will be entitled to cost of the
proceedings which are quantified at Rs.2,000/-.
GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
February 17th, 2005
kr

W.P.(C) 14719-20/2005

page 22 of page 22

