IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 9411/2007 & CM No. 17731/2007
Date of decision: 18th December, 2007
Shri Rajiv Gulati
... Petitioner
through: Mr. Hemant Malhotra, Advocate
VERSUS
MCD & Ors.
....Respondents
through: Mr. Amit K. Paul, Standing Counsel for the
MCD

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
1.Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
Judgment?
2.To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3.Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
GITA MITTAL, J(Oral)
1.

This writ petition has been filed by the petitioner claiming to be a co-owner of

the property no. C-173, Mansarover Garden, New Delhi-05 alongwith his brother Sh.
Anil Gulati and mother Smt. Nirmal Gulati. The petitioner has asserted that the
petitioner and respondent nos. 3 and 4 had applied jointly for sanction of a building
plan in respect of construction of the ground floor of the property which was granted
by the MCD on 6th May, 1995. However when the petitioner submitted an application
in 1993 for sanction of proposed additional construction the respondents did not
-2consider the application on the ground that the same was without the consent of the
co-owners.

2.

According to the petitioner the respondents thereafter accorded sanction on 6th

December, 2004 to the respondent no. 4 for raising construction on the subject
property without seeking consent of the petitioner and that the same is wholly illegal
and impermissible. The writ petitioner has contended that the same impacts the civil
rights of the petitioner who has sought redressal by way of filing CS(OS) No.396/2006
titled Rajiv Gulati vs. Anil Gultati & Ors. seeking a decree for partition, declaration and
injunction with regard to the subject property on the original side of this court.
3.

The petitioner has placed reliance on the mutation effected by the respondent

no. 1 of the property in its record on 15th June, 1984 in favour of the petitioner as well
as the respondent nos. 3 and 4. The submission is tht the MCD has recognised the
rights of the petitioner thereby. Inter alia, the petitioner has prayed in this writ
petition for issuance of directions to the commissioner of the MCD to consider the
representation of the petitioner dated 13th October, 2007. It has been complained that
even a legal notice has failed to motivate the MCD to take any action in the matter.
4.

The writ petition has been opposed by Mr. Amit Paul learned standing counsel

inter alia on the ground that the petitioner has available
-3to it an alternative efficacious remedy by way of a statutory appeal under Section 347B
of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957, inasmuch as the petitioner has primarily
laid a challenge to the ground of sanction for execution of building work under the
provisions of the statute.
5.

Having regard to the nature of controversy raised before this court and the

grievance of the petitioner, which is primarily on account of the failure of the

respondent no. 1 to consider his representation and legal notice and to pass
appropriate orders thereon I deem it in the interest of justice to dispose of the writ
petition at this stage itself.
This writ petition is hereby disposed of with a direction to the respondent no. 1
to consider the representation of the petitioner dated 13th October, 2007 in the light of
the applicable statutes and rules which would govern the matter. The respondent no. 1
may issue notice of its consideration to the respondent nos. 3 and 4 as well inasmuch
as admittedly they have claimed rights in the subject property and entitlement to the
construction which has been permitted by the MCD. The respondent no. 1 would take
a considered view in the matter after considering contentions of the petitioner,
respondent no. 1 as well as respondent nos. 3 and 4. Such consideration may be
completed within a period of six weeks from today.
The respondent no. 1 shall make available a copy of the order which
-4is passed to both petitioner as well as respondent nos. 3 and 4 who shall be at liberty to
assail the same if still aggrieved thereof in accordance with law.
In order to expedite the consideration by the respondent no. 1, the petitioner is
directed to serve a copy of the writ petition and all annexures upon the respondent no.
1 as well as respondent nos. 3 and 4 within a period of one week from today.
This writ petition and application are disposed of in the above terms.
It is made clear that nothing herein contained is an expression of opinion on the
merits of the respective claims of the parties.
Dasti to both parties.

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
December 18, 2007
kr

