IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 16574/2004
Judgm ent reserved on : May 17th, 2005
Dat e of decision: May 18th , 2005
CHEENA NANDA
through

... Petitioner
Mr. R.K. Saini, Advocate

VERSUS
GOVT. OF N.C.T. OF DELHI & ORS
.... Respondents
through Mr. A.K. Gupta, Adv. for
resp. no. 1 and 2
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

This writ petition has been filed by the petitioner

impugning a decision dated 29th September, 2004 whereby the
admission of the petitioner to the course for the three year
Diploma in Art for Drawing Teacher was cancelled.
2.

There is no dispute to the factual matrix. It is submitted

that the petitioner after passing her class 12th examination, the
petitioner sought admission to undertake the three year diploma
course run by the Department of Training and Technical
W.P.(C) 16574/2004

page 1 of 15

Education of the Government of NCT of Delhi (respondent no. 2
herein) in the Art for Drawing Teacher. The Information of
Bulletin has been placed before this court and the material term
setting out the condition of eligibility reads as under :-

3.

“Qualification :
Pass in Xth class of 10+2 or Matric
or any other exam equivalent to Xth class
exam conducted by the CBSE with minimum
45% marks in the aggregate.”
The respondents had provided reservation for different

categories

including

SC/ST/OBC

and

Physically

Handicap

category.

The petitioner has set up entitlement under the

Physically Handicapped quota.
As per this Bulletin of Information, the respondents had
prescribed a common entrance test for admission to the full time
diploma course programmes which was stated to be conducted by
the Guru Gobind Indraprastha University.
It is stated that the petitioner appeared in the entrance
examination as a general category but could not qualify the same.
The petitioner has submitted that she was a physically
handicapped person inasmuch as her palatal movement was not
adequate causing articulation defect in speech and Rhinu zial jista
type picture and the closure of nciopharyix is not proper. The

W.P.(C) 16574/2004

page 2 of 15

petitioner learnt of vacancies existing in the quota for the
handicapped and made a representation to the Minister of
Education, Training & Technical Education, Social Welfare and
Welfare of SCs/STs of the Government of NCT of Delhi who gave a
recommendation dated 28th August, 2003 in favour of the
petitioner and addressed a letter of this date to the Principal of the
respondent no. 3 namely the Sarada Ukil School of Art. This letter
reads as under :-

4.

“I am writing this letter regarding admissionof
Ms. Cheena Nanda in Three year (Full-Time)
Diploma in Art for Drawing Teacher under
Physically handicapped quota.
I shall be grateful if you could kindly
look into the matter favourably and admit her
in yoru institution. Ms. Cheena Nanda will met
you as per your convenience and submit all
other necessary details.”
Pursuant thereto, the petitioner was admitted in the

respondent no. 3 school and she deposited the fees on 29th August,
2003. An identity card was also issued to the petitioner. The
petitioner has thereafter perused the regular course.
5.

It appears that as per the procedure for admissions,

approval for the petitioner's admission was required from the
Department of Training and Technical Education of the
respondent no. 1. Additionally, as per clause 7.4 of the Information

W.P.(C) 16574/2004

page 3 of 15

Bulletin for admissions, the petitioner was required to submit a
certificate of suitability from the Vocational Rehabilitation Center
for Physically Handicapped in the format prescribed at annexure
IV.
6.

In these circumstances, the Principal of the respondent

no. 3 addressed a letter dated 30th April, 2004 to the said
department, the material terms whereof reads as under :“1.
The student ordered to be admitted
by the Hon'ble Minister is a physically
handicapped girl and deserved all help from
society for her rehabilitation.
2.
The Hon'ble Minister ordered her
to be admitted against a vacant seat reserved
for physically handicapped category.
3.
The Hon'ble Minister when
informed that DTE alone was competent to
make the intended admission, told the
institution that he had already conveyed the
DTE for necessary approval.
4.
Unfortunately facts in para 3 above
were not brought in writing when the
institution complied with orders of the
Hon'ble Minister.
5.
Minor technical lapse cited in para
4 is regretted.
However ex-post facto
approval may kindly be now granted and the
poor girl saved from harm due to mere
technicalities.
6.
Since, BTE examinations are just a
few days away expeditious approval of DTE
will save the P.H. Girl from suffering
uncertainty about the examination for not
fault of her.”

W.P.(C) 16574/2004

page 4 of 15

7.

In response thereto, the Department of Training and

Technical Education vide a letter dated 20th May, 2004 conveyed
the approval of the competent authority to permit the petitioner to
appear in the VTE Examination. It was however directed that she
be required to submit the disability certificate issued by the
competent authority of the Vocational Rehabilitation Centre for
Physically Handicapped giving particulars of her physical
disability and her fitness for undergoing the Diploma course in Art
for Drawing Teachers to this Department.
8.

The first year examination for the course was held in

May, 2004 which the petitioner undertook and thereafter also
deposited the fees for the second year of the course on the 29th
July, 2004. The petitioner was also issued an identity card for the
second year.
9.

While she was undergoing the second year course,

sometime in the first week of September, though the result of
other students was declared, the petitioner's result was not
declared. She approached the Principal of the respondent no. 3 in
this behalf. With the uncertainty being faced by the handicap of
the petitioner, the Principal of the respondent no. 3 addressed yet
another communication dated 10th September, 2004 to the
W.P.(C) 16574/2004

page 5 of 15

Department of Training and Technical Education now making the
following request :-

10.

“6.
Since her result for BTE examination
has been withheld and the helpless girl is
suffering uncertainly for no fault of her, if
approved she may be taken as a general
candidate vacancies for which vacancies still
exists in this institution.”
This submission on behalf of the petitioner by the

Principal of respondent no. 3 was however rejected by the
respondent no. 1 vide a letter dated 29th September, 2004 in the
following terms :“With reference to your letter NO.
SUSA/Admn./2004-05/258
dated
10.09.2004 on the above cited subject. In this
connection I am directed to convey the
decision of the competent authority regarding
regularization of admission to Art for Drawing
Teacher in respect of Ms. Cheena Nanda of
your Institute. The case was examining and
rejected by the competent authority.
It is, therefore, advised to cancel
her admission with immediate effect and
submit
action
taken
report
to
Dy.Director(Technical) under intimation to
this office.
You are further advise not to admit
any candidate without the prior approval of
this Directorate. The Institute itself shall be
responsible for any consequence issue out of
such irregular admission.”
11.

This order of rejection has been challenged by way of the

present writ petition by the petitioner on the ground that on
W.P.(C) 16574/2004

page 6 of 15

account of the physical handicap with regard to her palate, the
petitioner suffered from articulation defect which has resulted in
mental disability to her. Despite surgery by the ENT Department
of the Safdarjang Hospital and despite undergoing treatment in
the psychology department of the same hospital, the petitioner has
a residual speech defect with impaired palate movement and
speech articulation defects. In these circumstance, it has been
submitted that the petitioner was actually physically handicapped
and entitled to admission under the physically handicapped quota.
12.

Mr. R.K. Saini, learned counsel for the petitioner has

further contended that the respondents cannot be permitted to
give

a

restricted

meaning

to

the

expression

“physically

handicapped” as has been done in clause 7.4 of the Information
Bulletin and that the respondents have to include all disabilities as
have been mentioned under Section 2(i) and 2(r) of The Persons
with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and
Full Participation) Act, 1995.
13.

It has also been contended on behalf of the petitioner

that the petitioner was granted admission as handicapped person
as back as on 29th August, 2004 and she had successfully
completed the first year of the course and was into the second year
W.P.(C) 16574/2004

page 7 of 15

of the course as well. Learned counsel has pointed out that in view
of the orders passed by this court, the petitioner has also
participated in the second year of the course and has also
undertaken the practical examinations.
Placing reliance on the judgments reported at 195091(2) AIEC 205 entitled N. Bhuvnesh vs Principal, Usmania
College; AIR 1981 Rajasthan 8 entitled Harphool vs State of
Rajasthan and AIR 1979 Delhi 87 entitled Inder Prakash vs Deputy
Commissioner, Delhi, it is contended that the petitioner having
undertaken the course and also the examinations, the educational
institution cannot be permitted to cancel the petitioners initial
admission on the basis of any disqualification on principles of
equitable estoppel.
14.

In support of his submission that the petitioner is

handicapped, a certificate dated 11th December, 2004 has been
placed on record from the Office of the Medical Superintendent,
Safdarjang Hospital which reads as under :“This is to certify that Miss CHEENA NANDA,
whose particulars are furnished below is
suffering from MENTAL RETARDATION, her
percentage of disability is 38%”
15.

Since the Bulletin of Information of the respondents

W.P.(C) 16574/2004

page 8 of 15

required certification of the disability and the fitness of the
petitioner by the Vocational Rehabilitation Centre for Physically
Handicapped, the petitioner approached this Centre and was given
a certificate dated 8th February, 2005 which is in the following
terms :“During her evaluation, she has been found as
slow learner. Though she does not fall in the
category of Mental or Physical disability, yet she
is suitable to undergo training in Drawing &
Painting.”
Copy of this certificate was given to the respondents to
enable them to take instructions.
16.

However, learned counsel for the respondent nos. 1 and

2 has contended that in terms of clause 7.4, only physically
handicapped persons could have been granted admission if they
satisfy the eligibility conditions.

It was clearly stated in the

Information Bulletin that the reservation could be effected only
amongst such physically handicapped persons who suffered from a
hearing impairment and loco motor disability.
It has further been submitted that in the instant case,
the petitioner did not disclose that she was suffering from a mental
disability. According to learned counsel for the respondents, the
recommendation dated 28th August, 2003 was obtained by the

W.P.(C) 16574/2004

page 9 of 15

petitioner by a misrepresentation that she was physically
handicapped.

As per the certification given by the Safdarjang

Hospital, the petitioner does not suffer from any physical
incapacity but is stated to be mentally retarded. On the other
hand,

according

to

the

certification

of

the

Vocational

Rehabilitation Centre, the petitioner is neither physically nor
mentally handicapped but is merely a slow learner. It is submitted
that for all these reasons, the petitioner does not fall in any of the
categories stated in clause 7.4.
17.

I have given my considered thought to the submissions

made before me and perused the record placed before me. It is to
be noticed that the communication dated 20th May, 2004 whereby
the approval of the respondent no. 1 was granted enabling the
petitioner to appear in the first year diploma examination and the
further requirement of production of the certificate from the
Vocational Rehabilitation Centre does not appear to have been
communicated to the petitioner. On the other hand, the Principal
of the respondent no. 3 has noticed all facts in her letter dated 10th
September, 2004 and has even pointed out that apart from the fact
that the petitioner was occupying a seat for a physically
handicapped person but there was vacancies available even for
W.P.(C) 16574/2004

page 10 of 15

general candidates in the institution. The request was made to
adjust the petitioner against such vacancies which actually existed.
18.

The respondents have produced the original record

maintained by them before this court. From a perusal thereof, I
find that there has been no consideration of the facts set out in the
letter dated 10th September, 2004 by the Principal. There is no
note sheet even in the file. The authorities have also not noticed
that the petitioner was never required to produce the certificate as
was stated in the letter of 20th May, 2004.
19.

The admission given to the petitioner was also

unconditional and she was never given an opportunity to produce
the certificate of the Vocational Rehabilitation Centre for
physically handicapped by any communication from either
respondent no. 1 or 3. No fault can therefore be attributed to the
petitioner.
20.

I also find that the petitioner was permitted to join the

course which she undertook for the entire first year and was well
into the second year at the time the impugned order dated 29th
September, 2004 was passed.

In view of the fact that the

petitioner had been permitted to join and undertake the course for
this entire period, interest of justice would have meritted if the
W.P.(C) 16574/2004

page 11 of 15

petitioner had been given an opportunity to show cause and to
make a representation against the proposed action.
This not having been done, the order dated 29th
September, 2004 has resulted in grave injustice to the petitioner.
21.

It is also to be noticed that the medical experts have not

agreed with regard on the nature and extent of disability of the
petitioner. Mr. R.K. Saini, learned counsel for the petitioner has
submitted that the petitioner was a special education student in
the Sadhu Vasvani International School for Girls up to her class
10th and had successfully passed the class 12th examination from
the National Open School.
There is no contest to the fact that she was physically
disabled on account of her inadequate palate movement and the
other difficulties noticed above.
22.

I find that the petitioner was admitted to the course as

back as in August, 2003. No objection of any kind was taken and
she was permitted to take the first year examination. Even for the
second year, fees was also accepted from her when the course for
the second year was underway, the order dated 29th September,
2004 was passed without noticing any of the submissions made by
the Principal of the respondent no. 3.
W.P.(C) 16574/2004

page 12 of 15

23.

It is not disputed that the petitioner had passed her class

12th examination and was eligible for being granted admission to
the course. The certificate issued by the Vocational Rehabilitation
Centre for Physically Handicapped shows that it has certified that
the petitioner was in a physical condition to undertake the course
and training in Drawing and Painting even though she has been
categorised as a slow learner by it.

There is no allegation

whatsoever of any insufficiency in the petitioner's abilities while
she has been undergoing the course for the last two years.
24.

It is also noteworthy that there is no dispute to the

factual position of availability of vacancies against the physically
handicapped reserved seats. In addition, as per the letter dated
10th September, 2004 written by the Principal of respondent no. 3,
there exists a vacancy in the general category as well. Even though
the petitioner was initially granted admission pursuant to a
recommendation by the Minister, however the same was approved
by the respondent no. 1 vide its letter dated 20th May, 2004. The
respondent no. 1 also took no action whatsoever in this matter
despite knowledge of the petitioner's admission and two
communications dated 29th July, 2004 and 10th September, 200
from the respondent no. 3. In the given facts, if the respondents
W.P.(C) 16574/2004

page 13 of 15

do not consider the petitioner as a handicapped person, her
admission has to be considered against the general seats which are
admittedly available.
25.

I may appropriately advert to the law laid down by the

Apex Court in the judgment reported at AIR 1990 SC 1075 entitled
Sanatan Gauda v. Berhampur University which is to the following
effect :“10.
This is apart from the
fact that I find that in the present case the
appelalnt while securing his admission in the
Law College had admittedly submitted his
mark-sheet along with the application for
admission. The Law College had admitted
him. He had pursued his studies for two
years. The University had also granted him
the admission card for the Pre-Law and
Intermediate Law examiantions. He was also
admitted to the final year of the course. It is
only at the stage of the declaration of his
results of the Pre-Law and Inter-Law
examinations that the University raised the
objection to his so-called ineligibility to be
admitted to the Law course. The University
is, therefore, clearly estoped from refusing to
declare the results of the appellant's
examination or from preventing him from
pursuing his final year course.”
The pronouncements cited by the petitioner are also to
the same effect. The respondents are bound to act with dispatch
and cannot be permitted to cancel admission after letting a student

W.P.(C) 16574/2004

page 14 of 15

to study in the course in the manner in which the petitioner has
been permitted.

The respondents are bound by principles of

promissory equitable to permit the petitioner to complete her
course.
26.

The petitioner undoubtedly is suffering a difficulty. She

was permitted to join the course without any objection and has
undergone the same for two years. Pursuant to orders dated 2 nd
May, 2005 she was permitted to take the practical examinations.
27.

Having regard to the peculiar facts and circumstances of

the instant case, I am of the view that the order dated 20th
September, 2004 cannot be permitted to stand. Accordingly, I
hereby set aside the order dated 29th September, 2004.

The

respondents shall declare the result of the petitioner for the first
year of the Diploma Course in Art for Drawing Teachers and shall
permit her to continue the course for its full term and length. The
petitioner shall be permitted to undertake the theory examinations
of the course for the second year as well.
The writ petition is allowed in the above terms.
Dasti.
GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
May 18th , 2005kr
W.P.(C) 16574/2004

page 15 of 15

