IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
O.M.P. No. 265/2006
Judgment reserved on: October 30,
2006
Date of decision: December 18,
2006
M/s RATTAN SINGH ASSOCIATES PVT. LTD.
through: Mr. S.V. Kulkarni, Adv.

.... Petitioner

VERSUS
M/s GILL POWER GENERATION CO. P.LTD. & ANR. ...
Respondents
through: Mr. Ashok Sethi with Mr. Hari Mohan, Advs.
for defendant no. 1
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J
1.

By this petition under Section 9 of the Arbitration &

Conciliation Act, 1996, the petitioner has raised an issue that the
respondent has invoked the bank guarantee provided by it with the
intention to cause 'irretrievable financial loss to the petitioner
which cannot be compensated in any manner' and consequently
has sought the relief of injunction against such invocation. The

O.M.P. No. 265/2006

page 1 of 30

issue to be answered therefore, is as to whether 'irretrievable
financial loss' would entitle a petitioner to an injunction against an
invocation of an unconditional bank guarantee.
2.

The undisputed facts which are necessary to be noticed

for the purposes of adjudication are noticed hereafter. By an
agreement dated 19th April, 2003, the petitioner agreed to execute
the civil construction work of the Babehalli Hydro Electric Project,
Punjab at a contract rates of Rs. 6,09,82,995/-. The petitioner had
issued a letter of acceptance dated 1st April, 2003 accepting the
contract which formed part of the agreement dated 19th April,
2003 between the parties. The petitioner had agreed to furnish a
performance security in the form of a bank guarantee as
mentioned in the agreement for an amount which is equivalent to
Rs. 30,50,000/-. Such guarantee was to be furnished within 21
days of the receipt of letter of acceptance and was required to be
valid upto 28 days from the date of the expiry of the defects
liability period. The petitioner was required to complete the entire
contracted work within a period of one year.
3.

As per the agreement, the date of start of work was

supposed to be 15 days from the date of issue of the notice to
proceed with the work which was issued on 19th of April, 2003.
O.M.P. No. 265/2006

page 2 of 30

Intended date of completion of the whole work was 12 continuous
months from the start date. The site possession date was required
to be 7 days from the date of issue of the notice to proceed with
work. The defect liability period was supposed to be 365 days.
Therefore, the petitioner was required to keep the bank guarantee
alive uptill 3rd June, 2005 i.e. a period of 28 days from the date of
expiry of the defect liability.
4.

There is no dispute that on behalf of the petitioner, a

bank guarantee as performance guarantee for Rs. 30.50 lakhs was
furnished by the respondent no. 2/bank. This guarantee was in
the nature of performance security on behalf of the petitioner and
did not relate to any other matter. The respondent no. 1 served a
notice dated 19th April, 2003 upon the petitioner to commence the
work.
5.

My attention has been drawn to the manner in which

disputes between the parties which would include the disputes
regarding payments, work done, payments certificates etc. were
required to be undertaken. The contract dated 19th April, 2003
between the parties includes certain conditions of contract.
According to clause 24 of the conditions of contract, disputes
regarding payments etc.
O.M.P. No. 265/2006

were required to be referred to the
page 3 of 30

adjudicator namely Col. G.L. Bajpai within 14 days of the
engineers' decision and the site engineer of the respondent no. 1
was required to certify and take a decision on the bills submitted
by the petitioner.
The adjudicator was required to give a decision in
writing within 28 days of the receipt of the dispute.
6.

Clauses 24 to 26 of the conditions of contract which are

binding on the parties reads thus:“24.0
Disputes
24.1
If the contractor believes that a decision
taken by the Engineer was either outside the
authority given to the Engineer by the Contract or
that the decision was wrongly taken, the decision
shall be referred to the adjudicator within 14 days
of the notification of the Engineer's decision.
25.0
Procedure for disputes
25.1
The adjudicator shall give a decision in
writing within 28 days of receipt of a notification
of a dispute.
25.2
The adjudicator shall be paid daily at
the rate specified in the contract data and the cost
shall be divided equally between the employer
and the contractor, whatever decision is reached
by the adjudicator. Either party may refer a
decision of the adjudicator to an arbitrator within
28 days of the adjudicator’s written decision. If
neither party refers the dispute to arbitration
within the above 28 days, the adjudicator’s
decision will be final and binding.
25.3
The arbitration shall be conducted in
accordance with the arbitration procedure stated
in the Special Conditions of Contract.
O.M.P. No. 265/2006

page 4 of 30

7.

26.0
Replacement of adjudicator
26.1
Should the adjudicator resign or die, or
should the employer and the contractor agree that
the adjudicator is not fulfilling his functions in
accordance with the provisions of the contract, a
new adjudicator will be jointly appointed by the
employer and the contractor. In case of
disagreement between the employer and the
contractor, within 30 days, the adjudicator shall
be designated by the appointing authority
designated in the contract data at the request of
either party, within 14 days of receipt of such
request.”
There is no dispute that this scheme has not been

adhered to by the petitioner. The petitioner has stated that vide its
letter dated 25th August, 2004, it has submitted the fourth and fifth
running bills of the work done upto 30th June, 2004 and 31st of
July, 2004. Reminders for payment of outstanding bills which
according to the petitioner were to the tune of Rs. 58,73,662/- and
a legal notice dated 9th March, 2005 are alleged to have been sent
to the respondent no. 1. The petitioner claims that these were not
paid.
8.

The respondent no. 1 has disputed even the receipt of

any of these communications. According to the respondent no.1,
the petitioner failed to perform the contract from the very
commencement and it was unable to de-water the land by
excavating as required under the contract. It did not improve its
O.M.P. No. 265/2006

page 5 of 30

performance despite repeated entreaties.

Instead of trying to

overcome the technical problem of de-watering, it started reducing
the labour force which was assigned to the project. Upto 31 st of
March, 2004, the petitioner is stated to have submitted three bills
which were paid by the respondent no. 1. However, as on 31st
March, 2004, the respondent no. 1 has claimed that there was a
credit balance in its favour in the accounts of the petitioner to the
tune of Rs. 56 lakhs. The respondent claims that the petitioner has
concealed the factum of the receipt of an advance of Rs. 55 lakhs
by the respondent no. 1 to the petitioner. The respondent no. 1 has
stated that a few bills which were submitted by the petitioner after
31st March, 2004 were found to be forged and rejected by the
project engineer since the claimed work had not actually been
done. According to the respondent no. 1, the work has suffered
tremendously for the failure of the petitioner to do the work as
contracted and that in fact, it had not done any work after 31st of
March, 2004.
9.

The respondent no. 1 has claimed that, on the other

hand, the petitioner was approaching it for financial assistance
which was refused. So far as the bank guarantee of Rs. 30.50
lakhs is concerned, this guarantee was extended three times by the
O.M.P. No. 265/2006

page 6 of 30

petitioner. However, between the period, 3rd December, 2005 to
14th January, 2006, the bank guarantee had not been extended
according to the petitioner.
10.

The main plank of the petitioner's case rests on the

minutes of the meeting held between the parties on 20th May,
2005.

According to the petitioner, in these meetings, the

respondent no. 1 substantially admitted the claim of the
respondent no. 1 when it agreed to check up the accounts and bills
and quantities and to effect payments of amounts to the petitioner.
It has been stated that the respondent no. 1 in this meeting also
agreed to pay a portion of the amount to be incurred on the bank
guarantee and that it was on account of such settlement that all
legal notices already served and communications to the arbitrator
would stand withdrawn. However, perusal of the minutes of the
meetings shows a position to the contrary. These minutes quite
clearly refer to amounts upto 31st of March, 2004 as per photocopy
of the bills submitted by the respondent. No bills thereafter are
referred to. Para 1 of the minutes records that the bills were
checked and it was pointed out that only two items relating to
embankment quantities mentioned in para 2 and the de-watering
rates were agreed to be re-checked. The respondent no. 1 had
O.M.P. No. 265/2006

page 7 of 30

agreed to pay 12% on certain specified extra billing items.
11.

It has been pointed out by respondent no. 1 that on

account of the failure of the petitioner to discharge its contractual
liabilities, the respondent no. 1 had required the petitioner to
enhance the performance security substantially if it wanted to
carry out the further work. The respondent no. 1 has indicated the
figure of the enhanced bank guarantee as Rs. 3 crores. As the
petitioner had indicated the inability to bear the costs of furnishing
such an enhanced bank guarantee and that they could bear the
bank charges for such enhancement only upto Rs. 2 crores and not
beyond, para 6 of these minutes recorded thus:“6. The cost of bank guarantee to be extended to
the extent of Rs. 200 lakhs (2 crore) to be born by
RSA and balance by G.P.G.P.L.”
12.

In para 9 of this Memorandum of Understanding, the

respondent no. 1 had agreed to pay Rs. 30,000/- to the petitioner
as rent of motors.
13.

So far as the Memorandum of Understanding is

concerned, the admitted position is that the respondent no. 1 failed
to provide the enhancement of the bank guarantee even by the
amount of Rs. 2 crores. The respondent no. 1 has admittedly paid
the amount of Rs. 30,000/- on the 2nd of June, 2005. The receipt
O.M.P. No. 265/2006

page 8 of 30

in this behalf has been placed by the petitioner on record on the 4 th
of October, 2006. The receipt does not show that it was towards
any enhanced bank guarantee. The only stipulation whereby the
respondent no. 1 was required to make payment of Rs. 30,000/- is
to be found in para 9 of the MOU dated 20th May, 2005 which
clearly indicates that the same was payable towards rent of
motors.
14.

There is nothing to support the submission that the

petitioner took any steps towards the provision of the enhanced
bank guarantee.

For this reason as well, the occasion for the

respondent no. 1 to pay any amount towards this end never arose.
15.

In this background on or around 24th of April, 2006, the

petitioner filed an Arbitration Application No. 242/2006 under
Section 11 (6) of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 seeking
appointment of the arbitrator. The petitioner has contended that
after filing of this petition, the respondent no. 1 has dishonestly
invoked the bank guarantee furnished by the petitioner by way of a
letter dated 27th May, 2006 as a counter blast to its petition.
16.

In para 9 of the present petition, the petitioner has

stated that the bank guarantee is being invoked to pressurise and
to cause irretrievable financial loss which cannot be otherwise
O.M.P. No. 265/2006

page 9 of 30

recovered from respondent no. 1 as already pending bills to the
tune of Rs. 58 lacs or so are still payable to it and for which the
appointment of arbitrator is being sought from this Hon'ble Court.
The action of respondent no. 1 is patently mala fide and
unauthorized and also clear indication of fraudulent intentions.
On the one hand in the MOU, the respondent no. 1 agreed to settle
and sort out the pending disputes and without any further sincere
efforts and upon receipt of the notice of arbitration appointment
petition, the respondent has sought to invoke the bank guarantee.
All such actions on the part of the respondent no. 1 are fraudulent
in nature and also with the intention to cause irretrievable
financial loss to the petitioner which cannot be compensated in
any manner.
17.

On these averments, the present petition has been filed

under Section 9 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
praying for a stay against the encashment of the bank guarantee
dated 9th/10th April, 2003 which is on the ground that the same
comes within the purview of fraud having been committed by the
respondent no. 1 vitiating the very foundation of the guarantee
resulting in irretrievable harm and injustice of a kind which would
make it impossible for the guarantor to reimburse itself.
O.M.P. No. 265/2006

page 10 of 30

In support of its submissions, strong reliance has been
placed on behalf of the petitioner on the several pronouncements
of the Apex Court reported in (1997) 1 SCC 568 U.P. State
Sugar Corporation Vs. Sumac International Ltd. and
(2000) 6 SCC 728 BSES Ltd. (now Reliance Energy Ltd.)
Vs. Fenner India Ltd. & Ors.
18.

This petition has been vehemently opposed on behalf of

the respondent by Mr. Ashok Sethi, learned counsel for
respondent no. 1, who has submitted that financial loss does not
fall within the purview of irretrievable fraud or injustice as would
entitle a person to an injunction against invocation and
encashment of an unconditional bank guarantee in the light of the
principles laid down by the Apex Court.
19.

Learned counsel has placed strong reliance on the

earlier pronouncements of the Apex Court in AIR 1994 SC 626
Svenska Handelsbanken Vs. M/s Indian Charge Chrome
& Ors. in support of the contention that even assuming that the
petitioner had any right to recover money under running bills, the
same would be irrelevant for the purposes of consideration of
grant of an injunction for the invocation of the bank guarantee.
20.

My attention has also been drawn to the pronouncement

O.M.P. No. 265/2006

page 11 of 30

of the Apex Court in AIR 1991 SC 1994 General Electric
Technical Services Company Inc. Vs. M/s Punj Sons (P)
Ltd. & Anr., wherein the court laid down that the only condition
upon satisfaction of which the court may grant an injunction
prohibiting encashment of the bank guarantee.
21.

On facts, it has been urged that the petitioner has failed

to make out a prima facie case for grant of an injunction. It has
been contended that the petitioner is guilty of suppression of
material facts having concealed the complete conditions which
govern the contract between the parties; the receipt of Rs. 55 lakhs
as an advance from respondent no.1; and further the factual
position with regard to its financial solvency and placement.
Mr. Ashok Sethi, learned counsel for respondent no. 1
has placed reliance on the terms on which the bank guarantee
dated 10th April, 2003 was issued by the respondent no. 2
rendering the right of the petitioner to payment thereunder
absolute and unconditional upon its invocation.
22.

Having heard learned counsel for the parties and

perused the record as well as the law cited at the Bar, I find it
necessary to consider the terms on which the bank guarantee
dated 10th April, 2003 bearing no. 2/03 was furnished.
O.M.P. No. 265/2006

page 12 of 30

23.

It would be useful to notice some of the stipulations

therein in extenso. The bank guarantee notices that the same is 'at
security for compliance with his obligations in accordance with the
contract'. Thereby, it is clearly indicated that the bank guarantee
was in the nature of a performance guarantee furnished by the
petitioner.
24.

So far as the specific terms therein are concerned, the

same read as under:“NOW THEREFORE we hereby affirm that we
are the Guarantor and responsible to you, on
behalf of the contractor, up to a total of Rs.
30,50,000/- (Rupees Thirty Lakhs Fifty
Thousand only) such sum being payable in the
types and proportions of currencies in which the
contract price is payable and we undertake to pay
you, upon your first written demand and without
cavil or argument, any sum or sums within the
limits of Rs. 30,50,000/- as aforesaid without
your needing to prove or to show grounds or
reasons for your demand for the sum specified
therein.
We hereby waive the necessity of your demanding
the said debt from the Contractor before
presenting us with the demand.
We further agree that no change or addition to or
other modification of the terms of the contract or
of the works to be performed thereunder or of
any of the contact documents which may be made
between you and the contractor shall in any way
release us from any liability under this guarantee
and we hereby waive notice of any such change,
O.M.P. No. 265/2006

page 13 of 30

addition or modification.”
The petitioner has not contested the position that this
bank guarantee was unconditional and cast an absolute liability
upon the respondent no. 2/bank to pay upon receipt of the first
written demand from the respondent no. 1, a sum upto Rs. 3.50
lakhs without anything further.
25.

So far as the Memorandum of Understanding dated 20th

May, 2005 is concerned, it evidences an agreement by the
respondent merely to re-check certain items of billing which were
furnished upto 31st March, 2004 and nothing further.

The

petitioner has certainly agreed to provide an enhanced bank
guarantee of upto Rs. 2 crores which it failed to do so. There is an
admission on behalf of the petitioner in the petition that no work
has been done after 2004. An amount of Rs. 30,000/- paid by the
petitioner as the payment towards the costs of providing the
enhanced bank guarantee is not supported by the receipt which
has been executed. In the light of the nature of the receipt dated
2nd June, 2005 placed by the petitioner on record, the sum of Rs.
30,000/- purports to be the amount mentioned in para 9 of the
MOU dated 20th May, 2005 towards rent of the motors.
26.

There is no dispute that the mechanism for dispute

O.M.P. No. 265/2006

page 14 of 30

redressal as provided in clauses 24-26 of the specific conditions of
the contract has not been invoked by the petitioner.
In the petition, the petitioner has admitted in para 2 of
the petition that the bank guarantee has been in the nature of a
performance bank guarantee and consequently did not relate to
any amounts towards the running bills or the payment of bills of
the petitioner in respect of which the petitioner has raised the
dispute. The petitioner has accepted the validity and bindingness
of the contract dated 19th April, 2003 and there is no allegation by
the petitioner that there was any fraud either in the contract which
was executed between it and the respondent no. 1 or the provision
of the bank guarantee by the respondent no. 2.
In the light of the above, even the execution of the MOU
does not further the case of the petitioner as has been laid down
before this court.
27.

The only ground on which the petitioner has pleaded

fraud and irretrievable injustice is on the ground that it would
suffer financial loss which cannot be retrieved. The petitioner has
not been able to support its contention that the invocation of the
bank guarantee was after the filing of A.A. No. 242/2006 or
receipt of the notice thereof by the respondent no. 1.
O.M.P. No. 265/2006

page 15 of 30

Even assuming that the same has been done after the
receipt of the notice, in my view, the same would not further the
case of the petitioner in the instant case in any manner. In any
case, it is well settled that courts would be reluctant to interdict
contractual compliances by an injunction unless a strong prima
facie case was made out on behalf of the petitioner who is seeking
such injunction.
28.

Section 9 of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 has

been provided by the legislature to preserve the subject matter of
the arbitration pending final consideration in the arbitration
proceedings.
29.

The principles which govern grant of an injunction

against encashment of a bank guarantee were settled by the Apex
Court in (1988) 1 SCC 174 U.P. Coop. Federation Ltd. Vs.
Singh Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd., wherein the
court held thus:“28.
.....In order to restrain the operation
either of irrevocable letter of credit or of
confirmed letter of credit or of bank guarantee,
there should be serious dispute and there should
be good prima facie case of fraud and special
equities in the form of preventing irretrievable
injustice between the parties. Otherwise the very
purpose of bank guarantees would be negatived
and the fabric of trading operation will get
O.M.P. No. 265/2006

page 16 of 30

jeopardised.”
In the concurring opinion of the K. Jagannath Shetty, J,
it was observed that whether it is a traditional letter of credit or a
performance bond or guarantee, the obligations of the bank
appears to be the same. If documentary credits are irretrievable
and independent, the bank must pay when the demand is raised.
Since the bank pledges its own credit involving its reputation, it
has no defence except in the case of fraud. The bank's obligations
of course should not be extended to protect the unscrupulous
party, that is the party who is responsible for fraud but the bankers
must be sure of a ground before declining to pay. The nature of
the fraud that the courts talk about is fraud of a 'gregarious nature
so as to vitiate the entire underlined transaction'.
Thus, it would be fraud of the beneficiary and not fraud
of somebody else.
30.

On these principles, the court declined injunction

against the invocation of a bank guarantee in the judgment
reported in AIR 1991 SC 1994 General Electric Technical
Services Company Inc. Vs. M/s Punj Sons (P) Ltd. & Anr.
In this case, the respondent was claiming that it had not
received the full amount payable by the appellant under the
O.M.P. No. 265/2006

page 17 of 30

running bills. The Apex Court held thus:“10. The High Court has observed that failure on
the part of GETSCO to make a reference to
mobilisation advance in the letter seeking
encashment of the bank guarantee would be
tantamount to suppression of material facts, in
the sense that the mobilisation advance was under
the contract to be recovered from the running
bills. It was further observed that disclosure of
such facts would have put the bank to further
inquiry as to what was the amount covered by
those bills and what was the corresponding
amount of the mobilisation advance and to what
extent the amount covered by the bank guarantee
remained payable. In any event, the High Court
said that GETSCO could not demand full amount
of the bank guarantee on 17thApril 1989. It seems
to us that the High Court has misconstrued the
terms of the bank guarantee and the nature of the
inter se rights of the parties under the contract.
The mobilisation advance is required to be
recovered by GETS CO from the running bills
submitted by the respondent. If the full
mobilisation advance has not been recovered, it
would be to the advantage of the respondent.
Secondly, the, Bank is not concerned with the
outstanding amount payable by GETSCO under
the running bills. The right to recover the amount
under the running bills has no relevance to the
liability of the Bank under the guarantee. The
liability of the Bank remained intact irrespective
of the recovery of mobilisation advance or the
non-payment under the running bills. The failure
on the part or GETSCO to specify the remaining
mobilisation advance in the letter for encashment
of bank guarantee is of little consequence to the
liability of the Bank under the guarantee. The
demand by GETSCO is under the Bank guarantee
and as per the terms thereof. The Bank has to pay
and the Bank was willing to pay as per the
O.M.P. No. 265/2006

page 18 of 30

undertaking. The Bank cannot be interdicted by
the Court at the instance of respondent 1 in the
absence of fraud or special equities in the form of
preventing irretrievable injustice between the
parties. The High Court in the absence of prima
facie case on such matters has committed an error
in restraining the Bank from honouring its
commitment under the Bank guarantee.”
31.

It is therefore well settled that it is only in the case of

established fraud and irretrievable injury that an injunction may
be granted in a special case to a party. However the expression
fraud as well as irretrievable injury has been considered by the
Apex Court in a catena of judgments and as to what would
constitute such fraud and irretrievable injury entitling a party to
an injunction is also well settled. In this behalf, it would be useful
and topical to consider the principles laid down by the Apex Court
in AIR 1994 SC 626 Svenska Handelsbanken Vs. M/s
Indian Charge Chrome & Ors.
In this case as well, the contract between the parties was
not vitiated by any fraud much less established fraud. The plaintiff
had not repudiated the principal contract which related to sale and
purchase of machinery. The plaintiff had filed this suit alleging
fraud and has sought an injunction with regard to payment of the
bank guarantee.

O.M.P. No. 265/2006

page 19 of 30

The observations of the Apex Court and the principles
laid down for consideration of such prayer in this judgment are
extremely instructive on the issues raised in the present case and
reads thus:“40. Coming to the merits of the case itself it
appears to us that the High Court totally
misdirected itself in assuming that the present
application for interim relief against the
enforcement of bank guarantee is not to be
decided strictly on principles of injunction in
relation to bank guarantee but general principles
of injunction on lenders would be applicable and
on that basis proceeded to decide the matter.
xxxx

xxxx

xxxx

43. Again it appears the High Court found a
strong prima facie case against defendant No. 4
merely on reading the plaint. Pleadings make only
allegation or averments of facts. Merely pleadings
do not make a strong case of prima facie fraud.
The material and evidence has to show it. No
material whatsoever is referred to by the High
Court.
44. In A. L. N. Narayanan Chettiyar v. Official
Assignee, High Court, Rangoon AIR 1941 PC 93,
the Privy Council held that "fraud like any other
charge of a criminal proceedings, must be
established beyond reasonable doubt. A finding as
to fraud cannot be based on suspicion and
conjecture".
xxxx

xxxxx

xxxxx

81. Mr. Venugopal, learned counsel for the
borrower referred us to the decision in Itek
O.M.P. No. 265/2006

page 20 of 30

Corporation v. The First National Bank of Boston
etc. by the United States District Court,
Massachusetts
reoprted in 566 Federal
Supplement 1210, particularly observations at
page 1217, which read thus:
"Because I find that Itek has demonstrated that it
has no adequate remedy at law, and because I
find that the allegations of irreparable harm are
not speculative, but genuine and immediate, I am
satisfied that Itek will suffer irreparable harm if
the requested relief is not granted."
82. The facts in that case were that the exporter in
U.S.A. entered into an agreement with Imperial
Government of Iran had brought action seeking
order terminating its liability on standby letters of
credit issued by American Bank in favour of
Iranian Bank as part of the contract. The learned
District Court held that the contractor was
entitled to issuance of preliminary injunction.
83. It will be noticed that this judgment is on
peculiar facts of its own and the situation created
after the Iranian Revolution and the American
Government cancelled the export licence in
relation to Iran as it related to high technology. As
the American Government had cancelled the
export licence in view of revolution in Iran and
the Iranian Government had forcibly taken 52
American citizens as hostages and the President
Carter by Executive order blocked all Iranian
assets subject to the jurisdiction of the United
States and also cancelled the export contracts, the
plaintiff informed the importer in Iran invoking
force majeure but the Iranian importer in spite of
it resorted to encashment of the bank guarantee.
The court was of the view that even if claim for
damages is decreed by the American courts
situation in Iran was such that the decree will not
be executable in Iran. It was on these facts that
the court felt that it was a case where the plaintiff
O.M.P. No. 265/2006

page 21 of 30

had demonstrated that it has no adequate remedy
at law and the allegations of irreparable harm are
not speculative but genuine and immediate and
the plaintiff would suffer irreparable harm if the
requested relief is not granted. The court also
found as a fact at page 1217 itself that "the
uncontested facts in the record, if proved at trial,
appear to make out a prima facie case of fraud
within the meaning of Section 5-114(2)(b) and
held that under these circumstances, any demand
on the guarantees or letters of credit by Iran
importer in March, 1980 would necessarily have
been fraudulent".
84. It is thus clear that this judgment is based on
peculiar facts, particularly of situation in the
Government of Iran which came into power after
the revolution in Iran and its relation with the
United States of America and in any case on the
prima facie finding of fraud being given by the
learned court read with the finding of irreparable
harm which could not be avoided by adequate
remedy at law due to peculiar situation in Iran.”
32.

On this discussion, the court held that the contract

between the lender and the borrower was not vitiated by any fraud
much less established fraud and hence there was no question of
irretrievable injury. It was further held that irretrievable injury
would require to be of the type of injury as considered in the case
of Itech Corporation, 566 Federal Supplement 1210, wherein it was
considered that such injury would be in the nature of difficulty in
execution of a judgment against the defendant in its country. The
conclusion of established fraud justifying grant of an injunction
O.M.P. No. 265/2006

page 22 of 30

cannot be based on mere suspicion which may be raised on
account of allegations in the plaint. The same has to be clearly
spelt out from the material on record. In this behalf, the court
held thus:“98.
The High Court was also in error in
considering the question of balance of
convenience. In law relating to bank guarantees,
a party seeking injunction from encashing of bank
guarantee by the suppliers has to show prima
facie case of established fraud and an irretrievable
injury. Irretrievable injury is of the nature as
noticed in the case of Itech Corporation (566
Federal Supplement 1210) (supra). Here there is
no such problem. Once the plaintiff is able to
establish fraud against the suppliers or supplierscum-lenders and obtains any decree for damages
or diminution in price, there is no problem for
affecting recoveries in a friendly country where
the bankers and the suppliers are located.
Nothing has been pointed out to show that the
decree passed by the Indian courts could not be
executable in Sweden.”
33.

Again, so far as irretrievable injury is concerned, the

Apex Court has observed that the same has to be in the nature of
injury considered in the Itech Corporation case. In this behalf, in
(1997) 1 SCC 568 U.P. State Sugar Corporation Vs.
Sumac International Ltd., the court held thus:“12. The law relating to invocation of such bank
guarantees is by now well settled. When in the
course of commercial dealings an unconditional
bank guarantee is or accepted, the beneficiary is
O.M.P. No. 265/2006

page 23 of 30

entitled to realise such a bank guarantee in terms
thereof irrespective of any pending disputes. The
bank giving such a guarantee is bound to honour
it as per its terms irrespective of any dispute
raised by its customer. The very purpose of giving
such a bank guarantee would otherwise be
defeated. The Courts should, therefore, be slow in
granting an injunction to restrain the realisation
of such a bank guarantee. The Courts have carved
out only two exceptions. A fraud in connection
with such a bank guarantee would vitiate the very
foundation of such a bank guarantee. Hence if
there is such a fraud of which the beneficiary
seeks to take advantage, he can be restrained
from doing so. The second exception relates to
cases where allowing the encashment of an
unconditional bank guarantee would result in
irretrievable harm or injustice to one of the
parties concerned. Since in most cases payment
of money under such a bank guarantee would
adversely affect the bank and its customer at
whose instance the guarantee is given, the harm
or injustice contemplated under this head must
be of such an exceptional and irretrievable nature
as would override the terms of the guarantee and
the adverse effect of such an injunction on
commercial dealings in the country. The two
grounds are not necessarily connected, though
both may co-exist in some cases. In the case of U.
P. Co-operative Federation Ltd. v. Singh
Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd.(1988)1 SCC
174, which was the case of a works contract where
the performance guarantee given under the
contract was sought to be invoked, this Court,
after referring extensively to English and Indian
cases on the subject, said that the guarantee must
be honoured in accordance with its terms. The
bank which gives the guarantee is not concerned
in the least with the relations between the
supplier and the customer ; nor with the question
whether the supplier has performed his
O.M.P. No. 265/2006

page 24 of 30

contractual obligation or not, nor with the
question whether the supplier is in default or not.
The bank must pay according to the tenor of its
guarantee on demand without proof or condition.
There are only two exceptions to this rule. The
first exception is a case when there is a clear fraud
of which the bank has notice. The fraud must be
of an egregious nature such as to vitiate the entire
underlying transaction. Explaining the kind of
fraud that may absolve a bank from honouring its
guarantee, this Court in the above case quoted
with approval the observations of Sir John
Donaldson. M. R. in Bolivinter Oil SA v. Chase
Manhattan Bank NA, (1984) 1 All ER 351 at 352. "
The wholly exceptional case where an injunction
may be granted is where it is proved that the bank
knows that any demand for payment already
made or which may thereafter be made will
clearly be fraudulent. But the evidence must be
clear both as to the fact of fraud and as to the
bank's knowledge. It would certainly not normally
be sufficient that this rests on the uncorroborated
statement of the customer, for irreparable
damage can be done to a bank's credit in the
relatively brief time which must elapse between
the granting of such an injunction and an
application by the bank to have it charged". This
Court set aside an injunction granted by the High
Court to restrain the realisation of the bank
guarantee.
13. The same question came up for consideration
before this Court in Svenska Handelsbanken v.
M/s. Indian Charge Chrome, (1994) 1 SCC 502 :
(1993 AIR SCW 4002). This Court once again
reiterated
that
a
confirmed
bank
guarantee/irrevocable letter of credit cannot be
interfered with unless there is established fraud
or irretrievable injustice involved in the case.
Irretrievable injury has to be of the nature noticed
in the case of Itek Corporation v. The First
O.M.P. No. 265/2006

page 25 of 30

National Bank of Boston etc. (566 Fed Supp
1210). On the question of fraud this Court
confirmed the observations made in the case of U.
P. Co-operative Federation Ltd. (1988 (1) SCC
174) (supra) and stated that the fraud must be
that of the beneficiary, and not the fraud of
anyone else.
14. On the question of irretrievable injury
which is the second exception to the rule
against granting of injunctions when
unconditional bank guarantees are sought
to be realised the Court said in the above
case that the irretrievable injury must be
of the kind which was the subject-matter
of the decision in the Itek Corporation
case (566 Fed Supp 1210) (supra). In that
case an exporter in the U.S.A. entered into an
agreement with the Imperial Government of Iran
and sought an order terminating its liability on
stand by letters of credit issued by an American
Bank in favour of an Iranian Bank as part of the
contract. The relief was sought on account of the
situation created after the Iranian revolution
when the American Government cancelled the
export licences in relation to Iran and the Iranian
Government had forcibly taken 52 American
citizens as hostages. The U. S. Government had
blocked all Iranian assets under the jurisdiction
of United States and had cancelled the export
contract. The Court upheld the contention of the
exporter that any claim for damages against the
purchaser if decreed by the American Courts
would not be executable in Iran under these
circumstances and realisation of the bank
guarantee/ letters of credit would cause
irreparable harm to the plaintiff. This contention
was upheld. To avail of this exception.
therefore,
exceptional
circumstances
which make it impossible for the
guarantor to reimburse himself if he
O.M.P. No. 265/2006

page 26 of 30

ultimately succeeds, will have to be
decisively established. Clearly, a mere
apprehension that the other party will not
be able to pay, is not enough. In the Itek
case (supra) there was a certainty on this
issue. Secondly, there was good reason, in
that case for the Court to be prima facie
satisfied that the guarantors i.e. the bank
and its customer would be found entitled
to receive the amount paid under the
guarantee.
16. Clearly, therefore, the existence of any dispute
between the parties to the contract is not a
ground for issuing an injunction to restrain the
enforcement of bank guarantees. There must be a
fraud in connection with the bank guarantee. In
the present case we fail to see any such fraud. The
High Court seems to have come to the conclusion
that the termination of the contract by the
appellant and his claim that the time was of the
essence of the contract, are not based on the
terms of the contract and, therefore, there is a
fraud in the invocation of the bank guarantee.
This is all erroneous view. The disputes between
the parties relating to the termination of the
contract cannot make invocation of the bank
guarantees fraudulent. The High Court has also
referred to the conduct of the appellant in
invoking the bank guarantees on an earlier
occasion on 12th of April,1992 and subsequently
withdrawing such invocation. The Court has used
this circumstance in aid of its view that the time
was not of the essence of the contract. We fail to
see how an earlier invocation of the bank
guarantee and subsequent withdrawal of this
invocation make the bank Guarantees or their
invocation tainted with fraud in any manner.
Under the terms of the contract it is stipulated
that the respondent is required to give
unconditional bank guarantees against-advance
O.M.P. No. 265/2006

page 27 of 30

payment as also a similar bank guarantee for due
delivery of the contracted plant within the
stipulated period. In the absence of any fraud the
appellant is entitled to realise the bank
guarantees.
34.

Therefore, the rule is well settled that the bank which

has issued the bank guarantee is not concerned with the
underlying contract between the parties. The bank's duty under a
performance guarantee is created by virtue of the documents
issued by it.

When there is no dispute with regard to the

documents issued by the bank, it is bound to honour the same and
make payments ordinarily unless there is an allegation and a fraud
is established in the dispute between the parties to the contract
and there may be fraud in issuance, invocation and enforcement of
the bank guarantee.
35.

My attention has been drawn to the admitted position of

the petitioner's financial standing. The petitioner had submitted a
tender and has also filed along with its annual returns.

The

petitioner in the year 2001-2002 had indicated its annual financial
turnover of Rs. 1551 lakhs. Its profitability is indicated by the
profit and loss statements and balance sheets which were
submitted by the petitioner for the period between 2000 to 2002
which show profits of over Rs. 1 crore as late as on 27th March,
O.M.P. No. 265/2006

page 28 of 30

2003.
The same also indicate the financial health and standing
of the petitioner. It has not agitated for a considerable period
since March, 2004 when it executed the Memorandum of
Understanding dated 20th May, 2005. No steps were taken in this
behalf after the Memorandum of Understanding till the filing of
the Arbitration Application in April, 2006.
36.

In view of the well settled principles laid down by the

Apex Court as noticed above and the facts of the case as have been
established before this court, the petitioner has not been able to
make out any fraud in the provisions of the bank guarantee by the
respondent no. 2, let alone established fraud.

There is no

allegation even in this behalf.
So far as irretrievable injustice is concerned, certainly
the petitioner has been unable to make out a case for irretrievable
injustice.

It is only if the guarantor i.e. the petitioner

authoritatively and decisively establishes that it will be impossible
for him to reimburse himself or recover the amount if it ultimately
succeeds would he be entitled to an injunction. This is certainly
not so in the instant case. There is not a whisper of an allegation
or submission in this behalf. The only plea is that the petitioner is
O.M.P. No. 265/2006

page 29 of 30

suffering financial loss. It is well settled that financial loss would
not constitute irretrievable injustice to entitle the petitioner to
grant an injunction.
For all these reasons, I find no merit in this case.
This petition is accordingly dismissed.
The interim orders passed by this court on 1st June,
2006 shall stand vacated.
This petition is dismissed in the above terms.

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
December 18, 2006
SD

O.M.P. No. 265/2006

page 30 of 30

