IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 14427/2006 & CM No. Nil of 2007 & CM N0.
17869/2007

Date of decision: 18th December, 2007
Shri Jai Singh
... Petitioner
through: Mr. Sandeep Sethi, Sr. Adv. with
Mr. Aly Mirza, Adv.

VERSUS
Delhi Jal Board & Ors.
....Respondents
through: Mr. C.Mohan Rao, Adv. for the
respondent/DDA
Mr. H.S. Kohli, Adv. for the respondent/DJB
Mr. Biji Rajesh for Mr. Gaurang Kanth, Adv.
for the respondent/MCD

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
1.Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the Judgment?
2To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
GITA MITTAL, J(Oral)
1.

The petitioner in the present case had participated in an auction of commercial

plots conducted by the Delhi Development Authority (DDA for short) – respondent no.
2 herein on 28th December, 1987. His bid in respect of the commercial plot no. 1, Block
10 & 11, LSC Dakshin Puri Extension, New Delhi was found to be the highest and the
petitioner was declared successful. The respondent no. 2 issued a possession letter
dated
-25th October, 1988 in respect of this plot to the petitioner. All payments were made by

the petitioner to the DDA. The requisite stamp duty/transfer duty was deposited with
the Collector of Stamps on 21st September, 1989 and thereafter on 25th September,
1989 the petitioner deposited all receipts and documents with the DDA.
2.

Sometime in 1996 the petitioner learnt that the Municipal Corporation of Delhi

had occupied the plot in question. The petitioner has stated that in fact the Municipal
Corporation of Delhi ('MCD' for brevity) was allotted an adjacent plot on which there
was a coal depot and consequently, the MCD

made

efforts

to

occupy

the

petitioner's plot by building a boundary wall. In this background the petitioner was
constrained to file W.P.(C) No. 1880/1996 in this court. By an order passed on 16 th
October, 2003, this writ petition was allowed and the Municipal Corporation of Delhi
was directed not to interfere with the possession of the petitioner.
3.

Subsequently, in June, 2006 the petitioner found that instead of the Municipal

Corporation of Delhi, the Delhi Jal Board had occupied his property. A complaint was
made by the petitioner in this behalf on 1st September, 2006 to the police authorities.
In the absence of any redressal, the petitioner has been constrained to file the present
writ petition seeking the following prayers :-3“(1) A writ/order/direction in the nature of mandamus requiring
respondent-DDA to demarcate petitioner's property bearing being Plot
No. 1, Block 10 & 11, LSC, Dakshinpuri
Extn., New Delhi
(2) A writ/order/direction in the nature of mandamus directing Delhi
Jal Board, respondent no. 1 to remove itself and its belongings from
petitioner's property bearing being Plot No. 1, Block 10 & 11, LSC,
Dakshinpuri Extn., New Delhi.
(3) A writ/order/direction in the nature of prohibition prohibiting the
respondents from interfering in any way with the possession of the
petitioner of property being Plot No. 1, Block 10 & 11, LSC, Dakshinpuri
Extn., New Delhi.

(4) Such other writ, order or direction in favour of the petitioners as
may be deemed just and proper in the facts and circumstances of the
case.”
4.

The DDA has filed a counter affidavit disputing the contentions of the petitioner

and stated that possession of the vacant plot stood handed over to the petitioner on 5 th
October, 1988 which was duly demarcated with boundary pillars.
5.

In this background,

on the 29th of May, 2007, this court had directed the

executive engineer of the MCD to inspect the site and file a status report indicating the
status of the structure existing thereon and who was responsible for the encroachment.
In compliance thereof the executive engineer of the MCD has filed a counter affidavit
and a status report dated 8th August, 2007. The status report records that the Delhi
Development Authority was unable to place the lay out plan of the area in question and
that only a rough sketch of the site was produced which reflected that office/pump
house of the Delhi Jal Board was situated on the plot.
-46.

So far as the Delhi Jal Board is concerned it has been pointed out that upon

enactment of the Delhi Water Act, 1998, all properties which vested with the erstwhile
Delhi Water Supply & Sewage Disposal Undertaking ('DWS&DU' for brevity) were
vested in the Delhi Jal Board. It has been pointed out that the pump house in question
which is known as pump house no. 11 near the Post Office, Block 11, Dakshinpuri
Extn., of the DWS&DU statutorily vested in the Delhi Jal Board. Its existence and
status as back as on 1st June, 1988 has also been placed on record by the Delhi Jal
Board. It has been submitted that this was an allotment effected in favour of the Delhi
Water Supply & Sewage Disposal Undertaking, a department of the Municipal

Corporation of Delhi, by the DDA.
The counter affidavit of the Delhi Jal Board has also stated that earlier the
services and maintenance of the area in question was being looked after by the Delhi
Development Authority which had handed over these facilities for maintenance to the
erstwhile

Delhi Water Supply & Sewage Disposal Undertaking of the Municipal

Corporation of Delhi.
7.

From the foregoing, it is evident that the Delhi Development Authority has no

proper maintenance of records with regard to its properties, and that auction has been
effected of a plot on which there was a pump house purportedly constructed by it and
handed over to the erstwhile Delhi Water Supply & Sewage Disposal Undertaking of
the MCD
-5which statutorily vested in the Delhi Jal Board.

In addition, the petitioner had

successfully bid in the auction plot. The petitioner has also made full payment and
deposited all documents. The DDA has admitted the entitlement of the petitioner to
possession thereof.
8.

In this background, by an order passed on 7th September, 2007, a direction was

issued to the Vice Chariman of the DDA to examine the issue in consultation with the
Chief Executive Officer of the Delhi Jal Board within a period of four weeks and to
explore the possibility of an amicable resolution of the matter so that the interest of the
petitioner and the public were not jeopardised.
The matter was directed to be listed on 15th November, 2007.
On this date, further time was requested on behalf of the DDA on the ground

that it was not in a position to trace out the lay out plan of the land in question. Again
a further period of two weeks was given in order to make a report in terms of the order
passed on 7th September, 2007.
9.

On the next date of hearing, which was the 10th December, 2007, further

adjournment was sought without any compliance of the directions made either on 7th
September, 2007 or on 15th November, 2007. Perusal of the status report and counter
affidavit of the MCD shows that the matter was prolonged in similar circumstances,
without production of the layout plan.

Adequate opportunity stood given.

Such

matter deserved to have
-6been resolved by the authorities without compelling the petitioner to approach the
court and seek its intervention. Consequently, the Vice Chairman of the DDA and the
Additional CEO of the Delhi Jal Board were required to appear before the court on 18th
December, 2007.
10.

When the mater was called out today, I find that the Delhi Development

Authority has filed CM No. 1621/2007 seeking exemption of the personal appearance
of the Vice Chairman of the DDA. Mr. H.S. Kohli, learned counsel appearing for the
Delhi Jal Board had mentioned an application seeking exemption from personal
appearance of the Additional CEO of the Delhi Jal Board. This application has also
been directed to be listed and the applications have been taken up for consideration
with the writ petition.
11.

I find that alongwith the application filed by the Delhi Jal Board it has placed

copy of the minutes dated 14th December, 2007 of a meeting held by the Vice Chairman

of the DDA with senior officials of the Delhi Jal Board to resolve the controversy. The
minutes record the following decision :“A meeting was convened by Vice Chariman, DDA on 14.12.2007 to
resolve the issue regarding plot at Dakshin Puri, New Delhi for which a
Writ Petition has been preferred by one Sh. Jai Singh against DDA,
MCD, DJB & others. The following were present:1. Smt. Asma Manzar, Commissioner(LD) DDA.
-72. Sh. Santosh Vaidys, Addl. CEO, DJB.
3. Sh. B. M. Dhaul, Chief Engineer, DJB.
4. Sh. D. K. Singh, Legal Officer, DJB.
5. Sh. R. P. Gupta , SE, DJB.
6. Sh. Delip Singh , JLO, Slum & JJ Deptt., MCD.
7. Sh. Ashok Codwani, Sr. Architect, DDA.
During the deliberations, it was emerged that plot (measuring
15X11.90 Sq. Mtr) in question was handed over to Delhi Water Supply
& Sewage Disposal Undertaking which was with MCD in the year 1988
in the month of June for maintenance of water services for the area
developed by the DDA. Further out of this land, a plot measuring 75
sq. mtr. Was also allotted to the petitioner Sh. Jai Prakash Singh by
the Commercial Estate Branch, DDA in October, 1988 and possession
on record was shown handed over. The DJB has been providing its
operation and maintenance services for water supply & sewage
disposal in the area since1988.
After detailed, examination of the facts as available on file, it was
further emerged that the DDA is committed to honour the rights of
both the parties' i.e. Auction Purchaser as well as Delhi Jal Board.
(Earstwhile D.W.S. & S. D. Undertaking)
Therefore it was decided that keeping in view the peculiar
circumstances the DJB, would hand over the plot measuirng 15x11.90
mtrs back to DDA and DDA in turn would allot an alternative plot of
the same area i.e. 178.50 sqr. mtrs. to DJB in the nearby area. Out of
the returned plot from DJB, DDA would then hand over 75 sqr. mtr.
Size plot to the auction purchaser and the remaining plot would be
used by DDA as per 'land use'.
It was further resolved that the same decision will be brought to
the notice of Hon'ble High Court through the respective lawyers of
DDA and DJB that the matter has been amicable settled and as such
personal appearance of V.C., DDA and Addl. CEO, Delhi Jal Board be
not insisted.”
12.

In view of the above, it is apparent that the Delhi Jal Board has agreed to hand

over possession of the plot of 15 mtr x 11.90 mtr which was allotted by the DDA to it
against receipt of an allotment of an alternative
-8plot of 178.50 sqm. in the nearby area. The DDA has agreed to hand over such plot to
the Delhi Jal Bord. It has further agreed that the auctioned plot of the size of 75 sqm.
could be handed over to the petitioner who is the auction purchaser. The balance land
received from the Delhi Jal Board would be used by the DDA as per prescribed land
use. The claim of the petitioner thus admitted and his grievance would thus stand
resolved upon receipt of possession of the plot.
In view of the above this writ petition is allowed with the following directions :(i)

The Delhi Development Authority shall hand over possession of a plot of 178.50

sqm in the area to the Delhi Jal Board within a period of four weeks from today. On
receipt of this plot of land, the Delhi Jal Board would hand over possession of the
subject land to the Delhi Development Authority.
(ii)

The DDA would hand over possession of the commercial plot no. 1, Block No. 10-

11, LSC, Dakshin Puri Extn., New Delhi to the petitioner in an unencumbered
condition and free of encroachment, within a period of two weeks thereafter.
(iii)

Matters however cannot end with the above directions. The present case is not

the only case which has been placed before this court wherein DDA has auctioned plots
which are either encumbered or already stand
-9transferred. In the instant case the DDA has not been in a position to even produce the
lay out plan of the area in question. It is unexplicable as to how such auctions are

being conducted without even a site inspection by the authorities concerned, whether
they be from the land management/land disposal department of the DDA or from its
departments conducting the auction. This matter deserves imperative attention of the
Vice Chairman who has to take concrete steps to ensure that this does not recur and
valuable rights of the parties are not jeopardised. Commercial plots today are being
auctioned against consideration of crores of rupees.

The parties are required to

deposit substantial amounts immediately on the fall of the hammer. Accordingly, the
Vice Chairman shall also appropriately examine this issue and make appropriate
directions so that the land records in the DDA are properly maintained and its
properties are secured. In any case, so far as auctions are concerned, the matter needs
to be examined appropriately so that steps are taken to inspect the properties being
auctioned by the officials of the DDA immediately before the auction. Appropriate
directions required to be passed by the DDA in this behalf which may be notified to all
the concerned departments and steps taken.
(iv). The petitioner has been made to run from pillar to post . He has had to file two
writ petitions to seek relief. The stand of the DDA in the present
- 10 proceedings also shows that it has not placed the correct facts on record. Rather it is
blissful unaware of its own work on the land.
In these circumstances, the petitioner shall be entitled to costs of the present
petition which are quantified at Rs.25,000/- to be paid by the DDA. Costs shall be
paid within a period of six weeks from today.
Dasti

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
December 18, 2007
kr

