IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
OMP NO.305/2004
Reserved on 13th February, 2007
Date of Decision 19th February, 2007
SHRI RAGHUBIR SINGH
... Petitioner
through: Mr. B.T. Singh, Advocate
VERSUS
DELHI METRO RAIL CORPORATION LTD
& ORS.
.....Respondents
through: Ms. Monica Sharma, Adv. for
Ms. Anusuya Salwan, Adv. for DMRC.
Ms. Sujata Kashyap with Mr. Chandra
Mani, Adv. for the Respondent no.3.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

This petition has been filed by the petitioner under Section 34 of the

Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 placing its objections to the arbitration
award dated 27th May, 2004. So far as the essential facts giving rise to the
petition are concerned, there is no material dispute thereto and, to the extent
necessary for adjudication of the present petition, the same are noticed
OMP No.305/2004

Page No.1

hereinafter.
2.

The petitioner was allegedly running its business from property

bearing no.1/1142 B-1143, 1st floor, Railway Road, Shahdara. The Union of
India and the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi, in order to
cut down the load of traffic on the existing roads and to ensure smooth flow
of traffic has conceptualised the `Mass Rapid Transit System'. In order to
implement this project, it had necessitated evacuation of what was termed as
the `Project Affected Persons'.
3.

The petitioner has submitted that with the intention of rehabilitating

such project affected persons, a circular dated 31st January, 2002 was issued
by the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi. As per this
circular, a decision dated 10th December, 2001 had been taken by the
Cabinet that the project affected shopkeepers as were verified by the
concerned ADM/LAC would be recommended to DDA for making
alternative allotment of developed plots at `pre-determined price'. This
circular contains guidelines for relocation or rehabilitation of affected
persons evacuated for acquisition of property for the project of Delhi Metro
Rail Corporation (hereinafter referred to as `DMRC' for brevity).
4.

The respondent/DMRC has contended that the DMRC had no scheme
OMP No.305/2004

Page No.2

or policy to rehabilitate affected persons. It simply places its requirement of
land before the Government of NCT of Delhi who acquires land and allots it
to DMRC on payment of requisite amount of consideration. The DMRC
has also stated that it is not a land acquiring agency for the purposes of the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894.
5.

So far as the land of the petitioner is concerned, the same was

acquired by the Government of NCT of Delhi pursuant to a notification
under Section 4(1) read with Section 17(1) of the Land Acquisition Act,
1894 issued on the 12th June, 1997 notifying the acquisition of this property.
The declaration under Section 6 of the Statute followed on 28th July, 1997.
the petitioner before this court had staked a claim for compensation as also a
right to a suitable alternative site. The Land Acquisition Collector has made
an award dated 20th July, 1999. The petitioner has filed a reference against
the same in accordance with Section 18 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.
6.

The petitioner has placed reliance on an assurance allegedly given by

the respondent no.1 for providing inbuilt rehabilitation/re-settlement scheme
in its project to the project affected persons. This position is disputed by the
respondents who submit that they have no liability to make such allotments
in law and further that the circular dated 31st January, 2002 is not applicable
OMP No.305/2004

Page No.3

and cannot be enforced against the respondents.
7.

Both parties are, however, ad idem that they had executed a licence

agreement dated 6th September, 2000 which is the basis of the claim made
by the petitioner.

Perusal of this licence agreement shows that the

respondents had agreed to provide covered space measuring about 15 sq.
mtrs. to the petitioner who was a project affected shopkeeper on a licence
for a period of 50 years starting from the date of handing over possession on
the terms and conditions stated in the licence deed. So far as the location of
the shop was concerned, Clause 2 of this licence agreement clearly provided
that the allotted shop would be on an appropriate floor matching the existing
shop being dismantled and the exact location would be decided after
construction of the new shops by lottery to be held in public with due notice
to all concerned.
8.

The respondent no.1 constructed shops at the metro railway road track

station at Shahdara Railway Road from where the shop of the petitioner was
acquired. The respondent has also stated to have constructed shops at Bhola
Nath Nagar Road which was considered for allotment to the petitioner and
other persons similarly placed. The petitioner was notified of a draw of lot
which was to be conducted for allotment of shops on the 23 rd December,
OMP No.305/2004

Page No.4

2003.

In this draw of lots, the petitioner drew shop no.B-28 in the

Bholanath Nagar Road Complex which was so allotted to him.
9.

The petitioner was not satisfied with the allotment of this shop and

had consequently agitated claim urging that the petitioner was entitled to
allotment of one of those shops being shop nos.4, 11, 15, 16, 17 & 18 which
were constructed under the elevated Metro Railway Road Track at the
Shahdara Railway Road or in the alternative to one of the shops being
nos.A-16, A-17, A-30, A-31, A-34 & A-36 located in the complex
constructed at the Bhola Nath Nagar Road. It was contended that the
respondents have made the allotments in terms of Clauses 10 & 11 of the
licence agreement and that the shops which have been allotted are
commercially not viable.
10.

The petitioner had filed a petition under Section 9 of the Arbitration

& Conciliation Act, 1996 which came up for hearing on 13th April, 2004.
On this date, a request was made on behalf of the petitioner and in other
similar petitions, that an arbitrator be appointed to adjudicate upon the
disputes between the parties.

Accordingly, the matter was referred for

adjudication to Hon'ble Mr. Justice K.S. Gupta (Retd.) who was appointed
as an arbitrator to adjudicate upon the disputes between the parties by an
OMP No.305/2004

Page No.5

order dated 13th April, 2004.
11.

The learned arbitrator had permitted the parties to file their respective

pleadings. Both parties submit that the learned arbitrator had conducted
spot inspection of the site as well and proceeded to make and publish an
award dated 27th May, 2004.

Upon receipt of a copy of the award, the

present objections have been filed by the petitioner urging that the learned
arbitrator had erred in not giving an opportunity to the petitioner to lead
evidence in support of his contention, that the award deserves to be set aside
also for the reason that the respondent has failed to give explanation as to
why no ground floor shop was allotted to him despite the statement of the
respondent that he was entitled to preferential treatment.
12.

I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have perused the

record which has been placed before this court.
13.

So far as the first objection is concerned, the admitted position is that

the petitioner did not make any request for leading any evidence before the
arbitrator. The petitioner has also not objected to the proceedings being
closed after the completion of the pleadings, the spot inspection and hearing
of arguments by the arbitrator. It is apparent that the petitioner was satisfied
that no evidence was required for the purposes of adjudicating upon his
OMP No.305/2004

Page No.6

claim.
14.

It is also the admitted position that the rights of the petitioner were

governed by the terms and clauses of licence agreement dated 6th
September, 2000 and the petitioner cannot expand or claim anything beyond
the specific stipulations contained therein.

I find that Clause 2 of the

licence agreement clearly stated that the allocation would be made at
`appropriate floor matching the existing shop being dismantled'.

The

petitioner has stated even before this court that its shop which was taken
over for the purposes of DMRC project, was located on the first floor. In
the light of the petitioner having so covenanted in the licence deed, the
petitioner cannot be heard to contend that he was entitled to allotment of
any other floor.
15.

A grievance has been made with regard to the fact that despite shops

being available on the ground floor and the respondents having held that the
petitioner was entitled to preferential treatment, the petitioner was not
considered for such allotment.
16.

In order to ensure a fair and non-arbitrary allotment of public

property, it has been repeatedly held that allotment by public draw of lots is
the most egalitarian. All persons who are being considered for allotment
OMP No.305/2004

Page No.7

would be thrown together and a draw of lots is conducted out of the
available properties.

The project affected persons have been given a

preferential treatment inasmuch as they have been made allotments by a
draw of lots out of the properties which were earmarked for allotment to
them at a fixed rate. The petitioner has himself stated that the remaining
shops have been auctioned by the respondents for the purposes of drawing
best rates for them. The petitioner has been required to make payment of a
fixed amount and has claimed to have deposited Rs.52,500/-. Even as per
the claim filed by the petitioner in respect of the auctioned shops, the
respondents have charged over Rs.2,50,000/- as security and Rs.10,000/- to
Rs.12,000/- as lease rental against the newly constructed shops apart from
amounts which were to be paid in the auctions. In these facts, the petitioner
cannot be permitted to contend that he has not been given a preferential
treatment for allotment of the shops in question.
17.

Even otherwise, it is necessary to bear in mind the parameters within

which the court can judicially review an award made under the provisions of
Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996. The parameters thereof have been
statutorily delineated under Section 34 of the enactment. The petitioner has
contended that the objections raised by him fall within the meaning of the
OMP No.305/2004

Page No.8

expression `opposed to public policy' and that the award in the instant case
is opposed to the public policy in India.
18.

In this behalf, it would be useful to consider the scope and meaning of

the expression “Public Policy” under Section 34 of the Statute.

It

is

well settled that an arbitrator is a creation of the agreement between the
parties and the limits of his jurisdiction are prescribed by the agreement
between the parties. A challenge to an award made by the arbitrator is
prescribed under the provisions of Section 34 of the Arbitration &
Conciliation Act, 1996. As per this provision, the jurisdiction of the court
under Section 34 is limited and an arbitral award can be set aside only on
the grounds stated in para 34 Sub-Section 2 of the Arbitration &
Conciliation Act, 1996 which reads thus:34.

(1) xxx
xxx
xxx
(2) An arbitral award may be set aside by the court only if:(a) the party making the application furnishes proof that(i)
a party was under some incapacity; or
(ii) the arbitration agreement is not valid under the
law to which the parties have subjected it or, failing
any indication thereon, under the law for the time
being in force; or
(iii) the party making the application was not given
proper notice of the appointment of an arbitrator or of
the arbitral proceedings or was otherwise unable to
present the case; or
(iv) the arbitral award deals with a dispute not

OMP No.305/2004

Page No.9

contemplated by or not falling with the terms of the
submission to arbitration, or it contains decisions on
matters beyond the scope of the submission to
arbitration:
Provided that, if the decisions on matters
submitted to arbitration can be separated from those
not so submitted, only that part of the arbitral award
which contains decisions on matters not submitted to
arbitration may be set aside; or
(v) the composition of the arbitral tribunal or the
arbitral procedure was not in accordance with the
agreement of the parties, unless such agreement wa
sin conflict with a provision of this Part from which
the parties cannot derogate, or, failing such
agreement, was not in accordance with this Part; or
(b) the court finds that(i)
the subject-matter of the dispute is not capable
of settlement by arbitration under the law for the time
being in force, or
(ii) the arbitral award is in conflict with the public
policy of India.
19.

In this behalf, Section 28(3) of the enactment specifically provides

that `arbitral tribunal' shall decide in accordance with the terms of the
contract. By virtue of Section 28(2), an arbitrator is required to decide ex
aequo et bono (according to what is just and good) only if the parties
expressly authorised him to do so.
20.

In the instant case, I find that there is no challenge to the award on

any other grounds other than a submission that the arbitral award is in
conflict with the public policy of India.
OMP No.305/2004

Page No.10

21.

So far as the expression `Public Policy of India' is concerned, the

same has been considered by the Apex Court in its pronouncement reported
at (2003) 5 SCC 705 Oil & Natural Gas Corporation of India Vs. Saw
Pipes. In this matter, the court was required to consider as to what meaning
can be assigned to the phrase `Public Policy of India'. The court noticed
that this expression does not attempt of a precise definition and has to be
given meaning in the light and principles underlining the Arbitration Act,
Contract Act and the Constitutional provisions.

In this case, the court

considered the principle which was laid down in the earlier pronouncement
reported at (1986) 3 SCC 156 Central Inland Water Transport Corporation
of India Vs. Brojo Nath Ganguly wherein the court has stated thus“93. The normal rule of Common Law has been that a
party who seeks to enforce an agreement which is
opposed to public policy will be non-suited. The case of
A. Schroeder Music Publishing Co. Ltd. Vs. Macaulay,
however, establishes that where a contract is vitiated as
being contrary to public policy, the party adversely
affected by it can sue to have it declared void. The case
may be different where the purpose of the contract is
illegal or immoral. In Kedar Nath Motani Vs. Prahlad
Rai, reversing the High Court and restoring the decree
passed by the trial court declaring the appellants' title to
the lands in suit and directing the respondents who were
the appellants' benamidars to restore possession, this
Court, after discussing the English and Indian law on the
subject, said (at page 873):
OMP No.305/2004

Page No.11

The correct position in law, in our
opinion, is that what one has to see is whether
the illegality goes so much to the root of the
matter that the plaintiff cannot bring his action
without relying upon the illegal transaction into
which he had entered. If the illegality be trivial
or venial, as stated by Williston and the plaintiff
is not required to rest his case upon that
illegality, then public policy demands that the
defendant should not be allowed to take
advantage of the position. A strict view, of
course, must be taken of the plaintiff's conduct,
and he should not be allowed to circumvent the
illegality by resorting to some subterfuge or by
misstating the facts. If, however, the matter is
clear and the illegality is not required to be
pleaded or proved as part of the cause of action
and the plaintiff recanted before the illegal
purpose was achieved, then, unless it be of such
a gross nature as to outrage the conscience of
the court, the plea of the defendant should not
prevail.
The types of contracts to which the principle
formulated by us above applies are not contracts which
are tainted with illegality but are contracts which contain
terms which are so unfair and unreasonable that they
shock the conscience of the court. They are opposed to
public policy and require to be adjudged void.”
22.

It was also noticed that in Renu Sagar Power Company Ltd. Vs.

General Electronic Company 1994 Civil (1) SCC 644, it was held that a
violation of the provisions of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act which

OMP No.305/2004

Page No.12

was enacted to safeguard the economic interests of India, would be contrary
to the public policy of India as was envisaged under Section 7(1)(b)(i) of the
Foreign Exchange Regulation Act and that the enforcement of foreign
award on the ground that it is contrary to public policy if such enforcement
would be contrary to (i) fundamental policy in Indian Law (ii) the interest of
India (iii) justice on morality.
23.

After detailed consideration of the principles laid down in various

judicial pronouncements, the Apex Court laid down the principles on which
an arbitration award could be set aside under Section 34 of the Arbitration
& Conciliation Act, 1996. The principles were succinctly laid down in para
31 of the judgment which reads thus:31. Therefore, in our view, the phrase “public policy of
India” used in Section 34 in contenxt is required to be
given a wider meaning. It can be stated that the concept
of public policy connotes some matter which concerns
public good and the public interest. What is for public
good or in public interest or what would be injurious or
harmful to the public good or public interest has varied
from time to time. However, the award which is, on the
face of it, patently in violation of stautory provisions
cannot be said to be in public interest.
Such
award/judgment/decision is likely to adversely affect the
administration of justice. Hence, in our view in addition
to narrower meaning given to the term “public policy” in
Renusagar case it is required to be held that the award
could be set aside if it is patently illegal. The result
OMP No.305/2004

Page No.13

would be – award could be set aside if it is contrary to:
(a) fundamental policy of Indian law; or
(b) the interest of India; or
(c) justice or morality, or
(d) in addition, if it is patenty illegal.
Illegality must go to the root of the matter and if the
illegality is of trivial nature it cannot be held that award is
against the public policy. Award could also be set aside if
it is so unfair and unreasonable that it shocks the
conscience of the court. Such award is opposed to public
policy and is required to be adjudged void.”
24.

In the light of these principles, the court held that so far as the

objections under Section 34 were concerned, the term `public policy of
India' was required to be interpreted in the context of the jurisdiction of the
court where the validity of the award is challenged before it becomes final
and executable.
25.

The award would be required to be set aside on the ground of `patent

illegality',

if the award is patently against the statutory provisions of

substantiative law which is enforced in India or is passed without giving an
opportunity of hearing to the parties as provided under Section 24 or
without giving any reason in a case where parties have not agreed that no
reasons are required to be awarded.
26.

From the submissions noticed above, it is apparent that none of the

OMP No.305/2004

Page No.14

grounds afore-noticed have been made out. The Award in the present case
cannot be held to be opposed to public policy in India only for the reason
that the allotment has been made to the petitioner in terms of the agreement
between the parties and the petitioner has desired to have an allotment on
some other basis which has not been accepted by the arbitrator.
27.

The allotment to the petitioner has been made in terms of what was

promised under the licence agreement and it is not the petitioner's case that
he has not been made the allotment on terms or at the rates at which the
respondent made to other similarly placed persons. Even the dispossession
of the petitioner from its earlier property was only after the petitioner had
entered into the licence agreement with the respondent.
28.

In my view, none of the objections raised by the petitioner fall within

the permissible parameters of a challenge thereto under Section 34 of the
Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996. It cannot be held that the award is
opposed to public policy in India.
Consequently, I find that there is no merit in the petition and the same
is dismissed.
(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
OMP No.305/2004

Page No.15

February 19, 2007
aa

OMP No.305/2004

Page No.16

