IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Judgments reserved on:9th September, 2005
Date of decision: 19th October, 2005
1. WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 19912/2004
Shri Surender Singh Malik
... Petitioner
through Mr.M.K.Verma, Advocate
VERSUS
Govt. of NCT of Delhi and others
...Respondents
through Ms.Iram Majid for respondents 1 & 2
Mr.V.K.Tandon for respondent No.3
2. WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 19913/2004
Shri Gauri Shankar Goswami
... Petitioner
through Mr.M.K.Verma, Advocate
VERSUS
Govt. of NCT of Delhi and others
...Respondents
through Ms.Iram Majid for respondents 1 & 2
Mr.V.K.Tandon for respondent No.3
3. WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 20182/2004
Shri S. Narayan Singh

... Petitioner
through Mr.M.K.Verma, Advocate

VERSUS
Govt. of NCT of Delhi and others
...Respondents
through Ms.Iram Majid for respondents 1 & 2
1

Mr.V.K.Tandon for respondent No.3
4. WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 20183/2004
Shri Durga Singh

... Petitioner
through Mr.M.K.Verma, Advocate
VERSUS

Govt. of NCT of Delhi and others
...Respondents
through Ms.Iram Majid for respondents 1 & 2
Mr.V.K.Tandon for respondent No.3
5. WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 20184/2004
Shri Wazir Singh

... Petitioner
through Mr.M.K.Verma, Advocate
VERSUS

Govt. of NCT of Delhi and others
...Respondents
through Ms.Iram Majid for respondents 1 & 2
Mr.V.K.Tandon for respondent No.3
6. WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 20185/2004
Smt. Sheela

... Petitioner
through Mr.M.K.Verma, Advocate
VERSUS

Govt. of NCT of Delhi and others
...Respondents
through Ms.Iram Majid for respondents 1 & 2
Mr.V.K.Tandon for respondent No.3
7. WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 20186/2004
Shri Deepender Sharma
2

... Petitioner

through Mr.M.K.Verma, Advocate
VERSUS
Govt. of NCT of Delhi and others
...Respondents
through Ms.Iram Majid for respondents 1 & 2
Mr.V.K.Tandon for respondent No.3
8. WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 20187/2004
Shri Vijay Kumar Singh
... Petitioner
through Mr.M.K.Verma, Advocate
VERSUS
Govt. of NCT of Delhi and others
...Respondents
through Ms.Iram Majid for respondents 1 & 2
Mr.V.K.Tandon for respondent No.3
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

These writ petitions raise identical issues of law and fact and

are, therefore, being disposed of by this common judgment. The basic
issue which arises for consideration is the entitlement of a person to
issuance of a writ in his favour protecting a possession which is not

3

supported by law against any other person or the true owner.
2.

The writ petitioners, all claim to be owners of plots of land in

what is stated to be “Freedom Fighters Colony” located in Village Neb
Sarai, Delhi.

Ownership is claimed on these plots of land under

documents in the nature of agreements to sell, power of attorneys,
affidavits and wills which are not registered under the provisions of the
Registration Act, 1908. The petitioners claim to be owners in occupation
and possession of the plots mentioned in these documents. Based on
averments of attempted forcible dispossession at the hands of the
respondent nos. 1 to 3, the petitioners submit that such possession is
liable to be protected by this Court.
3.

All the petitioners have also raised a plea of entitlement to

relief on the ground of individuous

discrimination at the hands of

respondent nos. 1 to 3 submitting that the petitioners are bonafide
purchasers residing on the constructions raised on these plots which are
being used for residential purposes and have claimed possession of ration
card, gas connections, fine receipts, medical treatment records, postal
documents, election photo ID cards, identity cards, children education
records and such like documents. They assert peaceful enjoyment of the
premises for the last about 24 years without any interference. It is also

4

submitted that no notice has been issued or legal proceedings initiated
against the petitioners at any point of time.
4.

According to the petitioners, the respondent no.4 Shri

Raghvinder Singh, is a land grabber who has trespassed on land in the
area, carried out plotting and developed roads etc in connivance with
officials of the respondents 1 to 3. As he wanted to connect his illegally
plotted area to the main road, which could only be done by building a
pathway over the land of the petitioners, the respondent no.4 threatened
the petitioner to get him illegally dispossessed from the premises in
question. The petitioners have also alleged that respondent no.4 has
committed several illegalities which have been published in the
newspapers as well.
5.

It is further submitted that this respondent no.4 has himself

filed writ petition(C) 1193/99 against respondent nos. 1 to 3 wherein he
has been granted interim protection. This respondent no.4 has not filed
any counter affidavit to the instant petition.
6.

The petitioners also place reliance on the policy of the Central

Government and the State Government of regularisation of unauthorised
colonies.

It is submitted that the colony where the property of the

petitioners is situated is one of the colonies which is to be regularised.

5

Reliance is placed on resolution no.F22(1)6/2000-LAS-II dated 3rd
August, 2000 in respect of regularisation of 1071 unauthorised colonies.
The petitioners contend that multi-storeyed constructions have been
raised on the land in question and no legal action has been initiated
against the same. Claiming equal protection of law as other persons
occupying the other colonies, it is submitted that the officials of the
respondents cannot adopt differential standards.
7.

The writ petition was necessitated as, it is stated, that the

respondents took the law into their own hands and they visited the
site/vicinity of the plot of the petitioner on 13 th December, 2004 causing
some demolition of the properties without giving any notice to the
petitioners and directing them to vacate their occupation within two
weeks failing which the property would be uprooted and the petitioners
would be dispossessed.
8.

The petitioners have also pointed out that in a writ petition

( C) 7193/99 entitled Raghvinder Singh Vs. Deputy Commissioner and
others, an order dated 22nd February, 2002 granting interim relief has
been passed even though a FIR bearing no.663/2004 under Section
441/447 of the IPC has been registered by the Police Station Mehrauli
against him.

6

9.

The petitioner also place reliance on an interim order of stay

dated 23rd May, 2001 passed in WP(C) 3338/2001 filed by the Freedom
Fighter Colony Welfare Association.
10.

In answer to the writ petitions, detailed counter affidavits

have been filed.

The respondents have disputed ownership and

possession of the petitioners and have also streneously contended that
the documents in the

nature of agreements to sell, wills, power of

attorneys, letters of possession etc. relied upon by the petitioners do not
create any title in law in the petitioners. Furthermore, there is nothing on
record to establish title of the executants of these documents.

It is

submitted on behalf of the respondents that there is nothing placed on
record by the petitioners to establish that these plots are located within
the Freedom Fighters Colony which is the subject matter of the list
circulated by the authorities as colonies slated for regularisation. It is
further submitted that the petitioners were attempting encroachments on
land in respect of which demolition action was taken by the respondents
on 2nd November, 2004. All such illegal constructions were removed in
this demolition. It is stated that the possession of the land is with the
owners, that is the authorities, except for a parcel of land measuring
about 1600 sq. yards situated in khasra no.85 which is stated to be in

7

possession of respondent no.4 and is the subject matter of CW 7193/99.
The demolition report dated 2nd November, 2004 has been placed on
record. According to the respondents, the petitioners are hand in glove
with the respondent no.4 and are land grabbers who have attempted to
encroach upon Gaon Sabha land in khasra nos. 82, 84 and 85 in village
Neb Sarai. The respondents also place reliance on photographs of the
site taken on 2nd November, 2004 and photographs taken on 24th
December, 2004 which have been placed on record.
11.

The respondents have also strongly refuted the claim of the

petitioners that the parcels of land over which they claim title and
possession are situated adjacent to each other. In this behalf it is pointed
out that in some documents filed by the petitioners, the khasra numbers
of the land are mentioned as 148/141 and in some as 84 and 85. The
description of land mentioned in these petitions cannot be reconciled
with the documents filed by them or with the site possession.
12.

It is further submitted that the documents placed on record in

support of the plea of long and settled possession are random documents
without continuity and do not establish or even reflect actual or
continuous possession of the petitioners. No sanctions or permissions to
raise constructions are placed on record.

8

13.

The respondents submit that the land measuring 31 bighas and

11 biswas comprising khasra nos. 74(4-16), 75(4-16), 76(2-08), 77(310), 82(3-06), 83(4-14), 84(4-04) and 85(3-17) in village Neb Sarai was
allotted to the Directorate of Training and Technical Education for
establishment of an ITI vide letter no.F.4(192)/P/M/94/V/729 dated 17th
February, 1995. By this communication the ADM/Director(P) conveyed
the approval of the Lt. Governor, Delhi for allotment to lease out the
Gaon Sabha land for establishment of an ITI, a public necessity.
14.

Reliance is placed on a pronouncement reported at 118 (2005)

DLT 763 entitled Sanjeev Lamba and another vs. Delhi Metro Rail
Corporation and others in support of the submission that no relief can be
granted against the true owner in favour of a person without a title to the
land.
15.

The respondents have also placed on record the relevant

revenue records in support of their claim that the land is Gaon Sabha
land.
16.

I have heard the parties at great length. I find that the present

petitioners have approached this Court asserting a title of the land based
on documents. It would be appropriate to deal with the claims made in
this behalf in each writ petition. Dealt with case wise, the claims are

9

noticed hereafter.
17.

In WP(C) 19912/04, filed by Surender Singh Malik, it has

been claimed that the petitioner had purchased a property bearing no.B44/11, Freedom Fighters Colony, Neb Sarai, measuring 400 sq. yards, out
of khasra no.84 on 25th August, 1980 from Shri Baljeet Singh and Shri
Sukhbir Singh for a sale consideration of Rs.80,000/-. Photo copies of
the documents placed on record as documents establishing title are in the
nature of GPA, agreement to sell, will, affidavit, possession letter and
cash receipt. There is nothing on record to establish as to how Baljeet
Singh and Sukhbir Singh had any valid title to the land which is claimed
to have been sold by them to the petitioners. Shri Sukhbir Singh has not
signed these documents.
18.

While Surender Singh Malik claims ownership and residence

in B-44/11. Documents have been annexed by the petitioner in WP
19913/04 by Shri Gauri Shankar Goswami showing his residence as B44/11.
19.

A police complaint has also been filed as Annexure P-6 which

states that the land had been purchased in 1995 and the construction was
not carried out on account of paucity of funds. The photographs which
have been placed on record by the petitioners do not establish either the

10

location nor occupation by the petitioner.
20.

In WP(C) 19913/04 filed by Gauri Shankar Goswami, it is

claimed by him that he has purchased the property bearing no.B-44/6,
Freedom Fighters Colony, Neb Sarai measuring 100 sq. yards out of
khasra no.85 on 24th September, 1992 from Sukhbir singh for a sale
consideration of Rs.41,000/-.

Photo copies of the documents in the

nature of GPA, agreement to sell, will, affidavit, possession letter and
cash receipt, ration card have been relied upon.
21.

The documents filed on record show that they are also

unstamped and unregistered.

This petitioner though is claiming

occupancy of B-44/6, he is reflected as occupying B-44/11. There is no
document which has been signed or executed by Sukhbir Singh who is
stated to be the alleged co-owner. It is not stated as to how Sukhbir
Singh secured title and and in what capacity he has sold the land in
question.
22.

In WP(C) 20183/04, filed by Durga Singh, it has been claimed

that the petitioner had purchased a property bearing no.B-44/5, Freedom
Fighters Colony, Neb Sarai, measuring 300 sq. yards, out of khasra no.85
on 25th November, 1991 from Shri Baljeet Singh and Shri Sukhbir Singh
for a sale consideration of Rs.80,000/-. Again the only documents of title

11

relied upon are in the nature of a General Power of Attorney, agreement
to sell, will, affidavit, possession letter, cash receipt and ration card.
None of these documents are signed or executed by Sukhbir singh who is
stated to be the alleged co-owner. All documents are unregistered and
insufficiently stamped.
23.

In WP(C) 20187/04, filed by Vijay Kumar Singh, it is alleged

that the petitioner had purchased a property bearing no.B-44/7, Freedom
Fighters Colony, Neb Sarai, measuring 200 sq. yards, out of khasra no.84
on 28th December, 1991 from Shri Baljeet Singh and Shri Sukhbir Singh
for a sale consideration of Rs.80,000/-. Photo copies of the documents
are in the nature of GPA, agreement to sell, will, affidavit, possession
letter, cash receipt and ration card have been relied upon. The documents
do not disclose as to how the sellers/executants derived ownership in the
land and are unregistered and insufficiently stamped documents.
24.

Shri Vijay Kumar Singh (who is the petitioner in WP(C)

20187/04) has claimed to have purchased 200 sq. yards of land in 1991
which is stated by him to be bearing plot no.B-44/7. It has been claimed
that he has sold his land to three other petitioners before this Court.
25.

These three petitioners are firstly, S.Narain Singh who has

filed CW 20182/04 in respect of other property bearing no.B-44/8,

12

admeasuring 122 sq. yards; secondly Smt. Sheela who has filed WP(C)
20185/04 in respect of plot no.B-44/9 purportedly measuring 139 sq.
yards and Deepender Sharma who has filed WP(C) 20186/04 in respect
of plot no.B-44/10 purportedly measuring 125 sq. yards. Thus from the
averments made by these petitioners Shri Vijay Kumar Singh who was
allegedly owner of only 200 sq. yards has sold 380 sq. yards of land to
these petitioners.

The documents of title relied upon by Shri Vijay

Kumar Singh and all the three other petitioners are in the nature of
agreement to sell, will affidavit and cash receipt which are all
insufficiently

stamped,

unregistered

documents

and

unstamped

documents without disclosure as to how the executant of the documents
derived title.
26.

In WP(C) 20184/04, the petitioner Wazir Singh is claimed to

be the owner in possession of 325 sq. yards of land which has been
numbered as B-44/12, Freedom Fighters Colony, Neb Sarai, out of
khasra no.84-85 on 21st September, 1989 from Shri Ramesh Chand for a
sale consideration of Rs.30,000/-. Photo copies of the documents are in
the nature of GPA, agreement to sell, will, affidavit, possession letter,
cash receipt and ration card have been relied upon. Again these are
insufficiently stamped unregistered documents without disclosing as to

13

how the executant derived title of the property which he was purportedly
selling.
27.

The respondents have placed on record the relevant revenue

records wherein the land has been shown to as Gaon Sabha land. A
demolition report clearly stating out that the demolition action was taken
on 2nd November, 2004 and its details have been placed before the Court.
Photographs of the land taken on 2nd November, 2004 and 24th December,
2004 show that there is no construction whatsoever on the land in
question and no person could possibly be in possession or occupation of
the same.
28.

Perusal of the documents relied upon by the petitioners show

that there is nothing on record to establish the title of the person from
whom the petitioners claim to have derived title.
29.

None of the writ petitioners have shown any document

evidencing sanctions from any of the competent authorities of any
construction on any of the plots. I find that documents in all the writ
petitions are unregistered and insufficiently stamped. Under Section
17(i)(b) of the Registration Act, 1908, no right, title or interest in
immovable property of the value of one hundred rupees and upwards can
be created only by a registered document of transfer. The documents

14

appear to be executed in a standard printed or photostat format wherein
indiscriminate particulars have been filled in. It is noteworthy that the
land in question is not lease hold land. There is no reason for not having
registered sale deeds other than lack of title in the vendor/seller.
30.

It is also settled law that such kind of unregistered and

unstamped documents cannot create any legal title or interest in the
immovable property and as such the claims of the petitioners that they
are owners in possession has to be rejected.
31.

The writ petitions contain no averments of the claimed

construction, dates, extent or nature. There is no document on record to
show any construction was effected or date on which the persons effected
any construction or its nature. No permissions or sanctions have been
placed on record. In WP(C) 20185/2004 and 20186/2004 no documents
even in the nature of alleged possession receipts, have been filed.
32.

In find force in the submissions of the respondents that there

is nothing on record to show possession at all, let alone actual, long and
settled possession of the petitioners.
33.

The site plans, filed by the petitioners do not show the

location of the property vis-a-vis Freedom fighters Colony.
34.

It is trite that a person claiming entitlement to a relief has to

15

establish a subsisting legal right and entitlement to the same. Such a
right has to be independently established. It cannot rest on the pleas or
case set up by a respondent or a defendant. In other words a trespasser
cannot say that the respondent has no right to the land and, therefore, he
is entitled to protection of his possession. A person claiming a relief in
equity has not only to establish bonafides, that he is before a court with
clean hands and, more importantly, he has a legal right to the relief. It is
also well settled that when a petitioner invokes the jurisdiction of the
High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution, it is open to the High
Court to consider, whether in the exercise of its undoubtedly
discretionary jurisdiction, it should decline relief to such petitioner as the
grant of relief would defeat the interests of justice.
35.

I have, therefore, no hesitation in holding that the petitioners

are not the owners of the claimed plots and have no legal right, title or
interest therein. The petitioners were also not in possession of the land
in question on the date when the writ petitions were filed and as such
have no legal right to the reliefs prayed for in the writ petitions.
36.

It has been authoritatively held in a catena of authoritative and

binding judicial precedents that wider public interest is liable to be borne
in mind while exercising the power of issuing a prohibitory writ and

16

granting a stay and injunction.
37.

Even if it were to be found that the petitioner had some kind

of a right, it has been held by the Apex Court that such individual right
has to give way to overriding interests of the public at large. In this
behalf, in (1997) 1 SCC 134 entitled Ramniklal N. Bhutta and another vs.
State of Maharashtra and others, the Court held thus:“10. Before parting with this case, we think it
necessary to make a few observations relevant to land
acquisition proceedings. Our country is now launched
upon an ambitious programme of all-round economic
advancement to make our economy competitive in the
world market. We are anxious to attract foreign direct
investment to the maximum attain the pace of progress
achieved by some of the Asian countries, referred to as
“Asian tigers”, e.g. Sough Korea, Taiwan and
Singapore. It is, however, recognised on all hands that
the infrastructure necessary for sustaining such a pace
of progress is woefully lacking in our country. The
means of transportation, power and communications
are in dire need of substantial improvement, expansion
and modernization. These things very often call for
acquisition of land and that too without any delay. It
is, however, natural that in most of these courts. These
things very often call for acquisition of land and that
too without any delay. It is, however, natural that in
most of these cases, the persons affected challenge the
acquisition proceedings in courts. These challenges are
generally in the shape of writ petitions filed in High
Courts. Invariably, stay of acquisition is asked for and
in some cases, orders by way of stay or injunction are
also made. Whatever may have been the practices in
the past, a time has come where the courts should keep
the larger public interest in mind while exercising their
power of granting stay/injunction. The power under
17

38.

Article 226 is discretionary. It will be exercised only
in furtherance of interests of justice and not merely on
the making out of a legal point. And in the matter of
land acquisition for public purposes, the interest of
justice and the public interest coalesce. They are very
often one and the same. Even in a civil suit, granting
of injunction or other similar orders, more particularly
of an interlocutory nature is equally discretionary. The
courts have to weigh the public interest vis-a-vis the
private interest while exercising the power under
Article 226 --- indeed any of their discretionary
powers. It may even be open to the High Court to
direct, in case it finds finally that the acquisition was
vitiated on account of non-compliance with some legal
requirement that the persons interested shall also be
entitled to a particular amount of damages to be
awarded as a lump sum or calculated at a certain
percentage of compensation payable. There are many
ways of affording appropriate relief and redressing a
wrong; quashing the acquisition proceedings is not the
only mode of redress. To wit, it is ultimately a matter
of balancing the competing interests. Beyond this, it is
neither possible nor advisable to say. We hope and
trust that these considerations will be duly borne in
mind by the courts while dealing with challenges to
acquisition proceedings.”
In the instant case, the land is required in public interest for

the establishment of an ITI by the Directorate of Training and Technical
Education, a department of the Government of NCT of Delhi.
Undoubtedly this is a salutory purpose in order to enhance the
availability of technical education to the common man. There is no
dispute that there is genuine need for such like institutions in Delhi.
Such a purpose must necessarily prevail over private interest of persons

18

who are attempting to purportedly encroach upon the land in question.
39.

The Court always is entitled to refuse the relief where the

jurisdiction of the Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
has been invoked to secure dishonest advantage or to perpetuate illegal
gains. (Re: 1984(4) SCC 371 entitled MP Mittal vs State of Haryana and
others).
40.

It has been authoritatively laid down that where quashing of

an order results in greater harm to society, then even an order which may
be contrary to law, may not be necessarily quashed. (Re: 1984(2) SCC
481 entitled State of Maharashtra vs. Prabhu; 1984(1) SCC 370 State of
Karnataka vs. Surinder Kotiankar)
41.

In 2002(8) SCC 65 entitled Union of India vs. Joginder

Sharma, it was held that the Courts cannot compel authorities to exercise
jurisdiction in a particular way. The Court shall not direct relaxation of
essential conditions when no grievance or violation of substantial rights
of parties could have been already proved.
42.

It is noteworthy that where a challenge was laid to the taking

of possession on completion of acquisition by the beneficiary of the
acquisition proceedings, in 2003(70) DRJ 721 Nagin Chand Godha vs.
Union of India and others the Division Bench of this Court held thus:-

19

“10. ............................. Suffice it so say that after
symbolic possession is taken, if the petitioner is
enjoying the possession, he is enjoying the possession
as a trustee on behalf of the public at large and that by
itself cannot be considered to be a ground to contend
that possession is not taken. It is the duty of the person
who is occupying the property to look after the
property and to see that the property is not defaced or
devalued by himself or by others.
He cannot
subsequently come to the Court to say that actual
possession is not taken and therefore he should be
protected and land be denotified.”
Therefore, the petitioners as trespassers on public land can
claim no right to protection of possession.
43.

With regard to the delays which result in execution of public

projects on account of prohibitory writs and interim orders of injunction,
it would be useful to advert to the observations of the Apex Court in a
matter wherein a challenge was laid to the grant of a tender. In the
pronouncement reported at 1999(1) SCC 492 entitled Raunaq
International Limited vs. IVR Constructions Limited and others, the
Apex Court in the context of interim orders observed thus:“18. The same considerations must weigh with the
court when interim orders are passed in such petitions.
The party at whose instance interim orders are obtained
has to be made accountable for the consequences of the
interim order. The interim order could delay the
project, jettison finely worked financial arrangements
and escalate costs. Hence the petitioner asking for
interim orders in appropriate cases should be asked to
provide security for any increase in cost as a result of
such delay or any damages suffered by the opposite
20

party in consequence of an interim order. Otherwise
public detriment may outweigh public benefit in
granting such interim orders. Stay order or injunction
order, if issued, must be moulded to provide for
restitution.”
44.

I have no manner of doubt that the same principles would

guide grant of final relief.
45.

In yet another matter at JT 1994(6) SC 585 entitled Premji

Ratansey Shah and others vs. Union of India and others expressing
anguish for the delay which ensued on account of injunctions being
granted at the instance of persons who ultimately may be held to be
without any legal right or entitlement to the same, the Court observed
thus:“4. ..................................... The question, therefore, is
whether an injunction can be issued against the true
owner. Issuance of an order of injunction is absolutely
a discretionary and equitable relief. In a given set of
facts, injunction may be given to protect the possession
of the owner or person in lawful possession. It is not
mandatory that for mere asking such relief should be
given. Injunction is a personal right under Section
41(j) of the Specific Relief Act, 1963; the plaintiff
must have personal interest in the matter. The interest
or right not shown to be in existence, cannot be
protected by injunction.
5. It is equally settled law that injunction would not be
issued against the true owner. Therefore, the Courts
below have rightly rejected the relief of declaration
and injunction in favour of the petitioners who have no
21

46.

interest in the property. Even assuming that they had
any possession, their possession is wholly unlawful
possession of a trespasser and an injunction cannot be
issued in favour of a trespasser or a person who gained
unlawful possession, as against the owner. Pretext of
dispute of identity of the land should not be an excuse
of claim injunction against true owner.”
So far as the plea of discrimination is concerned, there is no

dispute that this plea is being asserted against the statutory authorities
and the Government in respect of actions contrary to law. No person can
legally set up a plea of individuous discrination or arbitrariness merely
because some other person has committed the same violation and no
action has been taken against other persons who have committed the
same illegality. The principles in this behalf were laid down by the
Supreme Court in case JT 1995(1) SC 445 entitled Chandigarh
Administration & Anr. vs. Jagjit Singh & Anr. etc. wherein the Court
held thus:“8. We are of the opinion that the basis or the
principle, if it can be called one, on which the writ
petition has been allowed by the High Court is
unsustainable in law and indefensible in principle.
Since we have come across many such instances, we
think it necessary to deal with such pleas at a little
length. Generally speaking, the mere fact that the
respondent-authority has passed a particular order in
the case of another person similarly situated can never
be the ground for issuing a writ in favour of the
petitioner on the plea of discrimination. The order in
favour of the other person might be legal and valid or it
might not be. That has to be investigated first before it
22

can be directed to be followed in the case of the
petitioner. If the order in favour of the other person is
found to be contrary to law or not warranted in the
facts and circumstances of his case, it is obvious that
such illegal or unwarranted order cannot be made the
basis of issuing a writ compelling the respondentauthority to repeat the illegality or to pass another
unwarranted order.
The extra-ordinary and
discretionary power of the High Court cannot be
exercised for such a purpose. Mrely because the
respondent-authority has passed one illegal/
unwarranted order, it does not entitle the High Court to
compel the authority to repeat that illegality over again
and again. The illegal/unwarranted action must be
corrected, if it can be done according to law -- indeed,
wherever it is possible, the court should direct the
appropriate authority to correct such wrong orders in
accordance with law --- but even if it cannot be
corrected, it is difficult to see how it can be made a
basis for its repetition. By refusing to direct the
respondent-authority to repeat the illegality, the court
is not condoning the earlier illegal act/order nor can
such illegal order constitute the basis for a legitimate
complaint of discrimination. Giving effect to such
pleas would be prejudicial to the interests of law and
will do incalculable mischief to public interest. It will
be a negation of law and the rule of law. Of course, if
in case the order in favour of the other person is found
to be a lawful and justified one it can be followed and a
similar relief can be given to the petitioner if it is found
that the petitioners' case is similar to the other persons'
case. But then why examine another person's case in
his absence rather than examining the case of the
petitioner who is present before the court and seeking
the relief. Is it not more appropriate and convenient to
examine the entitlement of the petitioner before the
court to the relief asked for in the facts and
circumstances of his case than to enquire into the
correctness of the order made or action taken in
another person's case, which other person is not before
23

47.

the case nor is his case. In our considered opinion,
such a course--- barring exceptional situations --would neither be advisable nor desirable. In other
words, the High Court cannot ignore the law and the
well-accepted norms governing the writ jurisdiction
and say that because in one case a particular order has
been passed or a particular action has been taken, the
same must be repeated irrespective of the fact whether
such an order or action is contrary to law or otherwise.
Each case must be decided on its own merits, factual
and legal, in accordance with relevant legal principles.
The orders and actions of the authorities cannot be
equated to the judgments of the Supreme Court and
High Courts nor can they be elevated to the level of the
precedents, as understood in the judicial world. (What
is the position in the case of orders passed by
authorities in exercise of their quasi-judicial power, we
express no opinion. That can be dealt with when a
proper case arises.)”
I may also appropriately advert to the observations of the

Apex Court wherein such a plea of individuous discrimination was based
on the land acquiring authorities under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.
In (1984) 4 SCC 316 entitled Chandra Bansi Singh and others vs.
State of Bihar and others, it was held by the Court that it was not open
for such a person to assert a positive right and entitlement to relief but it
was open to such a person to seek the same action in respect of other
persons who are similarly placed.
48.

So far as issuance of writs and injunctions is concerned, I

have no manner of doubt that the same are discretionary reliefs based on
equitable considerations and similar principles would guide their grant.
24

49.

This being the position in law no relief can be permitted or

granted to the petitioners for the sole reason that their claim is steeped in
illegality; the authorities have to be required to take action to ensure
compliance with the law and to ensure that the overriding interests of the
public are protected.
50.

The other issue urged on behalf of the petitioners is based on

the plea that the colony in which the plot of the petitioners are located is
slated to be regularised under the policy of the Government. In the
instant case the petitioner has failed to show that the plots in question are
part of that colony. This fact is streneously contested on the part of the
respondents. There is no document evidencing the boundaries of the
colony or the location of the plots in the instant case. The documents
relied upon by the petitioners do not establish location of the plots.
Therefore, I am unable to hold that the plots in question are part of any
colony which is slated for regularisation.
51.

In any case, even assuming in favour of the petitioners that

such plots are located in a colony which was slated for regularisation
under a policy of the Government, it has been repeatedly held that such a
policy does not create any rights in favour of a person against statutory
and government authorities claiming ownership of the property

25

especially where the plot is required for undertaking developmental
projects in public interest. The ownership of the government may be by
virtue of statutory provisions under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 or by
virtue of devolution of land under the revenue laws. However it is
settled law that even existence of such a policy of regularisation would
not prohibit the real owner from carrying out a developmental project in
public interest.
52.

In 2002(65) DRJ 313 entitled Moolchand Gaur vs. Delhi

Development

Authority

and

others

the

Delhi

Development

Authority(DDA for short), beneficiary of acquisition of the land under
the Land Acquisition Act, became owner thereof by its vesting in the
DDA by issuance of the notification under Section 22 of the Delhi
Development Act, 1957. A submission was made that the colony where
the petitioner's property was located was slated for regularisation under
Government policy and also that the Government had a policy not to
acquire built up property as the petitioner's. It is noteworthy that the
petitioner in this case(Mool Chand Gaur) was placing reliance on the
very orders passed in CW 4771/93 which have been relied upon by the
present petitioners.
53.

Upon consideration of the submissions, the Court held as

26

under:“9. I have considered the rival submissions advanced
by the learned counsel for the parties. There is no
dispute on the factual matrix to the extent that the land
in question stood acquired and the land was handed
over to the DDA under Section 22(1) of the Act and
stood vested with respondent DDA. However, the land
in question is occupied by the occupants where an
unauthorised colony exists.
The question of
regularisation of the unauthorised colonies which form
a part of the list of 1071 unauthorised colonies is
pending consideration before the competent authority
and despite the observation of the Division Bench in
CW No.4771/1993 no final decision has been taken.
The Division Bench has noted that in case colonies are
not to be regularised then the matter should be taken to
its logical end by demolition but selected demolition
should not be done.
10. There is however, no doubt about the proposition
that the petitioner as such has no right as the land
stands acquired and vested with respondent DDA. The
continued possession of the petitioner is undoubtedly
illegal and unlawful as held by the Supreme Court in
Balmokand Khatri Educational And Industrial Trust's
case (supra).
11. Specific allegations have been made in CW
No.6424/1998 that under the garb of the interim orders
passed by this Court the petitioner is trying to encroach
upon certain open areas which stood acquired. It is
further stated that the issue of regularisation is pending
consideration which cannot give a licence to the
occupants to construct at will or encroach upon the
open areas. The respondent authorities are well within
their rights to protect the open areas whether by
construction of boundary wall or in whatever manner it
deems appropriate. This is specially so as the land
vests with the respondent authorities.”
27

54.

Based on the plea that the Government had a policy not to

acquire built up lands, acquisition was challenged in 1991(2) Delhi
Lawyer 59(DB) entitled Shri Bhagwan and another vs. Union of India
and others which was rejected by this Court.
55.

This issue had also arisen for consideration before a Division

Bench of this Court in 66(1997) DLT 482 entitled M/s Prem Chand
Ramesh Chand vs. DDA and another wherein the Court held as under:“6. The contentions that there is any policy to
regularise unauthorised colonies or there is a policy
decision not to acquire built up area, are concluded
against the petitioner by a Division Bench decision of
this Court in the case of Attar Singh vs. DDA(CW
3110 of 1991) decided on 10th August, 1992. In Attar
Singh's case also it was alleged that the petitioner had a
godown built up an area situate in village Haiderpur on
private land and no action can be taken by the
respondents against the petitioner. In that case too, the
Bench referred in the judgment to the same Award
No.50/80-81 made on 18th July, 1980. The contention
that there was a policy of Government to regularise the
unauthorised colonies and also not to acquire built up
area was rejected and it was observed that:
“It was further contended that unauthorised
colonies on Government land are sought to be
regularised. It is possible that a political
decision to this effect may be taken with regard
to some of the colonies but as far as this land is
concerned, there have been valid proceedings
for acquisition under the provisions of the
Land Acquisition Act. If there was any built
up area as on the date when Section 4
Notification was issued the claimants would be
28

entitled to receive compensation in accordance
with law. As far as the petitioner is concerned,
we do not find that the petitioner is entitled to
any compensation and in fact it is one Udai
Singh who has already received the
compensation. Be that as it may merely
because some of the colonies are going to be
regularised cannot be of any assistance t the
petitioner specially when, in the writ petition,
there is no challenge to the acquisition
proceedings. The proposal of excluding the
land from the award which was there is 1968
has apparently been given a go bye and this has
resulted in, first Notification under Section 6
being issued on 2nd January, 1969, followed by
the award in 1980.”
7. The contention in respect of the policy of leaving
out from the acquisition built up area has also been
repelled in another Division Bench decision of this
Court in Shri Bhagwan and another vs. Union of India
and others, 1991(2) Delhi Lawyer 59(DB). This
decision has been affirmed by a Full Bench of this
Court in Roshanara Begum vs. Union of India, 1996(1)
AD(Delhi) 6=61(1996) DLT 206. We may also notice
that the appeal filed against Full Bench decision has
been dismissed by the Supreme Court (see Murari and
others vs. Union of India and others, 1997(1) SCC
15=1(1997) CLT 250).
8. Apart from above, the petitioner is not entitled to
any discretionary and equitable relief for the reasons
which we would presently notice. The petitioner has
not filed any document of title on record except only a
copy of Khasra Girdhawari for 1979-80. It cannot and
has not been urged to be a document of title. This
Khasra Girdhawari only shows that there are some
godowns on the land in question. The petitioner is not
the recorded owner. The recorded owner of the land
are different persons. The petitioner has not even
29

56.

disclosed in the writ petition as to when the
structures/godowns were constructed. It has also not
been disclosed in the writ petition that in respect of
land in question Section 4 and Section 6 notifications
had been issued. It could not be disputed that the
alleged constructions were made after issue of the said
notifications. The petitioner has also not disclosed as
to whether the recorded owners filed or not objections
under Section 5-A of the Land Acquisition Act. These
material facts were suppressed and not disclosed with a
view to secure interim protection from this Court. The
demolition and dispossession could not take place
because of the interim orders and, therefore, it does
not now lie in the mouth of the petitioner to contend
that the acquisition is not complete since possession
has not been taken. We feel that the writ petitions
deserve dismissal on the short ground of suppression
of material facts.”
I may also appropriately refer to the observations of the

Division Bench of this Court in 2001(60) DRJ 16 entitled Shanti Sports
Club and another vs. Union of India and others wherein dealing with the
submission that construction had been raised by the petitioners and for
this reason the acquisition of the land deserved to quashed, the Court
held thus:“In Gyan Chand and Gopala and others, (1995) 2 SCC
528, the Supreme Court held that any encumbrances
created by the owner of the land after the notification
under Section 4(1) is published does not bind the
Government. The agreement of sale, if any, would be
frustrated. Again in Yadu Nandan Garg Vs. State of
Rajasthan and others JT 1995(8) SC 179, it was held
that the purchase of the land after issuance of a
notification under Section 4(1) of th Act was not
lawful and did not clothe the purchaser with any colour
30

of title as against the State. It was also observed that by
operation of Section 16 of the Act all encumbrances
stand extinguished and the purchaser gets no title to
the acquired land. In this view of the matter, the court
found the sale to be void under Section 23 of the Act.
This view was followed by the Supreme Court in The
Secretary, Jaipur Development Authority, Jaipur vs.
Daulat Mal Jain etc. 1996(7) SCALE 135. Again
Jaipur Development Authority vs. Mahavir Housing
Coop. Society, Jaipur and others, (1996) 11 SCC 229,
it was held that the purchaser who buys the land after
issuance of a notification under Section 4 of the Act
cannot have a higher right than the original owner
himself had and he cannot set up any title to the
property on the basis of sale deeds. He is only entitled
to compensation obviously by getting into the shes of
the original land owner.
While we are dealing with the second reason on which
the impugned decision is grounded, we may note the
further submission advanced on behalf of the
petitioners in their attempt to demolish the same and to
seek our intervention on equitable grounds. The
learned senior counsel for the petitioners submitted
that the petitioners have developed the sports complex
at a huge cost. According to him the sports complex
has all the modern facilities for the sports person and
in case the same is demolished it will not be in the
national interest.
The Full Bench in Roshanara Begum vs. Union of
India and others, AIR 1996 Delhi 206 : 1996(36) DRJ
34(FB), while upholding acquisition took note of the
construction raised by the petitioners. The Full Bench
found that the construction was raised obviously with
complete knowledge of the fact that this land was
liable to be acquired for public purpose. Even the
Supreme Court in Murari vs. Union of India(supra) has
observed that where large tracts of land measuring
thousands of acres have been acquired, it would not be
31

proper to leave out some areas here and there over
which some structures are said to have been
constructed. While making these observations, the
Supreme Court relied upon its earlier decision in State
of Uttar Pradesh vs. Pista Devi (1986) 4 SCC 251, in
which it was held that when large chunks of land are
acquired for planned development of the urban area, it
would not be proper to leave small portions of the land,
out of the development scheme, over which some
structures have been constructed. The Supreme Court
in Murari's case(supra), however, left the question of
release of land from acquisition to the discretion of the
Appropriate Authority in view of the statement of the
counsel for the Government that it will consider each
of the structures and take a decision in respect thereof.
In consonance with the statement of the learned
counsel appearing for the Government in that case, the
representation of the petitioners was considered but
their request to denotify the land was not accepted.
Since the impugned order is, inter alia, based on the
consideration that the land is needed for Vasant Kunj
Housing Project no interference is called for by this
Court. Taking cue from the aforesaid decisions it also
appears to us that the petitioners cannot claim any
equity on th ground of having raised the constructions
on the land in question. The construction was raised at
their own risk and peril. In case the argument of the
petitioners is accepted it would amount to encouraging
unauthorised construction and conferring legitimacy to
brazen illegalities.”
57.

So far as constructions on acquired property is concerned the

Court noticed thus:“In Nirmalendu Dev Nath and others vs. Union of
India and others, 75(1998) DLT 765 : 1999(48) DRJ
147, it was urged that in view of the policy decision of
the Government built up area cannot be acquired. The
contention raised was rejected in view of the several
32

decisions of this Court. In this regard it was held as
follows:“Mr.Saini contended that the Government
in view of its policy decision cannot acquire
built up area and, therefore, the acquisition
proceedings must be quashed.
The
contention of the learned counsel is not well
founded. The power to acquire land is to be
exercised in the manner laid down by the
Act. The power is statutory power which is
required to be exercised in public interest.
If the land is needed for a public purpose
the mere fact that there is a policy of the
Government not to acquire built up area
cannot come in the way of acquisition. If it
was otherwise, the public authorities will
not be able to acquire built up areas to
decongest the localities and to provide civic
amenities including sanitation, parks,
amusement centres, etc. which are essential
for healthy living.
Reliance was placed by the
Bench on the decisions rendered in M/s
Prem Chand Ramesh Chand vs. Delhi
Development Authority and another
66(1977) DLT 482(DB), a Division Bench
of this Court relying on Attar Singh vs.
DDA(CWP No.3110 of 1991, decided on
August 10, 1992); Shri Bhagwan and
another vs. Union of India and others,
1991(2) Delhi Lawyer 59(DB), and
Roshanara Begum vs. Union of India,
1996(1) AD(Delhi) 6 : 1996(36) DRJ
34(FB): 61(1996) DLT 206.
58.

The last noticed decision in Shanti Sports Club(supra) is the

subject matter of a challenge before the Apex Court.
33

59.

I am bound by the authoritative pronouncements on this issue.

It is settled law that mere existence of a policy does not create any vested
right in a person entitling him to the protection by way of discretionary
and equitable relief of issuance of a writ or injunction in his favour as a
final relief.
60.

So far as FIR No.663/2004 and WP(C) No.7193/99 are

concerned, no copy thereof has been placed before this Court. Legal
action and proceedings shall follow in due course. No particulars or
details are forthcoming on the records of the cases before me.
61.

For all the foregoing reasons I find no merit in the writ

petitions which are hereby rejected.

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
October 19th, 2005
JK

34

