IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
IA No. 4385/2007 in CIVIL SUIT (OS)
NO.2115/1999
Judgmen t reserved on : 12th July,
2007
Date of decision : July 19,
2007
Shri Ravinder Pal Singh
...
Plaintiff
through: Mr. Vijay Gupta,
Ms. Geeta Goel and Mr. Jaladhar Das,
Advocates
VERSUS
Shri Surender Pal Singh
through: Nemo.

.... Defendants

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1.
2.
3.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the Judgment?
Yes
To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
Whether the judgment should be reported in
the Digest?
Yes

GITA MITTAL, J.
IA No. 4385/2006
1.
By this judgment, I propose to dispose of an application filed
by the plaintiff under Section 94 and 151 of the Code of Civil
Procedure praying for interim directions to the defendant to deposit
arrears of mesne profits/damages for use and occupation of the
plaintiff's property. In the alternative, the plaintiff prays for the
appointment of a receiver in respect of the suit property bearing no.
15, Babar Road, Bengali Market, New Delhi -110001.
I.A.No.4285/2007 in CS(OS) No. 2115/1999

page 1 of 19

2.

The application filed by the plaintiff in his suit for partition,

possession, rendition of accounts and prohibitory and mandatory
injunction was first listed as back as on 21st April, 2006 but has not
been disposed of for one reason or another till date. The matter was
passed over three times on 12th July, 2007 but the defendant failed to
put in appearance. Consequently the application was heard and this
court is proceeding to judgment.
3.

There is no material dispute to some of the essential facts. To

the extent necessary for adjudication of the present case, the same
are briefly noticed hereafter
(i)

The plaintiff Shri Ravindra Pal Singh and the defendant Shri

Surendra Pal Singh are real brothers, both being sons of late Shri
Mahender Pal Singh.
(ii)

Shri Mahendra Pal Singh was the owner of the perpetual

leasehold rights and the property built on the plot bearing no. 15,
Babar Road, New Delhi-110001 and certain other moveable
properties.
(iii) Late Shri Mahendra Pal Singh executed his last Will and
testament dated 16th May, 1970;
(iv)

The parties to the present suit filed a probate case bearing no.

153/1994 (later given transfer case no. 622/1993) seeking probate of
the Will and testament dated 16th May, 1970 of their father late Shri
Mahendra Pal Singh in respect of his estate in the court of the

I.A.No.4285/2007 in CS(OS) No. 2115/1999

page 2 of 19

District Judge, Delhi. The parties were granted probate of this Will
and certificate of probate was issued on 17th February, 1996 by the
court of the learned Additional District Judge. As per the probate
granted to the parties, they were appointed joint executors of the
Will of their deceased father and for the proper administration of the
deceased's property.
4.

The parties are at variance as to the events which have

occurred thereafter. According to the plaintiff, with his family, he
has lived in the suit property 15, Babar Road, New Delhi for a period
of five after the death of his father. He later shifted to Ghaziabad on
account of insufficiency of accommodation in the suit property for
his family and quarrels between the family members of the parties.
At the time of leaving, he had locked two rooms in the
accommodation in his possession which have been shown in red
colour in the plan filed by the plaintiff. The plaintiff has submitted
that he continued to visit and stay casually in the property under his
occupation as he was working in Delhi. All efforts made by the
plaintiff to enquire about the progress of the execution of the
testamentary bequests were avoided by the defendant.

The

defendant also refused to partition the suit property or to hand over
vacant possession of the half share of the plaintiff in terms of their
father's Will despite requests of the plaintiff.

The defendant

obstructed the plaintiff's entry into the suit property on 15th July,

I.A.No.4285/2007 in CS(OS) No. 2115/1999

page 3 of 19

1997 and threatened him with dire consequences if the plaintiff
insisted on his share of the property. The plaintiff contends that on
10th February, 1998, he received the threat from the defendant that
the plaintiff would not get a single penny and that the property
would be demolished and a commercial multi-storey building would
be raised by the defendant thereon. In these circumstances, the
plaintiff filed the present suit seeking a prohibitory injunction
against the defendant from dispossessing the plaintiff from the
rooms shown in red colour which are stated to be in his possession
and from transferring, alienating or demolishing the suit property in
any manner. The plaintiff has also sought a mandatory injunction to
enter and reside in the portion of the property shown in red colour
apart from a decree for partition and possession of his half share of
the property. There is also a prayer for mesne profits in the plaint.
5.

In his written statement, the defendant set up a plea that he

was the tenant under late Shri Mahendra Pal Singh in respect of the
entire suit property till his death.
So far as possession is concerned, the defendant has claimed
that “however, the defendant remains tenant in respect of half of the
property”. On these pleas, the defendant has sought to perpetuate
his occupation of the suit property urging that he is in possession of
half portion as owner and half portion as a tenant.
The defendant has however unequivocally made the following

I.A.No.4285/2007 in CS(OS) No. 2115/1999

page 4 of 19

admissions in his written statements :-

6.

“Late Shri Mahendra Pal Singh had executed a will in
favour of the plaintiff and the defendant, probate of
which has already been granted by the learned
competent court. Thus, the defendant has become
owner of half of the suit property after the death of his
father.”
In support of the plea of tenancy, the defendant has filed

photocopy of receipts dated 4th August, 1955, 3rd February, 1956, 10th
November, 1964, 13th December, 1964, 12th February, 1965 and 6th
September, 1975 on record. It is however an admitted position that
apart from these receipts purportedly issued by Shir Mahendra Pal
Singh, there is no an iota of evidence to show that the defendant has
made payment of any amount as rent to either late Shri Mahendra
Pal Singh or any other person.
7.

In order to examine the claim of the plaintiff towards the

mesne profits which have been claimed in the present suit, it
becomes necessary to notice some of the documents which have
been filed by the defendant. The defendant has placed reliance on a
letter dated 14th February, 1958 issued by the Ministry of Commerce
and Industry of the Government of India to the Accountant General,
Central Revenue, New Delhi which is in respect of house rent
allowance to Shri S.P. Singh, Section Officer in the Ministry. This
letter notifies the Accountant General of the scale of accommodation
which was purportedly occupied by Shri S.P. Singh, Section Officer
in quarter no. 15, Babar Road, New Delhi with effect from 1 st March,

I.A.No.4285/2007 in CS(OS) No. 2115/1999

page 5 of 19

1957. The accommodation which was stated to be occupied by him
consisted of only "three bed rooms, one servant room, one store
room kitchen, bath and front courtyard" at a "monthly rental of
Rs.70/-" Apart from the fact that this document does not evidence
any tenancy between the defendant and deceased Shir Mahendra Pal
Singh, it is noteworthy that the rate of rental mentioned therein is
Rs.70/- More importantly, this letter also specifically notices that
the defendant was not in occupation of the entire suit property but of
only a portion thereof. This is evidenced from the site plan which has
been placed on record by the plaintiff.
8.

Interestingly, while the letter dated 14th February, 1958

mentions rental @ Rs.70/- the photocopy of the receipts dated 4th
August, 1955 and 3rd February, which are claimed to have been
executed by late Shri Mahendra Pal Singh, reflect a sum of Rs.50/as having been received from Mr. S.P. Singh as house rent. Against
this, the defendant has placed reliance on photocopies of four
documents dated 10th November, 1964, 13th December, 1964, 12th
February, 1965 and 19th March, 1965 which reflect receipt of Rs.70/from Shri S.P. Singh by Shir Mahinder Pal Singh.
The written statement neither mentions any date on which the
tenancy began nor the dates on which there was variation in the rent
which the defendant claims to have paid to late Shri Mahendra Pal
Singh.

I.A.No.4285/2007 in CS(OS) No. 2115/1999

page 6 of 19

9.

In any case, whether the rate of rent was Rs.50/- or Rs.70/- as

claimed by the defendant, substantial doubt is cast thereon from a
document dated 5th November, 1974 has been filed on record
purporting to be a letter from late Shri Mahendra Pal Singh to the
Income-Tax Officer. This letter appears to have been filed for the
purposes of supporting the defendant's contention that late Shri
Mahendra Pal Singh was receiving rent from him. If, this letter is
examined, it reflects the income of late Shri Mahendra Pal Singh
from house property for the entire financial year 1973-74 as being
only Rs.301.91. Based on the rentals set up by the defendant, this is
certainly not equivalent to the annual rent claimed to have been paid
by the defendant to the deceased.
10.

The defendant has set up a plea in the written statement that

the entire suit property was under its tenancy and that he has been a
tenant under the original owner late Shri Mahendra Pal Singh in
respect of the entire suit property. On the other hand, the plaintiff
has claimed that a portion of the premises is under his lock and key.
Again, it becomes necessary to refer to document which has been
filed by the defendant on record.
11.

It appears that one Dr. Narinder Pal Singh, another son of late

Shri Mahendra Pal Singh had filed a suit for declaration and
permanent injunction entitled Dr. Narinder Pal Singh Vs. Shri
Surendra Pal Singh (defendant herein), Shri Ravindra Pal Singh

I.A.No.4285/2007 in CS(OS) No. 2115/1999

page 7 of 19

(plaintiff herein) and three others seeking a decree for declaration
and permanent injunction in claiming entitlement to one-fifth share
in the property no. 15, Babar Road, Bengali Market, New Delhi. Shri
Ravindra Pal Singh was arrayed as defendant no. 2 while Shri
Surendra Pal Singh was arrayed as defendant no. 1 in this case. In
this suit, Dr. Narinder Pal Singh had challenged the Will dated 16th
May, 1970 set up by the parties to the present suit. This suit was
listed before Shri Gurdeep Kumar, Sub-Judge, 1st Class, Delhi. Shri
Surendra Pal Singh, the present defendant, Shri Ravindra Pal Singh,
plaintiff, their brother Shri Rajinder Pal Singh and sister Smt. Shanti
Devi as defendant nos. 1, 2 and 5 respectively had filed a joint
written statement dated 28th January, 1984. The defendant has filed
the pleadings in this case on the record of the present case. The
averments made by the parties to the present suit in para 3 and a
part of para 4 of the written statement which have a bearing on the
questions raised in the present application, deserve to be considered
in extenso and read thus :
“3. That para no. 3 of the plaint is absolutely
wrong and is denied emphatically. It may be
submitted that by virtue of the Will dated 16.5.1970,
the property of the late Thakur Mahender Pal Singh
came in the hands of the defendant no. 1 and 2 and
that no other person, except defendant no. 1 and 2,
have any right, title or interest in the property. It is
wrong and denied emphatically that the other
defendants and the plaintiff are the co-owners of the
property. The plaintiff has no locus-standi in the
matter and has no rights, title or interest thereon.
The defendants no. 1 and 2 are in exclusive
I.A.No.4285/2007 in CS(OS) No. 2115/1999

page 8 of 19

possession of the property under reference in their
own rights as owners to the exclusion of any other
person, including the plaintiff. Rest of the para is
wrong and denied emphatically.
4.
.....It may also be submitted that the property
under reference has been under the occupation and
possession or answering defendant no. 1 for more
than 2 decades and this fact is fully supported by the
Government of India in the Ministry of Commerce &
Industry. Letter No. 2-E-II(i)/58 dated the 14th
February, 1958 recognising occupation of the
answering defendant no. 1.”
(Emphasis added)
From the above, the only inescapable conclusion is that,
though the present defendant had been claiming occupation and
possession of the property for more than two decades, however, as
on the date of filing of the written statement on 28 th January, 1984,
Shri Surendra Pal Singh, who was defendant no. 1 and Shri Ravindra
Pal Singh, who was defendant no. 2 in that suit, were in exclusive
possession of the suit property in their own rights as owners to the
exclusion of any other person.
Thus, prima facie the defendant's plea that he was a tenant
under the original owner in respect of the entire suit property is not
borne out from the documents which have been filed by him.
12.

It is an admitted position that despite this position, he has

been prevented from use and occupation of even the portion of
which he claims to be in possession. The present defendant has
admitted the possession of the defendant in his written statement
filed in 1984. The manner in which the defendant has proceeded
with the litigation clearly shows his intention of only perpetuating
I.A.No.4285/2007 in CS(OS) No. 2115/1999

page 9 of 19

his occupation of the entire suit property to the prejudice of the
plaintiff.
13.

In the present proceedings, by a judgment and decree dated

28th January, 2003, this court had decreed the relief of partition and
possession sought by the plaintiff. The defendant appears to have
assailed this judgment and decree by way of RFA(OS) No. 17/2003.
In the proceedings dated 22nd April, 2003, the counsel for the
appellant Shri Surender Pal Singh (defendant herein) had stated that
the "suit property was joint between the parties and he has no
objection in partitioning it by appropriate method.”

In these

circumstances, by an order dated 16th July, 2003, passed by the
Division Bench, a local commissioner was appointed to suggest
mode of partition of the property. The local commissioner submitted
a report dated 22nd October, 2003 before the Division Bench and a
report dated 15th December, 2003 suggesting modes of partition.
The defendant however filed objections to the report.

The

proceedings conducted before the local commissioner as well as the
report and the objections have been placed before this court by the
present plaintiff. The judgment and decree was set aside by the
Division Bench by an order dated 8th August, 2005. The matter is
since then pending in this court. Having regard to the nature of the
suit, in these proceedings the parties had also been directed to
explore the possibility of dispute redresssal by mediation in view of

I.A.No.4285/2007 in CS(OS) No. 2115/1999

page 10 of 19

the admitted position. However, mediation efforts have also failed.
14.

From the above, it is apparent it has never been the

defendant's case that he was ever in exclusive possession of the
entire suit property.

This is evidenced by the letter dated 14th

February, 1958 issued by the Government of India as well as the
written statement dated 28th January, 1984. The circumstances on
record prima facie tend to support the plaintiff's case that the rent
receipts relied upon by the defendant were for the purposes of house
rent allowance which the defendant may have drawn from the
government. The isolated documents relied upon by the defendant
are only photocopies of six receipts. These receipts are not in
seriatum and are for different periods spread over 20 years.
None of these receipts sets out the portion occupied by the
defendant.

The

rate

of

rent

claimed

commensurate either with the letter dated
of the Government of
made

therein

is

not

14th February, 1958

India or with the claim purportedly

by late Shri Mahendra Pal Singh before the income tax

authorities. The last receipt relied upon by the defendant is dated
September, 1975.

Late Shri Mahendra Pal Singh, father of the

parties and erstwhile owner of the suit property died on 15th May,
1978. His last Will and testament dated 16th of May, 1970 does not
mention a tenancy of the defendant.
15.

Even assuming that the defendant's plea was to be accepted

I.A.No.4285/2007 in CS(OS) No. 2115/1999

page 11 of 19

that he was a tenant under late Shri Mahendra Pal Singh of any
portion of the property, the admitted position that he has not been
able to place on record any evidence to show payment of rent month
by month for the entire period to late Shri Mahendra Pal Singh or
after his death to any person. The defendant does not even set up a
plea as to under whom he is claiming tenancy at the time of filing the
written statement or after the death of the father on 15th May, 1978.
Even assuming that the plea of the defendant that he was a tenant
under his father was accepted, then at best it would be that the
defendant had become the owner after the father's demise of the
portion of the property which was occupied by him as a tenant.
However in the light of the clear admission made by him in the
written statement dated 28th January, 1984 which has been filed by
him on record, there can be no manner of doubt that the plaintiff
was also occupying the suit property and appears to have been
prevented access thereto by the defendant.
16.

The right of the plaintiff to the suit property and his title

therein has been repeatedly admitted by the defendant in its
pleadings as well as in the statements made on his behalf. He is
being prevented from access to the suit property and the defendant
has claimed a plea of occupation of the entire property. Certainly, he
cannot be permitted to use, occupy and enjoy the suit property
without making payment in respect of the portion in which he has no

I.A.No.4285/2007 in CS(OS) No. 2115/1999

page 12 of 19

right, title or interest. Even in the reply filed by the defendant to the
present application, he states that he is in possession, control and
enjoyment of the entire suit property as a tenant.

In this reply filed

by the defendant in the year 2007, for the first time, he has set up an
even more vague plea that he was inducted as a tenant in the year
1956-57.

It is trite that such vague pleas unsupported by any

particular or documentation do not deserve any credence. In any
case, the defendant cannot even be permitted to set up any plea
other than the case set up by him in the written statement.
17.

The defendant in its reply has also stated that the valuation of

half share of the property of the plaintiff is Rs.1 crore and that at
present the same would be Rs.1.5 crores.

He submits that the

plaintiff would be entitled to half of the rent which was being paid by
the defendant to his father. There is nothing on record to show what
was the rent, if at all, which was being paid by the defendant to his
father on 15th May, 1978 when the father died, even assuming that
the plea of tenancy of the defendant was to be accepted. As noticed
above there is nothing on record to prima facie establish or show
that the defendant was a tenant of the entire property. In the light of
the admissions made by the defendant in para 9 of the reply,
certainly it has to be held that the prayer of the plaintiff to the extent
that he is entitled to an amount of mesne profits in respect of 50% of
the suit property has to be granted.

I.A.No.4285/2007 in CS(OS) No. 2115/1999

page 13 of 19

18.

The question then comes as to what would be a fair assessment

of mesne profits of the share of the plaintiff. Based on the valuation
of the 50% of the suit property being Rs. 1 crore, the plaintiff has
claimed an amount equivalent to 12% of this valuation towards the
mesne profits that is an amount of Rs.1 lakh per month with effect
from 1st March, 1995 that is three years proceeding the filing of the
suit in this court. On this basis, for the period from 1st March, 1995
to 31st March, 1996, the plaintiff has prayed for deposit of Rs.1 crore
33 lakh and a similar order for the defendant to pay the amount
month by month in future.
In its reply the defendant has submitted that the order if made
on the terms demanded by the plaintiff would not be in the interest
of justice.
19.

On a consideration of the matter, even though the defendant

has not disputed the manner in which the mesne profits have been
calculated by the plaintiff, I am also not inclined to direct payment of
mesne profits at the claimed rate to the defendant. However it is to
be noticed that the suit property is located in the Bengali Market
area and has been constructed on a plot of land ad measuring 289
square yards. Judicial notice can be taken of the fact that rentals in
Delhi are spiralling upwards.
20.

In a Division Bench pronouncement rendered on 31st May,

2005 in RFA No. 441/2000 in M/s The National Radio & Electronic

I.A.No.4285/2007 in CS(OS) No. 2115/1999

page 14 of 19

Co. Ltd. Vs. Motion Pictures Association, this court held thus :"34. Judicial notice is taken of only such facts of
which there can be only one view. In the light of the
aforestated position in law, there can be no manner
of doubt that so far as the increase of rent is
concerned, judicial notice can be taken of a fact that
over a certain period rents generally have arisen.
However, so far as quantification of the rate at which
the increase has actually taken place, a finding can be
arrived at only on the basis of legal evidence and
material establishing the actual rates at which
properties have been let over the period and
comparison of such properties with the property
which is the subject matter of the lis. Rents may vary
based on location of properties, nature of
construction, period of construction, purpose/user
for which the premises are let, variation between
demand for tenanted premises and availability of
premises and even factors relating to the position of
the economy. Therefore, while a learned trial judge
may be justified in taking judicial notice of the fact
that rents have risen over a certain period of time in
the area in question, it would be incumbent upon a
person laying a claim of entitlement to mesne profits
to prove the same by cogent and reliable evidence in
accordance with law.
As has been noticed in the judicial
pronouncements noticed here-in-above, the evidence
may include documentary evidence relating to
tenancies of properties in the area which can be
summoned from the office of the sub-Registrar or by
examination of property dealers, oral testimony of
the parties to the litigation and persons in the trade
of real estate, other property owners.
35. The defendant/tenant is entitled to know not
only the landlord's claim but also the extent to which
the same stands established. The defendant has a
legal right to an opportunity to prove the contrary."
21.

This court has been called upon to examine the prayer for

grant of mesne profit at an interim stage. Certainly, the parties
would have an opportunity to lead evidence on this issue in the light
I.A.No.4285/2007 in CS(OS) No. 2115/1999

page 15 of 19

of the settled provisions of law. But interest of justice and equity
mandate that a person though admittedly an owner, cannot be
deprived of benefits of a property as in the instant case, more so, in
facts of the present case noticed above. The plaintiff has indicated

the value of the property and prayed that this court make an order of
mesne profits equivalent to a percentage thereof. The defendant has
stated that fifty percent of the rental which was being paid by him be
given to the plaintiff.
22.

Mesne profits are the award in favour of a person who is

wrongfully deprived of use and occupation of his property. Mesne
profits have normally been equated to the market rate of rental
which such property would fetch in the open market on the date of
consideration of the issue. In the absence of information of the
prevalent market rate of rent, the formula and basis for fair
assessment of rental may be drawn from the methodology for
fixation of standard rent under the provisions of the Delhi Rent
Control Act, 1958. As per this statute, in respect of the properties to
which this Act applies, the standard rent of the property to which
this statute applies is equivalent to 10% per annum of the aggregate
amount of the actual cost of construction and the market price of the
land comprised in the premises on the date of commencement of the
construction.

I.A.No.4285/2007 in CS(OS) No. 2115/1999

page 16 of 19

23.

Today the rate of land is notified by the authorities in what are

termed as circle rates.

The Land and Development Office also

notifies rates for its properties. Land rates are to be found specified

by several land owning authorities as the Land & Development
Office, Delhi Development Authority etc. for the purposes of
permitting conversion of properties from lease hold to free hold.
Cost of construction is also to be found in CPWD notified rates and
for property tax purposes in Nabhi's publication for the purpose.
Land rates of adjacent colonies would provide a reasonable
indication of the land rates in Bengali Market. From the foregoing, it
would appear that the cost of construction in this area would not be
less than Rs.500/- per sq. foot and the land rate would in any case
be not less than Rs.18,000/- per sq. yards.
Bengali Market is bounded by Connaught Place on one side
and is in close proximity to major roads going to other areas. There
is undisputedly tremendous demand for property in this area.
Taking all factors into consideration and calculating on a
conservative basis, the suit property which measures 289 sq. yards
would not be valued at less than Rupees Two Crores. Its rental
would not be less than Rs.60,000/- per month. Therefore, assessed
at this rate, the defendant would be liable to pay mesne profits
equivalent to 50% of this rental which would be a sum of

I.A.No.4285/2007 in CS(OS) No. 2115/1999

page 17 of 19

Rs.30,000/- per month.
24.

I am not inclined to accept the prayers of the plaintiff for an

order directing the defendant to pay mesne profits for a period of
three years before the filing of the suit. Such an order would be
considered at the time of final decree in the suit.
25.

Accordingly, the defendant is directed to pay mesne profits for

use and occupation of the plaintiff's half share of the suit property at
the rate of Rs.30,000/- per month for the period commencing on
18th April, 2006 when the present application was filed.
The plaintiff shall file an undertaking in this court within seven
days from the passing of the order that in the event of ultimately
there being finding in favour of the defendant on the pleas taken by
the defendant, the plaintiff shall effect restitution of the amount
which he has received from the defendant under the orders passed
today.
Subject to the filing of this undertaking, the defendant shall
pay arrears on this basis within a period of four weeks from today.
The month by month mesne profits on this basis shall be paid by the
defendant to the plaintiff by a cheque/demand draft in the name of
the plaintiff on or before the 7th day of each English calender month.
26.

It is made clear that the present order is passed on a prima

facie view of the matter subject to final adjudication in the suit.

I.A.No.4285/2007 in CS(OS) No. 2115/1999

page 18 of 19

Needless to say, the amounts paid by the defendant to the
plaintiff

under

this

order

shall

be

subject

to

orders

of

adjustment/restitution at the time of passing of judgment in the suit.

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
July 19, 2007
kr

I.A.No.4285/2007 in CS(OS) No. 2115/1999

page 19 of 19

