IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
CCPO No.130/2005 in OMP No.361/2004
Reserved on 13th September, 2006
Date of decision: 19th October, 2006

GOYAL MG GASES PVT. LIMITED
... Petitioner
through: Mr. Sandeep Sethi, Sr. Adv. with
Mr. Pawan Sharma, Adv. , Mr. Sandeep
Mahapatra, Adv. & Mr. Harpreet S. Popli,
Adv.
VERSUS

AIR LIQUIDE DEUTSCHLAND GMBH & ORS. ... Respondents
through: Mr. Prag Tripathi, Sr. Adv. with
Mr. Atul Y. Chitale, Adv.,
Ms.Suchitra A. Chitale, Adv.,
Ms. Sujeeta Srivastava, Adv.,
Mr. Madhup Singhal, Adv. for
Respondent No.2.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?Yes
1.

CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.1

GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

The petitioner M/s Goyal MG Gases Pvt. Limited has filed the present petition

under Sections 11 & 12 of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 read with Article 215 of
the Constitution of India praying for initiation for contempt of court allegedly
committed by the respondents. In order to appreciate the respective contentions, it
becomes necessary to consider the factual matrix briefly.
2.

According to the petitioner company, which was controlled by the “Goyal

Group”, it was approached by M/s Air Liquide Deutschland GmbH and various other
foreign parties who were looking at the prospects of entering the Indian market. A
Share Purchase & Cooperation Agreement (referred to as the SPC hereafter) was
entered into between the petitioner and the M/s Air Liquide Deutschland GmbH
(respondent no.1 hereafter) on the 12th of May, 1995, which was amended in November,
1996, as a result of which, 51% holding of the petitioner company remained with the
Goyal Group while 49% shareholding went to respondent no.1.

Clause 9 of the

agreement which is material deserves to be considered in extenso and reads thus:“9. GGL and all Goyal Group companies will cooperate in the
Indian market with right to first refusal basis with MGG and will
not for the duration of this cooperation support in any way –
directly or indirectly – the activities of MGG's competitors with
regard to gas business. MGG will give written information to GGL
about every business opportunity it plans to take in the Indian
market in regard to industrial gases and related business and GGL
may decide if it wants to participate in it (right of first refusal). In
CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.2

case GGL does not within a period of two months after receiving
MGG's notice declare in writing that it is willing and able to
participate in the planned business, MGG is free to proceed with
the business on its own.
However, MGG will give due
consideration to the interest of GGL being its group company.
Such new business which MGG undertakes should be business of
gas supply to few major dedicated customers only and not to
general market supply.”
3.

The purport of this non-competition clause was that the Goyal Group or the MGG

Group would not enter into any business of gas in India without offering opportunity to
participate to the other Group and was aimed at preventing competition between the two
groups as well as association of any other competitors with the two groups in the
business of gas supply without affording the group associate, the right of first refusal,
which was incorporated in clause 9 of the agreement.
4.

According to the petitioner, M/s Air Liquide S.A. (respondent no.2 herein) is the

holding company while Air Liquide Deutschland GmbH (respondent no.1), Air Liquide
India Holding Pvt. Ltd. (respondent no.3 herein), Air Liquide International (respondent
no.4 herein) are all subsidiaries of Air Liquide S.A. (the respondent no.2). The Goyal
Group initially alleged that respondent no.1-Air Liquide Deutschland GmbH by
endeavouring to transfer its shareholding to Air Liquide S.A (respondent no.2 the
holding company) without first offering it to the Goyal Group, is not only violating the
SPC agreement and its Articles of Association, but is also indirectly bringing
petitioner's competitors into the petitioner company.

CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

It was alleged that another

Page No.3

subsidiary of respondent no.2 namely the Air Liquide India Holding Pvt. Ltd. is in
competition with the petitioner and the respondent no.1 by transferring its share to
respondent no.2, was bringing the nominees of respondent nos.2 & 3 on the board of
directors of the petitioner's company.
5.

The petitioner contended that the respondent no.3 was a rival of the petitioner and

respondent nos.1 & 2 had put themselves in a position in which they had interest in
respondent no.3 which was in breach of the letter and spirit of the agreement between
the parties.
6.

According to the respondent no.2 before this court, the petitioner on these

allegations had caused a Civil Suit (OS) No.582/2004 to be filed by Mrs. Ritu
Aggarwal, daughter of Mr. Suresh Goyal of the Goyal Group. A share transfer by the
respondents was injuncted by an ex parte order dated 25th May, 2004 passed in this suit.
7.

In the meantime, in September, 2004, tenders were floated by the Steel Authority

of India Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as `SAIL') in a meeting held on 10 th September,
2004 between the Steel Authority of India Ltd. & the suppliers of industrial gases in
India.

The petitioner company as well as Air Liquide India Holding Pvt. Ltd.

(respondent no.3) were found to be bidders.

The petitioner, consequently, on

allegations that the business interest of the three respondents are common and they are
acting against the interest of the petitioner as well as in breach of the non-competition
clause between the petitioner and the respondent no.1, filed a petition under Section 9
CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.4

of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 in this court which was registered as OMP
No.361/2004.
8.

This petition was disposed of by this court by a judgment dated 31 st January,

2005. The present petition has been filed on allegations that the respondents have
violated the specific order passed by the court on 31st January, 2005.
9.

While OMP No.361/2004 was filed only against three respondents, the present

petition has been filed on or around the 25th November, 2005 arraying the following
parties as respondents:1.

Air Liquide Deutschland GmbH
Having its Principal office at
D-47793 Krefeld, Germany

2.

Air Liquide S.A.
75, Quai d' Orsay
75321, Paris, Cedex-07, France

3.

Air Liquide India Holding Pvt. Limited
25, C-Commu8nity Centre, Janak Puri,
New Delhi.

4.

Air Liquide International
75, Quai d' Orsay
75321, Paris, Cedex-07
France

5.

Markus They Thing
Chairman of Management
Air Liquide Deutschland GmbH
Having its Principal office at
D-47793 Krefeld, Germany

Not a party in OMP 361/2004

6.

Benoit Potier
Executive Committee Members
Air Liquide S.A.,Quai d' Orsay
75321, Paris, Cedex-07, France.

Not a party in OMP 361/2004

7.

Jean-Claude Buono
Executive Committee Members
Air Liquide S.A., Quai d' Orsay

Not a party in OMP 361/2004

CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Respondent no.1 in OMP No.361/2004

Respondent no.2 in OMP No.361/2004

Respondent no.3 in OMP No.361/2004

Not a party in OMP 361/2004

Page No.5

75321, Paris, Cedex-07, France.
8.

Klaus-Jurgen Schmieder
Executive Committee Members
Air Liquide S.A., Quai d' Orsay
75321, Paris, Cedex-07, France.

Not a party in OMP 361/2004

9.

Pierre Dufour
Executive Committee
Air Liquide S.A., Quai d' Orsay
75321, Paris, Cedex-07, France.

Not a party in OMP 361/2004

10.

Jean-Marc de Royere
Executive Committee Members
Air Liquide S.A., Quai d' Orsay
75321, Paris, Cedex-07, France.

Not a party in OMP 361/2004

11.

John Glen
Executive Committee Members of
Air Liquide S.A., Quai d' Orsay
75321, Paris, Cedex-07, France.

Not a party in OMP 361/2004

12.

Jean Pierre Duprieu
Executive Committee Members
Air Liquide S.A., Quai d' Orsay
75321, Paris, Cedex-07, France.

Not a party in OMP 361/2004

13.

Francois Darchis
Executive Committee Members
Air Liquide S.A., 75, Quai d' Orsay
75321, Paris, Cedex-07, France

Not a party in OMP 361/2004

14.

Ron Labarre
Executive Committee Members
Air Liquide S.A., 75, Quai d' Orsay
75321, Paris, Cedex-07, France

Not a party in OMP 361/2004

15.

Larry Altobell
Executive C, Air Liquide S.A.
75, Quai d' Orsay
75321, Paris, Cedex-07, France

Not a party in OMP 361/2004

16.

Dominique MARIE
Executive Committee Members
Air Liquide S.A., 75, Quai d' Orsay
75321, Paris, Cedex-07, France

Not a party in OMP 361/2004

17.

Mr. G. Rao Rajeshwar
Managing Directors
Air Liquide India Holding Pvt. Limited
25, C-Community Centre, Janak Puri, New Delhi.

Not a party in OMP 361/2004

CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.6

18.

Mr. Satish Chand Kochar
Director, Managing Directors
Air Liquide India Holding Pvt. Limited
25, C-Community Centre, Janak Puri,New Delhi.

Not a party in OMP 361/2004

19.

Mr. Colin Kennedy
Director, Managing Directors
Air Liquide India Holding Pvt. Limited
25, C-Community Centre, Janak Puri, New Delhi.

Not a party in OMP 361/2004

10.

I have heard learned senior counsel for both sides and given the matter detailed

consideration. I find that the petition has been filed by the petitioner on the allegation
that the petitioner learnt that, after passing of the above order dated 31 st January, 2005,
Air Liquide India Holding Pvt. Limited, the respondent No.3 herein, which is alleged to
be a 100% subsidiary of the respondent no.4, Air Liquide International, enter into a
supply agreement with SAIL to supply oxygen and nitrogen to SAIL's steel plant in
Bhilai, India, where the respondent no.4 has agreed to provide a financial and technical
guarantee, under the terms and conditions to be agreed between respondent no.4 and
SAIL. Copy of the letter dated 7th October, 2005 addressed to SAIL by respondent no.4
is annexed as ANNEXURE-P6 to the petition. It is submitted that the respondent no.4
being a subsidiary of Air Liquide S.A., respondent No.2, is merely an agent of the
respondent no.2. In any event, it is contended that both are one economic unit as per
the findings of this Hon'ble Court and therefore any business activity in gas business in
India by the respondent no.2 by itself, directly or through companies under its direct or
indirect control as the respondent no.4 or any other such company, is in violation of the
CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.7

above order dated 31/1/2005.
11.

The submission on behalf of the petitioner is that vide order dated 31/01/2005,

respondent no.1 has been restrained from competing with the petitioner, directly or
indirectly. Therefore, since respondent no.4 is a 100% subsidiary of respondent no.2
which is also 100% holding company of respondent no.1, the guarantee given by
respondent no.4 vide its letter dated 7th October, 2005, is wilful disobedience of the
order dated 31/01/2005 passed by this Hon'ble Court.

It is submitted that the above

guarantee has been arranged to be given by respondent no.4 since respondent no.1 and
respondent No.2 have been restrained from doing so. Therefore, the guarantee by
respondent No.4 is merely a device designed by respondent No.1 and respondent no.2 to
violate the above order.
12.

According to Mr. Sandeep Sethi, learned senior counsel appearing for the

petitioner, the respondent no.4 is merely a holding/investment company of the Air
Liquide Group whose business is not of dealing in gases and that this fact also clearly
establishes that the guarantee issued through respondent No.4 is merely a device to
violate the order. It is submitted that what cannot be done directly, can also not be done
indirectly. Therefore, when respondent no.1 and respondent no.2 could not have issued
a guarantee letter in favour of respondent no.3 because they were restrained from doing
so, they also could not have done the same thing through the device of respondent No.4
which is under full control of respondent no.2. A copy of a document taken from the
CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.8

web site of the respondent no.2 evidencing that the respondent No.2 is the holding
company of the respondent no.4 has been placed before the court.
13.

At this stage, it would been useful to also consider the letter dated 7th May, 2005

issued by M/s Air Liquide International (respondent no.4 herein) which has been
complained of as constituting wilful disobedience of the order dated 31st January, 2005
in extenso. This communication which has been addressed to the SAIL, reads thus:“Should our one hundred percent owned subsidiary, Air
Liquide India Holding Pvt. Ltd., a company organized under the
law of India with its headquarters at 25, C-Block, Community
Centre, Janak Puri, New Delhi – 110 058 INDIA (“AL India”)enter
into the supply agreement with SAIL to supply oxygen and nitrogen
to SAIL's steel plant in Bhilai, India, Air Liquide International
(“ALI”) hereby agrees as follows.
Upon signature of the supply agreement, Air Liquide
International (“ALI”) shall provide a financial and technical
guarantee, under terms and conditions to be agreed between ALI
and SAIL, in the case that AL India shall fail to perform its
obligations under such agreement.
This guarantee shall come into effect upon signature of the
supply agreement and shall remain in force during the term of the
supply agreement.
The guarantee shall be annexed to the supply agreement.”
14.

A perusal of this communication shows that it is respondent no.3 M/s Air Liquide

India Holding Pvt. Ltd. which proposes to enter into a supply agreement with the SAIL
to supply oxygen and nitrogen to SAIL's steel plant at Bhilai. Respondent no.4 M/s Air
CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.9

Liquide International has agreed to provide a financial and technical guarantee under
the terms and conditions which would be agreed between them in case Air Liquide
India Holdings Pvt. Ltd., the respondent no.3 shall fail to perform its obligation under
the agreement with Steel Authority of India Ltd. The petitioner has pointed out that
from the perusal of the annual returns of M/s Air Liquide S.A., the respondent no.2,
extracts whereof have been placed on record, Air Liquide International, the respondent
no.4, is the 100% subsidiary of Air Liquide S.A. and that the business in which it is
engaged does not relate to supply of gases which is the business in which the
respondent no.3, Air Liquide India Holding Pvt. Ltd., is engaged.
15.

In view of the rival contentions, it becomes necessary to notice the obligations

which were imposed under the order dated 31st January, 2005 by this court. So far as
the respondent no.1 Air Liquide Deutschland GmbH was concerned, it becomes
necessary to notice the findings of the court which read as under:“A plain reading of this Clause shows that “Goyal Group” as well
as “MGG Group”, now respondent no.1, which were the two stake
holders in the petitioner company agreed that they will cooperate in
exploiting in the Indian market business of supply of industrial
gases. It was also agreed that they would not support directly or
indirectly any competitor in gas business. The respondent no.1
(MGG) was required to give written intimation to petitioner
company about every business opportunity it planned to take in
Indian Market in regard to the industrial gases and related business
so that in case the petitioner wanted to exercise the option of
joining, it could join it within a period of two months of the receipt
of the notice in writing. Even after the refusal of the petitioner
CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.10

company to join MGG in new operations, the obligation was still
upon MGG to give due consideration to the interests of the
petitioner company as it was its associate company. It cannot be
held that this Clause pertained to some business other than the
business of gas supply in India. Last para of the aforesaid clause
makes it clear. Therefore, it has to be held that the respondent
No.1 having 49% share holding in petitioner company is not
permitted to join hands with a competitor of the petitioner in
India for the supply of the industrial gases as it directly affects
the business interests of the petitioner company.”
16.

The court also noticed the further proceedings between the petitioner and the

respondents before the Division Bench of this court as well as in the Supreme Court of
India and emphasized the prohibition upon the respondent no.1 in the following terms.
“A division Bench of this Court had passed an order on 23.10.1998
in FAO (OS) No.251/1998 between the petitioner and respondent
No.1 in which Clause 9 of the SPC was upheld. This order was
upheld by the Supreme Court also and ultimately a consent Award
was passed between the parties. Therefore, the non-competition
clause contained in Section 9 of the SPC has to be effectively
enforced to safeguard the economic and commercial interests of the
petitioner company. The respondent No.1 cannot be permitted to
wriggle out of it and be in competition with the petitioner directly
or indirectly. To safeguard the business interests of the petitioner
and given effect to the secrecy clause which is likely to be violated
in view of the emerging relationship between the three
respondents, this Court is of the considered view that there are
good and sufficient grounds for proving protection to the petitioner
in the matter of participation in tenders for the supply of industrial
gases in India. The respondent No.1 cannot enter into any
competition with petitioner.”
17.

The order dated 31st January, 2005 also notices a plea of respondent nos.2 & 3

CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.11

that they, not being party to the arbitration agreement, cannot be injuncted by this court
in the petition under Section Section 9 of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996. It
was held by the court that in all those cases where group companies constitute one
economic entity, the court may, instead of going by separate legal entities of the
companies, look at the common economic entity of the group to which they belong.
Placing reliance on the judgment of this court in Chief Finances Construction Ltd. Vs.
Puri Construction Ltd. 2000 (VI) AD Delhi 509, the court came to the conclusion that
an equitable relief can be granted even between a non party to the arbitration agreement
where there is commonality of interest between the parties to the arbitration agreement
and such person and circumstances call for grant of such equitable relief with a view to
ensure compete justice between the parties. In these circumstances, the court considered
the apprehensions of the petitioners with regard to the presence of the directors of Air
Liquide Deutschland GmbH who were on the board of the petitioners company in terms
of the SPC agreement. It was noticed that such directors may be nominees of respondent
no.2 and also have connection with respondent no.3 and consequently they may
jeopardize the petitioner's participation in the tenders. Placing reliance on clause 11 of
the SPC agreement relating to secrecy, the court was of the view that in case secrecy is
not maintained, the respondent no.3, which is the competitor of the petitioner, may steal
a march over the petitioner in the matter of tenders for gas supply in view of the
relationship between it and respondent no.1 through their holding company, the
CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.12

respondent no.2.
18.

The court, thereafter, proceeded to consider the position on record to the effect

that the respondent no.2 Air Liquide S.A. was acquiring the shareholding of the
petitioner through respondent no.1. In these circumstances, it was observed thus:“Respondent No.2 also cannot compete with petitioner as it is
acquiring the shareholding of petitioner through respondent No.1.
However, respondent No.3 being in the same business and already
in competition with petitioner cannot be deprived of its ongoing
business activities. Possibility cannot be ruled out that in case the
Directors nominated by respondent No.1 continue to attend the
Board meetings of petitioner company when the tenders to be filed
by the petitioner are discussed and approved, some vital
information may be passed on to respondent No.3, which in turn,
may steal a march over the petitioner in the business of supply of
gas. The interests of the petitioner company, therefore, have to be
safeguarded by restraining the Directors nominated by
respondent No.1 from participating in those meetings in which
any matter relating to the filing of tenders by the petitioner
company is to be discussed or approved. The nominees of
respondent No.1 cannot be restrained from acting as Directors in
the petitioner company altogether as prayed. So long they are
having 49% share holding in the petitioner company, they can
exercise their voting and other rights in accordance with Articles
of Association and SPC.”
(Emphasis supplied)
19.

Upon such conclusions and findings, the court granted the following injunction:“Accordingly, the petition stands disposed of by restraining the
respondents No.1 & 2 from entering into competition with the
petitioner company in the matter of sale/supply of industrial gases in
India. The Directors, officers and nominees of respondent No.1
stand restrained from attending or participating in those meetings of

CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.13

the petitioner company in which any matter pertaining to the filing
of the tenders by the petitioner company is scheduled to be
discussed. This would ensure the secrecy of the petitioner's tenders.
These orders will remain in force till the disputes between the
petitioner and respondent No.1 are adjudicated by an Arbitrator by
Arbitral Tribunal in terms of their agreement. In case there is any
change in the circumstances, these orders may be modified by this
Court or the Arbitral Tribunal. No further directions are required to
be issued.”
20.

From a careful perusal of the above, it is evident that the court was not pursuaded

by the submission on behalf of the petitioner that the respondent nos.1, 2 & 3 are one
and the same merely because the respondent no.2 is a holding company. The court has
noticed and emphasized the individual entity of these companies as also the
responsibilities of their directors to the petitioner as well as to Air Liquide Deutschland
GmbH; Air Liquide S.A. & Air Liquide India Holdings Pvt. Ltd.

The absolute

prohibition sought by the petitioner was refused. The court also did not prohibit the
directors of respondent no.1 who may be directors in the other companies as well from
acting as directors in the petitioner's company.
21.

The court has clearly refused to pass any order of injunction against Air Liquide

India Holdings Pvt. Ltd., respondent no.3 even upon the application of the doctrine of
the piercing of the corporate veil.
22.

It is an admitted position between the parties that there is no injunction against

Air Liquide India Holding Pvt. Ltd., respondent no.3 from carrying on such business.

CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.14

Despite detailed submissions on the aspect that Air Liquide India Holding Pvt. Ltd.
was required to be injucted as it is the subsidiary of the respondent no.2 before this
court in OMP 361/2004, the court has refused to pass any order of injunction against the
respondent no.3. By a communication dated 7th October, 2005, respondent no.4, Air
Liquid International has merely agreed to provide technical and financial guarantee in
respect of any agreement which was proposed to be entered into between the respondent
no.3 and the SAIL. It is also the admitted case of the petitioner that the respondent no.4
is not engaged in any competing business in gases in India or even abroad.
23.

The entire edifice and thrust of the petitioner's case in OMP No.361/2004 rested

on the submission that on application of the doctrine of piercing of corporate veil, the
court would find that all the respondents were one and the same.
The petitioner contended that respondent no.3 is also a subsidiary of respondent
no.2 which was the holding company of both respondent nos.1 & 3.

This court

considered these submissions and still did not pass any interim order against respondent
no.3.
24.

Both Air Liquide India Holding Pvt. Ltd., respondent no.3 and the Air Liquide

International, respondent no.4, are stated to be subsidiaries of Air India Liquide S.A.
respondent no.2. This court consciously refused to grant injunction in respect of the
business of respondent no.3, also a subsidiary of the respondent no.2 in the order dated
31st January, 2005. In these facts and circumstances it would be too far fetched to say
CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.15

that respondent no.4 would stand prohibited or

injuncted from even providing a

guarantee in respect of any business activities of the respondent no.3 merely because its
holding company no.2 was injuncted.
In these facts, it has to be seen as to whether on the same pleas which did not find
favour before the court on 31st January, 2005, Air Liquide International, respondent
no.4, herein can be held liable under the Contempt of Court Act, 1972.
25.

This court has carefully considered the responsibilities and liabilities of the

respondents arrayed before it. It is trite that while considering a complaint alleging
wilful violation of an order, certainly, the petitioner cannot be permitted to expand the
applicability of the order of injunction to injunct respondent no.4 or the others who
were not even parties before the court in OMP 361/2004.
26.

Conscious of the legal responsibilities of the directors of the company, the court

has carefully passed the order dated 31st January, 2005, clearly recognizing the distinct
responsibility of a person who may be a director of more than one company. Despite
the allegations of commonality of directors, injunction even against the respondent
no.3, which was admittedly carrying on competing business with the petitioner, has
been refused.
27.

By the judgment dated 31st of January, 2005, even so far as the nominee directors

of the respondent no.1 who were on the board of directors of the petitioner, the
injunction sought against them was rejected except to the limited extent that the
CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.16

directors, officers and nominees of respondent no.1 were restrained from attending or
participating in those meetings of the petitioner company in which any matter pertaining
to the filing of the tenders by the petitioner company was scheduled to be discussed.
Thus, the prayer of the petitioner seeking a restraint against the nominees and
directors of respondent no.1 from participating and interfering in the business and
affairs of the petitioner company, was not granted.
28.

Looked at from any angle, it cannot be held that merely because the respondent

no.4 is also a subsidiary of respondent no.2 or there may be commonality of directors,
respondent no.4 stand injuncted from indulging in any competing activity with the
petitioner.
29.

There is also no dispute that the respondent no.4 has no connection with the SPC

agreement dated 12th May, 1995 which was amended in November, 1996 nor was it a
party to the OMP No.361/2004.
30.

Even otherwise, in the facts noticed above, the action of the respondent no.4 in

merely agreeing to provide a technical and financial guarantee, cannot be an act
prohibited either under the agreement between the petitioner and the respondent no.1 or
an act in violation of the order dated 31st January, 2005 in any manner. Therefore, in
my view, the contentions of the petitioners are wholly without substance and deserve to
be rejected outright.
31.

In any case, this court was also not impressed with these submissions of the

CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.17

petitioner and when the petition was listed on 29th November, 2005 had directed on the
contempt petition as follows:“At the first instance, notice be issued to respondent no.2,
returnable on 16th January, 2006”.
32.

At this stage, it would be also useful to notice the allegations on which the

petitioner has arrayed the respondents as parties in the contempt petition. In this behalf,
para 10 of the petition makes interesting reading and reads thus:“10. That therefore the Respondent No.1, 2 3 and 4 have willfully
violated and disobeyed the order dated 31/1/2005 passed by this
Hon'ble Court and therefore they and the Respondent No.5 being
the Chairman of the Management of Respondent No.1, Respondent
No.6 to 16 being Member of executive committee of Respondent
No.3 are in change of and responsible for the affairs of the
Respondent No.1, to 3, it is pertinent to note that Respondent No.7
is also in charge of and responsible for affairs of Respondent No.4
as the Guarantee letter dated 7th October, 2005 has been signed by
him on the behalf of Respondent No.4 respectively and have thus
committed the contempt of this Hon'ble Court for which they are
liable to be punished.”
33.

In the petition, the petitioner has sought not only initiation of the proceedings

under the Contempt of Courts Act against all the respondents but has also stated that till
the respondents purge the contempt, they ought to be restrained from competing with
the petitioner directly or through their agents, subsidiaries, associates etc. pending
disposal of the petition.
34.

A close reading of the petition does not show that all the respondents were even

CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.18

aware of the order dated 31st January, 2005 or that it was ever served upon them. On
these bald allegations, this contempt petition has been filed in this court arraying parties
who were not party to the initial lis wherein the order dated 31st January, 2005 was
passed.
35.

The respondent no.2 entered appearance in the matter after receipt of notice and

has pleaded a strong objection on the grounds of jurisdiction of this court to entertain
and adjudicate upon the subject matter of the SPC agreement dated 12 th May, 1995 and
the submissions made on behalf of the petitioner. It has been pointed out that it has
raised the jurisdictional issue even in the appeal filed by it.

Apart from these

objections, the respondent no.2 has stated thus:“8. I say that the Respondent No.2 is a company incorporated in
France and is having its office at 75, Quai d' Orsay, 75007, Paris,
France. The Respondent No.2 does not itself carry on the sale of
industrial gases within the territorial jurisdiction of this Hon'ble
Court nor does it have any office or agent related to such business
within the territorial jurisdiction of this Hon'ble Court. Since the
Hon'ble Court has no jurisdiction to pass any orders against the
Respondent No.2 therefore the OMP No.361 of 2004 as well as the
contempt proceedings are not maintainable against the Respondent
No.2 and the same be dismissed.
9.
I say that the Respondent No.2 is filing the present affidavit
in reply only for the purpose of protesting the jurisdiction of this
Hon'ble Court and the same does not constitute submissions to the
jurisdiction of this Hon'ble Court either expressly or impliedly.
Further, the Respondent No.2 reserves its right to make
submissions on merits if this Hon'ble Court comes to be
conclusion that it has jurisdiction in the matter.”
CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.19

36.

This affidavit has been deposed by one Mr. Laurent Blamoutier, Legal Manager

of Air Liquide S.A. and has been sworn at Paris on 9th May, 2005.
37.

The affidavit was filed without prejudice to such objections. It is also pointed out

that even in O.M.P. No.361/2004, the respondent no.2 had filed an affidavit dated 14 th
December, 2004 challenging the territorial jurisdiction of this court over the subject
matter and in relation to the parties. Reliance was placed before the court on the
pronouncement of the Supreme Court in (1998) 5 SCC 310 entitled World Tanker
Career Corporation Vs. SNP Shipping Services Pvt. Limited & Ors. It has been
pointed out that this objection was not considered in the judgment dated 31 st January,
2005 and that the respondent no.2 has assailed the order passed by the court by way of
FAO (OS) No.71/2005 which is stated to be pending before the Division Bench.
Without prejudice to the objection relating to the jurisdiction of this court, the
respondents have opposed the petition even on demurer. Mr. Prag P. Tripathi, learned
senior counsel appearing for the respondent, has addressed detailed submissions on the
contempt petition as has been laid before this court which are considered herein.
38.

It would be useful to notice the principles laid down by the Apex Court in (1998)

5 SCC 310 entitled World Tanker Career Corporation Vs. SNP Shipping Services
Pvt. Limited & Ors. The Apex Court was considering the territorial jurisdiction of the
court to entertain and adjudicate upon the subject matter of the lis which was brought
before it. In the case before the Apex Court, a collusion had occurred between the
CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.20

vessel in question and another vessel on high seas off the coast of a foreign country.
Both the vessels were foreign vessels, all persons and/or companies claiming ownership
rights either as owners or characters, managers or sub-managers were foreign
companies save only one of the managers which was the company registered in India,
and all claimants, defendants were foreigners neither doing any business in India, nor
submitting to the jurisdiction to the court in India nor filing any liability action in India.
The foreign defendants who appeared before the Indian court, appeared under protest to
contest jurisdiction. The Supreme Court held that the Bombay High Court was not the
domiciliary court of M/s Kara Mara or its vessel. Nor is any claim for liabiltiy which
can be limited and filed against M/s Kara Mara in the Bombay High Court.

None of

the defendants to the suit was within the jurisdiction of the Bombay High Court. The
fortuitous presence of the ship in the Bombay harbour would not entitle the owner to
file a limitation action in the Bombay High Court in the absence of any claim being
made or apprehended against him or the vessel in that court.

Therefore, bringing the

ship to the Bombay port in order to confer jurisdiction on the Bombay High Court, had
the character of forum-shopping rather than anything else. The court observed that the
presence of a foreign defendant who appears under protest to contest jurisdiction,
cannot be considered as conferring jurisdiction on the court to take action. Unless a
foreign defendant either resides within

jurisdiction or voluntarily appears or has

contracted to submit to the jurisdiction of the court, it is not possible to hold that the
CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.21

court will have jurisdiction against a foreign defendant. Further the court also observed
thus:“It is true that an order passed by the High Court even though it
may be without jurisdiction must be obeyed. If such an order is
disobeyed, it amounts to contempt of court and proceedings can be
taken in that connection against the contemnor.”
39.

In this behalf, the respondents before the Apex Court had placed reliance on the

earlier pronouncement of the Supreme Court in (1997) 3 SCC 443 entitled Tayabhai M.
Bagasarwalla Vs. Wind Rubber Industries (P) Ltd.
40.

In view of the principles laid down by the Apex Court in this judgment, the issue

as to the maintainability of OMP No.361/2004 before this court, would have no bearing
on the claim of the petitioner that the respondents had violated an order passed by this
court even if the same was without jurisdiction.
41.

For the same reason, the pronouncement cited on behalf of the petitioner to the

effect that the court dealing with an application for contempt of court, cannot traverse
beyond the orders. If any party concerned is aggrieved by any order which in its
opinion is wrong or against rules or its implementation is neither practicable nor
feasible, it should always either approach the court that passed the order or invoke the
jurisdiction of the Appellate Court. It is well settled that rightness or wrongness of the
order cannot be urged in contempt proceedings and that the right or wrong order has to

CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.22

be obeyed. These principles are well settled and in this behalf, the petitioner has cited
the pronouncement of the Apex Court in AIR (2004) SC 4277 Prithawi Nath Ram Vs.
State of Jharkhand (Paras 5 & 8) and (2001) 10 SCC 496 K.G. Derasari & Anr. Vs.
UOI & Ors.
42.

This objection in any case loses importance in the light of the findings which are

recorded hereinafter.
43.

Mr. Prag Tripathi, learned senior counsel for the petitioner, has also placed

reliance on the pronouncement of the Apex Court reported in (1974) 1 SCC 374 (Paras
91 & 92) Shri Baradakanta Mishra Vs. The Registrar of Orissa High Court &
Another in support of the contention that contempt jurisdiction should be exercised
with scrupulous care and only when the case is clear and beyond reasonable doubt.
Placing reliance on (2002) 4 SCC 21 Anil Ratan Sarkar & Others Vs. Hirak
Ghosh & Others, it was urged that a contempt jurisdiction should be sparingly and
carefully utilised and that unless a court is satisfied beyond doubt, it would neither be
fair nor reasonable for the lower courts to exercise jurisdiction in the suit. The burden
and standard of proof in contempt action has to be beyond any reasonable doubt and
that the power should be exercised only in the larger interest of the society and for
proper administration of the justice delivery system in the country. If a doubt in the
matter as regards the wilful nature of the conduct, is raised, then the question of success
in a contempt petition would not arise under any circumstances.
CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.23

44.

Placing reliance on (1999) 2 SCC 537 Indian Airports Employees' Union Vs.

Ranjan Chatterjee & Anr. (VII), it has been contended that the action of the
respondents was based on an interpretation of the orders by the respondents and could
not be said to amount to wilful disobedience of any order passed by the court.
45.

In (1997) III All ER 159 Attorney General Vs. Newspaper Publishing Plc &

Ors., the court held thus:“We do not accept that any conduct by a third party inconsistent
with the order of the court is enough to constitute the actus reus of
contempt. Where it is sought to impose indirect liability on a third
party, the justification for doing so lies in that party's interference
with the administration of justice. It is not in our view necessary
to show that the administration of justice in the relevant
proceedings has been wholly frustrated or rendered utterly futile.
But it is, we think, necessary to show some significant and adverse
effect on the administration of justice. Recognising that the
restraints upon freedom of expression should be no wider than are
truly necessary in a democratic society, we do not accept that
conduct by a third party which is inconsistent with the court order
in only trivial and technical way should expose a party to
conviction for contempt.”
46.

Learned senior counsel on behalf of the respondents also placed reliance on the

pronouncement of the Apex Court in AIR 1961 SC 1361 Shri B.K. Kar Vs. The
Hon'ble the Chief Justice and his companion Justices of the Orissa High Court &
Another (Para 7) to urge that only such wilful disobedience of an order can be held to
be contumacious as is that the knowledge of the order. Urging that for this reason, no

CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.24

contempt proceedings can be initiated or maintained against persons who were not
parties before the OMP No.361/2004. It is contended that the present petition is wholly
mala fide and devoid of merit which deserve to be rejected.
47.

Mr. Prag Tripathi, learned senior counsel appearing for respondent no.2 has

submitted that the petitioner has also concealed the material fact that the respondent
no.1 had invested around Rs. 138.00 crores in order to meet its obligations in terms of
the SPC agreement dated 12th of May, 1995 and that it has been compelled to sell its
shareholding at a paltry rate of Rs.19.00 crores to the Goyal Group. It is further
submitted that as of now, even the respondent no.1 has no shareholding and no directors
on the Board of Directors of the petitioner. It has been pointed out that three suits had
been caused to be filed by the Goyal Group seeking injunction with regard to
shareholdings of the respondent no.1 in the petitioner company and all these three suits
stand settled on the 21st February, 2006. There is no dispute to this factual assertion.
48.

If this is correct, then it would appear that even the order dated 31st January,

2005, so far as the respondent nos.1 & 2 is concerned, may also perhaps have ceased to
have effect as per the agreement.
49.

It is to be noted that at the time of closing of arguments on 13th September, 2006,

no judgment had been cited on behalf of the petitioner. However, subsequently, along
with written submissions which are dated 18th September, 2006, several judicial
pronouncements have been filed on behalf of the petitioners. The petitioners were
CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.25

directed to furnish copies of these pronouncement to the other side as well. In the light
of the view I have taken above and also for the reason that these pronouncements were
not cited before this court, the submissions made in the written submissions on behalf of
the petitioner would not have deserved to be considered. However, in any case, I find
that the same have no application to the facts and circumstances of the instant case.
50.

In support of the contention that this court has the jurisdiction to pierce the

corporate veil even in the contempt proceedings, the petitioner has placed reliance on
89 Company Cases 362 entitled Delhi Development Authority Vs. Skipper
Construction Company Pvt. Ltd. (Page 379, 380-381); 89 Company Cases 849 SC
(Pages 869 to 872) entitled New Horizons Limited Vs. UOI & 1987 Crl. Law Journal
1281 Del. entitled Jyoti Limited Vs. Kanwaljit Kaur (Paras 14 to 21). It is well settled
that the judicial precedents cannot be applied de hors the facts and circumstances of the
case in which the same have been cited. In DDA Vs. Skippers Construction Company
Pvt. Ltd., the court was concerned with the utilisation of a corporate entity which was
evolved not to encourage and promote trade and commerce, but to commit illegalities
and to defraud people. The court was considering the conduct of the directors of the
Skipper Construction Company Pvt. Limited who were utilising and taking the shield of
the corporate character of the respondent company for the purposes of committing
illegalities and for acts of fraud. It was in these circumstances held that the court would
ignore the corporate character and will look at the reality behind the corporate veil so as
CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.26

to enable it to pass orders to do justice between the parties concerned. In this case, the
court held that if it is found that someone has acquired property by defrauding the
people and if it is found that the persons defrauded should be restored to the position in
which they would have been but for the said fraud, the court can make all necessary
orders for the purposes. It was in the extreme circumstances of the case that the court
observed, as noticed above, and also directed that all properties and bank account
standing in the name of the contemnors and the directors of the respondent company,
their wife, sons and unmarried daughters would stand attached. The court so held in
exercise of its power under Articles 142 of the Constitution of India and observed that
the same was meant to supplement the existing legal framework to do complete justice
between the parties and not to supplant it. It is conceived to meet situations which
cannot be effectively and approximately tackled by the existing provisions of law. The
court had returned a specific findings that the contemnor and his family had created
plots and devices in the form of corporate bodies which were merely cloaks behind
which lurked him and members of his family and the device of incorporation was really
a play adopted for committing illegalities to defraud people. The court had arrived at
the finding that several properties in the name of corporation were really owned by the
director; that the corporate veil and the change of directorships were all mere devices to
screen the said property and its income from the creditors of one director and his family
including the purchasers who had purchased the office space pursuant to the
CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.27

advertisements issued by these persons in violation of the orders of the Apex Court.
The court held that “the reality is that Tejwant Singh, the contemnor, who is the author
of all these deals and devices. The transfer of shareholding if any between the father
and the son (and their respective wives) must also be treated as a sham transaction.
The instant case certainly has no parity with the facts of the case before the Apex
Court and the present case.
51.

Similarly, in New Horizons Limited Vs. UOI & 1987 Crl. Law Journal 1281

Del., the Apex Court was considering the challenge to the issuance and acceptance of a
tender. The appellant company had pooled together resources with other companies
who had made available equipment and organisation in different places. The court
noticed that all the constituents of the company had thus contributed to the resources of
the company showing that it was an association of the companies jointly undertaking a
commercial enterprise wherein they would all contribute assets and share risks and had
a community of interest. It was for the purposes of assessing the experience of the
appellant company which had participated in the tendering process that the court held
that the veil covering face of the appellant company had to be seen through and it would
be found that it was in the nature of a partnership between an Indian Group of
Companies and a foreign company, who had jointly undertaken the commercial
enterprises wherein they would contribute to the assets and share risks.
This precedent has no application to the facts of the instant case.
CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.28

52.

The court while opposing the judgment dated 31st January, 2005 has considered

these submissions of the petitioner and has passed a considered decision which has not
been assailed by the petitioner in any manner.

In the instant case, it is not the

petitioner's case that there is a community of interest that the respondents have jointly
undertaken any commercial enterprises or are contributing to assets and sharing risks,
on the contrary. Detailed submissions have been made on behalf of the petitioners
before this court pointing out that all the respondents are not even engaged in the same
activities.
53.

So far as the pronouncement of the Apex Court in 1987 Crl. Law Journal 1281

(Del.) Jyoti Limited Vs. Kanwaljit Kaur Bhasin and Anr. is concerned, it is to be noted
that the respondents were Chairman & Managing Director in another company by the
name of M/s Tower Height Builders Pvt. Ltd. which was incorporated only on 10th
January, 1980. The injunction order dated 8th October, 1980 related to the third and
fourth floor of a multi-storeyed building which was to be set up on plot no.16, Nehru
Place, New Delhi.
After the injunction order was confirmed on the 8th of October, 1980, lease hold
rights in the plot no.16, Nehru Place, New Delhi were transferred in favour of M/s
Tower Height Builders Pvt. Ltd. on the 12th November, 1980.
It was in these facts that the court held that the corporate veil required to be
pierced and it was found that the respondents were utilising corporate entity as a device
CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.29

of M/s Tower Height Builders Pvt. Ltd. to defeat the order passed by the court.
This case is clearly distinguishable upon facts urged by the petitioner in the
present petition.
54.

So far as the liability of the directors in the contempt action is concerned, the

petitioner has placed reliance on the pronouncement in (1910) 2 Ch. 190 Stancomb Vs.
Trowbridge Urban District Council and LR 5 RP 315 (1965) Re Galvanized Tank
Manufacturers' Association's Agreement. It is to be noticed that in all these matters,
the court was concerned with execution and enforcement of an order against the
corporation. The courts were concerned with a Writ of Sequestration and the relevant
provisions of the applicable provision of RSC Order 45 Rule 5. Sub Rule 1 specifically
provides that where a person disobeys the judgment or order requiring him to abstain
from doing an action then, subject to the provisions of the rule, the judgment or the
order may be enforced, where that person is a body corporate, with the leave of the
court, by a writ of sequestration against the property of any director or other officer of
the body. No such provision has been relied upon before this court.
55.

The petitioner, therefore, cannot place reliance on the principles laid down in

these judgment to urge that the respondents were guilty of contempt of the order dated
31st January, 2005 even though the relief specifically sought had not been granted.
56.

In the light of the above discussion, the present petition is wholly devoid of merit.

In my view, there is no violation of the order dated 31 st January, 2005 by the respondent
CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.30

no.2 on the allegations laid in the petition.
57.

So far as the other respondents are concerned, notice was not issued by this court.

However, from the foregoing discussion, I have held that issuance of the letter dated 7 th
October, 2005 by the respondent no.4 does not amount to a violation of the order dated
31st of January, 2005, let alone a wilful violation which could be held to be
contumacious on the part of respondent no.4.
58.

The petitioner has filed a wholly baseless, frivolous and mala fide contempt

petition seeking initiation of contempt proceedings against the respondents who, other
than respondent no.3, are admittedly based abroad. The respondent no.2 is located in
France and has been constrained to contest such petition in this court.

There is

substance in the submission on behalf of respondent no.2 that the very array of parties
would have considerably overawed the persons arrayed as respondents even though
notice was not issued against them. Apart from other companies, the petitioner has also
arrayed all persons holding any kind of office in the respondent no.2 organisation.
Undoubtedly, valuable time of the court has been wasted without any justification.
Contempt proceedings are intended to protect the majesty of law and uphold the rule of
law.
59.

From the above, I find substance in the contention on behalf of the respondent

no.2 by Mr. Tripathi, learned senior counsel that the petition is mala fide and has been
filed with the sole intent of pressurising the German companies into opting out of the
CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.31

Indian market under the threat of implication and conviction in contempt action. The
same would be evident from the prayers which have been made in this petition. The
contention of the petitioner in para 5 of the petition to the effect that the respondent
no.2 was injuncted because this court considered the respondent nos.1 & 2 as one
economic unit, is contrary to the specific findings of the court wherein the court has
passed the order against respondent no.2 holding that it cannot compete with the
petitioner only “as it is acquiring the shareholding of petitioner through respondent
no.1”.
60.

Vexatious and frivolous litigation poses a number of threats to the efficient

operation of any civil justice system. Those threats stem from the manner in which the
vexatious and frivolous litigant conducts litigation before the courts. Such proceedings,
apart, from the oppression and the harassment inflicted on the adversary, are extremely
damaging to public interest. Judicial resources are valuable and scarce. The resources
of the court are not infinite, especially in terms of judicial time.

Therefore,

administration of justice and interests of equity and fair play mandate that a party which
succeeds is compensated by award of costs in respect of false or vexatious claims or
defences. A faulting party may be required to pay to the other party such costs as
would, in the opinion of the court, be reasonably sufficient to reimburse the other party
in respect of the expenses incurred by him in attending the court on that date and
payment of such costs on the next date following the date of such order if unreasonable
CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.32

adjournments are taken by the parties.
However, many unscrupulous parties take advantage of the fact that either costs
are not awarded or nominal costs alone are awarded against the unsuccessful party.
61.

The legislature has recognised the need for imposition of costs and consequently,

so far as the civil proceedings are concerned, has enacted Section 35 of the Code of
Civil Procedure which provides for imposition of costs. The Apex Court was concerned
with the manner in which the costs are imposed resulting in undue advantage being
taken by parties of the fact that notional costs are awarded which do not deter or
discourage persons from filing vexatious or frivolous claims or defences. In this behalf,
in (2005) 6 SCC 344 Salem Advocate Bar Association Vs. Union of India, the court
observed thus:“37. Judicial notice can be taken of the fact that many
unscrupulous parties take advantage of the fact that either the
costs are not awarded or nominal costs are awarded against the
unsuccessful party. Unfortunately, it has become a practice to
direct parties to bear their own costs. In a large number of cases,
such an order is passed despite Section 35(2) of the Code. Such
a practice also encourages the filing of frivolous suits. It also
leads to the taking up of frivolous defences. Further, wherever
costs are awarded, ordinarily the same are not realistic and are
nominal. When Section 35(2) provides for cost to follow event,
it is implicit that the costs have to be those which are reasonably
incurred by a successful party except in those cases where the
court in its discretion may direct otherwise by recording reasons
therefor. The costs have to be actual reasonable costs including
the cost of the time spent by the unsuccessful party, the
transportation and lodging, if any, or any other incidental costs
besides the payment of the court fee, lawyer's fee, typing and
CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.33

other costs in relation to the litigation. It is for the High Courts
to examine these aspects and wherever necessary make requisite
rules, regulations or practice direction so as to provide
appropriate guidelines for the subordinate courts to follow.”
62.

However, there are several proceedings which are not governed by the Code of

Civil Procedure. The courts have recognised the inherent power of the court to award
costs in the interest of justice.
63.

In (2006) 4 SCC 683 entitled State of Karnataka Vs. All India Manufacturers

Organisation, a challenge was laid to a common judgment of the High Court of
Karnataka disposing of three public interest litigations whereby a direction was issued
to the State of Karnataka to continue to implement a certain project known as the
“Bangalore-Mysore Infrastructure Corridor Project”. While dismissing the appeals, the
Apex Court held that there was no merit in them. It was further directed that:“Considering the frivolous argument and the mala fides with
which the State of Karnataka and its instrumentalities have
conducted this litigation before the High Court and us, it shall
pay Nandi costs quantified at Rs.5,00,000/-, within a period of
four weeks of this order”.
“The appellants in CA No.3497/2005 (J.C. Madhuswami & Ors.)
in addition to the costs already ordered by the High Court, shall
pay to the Supreme Court Legal Services Authority, costs
quantified at Rs.50,000- within a period of four weeks of this
order.....”
64.

The observations of the Apex Court in this behalf as back as in (1994) 4 SCC 225

CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.34

(at page 246) Morgan Stanley Mutual Fund Vs. Kartick Das are also topical and
instructive and were made with the intention of discouraging speculative and vexatious
litigation and judicial adventurism. In this behalf, the court observed thus:“47 There is an increasing tendency on the part of the litigants
to indulge in speculative and vexatious litigation and
adventurism which the fora seem readily to oblige. We think
such a tendency should be curbed. Having regard to the frivolous
nature of the complaint, we think it is a fit case for award of
costs, more so, when the appellant has suffered heavily.
Therefore, we award costs of Rs.25,000/- in favour of the
appellant. It shall be recovered from the first respondent C.A.
No.4584 of 1994 arising out of SLP © No.272 of 1994 is allowed
accordingly.”
65.

The Division Bench of this court in 2004 (110) DLT 186 entitled Indian Steel &

Wire Products Vs. B.I.F.R. (DB), held that the sole purpose of filing the petition was
to sabotage the proposal/scheme of TISCO which was accepted by the BIFR. The court
held that the petitioner-company's false offer and undertaking has delayed the
implementation of the scheme and the interest of workers and other creditors have
suffered. The court held that the petitioner had not approached the court with clean
hands and that such practice and tendency needed to be strongly discouraged and
effectively curbed so that “in future, the petitioner and such like litigants should not
gather the courage of abusing the process of law for ulterior motives and extraneous
considerations. Such motivated petitions pollute the entire legal and judicial process
which seriously affects the credibility of this system”.
CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.35

66.

In these circumstances, the court held that the respondent who had to appear

before the court in pursuance of the notice issued had to “unnecessarily incur the costs
to contest such a frivolous petition.

In our considered opinion, at least those

respondents who have appeared and contested this litigation and incurred costs must be
compensated to some extent”. The court consequently awarded costs to each of the
respondents who appeared in the matter on consideration of the totality of the facts and
circumstances and in the interest of justice and fair play.
67.

Imposition of costs normally follows the indemnity principle which is simply

described as “If you lose, you will be responsible not merely for your own legal costs
but you must pay the other side's too”.
68.

In this background, there is yet another more imperative reason which

necessitates imposition of costs. The resources of the court which includes precious
judicial time are scarce and already badly stretched. Valuable court time which is
required to be engaged in adjudication of serious judicial action, is expended on
frivolous and vexatious litigation which is misconceived and is an abuse of the process
of law. A judicial system has barely sufficient resources to afford justice without
unreasonable delay to those having genuine grievances. Therefore, increasingly, the
courts have held that such totally unjustified use of judicial time has to be curbed and
the party so wasting precious judicial resources, must be required to compensate not
only the adversary but also the judicial system.
CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

For this reason, in the State of
Page No.36

Karnataka Vs. All India Manufactures Organisation (Supra), the appellants were
required to pay costs to the Supreme Court Legal Services Authority in addition to
paying the costs to the adversarial party. Such vexatious litigation has to be deprecated.
Lord Phillips MR in a judgment rendered in the court of appeal in (2004) 1 WLR 88
(CA) entitled Bhamjee v. Forsdick & Ors. said:“(8) In recent years the courts have become more conscious of
the extent to which vexatious litigation represents a drain on the
resources of the court itself, which of necessity are not infinite.
There is a trace of this in the judgment of Staughton LJ in
Attorney-General v. Jones (1990) 1 WLR 859, 865C, when he
explained why there must come a time when it is right for a court
to exercise its power to make a civil proceedings order against a
vexatious litigant. He said that there were at least two reasons:
“First, the opponents who are harassed by the worry
and expense of vexatious litigation are entitled to
protection; secondly the resources of the judicial
system are barely sufficient to afford justice without
unreasonable delay in those who do have genuine
grievances and should not be squandered on those
who do not.”
69.

The same concerns were articulated in Attorney-General Vs. Ebert (2004)

EWHC 1838 (Admn.) thus:“Mr. Ebert's vexatious proceedings have ....... been very
damaging to the public interest; quite aside from the oppression
they have inflicted on his adversaries. ... The real vice here,
apart from the vexing of Mr. Ebert's opponents, is that scarce and
valuable judicial resources have been extravagantly wasted on
CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.37

barren and misconceived litigation, to the detriment of other
litigants with real cases to try.” Silber J, concurring, referred (at
para 61) to “a totally unjustified use of judicial time”.
70.

The Division Bench of this court has further considered yet another impact of

frivolous and vexatious litigation. In 1995 (59) DLT 604 Jagmal Singh Vs. Delhi
Transport Corporation, the court was called upon to consider a challenge to the
disciplinary proceedings at the hands of an employee of the Delhi Transport
Corporation. While noticing the various reasons as to the self-imposed limitations on
the courts in interfering with interlocutory stages of departmental proceedings, the court
arrived at a finding that the writ petition by the petitioner was not only misconceived
but an abuse of the process of the court. After so holding, the court observed thus:“We are firmly of the view that petitioner has resorted to the
dilatory tactics hereby crippling the progress of the departmental
enquiry pending against him for the last about eight long years.
It is not only unfortunate but matter of concern to all of us being
the members of the society, that the petitioner by indulging in
this type of frivolous litigation has not only wasted his time and
money but has also wasted the time of the court and other
public functionaries thereby causing unnecessary drain on the
resources of public exchequer whose coffers are filled in by poor
people's money. In such a case with a view to discourage
frivolous litigation, it becomes our duty not only to see that the
petitioner is saddled with exemplary costs but also to ensure that
he gets no benefit on account of the delay caused by him in the
departmental enquiry pending against him.”
71.

There have been several other instances when the courts have been called upon to

CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.38

consider such frivolous and sham claims. In the judgment dated 17th July, 2006 passed
by this court in Arb.Petition No.22/2006 entitled M/s Ge Countrywide Consumer
Financial Services Ltd. Vs. Shri Prabhakar Kishan Khandare & Anr., it was observed
thus:“30. The matter however cannot rest here. It is apparent that the
petitioner has caused the respondents to incur heavy expenses and
to contest litigation in a city where they do not reside or work for
gain. The petition was filed in the district courts wherein it was
contested by the respondents and thereafter in the jurisdiction of
this court. Having regard to the entire conspectus and facts
noticed above, in my view, punitive and exemplary costs deserve
to be imposed on the petitioner for its conduct in effecting the
interpolations in the agreement and placing reliance on the same
before this court as well as in compelling the respondents to
contest litigation which it knew was not maintainable within the
jurisdiction of this court. The petitioner also deliberately and mala
fide concealed a material facts while filing the present petition.
The petitioner has deliberately wasted precious court time with
impunity and without remorse. Therefore, whether dismissal or
withdrawl, the petitioner cannot be permitted to get away without
compensation to the respondents and the justice system. The
matter has been listed before this court on several dates and before
the District Courts before that. Such conduct has not only to be
condemned but it is necessary to impose such costs as would deter
the petitioner and others like it from resorting to such tactics.
Therefore, while dismissing the petition I hereby impose
punitive and exemplary costs on the petitioner of Rs.1,20,000/The petitioner shall apportion the costs which have been awarded
equally between the respondents, the Delhi High Court Lawyers'
Social Security & Welfare Fund and the National Legal Aid Fund
(NALSA). The costs shall be deposited by the petitioner within
four weeks. Proof of deposit of the costs shall be placed before
this court.”
CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.39

72.

It has been held that the present petition is wholly misconceived and without

merit. In my view, the petitioner has wasted valuable judicial time unjustifiably with
the intent to oppress its adversaries for commercial gains. The petitioner has persisted
with this petition despite having been unsuccessful in obtaining prohibitory order which
it has sought in the earlier litigation. Undoubtedly, the petitioner must be required to
compensate the other side by the costs which they would have incurred in the litigation
and also to afford some measure of compensation to the judicial system.
73.

In 2006 (32) PTC 133 (Del.) entitled Austin Nichols & Anr. Vs. Arvind Behl &

Anr., a learned Single Judge of this court has expressed the view that mere injunction
does not subserve the interest of unsuccessful party and that the actual legal costs
incurred by them for contesting the application would be awarded to the party that
succeeds. The plaintiff had indicated that it had incurred costs of Rs.18,85,000/-. In
these circumstances, as the plaintiff succeeded in the application, it was held that it was
entitled to costs which were quantified at Rs.18,85,000/- even at the interlocutory
stage.
74.

Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the present case and the

quantification of costs by the Apex Court and this court in the cases which have been
noticed hereinabove.

In my view, the present case is also a fit case where the

respondents deserve to be compensated with costs. It is apparent from the aforegoing
CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.40

discussion that the this petition was filed by the petitioner to extract commercial gain
against persons who are far beyond the territorial jurisdiction of this court. Not a whit
of allegation is contained in the petition that any order was passed against them or they
were having knowledge of the same, to enable this court to hold the respondent guilty
of wilful violation of the order passed by this court. Protracted proceedings have taken
place in the present case and arguments spread over several years. The petition has
been found to be wholly without merit, vexatious and frivolous. Undoubtedly, the
petitioner must be burdened with heavy costs for filing such a petition.
75.

It is accordingly directed that the petitioner shall pay the respondent no.2 costs

which are quantified at Rs. 1,00,000/- within a period of two weeks of this order. In
addition thereto, the petitioner shall pay to each of the Delhi High Court Legal Services
Committee and the National Legal Aid Fund, an amount of Rs.50,000/- within the
period of two weeks of this order.
Proof of payment of costs shall be placed before the Deputy Registrar (Original).

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
October 19, 2006
aa

CCPO No.130/2005 in CS (OS) No.361/2004

Page No.41

