IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
I.A. No. 470/2005 in CS (OS) No. 880/2004
Judgment reserved on: January 11,
2007
Da te of decision: February 19, 2007
RASHTRIYA MAHILA KOSH
through: Mr. Mohinder Singh, Adv.

.... Plaintiff

VERSUS
THE DALE VIEW & ANR.
....Defendants
through: Mr. V. Shekhar, Sr. Adv. with Mr. S. Ganesh and
Mr. P. Dubey, Advs.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment? Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest? Yes
GITA MITTAL, J
1.

By this judgment, I propose to decide I.A. No. 470/2005

filed by the defendants under the provisions of Order 37 Rule 3(5)
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 seeking leave to defend the
present suit.

In order to appreciate the issues raised in the

application, it becomes necessary to notice certain essential facts.
2.

Rashtriya Mahila Kosh, the plaintiff herein is a society

registered under the Society Registration Act carrying on its

CS (OS) No. 880/2004

page 1 of 23

activities under the directions of the Department of Women and
Child Development of the Ministry of Human Resources
Development, Government of India having its office at 1, Abul
Fazal Road, Bengali Market, New Delhi-110001.

Amongst the

other activities of the plaintiff, it is contended that the plaintiff is
engaged in advancing loans to the poor women through Non
Governmental Organisations (NGOs).
3.

The defendant no. 1 is a registered co-operative society

located in Thiruvananthapuram in the State of Kerala. It is stated
to have approached the plaintiff in the year 1994 through its
Director, Mr. C. Christu Das, defendant no. 2 herein for a loan in
the main loan scheme. Between the period from 21st March, 1994
and 14th March, 1997, vide three sanction letters dated 21st March,
1994, 30th September, 1994 and 14th March, 1997, the plaintiff
sanctioned loan for a total sum of Rs. 58,42,730/-

to the

defendant no. 1 under the Main Loan Scheme. Towards these
sanctions, the defendant no. 1 executed various documents
including Memorandum of Agreements, Demand Pronotes etc.
from time to time and agreed to be bound by the terms and
conditions of the agreement and the sanction letters.
4.

The plaintiff places reliance on guarantee deeds executed by

CS (OS) No. 880/2004

page 2 of 23

the defendant no. 2 who had stood guarantor for the loan facility
given to the defendant no. 1.

The entire sanctioned loan was

disbursed to the defendants by the plaintiff by Disbursement
Advices between the period from 12th April, 1994 to 17th
September, 1997 through demand drafts.
5.

The plaintiff has further contended that a further loan

amount of Rs. 20 lakhs in the category of Revolving Fund Scheme
was sanctioned to the defendant no. 1 vide sanction letter dated
19th June, 1997 against execution of the Articles of Agreement
dated 19th July, 1997 and a demand pronote of the same date by
defendant no. 1 in favour of the plaintiff. The defendant no. 2
again executed a guarantee deed dated 19th July, 1997 in favour of
the plaintiff and again promised to pay the loan amount to the
plaintiff in the event of failure of defendant no. 1 to repay the same
along with interest at the rate of 8% per annum.
It is submitted that the amount was again disbursed to the
defendants vide Disbursement Advice dated 14th August, 1997.
6.

There is no dispute that these loans were granted by the

plaintiff to the defendants for the purpose of disbursement of the
same to the members/self help groups within the period stipulated
in the loan documents.
CS (OS) No. 880/2004

As per the agreements executed by
page 3 of 23

defendant no. 1, any amount which was not disbursed within the
stipulated period by the defendant no. 1 in favour of the
members/self help groups, was required to be refunded to the
plaintiff by the defendants forthwith failing which, again penal
interest at the rate of 8% per annum was chargeable besides the
interest of 8% per annum in the loan agreement.
7.

On account of failure of the defendants to maintain the

financial discipline despite reminders dated 27th July, 2001 and
27th August, 2001, it has been pointed out that the defendants
lastly paid a sum of Rs. 1 lakh on 8th July, 2002 in the Main Loan
Scheme out of which a sum of Rs. 97,445/- was adjusted towards
the principal and a sum of Rs. 2,555/- was adjusted towards
interest. The defendants are also stated to have paid a sum of Rs.
30,246/- on 21st March, 2002 in the Revolving Fund Scheme
which has been adjusted towards the interest by the plaintiff. As
the defendants failed to make any payment in respect of the loans
received by them, a legal notice was sent by the plaintiff on 19th
September, 2003.
8.

On failure of

the defendants to comply with the notice

demand, the plaintiff was constrained to file the present suit
seeking recovery of Rs. 26,54,786/- against the defendants
CS (OS) No. 880/2004

page 4 of 23

inclusive of the principal and the interest amounts.
9.

The suit has been filed by the plaintiff under the provisions

of Order 37 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 which provides
the summary procedure for effecting recovery of amounts. As per
the prescribed procedure, the defendants have entered appearance
and in answer to the summons for judgment, have filed the
present application i.e. I.A. No. 470/2005 under Order 37 Rule
3(5) of the CPC. The principal objection taken to the suit is based
on an objection to the territorial jurisdiction of this court to
entertain and adjudicate upon the subject matter of the suit.
According to the defendants, the entire cause of action for filing
the present suit arose in the State of Kerala which is outside the
territorial jurisdiction of this court.
10.

It has further been contended that the defendant no. 1 had in

fact implemented the micro-credit programme of the plaintiff for
which purpose it had availed the loans under the main loan
scheme and the revolving fund scheme.

According to the

defendants, this amount was disbursed to various micro-credit
groups in the area of operation of the defendants in the State of
Kerala. This disbursement was with a view to extend the financial
facilities to poor women for their income generation activities. As
CS (OS) No. 880/2004

page 5 of 23

per the scheme of the plaintiff, the beneficiaries of the
disbursement belong to the low income group and that the
defendants had done their utmost to strictly adhere to the
repayment of the loan as per the repayment schedule. The default
has occurred only because of the defaults by the beneficiaries who
failed to repay the loan amount to the defendants as per the
repayment schedule. The poor women who are the beneficiaries
under the loans suffered huge losses as a result of natural
calamities as flood, cyclone etc. which affected their repayment
capacity.

The

defendants

have

stated

that

they

have

communicated the plaintiff of these facts along with sufficient
reliable documents.
11.

It has further been contended that on account of implied

instructions from the Government of India, no strict documents of
repayments and consequences of non-payment as per schedule
could be procured from the poor women while disbursing the
loans and that the defendants have abided by such instructions.
The further submission is that all steps to recover the amounts
from the women to whom the loans were disbursed have not
evoked any fruitful result and that the list of the defaulters with
the reasons for their non-payment of loans have been sent to the
CS (OS) No. 880/2004

page 6 of 23

plaintiff on several occasions. According to the defendants, the
Secretary of the Government of Kerala and officers of the Social
Welfare Department are also satisfied with the real problem. On
these facts, the defendants have contended that their defence
raises triable issues and they are entitled to leave to defend the
present suit unconditionally.
12.

Reliance has been placed on the pronouncements of the

Apex Court reported in JT 1998 (3) SC 341 M/s Sunil
Enterprises

&

Anr.

Vs.

SBI

Commercial

and

International Bank Ltd. and in (1996) 3 SCC 443 South
East Asia Shipping Co. Ltd. Vs. Nav Bharat Enterprises
Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. and on the pronouncement of this court in the
judgment dated 8th September, 2005 rendered in I.A. No.
5879/2005 in CS (OS) No. 442/2004 entitled Rashtriya
Mahila Kosh Vs. Youth Charitable Organisation and Ors.
to contend that no part of cause of action had arisen in Delhi and
as such, this court does not have the territorial jurisdiction to
entertain and adjudicate upon the subject matter of the case.
13.

On the other hand, Mr. Mohinder Singh, learned counsel for

the plaintiff has contended that the defendants were disbursed the
loan amount against disbursement advices. Reliance has been
CS (OS) No. 880/2004

page 7 of 23

placed on a disbursement advice dated 28th April, 1997 whereby it
is pointed out that the defendants received the disbursement
advice by hand at Delhi. It has further been submitted that the
defendants sent the documents to the plaintiff at Delhi which were
signed by the plaintiff at Delhi. In this behalf, reference is made to
an application for withdrawal which is undated but refers to a
sanction letter dated 14th March, 1997 and 19th June, 1997 sent by
the defendants.
14.

Learned counsel for the plaintiff has also placed reliance on

copies of letters dated 7th August, 1997, 11th August, 1997, 10th
September, 1997, 20th May, 1997 and 30th March, 1999 sent by the
defendants to the plaintiff enclosing certain amounts which were
payable by them.

It has been therefore contended that these

letters have established the fact that the amounts were payable to
the plaintiff by the defendants at Delhi.

According to learned

counsel for the plaintiff, in view of the letters dated 23 rd March,
1999 and 20th May, 1999, the defendants had clearly admitted their
liability to pay the claimed amount to the plaintiff and the
defendants have no defence to the suit filed by the plaintiff and as
such, the application seeking leave to defend merited summary
rejection.
CS (OS) No. 880/2004

page 8 of 23

In support of these submissions, reliance is placed on the
judicial pronouncements reported in 106 (2003) DLT 340
Continental and Eastern Agencies Vs. Coal India Ltd. &
Ors.; 111 (2004) DLT 736 M/s Dura-line India Pvt. Ltd.
Vs. M/s BPL Broadband Network Pvt. Ltd.; AIR 2002
Kerala 397 Dr. Jose Paul & Anr. Vs. Jose & Ors.; AIR
1964 Calcutta 418 State of Punjab Vs. A.K. Raha
(Engineers) Ltd.; and AIR 1998 AP 381 Rajasthan State
Electricity Board & Ors. Vs. M/s Dayal Wood Works.
15.

Having heard learned counsels for the parties, I find that the

present suit is based on agreements, guarantee deeds and
pronotes which were executed by the defendants. The documents
have been executed on the stamp papers and have been procured
at Kerala. These documents also prima facie reflect that they have
been executed at Kerala. The pronotes and guarantee deeds relied
upon by the plaintiff also show that they have been signed by the
defendants at Kerala. The payments which have been made by the
plaintiff have admittedly been made through bank drafts. The
copies of the bank drafts which have been placed on record show
that the bank drafts are payable at Kerala. Therefore, so far as the
contention of the plaintiff that these documents were executed at
CS (OS) No. 880/2004

page 9 of 23

Delhi is concerned, the same is the matter which cannot be
decided by a mere examination of the documents but would
require evidence in support of the respective contentions. There is
also no dispute that the loans have been issued to poor women
needing micro-finance at Kerala as per the scheme of the plaintiff.
16.

It is further noteworthy that the agreement dated 12th

October, 1994 executed by defendant no. 1 stated that interest on
the dues would be as was specified in the letter of sanction of the
facility. The amount of the loan was sanctioned vide letter dated
30th September, 1994 wherein the rate of interest which the
plaintiff could charge was 8% per annum. The plaintiff has based
the suit claim on a demand made on the defendants by its legal
notice dated 19th September, 2003 wherein it has been stated that
repayment of the loan amount was to be effected by the
defendants to the plaintiff with interest at the rate of 8% per
annum with quarterly rates.

The suit claim is based on such

computation of the interest. I find that the suit also contains a
prayer for a demand of future interest at the rate of 16% per
annum from the date of filing of the suit.
17.

So far as interest liability is concerned, in the plaint it has

been alleged that the defendants were liable to pay 8% interest per
CS (OS) No. 880/2004

page 10 of 23

annum and upon default by the defendants, the defendants are
liable to pay penal interest at the rate of 8% per annum.
Therefore, there is apparent variation in the claim made by the
plaintiff at different places. In the light of such varying claims and
pleas, the liability of the defendants towards interest cannot be
also determined without evidence.
18.

Undoubtedly, there is no clause restricting exclusive

jurisdiction to any court contained in the agreements between the
parties. I find that so far as the pronouncement of this court
reported in 106 (2003) DLT 340 Continental and Eastern
Agencies Vs. Coal India Ltd. & Ors. and the pronouncements
of the Apex Court reported in AIR 2002 Kerala 397 Dr. Jose
Paul & Anr. Vs. Jose & Ors.; AIR 1964 Calcutta 418 State
of Punjab Vs. A.K. Raha (Engineers) Ltd.; and AIR 1998
AP 381 Rajasthan State Electricity Board & Ors. Vs. M/s
Dayal Wood Works. are concerned, the same considered
adjudication of the objection with regard to jurisdiction after
recording of evidence. In these cases, the plaintiffs have in fact, in
their evidence established that the contracts were communicated
to the plaintiff at Delhi and that the payments of the claims were to
be effected by the defendants at Delhi.
CS (OS) No. 880/2004

page 11 of 23

It was upon consideration of the evidence which was led in
all these cases, that the courts had returned categorical findings to
the effect that the court where the suit had been filed has
territorial jurisdiction as part of the cause of action had arisen
there.
This is certainly not the position in the instant case. At this
stage, this court is called upon to merely examine the pleadings
and the documents in the matter from the aspect of ascertaining as
to whether the defence raised by the defendants raises any triable
issues.
19.

Learned counsel for the plaintiff has relied on the common

law rule that a debtor must seek the creditor for payment and for
this reason also, placed reliance on AIR 1964 Calcutta 418
State of Punjab Vs. A.K. Raha (Engineers) Ltd. Mr. V.
Shekhar, learned senior counsel for the defendant has however
contended that this general common law rule cannot be applied in
abstract in the light of law which has evolved subsequently and
that application of such a rule would work extreme hardship in the
given facts to the defendants.
20.

It is noteworthy that such an objection as to territorial

jurisdiction of a court have repeatedly came up for consideration
CS (OS) No. 880/2004

page 12 of 23

before the Supreme Court which has authoritatively laid down the
applicable principles.
21.

It is well settled that the territorial jurisdiction of a civil court

would be ascertained having regard to the place of accrual of cause
of action. This issue has fallen for consideration in a catena of
judicial pronouncements by the Apex Court reported at AIR 1985
SC 1289 = (1985) 3 SCC 217 State of Rajasthan vs Swaika
Properties; AIR 2002 SC 126 Union of India vs Adani
Export Ltd. & Ors.; (2004) 9 SCC 786 National Textile
Corporation Ltd. & Ors. Vs Haribox Swalram & Ors.;
(2004) 6 SCC 254 Kusum Ingots & Alloys Ltd. vs Union
of India & Anr.; AIR 1992 SC 1514 M/s Patel Roadways
Limited Bombay Vs. M/s Prasad Trading Company; JT
1994 (5) SC 1 Oil & Natural Gas Commission Vs. Utpal
Kumar Basu & Ors.; (1996) 3 SCC 443 South East Asia
Shipping Company Ltd. Vs. Nav Bharat Enterprises Pvt.
Ltd. Several pronouncements of Division Bench of this court also
have adjudicated upon this issue. In the judgments reported at 85
(1997) DLT 81 DB Sector 21 Owners Welfare Association
Vs. Air Force Naval Housing Board & Ors.; and (2003)
69 DRJ 98 A.K. Surekha & Ors. Vs The Pradeshiya
CS (OS) No. 880/2004

page 13 of 23

Investment Corporation of U.P. Ltd & Anr.; and (2004)
73 DRJ 104 Callipers Naigai Ltd. & Ors. vs Government
of NCT of Delhi & Ors., this court has considered the same
issue.
22.

I have had occasion to deal with this issue on two earlier

occasions. In a decision rendered on 4th January, 2007 in
Arbitration

Application

No.

242/2006

M/s

Rattan

Singh

Associates (P) Ltd. Vs. M/s Gill Power Generation Co. Pvt. Ltd.
and an earlier decision rendered on 23rd December, 2005 in Writ
Petition (C) No.5133/2005 Jai Ganesh Petroleum Vs. Union of
India & Anr., upon a careful consideration of the principles laid
down in the several judicial pronouncements noticed hereinabove,
so far as the accrual of the place of cause of action which would
enable a court to have territorial jurisdiction to adjudicate upon a
lis relating thereto, the following principles had been culled out:(i)

making and signing of a contract is part of cause of action;

(ii)

parties cannot by consent confer jurisdiction on a court;

(iii) In the case of several courts having jurisdiction, parties can
legally agree to exclude the jurisdiction of any of such courts and
elect to restrict territorial jurisdiction to one out of such courts
which otherwise has jurisdiction;
CS (OS) No. 880/2004

page 14 of 23

(iv)

the high court must be satisfied from the entire facts pleaded

in support of the cause of action that those facts which constitute
the cause or are necessary to decide the dispute have wholly arisen
within its territorial jurisdiction, or, in any case, which have,
atleast in part, arisen within its jurisdiction;
(v)

each and every fact pleaded in the petition does not ipsofacto

lead to the conclusion that those facts constitute cause of action
vesting territorial jurisdiction upon the court to adjudicate upon
the lis;
(vi) only those facts pleaded which have a nexus or relevance
with the issues involved in the lis confer territorial jurisdiction on
the court;
(vii) in determining an objection relating to lack of territorial
jurisdiction, the court must take all the facts pleaded in support of
the cause of action as pleaded in the petition into consideration
without embarking upon an inquiry as to the correctness or
otherwise to the fact that;
(viii) A question of territorial jurisdiction must be apparent on the
facts pleaded in the petition, the source or otherwise of the
averments made in the writ petition being immaterial. In matters
where the parties have agreed to restrict jurisdiction to one or the
CS (OS) No. 880/2004

page 15 of 23

other court out of several courts which may have territorial
jurisdiction, such clause would be enforceable only if the litigation
which has arisen falls within the domain of the subject matter
which is being provided in such clause. The parties may have
confined jurisdiction to litigation arising only under the
agreement. In such cases, the court has to arrive at a finding that
the litigation between the parties was within the domain of the
clause confining jurisdiction. If it does not, then the territorial
jurisdiction of the court could be barred;
(ix) The court must be satisfied that all relevant facts which have
merely a substantial nexus with the lis are located within its
territorial jurisdiction;
(x)

Even if it were to be held that a court has jurisdiction, yet

guided by principles of forum non-conveniens, the court may
divert the parties to the court having a closer connection with the
subject matter of the litigation. Residence of parties, location of
evidence, situs of the dispute and such like considerations could
guide the decision of the court to this effect.
(xi) To the above, yet another principle requires to be added. It
also requires to be borne in mind that a trivial or insignificant part
of the cause of action arising at a particular place or where it may
CS (OS) No. 880/2004

page 16 of 23

have incidentally arisen, would not be sufficient to confer
territorial jurisdiction on the court. It is the court within whose
whose jurisdiction, the cause of action has substantially or
predominantly arisen which would have territorial jurisdiction to
adjudicate upon the lis.
23.

My attention had been drawn to the judgment rendered in

M/s Engineering Projects (India) Ltd. Vs. M/s Greater
Noida Industrial Development & Anr. reported at ILR
(2004) II Delhi 88, wherein applying some of the principles
noticed hereinabove, it was held that primacy has to be given to
such place where the cause of action has mainly or substantially or
predominantly arisen, in preference to or exclusion of a place
where it has incidentally or partially arisen. This, the court held,
has a a great pragmatic purpose and ensures convenience of
investigation and minimization of expenses. It was noticed that
the forum of convenience, from the perspective of the plaintiff,
has been looked at askance. A fortiori, where the defendant does
not have its principal or concerned office and the cause of action
has not substantially and overwhelmingly arisen at that particular
place, courts situated there should decline to exercise jurisdiction
in preference to the court possessing an umbical connection with
CS (OS) No. 880/2004

page 17 of 23

the cause of action. This will root out the pernicious practice of
forum shopping.
24.

In (1996) 3 SCC 443 South East Asia Shipping Co.

Ltd. Vs. Nav Bharat Enterprises Pvt. Ltd. & Ors., the apex
court held that mere issuance of the bank guarantee at Delhi could
not give rise to cause of action here.
25.

Therefore, in order to hold that this court has territorial

jurisdiction to entertain and adjudicate upon the subject matter of
the case, it is to be held that it is not a minor part of cause of action
which has to arise within the territorial jurisdiction of this court
but a substantial part of cause of action has to arise within the
territorial jurisdiction of this court. As noticed above, it is well
settled that the signing and execution of the agreement is a part of
cause of action.
26.

In the instant case, from a consideration of the material laid

before this court at this stage it is not possible to return a finding
that the agreement has been executed at Delhi.

This issue

certainly requires evidence to be led on the respective contentions
before a finding could be returned with regard to jurisdiction of
this court.
27.

So far as the plea of the plaintiff with regard to general rule

CS (OS) No. 880/2004

page 18 of 23

that the debtor must seek creditor is concerned, in my view, the
mere fact that the demand for payments may have been sent by
the plaintiff to the defendants at Delhi or that a demand draft
payable at Kerala was collected at Delhi, would not be sufficient,
without anything more, to apply such a rule and on this premise,
to hold that this court has the jurisdiction and the defendants were
required to make all payments at Delhi.
28.

I also find that the pleas similar to those raised before this

court have been the subject matter of a judicial pronouncement.
The issues before the court in the judgment rendered on 8th
September, 2005 in I.A. No. 5879/2005 in CS (OS) No.
442/2004 entitled Rashtriya Mahila Kosh Vs. Youth
Charitable Organisation and Ors. are identical to the issues
raised before this court.
29.

This case was also filed by the present plaintiff under Order

37 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 against the defendants.
The defendants had sought leave to defend on grounds similar to
those raised by the present defendants including the plea relating
to territorial jurisdiction of the court. In similar facts, this court
had arrived at a conclusion that the defendants have raised triable
issues and granted unconditional leave to defend to the
CS (OS) No. 880/2004

page 19 of 23

defendants.
30.

So far as the issue with regard to the grant of unconditional

leave to defend to the defendants is concerned, the court was
guided by the following principles laid down by the Apex Court in
(1958) SCR 1211 Santosh Kumar Vs. Mool Singh wherein
the court summed them up thus:“(a) If the defendant satisfied the Court that he
has a good defence to the claim on merits, the
defendant is entitled to unconditional leave to
defend.
(b) If the defendant raises a triable issue
indicating that he has a fair or bonafide or
reasonable defence, although not a possibly good
defence, the defendant is entitled to
unconditional leave to defend.
(c) If the defendant discloses such facts as may
be deemed sufficient to entitle him to defend,
that is, if the affidavit discloses that at the trial he
may be able to establish a defence to the
plaintiff's claim, the court may impose
conditions at the time of granting leave to defend
the conditions being as to time of trial or mode of
trial but not as to payment into court or
furnishing security.
(d) If the defendant has no defence, or if the
defence is sham or illusory or practically
moonshine, the defendant is not entitled to leave
to defend.
(e) If the defendant has no defence or the
defence is illusory or sham or practically
moonshine, the court may show mercy to the
defendant by enabling him to try to prove a
defence but at the same time protect the plaintiff
imposing the condition that the amount claimed
should be paid into court or otherwise secured.”
CS (OS) No. 880/2004

page 20 of 23

31.

These principles were reiterated by the Apex Court in JT

1998 (3) SC 341 M/s Sunil Enterprises & Anr. Vs. SBI
Commercial and International Bank Ltd. and in this view
of the matter, I find that this application filed by the defendants
requires to be allowed unconditionally.
32.

In the instant case, I have already held that the defendants

have raised triable issues in the application for leave to defend and
consequently, would be entitled to the same. So far as imposition
of conditions is concerned, it is noteworthy that one of the issues
raised by the defendants relates to the territorial jurisdiction of
this court to entertain and adjudicate upon the subject matter of
the present case. The aspect with regard to directing the defendant
to meet certain conditions for leave to defend is concerned, it
needs examination as to the impact of such directions and
balancing of equities in case the court ultimately holds that this
court has no territorial jurisdiction to entertain and adjudicate
upon the subject matter of the case.
33.

I further find that the plaintiff has relied upon a

pronouncement of this court reported in 111 (2004) DLT 736
M/s Dura-line India Pvt. Ltd. Vs. M/s BPL Broadband
Network Pvt. Ltd.
CS (OS) No. 880/2004

In this case, the court had arrived at a
page 21 of 23

conclusion that the contract had been concluded in Delhi and the
payments have been received in Delhi and hence, material part of
the cause of action has arisen in Delhi. For this reason, a finding
was returned to the effect that this court has the territorial
jurisdiction to entertain and adjudicate upon the subject matter of
the case.
However, bearing in mind the commercial nature of the
transaction and the facts of the case, the court granted conditional
leave to defend to the defendant.
34.

Prima facie, it appears that the disbursement of the loan was

effected by the defendants at Kerala.

The bank drafts were

encashable at Kerala. There is yet another aspect of the matter
which requires consideration. The defendants have pointed out
that the persons to whom the loans were advanced, were all
women living at the level of poverty line. A list of the debtors has
been enclosed by the defendants in this regard. The amounts of
the loans are small and in some cases, even paltry, amounts. The
difficulties expressed relate to non-payment by these poor women
on account of natural calamities. The defendants have asserted
that recovery by them were discouraged by the government
authorities. Certainly, these aspects of the matter require to be
CS (OS) No. 880/2004

page 22 of 23

considered and the merits of the respective contentions raised by
the parties need to be examined more closely.
35.

For all the foregoing reasons, the application for leave to

defend

filed

by

the defendants

deserves

to

be

allowed

unconditionally.
Accordingly, I.A. No. 470/2005 is hereby allowed and the
defendants are granted unconditional leave to contest the suit.

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
February 19, 2007
SD

CS (OS) No. 880/2004

page 23 of 23

