IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Arbitration Petition No. 84/1997
Judgment reserved on : October 6,
2006
Date of decision: October 19, 2006
BUDHIRAJA ELECTRICALS
... Petitioner
through: Ms. Anusuya Salwan, Advocate
VERSUS
M/S ROSEWOOD APARTMENTS CO-OP. GROUP HOUSING
SOCIETY
.....Respondent
through: Nemo
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
No
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
No
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in
the Digest?No
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

By this petition under Section 11 of the Arbitration &

Conciliation Act, 1996, the petitioner has sought appointment of
an arbitrator. It has been contended that it had entered into a
contract with the Rosewood Apartments Co-operative Group
Housing Society for the construction of 86 dwelling units at Mayur
Vihar. During the course of the execution of the contract, the
petitioner was submitting bills time to time to the respondent.

A.A No. 84/1997

1

The final bill was admittedly submitted by the petitioner to the
respondent on the 10th March, 1992.
2.

In terms of the agreement between the parties, the bill

required certification from the architect i.e. M/s Garg &
Associates.

On the 18th of April, 1992, the architect sought

clarifications in respect of the bill from the respondent-society.
The respondent failed to respond to the architect and
consequently, the petitioner remained unpaid. The petitioner had
therefore addressed a letter dated 2nd December, 1995 to the
architect M/s Garg & Associates.

The petitioner had clearly

notified the architect that in case no decision was received within
21 days, the petitioner would be constrained to nominate an
arbitrator on its behalf as per the arbitration agreement. In this
letter, the petitioner also reminded the architect that it had
submitted the final bill on 10th March, 1992 and the labour
escalation bill on 21st May, 1992. The architect vide a letter dated
18th April, 1992 had sought clarifications from the respondentsociety to which the respondent-society had failed to respond.
3.

The letter dated 6th January, 1996 which has been addressed

by the architect to the respondent-society has been placed before
this court. In this communication, the architect has written thus:A.A No. 84/1997

2

“
Dated
06.01.96
THE PRESIDENT,
ROSE WOOD APARTMENTS,
PLOT NO. 4, MAYUR VIHAR EXT.
NEW DELHI
SUB: FINAL BILL FOR THE WORK OF
CONSTRUCTION 86 DWELLING UNITS FOR
M/S
ROSEWOOD
APARTMENTS
COOPERATIVE GROUP HOUSING SOCIETY
LTD. (ELECTRICAL WORK) AT MAYUR
VIHAR.
Dear Sir,
We have received final notice from the M/s
Budhiraja Electricals regarding the decision
under clause no. 27 of Notice Inviting Tender to
act as Arbitrator for payment of his final bill. In
this respect, kindly refer our letter dated
18.04.92 and 16.07.95 (copy attached) in which
we have demanded certain informations
regarding advance payment if any to the
contractor after our last certificate of R/A bill no.
5 & Extra items got done without our
recommendations.
You are requested to reply the same within
a week of receipt of this letter so that action may
be taken accordingly.
Thanking you,
Yours
faithfully,
Sd/(I.M. Garg)
Garg& Associates”
4.

Thereafter, the petitioner has addressed a reminder dated

A.A No. 84/1997

3

22nd March, 1996 to the architect M/s Garg & Associates as well
as to the respondent-society. The petitioner has also addressed
another reminder dated 22nd October, 1996 with a copy to the
architect M/s Garg & Associates as well as to Mr. Ravinder
Chadha, Advocate wherein it was noted thus:-

5.

“Be it noted that in case you fail to appoint the
arbitrator on behalf of the Society within the
aforesaid time then it would be considered and
established that you are not interested in the
exercise of the powers vested in you under the
Agreement by virtue of clause 27, and in that case
the claimants shall be painfully constrained to
move an application to the competent Court for
appointment of the Arbitrator and in that
eventually the Arbitrator so named by the
claimant may also be entitled to act as a Sole
Arbitrator to decide the disputes and for which
you will have no right to raise any objection.
Please also note that the proceedings so initiated
shall be done at your expense and cost.”
This petition was filed on the 26th March, 1997 by the

petitioner as the respondent failed to take any action in the matter.
The petitioner has placed reliance on the arbitration agreement
between the parties which reads thus:“27. The Contractor shall not go to the court in
case of dispute arising out of the execution of
this works, items, conditions of the contract. At
the first instance, it shall be decided by the
architect M/s Garg & Associates, in case of
disagreement it shall be binding on both parties.
The arbitration will comprise as follows:(i) One person appointed by the Society.
A.A No. 84/1997

4

6.

(ii) One person appointed by the Contractor.
(iii) Third person – Umpire – shall be the
Architect.”
The respondents put in appearance upon receipt of notice

and have filed a detailed reply clearly denying the claim of the
petitioner and asserted that the petition was barred by limitation.
Even though none appeared to press this petition when the
matter was called out, however, in as much as such an objection
was raised in the written statement, learned counsel for the
petitioner was heard in answer to the same.
7.

It has been pointed out that the respondent failed to respond

to the request of the petitioner for giving the clarifications which
the architect has sought.
In the communication dated 6th January, 1996, the architect
had pointed out that it had written letters dated 18th April, 1992
and

16th

July,

1995

to

the

respondent-society

seeking

clarifications and informations.
The respondent had failed to respond to the same despite
receipt of the communication dated 6th January, 1996 from the
architect.
8.

It has been submitted that in these circumstances, the

matter remained pending for consideration before the architect

A.A No. 84/1997

5

and it is only when the respondent did not settle the claims of the
petitioner nor respond to the nomination of its arbitrator, that the
cause of action arose in favour of the petitioner to raise the claim
and seek appointment of the arbitrator before this court.
9.

I have given my considered thought to the submissions made

and the record of the case. It is apparent from the reading of the
letter dated 6th January, 1996 addressed by the architect to the
respondent-society that the matter was pending consideration
before the architect who had kept the final bill dated 10th March,
1992 of the petitioner pending before him. The petitioner asserted
its right and entitlement when it wrote reminders to the architect
as well as to the respondent-society.

Thereafter when it

nominated its arbitrator on the 22nd October, 1996, the
respondents refused to comply with the demand made by the
petitioner in respect of the claim raised in the final bill or by way of
nomination of an arbitrator.
10.

My attention has been drawn to the principles laid down by

this court in 2002 (Suppl.) Arb. LR 659 (Delhi) (DB)
Pandit Munshi Ram & Associates (Pvt.) Ltd. Vs. DDA &
Anr.
The respondents had raised a similar contention based on
A.A No. 84/1997

6

the claim being barred by limitation in this case as well. Upon a
detailed consideration of the pronouncement of the Apex Court
and of the High Court of Orissa, the Division Bench of this court
held thus:“13. Assuming that the signature of the
petitioner's representative on measurement
book dated 2nd February, 1994 amounts to
acceptance of the final bill, the dispute regarding
the payment of final bill still persists as is clear
from the pleadings of the parties. According to
the petitioner, the amounts are still outstanding.
According to the respondent, final bill was paid
on 5th May, 1995.
As already noted, the
measurement book dated 2nd February, 1994
did not contain any particular figure showing the
amount payable to the petitioner. Moreover,
there is a letter dated 15th April, 1997 where is
the question of its having been paid on 5th May,
1995? It is on the receipt of the final bill vide
letter dated 15th April, 1997 that the petitioner
started writing letters claiming the balance
amount due and ultimately invoking arbitration
clause. Under these circumstances, we think
that the period of limitation for filing the petition
under Section 11d(6) of the Arbitration Act
would begin to run when the respondent served
the final bill vide letter dated 15th April, 1997
and the petitioner raised his claim which
remained unpaid. As observed in the cases of
Major I.S. Rekhi dand L.K. Ahuja's case the
contractor had given no claim declaration on
19th June, 1976 i.e. after the expiry of more than
four years. This claim was disputed. The matter
went up to the Supreme Court but the Supreme
Court rejected the appeal of the UOI. In the
present case, it appears that the respondent had
been making payments from time to time.
A.A No. 84/1997

7

11.

According to them the last payment was made on
5th May, 1995. The application under Section
11(6) was filed on 30th July, 1999 i.e. well within
three years from the date of petitioner raising
the claim which was rejected vide respondent's
letter dated 22nd September, 1998. So in view of
the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the
case of Major I.S. Rekhi and L.K. Ahuja referred
to above, we think that the petitioner's
application under Section 11ss(6) of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 was well
within the limitation period prescribed in Article
137 of schedule to the Limitation Act, 1963.”
In this behalf, the judicial pronouncements of the Apex

Court reported in (1992) 3 SCC 608 S.Rajan Vs. State of
Kerala & Anr.; AIR 1988 SC 1007 Inder Singh Rekhi Vs.
DDA; and of this court in AIR 1981 Delhi 293 M/s. Oriental
Building & Furnishing Co. Ltd. Vs. Union of India can
also be adverted to.
12.

In view of the binding principles laid down in these judicial

pronouncements, there is no merit in the objection taken by the
respondents.
13.

The respondents have failed to appoint an arbitrator in

terms of the arbitration agreement and have thereby forfeited their
right to appoint an arbitrator.
Accordingly, this petition is allowed.

I hereby appoint

Justice Devinder Gupta (Retd.), R/o C-89, South Extension Part

A.A No. 84/1997

8

II, New Delhi – 110 049 as arbitrator to arbitrate on the disputes
between the parties. The learned arbitrator shall fix his fees in
consultation with both parties. The learned arbitrator would be
entitled to all out of pocket expenses as well. The parties shall pay
the fees and expenses in equal shares.
Since the issue of limitation stands decided, the learned
arbitrator would decide on the merits of the claim.

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
October 19, 2006
(SD)

A.A No. 84/1997

9

