IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
C.C.P. No.74/2007 in O.M.P. No.477/2007
Reserved on 3rd August, 2007
Date of Decision 20th September, 2007
MODI RUBBER LIMITED
... Petitioner
through: Mr. Arun Jaitley, Sr. Adv. with
Mr. D.S. Narula, Advocate with
Ms. Manmeet Arora, Advocate
VERSUS
M/s GUARDIAN INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION
& ANOTHER
.....Respondents
through: Mr. A.S. Chandhiok, Sr. Advocate
with Mr. Manu Krishnan, Advocate.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

This petition has been filed by the petitioner under Article 215 of

the Constitution of India seeking initiation of contempt of court
proceedings against the respondents.

Notice was issued to the

respondent on 30th May, 2007 and a reply has been filed to the present
petition.
Inasmuch as there is no dispute to the material dates, the same are
briefly noticed hereinafter.
2.

Disputes had arisen between the parties and the petitioner herein

had filed OMP No.477/2006 under Section 9 of the Arbitration &
CCP No.74/2007 in OMP No.477/2006

Page No.1

Conciliation Act, 1996 praying for grant of interim relief against the
respondent no.1. This petition was allowed by this court by a judgment
dated 28th March, 2007.
3.

The respondent no.1 thereafter filed an application being IA

No.4376/2007 before this court seeking clarification of the judgment
dated 28th March, 2007. Notice of this application was issued to the
present petitioner.

Reply was filed taking an objection that the

application was not maintainable.

The petitioner points out that a

rejoinder was filed to this reply on the 3rd of May, 2007 when the
respondents had taken a stand that the application seeking clarification
was maintainable irrespective of the appeal which may have been filed
by the respondent no.1.
The application was argued on several dates and an additional
affidavit was also filed in those proceedings on behalf of respondent no.1
by the respondent no.2 on 15th May, 2007.
4.

It appears that on the 28th April, 2007, the respondent no.1 filed

an appeal assailing the judgment dated 28th of March, 2007. It has
been submitted that limitation for filing the appeal against the judgment
dated 28th March, 2007 was expiring on or about the 28th April, 2007
and in these circumstances, the appeal was filed on the last date of
limitation.

Inasmuch as certain defects were pointed out by the

Registry, the appeal paperbook was returned and was refiled by the
respondent twice over, firstly on the 9th of May, 2007 and thereafter on
CCP No.74/2007 in OMP No.477/2006

Page No.2

the 25th of May, 2007.
5.

The petitioner points out that in the meantime, this court

proceeded to hear the arguments in IA No.4376/2007 and reserved
orders on that application on 17th May, 2007.
6.

The appeal which was filed by the respondent no.1 was registered

as FAO (OS) No.180/2007 came up for hearing before the Division
Bench on 28th May, 2007. The respondents point out that they had
informed the Division Bench with regard to the pendency of the
application seeking clarification of the judgment dated 28th March,
2007. The respondents have submitted that in this background, the
Division Bench had directed FAO (OS) No.180/2007 to be renotified on
16th July, 2007 to await the decision in the application seeking
clarification.
The petitioner was represented before the Division Bench as
caveator and had been served with advance copy of the appeal.
7.

This petition has been filed by the petitioner taking strong

objection to the fact that this court was not informed about the filing of
the appeal by the respondents. The petitioner submits that despite the
specific objection having been taken by the petitioners to the
maintainability of the application on the ground that only the appeal
was an appropriate remedy while hearing IA No.4376/2007, this court
was not informed about the filing of the appeal. It has further been
contended that in the light of the substantive appeal challenging the
CCP No.74/2007 in OMP No.477/2006

Page No.3

judgment dated 28th March, 2007, in fact IA No.4376/2007 had been
rendered infructuous and that for this reason, the respondents were
bound to have disclosed these facts.
8.

According to the petitioner, such failure to disclose the factum of

having filed the appeal and having taking ground `N' therein was wilful
and mala fide and deliberate concealment of material fact was
contumacious and an attempt to deliberately interfere with the
administration of justice in the light of the principles laid down in
(2007) 2 SCC 466 A.P. SRTC & Others Vs. Abdul Kareem;
(2005) 3 S.C.C. 427 Rekha Mukherjee Vs. Ashis Kumar Das &
Others; (2004) 12 SCC 713 Ram Chandra Singh Vs. Savitri
Devi & Ors.; (1999) 3 SCC 500 Dwaraka Das Vs. State of M.P.
& Another; (1995) 3 SCC 507 Delhi Development Authority
Vs. Skipper Construction & Another and (1980) 3 SCC 311
Advocate General, State of Bihar Vs. M/s Madhya Pradesh
Khair Industries & Another.
The petitioner has also placed several judgments before this court
in support of their contention that the application seeking review and
clarification was not maintainable.
9.

I have heard learned counsel for the parties at length. The limited

question which therefore arises is as to what is the effect of not having
disclosed the filing and pendency of the appeal to this court so long as IA
No.4376/2007 remained pending.
CCP No.74/2007 in OMP No.477/2006

Page No.4

10.

My attention has been drawn to a pronouncement of the Apex

Court reported at AIR 1964 S.C. 1372 M/s Thungabhadra
Industries Ltd. Vs. Govt. of Andhra Pradesh represented by
the Deputy Commissioner of Commercial Taxes, Anantapur.
In this case, the respondents had sought revocation of the order
granting special leave to appeal under Article 136 of the Constitution of
India to the petitioner by filing an application for review.

The

observations of the Apex Court in this judgment deserves to be
considered in extenso and read thus:“5. The question that arises for consideration in these
appeals is primarily whether this order dated September 4,
1959 is vitiated by error apparent on the face of the record.
How that matter becomes relevant is because the appellant
filed three applications for review of this order under
O.XLVII R. 1 of the Civil Procedure Code specifying this as
the ground for relief. These applications for review were filed
on November, 23, 1959 and apparently notice was issued to
the respondent State Government and the petition for review
came on for hearing on January 6, 1961. On that date the
learned Judges dismissed the said applications and assigned
the following as the reasons for their order:
“The only ground argued in support of these review
petitions is that leave to appeal to the Supreme Court
was granted in similar circumstances in regard to
previous year and there was no reason why leave
should have been refused in these cases. We do not
think that that would furnish a sufficient ground for
reviewing the order dismissing the petitions for leave
to file an appeal to the Supreme Court. That apart,
the Supreme Court was moved under Article 136 of
the Constitution for special leave and that was
dismissed may be on the ground that it was not filed
in time. In the circumstances, we think that our
order
dated
4-9-1959
dismissing
S.C.C.M.
Ps.Nos.4823, 4825 and 4827 of 1959 cannot be
CCP No.74/2007 in OMP No.477/2006

Page No.5

reviewed.”
The appellants thereupon made applications for special
leave from this Court to challenge the correctness of this last
order and the leave having been granted after notice to the
respondent, the appeals are not before us.

11.

8.
Order XLVII R. 1(1) of the Civil Procedure Code permits
an application for review being filed “from a decree or order
from which an appeal is allowed but from which no appeal
has been preferred.” In the present case, it would be seen,
on the date when the application for review was filed the
appellant had not filed an appeal to this Court and therefore
the terms of O.XLVII R. 1(1) did not stand in the way of the
petition for review being entertained. Learned counsel for
the respondent did not contest this position. Nor could we
read the judgment of the High Court as rejecting the petition
for review on that ground. The crucial date for determining
whether or not the terms of O.XLVII R. 1 (1) are satisfied is
the date when the application for review is filed. If on that
date no appeal has been filed, it is competent for the Court
hearing the petition for review to dispose of the application
on the merits notwithstanding the pendency of the appeal
subject only to this that if before the application for review is
finally decided the appeal itself has been disposed of, the
jurisdiction of the court hearing the review petition would
come to an end.”
Thus, the crucial dates which would ascertain maintainability of

even an application for review would be the date on which IA
No.4376/2007 was filed.
In this pronouncement, the Apex Court also laid down the
principle that a petition for review would be required to be disposed of
on merits notwithstanding the pendency of an appeal which was filed
subsequent to the filing of the review petition. However, in case the
appeal itself is disposed of, the jurisdiction of the court hearing the
review petition would come to an end.

CCP No.74/2007 in OMP No.477/2006

Page No.6

12.

It is trite that deliberate suppression of material fact or mis-

representation would disentitle to a party to any discretionary relief. It
is a settled legal principle that a person making a false statement
exposes himself to the liability of a criminal prosecution. However, it is
equally well settled that to enable the court to refuse to exercise its
discretionary jurisdiction, suppression must necessarily be of a material
fact.

As to what would constitute such material fact, suppression

whereof would disentitle the appellant to obtain a discretionary relief,
would depend on the facts and circumstances of each case. In (2007) 6
SCC 120 Arunima Baruah Vs. UOI, it was held that:-

13.

“Material fact would mean material for the purpose of
determination of the lis, the logical corollary whereof would
be that whether the same was material for grant or denial of
the relief. If the fact suppressed is not material for
determination of the lis between the parties, the court may
not refuse to exercise its discretionary jurisdiction.”
It is trite that a suppressed fact must be a material one in the sense

that had it not been suppressed, it would have had an effect on the
merits of the case. The suppressed fact must be a matter which was
material for the consideration of the court, whatever view the court may
have taken. (Ref. AIR 2004 SC 2421 SJS Business Enterprises
(P) Ltd. Vs. State of Bihar & Others).
14.

I find that the observations of the Apex Court in AIR 2003 SC

3039 S.R. Ramaraj Vs. Special Court, Bombay, throw further
light on the issue as to what action or defence would mandate stringent
action against the person so acting or pleading. In this case, the court
CCP No.74/2007 in OMP No.477/2006

Page No.7

had laid down the following principles which would guide adjudication
even in the present case:-

15.

“In order to expose a person to the liability of a
prosecution of making false statement there must be a
false statement of fact and not a mere pleading made on
the basis of facts, which are themselves not false. Merely
because an action or defence can be an abuse of process
of the court those responsible for its formulation cannot
be regarded as committing contempt, but an attempt to
deceive the court by disguising the nature of a claim is
contempt. If the facts leading to a claim or defence are
set out, but an inference is drawn thereby thereby stating
that the stand of the plaintiff or defendant is one way or
the other it will not amount to contempt unless it be that
the facts as pleaded themselves are false.”
It is equally well settled that even though suppression of material

facts would justify rejection of a petition filed by the persons so
suppressing, however the Supreme Court has held that the justice
delivery system of the country does not deprive anybody to receive
justice on the ground of technicalities alone. On account of the fact that
such justice oriented approach in this system is the hallmark,

despite

suppression of the filing of the second review petition, the court did not
reject the appeals of the petitioners on this ground alone. It was so held
in 2002 (2) JT 480 (SC) Abdul Latif Vs. Abdul Hamid &
Another.
16.

For the same reason, in 2003 (156) ELT 3 (SC) Kamkhaya

Steels (P) Ltd. Vs. Union of India, though the writ petition had
been dismissed by the High Court on the ground of suppression by the
petitioner who wrongly stated that no similar petition was filed or had

CCP No.74/2007 in OMP No.477/2006

Page No.8

been dismissed; however, on realising the mistake, a supplementary
affidavit was placed the very next date after filing of the writ petition and
a day later that affidavit was placed on the record of the High Court. The
appeal of the petitioner against the order dismissing the writ petition by
the High Court on the ground of suppression of facts, was allowed and
the matter was remanded for hearing.
17.

The present case has to be examined on these principles.

As

noticed hereinabove so far as the Appellant Bench is concerned, the
respondents have disclosed not only the filing of the application seeking
clarification being IA No.4376/2007 in the appeal but have also
enclosed a copy thereof. When the appeal was first listed, the Bench was
informed that this court was seized off the matter and the appeal was
adjourned to await the outcome of IA No.4376/2007.
18.

In the instant case, the appeal has admittedly been filed before the

filing of IA No.4376/2007 seeking clarification. Even assuming that this
application amounted to an application for review, however, the position
does not change. Copy of the appeal has been placed by the petitioner
before this court which shows that the respondents have disclosed the
pendency of the application before this court. The Division Bench is also
awaiting the outcome of the clarification petition before proceeding with
the appeal.
It is not disputed that on the date the application was filed, no
appeal had been filed by the respondents. The pendency of the appeal is
CCP No.74/2007 in OMP No.477/2006

Page No.9

also undisputed.
19.

In this view of the matter, IA no.4376/2006 certainly could not be

dismissed for the sole reason that the respondent no.1 has preferred an
appeal assailing the judgment dated 28th March, 2007.
20.

The averments of the respondent no.1 in FAO (OS) No.180/2007

with regard to the application filed in the present proceedings deserve to
be considered in extenso and read thus:-

21.

"On 28.03.2007, the Lt. Single Judge passed the
Impugned Order. It would be pertinent to point out that
the Appellant has also field an application for
modification/clarification of the Impugned Order, which
is still pending before the Single Judge. A copy of the said
application being IA No.4376/2007 along with the
pleadings therein are Annexure Y (Colly) hereto."
In the above background, so far as the Appellate Bench is

concerned, the respondents have disclosed not only the factum of filing
of the application for clarification but have also placed copy thereof on
record and the Bench was pleased to adjourn hearing of the appeal to
await outcome of the adjudication on the application filed by the
respondents.
22.

M/s Guardian International Corporation, the respondent no.1 was

represented by the respondent no.2 who has filed all pleadings before
this court in OMP No.477/2006 as well as in IA No.4376/2007 on behalf
of the respondent no.1. The respondents have submitted that the appeal
was filed subsequent to the filing of IA No.4376/2007 and they had
made complete disclosure of all facts in the appeal. Based on these

CCP No.74/2007 in OMP No.477/2006

Page No.10

assertions, it has been contended that the respondents had no intention
of hiding any facts before this court. On affidavit it has been submitted
that the omission was not deliberate nor wilful and that the same was
inadvertent. An unconditional apology has been tendered to this court
for failure to disclose the fact of having filed the appeal.
23.

The sole question which remains to be answered is the impact of

the respondent having failed to disclose the filing of the appeal when
judgment in IA No.4376/2007 was reserved. It cannot be disputed that
in the light of the principle laid down in M/s Thungabhadra
Industries Ltd. Vs. Govt. of Andhra Pradesh represented by
the Deputy Commissioner of Commercial Taxes, Anantapur
(Supra) the application for clarification having been filed prior to the
appeal and the appeal being postponed to a date of hearing to await
outcome of the appeal, it is evident that merely filing of the appeal in the
instant case could not impact adjudication in IA No.4376/2007. The
respondents have submitted that their actions were based on legal
advice with regard to the filing of the clarification application as well as
the appeal.
24.

During the course of hearing, learned senior counsel for the

respondents very fairly has urged that the blame for omission would
require to be apportioned on the person responsible for the same and in
the instant case, was attributable to counsel and none else. Based on
this submission, it is urged that for this reason, no fault can be
CCP No.74/2007 in OMP No.477/2006

Page No.11

attributed to the respondent. Mr. A.S. Chandhiok, learned counsel has
expressed regret for the omission and urged that this court accept the
bona fide of the applicant in the given circumstances.
25.

In

Delhi

Development

Authority

Vs.

Skipper

Construction & Another (Supra) is concerned, the same related to
conduct of the respondent and his wife deliberately flouting the court's
order and abusing the process of the court with a view to obstructing due
course of judicial proceedings and administration of justice. In this
case, the court first had concluded that the respondent was guilty of both
civil and criminal contempt and the apology which had been tendered
was more of the defiance than as real contriteness and hence not
acceptable.
26.

So far as the pronouncement relied upon by the petitioner is

concerned, the Apex Court in Advocate General, State of Bihar
Vs. M/s Madhya Pradesh Khair Industries & Another, the
court held that the action of the accused amounted to hampering the due
course of judicial proceedings and that its application was not bona fide
but intended to harass and oppress the opposite parties.

Repeated

applications had been filed, each one designed to circumvent, defeat or
nullify the effect of the orders of the Division Bench of the Court as well
as the High Courts having jurisdiction of the cases. The court concluded
that every application was a “daring raid” on the court and each was an
abuse of the process of the court which was calculated to obstruct the
CCP No.74/2007 in OMP No.477/2006

Page No.12

due course of a judicial proceedings and the administration of justice
which amounted to criminal contempt of court.
27.

Certainly, the facts which were before the Apex Court in these two

judgments have no parity with the facts of the instant case.

The

respondents have manifested their intention of not hiding the facts
when they made a complete and fair disclosure in the appeal which was
filed by them subsequent to the filing of the review petition.
28.

However, this is not to say that the respondents ought not to have

disclosed the filing of the appeal in the rejoinder or the subsequent
affidavit which was filed by them in IA No.4376/2007. Every party
seeking relief specially discretionary relief from the court is required to
make a fair and complete disclosure of all material facts before the court
adjudicating upon its application. Filing of the appeal was a material
fact. However, as noticed above, in the given facts, the appeal cannot
impact adjudication and outcome of the application before this court.
It has been submitted that the omission to do so was not on
account of any deliberate act on the part of the respondents and that
they had been guided by the legal advise of the counsel appearing for the
respondents and has submitted unconditional apology which has been
tendered by the respondents.
29.

In this view of the matter, I am inclined to accept the explanation

given by the respondents and the unconditional apology tendered by
them.
CCP No.74/2007 in OMP No.477/2006

Page No.13

However, propriety demands the fact that the appeal has been
filed deserved to be disclosed to the court. On account of failure of the
respondent to disclose so, the present petition has been filed by the
petitioner. Valuable judicial time has been expended on adjudication on
this petition.

In this view of the matter, even while accepting the

apology tendered by learned senior counsel on behalf of the respondents
towards discharge of contempt liability, I am of the view that the
respondents are required to compensate for its conduct and time spent
on adjudication of the present petition by payment of adequate costs.
Accordingly, the apology is accepted subject to payment of costs of
Rs.50,000/- which shall be apportioned equally between the petitioner
and the Delhi High Court Legal Services Committee. The costs shall be
deposited within a period of two weeks from today and proof of deposit
of costs shall be placed before this court.
This petition is disposed of in the above terms.
Notice issued to the respondents to show cause shall stand
discharged.

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
September 20, 2007
aa

CCP No.74/2007 in OMP No.477/2006

Page No.14

