IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 3537/2005
Judgment reserved on : 9 th May,
2005
Dat e of decision : May 20th,2005
Arun Kumar Garg
... Petitioner
through Petitioner in person
VERSUS
University of Delhi and others
...
Respondents
through Mr. S.K.Luthra, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.
The present writ petition brings to the fore the manner
in which judicial pronouncements are not being given effect to in a
timely manner thereby defeating the directions made therein.
This Court vide a judgment which is reported at 112(2004) DLT 53
entitled Abhinitam Vs. University of Delhi and others

:1:

WP(C) 3537/2005

issued specific directions in its judgment dated 8th April, 2004
directing the respondents as follows:“22. Before parting with the matter, I am
constrained to comment on certain aspects
which have come to the notice of this Court
during the proceedings of the present matter.
The admission process apparently was started in
November, 2003 and took shape only in
December, 2003 when more than half the term
was over. This is an extremely undesirable
situation. Once the departments finalise their
merit list, expeditious steps should be taken to
fill up the seats in the hostel on merit as
otherwise students are left to fend for
themselves.
The second aspect arises on
account of the fact that each candidate has to
apply to different hostels and there is bound to
be overlapping in this procedure.
The
University must consider the feasibility of a
centralised admission procedure to the hostels
where the options/merit of the candidate are
taken into consideration instead of making the
student apply to different hostels. Lastly, for the
Law Faculty admissions there should be
specified bifurcation of seats under different
categories for the three years of LLB course and
two years of the LLM course to obviate the
possibility of any arbitrariness or favoritism. It
may also be noticed that the petitioner was
asked to leave the accommodation while
admittedly even on date there is a person who is
in unauthorised occupation of a room and no
action has been taken to clear the room. The
petitioner has also given names of other persons
who were permitted to continue to stay as guests
and the only unsatisfactory answer in the
counter affidavit is that these students were
ultimately found eligible. I consider it
appropriate that these matters be considered by
:2:

WP(C) 3537/2005

the Vice-Chancellor of the University and for the
said purpose, the judgment be placed before him
for necessary action.”
This judgment cited with
approval yet another
pronouncement by this Court reported at 98(2002) DLT 679
entitled Manish Chandra Pathak Vs. University of Delhi
and others.
2.

Despite

these

two

authoritative

pronouncements,

students undertaking the LLB or the LLM courses in the Faculty of
Law of the Delhi University are being put to tremendous
difficulties in allocation of seats in the hostels.
3.

The petitioner is one such student who appeared in the

LLM Entrance Test 2004 conducted by the Faculty of Law of the
respondent no.1 on 27th June, 2004. He secured 13th rank in the
merit list and was admitted on 20th July, 2004 to the LLM first
year course. As the petitioner hails from District Hisar(Haryana),
he has no place of residence in the entire National Capital Region.
The petitioner, for want of accommodation, was compelled to take
on rent accommodation at expensive rent which he says he is
unable to afford and is also facing difficulty on account of the
expenses of food, lodging and transportation.
4.

In these circumstances the petitioner applied for

:3:

WP(C) 3537/2005

admission to the Jubilee Hall Hostel of the respondent no.1. Upon
considering the rules set out in the Handbook for 2003-2004 for
the Jubilee Hall Hostel, the directions were given by this Court in
the case of Abhinitam on 8th April, 2004, yet the Handbook for the
current academic year i.e. 2004-05 which was handed over to the
petitioner was the same as for the year 2003-04. The respondents
had taken no decision whatsoever in terms of the directions made.
Perusal of the handbook which has been placed on record as
annexure P-3 shows that merely by scoring out the year and
insertion of the fresh academic year 2004-05 in hand, the earlier
handbook was being treated as Handbook for the admissions to
the current year. The petitioner's application form was dated 27th
September, 2004.

The first admission list displayed on 6th

November, 2004 shows the name of one Mr. Prabhu Narayan
Singh of LLM first year at serial no.48 in the General Category
Seat for LLM first year students. This candidate however had been
given admission to the PG Mens Hostel and had withdrawn his
application for hostel accommodation in Jubilee Hall as back as on
1st November, 2004.
5.

It is contended that one Mr.Shailender Pratap Singh of

LLM first year who was next in the merit list of LLM first year,
:4:

WP(C) 3537/2005

filed his objection against the respondents for selecting the name
of Prabhu Narain Singh despite his withdrawal. He was assured
that the respondents would issue a second admission list for the
LLM first year general category which was stated as remaining
vacant.
6.

According to the petitioner out of 13 persons who were

shown in the merit list dated 6th November, 2004, only five were
eligible as the others were either residents of Delhi or admitted to
the three year course of LLM. Finally all other candidates above
the petitioner in the merit list lost their candidature on the ground
of having been admitted to other hostels or because they withdrew
from the admission process.
7.

In these circumstances, as no action was taken by the

respondents, to display a second admission list, the petitioner
made a written representation to respondent no.2 on 28th January,
2005 requesting them to declare the 2nd admission list and to
admit the petitioner as there was no other lawful claimant.

No

action was taken thereon. The petitioner again addressed
representation on 5th February, 2005 and 8th February, 2005 to
grant permission against the vacancy to the petitioner.

The

respondents informed the petitioner that as the admission
:5:

WP(C) 3537/2005

committee would not meet for filling up the one seat which was
lying vacant on account of withdrawal of Prabhu Narain Singh,
there would be no occasion to issue a second list.
8.

The petitioner has challenged the action of the

respondents in refusing to fill up the vacancy against which they
had wrongfully notified the name of Prabhu Narain Singh on
grounds of arbitrariness, illegality, high handedness and has
specifically contended that the respondents have failed to take any
action as per the specific directions of this Court in Abhinitam's
case(supra).
9.

In answer to the aforestated contentions Mr.S.K.Luthra,

learned counsel appearing for the respondents has contended that
the University was directed to specifically bifurcate seats under
different categories for the three years of LLB and two years of
LLM courses to obviate the possibility of arbitrariness or
favourtism. Accordingly, it is submitted, that out of the total 40
seats available under the Law Faculty quota in Jubilee Hall, the
respondents had effected admission strictly on the basis of the
existing strength of students to each course in the Faculty.
According to this two seats can be allotted to LLM course (1st and
2nd year) and rest of the 38 seats to LLB course (1st, 2nd and 3rd
:6:

WP(C) 3537/2005

year).
Learned counsel has placed reliance on the averments
made in the counter affidavit of the respondent no.1 wherein it is
stated that in terms of the directions made in Abhinitam's case
(supra) the seats were bifurcated in the meeting held on 18th
March, 2005 and 6th April, 2005. The aforestated bifurcation has
been made in terms of this decision taken on 6th April, 2005. The
material terms whereof read as under:“a) The total number of seats available in Jubilee
Hall under the Faclty of Law is 40, which includes
13 reserve seats as per University Rules.
d) As per the direction of high court dated 8th
April, 2004, in the case of Abhinitam Vs.
University of Delhi via WP 898/2004, it is quoted
that:
“For the law faculty admission, there
should be specified bifurcation of seats
under different categories for the three
years of LL.B. Course and two years of
LL.M. Course to obligate the possibility of
any arbitraries or favoritism”.
In the light of above directions, it was decided to
divide the existing seats in the Faculty of Law for
LL.B (1st, IInd, IIIrd year) and LL.M (1 & IInd
year courses on the basis of strength of students
in each course.
e) Thus on the basis of point 'c' and the decision
in 'd' the seats are divided as follows:
Out of total 40 seats, 2 seats should be allotted to
:7:

WP(C) 3537/2005

LL.M. Course and rest 38 seats to LL.B. Course.
f) On the basis of total number of seats available
in Jubilee Hall for the Faculty of law, the
following should be the bifurcation under
different courses (LL.B. 1St, IInd and IIIrd and
LL.M. 1St & Iind year) on the basis of strength of
students in each course.
Course

Present strength

Seats to be

allocatted
i) LLB 1st year
ii)LLB 2nd year
iii)LLB IIIrd year
iv)LLM 1st year
v) LLM IInd year

494
441
371
31
29

14
13
11
01
01
................................
.................

40...........
According to the distribution in 'f' no seat is
available in LL.M. Course and all vacant seats
should go to LL.B. Course.”
It is further contended that three bonafide students of
LLM course are staying in Jubilee Hall and hence no seat exists at
the moment in the LLM course.
10.

Based on these submissions it has been contended that

the petitioner cannot be accommodated.
The petitioner had brought to the notice of this Court the
fact

that

the

respondents

had

given

admission

to

one

Mr.Febroneous Sil on 13th November, 2004 against the LLM quota

:8:

WP(C) 3537/2005

even though he was not deserving as per the merit list. This was
admitted in reply on behalf of the respondents and the defence
taken was that this candidate was admitted on 13th November,
2004 prior to the decision with regard to the distribution of seats
which was taken on 6th April, 2005.
Learned counsel has also urged that in view of the
stipulation in clause 5.4 of the brochure, the academic year being
over, this writ petition has been rendered infructuous.
In answer to the contention that all the seats for the
foreign quota remained vacant and that the respondents could
have very well converted the same for admission by the general
category candidate of all Faculties, it has been urged that there are
no rules for conversion of foreign quota seats and that these had to
be kept vacant as there were no applicants for the same.
11.

Having considered the entire matter, I am unable to

accept the contentions raised on behalf of the respondents. It is an
admitted fact that the respondents had wrongfully notified the
name of a candidate namely Prabhu Narain Singh who had
withdrawn his name for admission to the Jubilee Hall as back as
on 1st November, 2004. Having so accepted the fact that one seat
was available for the LLM general category candidate, the only
:9:

WP(C) 3537/2005

option available to the respondents to effect admission to the said
vacant seat in accordance with merit.

The respondents have

admittedly failed to adhere to the merit and have admitted one Mr.
Febroneous Sil who has admittedly been given admission not as
per merit. I find no force in the submissions made on behalf of the
respondents that this admission was effected on his being a
reserved category candidate. This submission is also devoid of any
merit. Undisputably, the respondents had notified availability of
one seat for the LLM first year candidate and there could possibly
have been no reservation in respect of the only one available seat.
The respondents were also not treating the same as a reserved
category seat having allotted the same to the Prabhu Narain Singh
and, therefore, could have effected admissions thereto only in
terms of the merit list.
12.

From the manner in which the respondents have

proceeded in this matter, it is a glaring instance of failing to
comply

with

the

Court

directive.

Despite

the

judicial

pronouncement on 8th April, 2004, the respondents commenced
the admission process only after the academic courses began in
September, 2004.

Admissions were not complete even in

November, 2004 and thereafter.
: 10 :

WP(C) 3537/2005

13.

The respondents' reliance on the decisions taken on 18th

March, 2005 and 6th April, 2005 is also wholly misconceived. The
decision taken in these meetings can have no bearing on the
admission process for which the handbooks have been distributed
much earlier and admissions effected in November, 2004.
14.

The entire purpose of providing hostel facilities in the

Delhi University is to enable deserving students the facility of
campus accommodation so that their accommodation problems
including messing etc. are obviated. Despite existence of vacancies
and specific directions of the Court, the respondents are effecting
admissions arbitrarily and long after the academic course has
commenced. As noticed here-in-above, this Court in the judgment
reported at 98(2002) DLT 679 entitled Manish Chandra Pathak
Vs. University of Delhi and others had specifically held that seats
pertaining to the foreigner's quota of the Law Faculty had to be
allocated to the general category of students of the Law Faculty.
This judgment was cited with approval in
case(supra).

Abhinitam's

Despite these pronouncements, undoubtedly four

seats of the foreign quota candidates remained unfilled.
15.

The petitioner has pointed out that no prejudice would

result to any foreign student if these seats were made available to
: 11 :

WP(C) 3537/2005

general category students, even in the future inasmuch as the LLB
3rd year candidate and the LLM 2nd year candidate would vacate
the hostel on expiry of the academic session and consequently the
seats would be available against which the quota can be
maintained. I find force in this submission.
16.

This writ petition was been filed by the petitioner in

person as back as on 26th February, 2005 after the petitioner
failed to get redressal of his grievances from the respondent no.1.
The same has remained pending while the respondents took time
to examine the issues. On 2nd March, 2005 this Court has recorded
the following order:“Issue notice to the respondents to show cause
why rule nisi be not issued against them,
returnable on 21st March, 2005.
Mr.S.K.Luthra, Advocate accepts notice on behalf
of the respondents and submits that the
admission process to the hostel is still on and if
the petitioner is eligible and entitled his case
could be considered. Let the position in this
behalf be placed on record within one week.
List on 21st March, 2005.”
17.

Then again on 21st March, 2005 it was stated as

hereunder:“It is submitted by learned counsel for the
respondents that the University is in the process
: 12 :

WP(C) 3537/2005

of finalising the second list to the Jubilee Hall
and the case of the petitioner shall be considered
accordingly.
It is directed that this process shall be completed
within two weeks.
18.

Post on 14th April, 2005.”
In order to establish that no candidates existed above

him in the merit list, the petitioner has filed an affidavit dated 13th
April, 2005 wherein it was stated that the candidates had visited
the Jubilee Hall to submit their withdrawal of the candidature in
writing but the authorities had refused to accept the same.
Accordingly the withdrawals of the candidates was sent by post
and copies thereof were placed on record. The petitioner had
specifically set out the names of the candidates and the names of
the other hostels to which they had been admitted in para 9 of
such affidavit.
These facts have not been disputed on the Court record
by the respondents. The admitted position remains that there is
no other claimant from the LLM first year course to a seat in the
Jubilee Hall or above the petitioner in the order of merit.
19.

It has been pointed out that the final examinations of the

petitioner are starting from 27th May, 2005 and ending on 6th June,
2005 and that the academic session for the purposes of this course
: 13 :

WP(C) 3537/2005

is not over. Perusal of the handbook also shows that a candidate is
required to vacate the hostel only after the final examinations are
over. It is, therefore, not open to the respondents to contend that
the academic year is over. Further, having failed to take action in
the matter, the respondents cannot be permitted to fault the
petitioner or defeat his claim on a plea of delay.
20.

I have already found that the respondents have acted

arbitrarily and illegally in not making admission to the LLM first
year seat as per the order of merit. The respondents were bound
by the representations made by them while notifying the name of
the general category candidate Prabhu Narain Singh in the list on
6th November, 2004 to the effect that the same was a general
category seat and could not have given admission subsequently to
a candidate by treating the same as a reserved seat. There was, in
any case, only one seat for admission.
21.

The petitioner has also pointed out that Abhinitam, the

petitioner in the aforestated case has been admitted this year as a
LLM second year against a foreign quota seat which was converted
to the general pool. The petitioner further points out that there is
only one student namely Alok Rajoria of the LLM 2nd year who is
staying as a bonafide student in the Jubilee Hall and as such the
: 14 :

WP(C) 3537/2005

seat for the LLM first year is a general category seat and is still
lying vacant. There is no dispute on record to these facts by the
respondents. It is also to be noticed that the decision dated 6th
April, 2005 has been taken during the pendency of the present
writ petition and two weeks before the filing of the counter
affidavit.
22.

In view of the foregoing discussion, I have no manner of

doubt that the petitioner was entitled to be given the seat against
the LLM first year quota. The vacancies in the hostel exist and the
petitioner

cannot

be

deprived

of

the

benefit

of

hostel

accommodation in such arbitrary manner.
23.

I, therefore, issue a mandamus to the respondents to

admit the petitioner to the Jubilee Hall Hostel subject to the
petitioner fulfilling all other requirements within a period of ten
days from the date of this judgment. If necessary, the petitioner
shall be accommodated against the vacancies of the foreign quota
seats. The petitioner shall be liable to make payment of charges
with effect from the date that he is given admission.
24.

This Court also records its appreciation for the ability

with which the petitioner has put forth his case and manner in
which he conducted the arguments.
: 15 :

WP(C) 3537/2005

25.

The writ petition is allowed in above terms.
Dasti.

May 20th,2005
JK

GITA MITTAL, J.

: 16 :

WP(C) 3537/2005

