IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
REGULAR FIRST APPEAL (OS) NO. 269 OF 1982
Date of decision: 20th May, 2005
THE NEW INDIA ASSURANCE CO. LTD. ... Petitioner
through: Mr. Salil Paul,
Advocate
VERSUS
M/S KOCHHAR CARRIERS & ANR.
through: Nemo

... Respondents

CORAM:
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

The present appeal has been filed by the appellant/plaintiff

against the judgment and the decree dated 29th May, 1982 passed by Shri
B.B. Gupta, Additional District Judge, Delhi in the Suit No.84/1980
entitled the New Indian Assurance Company Limited Vs. M/s Kochhar
RFA No.269/1982

page 1 of 29

Carriers & Another.
2.

The suit was filed on the original side of this court on 9th July,

1979. Subsequently, on account of amendment under Section 4 of the
Delhi High Court (Amendment) Act of 1980, vide an order made, the
same was transferred to the District Courts. Upon consideration of the
pleadings of the parties, vide an order dated 20th April, 2001, the
following issues were framed:“1.

Whether the plaint is presented by duly

authorised person?
2.

Whether plaintiff has locus standi to sue?

3.

Whether the defednant is not liable to pay

any amount, as alleged?
4.

To what amount as damages, if any, is the

plaintiff entitled to recover?
5.

Is the plaintiff entitled to interest, if so, as

what rate and for what period?
6.

3.

Relief.

The facts giving rise to the present appeal to the extent that

the same are necessary for the purpose of adjudication are that the

RFA No.269/1982

page 2 of 29

appellant as plaintiff brought a suit for recovery of Rs.74,360.71 paise
against M/s Kochhar Carriers (respondent No.1 herein) as a common
carrier for seeking compensation for the loss and damage caused to a
consignment under GR No.859 dated 19th July, 1978. ex Bombay to
Delhi. M/s Bombay Dyeing Manufacturing Company Limited, Bombay
was the consignee of the goods who had consigned the goods to M/s
Wings Wear Pvt. Ltd. (arrayed as defendant No.2 in the suit and
respondent No.2 before this court) as consignee owner of the
consignment. The consignment was stated to be consisting of 16 bales of
cotton piece goods valued at Rs.69,059.14 paise. The respondent No.2 is
stated to have insured the consignment with the plaintiff under its open
policy dated 23rd July, 1976 covering all risks during transit. It was
alleged that due to negligence and misconduct of the respondent
no.1/defendant no.1, out of the 16 bales of cotton piece goods, 15 bales
which were valued at Rs.64,394.71 paise were damaged. M/s Kochhar
Carriers, the defendant No.1, is stated to have issued a Damage
Certificate dated 30th July, 1976 to the defendant No.2. The defendant
No.2 gave a written notice under Section 10 of the Carriers Act, 1865 to
the defendant No.1 in writing for damages and loss of goods and lodged
a claim of Rs.64,957/- which was repudiated vide a letter dated 24th

RFA No.269/1982

page 3 of 29

August, 1976. It was alleged that the goods were carried at owner's risk.
The defendant no.2 is stated to have preferred a claim with the
appellant/plaintiff which was settled for a sum of Rs.64,394.71 paise and
paid to the defendant.
4.

The plaintiff/appellant alleged that it had recovered a sum of

Rs.10,068/- being the salvage value of the damaged goods.

The

insurer/defendant no.2 transferred all beneficial interests and rights under
the insurance policy and certificate to the plaintiff by executing a letter of
subrogation whereby the marine policy and certificate were assigned to
the appellant insurance company. It was contended that even otherwise
the appellant/plaintiff had beneficial interest and that the plaintiff and
defendant no.2 were entitled to release the amount of compensation of
Rs.54,326.71 paise by way of principal amount and Rs.20,034/- as
interest, bringing a total sum of Rs.74,360.71 paise. The claim of the
appellant/plaintiff was based on the allegation that the defendant
No.1/M/s Kochhar Carriers had caused loss/damage to the consignment
during transit due to its own fault and negligence.
5.

The carrier arrayed as defendant no.1(respondent no.1 herein)

filed a written statement disputing the locus standi of the appellant on the
ground that there is no privity of contract between the plaintiff and the

RFA No.269/1982

page 4 of 29

defendant no.1. The legality and validity of the letter of subrogation in
plaintiff's favour was disputed and a challenge was laid to the authority
of the person who had signed and verified the plaint and instituted the
suit. A specific plea was taken by the defendant no.1 that the goods were
carried at owners risk and as such the contract between the parties
precluded no liability on the part of the defendant no.1 on account of any
loss or damage occurring in transit. The defendant no.1 also stated that
the goods were booked on 19th July, 1976 and the alleged damage was
caused on 21st/22nd July, 1976. At the time of booking, there was no
insurance and that the goods were insured after the damage had occurred
on 23rd July, 1976 with mala fide intention and in collusion with a
calculated design to lodge claim with full knowledge of the happening
and damage which had resulted in transit. The alleged negligence and
misconduct in carriage were denied. It was pleaded that the goods were
handled properly throughout and damage, if any, had resulted only on the
happening of natural calamities as a result of which the goods carrying
truck turned turtle. According to the defendant no.2, consignee had
advised the carrier that the cloth had been soaked in water and needed reprocessing. The claim of the appellant was vehemently disputed by the
appellant/plaintiff.

RFA No.269/1982

page 5 of 29

6.

After considering the pleadings of the parties, the plaintiff

filed a replication to the written statement of the respondent no.1
disputing the averments made on behalf of the defendant no.1.
7.

Vide an order dated 18th September, 1981, the matter

proceeded to evidence. The plaintiff examined four witnesses in support
of his case. Shri V.K. Keshyap, the surveyor was examined as PW 1 who
proved his survey report as Exh. P.1/1 and stated that he was working as
surveyor under the name and style of S.S. Keshyap & Company proved
his survey report. A survey report dated 25th August, 1976 is shown as
Exh. PW. 1/1. A perusal of the survey report which has been proved on
record as Exh. PW. 1/1 shows that the First Information Report was
enclosed with it. The surveyor had not also enclosed photographs of the
accident spot. We find that no such FIR or photographs are forthcoming
on record along with the survey report. Therefore, a complete report has
not been placed before this court. In his cross-examination, this witness
submitted that he was not employed by the plaintiff and he has
experience of 17 years as a surveyor. According to him, he had surveyed
the case upon receipt of a letter from the plaintiff requiring him to do so.
He submitted that he had never dealt with PVC coated cloth which was
the subject matter of consignment and that it was his first survey of such

RFA No.269/1982

page 6 of 29

cloth. He evaluated the damage on the basis of the invoice and stated
that he had conducted the survey in the godown of defendant no.1. This
witness also stated that only five of the cases of the consignment were
wet and rest were wet and muddy. In support of issue no.1, the plaintiff
examined Shri V.B. Lal, plaintiff No.2, who was then working as Senior
Assistant in the plaintiff/company. This witness proved the authority of
Shri D.V.N. Rao, the then area manager and principal officer of the
plaintiff to prove his authority to sign and varify the plaint and instituted
the suit.

Certificate of incorporation of the plaintiff was proved on

record of Exh. P.1 while copy of the power of attorney was proved as
Exh. P.2. This witness also proved the original insurance policy as Exh.
P.5 and assignment by way of the letter of subrogation made by the
defendant no.2 of the insurance policy in favour of the plaintiff. The
witness submitted that the subrogation was effected by Mr. N.A.
Thadani. The witness also proved Exh. P.6 which was being a certificate
issued on 23rd July, 1976 effecting insurance of the suit consignment and
the letter dated 20th August, 1976 received from respondent
no.2/consignee in respect of damage and claim having been lodged with
the defendant no.1 along with the claim bill allotted by M/s Wings Wear
Private Ltd./defendant no.2, dated 20th August, 1976, as Exh. P.8. The

RFA No.269/1982

page 7 of 29

certificate issued by defendant No.1 with regard to the damage to the
consignment, which was issued by the carrier, was proved on record
dated 30th July, 1976. The letter of the carrier dated 24th August, 1976
repudiated its liability to make any payment on account of the claim
alleged by defendant no.2 was proved on record as Exh. P. 10. The
carrier was placing reliance on the terms stated on the face of the goods
received to the effect that the goods were carried at “Owner's Risk” .
8.

PW.2 also submitted that the goods were auctioned after

giving notice in the newspaper through an auctioner M/s S.M.B.G.T. Pvt.
Ltd. for a sum of Rs.10,068/-. Receipt in this behalf dated 17 th March,
1977 was proved on record as Exh. P.11. The statutory notice under
Section 10 to the defendant dated 12th July, 1977 was marked as Exh.
P.12 while the receipt of the amount of Rs.64,394 and paise 71 from the
appellant/plaintiff by the defendant no.2 was proved as Exh. P. 13. The
letter of subrogation and assignment of the insurance policy dated 27th
August, 1976 was proved on record by this witness as Exh. P. 14. The
claim of interest in the plaint was stated to be based on the normal market
rates as prevalent.
9.

In his cross-examination, this witness, however, stated that he

was not present either at the time of survey nor was he present at the time

RFA No.269/1982

page 8 of 29

of auction.
10.

Thereafter, the plaintiff examined Shri Raj Singh Garg, a

Director of the auctioner M/s S.M.G.B.T. Pvt. Ltd. as PW III. This
witness has proved on record the fact that the company was appointed as
auctioner by the plaintiff. A letter dated 30th August, 1976 was proved
on record as Exh. PW. 3/1 whereby the plaintiff had intimated the carrier/
defendant no.1 to the extent that the contents of the 15 cases were
preliminarily surveyed at his godown on 30th July, 1976 and also on the
6th August, 1976 by the surveyor M/s S.S. Keshyap and Company. The
insurance company had informed the carrier that before disposing of the
salvage material to the highest bidder, it was offered an opportunity to
inspect the goods at M/s S.M.G.B.T. Pvt. Ltd. with whom the damaged
goods were stored. A maximum offer was invited upto 1st September,
1976 failing which it was notified that the goods would be disposed of to
the highest bidder and that the amount recovered would be payable to the
insured. In pursuance thereto, since no steps were taken by the defendant
no.1, a public notice was issued in the Hindustan Times on the 16th
November, 1976 inviting sealed tenders of approximately 5940 of cloth
in damaged condition.

The tenderers were notified that they could

inspect the goods at the premises with the auctioner or in the office of the

RFA No.269/1982

page 9 of 29

insurance company and would submit the tender by 23rd November,
1976.

After giving wide publicity in national dailies, as well as in

newspapers in vernacular and Urdu, the goods were auctioned on 13 th
January, 1977 for a total sum of Rs.11,000 to the highest bidder.
According to PW 3, it had deducted the expenses and, thereafter, an
amount of Rs.9,068/- were given to the New India Assurance Company
by way of a cheque towards the amount of auctioned goods.
11.

In his cross-examination, this witness submitted that the

auction was conducted by negotiations and that he had personally
collected the goods from Naraina.

The goods were stated to be

completely wet and had got damaged due to water action.

PW 11

submitted that despite the wide publicity, no offer whatsoever was
received for purchase of goods. He further stated that as per instructions
received from the plaintiff, the goods were delivered to party for
Rs.11,000/-. It was further stated that it was the plaintiff insurance
company who had negotiated the sale of the goods.
12.

PW.4, Mr. Jagdish Parshad Verma, a representative of

defendant no.2, was unable to support the authority of Shri Harish
Gurnani for making the subrogation. He has proved the insurance policy
as Exh. P.5 and the survey of insurance as Exh. P.6. The claim bill

RFA No.269/1982

page 10 of 29

lodged by defendant no.2 was proved as Exh. PW. 4/1 and the fact that
the goods were delivered in a damaged condition as well as the lodging
of the claim in support thereof. The witness proved the value of the
consignment and the payment by cheque to M/s Bombay Dyeing
Manufacturing Company Pvt. Ltd. This witness also proved a receipt of
Rs.64,394.71 paise from the insurance company. However, this witness
had not personal knowledge about the booking of the goods or the
condition when they were booked. He also submitted that the insurance
policy P-5 is a general policy and was not acceptable to the goods in
dispute specifically. He also admitted that the declaration was given to
the insurance company only on 21st July, 1996 and that Exh. P.6 was
obtained thereafter.
13.

So far as the subrogation is concerned, the witness could not

prove any resolution or authority of M/s Wings Wear Private Limited
authorising the executant Mr. Harish Gurnani to effect subrogation.
14.

In its defence, the defendant no.1 examined Shri Vijay

Kapoor, its field officer who submitted that the goods were booked with
the defendant No.1 by defendant No.2. As per the goods receipt, the
goods were booked at “owner's risk”. The value given in the goods
received was as per the declaration given by the consignee and that the

RFA No.269/1982

page 11 of 29

defendant No.1 did not know the actual price. According to this witness,
there were heavy rains in the state of Madhya Pradesh and when the
truck of defendant no.1 was crossing through Madhya Pradesh, the road
caved due to which the truck overturned. He submitted that the road
caved in because of heavy rain. According to this witness, though the
goods that were not otherwise damaged, the goods were stated to be
booked in polythene cover. The witness submitted that there was no
fault of the driver and that the goods were brought from Madhya
Pradesh. The witness submitted that Mr. Harish Gurnani, representative
of the defendant No.2, had informed the carrier that the goods will be
processed for they were not only wet and that the company would bear
the expenses of the processing. He disputed the claim.
15.

In his cross-examination, this witness admitted that he was

not present at the time of the accident and that he did not know the
whereabouts of the driver. According to him, the goods fell down on the
ground. However, it was rainy so the water seeped into the packing. The
witness disputed that they were ever surveyed by any surveyor in his
presence.
16.

The matter proceeded to judgment thereafter.

Vide the

impugned judgment and decree dated 29th May, 1982, the learned Trial

RFA No.269/1982

page 12 of 29

Judge found in favour of the plaintiff so far as the issue Nos.1 & 2 are
concerned. However, issue Nos.3, 4 & 5 were found against the plaintiff
and as a result, the suit of the plaintiff was dismissed living the parties to
bear their own costs. The appellant has impugned the findings of the
learned Trial Judge on issue Nos.3, 4 & 5 before this court.
17.

The arguments laid before this court are in support of the

challenge to the findings recorded by the learned Trial Judge. Mr. Salil
Paul, learned counsel appearing for the appellant, has relied upon the
provisions of Sections 8 & 9 of the Carriers Act, 1865 to contend that in
terms of the statutory scheme, the liability of the common carrier is
absolute for the loss or damage to any property stated to be for carriage
where such loss or damage has arisen on account of any act of the carrier
or his agents or servants or on account of any loss or damage which has
arisen from the negligence of the carrier or his agents or servants. It is
contended that as per the statutory claim, there is a presumption of
negligence upon damage occurring to the goods delivered for carriage by
a common carrier. In the instant case, defendant no.1 had failed to
discharge the onus to prove the lack of exercise of due care and caution
and had failed to prove his plea that the accident had occurred not on
account of negligence but on account of an act of God. The defendant

RFA No.269/1982

page 13 of 29

no.1 had failed to produce the driver or cleaner who were the eyewitnesses to the occurrence and as such learned Trial Judge had grossly
erred in holding issue Nos.3, 4 & 5 against the plaintiff.
18.

It is to be noticed that the present appeal was admitted on 3rd

November, 1982. Thereafter, the appellant took steps for issuance of
notice and also filed the paper book in the court. Notice of the appeal
was duly served on the respondents who had failed to appear in the
matter. The appeal was, in these circumstances, taken up for hearing
whereupon learned counsel for the appellant was heard at length. We
have also been taken through the record of the Trial Court and through
the grounds of appeal as well as the applicable provisions of law. uuu
19.

Upon careful consideration of the record and the matter in

issue, we find that as per the scheme of the Carriers Act, 1865, the
burden is cast upon the carrier who is entrusted with goods for carriage
to establish that there was no negligence on its part or on the part of its
agents or employees in carrying goods which have suffered damage.
Regard may be had to the applicable statutory provisions in this behalf of
the Carriers Act, 1865:-

“8.
Common carrier liable for loss or damage
caused by neglect or farud of himself or his agent.RFA No.269/1982

page 14 of 29

Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, every
common carrier shall be liable to the owner for loss of or
damage to any property delivered to such carrier to be
carried where such loss or damage shall have arisen
from the criminal act of the carrier or any of his agents
or servants (and shall also be liable to the owner for loss
or damage to any such property other than property to
which the provisions of section 3 apply and in respect of
which the declaration required by that section has not
been made, where such loss or damage has arisen from
the negligence of the carrier or any of his agents or
servants.)
9.
Plaintiffs, in suits for loss, damage or nondelivery, not required to prove negligence or criminal
act.- In any suit brought against a common carrier for
the loss, damage or non-delivery of goods entrusted to
him for carriage, it shall not be necessary for the
plaintiff to prove that such loss, damage or non-delivery
was owning to the negligence or criminal act of the
carrier, his servants, or agents.”
20.

Learned counsel for the appellant has placed reliance on the

judgment reported at AIR 1966 ALLAHABAD 260 (Para 11, 14 & 15),
entitled Tugun Ram Vs. Dominionof India & Others.; AIR 1964
Punjab 318 (para 10) entitled Northern India Goods Transport Co.
(Pr) Ltd. Vs. M/s Guru Hosiery Factory Ludhiana and AIR 1962
Assam 110 (para 12) entitled to contend that the onus was on the carrier
to prove that it was not negligent and that in the instant case, the carrier
had miserably failed to establish exercise of due care and caution in
carrying the goods. There can be no dispute with the proposition laid
RFA No.269/1982

page 15 of 29

down in the judicial pronouncement relied upon by the petitioner.
21.

In this behalf, we may refer to the evidence proved on court

record. It is amply clear from the evidence of all the witnesses examined
on behalf of the plaintiff that goods which were consigned with the
defendant no.1 were damaged. It is also not disputed that the goods were
damaged on account of water action. The statement of DW.1, Shri Vijay
Kapoor, to the effect that there was heavy rain in the state of Madhya
Pradesh through which the truck of defendant No.1 which was carrying
the consignment, had to travel, was not challenged in the crossexamination. This witness's statement to the effect that the rain water
seeped into the packings on account of which the goods became wet was
also not challenged. The statement made by this witness that truck had
overturned remains unrebutted.
22.

At this stage, it is necessary to note the suggestions given to

this witness in his cross-examination on the 27th May, 1982 which reads
as under:..............................
23.

From the afore-stated suggestions, it appears that the case of

the plaintiff was that the road caved in on the spot of the accident before
the truck reached the spot and the driver did not notice such defect

RFA No.269/1982

page 16 of 29

resulting in the accident.
24.

In these circumstances, the learned Trial Judge has held that

no person would jeopardize his own life deliberately and by his own
negligence after seeing that the road had caved in, he would drive into
such a spot and that it was more plausible that the road caved in when the
truck was passing over the same or that the pit in the road was not
reasonably visible.
25.

We find that the view taken by the learned Trial Judge was

reasonable and plausible. There is no dispute that there were heavy rains
in the area through which the truck was passing and also that the road
had caved in. The suggestion given to the witness of the defendant Shri
Vijay Kapoor also mala fide against the finding of the negligence on the
part of the driver of the truck. We find that the view taken by the learned
Trial Judge that the accident occurred on account of unavoidable
circumstances and that no negligence can be attributed to the driver in
the circumstances proved on record and that the accident occurred due to
unavoidable circumstances and as such, the liability of the carrier under
Sections 8 & 9 of the Carriers Act, 1865 was not attracted.
26.

From a careful perusal of the record and the position in law,

we find that even if we were to hold in favour of the appellant on issue

RFA No.269/1982

page 17 of 29

No.3 and arrive at a conclusion that defendant No.1 had failed to
discharge the onus to prove that it had exercised due care and caution
and no negligence in carrying the goods has occurred, we find that the
suit claim of the appellant would fail on yet another account which we
proposes to discuss hereafter.
27.

It would be useful to notice the position in law at this stage.

In view of the provisions of Section 8 of the Carriers Act, 1865, the
liability of a common carrier is absolute and, therefore, it cannot avoid
liability to the plaintiff based on any special contract containing clause
that the goods are carried at owner's risk. It has been held that where the
carrier admitted short delivery of goods due to an accident, and there was
no evidence to show that the accident occurred due to the act of God,
such carrier would be liable for loss of goods even when the loss was not
caused by negligence.

Printing of conditions on the reverse of the

consignment note that the goods were carried at owner's risk is not
sufficient to constitute a special contract consigned by the owner to
protect a carrier from liability. It has been so held in the judgment
reported at AIR 2004, Kerala 139 (142) entitled South Eastern
Carriers (P) Ltd. Vs. The Oriental Fire and General Insurance Co.
Ltd. and another and in the judgment reported at (2000) 2 Recent Civil

RFA No.269/1982

page 18 of 29

Reports 414 (416).
28.

In such circumstances, where the carrier has admitted delivery

of goods in his business and further admitted the loss of goods due to
accident, it would no longer be necessary for any plaintiff to prove the
liability of the carrier. The damage to the goods would be taken as proof
of such liability unless the same is disproved by evidence led by the
carrier showing due care taken by it. (Reference AIR 1993 Calcutta 26
(27) entitled National Insurance Co. Ltd. & Another Vs. Om Prakash
Poddar.
29.

So far as the stipulation on the consignment note to the effect

that the goods were booked at the owner's risk and such consignment
note is signed by the consignor and the

loss occasioned by

circumstances beyond the control of the common carrier, only then the
carrier would not be made liable for damages. This was so held in the
judgments reported at AIR 1994 Andhra Pradesh 24 (32) entitled M/s
Milap Carriers, Transport Contrs. And Commissions-Agents,
Hyderabad Vs. National Insurance Company Limited, Hyderabad
equivalent to (1974) 2 Accident Claim Case 7; and II (1991) ACC 509
at 5.11 entitled M.P. Highway Organisation Vs. New India Assurance
Co. Ltd. & Another

RFA No.269/1982

equivalent to 1991 (1) ACJ 330 (Madhya

page 19 of 29

Pradesh).
30.

Therefore, in order to limit its liability on account of a special

contract, the carrier has to prove his diligence in avoiding peril before
claiming benefit of such contract. (AIR 1977 Assam 79 (82)).
31.

It would be useful to examine the judicial pronouncement

cited by the appellant before this court which are to the following
effect...............to be told.............................................
32.

We find that in the instant case, the goods received has not

been produced on record by any of the parties. The same has not been
proved on record in accordance with law. Therefore, the bare assertion
on behalf of defendant No.1 by its witness Shri Vijay Kapoor to the
effect that the goods were carried at owner's risk as per the stipulation
and declaration on the goods receipt cannot be relied upon for any
purpose. The defendant no.1 cannot seek avoidance or mitigation of its
liability under Section 80 of the Carriers Act, 1865 on account of any
such stipulation or special contract.
33.

In view of the afore-stated statutory claim and legal position,

assuming that a carrier failed to discharge its burdenof prove with regard
to the exercise of due care and caution and the damage resulting to the
consignment for reasons beyond the control of the carrier, the question

RFA No.269/1982

page 20 of 29

which would required to be answered is the extent of the damages to the
consignment and the quantum of damages to which the consignee or the
insurance company entitled. There is no challenge to the assignment of
the benefit of the insurance claim or the letter of subrogation before us.
34.

The principles relating ot violation of the loss which has

resulted to the goods entrusted to the carrier or transportation have arisen
for consideration in several judgments.
35.

It has been held by the Apex Court that in the case of a claim

of damage or loss to goods entrusted to the carrier, it is not necessary for
the plaintiff to establish negligence even assuming that the general
principal in cases of tortious liability is that the party who alleges
negligence against the other must prove the same. The said principal has
no application to a case covered under the Carriers Act also. This is also
the position notwithstanding any special contract between the parties. It
was so held in the pronouncement of the Apex Court reported at AIR
2000 SC 1461 (1469) entitled Patel Roadways Ltd. Vs. Birla Yamaha
Ltd. to prove that the burden of proof of negligence lies absolutely on
the carriers. Reference may also be made to AIR 1970 Andhra Pradesh
41 AIR 1979 Calcutta 178 entitled Assam Roadways Vs. National
Insurance Co. and Others and AIR 2000 Supreme Court 1635

RFA No.269/1982

page 21 of 29

entitled Economic Transport Organisation Vs. Dharwad District
Khadi Gramodhyog Sangh.
36.

It has been held that in a case where a carrier does not come

forward to contest the claim of the plaintiff and as such fails to adjoure
its liability, negligence of the carrier is assumed and, therefore, need not
be proved. In such circumstances, the plaintiff would be entitled to a
decree against the carriers. It was so held in a judgment of this court
reported at AIR (2001) Delhi 353 (357) entitled Rolta India Limited
and another Vs. ELBEE Services Limited equivalent to 2001 2 DLT
232.
37.

In view of the provisions of Section 9, the Carrier would be

liable to pay when it failed to deliver the goods to the consigee in the
condition in which they were entrusted to it. However, the material
questions which would remain is the quantum at which the damages have
to be awarded. It has been held by the courts that the quantum of such
damages has to be fixed with reference to the evidence in that behalf and
that burden is on the consignee. The court cannot fix the amount of
damages when there was no evidence on record to enable the court to fix
the quantum of damages. In this behalf, we may appropriately refer to
the pronouncement reported at (1984) 2 ACC 135 (DB) equivalent to

RFA No.269/1982

page 22 of 29

(1984) 1 TAC 41 (44).
38.

It is in this background that we have to examine the claim laid

by the appellant before the learned Trial Judge. Even assuming that the
carrier had failed to discharge its burden to prove with regard to the
accident occurring in circumstances beyond its control, the plaintiff was
bound to prove the accident to which the goods had been damaged and
the value thereof.
39.

In support of this it is claimed the plaintiff examined the

surveyor as PW 1. This witness was unfortunately totally unexperienced
in making an assessment of damages to the nature of the consignment.
He had never conducted the survey of a consignment of cloth and did not
have knowledge about it. The witness had no knowledge about the
original cloth quality nor any evidence to prove the nature of quality.
This witness could not assess the marketability and utility of the cloth in
the wet condition or the uses to which it could be put and his assessment
of damages was based totally on the value of the goods as mentioned in
the invoice. We may also advert to the statement made by the witness in
his survey report dated 25th August, 1976 which was proved on record as
Exh. PW. 1/1. The survey report states that the nature of loss was on
account of water damage and the loss was attributed on account of an

RFA No.269/1982

page 23 of 29

accident. According to the survey report, the consignment comprised of
16 cases containing 640.2 meters of rich MCSF fUSI interlining valued
at Rs.69.059.14 paise as per invoices dated 22nd June, 1976 and 21st June,
1976. Copy of the report and the photographs at the site of the accident
which were obtained from the carrier were enclosed with the report. The
accident is stated to have occurred on the night intervening 21st & 22nd
July, 1976 at about 2.30 a.m. near Neem Vali Village. According to this
witness, the truck overturned on its left side into a ditch full of water and
that water had to be pumped out to take out the loaded merchant and the
truck.
40.

As per PW 1/1, four cases out of the 15 cases loaded into the

truck broke completely and were in a loose condition at the time of
survey. 53 pieces measuring 1610 meters which were loose were found
badly damaged with water and mud stained. Balance 11 cases were
packed. Five cases appeared safe and six cases were badly drenched
externally.
41.

So far as the 11 cases which were in a damaged condition are

concerned, 69 pieces which were measuring 2096. 9 meters appeared
intact and remaining 19 pieces measuring 2266.6 meters were found
badly drenched with water and mud stained.

RFA No.269/1982

page 24 of 29

42.

This witness contended that 2096.9 meters which appeared to

be in sound condition was again inspected in the presence of the
production man who expressed the opinion that the material had
absorbed excessive moisture rendering it unusable.
43.

One case was accepted by the consignee which had 432

meters cloth. In the assessment of the damages to the consignment,
according to the surveyor was to the extent of Rs.64402.12.
44.

It is noteworthy that this witness had no knowledge

whatsoever of the nature of consignment in question and he had no
authority to give an opinion with regard to the either the question of
damage or the usability of the consignment.

The witness had no

knowledge also with regard to the evaluation of either the consignment
as was originally signed or the value of the damaged goods. His report is
based on the representation made on behalf of defendant No.2. The
survey

report, therefore, is neither objective nor independent.

The

opinion on which it is based is that of the defendant No.2 and the
surveyor had made no assessment whatsoever with regard to the value of
the damaged goods.
45.

The other witness examined on behalf of the plaintiff was to

prove the accident of the damage. The representative of the auctioner

RFA No.269/1982

page 25 of 29

M/s SMGBT Pvt. Ltd. was here examined as PW 3. As per the statement
of this witness, 16 cases are stated to have been auctioned without
making a distinction between the cases which were in good condition
and the cases which were damaged. Though the semblance of open
action appears to have been created by issuance of public notice,
however, PW III in his cross-examination stated that no tender was
received and no person or the public came forward to purchase the
damaged consignment. There is a clear statement by this witness that
based on the pleadings and instructions, the goods were delivered to
some person at an agreed price. No details of the person to whom it was
delivered have been placed on record by either this witness or by the
plaintiff nor details of sale which was effected. The basis of the “Agreed
Price” is not forthcoming on record.
46.

We may notice that 2096.9 meter cloth was damaged in fact

by the seepage of water. The plaintiff had to prove that there was any
damage to this portion of the consignment or that it was in a condition
different from the condition in which it was consigned. The undamaged
cloth and damaged cloth are stated to have been disposed of at the
consolidated price of Rs.11,000/- to some person on the instructions of
the plaintiff without any proof of the basis of such valuation.

RFA No.269/1982

page 26 of 29

47.

We find that the learned Trial Judge has discussed this aspect

of the matter at great length and arrived at a finding that only 3877.6
meters of cloth was badly damaged and mud stained. The plaintiff could
have evaluated the damage and undamaged goods on the same value or
have treated the same as having been referred such a waste that it has
absolutely lost the mark and carried no value.
48.

In these circumstances, we are of the firm view that the

conclusion arrived at by the Trial Judge that there was no reliable
evidence with regard to the actual damage which had been sustained by
the consignment on record and that, therefore, the plaintiff was
disentitled to its claim of damage based on the survey report and the
alleged action. It is apparent that there was no auction whatsoever but
the consignment was handed over to some person. Material details of
this transaction have been withhold from the plaintiff in court. We may
also notice that the defendant No.1 was bound to point out that at the
time of handing over consignment, there was no insurance whatsoever.
There was no insurance cover even at the time of accident and the
resultant damage to the goods on 21/22nd July, 1976 and that the general
insurance policy was taken only on 23rd July, 1976, after the accident and
damage had occurred. There was no reliable independent witness from

RFA No.269/1982

page 27 of 29

the trade has been brought into the witness box to prove the claim).
Even the concerned representative of the defendant no.2, who had
surveyed the goods, has not stepped into the witness box.
49.

The defendant No.2 had set up a plea of collusion between the

plaintiff and the defendant No.2 in these circumstances.
50.

For all the foregoing reasons, we have no hesitation in

holding that the appellant/plaintiff miserably failed to prove of damages
which has resulted to the consignment and even the defendant no.2, the
consignee, failed to lead any evidence with regard to the violation of
condition of the consignment or the loss and quantum of damages
resulting on account of the accident.
51.

In this view of the matter, even if we were to hold that the

defendant no.1 had failed to discharge its burden to prove under Section
8 of the Carriers Act, we would be unable to grant any decree in favour
of the plaintiff inasmuch as it has miserably failed to prove the quantum
of damages.

We, therefore, have no hesitation in agreeing that the

findings arrived at by the learned Trial Judge has a basis.
52.

The appeal fails and the same is, hereby dismissed.

There shall be no orders as to costs.

RFA No.269/1982

page 28 of 29

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
(MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
JUDGE
MAY 20th, 2005.
aa

RFA No.269/1982

page 29 of 29

