: 1 :

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.1990/2003
Date of decision : 20th July, 2004
Ex. Sub. Shamsher Singh

... Petitioner
through Mr. S.R.Kalkal, Advocate

VERSUS
Union of India & others

.... Respondents
through Mr.Atul Bandhu, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE JUSTICE DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, J (ORAL)
1.

This writ petition is filed by the petitioner praying for

direction to the respondents to pay to the petitioner disability
pension @ 50% and to compute his pension as would be calculable
at the salary received by him on the post of Warrant Officer/Junior
Commissioned Officer of Army alongwith arrears and 12% interest
thereon.
2.

The petitioner was enrolled in the Air Force as

: 2 :

Combatant Soldier on 4.8.1963. It is alleged in the petition that the
petitioner while performing his duties developed some health
problems and reported to medical authorities of the Army. Due to
the aforesaid health problems the petitioner was placed in a low
medical category. Thereafter the petitioner was brought before a
properly constituted medical board and the board recommended
that the petitioner be released in a low medical category with effect
from 31st August, 1991 from Army with 20% disability pension.
3.

It is contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner

that in view of the recommendations of the Vth Pay Commission
raising the minimum percentage of disability pension to all central
government employees from 20% to 50%, the petitioner made
representation dated 8th July, 2002 for the revision of his disability
pension.
4.

Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that in

reply to the representation of the petitioner the respondent no.2
vide communication dated 31st July, 2002 sent a letter to the bank
for disbursement of the disability pension @ Rs.310/- p.m. with
effect from 1.1.1996 whereas the actual amount of disability
pension @ 20% would have been Rs.380/- p.m. and the present
entitlement of 50% disability pension @ Rs.950/-, as the petitoner
retired from the Army as a subedar i.e. Junior Commissioned

: 3 :

Officer.
5.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has drawn our

attention to the order dated 6th August, 2001 issued by the
respondent which is applicable to the Army Personnel. In the said
order it is categorically stated that the said order is applicable to all
Pre-96 Armed Forces Disability Pensioners who are in receipt of
Disability Pension as on 1.1.1996. The petitioner admittedly was
in receipt of the disability pension as on 1.1.1996 and, therefore,
the said order dated 6.8.2001 should be applicable to the case of
the petitioner. Learned counsel for the petitioner has also drawn
our attention to another circular issued by the respondents on 7th
June, 1999 which reiterates the aforesaid position. It is stated in
the said circular that with effect from 1.1.1996, pension of all
armed

forces

pensioners

irrespective

of

their

date

of

retirement/discharge/invalidment would not be less than 50% of the
minimum pay in the revised scale of pay introduced with effect
from 1.1.1996 of the rank and group last held by the pensioner. It
is also contended that the said circular also provides that the 50%
disability pension should be calculated on the basis of the rank and
post last held by the personnel below the officer rank.
6.

Considering the entire facts and circumstances of the

case particularly the contents of the aforesaid circulars and orders

: 4 :

of the respondents, we are of the considered opinion that the
respondents should re-consider the matter of revision of the
pension of the petitioner and the rank and group on the basis of
which such pension should be calculated in the light of the
aforesaid order dated 6th August, 2001 and circular dated 7th June,
1999 provided the said circulars are applicable to the facts and
circumstances of the case. In case it is held by the authority on
reconsideration that relief and benefit in terms thereof should be
given to the petitioner by the respondent, an order thereto shall be
passed as expeditiously as possible.

This writ petition stands

allowed to the aforesaid extent.
7.
shall be

While reconsidering the matter in terms of this order, it
open to the respondents to consider applicability of

various other circulars also to which reference is made by the
respondents in their counter-affidavit placed before us.
8.

A copy of the order be given dasti to the counsel

appearing for the parties.

(DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
JUDGE
(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
July 20, 2004
JK

