IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
I.P.A. No.9/2004
Date of decision:

20th September, 2007

SMT. SUMEDHA BHARDWAJ
... Petitioner
through: Mr. Manu Nayar, Advocate
VERSUS
SHRI JAGDEEP BHARDWAJ
through: None.

....Respondent

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest? Yes
GITA MITTAL, J
1.

This suit has been filed by Smt. Sumedha Bhardwaj under

Section 18 of the Hindu Maintenance and Adoption Act, 1956 on
the 24th May, 2004. The petitioner has prayed for a decree
against the respondent for grant of maintenance for the
petitioner at the rate of Rs.20,000/- per month from the date of
filing of the suit; directions to the respondent to provide a house
to the respondent and her minor daughter and litigation
expenses.
2.

The petition was filed seeking leave to sue as an indigent

person on the ground that the petitioner was not possessed of the
means to do so. On the 16th of September, 2004, the Joint
Registrar had returned a finding that the petitioner is an indigent
person and issued notice to the respondent. The respondent had
put in appearance in the matter on 14th March, 2005 but had
failed to appear thereafter. On the 7th July, 2006, it was noticed
IPA No.9/2004

Page No.1

that by an order recorded on 16th September, 2004, the petitioner
had already been found to be an indigent person and for the
reason that the respondent had appeared only once, the Joint
Registrar directed summons of the suit and application to be
issued to the respondent. The respondent was duly served with
the summons for the next date of hearing. In these facts, by an
order passed by this court on 11th September , 2006, the
respondent was proceeded ex-parte. The petitioner filed her exparte evidence by way of affidavit which remains unrebutted on
record. Inasmuch as the parties are reflected as petitioner and
respondent in the pleadings, they are so referred herein.
3.

In these circumstances, the facts established by the

petitioner on record are noticed hereafter. The petitioner was
married to the respondent in accordance with the Hindu rights
and ceremonies on 11th November, 1999 at Delhi. The marriage
between the parties was an arranged marriage.

On 4th

December, 2000 from their wedlock they were blessed with a girl
child who is named Simran.
4.

According to the petitioner, the respondent and his family

was unhappy with the gifts given by the petitioner's parents for
which reasons, the respondent hit her on 13th November, 1999
itself.

Amongst other, the respondent and his family were

continuously demanding cash and expressed unhappiness with
the dowry received by them. The respondent was giving physical
beating to the petitioner regularly and was even consuming large
quantities of liquor. Respondent was so addicted to alcohol that
he would drink even at intervals of one to two hours every day,
apart from his dependence on ciggarete and other intoxicants.
The respondent did not care to maintain the petitioner or the
daughter of the parties and consequently the petitioner was

IPA No.9/2004

Page No.2

dependent on the parents for maintenance and support. At the
same time the respondent was indulging in extra-marital
relationships with other women while passing comments and
criticizing the petitioner's physical appearance. According to the
petitioner, even the kitchen used to be locked up by the
respondent's mother preventing her from eating food of her
choice and there were constant demand of cash, luxuries from the
respondent who were pressing the petitioner to pressurize the
family to give substantial amount.

The respondent was also

always so drunk and under such a bad condition that he had no
interest in marital relations with the petitioner causing distress to
her. The petitioner was thrown out of the house in September,
2003 by the respondent and he got aggravated because the
petitioner brought up an issue of his sending lurid messages to
the petitioner's aunt and to Simran's school principal.
5.

On 31st December, 2003, the petitioner was brought back to

the matrimonial home by the interventions of cousins and
relatives on the promise of the respondent to behave properly.
Respondent beat up the petitioner with chappals on 15th
February, 2004 and even slapped her.

The behavior of the

respondent was witnessed by his friend and his uncle who could
not help the petitioner. The petitioner was told leave the house.
Having no other alternative she was compelled to leave for her
maternal aunt's house as her mother was at that time in Ajmer.
On 18th February, 2004, the petitioner was again
manhandled when she went to the matrimonial home to take the
school uniform of the child by the respondent who was again in a
drunken state.
6.

In these circumstances, since 18th February, 2004, the

petitioner is staying with her parents at their Vasant Kunj flat.
The petitioner and her daughter had been treated with utmost

IPA No.9/2004

Page No.3

cruelty and had been abandoned without any reasonable cause.
The respondent has refused to maintain or support the petitioner
who is not employed and has been compelled to seek an roof and
shelter and sustenance from her father.
7.

Urging that she is without any means of livelihood and

needs privacy and independent accommodation, the petitioner
has filed the present suit seeking maintenance of Rs.20,000/-per
month and a house to live in apart from costs of the present suit.
8.

So far as the prior litigation between the parties is

concerned, the petitioner submits that after her marriage, she
was residing in house No.368, Sant Nagar, East of Kailash, New
Delhi which is the matrimonial home of the petitioner.
9.

The petitioner had filed a suit being S.No.177/2004 against

the present respondent as also his father Shri Jaswant Rai
Bhardwaj, his mother Smt. Shila Rani Bhardwaj, brother Shri
Satish Rai Bhardwaj and Sunil Bhardwaj as respondents nos. 1-5.
The suit was filed by the petitioner on behalf of her daughter
Simran Bhardwaj and herself.

In this case, the respondents

pleaded in the written statement that they had not caused
hindrance to the ingress and egress of the petitioners to the suit
property and that the petitioner had left the matrimonial home
on her own volition.
10.

On account of compromise talks initiated between the

parties, the petitioners started residing in the matrimonial home
with effect from the first Navratra of 2004 with the consent of the
respondents. In this view of the matter, the suit was disposed of
by the Civil Judge on an application of the petitioner by an order
passed on 15th September, 2005 recording that since the relief
sought by the petitioners in the suit stood acceded to by the
respondents, thus the cause of action for filing the suit ceased to
exist and that it would be a futile exercise to pursue the suit any

IPA No.9/2004

Page No.4

further. This suit was thus disposed of as infructuous.
11.

The petitioners have submitted that after the disposal of

this suit, the respondents started harassing the petitioner by
making it impossible for her to live in the matrimonial home. The
respondent and his family members stopped paying the
electricity bill of the ground floor so that the electricity to the
ground floor portion of the premises which was the matrimonial
home of the petitioner was disconnected. For this reason, the
petitioner was again compelled to shift her mother's house at
Vasant kunj, New Delhi where she is residing with her daughter
ever since.
Execution Case no. 743/2006 in this behalf is pending
before the Civil Judge even at present.
12.

The petitioner also filed a petition on 27th May, 2004 under

Section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1956 (Exhibit PW1/1)
seeking restitution of conjugal rights which was registered as
HMA No. 195/2004. This petition was decreed in favour of the
petitioner by Shri B.K. Khanna, ADJ, Delhi on 11th August, 2006.
13.

The stridhan of the petitioner is still lying the matrimonial

home which the petitioner was regularly visiting.

On 5th

September, 2006, the petitioner went to the matrimonial home to
request the respondent and his father to seek restoration of
electricity connection or to give a no objection to the petitioner
for obtaining a separate connection in her own name. All these
requests were turned down and the petitioner was not even
permitted to enter the matrimonial home.
The petitioner was thus compelled to file execution case no.
1840/2006 which is also pending before the court of the learned
Additional District Judge.
14.

Faced with the situation where the respondent had refused

to maintain the petitioner and her daughter, the petitioner filed a

IPA No.9/2004

Page No.5

petition under Section 20 of the Hindu Adoption and
Maintenance Act, 1956 being Simran Bhardwaj v. Jagdeep
Bhardwaj seeking a grant of maintenance for her five year school
going daughter. This petition was registered initially as Petition
No. 2/2004 inasmuch as it was also filed in forma pauperis under
Order 33 of Civil Procedure Code. After the court gave permission
to the petitioner to sue as an indigent person, the same was
registered as Suit No. 359/2004.

The present respondent

contested the petition negligently. The court initially passed an
order of interim maintenance to the tune of Rs.4500/- which the
respondent did not comply with. Finally by an ex-parte judgment
and decree dated 29th September, 2006 (Exhibit PW1/2), the
court decreed the suit of the petitioner and awarded maintenance
of Rs.5,000/- per month to Ms. Simran Bhardwaj, daughter of
the parties which were directed to be paid by the respondent to
the petitioner by the 7th of each calender month till the child
attains majority.
15.

The petitioner has failed to abide by the decree dated 29th

September, 2006 so far as the minor daughter of the parties is
concerned as well. Execution Case No. 1841/2006 in this behalf
is pending before the learned trial Judge.
16.

In a case for maintenance, it becomes necessary to examine

the means and income of the petitioner. Before this court, the
unrebutted fact is that the petitioner is unemployed and is
without any independent source of income. It is pointed out that
the petitioner and her daughter are totally dependent on the
petitioner's parents.

As per the material on record, the

petitioner's parents had invested a sum of Rupees six lakhs in the
joint name of the petitioner and the respondent in a post office
monthly scheme for meeting the kitchen expenses of the
petitioner and her daughter. The passbook of this account is

IPA No.9/2004

Page No.6

stated to be with the respondent and the petitioner has no access
thereto. This monthly income scheme is in the post office Kalkaji
is in account no. 3110329.
17.

In the HMA No. 195/2004 which was a petition under

Section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1956, the petitioner filed an
application for interim maintenance. In these proceedings, on
the 9th July, 2004, the respondent had stated that he had no
objection if the monthly accrual of Rs.4500/- on this post office
account is withdrawn by the present petitioner for the education
of the child of the parties and making ends meet. Consequently,
by an order passed on 9th July, 2004 in HMA No.195/2004, the
learned Addl. Distt. Judge had directed that on a no objection of
the present respondent, the Postmaster Kalkaji, may release the
payment of the interest accruing in this account to the petitioner
Sumedha Bhardwaj till further orders.
18.

The admitted position is that the petitioner is so receiving

the amount of Rs.4500/- per month. This amount is insufficient
to enable the petitioner to meet even the complete expenses of
the child.
19.

It is well settled that the wife and children from a marriage

are entitled to be maintained in the same status and according to
the standard of living which they were while residing with the
their husband/father.
20.

For this reason, it becomes necessary to examine the

evidence which has been lead before this court with regard to the
standard of living enjoyed by the petitioner while co-habiting
with the respondent. The petitioner has proved on record as
Ex.PW.1/3 the matrimonial advertisement published on behalf of
the respondent in the Hindustan Times dated 25th September,
1999 wherein the respondent and his family invited a match for
the defendant and represented that he `own car, house, shops in

IPA No.9/2004

Page No.7

Kalkaji, Greater Kailash and plans a telecom showroom in GK
Market'.
21.

The petitioner has further proved as Ex.PW.1/24, the

application form submitted by the respondent in the Delhi Public
School for admission of the minor child of the parties wherein he
has clearly indicated his profession as `business (self-employed)'.
The respondent has also indicated that he is a proprietor of
this business which is being run under the name and style of
`Namaskar Traders' at B-41A, Main Road Kalkaji, New Delhi.
The respondent has given his residential phone No. as 26489791
and his office phone no. as 51603324. The respondent has also
submitted

that

he

is

using

a

mobile

phone

bearing

no.98730000368. The respondent has indicated that his annual
income on this form as Rs.2.40 lacs.
22.

The petitioner has proved before this court an order dated

19th April, 2005 on the petitioner's application seeking interim
maintenance, passed in HMA no.195/2004 being her petition
seeking conjugal rights.

While deciding this application under

section 24 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1956, the trial court placed
reliance on this admission form and held that as per this
document the monthly income of the respondent comes to
Rs.20,000/- based whereon an award of Rs.10,000/- was made
to the petitioner and her daughter.
23.

The learned Judge placed reliance on the pronouncement of

this Court in 2002 (II) DMC 114 Harminder Kaur Vs.
Sukhbinder Singh to hold that on failure of the husband to
disclose his income which was in a special knowledge, the court
should presume against him but with some caution and
circumspection.
24.

I find that the learned judge in the order dated 19th April,

2005 has completely lost sight of the fact that the husband is

IPA No.9/2004

Page No.8

admittedly living with his parents and brothers in their property
in South Delhi, which is stated to be a multi-storeyed property.
The respondent is doing business as a sole proprietor under the
name and style of `Namaskar Traders' in a property located on
the main road of the Kalkaji. He is enjoying his own telephone
connections, both at his residence and business premises and
also using a mobile phone.

As per the matrimonial

advertisement which was issued as back as in the year 1999, the
respondent even then owned a car and also was proposing to
expand his business to the Greater Kailash Market.

The

matrimonial advertisement showed that he owned a house and
shops in Kalkaji and Greater Kailash and plans a telecom
showroom.
25.

Therefore, reasonable inference can be drawn that such a

businessman who is owning immoveable residential property in
South Delhi, as well as several business premises in posh South
Delhi Market, would certainly be earning more than only
Rs.20,000/- per month.

In this background, while making a

declaration on any form which could possibly be used against him
or by which statements he would be bound, a businessman
understate his income or even not state the full amount. It has
repeatedly been held that declarations of income as contained on
income-tax records etc. may not always be a fair index of what is
being earned by a businessman. The court would be required to
take a comprehensive view in the matter.
26.

The petitioner has asserted that the respondent is also

working jointly with his father and relatives and is drawing
handsome benefits from the business being conducted by them.
There is no evidence to the contrary. The proceedings in the suit
No.177/2004 corroborate this evidence and contention of the
petitioner.

IPA No.9/2004

Page No.9

27.

The statute recognises the duty of the husband to maintain

his wife, children and parents. In the instant case, the parents
are not dependent upon the respondent. It is on record that the
mother of the respondent has expired. There is no person
dependent on the respondent for maintenance other than the
petitioner and the daughter of the parties and the respondent
himself.
28.

In (1997) 7 SCC 7 Jasbir Kaur Sehgal Vs. District

Judge, Dehradun & Others, the court held that there was no
strait jacket formula for determining the amount of maintenance
payable to claimants and that each case would require to be
decided on its own facts keeping in view the status and capacity
of the parties. The obligation of the husband to maintain his wife
and children arises not only in law but even on social and moral
grounds. Exceptions apart, it is expected by the parties to the
proceedings to place before the court evidence in their power and
possession and, in fact, to put in all possible endeavour in
accordance with law, in order to ensure that the controversies
raised between the parties are decided fully and finally.

The

court specifically held that wherever there is an attempt on the
part of the husband to withhold his correct income and
information in regard to his property from the court, the court
would draw adverse inference and fix appropriate maintenance.
In this behalf, the Apex Court has observed thus:“No set formula can be laid for fixing the amount of
maintenance. It has, in the very nature of things, to
depend on the facts and circumstances of each case. Some
scope for leverage can, however, be always there. The
court has to consider the status of the parties, their
respective needs, the capacity of the husband to pay having
regard to his reasonable expenses for his own maintenance
and of those he is obliged under the law and statutory but
involuntary payments or deductions. The amount of
maintenance fixed for the wife should be such as she can
live in reasonable comfort considering her status and the
IPA No.9/2004

Page No.10

mode of life she was used to when she lived with her
husband and also that she does not feel handicapped in the
prosecution of her case. At the same time, the amount so
fixed cannot be excessive or extortionate.
In the
circumstances of the present case we fix maintenance
pendente lite at the rate of Rs.5000 per month payable by
the respondent-husband to the appellant-wife.”
29.

From the manner in which the respondent has contested

the proceedings, it is apparent that the respondent has made a
concerted effort to withhold his true income and has deliberately
concealed material facts which were within his personal
knowledge. The respondent has not given the details of various
immovable properties ownership whereof is attributed to him by
the petitioner in the various proceedings which have been filed by
the petitioner either for maintenance or for her daughter. In my
view, therefore, the standard of living of the respondent as
indicated by the petitioner, provides a fair index of the standard
of living and status which the parties enjoyed when cohabiting in
the matrimonial home.
30.

It is also to be noticed that the matrimonial advertisement

is of the year 1999. The admission form is of the year 2005. The
respondent is still in business. Certainly his income would have
only increased over the years.
31.

The petitioner has urged that the respondent is earning

Rs.50,000/- from his business with his brother. He is involved in
the business of employment/placement and sale and purchase of
cars. The advertisement had stated that he was proposing other
business as well. Such a figure may not be an exaggerated figure
in the light of the admitted and disclosed assets of the petitioner.
In any case, from the fact that he is living in a joint family with
his parents and brothers, he would be enjoying the fruits of the
income of the joint family and the benefit of the income thereof
as well. The respondent is living with the joint family and not
IPA No.9/2004

Page No.11

incurring any expense on rental, food or the necessities.
32.

The evidence of the petitioner that the respondent is

owning and having interest in the joint family property which is
worth Rs.1,00,00,000/- is unrebutted. The advertisement (taken
out by the respondent in 1999 at the time of marriage of the
parties) itself declares that he is owning several properties in
South Delhi.
33.

The conduct of the respondent before this court also speaks

volumes. Even in the earlier litigation where it chose to appear
and file a written statement or appeared and orally oppose the
prayer made by the petitioner, the respondent has filed no proof
of his income in the nature of income tax returns etc. which
would have enabled the court to arrive at a mere assessment of
the income of the respondent.
34.

In this behalf reference can usefully be made to the

pronouncement of the Supreme Court in AIR 1968 SC 1413
Gopal Krishnaji Kelkar Vs. Mohd. Haji Latif & Ors.
wherein the court held that a party cannot rely on the abstract
doctrine of onus of proof or on the fact that he was not called
upon to produce the best evidence which is in his possession.
Therefore, upon failure to produce the best evidence which would
have thrown light on the issue in controversy, which is in his
possession, the court is required to draw an adverse inference
against such party even if onus of proof is not on him. This
principle was reiterated in (1988) 1 SCC 626 National
Insurance Co. Ltd., New Delhi Vs. Jugal Kishore &
Others.
35.

It is well settled that quantum of maintenance has to be

awarded keeping in mind the status of the husband in society and
his resources and income also in mind. (Ref : 1(1984) DMC
301 Shardaben Sitaram Patel Vs. Patel Ramjibhai

IPA No.9/2004

Page No.12

Bhagwanbhai)
In a pronouncement of this court reported at 1993 (26)
DRJ 469

Smt. Neelam Malhotra Vs. Shri Rajinder

Malhotra & Ors. the court observed the issue which was under
consideration was as to whether the moveable and immoveable
assets belonging to family members other than the husband
would be taken into consideration for determining the earning
capacity and social status of the husband. In this case the court
found substance in the contention of the wife that the income of
the family members of the husband was required to be taken into
account for determining the husband's capacity and social status.
36.

In AIR 1987 Delhi 43 Smt. Renu Jain Vs. Mahavir

Prashad Jain, the husband who was living in a joint family and
having joint family business suppressed his income by not
producing account books, ledgers and similar documents
reflecting profits in business and investment in landed property.
In the instant case, it is apparent that the respondent has
deliberately not appeared before the court and has concealed all
evidence of his real income and assets from this court.

The

husband who is living in joint family and doing business with his
family members is certainly deriving benefit therefrom.
37.

I have therefore no hesitation in holding that the

respondent has deliberately concealed the evidence in his power
and possession.
38.

In view of the principles laid down in the Apex Court

noticed hereinabove with regard to the onus and burden of proof,
adverse inference is liable to be drawn against the respondent
and in favour of the petitioner. In the given facts, this court
would be justified in including the business income of the family
in order to arrive at an assessment of the petitioner's income.
However, inasmuch as there is no specific material with regard to

IPA No.9/2004

Page No.13

the same on record, it is not possible to make an assessment
thereof.
39.

The respondent has not even appeared before this court

and has not controverted the statement of the petitioner or the
material which has been placed by her on record. Consequently,
having regard to the resources of the husband and the aforenoticed facts, I have no hesitation in also holding that the income
claimed by him in the school application form is not a reflection
of his real income.

I, therefore, accept the evaluation and

assessment of the monthly income of the respondent as
Rs.50,000/- which has been assessed by the petitioner.
40.

It is now necessary to examine the entitlement of the

maintenance of the petitioner.
41.

While the maintenance which is to be awarded has to be

commensurate with the income and assets of the husband, it
certainly has to be such as to enable her to live in reasonable
comfort considering her status and the standard of living she was
used to while co-habiting with the husband. At the same time, it
is well settled that the same cannot be exorbitant, excessive or
extortionate. This makes it necessary for this court to make an
assessment as to what would be the entitlement of the wife who
has no source of income and has been deserted by her husband.
Maintenance and living encompass not only food and apparel but
also residence. The other normal expenses which a person may
be required to meet would include expenses on medical facility,
toiletries, newspapers and journals, transportation, telephone,
household help, social obligations, holidays, entertainment etc.
42.

The Apex Court has given an all encompassing definition as

to what would constitute maintenance in (1995) 6 SCC 88 = I
(1996) DMC 1(SC) Mangat Mal (Dead) and Anr. Vs.
Smt. Punni Devi (Dead) & Ors. which reads as follows:-

IPA No.9/2004

Page No.14

“19. Maintenance, as we see it, necessarily must
encompass a provision for residence. Maintenance is
given so that the lady can live in the matter, more or
less, to which she was accustomed. The concept of
maintenance must, therefore, include provision for
food and clothing and the like and take into account
the basic need of a roof over the head. Provision for
residence may be made either by giving a lump sum
in money, or property in lieu thereof. It may also be
made by providing, for the course of the lady's life, a
residence and money for other necessary
expenditure.
Where provision is made in this
manner, by giving a life interest in property for the
purposes of residence, that provision is made in lieu
of a pre-existing right to maintenance and the Hindu
lady acquires for more than the vestige of title which
is deemed sufficient to attract Section 14(1).
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
21. The Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act,
1959 was enacted to amend and codify the law
relating to adoptions and maintenance among
Hindus, and it defines maintenance in Section 3(d) to
include “(i) in all cases, provision for food, clothing,
residence, education and medical attendance and
treatment.”
(Emphasis supplied)
43.

The scope and ambit of maintenance which would be

payable to a wife also fell for consideration before the Apex Court
in (1996) 4 SCC 479 Kirtikant D. Vadodaria Vs. State of
Gujarat & Another and the court held thus:“8. We have given serious thought and
consideration to the submissions made above by the
learned counsel for the appellant and notice that
Dhayalal Hirachand, the husband of Respondent 2
Smt. Manjulaben, h as been found to be a person of
sufficient means and income. It is also true that there
are 5 natural born sons of Respondent 2 besides 2
daughters, who are all major. It is also a fact that
Dalip one of the sons had contested the Municipal
Election and two other sons are carrying on various
businesses. According to the Law of the Land with
regard to maintenance, there is an obligation of the
husband to maintain his wife which does not arise by
reason of any contract – to maintain his wife which
IPA No.9/2004

Page No.15

does not arise by reason of any contract – express or
implied – but out of jural relationship of husband and
wife consequent to the performance of marriage. Such
an obligation of the husband to maintain his wife
arises irrespective of the fact whether he has or has no
property, as it is considered an imperative duty and a
solemn obligation of the husband to to maintain his
wife. The husband cannot be heard saying that he is
unable to maintain due to financial constraints so long
as he is capable of earning. Similarly, it is obligatory
on the part of a son to maintain his aged father and
mother by reason of personal obligation. Under the
old Hindu law, this obligation was imposed on the son
alone, but now the present-day Hindu law extends this
obligation both on sons and daughters. In this
connection, it is relevant to point out that according to
sub-section (1) of Section 18 of the Hindu Adoptions
and Maintenance Act, 1956, a Hindu is entitled to
claim maintenance from her husband so long as she is
chaste subject to the conditions laid down in subsection (2) of Section 18 of the said Act. Under the
present law, as said earlier, both son and daughter are
liable to maintain aged or infirm parents including
childless stepmother, to maintain his mother
irrespective of the fact whether he inherits any
property or not from his father, as on the basis of the
relationship alone he has given birth to him. Further,
according to Section 20 of the Hindu Adoptions and
Maintenance Act, 1956, a Hindu is under a legal
obligation to maintain his wife, minor sons,
unmarried daughters and aged or infirm parents. But
the question before us is whether a stepmother can
claim words, whether Section 125 of the Code includes
within its fold the stepmother also as one of the
persons to claim maintenance from her stepson.”
44.

In this behalf, reference can usefully be also made to two

Division Bench pronouncements reported in 132 (2006) DLT
300 (D.B.) Rajiv Kapoor Vs. Seema Kapoor & Anr.; 90
(2001) DLT 312 (D.B.) G.C. Ghosh @ M. Karim Ghazi
Vs. Sushmita Ghose and Single Bench decision reported at
110 (2004) DLT 546 Annurita Vohra Vs. Sandeep
Vohra; 112 (2004) DLT 813 S.S. Bindra Vs. Tarvinder
IPA No.9/2004

Page No.16

Kaur.
45.

In Rajiv Kapoor Case (Supra), wherein the husband

was the appellant, the court had observed thus:"The time has changed. The law has developed and to
contend today that the relief for grant of maintenance
has to be based on bare need or to meet the ends of
food, would be a contention without substance and
contrary to legislative intent. Quantum of maintenance
must essentially have a bearing and relation to the
income of the husband/father, facilities available to
him, facilities or perks available to him, standard of
living and the social and financial status that he is
enjoying. The expression `matrimonial home', by very
nature of things, would include the facilities, benefits
and status involved to such a home. This concept
cannot be dissected under two different heads of
matrimonial home and the standard of living in the
matrimonial home. They would always have to be
determined and construed together. The conduct of the
husband has not been quite fair in these proceedings.
Firstly, he has failed to disclose the true and correct
income and there is no whisper in the pleadings of the
fact that he has interest in different companies.
xxx
xxx
xxx
Of course, the version of the appellant that he was
earning Rs.4060/- is also equally unbelievable where it
cannot be said with some certainty that the income of
the husband was Rs.40,000/- as alleged by the wife.
Some kind of guesswork has to be applied by the Court
in such cases where one party has failed to discharge
the onus placed upon it in proving the income while the
other party has withheld the best evidence which was in
his power and possession. Thus, in the facts and
circumstances of the case, the appellant himself has
admitted in his affidavit that he was working with his
father earlier at a salary of Rs.6,000/- per month which
itself may not be true reflection of the money that is
receiving from the concern of his father and it can
reasonably be expected that he was earning more than
Rs.12,000/- to Rs.13,000/- per month and he must pay
at least 60% of his income for the welfare and
upbringing of his minor child as maintenance."
46. So far as the entitlement to right to respond was concerned,
the same was considered by the Apex Court in its pronouncement
IPA No.9/2004

Page No.17

at (1995) 6 SCC 88 = 1 (1996) DMC 1 (SC) Mangat Mal
(Dead) & Anr. Vs. Punni Devi (Smt.) (Dead) the court held
thus:“19. Maintenance, as we see it, necessarily , must
encompass a provision for residence. Maintenance is
given so that the lady can live in the manner, more or
less, to which she was accustomed. The concept of
maintenance must, therefore, include provision for food
and clothing and the like and take into account the basic
need of a roof over the head. Provision for residence
may be made either by giving a lump-sum in money, or
property in lieu thereof. It may also be made by
providing, tor the course of the lady's life, a residence
and money for other necessary expenditure. Where
provision is made in this manner, by giving a life
interest in property for the purposes of residence, that
provision is made in lieu of a pre-existing right to
maintenance and the Hindu lady acquires for more that
the vestige of title which is deemed sufficient to attract
Section 14(1).
20.XXX

47.

XXX

XXX

21. The Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act, 1959,
was enacted to amend and codify the law relating
to adoptions and maintenance among Hindus,
and it defines maintenance in Section 3(d) to
include ? (i) in all cases, provision for food,
clothing, residence, education and medical
attendance and treatment.”
In 112 (2004) DLT 813 S.S. Bindra Vs. Tarvinder

Kaur (Supra), the court has held that it would be unfair to
restrict a prayer for maintenance in mindless manner to what has
been made years earlier. Orders should be passed keeping the
present in perspective and with a view to bringing about justice
between the parties. The court does not grant exactly what is
prayed for but shall much less. By that very yardstick, it is not
precluded from granting more maintenance if the circumstances
called for it.
48.

Again in 110 (2004) DLT 546 Annurita Vohra Vs.

IPA No.9/2004

Page No.18

Sandeep Vohra, the court reiterated that despite orders of
maintenance having been passed, however, if a change in the
circumstances occurs, the affected party can seek modification of
interlocutory orders such as interim maintenance. In this case,
the court noticed that with passage of time, as the children start
going to school, the financial need of the wife would increase.
49.
the

The petitioner, as mother of Simran Bhardwaj, daughter of
parties,

had

filed

this

maintenance on her behalf.

petition

no.2/2004

seeking

By a judgment dated 29th

September, 2006, the court directed maintenance of Rs.5,000/to the minor child.
50.

The petitioner has pointed out that an application filed by

her seeking interim maintenance under Section 24 of the Hindu
Marriage Act in HMA No. 195/2004 was allowed by an order
passed on 19th April, 2005. This application was allowed and
maintenance of Rs.10,000/- per month was fixed. At that time,
the consideration before the court was the fact that the petitioner
was living with the minor in the matrimonial home.

It is

noteworthy that the main proceedings having been decreed on
11th August, 2006, this order would ceased to operate.

The

respondent has not complied with even this order and the
petitioner has received only the amount from the accruals on the
fixed deposit receipt.
51.

I find that the interim maintenance of the petitioner was

fixed at Rs.10,000/- when she was cohabiting in the ground floor
of the matrimonial house with the respondent. However, the
position has changed inasmuch as the respondent has forced the
petitioner and the minor daughter of the parties out of the house
and she has been compelled to beg shelter from her mother. He
and his family have prevented the petitioner from enjoying the
benefits of the order dated 15th September, 2005 and rendered it

IPA No.9/2004

Page No.19

impossible for the petitioner to stay therein.
52.

The petitioner is certainly legally entitled to an independent

residence without having to depend on her parents for residence
and is justified in seeking adequate maintenance which would
enable her also to leave a life of dignity and self-respect.
53.

The respondent and his family not only caused the

petitioner's suit to be disposed of but I also find that by a decree
dated 11th August, 2006 passed in HMA No.175/2004, the
petitioner's petition under Section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act,
1956 has been allowed. The learned Additional District Judge
has held that the respondent has withdrawn from the society of
the petitioner without reasonable cause and that the respondent
shall join the matrimonial home for discharging his conjugal
obligation.

In this background, the respondent has failed to

comply even with this decree.
The petitioner has been compelled to file execution
no.1840/2006 which is pending before the district judge.
54.

The respondent has failed to abide by the decree dated 29th

September, 2006 passed in petition no.2/2004 awarding
maintenance of Rs.5,000/- to the daughter of the parties. He has
failed to comply with the order and the decree dated 11th August,
2006 passed in HMA No.195/2004 whereby the petition of the
petitioner seeking restoration of the conjugal rights, was decreed.
The petitioner has been constrained to also file an Execution Case
no.743/2006 in respect of the order dated 15th September, 2005
passed by the Civil Court in Suit No.177/2004.
55.

The conduct of the respondent is also evidenced by his

failure to maintain even the minor daughter of the parties. It has
come in the evidence of the petitioner that her parents have
invested a sum of Rs.6,00,000/- in the joint names of the
petitioner and the respondent in a Post Office Monthly Scheme in

IPA No.9/2004

Page No.20

account no. 3110329 for meeting the kitchen expenses of the
mother and the daughter. The pass book of this account is in
possession of the respondent. It is the interest which is accruing
on this fixed deposit receipt which is being received by the
petitioner towards the education of the child of the parties.
56.

The respondent has not complied with the order dated 19th

April, 2005 passed in HMA No.195/2004 granting the petitioner
and daughter interim maintenance of Rs.10,000/-.
57.

In 90 (2001) DLT 312 (DB) G.C. Ghosh @ Karim

Ghazi Vs. Sushmita Ghosh, the court observed that the
husband having created circumstances compelling the wife to
leave the matrimonial home, cannot plead that she is not entitled
to maintenance or provision for a separate residence for the
reason that she has not spent any such amount on maintenance
or on separate residence.
58.

In the instant case, the parties were cohabiting in South

Delhi, a post area of Delhi. The husband is owning business in
prime colonies as Greater Kailash and Kalkaji.

Certainly,

assuming that the petitioner was rented even in two bed room
accommodation in a decent locality close to, if not in the area in
which the husband is residing, she would be required to pay
rental which could be between Rs.5,000/- to Rs.7,500/-.
Electricity and water consumed are also payable. Such amount
should enable the petitioner to secure residence and privacy for
her daughter and herself.
Accordingly, so far as the residence is concerned, it is
directed that the respondent shall pay a sum of Rs.5,000/- per
month towards the prayer for residence to the petitioner.
59.

The respondent is enjoying the facility of a mobile phone

and his own vehicle.

According to the petitioner, he has

expensive drinking habits and used to consume expensive liquor

IPA No.9/2004

Page No.21

and wear branded clothes. The petitioner has deposed that the
respondent is spending not less than Rs.30,000/- per month on
himself. The petitioner has made a prayer of Rs.20,000/- for this
purpose. Having regard to the facts established and the award
for residence, in my view, an amount of Rs.15,000/- to meet the
other

needs

including

food,

social

obligations,

travel,

transportation, medical etc. of the petitioner cannot be
considered as excessive.
60.

The child of the parties has been awarded monthly

maintenance of Rs.5,000/- out of which the petitioner is
receiving about Rs.4,500/- per month from the interest on the
deposit with the post office.
In view of the above, the claim of the petitioner is decreed
for a total amount of Rs.20,000/- per month towards the
maintenance and residence with effect from the date of filing of
this case. It is made clear that this amount is exclusive of the
amount of Rs.5,000/- which has been decreed as monthly
maintenance towards the child of the parties by the judgment and
decree dated 29th September, 2006
The petitioner shall also be entitled to costs of the present
proceedings which are assessed at Rs.55,000/-.

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
September 20, 2007
aa

IPA No.9/2004

Page No.22

