IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Test Case No.21/2004
Reserved on: 6th March, 2007
Date of decision: 20th April, 2007
PROFESSOR S.C. TEWARI & ANR.
... Petitioners
through: Dr. Praveen Kumar Sharma,
Advocate
VERSUS

STATE

... Respondent
through: Nemo.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the Judgment?
No
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
No
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
No
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

By this judgment, I propose to dispose of the present petition filed by

the petitioner under Section 276 of the Indian Succession Act seeking grant
of probate of the last Will and testament dated 26th June, 1997 executed by
late Shri J.C. Tewari. Along with the petition, the petitioner has filed the
list of near relation/legal heirs of the deceased as Schedule `A' and the list of

Test Case No.21/2004

Page No.1

the properties which form part of his estate as schedule `B'.
2.

A public notice by publication of citation in the newspaper “The

Statesman” (New Delhi Edition), was directed by an order passed on 4 th
May, 2004. Despite publication of the notice, no member of the public has
filed any objection to the grant of this petition.
3.

So far as the facts which have been established on record before this

court are concerned, Shri J.C. Tewari, son of Shri L.B. Tewari, was a
resident of Flat No.6386, Ground Floor, Block B, Pocket – 9, Vasant Kunj,
New Delhi.

It appears that his wife pre-deceased him and he had no

surviving children at the time of his death. Shri J.C. Tewari expired on 17 th
September, 2003 at Delhi. His death was registered with the competent
municipal authority. The death certificate has been proved on record as Exh
PW 1/1.
4.

Prior to his death, Shri J.C. Tewari had executed his last Will and

testament dated 26th June, 1997. The three page document was handwritten
by late Shri G.C. Tewari and bears his signatures on all pages.

This

document was also executed in the presence of two witnesses Prof. A.K.
Kapoor and Prof. D.K. Bhattacharya of the University of Delhi who have
affixed their signatures as attesting witnesses thereon.
Test Case No.21/2004

Along with the

Page No.2

petition, the petitioner had filed an affidavit of Professor A.K. Kapoor, one
of the attesting witnesses of the Will.
5.

The present petition was filed on or about 13th February, 2003 by

Professor S.C. Tewari and Smt. Basanti Tewari. They have disclosed and
established their relationship to the deceased testator on the record of this
court. Shri J.C. Tewari is stated to have had two siblings namely Prof. N.K.
Tewari and Prof. S.C. Tewari.

Unfortunately, Shri N.K. Tewari pre-

deceased the testator and had expired on 15th May, 2003. Shri N.K. Tewari
was succeeded by his widow Smt. Manorma Joshi, one son Shri Bharat
Bhushan Tewari and two daughters Ms. Manorma Joshi and Ms. Sangeeta
Joshi. The death certificate in respect of the demise of Shri N.K. Tewari has
been proved on record as Exh PW 1/3.
6.

I find that the notice of the filing of this petition was also directed to

issue to the relatives of the deceased. Upon receipt of the notice, Shri
Bharat Bhushan Tewari, son of deceased late Shri N.K. Tewari (and nephew
of the testator Shri S.C. Tewari), Smt. Manorma Joshi and Ms. Sangeeta
Joshi, daughters of late Shri N.K. Tewari have filed their affidavits
submitting that they have no objection to the grant of probate in the present
matter.
Test Case No.21/2004

Page No.3

7.

As per the bequests made in the Will, the deceased has bequeathed his

flat no.6386, Ground Floor, Block B, Pocket 9, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi in
favour of his elder brother Shri N.K. Tewari, younger brother professor S.C.
Tewari and sister-in-law Smt. Basanti Tewari and widow of late Shri N.K.
Tewari in equal shares. The deceased testator has bequeathed his one-third
share in the property owned as Oakley Cottage, Contant Lane, measuring
2.05 acres at Mussoorie to the same persons.
8.

The petitioners have filed their own affidavits in support of the

petition.

An affidavit of Prof. A.K. Kapoor of the Department of

Anthropology, University of Delhi has also been filed who has supported
the statement of the petitioners to the effect that the deceased Shri J.C.
Tewari had made and executed his last Will and testament dated 20th June,
1997 in his presence and in the presence of Prof. D.K. Bhattacharya. He has
also proved that the two witnesses had put their signatures on this document
as attesting witnesses after they had witnessed the testator affixing his
signatures on the Will and acknowledged the same to be his last Will and
testament.
9.

The petitioners have consequently fulfilled all legal requirements and

established the document dated 26th of June, 1997 as validly executed by
Test Case No.21/2004

Page No.4

Late Shri J.C. Tewari as his last Will and testament.
10.

The deceased was a resident of Delhi who had died at Delhi. The

Will was executed at Delhi. The property of the deceased at Delhi is valued
over Rs.10,000/-. There is thus no impediment to this court exercising
jurisdiction in this matter.
11.

The notices of the filing of the present petition had also been sent to

the Chief Revenue Controlling Authority at Delhi as well as at Mussoorie to
submit a report with regard to the valuation of the property owned by the
deceased at Delhi and Mussoorie. The Registry has placed report dated 22nd
February, 2006 given by the Tehsildar (Vasant Kunj), Kapashera, New
Delhi with regard to the valuation of the afore-noticed flat which had been
owned by the deceased at Vasant Kunj. So far as the valuation of the
property at Mussoorie is concerned, the Registry has received a report dated
12th August, 2004 pointing out that the valuation of the property at Mussorie
is Rs.27,44,233.00.
12.

In view of the above, there is no legal impediment to the grant of the

petition which is hereby allowed. The petitioner is granted probate of the
Will dated 26th June, 1997 with Will attached subject to their furnishing
administration bonds in this court to the satisfaction of the Registrar.
Test Case No.21/2004

Page No.5

13.

I also hereby accept the valuation report dated 22nd February, 2006

given by the valuation authority in Delhi in respect of the Vasant Kunj
property and the valuation dated report dated 12th August, 2004 in respect of
Mussoorie property. The petitioners would be required to pay appropriate
court fee based thereon.
This petition is allowed in the above terms.
(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
April 20, 2007
aa

Test Case No.21/2004

Page No.6

