IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Other Miscellaneous Petition No.465 /2003
Da te of decision: May 21, 2007
Shri Kamal Nath Monga
.... Petitioner
through: Mr. Anil Sapra, Advocate
VERSUS
Shri Navin Kumar & Ors
.... Respondents
through: Mr. Lalit Bhardwaj, Adv. for respondent
no. 1
Mr. Sunil Magon, Advocate for
respondent no.3
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
1.Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
No
2.To be referred to the Reporter or not?
No
3.Whether the judgment should be reported in
the Digest?
No
GITA MITTAL, J
1.

By this order I shall dispose off this petition filed under

Section 9 of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 by the
petitioners.
The facts giving rise to the present petition briefly noticed
show that by a partnership deed dated 3rd February, 1962 Shri
Prem Nath Monga (father of the petitioner herein); Shri Kishan
Lal Kumar (father of respondent no. 1); Shri Bal Kishan Monga

OMP 465/2003

page 1 of 10

(father of respondent no. 2); Mrs. Sillina Abrecht (mother in law of
respondent no. 3) and Mrs. Anita Abrecht had agreed to carry on
the business of sale and purchase of watches, time pieces, clocks,
spare parts thereof, and accessories and allied things thereto
under the name and style of M/s. Farmag Watch Company. The
partnership firm was carrying on its business from tenanted
premises at no. 269, Dr. Dadabhai Naoroji Road, Fort, Mumbai.
The partnership was reconstituted by a partnership deed dated 19th
February, 1977 whereby the shares of the partners were redefined.
On the death of Shri Kishan Lal Kumar on 24th September, 1991,
his son Shri Naveen Kumar (respondent no. 1 herein) was
inducted as a partner and a partnership deed dated 19 th October,
1981 was executed.
Similarly on the death of Shri Prem Nath Monga on 21st
January, 1982, the present petitioner Shri Kamal Nath Monga was
inducted as a partner and a partnership deed dated 1st March, 1982
was executed. The five partners were holding the following shares
:"(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

Shri Kamal Nath Monga
Shri Vimal Nath Monga
Shri Bal Kishan Monga
Mrs. Sillina Abrecht
Mrs. Anita Abrecht

OMP 465/2003

page 2 of 10

15%
10%
15%
20%
20%

2.

(f) Shri Narin Kumar
20%"
Shri Bal Kishan Monga expired on the 11th June, 1986 when

his son Shri Ranjan Monga was inducted as a partner and a
partnership deed dated 4th August, 1986 was executed.

This

partnership deed has been placed before this court. The petitioner
has contended that under the partnership deed dated 4th August,
1986, Shri Naveen Kumar, respondent no. 1 herein was made incharge of the entire business and authorised to act for and on
behalf of the said firm either himself or through any manager or
other person. He was also authorised to appoint any other person
to operate the bank accounts of the partnership. Clause 12 and 14
of the partnership deed have been relied upon by the plaintiff in
support of this contention.
3.

Disputes arose between the parties for the reason that even

though respondent no. 1 was not authorised to exclude the other
partners from the management control and administration of the
affairs of the firm or to deprive them access to the books of
accounts or other documents, since 1998, the respondent no. 1
fraudulently arrogated to himself all powers of managing the
business and affairs of the firm to the exclusion of the petitioner.
The petitioner was also not granted access to the books of account

OMP 465/2003

page 3 of 10

of the other documents. The petitioner also points out that apart
from the Farmag Watch Company, the parties were also partners
in two other partnership firms namely M/s Meridian Watch
Company and M/s CH Abrecht. The respondent no. 1 is alleged to
have caused these partnership firms to run in continuous losses
while deriving unlawful gains to himself from the business of the
partnership by falsification and defrauding of accounts and
denying access to the records of the firm and also ousting the other
partners from participation in the management of his affairs.
4.

In support of the allegations of complete loss of confidence,

trust and faith by the petitioner in the respondent no. 1, the
petitioner has referred to an alleged sale of land by the respondent
no. 1, which land actually belong to another partnership firm of
which the petitioner was a partner alongwith the respondent no. 1.
The second instance which has been cited is that of the illegal and
unauthorised closure of the business of the partnership firm M/s
CH Abrecht at Delhi and Calcutta and the usurption of the assets
of the partnership firm by surrendering the tenancy of this firm in
property at Calcutta and disposal of its movable assets.
5.

The petitioner has also submitted that the partnership firm

also has tenancy rights in the premises no. 269, Dr. Dadabhai
OMP 465/2003

page 4 of 10

Naoroji Road, Fort, Mumbai and other properties which the
respondent no. 1 is treating as his self acquired properties and has
threatened to alienate and transfer the same and also to surrender
the tenancy rights of the partnership firm without the consent of
the partners and to usurp the amounts received therefrom.
In these circumstances, apprehending illegal dispossession
of the various assets of the partnership firm, the present petitioner
filed the present application under Section 9 of the Arbitration &
Conciliation Act before this court seeking interim orders against
the respondent nos. 1 and 2 from parting with possession or
surrendering the tenancy rights or other assets of the partnership
firm till adjudication of the disputes between the parties by
arbitration. This court by an order dated 9th December, 2003 has
issued a direction to the parties to maintain status quo in respect
of property bearing no.269, Dr. Dadabhai Naoroji Road, Fort,
Mumbai.
6.

The petitioner has also pointed out that respondent no. 2,

Shri Ranjan Monga had filed Suit No. 957/1992 entitled Shri
Ranjan Monga v. Shri Naveen Kumar & Ors. against the petitioner
as well as respondent nos. 1 and 3 herein which is pending before
this court. The respondent no. 2 has sought relief of rendition of
OMP 465/2003

page 5 of 10

accounts in the partnership firm M/s Farmag Watch Company and
a relief of permanent injunction from expelling respondent no. 2
from the partnership or for execution of any fresh partnership
deed to his exclusion. The respondent no. 2 had also prayed for an
injunction from transferring or surrendering of the tenancy rights
of the partnership business. This court has granted an interim
injunction restraining the defendants in the suit, that is the
present petitioner and respondent nos. 1 and 3 from parting with
possession or surrendering tenancy rights in the said premises no.
269, Dr. Dadabhai Naoroji Road, Fort, Mumbai. Initially even
though the present respondent no. 1 was contesting the claim of
the plaintiff, however, subsequently the respondent no. 1, started
colluding with the respondent no. 2 to persuade him not to pursue
his Suit no. 957/1992 inasmuch as the interim injunction granted
therein would thereupon stand vacated and would have enabled
the respondent no.1

to implement his illegal design of

surrendering the tenancy rights of the partnership firm and selling
the partnership assets as well as stocks etc to the exclusion of the
partners.
7.

The petitioner claims to have approached the respondent

nos. 1 and 2 seeking dissolution of the partnership firm by mutual
OMP 465/2003

page 6 of 10

consent and division of its properties and assets including
goodwill, tenancy and ownership. However, the respondents have
failed to react positively. Accordingly, the petitioner has got issued
a notice dated 28th November, 2003 upon the respondents calling
upon them to agree to the appointment of Justice S. Ranganathan,
a retired Judge of the Supreme Court of India who is conducting
arbitration between some of the parties herein with regard to M/s
Standard Restaurant, another partnership concern.
Inasmuch as the respondent did not concede to the request
for appointment of the arbitrator, the petitioner was constrained
to file Arbitration Petition No. 35/2004 under Section 11 of the
Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 praying for appointment of an
arbitrator. By a separate judgment, this court has allowed the
petition and appointed an arbitrator for reference of the disputes
between the parties to his sole arbitration in terms of clause 19 in
the partnership deed which contained the arbitration agreement
between the parties.
8.

The present petition has been filed by the petitioner praying

that this court may restrain respondent nos. 1 and 2 from, in any
manner parting with possession or surrendering the tenancy rights
of the premises no.
OMP 465/2003

269, Dr. Dadabhai Naoroji Road, Fort,
page 7 of 10

Mumbai or in any manner selling any partnership assets of the
partnership firm M/s Farmag Watch Company till adjudication of
the disputes between the parties by arbitration.
9.

When this petition came up for hearing on the 9th December,

2003, counsel for respondent no. 1 had entered appearance and
accepted notice thereof. The court by orders passed on the same
date had directed the parties to maintain status quo in regard to
the tenanted premises no. 269, Dr. Dadabhai Naoroji Road, Fort,
Mumbai. These orders have continued to operate even on date.
10.

The main ground of opposition to the present petition is

based on the objection raised with effect to this Court not having
the territorial jurisdiction to entertain and adjudicate upon the
subject matter of the present case.

I have recorded detailed

reasons rejecting this objection of the respondent no. 1 while
passing orders on Arb.A. 35/2004. In view of the Section 2 (e) of
the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 which defines the
expression Court. It would be apparent that so far as territorial
jurisdiction of the court is concerned, section 16 to 20 of the Code
of Civil Procedure would guide consideration of such an objection.
Section 20 permits a suit to be filed in such court which whose
territorial jurisdiction the cause of action has arisen wholly or in
OMP 465/2003

page 8 of 10

part or within whose territorial jurisdiction the defendants reside.
From the array of parties I find that the petitioner and the
respondents reside at Delhi within the jurisdiction of this court.
The respondent no. 3 has filed a reply and an affidavit stating that
she does not contest the claim made by the petitioner in the
present case. In view of the statutory provisions contained in
Section 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure and upon application of
the doctrine of forum non conveniens, I am satisfied that this court
has the territorial jurisdiction to entertain and adjudicate upon the
subject matter of the case.
11.

There is no contest to the submission that the partnership

firm M/s Farmag Watch Company has the tenancy rights in the
property no. 269, Dr. Dadabhai Naoroji Road, Fort, Mumbai and
also other immovable assets.

The petitioner has also taken

recourse to invocation of the arbitration clause and has sought
appointment of an arbitrator under Section 11 of the Arbitration &
Conciliation Act, 1996.
12.

It is trite that the legal principles which govern the discretion

to grant interlocutory injunctions under Order 39 of the code of
Civil Procedure are the very principles on which jurisdiction to
grant relief under Section 9 of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act,
OMP 465/2003

page 9 of 10

1996 rests. In this factual background, it certainly has to be held
that the plaintiff has made out a prima facie case for grant of an
ad-interim injunction. Balance of convenience, interest of justice
and equity are also in favour of the petitioner and against the
respondents.
However having regard to the nature of the disputes, interest
of justice merits that the petitioner who is also a partner in the
partnership firm is also directed to maintain the status quo with
regard to these properties on the same terms on which the
respondents have been directed.
Accordingly, this petition is allowed.

The parties shall

maintain status quo of title and possession so far as the property
no. 269, Dr. Dadabhai Naoroji Road, Fort, Mumbai and also with
regard to all assets of the partnership firm till adjudication of the
disputes which have arisen between the parties.
This petition is allowed in the above terms.

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
May 21, 2007
kr

OMP 465/2003

page 10 of 10

