IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
ARBITRATION PETITION NO. 327/2006
Judgm ent reserved on : May 11, 2007
Dat e of decision: May 21, 2007
Shri Avinash Sharma
.... Petitioner
through: Mr. Raman Kapur, Advocate
VERSUS
Municipal Corporation of Delhi
.....Respondent
through: Mr. Gurinder Pal Singh and
Mr. Nitin Mangla, Advocates for
respondent/MCD
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in
the Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J
1.

This petition has been filed by the petitioner under Section 11

(6) of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 praying for
appointment of an arbitrator in accordance with the terms of the
arbitration agreement between the parties. The brief facts so far
as necessary for the adjudication of the present petition are briefly

Arb.P.327/2006

page 1 of 16

noticed hereafter.
2.

The petitioner is a sole proprietor of M/s Kamal

Construction Company which was awarded two contracts by the
respondent during the year 2000-01.

Pursuant to the first

contract, a work order dated 24th May, 2000 for the desilting and
removal of silt of Bhagat Singh Road Nalla in W. No. 78 was placed
on the petitioner.

The second contract relate to desilting and

removal of silt from West Vinod Nagar drain in W.No. 72, RD 0 To
550 mtrs was awarded to the petitioner and order dated 25th May,
2000 was placed on him. The petitioner has contended that the
work was successfully completed and bills for payment of the work
were duly given, finalised and cleared for payment by the
respondent. According to the petitioner, against work order no.
107, a sum of Rs.1,34,607/- is due and payable while against work
order no. 184 a sum of Rs.1,648,000/- is due and payable.
Meanwhile the petitioner has urged that he is entitled to a total
sum of Rs.2,35,255/- from the respondent with interest. The bills
of the petitioner are stated to have been certified and placed for
payment on 13th July, 2001 in respect of work order no. 184 and on
Arb.P.327/2006

page 2 of 16

16th July, 2001 in respect of a work order no. 107.

Despite

clearance for payment, the amounts so payable are till date
outstanding from the Municipal Corporation of Delhi to the
petitioner. Numerous requests for payment have not elicited any
positive response. Accordingly, the petitioner invoked the
arbitration clause between the parties contained in clause 25 of the
conditions of the contract which governs both contracts.

The

petitioner sent a notice dated 15th April, 2004 to the respondents
requesting appointment of an arbitrator in terms thereof. This
was followed by a reminder dated 5th June, 2006.

As the

respondent failed to act in terms of the arbitration agreement, the
present petition was filed by the petitioner on 11th July, 2006
praying for appointment of an independent arbitrator.
3.

This petition has been vehemently opposed by Mr. Gurinder

Pal Singh, learned counsel for the respondent on the ground that
the petitioner has not exhausted the requirements of clause 25 of
the general conditions of the contract which governs the parties
and consequently the petition is premature. The respondent has
also challenged the manner of invocation and contended that the
Arb.P.327/2006

page 3 of 16

notice issued by the petitioner is not as per clause 25. At the same
time, an objection has been taken that the petition is not
maintainable inasmuch as the claims of the petitioner are
hopelessly barred by limitation.
4.

Having heard learned counsel for the parties and having

given my considered thought to the respective contentions, I find
that the objections taken by the respondent are not only mutually
destructive but are legally misconceived in the facts of the present
case. It becomes necessary to consider the terms of clause 25 of
the general conditions of contract which admittedly governs the
parties. This term in the contract reads thus :"Arbitration Clause 25 :Except where other wise provided in the
contract an illustration and disputes relating to
the measuring of specification, designs,
drawings, and instructions herein before
mentioned and as to the quality of workmanship
of material used on the work as to any other
question claim, right matters of things whatever
in any way arising out are relating to the
contractor, designs drawings, specifications,
estimate instruction order or these conditions or
otherwise concerning the works or execution of
failure to execute the same wherever arising
during the progress of work or after the
completion or abandonment shall be referred to
Arb.P.327/2006

page 4 of 16

the sole arbitrator of person appointed by the
Commissioner, MCD at the time of dispute of the
administrative head of MCD at the time of such
appointment. It will be no objection to any such
appointment that the arbitrator so appointed is a
govt. servant, that he had to deal with the matters
to which contract relates and that in the course of
his duties as Govt. servant he had expressed his
views on all/or any of the matters in disputes of
difference. The arbitrator to whom the matter is
originally referred being transferred or vacating
his office or being unable to act for any reason
the Commissioner or administrative head as
aforesaid at the time of such transfer vacation of
officer or inability to act, shall appoint another
person as Arbitrator in accordance with the terms
of the contract. Such person shall be entitled to
proceed with reference from such stage at which
it was left by his predecessor, it is also a term of
this contract that no person other than the
person
appointed
by
Commissioner
or
Administrative head of the MCD as aforesaid
should act as Arbitrator any if for any reason that
is not possible, the matter not be referred to
arbitration at all. In all cases where the amount
of the claim in dispute is Rs.25,000/- (Twenty
five thousand only), and above the Arbitrator
shall give reason for the award.
Subject as aforesaid the provision of the
arbitration act 1940 or any statutory modification
or reenactment there of and the rules made
thereunder for the time being in force shall apply
to the arbitration proceedings under this clauses.
It is a term of the contract that the pay invoking
arbitration shall specify the dispute or disputes to
be reference of arbitration under this clause
together with the amount or amounts claimed in
Arb.P.327/2006

page 5 of 16

5.

respect of such disputes.
It is also a term of the contract that if the
Contractor(s) do/does not make any demand for
arbitration in respect of any claim in writing
within 90 days of receiving the intimation from
the corporation or any officer authorised in this
behalf that the bill is ready for payment to claim
of the contractor(s) will be deemed to have been
waxed and absolutely barred and the corporation
shall be discharged and released to all liabilities
under the contract in respect of these claims.
The arbitrator may from time to time with
the consent of parties enlarge time for making
and publishing the award. The decision of the
Superintending Engineer regarding quantum of
reduction as well as subject justification thereof
in respect of rates for substandard work which
any be decided to be accepted will be final and
would not be open to arbitration."
The petitioner addressed a notice dated 15th April, 2004 to

the Commissioner of Municipal Corporation of Delhi clearly
stating that disputes had arisen between the parties in terms of
this clause in the general conditions of contract, setting out the
claim of the petitioner and requesting the appointment of an
arbitrator within the statutory period of 30 days of the receipt of
the notice. A receipted copy of this notice has been placed before
this court. When no action took place on this notice, the petitioner
addressed a reminder dated 5th of June, 2006 on which the

Arb.P.327/2006

page 6 of 16

executive engineer of the MCD effected the following endorsement
:“The abovementioned bills were sent to cash liability after
passing by the then officer. The payment is still pending in view of
some audit/objection/vigilance enquiries.
Signed
5/6/06”
This noting has been approved by the executive engineer
DEMS, Shahdara, South Zone MCD, Delhi.
6.

So far as the other objection to the effect that the petition is

premature is concerned, as noticed hereinabove, the contract
contains a stipulation that if the contractor does not make any
demand for arbitration in respect of any claim in writing then 90
days of receiving intimation from the corporation or any officer
authorised in this behalf that the bill is ready for payment to the
claim of the contractor will be deemed to have been waived and
absolutely barred and the corporation shall be discharged and
released of all liabilities under the contract in respect of these
claims. It is therefore apparent that the communication of the fact
that the bill of the contractor is ready for payment is a sine qua
non for waiver or a prohibition to come into force. In the instant

Arb.P.327/2006

page 7 of 16

case, there is admittedly no communication to the contractor that
his bills were ready for payment. On the contrary even on 5th
June, 2006, the petitioner has been informed that the bills are
pending for payment with the accounts section.
The objection therefore taken on behalf of the respondent in
the instant case is clearly misconceived.
7.

Even otherwise, the stipulation of the 90 day period for

raising a claim, failing which the same would stand waived and
contractually barred, has fallen for consideration in several judicial
pronouncements wherein it has been held that such a condition is
contrary to law and would not bind the parties. In this behalf,
reference

can

appropriately

be

made

to

the

judicial

pronouncements reported at 2001 (59) DRJ 380 entitled J.K.
Anand Vs. Delhi Development Authority & Anr. wherein
the court held thus :"2. The question involved for determination is
whether the arbitration was competent to reject the
claim of the petitioner on the ground that the
deemed for arbitrator was not made within 90 days
from the date of the final bill as per clause 25 of the
agreement.
3. Clause 25 of the agreement provides as under:Arb.P.327/2006

page 8 of 16

“It is also a term of the contract that if the
contractor does not make deemed of arbitration in
respect of any claim in writing within 90 days of
the intimation from the Engineer-in-charge that
the bill is read for payment the claim of the
contractor will be demand to have been waived
absolutely and the Delhi Development Authority
shall be discharged and released of all liabilities
under the contract in respect of those claims.”
4.
The validity of the above clause of the
agreement cropped up for consideration in M/s
Hindustan Construction Corporation Vs. Delhi
Development Authority, 77 (1999) DLT 165 : 1999
(49) DRJ 243. In the aforesaid case also, the
arbitration was not demanded within 90 days and
the claims of the petitioner were dismissed on that
short ground alone and not on merits. It was held
that clause 25 is hit by an amendment which has
been made to Section 28 of the Contract Act (vide
Amendment Act I of 1997) whereby clause (b) has
been incorporated therein. Section 28 of the
Contract Act provides as under:“Every agreement:(a) by which any party thereto is restricted
absolutely from enforcing his rights under or in
respect of any contract, by the usual legal
proceedings in the ordinary tribunals, or which
limits the time within which he may thus enforce
his rights; or
(b) which extinguishes the rights of any party
thereto, or discharge any party thereby, from any
liability, under or in respect of any contract on the
expiry of a specified period so as to restrict any
party from enforcing his rights.”
5. Perusal of the aforesaid provisions shows that
Arb.P.327/2006

page 9 of 16

these are applicable to the facts and circumstances
of this case in hand. It was observed that clause 25
of the agreement that the contractor's right to claim
arbitration comes to an end after the expiry of 90
days from the date of intimation of the final bill
being ready for payment deprives the contractor of
a very valuable right to claim the amount which
was due to him from the respondent.

8.

6. Since the arbitrator did not decide the claim on
merits and the clause (b) of Section 28 of the
Contract Act keeps the rights of the contractor to
claim the amount which was due to him alive
irrespective of clause 25 in the agreement, the
application is allowed."
This judgment was relied upon in 2007 (1) ALR 486 D.C.

Kapur v. DDA wherein the court reiterated the principles earlier
laid and held thus :"7. The second issue to be considered is a
plea of limitation raised by the respondent
inasmuch as it is the contention of the respondent
that the period of 90 days referred to in Clause 25
mandates the dispute to be raised from the date
when it arose and not 90 days from the final bill.
This issue has also dealt with in Anil Garg on the
ground that such a stipulation was contrary to the
general period of limitation and in these
circumstances, fell within the contemplation of
Section 28 of the Contract Act. The learned judge
relied upon another judgment of the learned Single
Judge of this court in Hindustan Construction
Company vs. DDA, 77 (1999) DLT 165 =
1999(1) Arb.LR 272 (Del.) I am in full
agreement with this view."
Arb.P.327/2006

page 10 of 16

9.

In this view of the matter, the condition of the contract to the

effect that if the claim is not raised within 90 days of receiving the
intimation from the contractor that the bill was ready for payment
has to be held to be void and not binding on the parties, even if
this condition applies. However, as no intimation has been sent to
the petitioner till date, such condition in any case would not
prohibit the maintainability of the claim of the petitioner.
10.

The respondents have set up a plea that the claim is barred

by limitation on the ground that the same has been lodged beyond
the ninety day stipulation in clause 25 aforenoticed. In this behalf,
reference can appropriately be made to the pronouncement
reported at 1999 (1) ALR 298 EN Veeka Construction Co.
Vs DDA & Anr., wherein this issue was raised and the court held
thus :“5. Clause 25 of the arbitration agreement
provides that a claim is to be raised by the contractor
within 90 days from the date of payment of the final
bill. According to the said provisions, if a claim is not
lodged and arbitration clause is not invoked within
90 days of the date of payment of final bill, the said
claim would not be entertained.
6.
Article 137 of the Limitation Act also lays down
provisions fixing the time limit for raising the claims
Arb.P.327/2006

page 11 of 16

and invocation of the arbitration agreement.
According to the said provisions, a claims to be
raised within a period of three years from the date
when the right to apply first accrues. The Supreme
Court in the decision of The State of Orissa vs.
Damoder Dass, has held that no right to apply would
accrue until there is a clear and unequivocal denial of
that right by the respondent.
7.
My attention was also drawn tot he notification
dated 8.1.1997 notifying the Indian Contract
(Amendment)Act, 1996 amending the provisions of
Section 28 of the Contract Act which provides thus :“Every agreement :
(a) By which any party thereto is restricted
absolutely from enforcing his rights under or in
respect of any contract, by the usual legal
proceedings in the ordinary Tribunal, or which limits
the time within which he may thus enforce his rights;
or
(b) which extinguishes the rights of any party
thereto, or discharges any party thereto from any
liability, under or in respect of any contract on the
expiry of a specified period so as to restrict any party
from enforcing his rights, is void to that extent.”
prescribing that an agreement by which a party
thereto is restricted absolutely from restring his
rights under or in respect of any contract, which
limits the time within which he may thus enforce his
rights, is void to that extent.”
(Emphasis supplied)
11.

The similar stipulation in the contract relied upon by the

MCD is therefore clearly void by application of Section 28 of the
Contract Act and the principles laid down in the above noticed

Arb.P.327/2006

page 12 of 16

judicial pronouncements. Certainly the respondent in the instant
case cannot be permitted to avoid its liability in the given facts on
such a plea as has been raised on its behalf.
12.

I find that the noting of the officer of the MCD on the letter

dated 5th of June, 2006 clearly states that the bill duly approved is
pending for payment. It is an admitted fact that the petitioner has
not received any intimation from the corporation or any officer
authorised by it that the amount is ready for payment to the
contractor.

Thus, so far as the petitioner was concerned, the

respondent was still processing the bill for payment.
In view of the clear admission by the executive engineer in
his noting dated 5th June,

2006, the respondent had not

repudiated the claim of the petitioner or informed the petitioner
that its bills were rejected. As per this noting, the respondent was
still processing the bill for payment after the same had the
approval of the concerned engineer.
13.

There is thus no denial of the right or entitlement of the right

or the claim of the petitioner by the respondent which would have
given it cause of action prior hitherto. It cannot therefore be held
Arb.P.327/2006

page 13 of 16

that the claim of hte petitioner is barred by limitation.
14.

The respondents do not dispute that the contract between

the parties contained an arbitration agreement in clause 35 which
has been noticed hereinabove. Disputes have admittedly arisen
inasmuch as the claim of the petitioner though admitted by the
respondent has not been paid till date.
15.

Notice has been served upon the commissioner of the MCD

on 15th April, 2004 as per the endorsement contained thereon.
Admittedly, no arbitrator has been appointed to adjudicate upon
the claims of the petitioner within the statutorily permissible
period of thirty days.
16.

The consequences of failure to so appoint an arbitrator have

been considered in the pronouncement of the Apex Court reported
in (2006) 2 SCC 638 Punj Lloyd Ltd. Vs. Petronet MHB
Ltd. and the pronouncement of this court reported at 137 (2007)
DLT 47 Gurdeep Singh Vs. NDMC.
In (2006) 2 SCC 638 Punj Lloyd Ltd. Vs. Petronet
MHB Ltd., the Apex Court had placed reliance on its earlier
pronouncement reported at (2000) 8 SCC 151 Datar
Arb.P.327/2006

page 14 of 16

Switchgears Ltd. Vs. Tata Finance Ltd. and held that upon
failure to appoint an arbitrator within 30 days of the demand, the
right to appointment would not get automatically forfeited even
after 30 days, if the opposite party makes an appointment after 30
days of demand, but before the first party had moved the court
under Section 11.

This would sufficiently meet the legal

requirements of an appointment under Section 11 (6). However, if
no appointment is made even till such time as the first party
moves the court under Section 11, the opposite party would forfeit
its right to make the appointment.
17.

Therefore the respondent having failed to appoint an

arbitrator within the statutory period of 30 days of the notice
issued on 15th April, 2004, followed by the reminder of 5th June,
2006 till even filing of the present petition has forfeited the right
to appoint an arbitrator.
In the light of the principles laid down by the Apex Court in
S.B.P. & Company vs. Patel Engineering Limited 2005
(8) SCC 618, this petition therefore satisfies all the necessary
conditions for appointment of an arbitrator and there is thus no
Arb.P.327/2006

page 15 of 16

prohibition to this court appointing an independent arbitrator to
adjudicate upon the claims of the petitioner.

This court is

informed that Shri G.P. Thareja, Additional District Judge (Retd.)
has been appointed an arbitrator in similar matters wherein
contractors have not received payment from the MCD.
Accordingly, this petition is allowed.
The claims of the petitioner are referred for arbitration of
Shri G.P. Thareja, Additional District Judge (Retd.) (Address : B201, Priyadarshini Apartments, Patparganj, Delhi92, Phone No.
20906899). The arbitrator shall be paid fees of Rs.33,000/- and
all incidental and ancilliary expenses which shall

be shared

between the parties.
This petition is allowed in the above terms.

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
May 21, 2007
kr

Arb.P.327/2006

page 16 of 16

