IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
CS (OS) No.2613A/1998
Date of Decision 21st March, 2007
CENTRAL WAREHOUSING CORPORATION ... Petitioner
through: Mr. K.K. Tyagi, Advocate with
Mr. Iftekhar Ahmed, Advocate
VERSUS
CHOUDHARY & CHOUDHRY (INDIA) LTD.
& ANOTHER
.....Respondents
through: Dr. Rajiv B. Masoodkar, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
GITA MITTAL, J. (Oral)
1.

This petition has been filed under Section 34 of the Arbitration &

Conciliation Act, 1996 by the Central Warehousing Corporation assailing
an award dated 5th September, 1998 made by the sole arbitrator. It appears
that the Central Warehousing Corporation invited tenders for the
construction of the pile foundation caps, beams and RCC flooring etc. for
the warehousing complex at Jawaharlal Nehru Port, Navi Mumbai Phase 1.
2.

The tender submitted by the respondent firm was accepted. A work

order was issued on 5th March, 1990 and the contract agreement entered into
CS (OS) No.2613A/1998

Page No.1

between the parties on the 23rd March, 1990. It is submitted that the costs of
the work amounted to Rs.1,97,91,864/- and the stipulated period for
completion of the project was ten months. There is no dispute that the work
ran behind schedule and it is only after repeated extension of time that the
work could be completed on 27th February, 1993.
3.

The petitioner has settled the final bill of the claimants in June, 1996

but made recoveries of several amounts against the respondents which was
opposed by the respondents.

Disputes arose between the parties over

different matters relating to the conditions at the work site as well as
settlement of accounts etc. The respondents by a letter dated 23rd April,
1996 addressed to the Corporation charging the latter, inter alia, with
causing hindrance in the execution of the work, breaches of the contract,
delays in decision making and payment of rent, bills etc and delay in supply
of the essential materials including the cement and steel etc. to the Central
Warehousing Corporation and invoked the arbitration agreement between
the parties.
4.

The petitioner appointed Shri R.K. Goel, IAS (Retd.) as the sole

arbitrator to arbitrate on the disputes. The arbitrator has conducted detailed
proceedings and made and published an award on the 5th September, 1998
upholding the claims of the respondents.

CS (OS) No.2613A/1998

Page No.2

Aggrieved thereby, the respondent has filed the present petition
assailing the award of the arbitrator on claim nos.2, 3, 4 & 12.
5.

I have heard learned counsel for the parties on the objections raised

by the petitioner and the same are dealt with claim wise for convenience.
6.

Claim No.2

The principal ground of challenge to the award is based

on the plea that the claims of the respondents were based on the delay which
has occurred at site. It is contended that the arbitrator has noticed that there
was delay of 155 days. The petitioner has asserted that the reasons which
weighed with the arbitrator in making the award of claim no.2 wherein the
respondent claimed a sum of Rs.32,52,050/- as compensation on account of
loss of overhead/establishment, idle labour for 155 days were erroneous and
untenable.
On a consideration of the matter, I find that there is no dispute that
delay occurred in execution of the project owing to agitations by the project
affected persons.

After the detailed consideration of the matter, the

respondent had claimed that delay on account of such agitation resulted in
193 days of delay. The petitioner, on the other hand, admitted delay but had
submitted that the delay occurred resulting in loss of only 155 working
days. My attention has been drawn to para 13.4 of the award wherein the
arbitrator had accepted the contentions of the Central Warehousing

CS (OS) No.2613A/1998

Page No.3

Corporation to the effect that 155 working days were lost on account of
such agitations. The learned arbitrator has considered the matter at great
length and to a large extent, rejected the claim. He has held that the Central
Warehousing Corporation is liable for the delay which has occurred on
account of the agitation. The arbitrator has held that the respondent would
be entitled to compensation for one-tenth of the period which was duly
admitted by the Corporation which came to only about 15 days.
7.

So far as quantification of the loss was concerned, the respondents

computed their loss at Rs.16,850/- per day.
The arbitrator however has awarded loss only at the rate of Rs.5,500/per day and has therefore awarded a total sum of Rs.32,52,050/-.
8.

So far as the reason for awarding Rs.5,500/- is concerned, I find that

in paras 7.9 to 9.10 of the arbitral award, the learned arbitrator has
considered the loss which would be suffered on account of prolongation of
the contract for different reasons. The learned arbitrator has accepted the
computation put forth by the Central Warehousing Corporation which is to
be found in paras 7.9 & 8.4 of the award. The arbitrator has noted that in a
noting dated 5th February, 1998, the Corporation has submitted their own
alternative data to arrive at the profit which, but for the hindrances would
have normally accrued to the claimants. The note put up by the Corporation

CS (OS) No.2613A/1998

Page No.4

has been reproduced in para 7.9. The arbitrator has accepted the profit
projection as has been put forth by the Central Warehousing Corporation
itself. This figure has been considered by the arbitrator elsewhere also in
the award in arriving at the computation.
9.

In a latter part of the award in para 8.4, the arbitrator has held that the

claim of loss of overhead/establishment at the rate of 5% of the value has
been considered as being exorbitant by the arbitrator. He has given reasons
and held that tools and plants etc. could not remain idle for the entire
extended period of 25.40 months as has been claimed by the respondent. In
his reasoning, the arbitrator has taken into consideration the provisions
which are made by Government departments on account of such loss which
is contained in their contracts. After a detailed discussion, the arbitrator has
arrived at a loss of 3% on tools and plants and 2% on other overheads.
Based thereon, the arbitrator has held that an overall percentage of 4.5%
would be fair and reasonable which has been allowed to the respondent.
10.

In arriving at the compensation which the respondent would be

entitled to, the learned arbitrator has considered loss which would have
resulted to the contractor on account of idle labour. Again, the claim of the
contractor to the effect that labour force costing Rs.54,846/- per month had
to remain on their rolls due to prolongation of their project, has been

CS (OS) No.2613A/1998

Page No.5

rejected. The learned arbitrator has again recorded that there is substance in
the Corporation’s contention that labour would not be engaged and kept idle
for such a prolonged period. There is careful consideration of the claimants
plea that a contractor cannot also engage and disband labour frequently and
consequently the contractor would have suffered some loss on account of
retention of labour which was idle.

The learned arbitrator on a

consideration of the entire conspectus of the award, has awarded only
Rs.5,000/- per month on account of skeleton labour which would have been
idle.
11.

On this basis, the learned arbitrator has awarded only 15 days

compensation to the respondent at the rate of Rs.5,500/- so far as claim no.2
is concerned.
12.

The contractor had also made a claim of Rs.32,52,050.00 on account

of the avoidable delay of 193 days in execution of the work on account of
local agitations and protests.

The respondents have accepted in their

records that delay of 155 days resulted on account of such agitations. The
arbitrator has taken the view that having regard to all the circumstances, the
Corporation could have taken effective steps so that the protests could be
tackled. On this reasoning only a token liability has been fastened on the
Corporation.

The arbitrator has therefore allowed compensation to the

CS (OS) No.2613A/1998

Page No.6

contractor for only 15 days which is merely one tenth of the period of 155
days of delay. The claim of the contractor of compensation at the rate of
Rs.16,850/- per day of delay was also not accepted. The arbitrator has
awarded only a sum of Rs.5500/- per day as compensation being a total of
Rs.82,500/- on this count.
13.

Nothing has been pointed which could bring the objections within the

purview of Section 34 of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996. As such
the objections to the award on claim no.3 do not raise any legally tenable
grounds and are hereby rejected.
14.

Claim No.3

The respondent made a claim based on a loss of 123

days on account of delay in the supply of cement and steel and had,
therefore, claimed Rs.20,72,550/- at the rate of Rs.16,850/- per day.
15.

The arbitrator has noted that the Central Warehousing Corporation

has admitted 116 days of delay and has held the respondent entitled to
compensation for this delay at the rate of Rs.5,500/- per day based on the
calculations which have been given by him extensively in the award. On
this basis, the arbitrator has held the respondent entitled to only
Rs.6,38,000/- against their claim for Rs.20,72,550/-.
16.

The petitioner has challenged the award based on the additional

condition no.4 in the contract agreement which reads thus:-

CS (OS) No.2613A/1998

Page No.7

“The contractor shall make his programme of work in
consultation with the Engineer in charge, keeping in
view the availability of materials and unavoidable
hindrances. No claim, whatsoever, will be entertained
due to delay on this account”
17.

Bare perusal of this condition shows that the same relates to drawing

up of a programme of work by the contractor in consultation with the
engineer incharge. The availability of materials and unavoidable hindrance
relate to drawing up such programme wherein it has been stated that the
claim of the contractor would not be entertained due to delay on this
account. Thus the prohibition relates to drawing up of programme of work
and would not relate to availability of material or hindrances in execution of
the contract.
18.

I find that the arbitrator has noticed that the Corporation has not

referred to any “delay in drawing up programme of work”. Even before this
court, no material to support such a plea has been placed. This condition,
therefore, would have no bearing on the facts of the instant case. In this
view of the matter, the objections to the Award made in respect of claim
no.3 are without any factual or legal basis.
19.

Learned counsel for the petitioner before this court has submitted that

the arbitrator has commented on the terms of the contract in para 14.2 of the
award which contain an observation by the arbitrator that the additional

CS (OS) No.2613A/1998

Page No.8

condition no.4 is one side and totally unfair to the contractor. However, I
find that in the later part of the same paragraph, the arbitrator has noticed
the fact that there was no delay in drawing up the programme of work. In
any case, on perusal of the terms of the contract, it cannot be held that the
award on this claim of the respondent was prohibited and unjustified. The
objections to the award on claim no.3 are therefore rejected.
20.

Claim No.4 The objections raised by the claimant to this claim are

not supported by the record or by the applicable law and the same are
consequently rejected.
21.

Claim No.12

The petitioner has submitted that there is an error

in computation of interest on the delayed payment of the final bill which
was claimed as claim no.12 by the respondent. It has been contended that
the learned arbitrator has wrongly calculated the same and has wrongly
arrived at a figure of Rs.50,000/- on this claim.
22.

Dr. Rajiv B. Masoodkar, learned counsel representing the

respondents, submits that the submissions made by the petitioner on this
aspect is correct and that the respondent is entitled to only a sum of
Rs.7871/- only as interest on the delayed payment of the final bill and not
Rs.50,000/- as has been awarded. He submits that the respondent has no
objection if the award to these effect is modified.

CS (OS) No.2613A/1998

Page No.9

23.

In view of the above, so far as the objections of the petitioner to the

award made by the arbitrator in respect of the claim nos.2, 3 & 4 do not fall
within the purview of Section 34 of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act,
1996 and are legally untenable.

The respondent has conceded the

objections to the extent of the award on claim no.12.
In view of the foregoing discussion, the objections of the Central
Warehousing Corporation to the Award dated 5th September, 1998 to claim
nos.2, 3 & 4 are hereby rejected. The objection to the Award on claim
no.12 is accepted. It is directed that the award made on claim no.12 is
hereby modified and it is held that the respondent will not be entitled to the
amount of Rs.50,000/- but only to the amount of Rs.7,871/- on account of
interest on delayed payment of the final bill.
This petition is disposed of in the above terms.
(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
March 21, 2007
aa

CS (OS) No.2613A/1998

Page No.10

