IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 268/2005
Judgment reserved on: 9th May, 2005
Date of decision: 22nd August, 2005
Shri Subhash Chawla

... Petitioner
through Mr.M.Arora, Advocate

VERSUS
The Commissioner of Industries
.... Respondents
through Ms. Reeta Kaul, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

This Writ petition has been filed on behalf of the

petitioner seeking entitlement to consideration of his application
for allotment of an industrial plot/flat made by him.
2.

So far as the facts giving rise to the writ petition are

concerned, they are within a narrow compass and there is no

1

WP(C) 268/2005

dispute on the same. The petitioner has filed the writ petition on
the plea that he is the sole proprietor of a firm which was being run
by him under the name and style of M/s Silvo India engaged in the
business of manufacture and sale of silver extraction machines
since 29.02.1988. The assembling and manufacturing and sale of
the machines was being carried out by the petitioner in a building
over a plot of land measuring about 190 sq. yards bearing no.20,
Pandit Park, First Floor, Krishna Nagar, Delhi which had been
taken on lease by the petitioner.

The petitioner had installed

machines including drilling machine, grinder, compressor,
spraying gun, welding machines etc. at these premises.
3.

It is pointed out that pursuant to orders passed by the

Apex Court in the judgment entitled M.C.Mehta Vs. Union of
India it was held that as per the Master Plan in Delhi approved by
the Central Government under Section 11A(2) of the Delhi
Development Act required that existing industrial units in nonconforming/residential areas were to be shifted/relocated. Based
on the directions of the Apex Court, the respondents directed all

2

WP(C) 268/2005

manufacturing units so located to be closed down and
simultaneously formulated a scheme that persons carrying on
manufacturing activities in the aforestated areas would be allotted
industrial plots/factories in industrial areas.
4.

This scheme was formulated by the respondent no.1 who

had also invited applications for allotment of industrial plots and
factory sheds in the functioning industrial estates including those at
Narela, Jhilmil Tahirpur, Jhilmil, Badli,Kotla and Patparganj etc.
The respondent no.2 was vested with the function of developing
the industrial areas and ensuring allotments.
5.

As per the scheme, the notified eligibility conditions

required an applicant to be having an industrial unit in a nonconforming or residential areas. It was also stated that no new
industrial unit shall be considered for allotment of the industrial
property. There was also a prohibition of consideration of an
application by a person who was possessed of an industrial area/
plot/flat in its own name or in the name of the Directors of the
concern.

3

WP(C) 268/2005

6.

The petitioner applied for allotment of an industrial plot

vide application no.38598 dated 27.12.1996 for relocation of his
industrial unit from the aforestated residential/non-conforming area
under the above scheme. Alongwith his application the petitioner
forwarded a pay order no.139684 dated 27.12.1996 for
Rs.30,000/-. The petitioner also submitted an undertaking on
affidavit to the following effect:-

7.

“I, Subhash Chawla Prop. Of M/s Silvo India do
hereby undertake to completely shift my industrial
unit presently functioning/operating at 20, Pandit
Park, 1st floor, Krishna Nagar, Delhi to flatted
factory/industrial plot to me by the authority failing
which I shall stop operating in residential/nonconforming area with effect from 1.1.1997.”
The petitioner had also enclosed a second affidavit to the

effect that he did not own any industrial plot/shed/flat in his name
or in the name of his wife, dependent children or dependent family
members in the National Capital Territory of Delhi.
8.

Certain specified documents were required to be

submitted as proof of the occupancy and location of an applicant’s
industry.

The respondents had provided detailed guidelines

4

WP(C) 268/2005

alongwith the application form which were required to be complied
with. The guidelines relevant for the adjudication of the present
case were to the following effect:“2. If the application form is from a firm, the
name and address of the firm must be mentioned.
In case of partnership firm, certified copy of latest
partnership deed and attested copy of Form “A”
under partnership Act issued by Registrar of firms
and Societies must be attached. In case of others
documents like certificate of incorporation,
memorandum & Articles of Association/Bye Laws
(for Co-operative Societies) along with complete
list of shareholders and Directors must be attached
as applicable. Attach documentary proof showing
date of establishment of the applicant unit.

9.

3. Attach documents like self-attested sketch
of the building, site plan, rent receipt/house tax
receipt/lease deed and Balance Sheet.”
It is pointed out that in compliance with the requirement

of guideline number three noticed above, in addition to his
affidavit dated 30.12.1996, the petitioner had enclosed the
following documents:“1.Pay order for Rs.30,000/-(No.139604)
2.Affidavit for not having any industrial
property in NCT of Delhi.
3. Affidavit for shifting the unit.
4. Rough sketch of site plan.

5

WP(C) 268/2005

10.

5. Copy of rent receipt.
6. Balance sheet.
7. Sales Tax Registration Certificate(Local)
8. Sales Tax Registration Certificate(Central)
9. List of raw material used.
10. Copy of Income Tax Assessment Order.
11. Copy of RBI Code number.
12. Copy of Import & Export Code.
13. Copy of Driving Licence.”
My attention has also been drawn to the details of the

machinery which was stated to be installed by the petitioner in
answer to column no.8 of the application form,

its source of

procurement, approximate price and the power requirement of the
machinery. I find that the petitioner was also required to give its
particulars as well as particulars of the existing unit in the
application form and the information furnished by the petitioner
was to the following effect:“2(i) Name of the applicant/industrial unit:
(in capital letters)
(ii) Full address
(iii) Telephone number
(iv) Date of establishment of the
industrial unit at the present site
(v) Constitution of the firm (proprietary/

6

Silvo India
:G-59, vikas Marg
LaxmiNagar
Delhi-110092
: 2215916
: 29.02.1988
:Proprietary

WP(C) 268/2005

partnership/pvt. Ltd. co./public ltd. co./
Co-operative society/Registered Society/
Others
(vi) Name(s) of the Proprietor/Partners/
Directors/Managing Committee Members
4. Particulars of existing industrial unit
(i) Full address of the Factory
(ii) Land use(Residential/
commercial/industrial)
(iii) Total area/covered area
(a) Area of plot

: Subhash Chawla
:
:20,Pandit Park
(1st floor)
Delhi-110051
Industrial
253sq.Yards
(Approx

(b) Covered area of the building
300 sq. feets
( c )Area occupied by the Unit/Factory 190sq. Yards
(Approx
11.
The petitioner submits that it fulfilled all the eligibility
requirements and had placed the complete material before the
respondents to the effect that its industrial unit was located in the
rented premises at 20, Pandit Park, First floor,Delhi-110051 and
the documents required to be submitted, were also duly furnished.
12.

The petitioner has also submitted that being law abiding,

in compliance with the directives of the Apex Court and his
affidavit to the respondents, the petitioner closed down his

7

WP(C) 268/2005

industrial unit in the non-conforming area. It is stated that the unit
remains closed till date.
13.

No further correspondence or query in the matter was

addressed to the petitioner. No objections were communicated to
the petitioner.

Yet,

despite repeated representations by the

petitioner, no allotment was made in his favour.
Without any warning or notice, the petitioner for the first
time received a letter dated 9th July, 2002 from the respondent no.2
enclosing a cheque no.465918 drawn on Punjab & Sind Bank
dated 20.06.2002 for Rs.30,000/- stating that this cheque was
towards refund of the earnest money deposited by the petitioner
with his application no.38598.
14.

The

petitioner

immediately

represented

to

the

respondents vide letter dated 5.8.2002 notifying the respondents
that in terms of his affidavit, he stopped operating the unit with
effect from 1.1.1997 and has been waiting for more than 5½ years
for allotment of the industrial property. The petitioner objected to
the communication sent by respondent no.2 giving no reasons for

8

WP(C) 268/2005

refunding the money and for failing to allot the industrial plot to
the petitioner. It was stated that the petitioner was not interested in
return of the amount as he had closed his unit on the assurance of
the respondents and needed the industrial property. Accordingly
the petitioner returned the cheque which has been sent by the
respondents to him with this communication.
15.

I find that no action whatsoever was taken by the

respondents on the petitioner’s representation. On the contrary a
second communication dated 22.8.2003 was sent by the respondent
no.2 without addressing any of the grievances made by the
petitioner.

It was merely stated that the respondent no.2 was

enclosing with this communication, a cheque no.003509 dated
22.8.03 for Rs.10209/- drawn on Punjab and Sind Bank towards
payment of interest on the earnest money deposited by the
petitioner for an industrial plot/flat under the relocation scheme.
This cheque was also returned by the petitioner to the
respondents vide his letter dated 18.12.2003 and with the request
of allotment of the plot to him.

9

WP(C) 268/2005

16.

Since no action was taken by the respondents on the

representations of the petitioner, the present writ petition was filed
seeking the following prayers:“A) Issue a writ of certiorari, mandamus or any
other writ, direction or order directing the
respondents to consider the application of the
petitioner for allotment of plot/flatted factory shed
etc. and allot alternative site to the petitioner under
the scheme and
B) pass such other and further orders as this Hon’ble
Court may deem fit, proper and just on the facts and
circumstances of the case.”
17.

In answer to the notice to show cause a plea has been set

up by the respondents for rejecting the application of the petitioner
in their counter affidavit which is to the following effect:“2. That the petitioner had applied under Relocation
Scheme for allotment of industrial plot vide
application no.38598. The petitioner failed to give
the proof regarding the functioning of industry, as
such was not found eligible for industrial unit under
the Relocation Scheme. And his application was
rejected with a remark ‘No Government proof, Not
eligible’. Copy enclosed is Annexure.
3. That the petitioner failed to give any proof with
respect of his functioning unit/factory at 20, Pandit
Park Delhi –51 (Industrial), however, it is submitted

10

WP(C) 268/2005

18.

that the petitioner was running his factory in
Industrial Area when the scheme was applicable to
non-conforming areas i.e working in residential or
non-conforming areas. As such the petitioner was
not entitled for allotment of industrial unit.”
I have given my considered thought to the submissions

made before me and have also perused the original record of the
respondents relating to the application of the petitioner.

It is

noteworthy that the information given by the petitioner in the
application form itself sets out the fact that the petitioner firm is
located at G-59, Vikas Marg and that its manufacturing unit was
located at 20, Pandit Park, First Floor, Lakshmi Nagar, Delhi. The
petitioner had enclosed the documents required as per the
respondents’ guidelines in terms of the rent receipt, site plan and
the affidavits.
19.

My attention has been drawn to the original record

produced before me. I find that there was a check list which had
been prepared by the respondents for consideration of applications.
This check list contains the columns in seriatum and the officer
who has scrutinized the application has noticed thus against the

11

WP(C) 268/2005

same in the petitioner’s file:“02 Name and address of applicant
(a) Office
:
M/s Silco India, G-59, Vikash Marg
(b) Factory
:
20, Pandit Park(first floor), Laxmi
Nagar, Delhi-51”
This check list also notices that the petitioner has
enclosed his sales tax registration for manufacturing, site plan,
balance sheet, list of raw material used etc.
The existing area of the property is mentioned as 190 sq.
yards. I find that this is the area which has been pleaded in the writ
petition.
20.

I, therefore,

find force in the submissions made on

behalf of the petitioner that in the application form in column no.4
the petitioner understood that where he was required to give the
land use, he was required to give such use of the land as that to
which the same had been actually put and, therefore, the petitioner
had reflected the same as “industrial”. However it is submitted that
the land use of the area is residential and as such the petitioner is
entitled to a favourable consideration of his application.

12

WP(C) 268/2005

21.

Perusal of the original record shows that after

consideration of the application and documents of the petitioner,
the petitioner’s application was originally actually recommended
for allotment of an industrial plot measuring 100 sq. mtrs. vide an
endorsement made thereon on 25.8.1998.

This has been later

scored out and there is a scribbling to the following effect on the
application form ‘No Government proof, Not eligible’. This noting
on the application form does not bear any date.
No note sheet is available on the file between the period
1996 to 2002.
22.

The file commences with a photocopy of a proforma

titled “DSIDC/Relocation/Refund” filed up on 12th June, 2002 by a
supervisor. It is unfortunate that for five and a half years not a
single communication has been addressed by the respondent to the
petitioner seeking a clarification in respect of any objections or
doubts being entertained by any authority on the petitioner's
application.
23.

I also find that the respondents have not doubted the

13

WP(C) 268/2005

authenticity or the genuineness of the documents placed on record
before them by the petitioner. The application form itself set out
the address of the applicant and gave the full particulars of the
existing industrial unit which was located at 20, Pandit Park, First
Floor, Delhi-110051 including its area and the machinery installed
therein. There was no material whatsoever for the respondents for
changing the recommendation from allotment to the rejection of
the application. The petitioner had enclosed the documents as per
the guidelines which included a rent receipt and the site plan which
the respondents have not considered. I also find that the balance
sheet enclosed with the form of the petitioner reflects payment on
account of rent. There was no inspection of the premises of the
petitioner to justify the rejection of the statements made in the
application form.
24.

Even assuming that the impression in the mind of the

officers of the respondent was correct, it was necessary for them to
have intimated the petitioner with regard to the doubts, if any,
being entertained and they ought to have called for clarification

14

WP(C) 268/2005

from the petitioner prior to rejection of the application form.
25.

Mr.M.Arora, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner

has submitted that the premises at G-59, Vikas Marg was the office
premises of the petitioner and was a room of barely 9’x10’ in area.
It has further been contended that the petitioner had enclosed the
sales tax registration certificate, income tax assessment order etc.
to show that the business had actually been conducted. The rent
receipt and the site plan were enclosed to show the location of the
manufacturing industry which was the applicant.
26.

The respondents are even on date possessed of the

earnest money deposited by the petitioner as he had returned the
cheque and also the amount which they have sent towards interest
thereon. There is no rebuttal to the petitioner's assertions that it
had returned the pay orders to the respondent. In reply to these
assertions, it is merely that the same are a matter of record.
27.

In the instant case the respondents were fully aware of

the directions of the Apex Court with regard to the closure of the
industry in a non-conforming area.

15

The petitioner had been

WP(C) 268/2005

required to give an undertaking to this effect. An application and
affidavit was received by the respondents as back as on 27th
December, 1996 whereby the petitioner undertook to close the
factory in a non-conforming area with effect from 1st January,
1997. It has not been disputed either in the counter affidavit or in
the original records that the petitioner stopped operating its factory
with effect from such date.

In these circumstances it was

incumbent upon to the respondents to act with despatch and to deal
with the application of the petitioner at the earliest.

The

respondents sat over the matter till 2002 when the earnest money
deposited by the petitioner was sent by pay order to it without
disclosing any reasons whatsoever for the rejection of the
petitioner's application. The petitioner would have remained under
the impression that its application is being favourably considered.
In the event that the respondents had arrived at a conclusion that
the petitioner was not entitled to an industrial plot on the ground
that he was not located in a non-conforming area, the petitioner
would have continued with his manufacturing activity as he would

16

WP(C) 268/2005

not be violating any statutory provisions. In this view of the matter
I have no manner of doubt that the respondents have acted illegally
and arbitrarily justifying intervention by this Court in exercise of
its discretionary powers under the extraordinary writ jurisdiction.
In any case, the stand taken in the counter affidavit is not
supported by the original records. Such stand cannot, therefore, be
pressed to oppose the writ petition. (Re: Mohinder Singh Gill and
another vs. The Chief Election Commissioner, New Delhi and
others AIR 1978 SCC 851).
28.

For all the foregoing reasons, in my view, it was not open

for the respondents to reject the application of the petitioner
especially when the same had been recommended for allotment
without calling upon the petitioner to clarify doubts if any being
entertained on any count.

The records of the respondents reflect

that the respondents had themselves noticed that the petitioner had
different addresses for office and factory and that its factory was
located at 20, Pandit Park(First Floor) Krishna Nagar, Delhi.
Accordingly this writ petition is allowed. The rejection

17

WP(C) 268/2005

of the application of the petitioner is set aside.
29.

It is directed that the respondents shall give an

opportunity to the petitioner to place any other and further
submissions and records before them in support of its application.
The petitioner shall place all other and further submissions and
records in this behalf before the respondents within two weeks.
The respondents shall consider the material placed before them and
the submissions made by the petitioner and shall consider the
application of the petitioner afresh and pass a reasoned and
speaking order thereon within two weeks thereafter. The order
shall be communicated to the petitioner.
30.

The petitioner shall be entitled to the costs of the present

proceedings which are quantified at Rs.5,000/-.
Dasti
GITA MITTAL, J.
22nd August, 2005
JK

18

WP(C) 268/2005

