IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1925/2003
Judgment reserved on: 8th September,
2005
Da te of decision:December 23, 2005
SANJAY KUMAR RANA & ANR.
... Petitioner
through Ms. S. Janani and Mr. Deepak Goel,
Advocates
VERSUS
INDUST.FINANCE CORP.OF (I) LTD .... Respondents
through Ms. Anuradha Dutt with
Mr. Sandeep Mohapatra, Ms. Ekta Kapil &
Ms. Soni Singh, Advocates for resp. no. 1
Mr. Arjun Harkauli and Mr. Ashish Rana,
Advocates for resp. nos. 2 and 3
WITH
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 2128/2003
VIVEK KUMAR & ANR.
... Petitioner
through Ms. S. Janani and Mr. Deepak Goel,
Advocates
VERSUS
INDUST.FINANCE CORP.OF (I) LTD .... Respondents
through Ms. Anuradha Dutt with
Mr. Sandeep Mohapatra, Ms. Ekta Kapil &
Ms. Soni Singh, Advocates for resp. no. 1
Mr. Arjun Harkauli and Mr. Ashish Rana,
Advocates for resp. nos. 2 and 3
AND
W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 1 of 42

WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 3151/2003
RAKESH KUMAR & ANR.
... Petitioner
through Ms. S. Janani, Advocate
VERSUS
INDUST.FINANCE OF (I) LTD.
.... Respondents
through Ms. Anuradha Dutt with
Mr. Sandeep Mohapatra, Ms. Ekta Kapil &
Ms. Soni Singh, Advocates for resp. no. 1
Mr. Arjun Harkauli and Mr. Ashish Rana,
Advocates for resp. nos. 2 and 3
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

These writ petitions raise similar questions of fact and law and

as such are being taken up for disposal together. The petitioner no. 1
in these writ petitions are sons of deceased employees of the
respondent no. 1 who expired while in service. These petitioners are
seeking appointment on compassionate basis in terms of a scheme
for providing such employment to dependents of employees who died
in harness which was introduced by the respondent no. 1 since 1979.
W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 2 of 42

The respondent no. 1 has refused to give such employment to the
petitioners no. 1. The issue was agitated by these petitioners before
the conciliation officer under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 who
gave a report of failure of conciliation to the appropriate authority.
2.

Vide a letter dated 7th November, 2002, the respondent no. 2

refused to refer the issue raised by Shri Sanjay Kumar, petitioner no.
1 in W.P.(C) No. 1925/2003 for adjudication to the Industrial
Adjudicator for the reason that :“The claim made by All India Industrial Finance
Corporation Employees” Association for providing
compassionate appointment to the dependents of
employees died in harness was considered by the
management of IFCI Ltd. and the claims were not
found to be justified for providing employment
under the scheme in force. It is also noted that the
financial assistance offered under the Disability and
Financial Assistance Scheme was not accepted by 5
of the families. The scheme is a benevolent one for
the welfare of the needy persons and each case has
to be considered in its own merit and appointment
under the scheme cannot be claimed as a matter of
right. In the circumstance, the dispute raised on
this account is found to be not maintainable.”
The communications to Shri Rakesh Kumar, petitioner in Writ
Petition(Civil) 3151/2003 and to Shri Vivek Kumar, petitioner in Writ
Petition(Civil) 2128/2003 are also dated 7th November, 2002 and are

W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 3 of 42

in identical terms.
3.

The petitioners are aggrieved by the refusal to grant

appointment to them on compassionate basis by the respondent no. 1
and by the action of the respondent no. 2 in refusing to refer the
matter for adjudication to the industrial adjudicator.

The letters

dated 7th November, 2002 have been assailed by way of the writ
petitions on the following grounds :(i) the decision taken by the respondent no. 2
amounts to an adjudication on the merits of the
claim made by the petitioner which is beyond the
scope of consideration by the appropriate
government under Section 10 of the Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947.
(ii) the purported ground for refusal to appoint the
petitioners on compassionate basis on the plea that
the respondent no. 1 had set up an alternative
scheme of financial assistance in lieu of
compassionate appointment is wholly misconceived.
The respondent no. 1 cannot avoid its responsibility
to give effect to the scheme of compassionate
appointment dated 1st January, 1979 which was
notified and implemented by it for the last several
decades inasmuch as the scheme arises out of a
settlement with the industrial workers and as such
the respondent no. 1 has no jurisdiction and
authority to unilaterally vary the term thereof.
(iii) The respondent no. 1 has adopted a clever
device to avoid the appointment on compassionate
basis. There is no denial to the fact that the work for
W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 4 of 42

the class IV posts, to which the petitioners are
seeking employment, exists and is of perennial
nature. The respondent no. 1 however has resorted
to a device of outsourcing the work merely to avoid
their responsibility to give appointment to the
petitioners on compassionate basis.
(iv) Large number of employees of the respondent
no. 1 have sought voluntary retirement under a
voluntary retirement scheme of the respondent no. 1.
It is stated that as on 1st January, 2000, 162
employees who were in class IV cadre and between
2000-2003, 64 class IV staff had opted for and
retired under the voluntary retirement scheme
introduced by the IFCI management. It is further
submitted that out of the remaining staff members in
class IV, ten employees were promoted to class III
cadre and others either retired or died. On the date
of filing of the rejoinder by the petitioners in
October, 2004, it was stated that there are only 73
employees in the class IV cadre of the respondent no.
1 and as such sufficient number of vacancies are
available for appointing the petitioners.
(v) It is submitted that the respondent no. 1 is
placing reliance on the Basu Committee
recommendation for staff reduction for the self
imposed ban on engaging class IV employees.
According to the committee report, only 15% to 20%
reduction in staff strength was recommended.
However from the above noticed figures, 38% of the
class IV staff had taken voluntary retirement service.
In this view of the matter, the petitioners were
entitled to appointment on compassionate ground in
the class IV cadre where posts were actually
available.
The petitioners submit that there is no
abolition to any existing post in the respondent no. 1.
W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 5 of 42

4.

(vi). The petitioners have also contended that
existence of a financial assistance scheme cannot
render otiose another scheme for appointment of
needy dependents of employees on compassionate
basis who died in harness.
The respondent no.1, on the other hand, has vehemently

disputed the entitlement of the petitioners to appointment on
compassionate basis. The principal submission has been that the
scheme for providing appointment on compassionate grounds to
needy dependents of its employees who died in harness was stated to
have been introduced with effect from 1st January, 1979 by the
management

of

the

respondent

no.

1

and

compassionate

appointments had been made in terms thereof. This scheme was
considered necessary because at the time when the scheme came into
existence, employees of the respondent no. 1 were not covered by any
pension scheme and as a result, the death of an employee in harness
caused immediate hardship to dependent members of his family. In
these circumstances, after judging each case on its merits, appoints
were made in the class III and IV cadre of dependent members of the
deceased employee who are eligible and fulfilled the criteria for
compassionate appointments.

W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 6 of 42

5.

Ms. Anuradha Dutt, learned counsel for respondent no. 1

contends that the benefits of this scheme could not be availed in case
of every employee who died in harness for several reasons including
old age or illiteracy of his spouse and further that such appointments
were not in the best interest of the respondent no. 1. Therefore, after
a detailed consideration, the respondent no. 1 came out with the
scheme

for

financial

assistance

in

lieu

of

compassionate

appointment. This scheme was titled as the 'Disability and Financial
Assistance Scheme' in the year 1985. The financial assistance which
was offered under this scheme was payable per month for a period of
15 years or till the normal age of superannuation of the deceased
employee, whichever is earlier and at present the maximum is to the
extent of Rs.4,000/- per month.

As per the scheme formulated in

the year 1990, other measures to provide immediate succour to
families/dependents

of

the

deceased

employee

including

compassionate gratuity are also in place. Under this scheme, the
family of the deceased employee is entitled to compassionate gratuity
which is equivalent to one months pay for every completed year of
service or part thereof in excess of six months subject to minimum of

W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 7 of 42

two months pay and allowances drawn by the deceased employee at
the time of his death subject to a maximum of Rs.15,000/6.

The board of directors of the respondent no. 1 is stated to have

passed a resolution in March, 1999 reviewing the position regarding
compassionate appointment. Keeping in view the changes in the
organisation's working and business environment, it decided not to
make any compassionate appointment. The respondent company had
implemented a voluntary retirement scheme for class III and IV staff
in February 2000 and January, 2001 and further in October, 2003
and February, 2004 to reduce staff strength in these cadres which
positions have not been filled up. In fact no appointment at all has
been made to the class III and IV staff after 1996. These actions are
based on a report and recommendation by an independent forum of
consultants which had been appointed to review the man power
situation of the respondent company.
7.

It has been held by the Apex Court that grant of appointment

on compassionate basis is an exception to regular appointment and is
intended to mitigate the immediate financial crisis upon the demise
of the employee which would enure to the family of a deceased

W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 8 of 42

person.
8.

It is further submitted that in the year 1994, long after the

scheme for appointment on compassionate basis came into vogue,
the respondent no. 1 introduced a 'pension scheme' for the welfare of
its employees.

Under this scheme in the event of death of an

employee who has opted for pension, his wife/dependent children
are able to draw family pension from the respondent company. This
family pension is payable at a higher rate for a period of seven years
or till the deceased employee would have attained the age of 65 years,
whichever is earlier, and on the normal rate thereafter.
9.

The dependent family members of a deceased employee are

additionally paid compassionate gratuity and offered financial
assistance under the Disability and Financial Assistance Scheme.
10.

So far as Sanjay Kumar Rana petitioner in writ petition(civil)

1925/2002 is concerned, his father late Sh. C.L. Rana was working as
a sweeper in the Calcutta Regional Office of the respondent no. 1. He
died on duty due to fall of a fire fighting concrete platform on him on
15th May, 2000 and his mother applied for appointment in class IV on
compassionate basis seeking appointment for the petitioner. The

W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 9 of 42

petitioner has been sending reminders through his mother.
11.

The respondent no. 1 has pointed out in its counter affidavit

that late Shri C.L. Rana was succeeded by his widow Smt. Tasmani
Devi. The widow of the deceased employee has availed the financial
assistance under the IFCI Disability and Financial Assistance
Scheme. It has been pointed out that under this scheme, she is
receiving a sum of Rs.4,000/- per month and in addition, she is also
getting pension of Rs.4,527/12.

The respondent no. 1 points out that Vivek Kumar, petitioner in

Writ Petition(Civil) 2128/2003 was the son of Shri Bhagwan Das who
was employed a an industrial financial assistant at the Delhi
registered office of respondent no. 1. He died on 19th November ,
1998 at the age of 50 years and his widow submitted an application
for appointment on compassionate basis.

The respondent no. 1

expressed inability to make appointment on compassionate basis but
offered financial assistance under the IFCI Disability & Financial
Assistance Scheme which was not availed by her. This assistance was
to the tune of Rs.4,000/- per month. Apart from this offer, the
widow is getting family pension of Rs.5021/- per month.

W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 10 of 42

These assertions of fact made by the respondent no. 1 in its
counter affidavit have not been disputed. The respondent has also
submitted that in addition thereto, the other payments noticed
hereinabove would have been received by the families of the deceased
employees.
13.

So far as Shri Rakesh Kumar petitioner in writ petition(civil)

3151/2003 is concerned, his father late Sh. Pratap Singh was
employed as a Subedar, Grade I in the head office of the respondent
no. 1. He died of haemorrhage and paralysis on 18 th April, 1997 at the
age of 54 years. The widow of the late Shri Pratap Singh submitted
an application for appointment of Sh. Rakesh Kumar, the petitioner
no. 1 in W.P.(C) No. 3151/2003 in the class III cadre on
compassionate basis. Reminders for this appointment have been
sent however the same has not been granted on the aforestated
reasons.
14.

The respondent no. 1 in answer has submitted that distress to

the family of the deceased employee late Shri Pratap Singh on
account of his demise was mitigated by the fact that his widow Smt.
Phoolwati is getting family pension of Rs.4,947/- per month which

W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 11 of 42

has been paid to her up to 18th April, 2004 and thereafter at the rate
of Rs.2,473/- per month.

It has further been submitted by the

respondent no. 1 on affidavit that Smt. Phoolwati was offered
financial assistance under the IFCI Disability and Financial
Assistance Scheme which was not availed by her. According to the
respondent no. 1, the financial benefit to which she was entitled
under this scheme would have been to the tune of Rs.2500/- per
month.
15.

The principles which govern consideration of an application for

appointment on compassionate basis are well settled. In 94 (2001)
DLT 746 entitled Municipal Corporation of Delhi vs Vir Mohd., it has
been held that the object of appointment of a dependant of a
deceased employee who died in harness is to relieve unexpected and
immediate hardship and distress caused to a family on account of
sudden demise of such earning member.

Compassionate

appointment runs counter to the general rule of appointments on
merit guaranteed to a citizen and while effecting such appointment
the management is required to keep in mind the family income and
assets of the members of the family of the deceased employee. It is

W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 12 of 42

also significant that the deceased employee expired shortly before he
would have otherwise superannuated.

This court in MCD vs Vir

Mohd. (supra) attached weight to the fact that an overwhelming
section of our society does not even receive minimum wages and
therefore the concept of penury should be strictly construed against a
person whose family has some income.
In this case, it was noticed that discounting an elder brother's
salary, the funds and income which were available to the mother of
the petitioner and the family owning land in Bihar would place the
petitioner, if not in the middle income bracket, well above the poverty
line.
16.

In (2004) 7 SCC 265 entitled Punjab National Bank and Ors vs

Ashwani Kumar Taneja, the Apex Court was called upon to consider
the issue as to whether retiral benefits are to be taken into
consideration while dealing with a

prayer for compassionate

appointment. Adverting to the applicable scheme as was applicable
to the employer, the court held that the amounts paid towards family
pension, gratuity, employees/employers contribution to provident
fund, compensation paid by the employer or its welfare fund,

W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 13 of 42

proceeds of the LIC policy, income of family through other sources,
employment of other family members,

family liability were all

relevant considerations while considering an application for such
appointment.
17.

In General Manager(D&PB) & Ors. vs Kunti Tiwari & Anr.

(2004) 7 SCC 271, it was held by the Apex Court that perennial
benefits received and other movable and immovable property
possessed by the family of the deceased employee shows that its
financial condition was not

penurious.

This criterion was

recommended by the Indian Bank Association and adopted by the
appellant bank to consider eligibility for effecting appointments on
compassionate basis. The court held that it could not have been said
that the family of the deceased employee had been left in penury or
without any means of livelihood and such consideration could not
have been diluted to one of 'not very well to do'.
18.

The courts have reiterated the principles laid down in earlier

judgments in the pronouncements reported at 1994 (2) SCC 718 LIC
vs Asha Ambedkar; 1994 (4) SCC 138 Umesh Kr. Nagpal vs State of
Haryana, 2000 (6) SCC 493 Balbir Kaur vs Steel Authority of India.

W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 14 of 42

The pronouncement of this court in 2001 (93) DLT 692 Bimla Devi vs
DVB and 113 (2004) DLT 531 Shiv Prasad vs The Directorate Of
Education, Govt. Of NCT of Delhi also lay down the applicable law.
In Balbir Kaur's case, it was held that existences of a scheme of
financial assistance would have no bearing on the application for
compassionate appointment.
19.

The application of the petitioners could have been rejected if

they fell within the prohibitions laid down in the scheme of the
employer and by these judicial pronouncements. In the instant case,
the respondent no. 1 has set up a plea of having abandoned the
scheme of appointment on compassionate basis. The obvious and
necessary consequence is non-consideration of the applications of the
petitioners by respondent no. 1.
20.

At this stage, the respondent no.1 has submitted that the

cleaning and maintenance of the head office premises of respondent
no. 1 is specialized work inasmuch as the office is located in an ultra
modern multistorey building of 21 floors including two basements.
For this reason, these entire operations have been outsourced to a
specialized agency having skilled manpower to perform such

W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 15 of 42

functions.

The respondent no. 1 submits that it is a financial

organisation with no practical knowhow or facility to undertake such
cleaning functions.
21.

The further submission is that its functioning has been fully

examined by the Labour Commissioner(Central) Delhi in November,
1999 who has not found any irregularity by the respondent company
in respect of any provision of the Contract Labour(Regulations &
Abolition) Act, 1970. The respondent no. 1 also submits that the
Ministry of Labour was fully apprised of all facts and circumstances
and the application of these provisions to the premises of the
petitioner. The respondent no. 1 submits that it is submitting all
annual returns to the office of the Labour Commissioner giving the
full details of the working of the contractor and its labour.
The respondent no. 1 is thus rendering yet another justification
for giving up the scheme for appointment on compassionate basis.
This is not for this court to consider in these proceedings.
22.

The respondent no. 1 has vehemently defended its action

submitting that its actions ensure social justice and it has been fair to
the employees.

W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 16 of 42

23.

In view of the aforestated conclusion,it becomes necessary to

notice respective submissions of both parties on the challenge to the
order dated 7th November, 2002 which has been passed by the
respondent no. 2 refusing to refer the disputes raised by the
petitioners for adjudication to the industrial adjudicator. The validity
of this order has to be tested on the touchstone of the scope of
discretion conferred on the appropriate government under Section 10
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947
24.

This issue arose for consideration before the Apex Court on

several occasions. In its judgments reported in AIR 1953 SC 53 State
of Madras vs C.P. Sarathy and AIR 1960 SC 1223 State of Bombay vs
K.P. Krishnan. The Apex Court held that the order of the government
under Section 10(1) read with Section 12(5) of the Act is an
administrative order and not a judicial one.
25.

In the judgment of the Apex Court reported in 1960 (2) LLJ 592

entitled State of Bombay vs K.P. Krishnan & Ors., it was held by the
Apex Court that when the appropriate government considers the
question as to whether any industrial dispute should be referred for
adjudication or not, it may consider primafacie the merits of the

W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 17 of 42

dispute and take into account other relevant considerations which
would help it to decide whether making a reference would be
expedient or not. It is true that if the dispute raises questions of law,
the appropriate government should not purport to reach a final
decision on the questions of law because that would normally lie
within the jurisdiction of the industrial tribunal.

Similarly, on

disputed questions of fact, the appropriate government cannot
purport to reach final conclusions, for that again would be the
province of the industrial tribunal. But it would not be possible to
accept the plea that the appropriate government is precluded from
considering even primafacie the merits of the dispute when it decides
the question as to manner in which it must exercise its discretion
under Section 10(1) read with Section 12(5) of the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947.

If the claim made is patently frivolous, or is clearly

belated, the appropriate government may refuse to make a reference.
Likewise if the impact of the claim on the general relations between
the employer and the employee in the region is likely to be adversely
effected, the appropriate government may decide that a reference for
adjudication ought not to be made. It must therefore be held that

W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 18 of 42

merely because a primafacie examination of the merit was carried
out, it cannot be said to be that the appropriate Government has
exceeded its jurisdiction in making the inquiry which the appropriate
government is entitled to make in dealing with the dispute under
Section 10(1).
26.

This judgment was relied upon by the Apex Court in AIR 1964

SC 1617 Bombay Union of Journalists & Ors vs State of Bombay
where the court held thus that while entertaining an application for a
writ of mandamus against an order made by the appropriate
government under Section 10(1) read with Section 12(5) of the
enactment, the court does not sit in appeal over the order and is not
entitled to consider the purport or the satisfactory character of the
reasons given by the Government. If it appears that the reasons
given show that the government took into account irrelevant

or

foreign considerations, only then, the court may in a given case
consider issuance of a writ of mandamus.
27.

The court further observed that in entertaining an application

for a writ of mandamus against an order made by appropriate
government under Section 10(1) read with Section 12(5), the court is

W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 19 of 42

not sitting in appeal over the order and is not entitled to consider the
purported or the satisfactory character of the reasons given by the
government. It would be idle to suggest that in giving reasons to a
party for refusing to make a reference under Section 12(5), the
appropriate government has to write an elaborate order indicating
exhaustively all the reasons that weighed in its mind in refusing to
make a reference. It is no doubt desirable that a party concerned
should be told clearly and precisely the reasons why no reference is
made, because the object of Section 12 (5) appears to be to require
government to state its reasons for refusing to make a reference, so
that the reasons should stand before accruing. But that does not
mean that a party challenging the validity of the government decision
not to make a reference can require the court in writ proceedings to
examine the purport or the correctness of the said reasons. If it
appears that the reasons given for consideration were irrelevant or
extraneous or if the action of the appropriate government is malafide,
a party would be entitled to assail such order and be justified in its
claim for issuance of a writ of mandamus.
28.

In Workman of Syndicate Bank, Madras vs Government of

W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 20 of 42

India, 1985 (51) FLR 131, the Apex Court was called upon to consider
the legality of an order passed by the Central Government to refuse to
make a reference on the ground that the charges of misconduct
against a worker were proved in a duly constituted departmental
inquiry. It was held by the court that such a situation cannot be
countenance by law inasmuch as, if such ground was permissible to
avoid reference, managements could easily avoid a reference for
adjudication and deprive the workman of the opportunity of getting a
dispute referred to the industrial adjudicator even if the penalty
imposed upon the workman were unreasonable or perverse or
disproportionate or the proceedings against the workman or actuated
by malafide.
29.

In Nirmal Singh vs State of Punjab & Ors. 1984 (2) LLJ 396, a

branch manager of a bank challenged his dismissal order and made a
complaint to the state government under the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947.
The state labour commissioner exercising powers of the state
government, declined to refer the issues raised by the appellant for
adjudication under the Industrial Disputes Act on the ground that the

W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 21 of 42

appellant was not a workman.

The writ petition impugning this

decision of the labour commissioner was dismissed in limini by the
High Court.
The Apex Court was of the view that the labour commissioner
had merely stated his conclusion without giving any reasons as to
why he arrived at the conclusion that the appellant was not a
'workman' within the meaning of Section 2 (s) of the Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947.

Observing that the matter would therefore

require to be remanded to the labour commissioner asking him to
state his reasons for this conclusion would entail delay.
Therefore the Apex Court directed the labour commissioner to whom
the state government had delegated his powers under Section 12 of
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 to make a reference of the question
as to whether the dismissal of the appellant was legal and justified.
It is to be noticed that at one stage, the court had examined the
question as to whether it should decide the issue as to whether the
appellant was a workman within the meaning of Section 2 (s) of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. However, this is a question of fact and
it was found by the apex court that the question could not be decided

W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 22 of 42

on the basis of the stray material which was before the Court.
30.

In the Syndicate Bank's case, the Apex Court observed that it

would have directed the Government of India to reconsider the
question of making reference of the industrial dispute for
adjudication without taking into account the irrelevant ground which
has prevailed with it in declining to make a reference. Time bound
directions to make a reference was issued by the Apex Court.
31.

In 1976 3 SCC 433 entitled Prakash vs State of Haryana & Anr.,

the Apex Court found that the Government had given reasons for
finding that the petitioner was not a workman and hence reference
was declined. In view of the reasons given, the Apex Court declined
to interfere in the matter.
32.

In 1989 SCC L&S 465 Telco Convey Drivers Mazdoor Sangh &

Anr vs State of Bihar, the law was succinctly laid down by the Apex
Court in the following terms :“12. It is however, submitted on behalf of TELCO
that unless there is relationship of employer and
employees or, in other words, unless those who are
raising the disputes are workmen, there cannot be
any existence of industrial dispute within the
meaning of the term as defined in Section 2(k) of
the Act. It is urged that in order to form an opinion
as to whether an industrial dispute exists or is
W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 23 of 42

apprehended, one of the factors that has to be
considered by the government is whether the
meaning of the definition as contained in Section
2(k) of the Act.
13. Attractive though the contention is, we regret,
we are unable to accept the same. It is not well
settled that, while exercising power under Section
10(1) of the Act, the function of the appropriate
government is an administrative function and not a
judicial or quasi-judicial function, and that in
performing this administrative function the
government cannot delve into the merits of the
dispute and take upon itself the determination of
the lis, which would certainly be in excess of the
power conferred on it by Section 10 of the Act. See
Ram Avtar Sharma v. State of Haryana ; M.P.
Irrigation Karamchari Sangh v. State of M.P. ;
Shambhu Nath Goyal v. Bank of Baroda,
Jullundur.
14. Applying the principle laid down by this
Court in the above decisions, there can be no doubt
that the government was not justified in deciding
the dispute. Where, as in the instant case, the
dispute is whether the persons raising the dispute
are workmen or not, the same cannot be decided by
the government in exercise of its administrative
function under Section 10(1) of the Act. As has been
held in M.P. Irrigation Karamchari Sangh case,
there may be exceptional cases in which the State
Government may, on a proper examination of the
demand, come to a conclusion that the demands
are either perverse or frivolous and do not merit a
reference. Further, the government should be very
slow to attempt an examination of the demand with
a view to declining reference and courts will always
be vigilant whenever the government attempts to
usurp the powers of the Tribunal for adjudication of
valid disputes, and that to allow the government to
W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 24 of 42

do so would be to render Section 10 and Section
12(5) of the Act nugatory.”
33.

On several occasions the Apex Court has considered the issue of

appropriate directions which ought to be made in such cases wherein
an order refusing to make a reference under Section 10 or Section 12
(5) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 has been impugned. In this
regard, in the Telco case(supra) the Apex Court observed thus :“16. It has been already stated that we had given one
more chance to the government to reconsider the
matter and the government after reconsideration has
come to the same conclusion that the convoy drivers
are not workmen of TELCO thereby adjudicating the
dispute itself. After having considered the facts and
circumstances of the case and having given our best
consideration in the matter, we are of the view that
the dispute should be adjudicated by the Industrial
Tribunal and, as the government has persistently
declined to make a reference under Section 10(1) of
the Act, we think we should direct the government to
make such a reference. In several instances this
Court had to direct the government to make a
reference under Section 10(1) when the government
had declined to make such a reference and this Court
was of the view that such a reference should have
been made. See Sankari Cement Alai Thozhilalar
Munnetra Sangam v. Government of Tamil Nadu;
Ram Avtar Sharma v. State of Haryana; M.P
.Irrigation Karamchari Sangh v. State of M.P.;
Nirmal Singh v. State of Punjab. ”
The Apex Court had thus considered it appropriate to direct
W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 25 of 42

the government to make a reference of the dispute raised by the
workman to the appropriate industrial tribunal/court within one
month of the judgment.
34.

In Sultan Singh vs State of Haryana, (1996) 2 SCC 66, the Apex

Court held that an order under Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes
Act is an administrative order and the government is entitled to go
into the question whether an industrial dispute exists or is
apprehended and it will be only a subjective satisfaction on the basis
of material on record and, being an administrative order, no lis is
involved.
35.

The principle requisites for making a reference under Section

10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and the law applicable thereto
has been thus stated in (2000) 3 SCC 93 entitled Secretary, Indian
Tea Association vs Ajit Kumar Bharat & Ors. :“7. The law on the point may briefly be
summarized as follows:1.
The appropriate Government would not be
justified in making a reference under Section 10 of
the Act without satisfying itself on the facts and
circumstances brought to its notice that an industrial
dispute exists or is apprehended and if such a
reference is made it is desirable wherever possible,
for the Government to indicate the nature of dispute
in the order of reference.
W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 26 of 42

2.
The order of the appropriate Government
making a reference under Section 10 of the Act is an
administrative order and not a judicial or quasijudicial one and the court, therefore, cannot canvass
the order of the reference closely to see if there was
any material before the Government to support its
conclusion, as if it was a judicial or quasi-judicial
order.
3.
An order made by the appropriate Government
under Section 10 of the Act being an administrative
order no lis is involved, as such an order is made on
the subjective satisfaction of the Government.
4.
If it appears from the reasons given that the
appropriate Government took into account any
consideration irrelevant or foreign material, the court
may in a given case consider the case for a writ of
mandamus.
5.
It would, however, be open to a party to show
that what was referred by the Government was not an
industrial dispute within the meaning of the Act.”
36.

In 1985 3 SCC 189 Ram Avtar Sharma & Ors vs State of

Haryana while examining the issue relating to the scope of the
government's power to make or refuse to make a reference under
Section 10 of Industrial Disputes Act, the court observed thus :“5. The first question to be posed is whether
while exercising the power conferred by Section 10
to refer an industrial dispute to a Tribunal for
adjudication, the appropriate Government is
discharging an administrative function or a quasijudicial function. This is no more res integra. In
State of Madras v. C.P. Sarathy a Constitution
Bench of this Court observed as under:
But, it must be remembered that in making a
W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 27 of 42

reference under Section 10(1) the Government is
doing an administrative act and the fact that it has
to form an opinion as to the factual existence of an
industrial dispute as a preliminary step to the
discharge of its function does not make it any the
less administrative in character. The Court cannot,
therefore, canvass the order of reference closely to
see if there was any material before the
Government to support its conclusion, as if it was a
judicial or quasi-judicial determination.
Explanation the ratio of the decision in Sarathy
case, in Western India Match Co. Ltd. v.Western
India Match Co. Workers Union it was observed as
under : (SCC p. 231, para 9)
In the State of Madras v. C.P. Sarathy this
Court held on construction of Section 10(1) of the
Central Act that the function of the appropriate
Government thereu7nder is an administrative
function. It was so held presumably because the
Government cannot go into the merits of the
dispute, its function being only to refer such a
dispute for adjudication so that the industrial
relations between the employer and his employees
may not continue to remain disturbed and the
dispute may be resolved through a judicial process
as speedily as possible. (embhasis supplied)
After referring to the earlier decisions on the
subject in Shambhu Nath Goyal v. Bank of
Baroda, Jullundur it was held that “in making an
administrative act and the fact that it has to form
an opinion as to the factual existence of an
industrial dispute as a preliminary step to the
discharge of its function does not make it any the
less administrative that while exercising power of
making a reference under Section 10(1), the
appropriate
Government
performs
an
administrative act and not a judicial or quasijudicial act.
W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 28 of 42

6. The view that while exercising power under
Section
10(1),
the Government
performs
administrative function can be supported by an
alternative line of reasoning.
Assuming that
making or refusing to make a reference under
Section 10(1) is a quasi-judicial function, there is
bound to be a conflict of jurisdiction if the
reference is ultimately made. A quasi-judicial
function is to some extent an adjudicatory function
in a lis between two contending parties. The
Government as an umpire, assuming that it is
performing a quasi-judicial function when it
proceeds to make a reference, would imply that the
quasi-judicial determination of lis prima facie
shows that one who raised the dispute has
established merits of the dispute. The inference
necessarily follows from the assumption that the
function performed under Section 10(1) is a quasijudicial function. Now by exercising power under
Section 10, a reference is made to a Tribunal for
adjudication and the Tribunal comes to the
conclusion that there was no merit in the dispute,
prima facie a conflict of jurisdiction may emerge.
Therefore the view that while exercising power
under Section 10(1) the function performed by the
appropriate Government is an administrative
function and not a judicial or quasi-judicial
function is beyond the pale of controversy.
7.
Now if the Government performs an
administrative act while either making or refusing
to make a reference under Section 10(1), it cannot
delve into the merits of the dispute and take upon
itself the determination of lis. That would certainly
be in excess of the power conferred by Section 10.
Section 10 requires the appropriate Government to
be satisfied that an industrial dispute exists or is
apprehended. This may permit the appropriate
W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 29 of 42

Government to determine prima facie whether an
industrial dispute exists or the claim is frivolous or
bogus or put forth for extraneous and irrelevant
reasons not for justice or industrial peace and
harmony.
Every administrative determination
must be based on grounds relevant and germane to
the exercise of power.
If the administrative
determination is based on the irrelevant,
extraneous or grounds not germane to the exercise
of power it is liable to be questioned in exercise of
the power of judicial review. In State of Bombay v.
K.P. Krishnan it was held that a writ of mandamus
would lie against the Government if the order
passed by it under Section 10(1) is based or
induced by reasons as given by the Government are
extraneous, irrelevant and not germane to the
determination. In such a situation the court would
be justified in issuing a writ of mandamus even in
respect of an administrative order. Maybe, the
Court may not issue writ of mandamus, directing
the Government to make a reference but the Court
can after examining the reasons given by the
appropriate Government for refusing to make a
reference come to a conclusion that they are
irrelevant, extraneous or not germane to the
determination and then can direct the Government
to reconsider the matter. This legal position
appears to be beyond the pale of controversy.”
37.

An issue as to whether a particular person is a workman or not

fell for consideration before the Supreme Court in Sharat Kumar vs
Government of NCT of Delhi & Ors., 2002 4 SCC 490. The court held
that this issue has to be determined on the basis of types of duties of
the employee and not merely on the designation held in the past. It
W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 30 of 42

was held that the question requires examination of factual matters
for which material, including the oral evidence, has to be considered.
It was therefore held that the appropriate government exercising
administrative jurisdiction under Section 10(1) read with Section
12(5) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 for the limited purpose of
determining whether the dispute was an industrial dispute within
Section 2 (k) could not claim the power to adjudicate upon such a
question and could not merely on the basis of discretion of the
employer, hold that he was not a workman. Such a question should
be decided by the industrial tribunal or the labour court on the basis
of material produced by the parties.
38.

In the case of Bombay Union of Journalists (supra) and in M.P.

Association Karamchari Sangh vs State of M.P., 1985 2 SCC 103 it has
been held that a competent government has a very limited
jurisdiction to examine patent frivolousness of the demand and it is
to be understood that, as a rule, adjudication of the demand made by
the workman has to be left to the tribunal to decide.
39.

I have noticed hereinabove the assertions of the petitioners had

made their claim seeking appointment on compassionate basis. The

W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 31 of 42

determination of all the issues raised required examination of factual
matters for which material, including oral evidence, was required to
be considered. In such a matter, the respondent could not abrogate
to itself the power to adjudicate on the issues and hold that that the
respondent no. 1 was justified in disallowing the application for
providing employment on compassionate basis under the scheme in
vogue.

The petitioners claimed eligibility and entitlement for

appointment under the scheme for grant of appointment of the
dependents of the deceased employee of the respondent no. 2, on
compassionate basis to any member of the family. Size of the family,
assets and liabilities of the family and other relevant considerations
were all questions of fact which required evidence. Such a matter, it
is well settled, should be decided by the Industrial Tribunal or the
labour court on the basis of the material to be placed before it by the
parties.
40.

In the instant case, an issue was also raised as to whether the

respondent no. 2 can justifiably deny engagement to employees on
the basis of a resolution of the board of directors vis-a-vis the claim
put up by the petitioners based on the Scheme which has been in

W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 32 of 42

vogue since 1979. In such a case, determination of the issues raised
would not be possible at a stage when the respondent no. 2 is
exercising administrative jurisdiction vested in it for the limited
purpose of satisfying itself whether the dispute raised is an industrial
dispute within the meaning of Section 2(k) or the Act or not.
41.

Applications had been filed on behalf of the petitioner no. 1 in

each of the writ petitions seeking appointment on compassionate
basis. The petitioners were all agitating that they were entitled to
consideration for appointment on compassionate basis under the
scheme of the respondent no. 1 of 1979. It was also asserted that the
respondents had no right to avoid the scheme which was based on a
settlement between the workers and the management.

As the

petitioners were being denied such consideration, the Union of the
workers had sought a reference of the issues raised by the workmen
for adjudication by an industrial adjudicator. The circumstances in
which the widows of the deceased employees refused the benefits
under the Disability and Financial Assistance Scheme were not
before the appropriate government. There is no material even before
this court as to what were the circumstances in which the benefits

W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 33 of 42

under the financial assistance scheme were not accepted. Whether
the same was on account of the pendency of the applications seeking
compassionate appointment of the respondent no. 1 or whether it
was on grounds of insufficiency of the benefits or whether it was on
account of an impression in the minds of the widows that acceptance
of this scheme would defeat their claim for compassionate
appointment of the petitioner no. 1 under the scheme of 1979 for such
appointment, was not before the appropriate government i.e. the
respondent no. 2 nor is it before this court. There is no material with
regard to the size of the family or the number of dependents which
was left by the deceased employee. As noticed above, the Apex Court
has emphasised that the financial status of the family and its assets
are a valid consideration for grant or rejection of an application
seeking compassionate appointment. There was no such material
before the respondent no. 2.
42.

In the instant case, the respondent no. 1 has set up a plea of it

being over staffed as one of the reasons for not making appointments
on compassionate basis.

The petitioners have made detailed

submissions with regard to the staff position after the respondents

W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 34 of 42

effectuated the voluntary retirement scheme. The merits of the plea
taken up by the respondent no. 1 and the effect of the factual
submissions made by the petitioners is something which has to be
established and considered by an industrial adjudicator. In any case,
no such material was before the respondent no. 2.
I also find that the respondent no. 1 had stated that having
implemented the pension scheme and the disability and financial
assistance scheme, it was not effecting any appointment on
compassionate basis. In this view of the matter, it would appear that
the respondent no. 1 would not have considered the applications on
behalf of the petitioner no. 1 in these three matters.

The effect

thereof would also deserved to be considered in an appropriate
adjudication. The respondent no. 1 has admittedly given a go-by to
the scheme for compassionate appointment which was in vogue since
1979, the petitioners have contended that the same was a result of
negotiations and a settlement with the workmen. Therefore, an issue
arises as to whether the respondent no. 1 could have legally given a
go bye to such a scheme arising out of an industrial settlement by a
resolution of the board of directors or replace such settlement by the

W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 35 of 42

pension scheme and the financial assistance scheme. According to
the petitioners this was not open to the respondent no. 1.
Therefore, the validity of the action of the respondent no. 1 and
the consequences thereof require to be considered.
43.

In this background, the other issues which have been noticed in

para 3 hereinabove, which have been raised at the instance of the
petitioner deserved to be considered before a finding can be arrived
at as to whether the petitioners deserved consideration of their
applications or not. The respondent no. 2 has held that the IFCI
Limited has considered the claims of the petitioners and has found
them not justified. This is opposed to the stand of the IFCI whereby
it has been contended that it is not considering applications for
compassionate appointment in view of its pension scheme, the
Disability and Financial Assistance Scheme and the report of the
Basu Committee whereby it has been recommended that it should
reduce its work force.
It is aggrieved by the non-consideration of its applications that
the petitioners have sought reference of the disputes. Consequently,
it has to be held that the order dated 7th November, 2002 is based on

W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 36 of 42

no material whatsoever and is contrary to the record.
44.

It is also noteworthy that the reasons for rejection of the

application for appointment on compassionate basis urged before
this court to the extent of the self imposed ban on employment is not
the reason mentioned in the impugned order dated 7th November,
2002. However, the offer for financial assistance under the Disability
and Financial Assistance Scheme, reasons for its acceptance or nonacceptance; effect of the non-acceptance thereof are the issues which
require material to be placed before the adjudicating authority for
arriving at a conclusion as to the impact thereof on the application
seeking appointment on compassionate basis. The petitioners had
raised the industrial dispute as their claims were not granted by the
respondent no. 2 and they had sought adjudication by the industrial
adjudicator.
45.

In view of the settled principles of law noticed hereinabove, the

reasons given by the respondent no. 2 in passing the order or refusal
to refer the disputes for adjudication as contained in the order dated
7th November, 2002 are at the face of the order unsustainable. No
reasons have been given in respect of the petitioners. Perusal of the

W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 37 of 42

same shows that there does not appear to have been any
consideration of the claims of the individual applications.
46.

For the aforestated reasons the decision of the respondent no. 1

in declining to make the reference deserves to be set aside. So far as
prayer (b) in the writ petition is concerned, the same is allowed. The
impugned communications all dated 7th November, 2002 in all three
writ petitions are hereby set aside and quashed.
47.

Having setting aside these orders, the matter would require to

be remanded back to the respondent no. 2 for fresh consideration
and making the reference.

However the instant case relates to

application seeking employment on compassionate basis.

I have

noticed hereinabove, the fact that the employee of the respondent no.
1 in W.P.(C) No. 2128/2003 expired on 19th November, 1998; in writ
petition(civil) 1925/2003 expired on the 15th May, 2000 and the
employee in W.P.(C) No. 3151/2003 Rakesh Kumar vs IFCI had died
on 19th April, 1997. The requests for appointment on compassionate
basis of the petitioner no. 1 in all three matters are pending since
then.
48.

In 1999 LLR 1020

W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Municipal Employees

Union vs

Page 38 of 42

Secretary(Labour) & Anr., it was held that the definition of
“industrial dispute” is wide enough to cover a dispute raised by the
employee workman in regard to non-employment of others who may
not be his workman at the material time. The beneficiary of a claim
need not be workman of the employer at the time of raising the
dispute. This court placed reliance of a judgment rendered in Civil
Writ 2640/1997 Delhi Municipal

Workers Union(Regd.) vs the

Management of MCD & Ors. which related to appointment on
compassionate basis of the person whose relative has died in harness.
Therefore, it is clear that an industrial reference at the instance of a
person seeking appointment on compassionate basis is maintainable.
49.

In the light of the aforenoticed position in law and the factual

position, in my view, the present case is a fit case for issuance of a
writ of mandamus.

The respondent no. 2 had taken a decision

refusing to refer the dispute for adjudication which has been set
aside. Accordingly a direction is issued to the respondent no. 2 to
make reference of the disputes raised by the petitioners for
adjudication within a period of four weeks from the date of receipt of
copy of this judgment.

W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 39 of 42

There is however no order as to costs.

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
December 23, 2005
kr

W.P Nos. 1925, 2128 & 3151/2003

Page 40 of 42

