IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Dat e of decision: December 23, 2005
I. WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 5133/2005
JAI GANESH PETROLEUM
... Petitioner
through Mr. A. Maitri, Advocate
VERSUS
UNION OF INDIA & ANR.
... Respondents
through Mr. Ruchir Mishra, Adv. for
respondent no. 1
Ms. Ira dhasmana with Ms. Mala Narayan,
Adv. for respondent no. 2
WITH
II. WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 5167/2005
KHUTAR FILLING STATION
... Petitioner
through Mr. A. Maitri, Advocate
VERSUS
UNION OF INDIA & ANOTHER
... Respondents
through Mr. M.M. Kalra with
Ms. Rubina Singh and
Ms. Anisha
Kaushik,
Advocates for respondent no. 2
Mr. Amit Bansal with Ms. Manisha, Advocate
for UOI
AND
III. WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 16946/2004
M/S ANNAPURNA FILLING STATION
...
Petitioner
through Mr. Kaushal Yadav, Advocate
VERSUS
W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 1 of 40

INDIAN OIL CORPORATION LTD. & ANR.
... Respondents
through Mr. M.M. Kalra with
Ms. Rubina Singh and Ms. Anisha Kaushik,
Advocates for respondent no. 2
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

These three petitions are being taken up together for hearing

inasmuch as in all the three petitions, the respondents have urged
an objection to the effect that this court does not have the
territorial jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the subject matter of the
writ petition.
2.

The petitioners are principally aggrieved by the action taken

by the oil companies, who have granted dealership agreements to
them, for alleged breaches and violations. The actions taken by oil
companies against the three petitioners have been impugned by
way of the present writ petitions.
The common factor relied upon the petitioners in all the
three matters is that the principal office of the oil company in
W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 2 of 40

question (Indian Oil Corporation in Writ Petition(Civil) 5167/2005
and Writ Petition(Civil) 16964/2004 and IBP Company Ltd. in
Writ Petition(Civil) 5133/2005) is located in Delhi.
3.

The other common factor, which is relied upon by the

petitioners to assert maintainability of the writ petition and
territorial jurisdiction of this court, is a clause in the agreement
which according to petitioner, restricts jurisdiction to courts at
Delhi in the eventuality of a dispute arising between the parties.
4.

So far as the two agreements with the Indian Oil Corporation

are concerned, the jurisdiction clause is contained in Clause 68 of
the agreement which reads as under :“68. This Agreement has been made in
Agra and all payments thereunder shall be
due and made in New Delhi, unless
otherwise directed by the Corporation.
The Courts in the city of New Delhi alone
shall have jurisdiction to entertain any
suit, application or other proceeding in
respect of any claim or dispute arising
under this Agreement.”
5.

So far as the IBP Company Ltd. is concerned, the

jurisdictional clause is contained in Clause 32 of the agreement
with the petitioners reads thus:“32. The agreement shall be deemed to have
been granted in New Delhi and shall be
construed according to the laws of India and the
W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 3 of 40

performance by the Dealer/s of any agreement
on their part herein contained shall be
considered due in New Delhi for the purpose of
jurisdiction.”
6.

It is settled law that parties cannot confer jurisdiction upon a

court of law by consent. However, in the event of more than one
court having territorial jurisdiction upon the subject matter of the
lis, parties can by consent restrict the territorial jurisdiction to one
of such courts. It has been held that restriction to one of such
courts to which the parties could take recourse in the event of
disputes does not contravene Section 28 of the Contract Act in the
pronouncement of the Apex Court in AIR 1971 SC 740 entitled
Hakam Singh vs Jammon(India) Ltd.
7.

The issue raised in this case relates not only to the disputes

which have arisen between the parties, but reliance is being placed
on a clause in the agreement whereby jurisdiction is restricted to
this court in the above noted terms.

Such question arose for

consideration before the Apex Court in the judgment reported at
AIR 1989 SC 1239 entitled ABC Laminart Pvt. Ltd. Vs Andhra
Pradesh Agencies, Salem and was answered thus :“15. In the matter of a contract there may arise
causes of action of various kinds. In a suit for
damages for breach of contract the cause of
action consists of the making of the contract,
W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 4 of 40

and of its breach, so that the suit may be filed
either at the place where the contract was made
or at the place where it should have been
performed and the breach occurred.
The
making of the contract is part of the cause of
action. A suit on a contract, therefore, can be
filed at the place where it was made. The
determination of the place where the contract
was made is part of the law of contract. But
making of an offer on a particular place does not
form cause of action in a suit for damages for
breach of contract. Ordinarily, acceptance of an
offer and its intimation result in a contract and
hence a suit can be filed in a court within whose
jurisdiction the acceptance was communicated.
The performance of a contract is part of cause of
action and a suit in respect of the breach can
always be filed at the place where the contract
should
have (been) performed or its
performance completed. If the contract is to be
performed at the place where it is made, the suit
on the contract is to be filed there and nowhere
else. In suits for agency actions the cause of
action arises at the place where the contract of
agency was made or the place where actions are
to be rendered and payment is to be made by
the agent. Part of cause of action arises where
money is expressly or impliedly payable under a
contract. In cases of repudiation of a contract,
the place where repudiation is received is the
place where the suit would lie. If a contract is
pleaded as part of the cause of action giving
jurisdiction to the Court where the suit is filed
and that contract is found to be invalid, such
part of cause of the action disappears. The
above are some of the connecting factors.”
8.

This issue has further been considered by the Apex Court in

a later judgment reported at JT 1993(1) SC 617 entitled R.S.D.V.

W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 5 of 40

Finance Company Pvt. Ltd. Vs Shree Vallabh Glass Works Ltd. It
was held by the Apex Court as hereunder :“9. We may also consider the effect of the
endorsement 'Subject to Anand jurisdiction'
made on the deposit receipt issued by the
defendant. In the facts and circumstances of
this case it cannot be disputed that the cause of
action had arisen at Bombay as the amount of
Rs.10,00,000/- itself was paid through a
cheque of the Bank at Bombay and the same
was deposited in the bank account of the
defendant in the Bank of Baroda at Nariman
Point Bombay. The five post dated cheques
were also issued by the defendant being payable
to the plaintiff at Bombay. The endorsement
'Subject to Anand jurisdiction' has been made
unilaterally by the defendant while issuing the
deposit receipt. The endorsement 'Subject to
Anand jurisdiction' does not contain the ouster
clause using the words like 'alone', 'only',
'exclusive' and the like. Thus the maxim
'expressio uniusest exclusio alterius' cannot be
applied under the facts and circumstances of
the case and it cannot be held that merely
because the deposit receipt contained the
endorsement 'Subject to Anand jurisdiction' it
excluded the jurisdiction of all other courts who
were otherwise competent to entertain the suit.
The view taken by us finds support from a
decision of this Court in A.B.C. Laminart Pvt.
Ltd. & Anr v. A.P. Agencies, Salem(1989) 2
S.C.R. page1.”
9.

Thus, there can be no dispute that making of a contract is a

part of cause of action. However, in order to determine territorial
jurisdiction of the court, what has to be considered is as to whether

W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 6 of 40

such cause of action has a realm and substantial nexus with the
matter in lis.
10.

So far as the extraordinary writ jurisdiction of the High

Court is concerned, the source of power is to be found in Article
226 of the Constitution of India.

The relevant portion of this

article reads as under :“Article 226.
Power of High Courts to
issue certain writs -(1) Notwithstanding
anything in article 32, every High Court shall
have powers, throughout the territories in
relation to which it exercise jurisdiction, to issue
to any person or authority, including in
appropriate cases, any Government, within
those territories directions, orders or writs,
including writs in the nature of habeas corpus,
mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and
certiorari, or any of them, for the enforcement
of any or the rights conferred by Part III and for
any other purpose.
(2) The power conferred by clause (1) to issue
directions, orders or writs to any Government,
authority or person may also be exercised by
any High Court exercising jurisdiction in
relation to the territories within which the cause
of action, wholly or in part, arises for the
exercise of such power, notwithstanding that
the seat of such Government or authority or the
residence of such person is not within those
territories.]
xxxx”
11.

Therefore, this court is empowered to issue writs, orders or

direction to any government, authority or person exercising

W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 7 of 40

jurisdiction in relation to the territories within which cause of
action arises wholly or in part. The high court is constitutionally
empowered to issue writs irrespective of the place of residence of
such government or authority or person being without the
territories.
12.

In civil proceedings, 'cause of action' is understood to mean

every fact, which, if traversed, would be necessary for the plaintiff
to prove in order to support his right to the judgment of the court.
It is that bundle of fact which, taken together with the applicable
law, entitles the plaintiff to relief against the defendants.
13.

In a judgment reported at AIR 1985 SC 1289 = (1985) 3 SCC

217 State of Rajasthan vs Swaika Properties, certain properties
belonging to a company which had its registered office in Calcutta
were sought to be acquired in Jaipur and the notice under Section
52 of the Rajasthan Urban Improvement were served upon the
company at Calcutta. Basing its right to maintain the writ petition
at Calcutta High Court, it had been contended that service of the
notice within the territorial jurisdiction of the Calcutta High Court
empowered that court to exercise jurisdiction in the matter. The
Apex Court held that the entire cause of action for challenging the
acquisition of the land under Section 152 of the Rajasthan Urban
W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 8 of 40

Improvement Act had arisen within the territorial jurisdiction of
the Rajasthan High Court. The factum of service of the notice at
Calcutta was held unnecessary for grant of an appropriate writ,
order or direction under Article 226 of the Constitution for
quashing the notice issued by the Rajasthan Government. It was
thus held that the High Court at Calcutta had no jurisdiction to
entertain the writ petition.
14.

The law on this aspect has been authoritatively laid down by

the Apex Court when it had occasion to examine this question
further in its judgment reported at AIR 2002 SC 126 entitled
Union of India vs Adani Export Ltd. & Ors. wherein it was held
thus :“17. It is seen from the above that in order to
confer jurisdiction on a High Court to entertain
a writ petition or a special civil application as in
this case, the High Court must be satisfied from
the entire facts pleaded in support of the cause
of action that those facts do constitute a cause
so as to empower the court to decide a dispute
which has, at least in-part, arisen within its
jurisdiction. It is clear from the above judgment
that each and every fact pleaded by the
respondents in their application does not ipso
facto lead to the conclusion that those facts
gives rise to a cause of action within the court's
territorial jurisdiction unless those facts
pleaded are such which have a nexus or
relevance with the lis that is involved in the
case. Facts which have no bearing with the lis
W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 9 of 40

15.

or the dispute involved in the case, do not give
rise to a cause of action so as to confer
territorial jurisdiction on the court concerned.
If we apply this principle then we see that none
of the facts pleaded in Paragraph 16 of the
petition, in our opinion, fall into the category of
bundle of facts which would constitute a cause
of action giving rise to a dispute which could
confer territorial jurisdiction on the courts at
Ahmadabad.”
Placing reliance on the pronouncement of the Apex Court in

the State of Rajasthan (supra) and the Adani Export matter in its
judgment reported at (2004) 9 SCC 786 entitled National Textile
Corporation Ltd. & Ors. Vs Haribox Swalram & Ors., the Apex
Court elucidated the applicable principles:“12.1. As discussed earlier, the mere fact that the
writ petitioner carries on business at Calcutta or
that the reply to the correspondence made by it
was received at Calcutta is not an integral part
of the cause of action and, therefore, the
Calcutta High Court had no jurisdiction to
entertain the writ petition and the view to the
contrary taken by the Division Bench cannot be
sustained. In view of the above finding, the writ
petition is liable to be dismissed.”
In this case as the parties had litigated upto the Apex Court.
In order to put an end to the litigation, the Supreme Court
however examined the matter on merits as well.
16.

In a recent judgment reported at (2004) 6 SCC 254 entitled

Kusum Ingots & Alloys Ltd. vs Union of India & Anr. the Apex

W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 10 of 40

Court has considered this issue further and held thus :“26. The view taken by this Court in U.P.
Rashtriya Chini Mill Adhikari Parishad that the
situs of issue of an order or notification by the
Government would come within the meaning of
the expression “cases arising” in clause 14 of the
(Amalgamation) Order is not a correct view of
law for the reason hereafter stated and to that
extent the said decision is overruled. In fact, a
legislation, it is trite, is not confined to a statute
enacted by Parliament or the legislature of a
State, which would include delegated legislation
and subordinate legislation or an executive order
made by the Union of India, State or any other
statutory authority. In a case where the field is
not covered by any statutory rule, executive
instructions issued in this behalf shall also come
within the purview thereof. Situs of office of
Parliament, legislature of a State or authorities
empowered to make subordinate legislation
would not by itself constitute any cause of action
or cases arising. In other words, framing of a
statute, statutory rule or issue of an executive
order or instruction would not confer
jurisdiction upon a court only because of the
situs of the office of the maker thereof.”
17.

It is noteworthy that the doctrine of forum conveniens is also

guiding the courts in adjudicating upon and deciding issues,
objections relating to territorial jurisdiction. This doctrine find its
base in convenience to parties and applies the principles that the
court having the closest connection to the lis would guide the court
in deciding as to the objections relating to territorial jurisdiction of
the courts. In this behalf in (2004) 6 SCC 254 Kusum Ingots &
W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 11 of 40

Alloys Ltd. vs Union of India, the court held thus :
“10. Keeping in view the expressions used in
clause (2) of Article 226 of the Constitution of
India, indisputably even if a small fraction of cause
of action accrues within the jurisdiction of the
Court, the Court will have jurisdiction in the
matter.
30. We must however, remind ourselves that
even if a small part of cause of action arises within
the territorial jurisdiction of the High Court, the
same by itself may not be considered to be a
determinative factor compelling the High Court to
decide the matter on merit. In appropriate cases,
the Court may refuse to exercise its discretionary
jurisdiction by invoking the doctrine of forum
conveniens. [See Bhagat Singh Bugga v. Dewan
Jagbir Sawhney, Madanlal Jalan v. Madanlal,
Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. v. Jharia Talkies & Cold
Storage (P) Ltd., S.S. Jain & Co. v. Union of India
and New Horizons Ltd. v. Union of India.]”
18.

This principle finds application in the rationale and

reasoning of the Apex Court in the Adani Export matter. Thus,
there may be some facts which may constitute a cause of action
whereby the High Court would be enabled and empowered to
decide the disputes. Yet, each and every such fact pleaded by a
party does not by itself lead to the conclusion that the court would
have the territorial jurisdiction to entertain the writ petition. It is
only such facts which have a nexus or relevance with the issues
raised in the

litigation which vest the court with territorial

jurisdiction. Thus, though an agreement may have been executed
W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 12 of 40

within the territorial jurisdiction of the court, however in order to
decide the issue of territorial jurisdiction in cases where the
extraordinary jurisdiction of the High Court has been invoked
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, it has to be seen
whether the execution of the agreement is such an integral part of
the facts relating to the litigation and dispute that consideration of
such fact is absolutely imperative and essential for deciding the
disputes involved in the case.
19.

This question has arisen before a division Bench of this court

in its judgment reported at (2003) 69 DRJ 98 entitled A.K.
Surekha & Ors. Vs The Pradeshiya Investment Corporation of U.P.
Ltd & Anr. In this case, the court was concerned with a challenge
to the issuance of an recovery certificate against the petitioner at
Delhi. The recovery certificate was issued pursuant to exercise of
power under the statute on account of default of payments under
an agreement between the parties at Lucknow. The agreement
was entered at Lucknow and all disbursements were made from
U.P. The agreement also contained a clause restricting territorial
jurisdiction to the courts at Lucknow alone. In these facts, the
court held as under :“28. We have examined the relevant clauses of
W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 13 of 40

the agreement and decided cases of various
courts on question of territorial jurisdiction. If
the principles which have been crystallized by
the various courts are made applicable to the
facts of this case, the conclusion would be
irresistible that the court has no territorial
jurisdiction to entertain this petition because in
the instant case the respondent had entered into
an agreement with the company of the
petitioner at Lucknow and in the loan
agreement, it was clearly stated that for the
purposes of litigation relating to this agreement
the territorial jurisdiction shall be of Lucknow
courts alone. The petitioner on behalf of the
company was signatory to the agreement.
Thereafter a separate bond of guarantee was
executed. In the bond of guarantee it was
clearly agreed that the guarantors herein waive
all rights which the Guarantors may become
entitled to as surety/sureties to compete with
the Corporation in obtaining payment of the
moneys due or to become due to the
Corporation in respect of the said loan in favour
of the Corporation, as against the said
Company. In clause 9, the petitioner has agreed
that in order to give effect to the guarantee
herein contained the corporation shall be
entitled to act as if the Guarantors were the
principal debtors to the Corporation for all
payments and Covenants guaranteed by them
as aforesaid, to the Corporation.
29. In this view of the matter, there was no
justification or propriety on behalf of the
petitioner to have filed a petition in this court
for the relief of staying the recovery certificate.
It is indeed unfortunate that most of the
companies despite all kinds of clear and
unequivocal agreements with the public sector
undertakings and banks adopt delaying tactics
whenever a case of re-payment of loans or dues
arises. Unless the Courts adopt strict view of
W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 14 of 40

20.

the matter it would be difficult to effectively
curb this tendency.”
A similar question had fallen for consideration before this

court in a judgment reported at (2004) 73 DRJ 104 entitled
Callipers Naigai Ltd. & Ors. vs Government of NCT of Delhi & Ors.
and it was held as under :“8. In this particular case, we have to
examine, therefore, what is the actual grievance
of the petitioner. The petitioners, in view of
Section 3 (3) of the said Act, cannot have any
grievance with regard to the issuance of notices
dated 02.07.1998 because these have been
issued merely in compliance of the recovery
certificate received by the respondent no. 2 from
the Haryana Financial Corporation at
Chandigarh. The respondent no. 2 had no
option in the matter. He was not in any manner
enjoined with any duty to examine the
correctness or otherwise of the recovery
certificate issued under Section 3 (2) of the said
Act. The issuance of the recovery certificate is
conclusive proof of the matters stated therein.
In fact, the actual cause of action is in respect of
the recovery certificate which is the causa
causea and it is well-known that causa causea
est causa causati (the cause of a cause is the
cause of the thing cause) and the cause of the
cause is to be considered as the cause of the
effect also (see: Black's Law Dictionary 6th
Edition, p.220). Thus, the recovery notices are
nothing but the effect and the cause, in point of
fact, is the issuance of the recovery certificate.
In other words, the recovery certificate is the
causa sine qua non (a necessary or inevitable
cause); a cause without which the effect in
question could not have happened (see: Black's
Law Dictionary 6th Ediction, p.221. Sans the
W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 15 of 40

recovery certificate, the recovery notices could
not have been issued. Thus, it is clear that the
recovery notices dated 02.07.1998 cannot be set
aside without the recovery certificate dated
21.10.1998 also being set aside. The recovery
notices have no life of their own and must
necessarily depend for their sustenance on the
existence of the recovery certificate and the
cause of action for which arose entirely in
Chandigarh. The recovery notices do not form
an integral part of the cause of action. Thus,
this court does not have territorial jurisdiction
to entertain the present writ petition.
9.
In the aforesaid decision, which clearly
dealt with a similar situation, it was held that
recovery notices such as the one impugned
herein do not form an integral part of the cause
of action and, therefore, this court would not
have territorial jurisdiction to entertain the writ
petition challenging the recovery notice. I see
no reason to depart from this view. The lis is
with PICUP. Consequently the cause of action is
qua PICUP. Unfortunately that has entirely
arisen outside the territorial jurisdiction of this
court. The issuance of the recovery notice has
no relevance with this lis that is involved in the
case. It is the result of a purely ministerial act
on the part of Respondent No. 1 who cannot be
faulted for acting in the manner he did. The
stature required him to do so. He had no
discretion in the matter. He had no lis to
decide. The recovery notice is merely an effect
and not the cause. It is the cause which confers
jurisdiction and not the effect. Then, the answer
to question No. 2 is that the mere issuance of
the impugned recovery notice at Delhi does not
clothe this court with the territorial jurisdiction
to entertain this petition.”
21.

My attention has been drawn to several decisions of this

W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 16 of 40

court wherein the court had specifically considered similar
dealership agreements as in the instant cases and have answered
objections relating to territorial jurisdiction. Perusal of clause 32
in the agreement with IBP Company Ltd. shows that the same is
concerned with the performance of the agreement and jurisdiction
has been restricted to Delhi only in such concerns. Clause 68 in
the agreement with IOC further stipulates that the courts in the
city of New Delhi alone shall have jurisdiction to entertain any
suit, application or other proceedings in respect of any claim or
dispute arising under this agreement.
22.

The question therefore to be considered is as to whether the

disputes raised by the petitioners in the instant case relate to any
claim or dispute arising under the agreement and as to whether
the dispute relates to performance by the dealer of the terms of the
agreement.
23.

In Phool Service Station vs Indian Oil Corporation 2003 (4)

AD(Delhi) 6 the agreement between the parties restricting
jurisdiction was contained the aforenoticed clause 68.

The

petitioner, Phool Service Station, was located in the state of Uttar
Pradesh.

Being aggrieved by the action of the respondents in

taking a sample, a challenge was laid by it relating to the sampling
W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 17 of 40

procedure which was adopted by the Indian Oil Company. The
writ petition was filed at Delhi against a show cause notice issued
by the respondents to the petitioner. Inasmuch as the matter was
at the show cause notice stage, apart from holding that no cause of
action had arisen in favour of the petitioner as yet, the court
further held that the grievance with regard to the sampling was
outside the scope of the agreement and the reliance placed on the
jurisdiction cause was misconceived.
The Bench therefore held as under :“10. In all the present case, first of all, no cause
of action as such has arisen inasmuch as a final
decision is yet to be taken by the respondent in
response to the reply filed by the petitioner on
26.07.2003. Where the cause of action itself
has not arisen, the question of territorial
jurisdiction obviously cannot arise. However,
assuming that any cause of action has accrued
in favour of the petitioner, such a cause of
action is not one which could be said to have
arisen under the said Dealership Agreement.
This being the case, clause 68 of the said
Dealership Agreement would not come into play
at all.
The grievance with regard to the
sampling procedures and non-compliance with
the mother sample are all outside the domain of
the contract between the petitioner and the
respondent and has entirely arisen in U.P. No
part of it has arisen within the territorial
jurisdiction of this Court.”
(emphasis supplied)
24.

Considering a similar objection as to want of territorial

W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 18 of 40

jurisdiction in yet another judgment, reported at 109(2004) DLT
410 entitled Hilal Filling Station vs Indian Oil Corporation Ltd.,
this court has held thus:“5.

xxxx
The learned Counsel for the petitioner
seeks to apply the aforesaid observations of the
Division Bench to the facts of the present case to
show that the Courts in Delhi alone would have
jurisdiction.
The learned counsel for the
respondent, however, submitted that the fact
situation is entirely different. In the case before
the Division Bench the party was being
proceeded against in terms of the agreement.
In the present case, no action has yet been taken
in terms of the agreement. What has happened
is that a surprise inspection was carried out on
5.7.2003 which has been followed by the showcause notice dated 16.8.2003 to which the
petitioner has replied by his Advocate's letter
dated 19.8.2003. Nothing more has happened.
As such, clause 68 of the said agreement does
not come into play at all.
6.
I am in agreement with the submission of
the learned Counsel for the respondent. Clause
68 specifically speaks of a suit, application or
other proceeding in respect of any “claim or
dispute” arising under the agreement.
There is no claim or dispute which has
arisen under the agreement. In construing
the expression “arising out of” in the context of
an arbitration clause contained in an
agreement, the Supreme Court in the case of
Union of India v. Salween Timber
Construction(India) & Ors., 1969 (2) SCR 224
laid down the following test :
“In our opinion the claim made
by the respondent firm was a
claim arising out of the contract.
W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 19 of 40

The test for determining the
question is whether recourse to
the contract by which both the
parties are bound is necessary
for the purpose of determining
whether the claim of the
respondent firm is justified or
otherwise. If it is necessary to
take recourse to the terms of the
contract for the purpose of
deciding the matter in dispute it
must be held that the matter is
within the scope of the
arbitration clause and the
arbitrators have jurisdiction to
decide the case.”
Do the issue raised in the present petition
fall within he expression “claim or dispute
arising under this agreement” appearing in
Clause 68 of the said agreement? The test for
determining the question is whether recourse to
the said agreement is necessary for the purpose
of deterring these issues? Recourse to the
agreement
is
not
necessary
for
considering
the
incident
of
the
inspection. Recourse to the agreement is not
necessary while taking up the issue of drawing
of samples and the correct procedure therefor.
Recourse to the agreement is also not necessary
for deciding the question as to whether the show
cause notice dated 16.8.2003 is valid and legal.
Clause 68 of the said agreement is not at all
attracted. Consequently, the judgment of the
Division Bench in the case of A.T. Surekha
(supra) would not be applicable to the facts of
the present petition.
7.
Thus,
the question of territorial
jurisdiction will have to be decided de hors
Clause 68 of the said agreement. The Supreme
Court in the case of Union of India v. Adani
Exports Ltd., VII (2001) SLT 612=(2002) 1 SCC
W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 20 of 40

567, observed as under :
“17. xxxx
In the present case the facts that have a
nexus with the lis are those with regard to the
inspection which took place on 5.7.2003 and the
show cause notice that was issued by the
respondent on 16.8.2003. In this petition the
petitioner has submitted that the respondent's
said letter dated 16.8.2003 is absolutely vague.
It is also submitted that, while it has been
alleged that the HSD samples drawn from the
petitioner's pump on 5.7.2003 failed to meet the
BIS specifications, it has not been disclosed as
to when and where and in which laboratory, the
samples were tested . The petitioner has further
submitted that the respondent's impugned
letter dated 16.8.2003 does not even point out
any illegality or irregularity on the part of the
petitioner. It is also alleged that the said letter
dated 16.8.2003, without supplying any test
report, cannot be termed as a show-cause notice
at all. In the absence of a test report, the
petitioner is unable to rebut any allegations
made against it. Finally the petitioner has
stated that the issuance of the purported showcause notice dated 16.8.2003 by the respondent
is merely an eye wash and the petitioner has
reasons to believe that the respondent intends
to terminate the petitioner's dealership. From
these averments and submissions, it is clear that
the petitioner's grievance is essentially with
respect to the inspection of 5.7.2003, the showcause notice dated 16.8.2003 and the sampling
and testing procedure adopted by the
respondent.
These are the facts which
constitute the cause of action. They have
entirely arisen in U.P., beyond the territorial
jurisdiction of this Court. Hence, this Court
would not have the territorial jurisdiction to
entertain the present writ petition.”

W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 21 of 40

25.

This court had occasion to consider a challenge to the action

of the Indian Oil Corporation in drawing samples and issuance of a
show cause threatening imposition of fine and suspension of
supplies to the service station in the judgment reported at
109(2004) DLT 400 entitled Amar Filling Station vs Indian Oil
Corporation.
In Arun Service Station vs IOC LIMITED 109 (2004) DLT
400,

the petrol retail outlet was located at Meerut, U.P. and

everything was done outside the territorial jurisidctionof this
court. Having regard to these facts, it was held that :
“4. It is clear, only those facts which have a
bearing with the lis or the dispute involved in
the case give rise to a cause of action so as to
confer territorial jurisdiction on the Court
concerned. All other facts which have no
nexus or relevance with the lis are to be
ignored for the purposes of territorial
jurisdiction. In the present case, the facts
which have a nexus with the lis or the dispute,
have all arisen in Meerut, beyond the
territorial jurisdiction of this Court.
Accordingly, in view of the aforesaid decision
of the Supreme Court, since no part of the
cause of action has arisen in Delhi, this Court
does not have territorial jurisdiction to
entertain the present writ petition.
5.
Moreover, the writ petition itself is
premature as no action has been taken by the
Indian Oil Corporation.
Mr. Kalra's
submission that the writ petition is also
premature is well founded. In any event, if
W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 22 of 40

any action is taken, the same will be taken by
Indian Oil Corporation as may be available to
it under law.”
In writ petition (Civil) 14820/2004 entitled Naresh Kumar
Sharma vs Union of India & Ors. on the 15th December, 2004 for
the reason that the matter in question dealt with dealership of LPG
in Uttar Pradesh and all records were available in Lucknow alone,
this court dismissed the writ petition for want of territorial
jurisdiction.
26.

The petitioners have placed reliance on an Apex Court

decision reported at (2003) 2 SCC 107 Harbans Lal Sahnia vs IOC.
In this case the petitioners had assailed the High Court dismissing
its writ petition on the ground of availability of an appropriate
remedy under the contract which contained an arbitration clause.
The petitioner contended that the procedure of drawing the
sample was illegal and that the dealership of the petitioner was
terminated on irrelevant and non-existant grounds and therefore
the petitioner was entitled to issuance of a writ. In this case, the
court held as under :“ 7. So far as the view taken by the High Court
that the remedy by way of recourse to arbitration
clause was available to the appellants and
therefore the writ petition filed by the appellants
was liable to be dismsised is concerned, suffice it
W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 23 of 40

to observe that the rule of exclusion of writ
jurisdiction by availability of an alternative
remedy is a rule of discretion and not one of
compulsion. In an appropriate case, in spite of
availability of the alternative remedy, the High
Court may still exercise its writ jurisdiction in at
least three contingencies : (i) where the writ
petition seeks enforcement of any of the
fundamental rights; (ii) where there is failure of
principles of natural justice; or (iii) where the
orders or proceedings are wholly without
jurisdiction or the vires of an Act is challenged.
(See Whirlpool Corpn. Vs Registrar of Trade
Marks.) The present case attracts applicability of
the first two contingencies. Moreover, as noted,
the petitioner's dealership, which is their bread
and butter, came to be terminated for an
irrelevant and non-existent cause.
In such
circumstances, we feel that the appellants should
have been allowed relief by the High Court itself
instead of driving them to the need of initiating
arbitration proceedings.”
27.

From a careful consideration of the aforestated decisions, the

following principles emerge:(i)

making and signing of a contract is part of cause of action;

(ii)

parties cannot by consent confer jurisdiction on a court

(iii) In the case of several courts having jurisdiction, parties can
legally agree to exclude the jurisdiction of any of such courts and
elect to restrict territorial jurisdiction to one out of such courts

W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 24 of 40

which otherwise has jurisdiction.

(iv)

the high court must be satisfied from the entire facts pleaded

in support of the cause of action that those facts which constitute
the cause or are necessary to decide the dispute have wholly arisen
within its territorial jurisdiction, or, in any case, which have,
atleast in part, arisen within its jurisdiction;

(v)

each and every fact pleaded in the petition does not ipsofacto

lead to the conclusion that those facts constitute cause of action
vesting territorial jurisdiction upon the court to adjudicate upon
the lis.

(vi) only those facts pleaded which have a nexus or relevance
with the issues involved in the lis confer territorial jurisdiction on
the court;

(vii) in determining an objection relating to lack of territorial
jurisdiction, the court must take all the facts pleaded in support of
the cause of action as pleaded in the petition into consideration
without embarking upon an inquiry as to the correctness or
W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 25 of 40

otherwise to the fact that.

(viii) A question of territorial jurisdiction must be apparent on the
facts pleaded in the petition, the source or otherwise of the
averments made in the writ petition being immaterial. In matters
where the parties have agreed to restrict jurisdiction to one or the
other court out of several courts which may have territorial
jurisdiction, such clause would be enforceable only if the litigation
which has arisen falls within the domain of the subject matter
which is being provided in such clause. The parties may have
confined jurisdiction to litigation arising only under the
agreement. In such cases, the court has to arrive at a finding that
the litigation between the parties was within the domain of the
clause confining jurisdiction. If it does not, then the territorial
jurisdiction of the court could be barred.

(ix) The court must be satisfied that all relevant facts which have
merely a substantial nexus with the lis are located within its
territorial jurisdiction.

(x)

Even if it were to be held that a court has jurisdiction, yet

W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 26 of 40

guided by principles of forum non-conveniens, the court may
divert the parties to the court having a closer connection with the
subject matter of the litigation. Residence of parties, location of
evidence, situs of the dispute and such like considerations could
guide the decision of the court to this effect.
28.

Having thus set out the legal position which arises from

consideration of the various decisions cited before me, it becomes
necessary to deal with facts of the three cases individually :29.

Writ Petition(Civil) No. 5133/2005 entitled Jai

Ganesh Petroleum vs Union of India & Anr.
The undisputed facts in this writ petition are that the
petitioner purchased the dealership for a retail outlet/petroleum
pump of the Indian Oil Corporation. The retail outlet was to be
commissioned at Mau, Mohamadabad Road, Mau Nath Bhanjan,
U.P. The parties had entered into an agreement dated 26th April,
1999 in this behalf. The agreement contained the clause 32 as has
been reproduced in the above discussion.

The petitioner has

placed reliance on clause 11(u) and 27(b) of the agreement which
read as under :“11.(u).
The Company shall be at liberty
upon a breach by the Dealer/s or any covenant
in this Agreement forthwith to stop all supplies
W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 27 of 40

to the Dealer/s for such period as the Company
may think fit, and such right of stoppage of
supplies shall be without prejudice to any other
right or remedy of the Company under this
Agreement. For the purpose of this sub-clause
the Manager of the Company for the time being
in New Delhi shall be the sole judge as to
whether a breach of any covenant or agreement
has been committed by the Dealer/s.
27.(b).
That the accounts of the dealer/s in
respect of their dealings with the Company shall
be kept in the name of the Dealer/s at each
Branch of the Company where they have an
account and any credit or deposit for the time
being with one Branch of the Company may be
utilised to adjust any debit in any other Branch
of the Company. All amounts from time to time
becoming due under this Agreement by the
Dealer/s to the Company shall be paid to the
Company at its office at New Delhi free of all
charges to the Company.”
30.

The respondents however have placed reliance on the

beforestated agreement to contend that no part of the cause of
action had arisen at Delhi.

The dispute in the instant case is

unrelated to payment or actions under the agreement.
31.

I find that on the 30th January, 2005 officers of the Indian

Oil Corporation undertook an inspection of the petitioner's retail
outlet and drew MS/HSD/lube samples. The same were sent for
testing and lsd/lube samples were found to be meeting
specifications. However, the ms sample was not meeting the

W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 28 of 40

specifications in respect of the rol test.
32.

The respondents noticed that the petitioner had committed

breach of the terms and conditions as contained in clause 9(e) of
the dealership agreement and had violated the provisions of
Marking Disciple Guidelines as well. Consequently, a notice to
show cause was sent on 18th February, 2005 from the office of the
Indian Oil Corporation at Allahabad. The petitioner was required
to render an explanation to the Deputy Manager (Supply) at
Varanasi.
33.

Perusal of the test report also shows that the testing was

undertaken at the quality control lab of the respondents at Amausi
depot at Lucknow. The supplies are effected to the petitioner from
the IBP Company Ltd. Depot at Noida, Uttar Pradesh.

The

petitioner sent its reply dated 26th February, 2005 to the
respondents at Allahabad. The same was considered by the Indian
Oil Corporation at Allahabad and the explanation was found
unsatisfactory.

Communication thereof was made by the

divisional office at Allahabad vide a letter dated 4th March, 2005.
34.

No part of the cause of action has admittedly arisen at Delhi

in view of principles of law noticed hereinabove. Consequently,t
he present writ petition is not maintainable in this court and is
W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 29 of 40

hereby dismissed.
35.

It is noteworthy that all communications have been effected

to the petitioners IBP Company Ltd. at Baragaon at Mau Nath
Bhanjan, U.P. The respondents divisional office vide an order
dated 4th March, 2005 from Allahabad imposed a fine of
Rs.20,000/- upon the petitioner and also directed suspension of
supplies for 30 days.
36.

I find that all material and relevant facts having a nexus to

the litigation, have arisen outside the territorial jurisdiction of this
court in the State of Uttar Pradesh.

The respondents have

contended that all records relating to the instant case are available
with their divisional office in Uttar Pradesh. The retail outlet is
also admittedly located within the territorial jurisdiction of Uttar
Pradesh. In my view, therefore, no part of the material facts giving
rise to cause of action in the petitioner's case having arisen at
Delhi. That this court does not have the territorial jurisdiction to
entertain and adjudicate upon the subject matter of the present lis.
37.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 5167/2005 entitled Khutar

Filling Station vs Union Of India & Anr.
The brief undisputed facts giving rise to this petition are that
the Indian Oil Corporation entered into dealership agreement
W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 30 of 40

with the petitioner at New Delhi for commissioning of a retail
outlet/petrol pump at Khutar, Distt. Shahjahanpur, Uttar Pradesh
on the 12th November, 2004.

This agreement contains a

jurisdictional clause which reads as follows :“68. This Agreement has been made in and all
payments thereunder shall be due and made in
, unless otherwise directed by the Corporation.
The Courts in the city
of alone shall have
jurisdiction to entertain any suit, application or
other proceeding in respect of any claim or
dispute arising under this agreement.”
38.

The petitioner contends that on receipt of the message with

regard to his sister-in-law having been shot dead at the
Shahajahanpur on 18th July, 2003, he rushed there to attend the
funeral. It is contended that there was a stock of 62 ltrs of HSD
storage tank of the petrol pump. The petrol pump was also lying
close as the petitioner had to attend the funeral. The officers of the
respondents are stated to have visited the retail outlet in his
absence on 18th July, 2003 when they are alleged to have taken
samples from the tank which was almost dry. The petitioner is
aggrieved by the method of taking sample and had stated that the
same was in violation of the specific prescription in the petroleum
and also was in violation of the Marketing Discipline Guidelines of
2001.
W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 31 of 40

39.

The Indian Oil Corporation issued a notice to show cause to

the petitioner from its office at Bareily on the 22nd July, 2003 in
respect of the sample of the HSD on the ground that the density
variance was found beyond the permissible parameters. The
petitioner addressed a reply dated 23rd December, 2004 to the
U.P. State office of the respondents at District Shahajahanpur.
40.

The respondents considered the reply received and an order

was passed by the office of the Indian Oil Corporation at Lucknow
dated 24th December, 2004 terminating the dealership.

This

decision has been impugned before by way of the present writ
petition.
41.

The respondents have vehemently contended that no part of

the cause of action had arisen within the territorial jurisdiction of
this court and as such the writ has to be dismissed on this court
alone. Reliance has been placed on the pronouncement of the
Apex Court in the case of Union of India vs Adani Exports (supra).
The matter has been answered on merits itself and it is contended
that the respondents have not violated the prescribed procedure
and have also complied with principles of natural justice.
42.

It is noteworthy that admittedly, the petrol pump/the retail

outlet of the petitioner is located at Uttar Pradesh which is outside
W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 32 of 40

the territorial jurisdiction of this court.

Additionally, the

inspection was carried out at the retail outlet. Notice to show
cause was issued from Uttar Pradesh and his answered considered
by authorities at Uttar Pradesh who passed the impugned order
terminating the dealership. All these facts are such material facts
having a direct nexus to the lis. The petitioner has not contended
that any part of the cause of action has arisen at Delhi.
As noticed hereinabove, that it is well settled that in order to
confer jurisdiction on this court, a part of the cause of action must
have arisen at Delhi. This is not so in the instant case. Further as
was held in the case of Hilal Service Station (supra), recourse to
the agreement is not necessary for consideration of the inspection
and the drawing of the sample. In the present case also there is no
claim or dispute which has arisen under the agreement.
Therefore, recourse cannot be made to clause 68 of the agreement
to vest this court with the jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the
dispute raised. I therefore, find that the jurisdiction of this court is
barred on account of want of territorial jurisdiction.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
43.

Writ Petition(Civil) NO. 16946/2004 entitled M/s

Annapurna Filling Station vs Indian Oil Corporation Ltd.
W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 33 of 40

& Anr.
This writ petition has been filed by the petitioner impugning
the order dated 15th October, 2004 of the respondents whereby the
respondents suspended supply to the petitioner's retail outlet for
15 days i.e. with effect from 16th October, 2004 and also imposed a
fine of Rs.5,000/44.

The facts giving rise to the present petition are that the

petitioner was appointed as a dealer of the petroleum products of
M/s Indian Oil Corporation from its retail outlet in the name and
style of M/s Annapurna Filling Station,

Kurawali, G.T. Road,

Mainpuri, Uttar Pradesh. An agreement dated 4th May, 1999 was
executed between the parties which contain Clause 68 restricting
the jurisdiction to the courts at Delhi. This clause reads as under
:“68.
This Agreement has been made
in Agra and all payments thereunder shall
be due and made in New Delhi unless
otherwise directed by the Corporation.
The Courts in the City of New Delhi alone
shall have jurisdiction to entertain any
suit, application or other proceedings in
respect of any claim or dispute arising
under this agreement.”
45.
retail

It is alleged that a sudden inspection of the petitioner's
outlet was undertaken on 19th September, 2004. The

W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 34 of 40

petitioner submits that at the time of inspection, the petitioner had
enough stocks to covers 15 days supplies as he had almost 1129
kilo ltrs of petrol. The petitioner's monthly average sale is stated
to go 323 kilo ltrs.
46.

Despite the above, three shortcomings were pointed out

in the petitioner's retail outlet. A show cause notice dated 20th
September, 2004 was issued to the petitioner by the Senior
Divisional Manager, Indian Oil corporation at Agra.

The

petitioner submitted a reply dated 29th September, 2004 to the
authorities of the respondents at Agra. The same was considered
and thereafter an order dated 16th October, 2004 was passed by
the respondents office at Agra whereby sales and supplies of all
products to the petitioner's retail outlet was suspended with
immediate effect.
47.

This action of the respondents has been impugned by

way of the present writ petition on various grounds. The petitioner
has placed strong reliances on the Marketing Discipline
Guidelines. It has been contended that there was short supply
from one one dispenser at the filling station of the petitioner. The
petitioner places reliances on a record note of discussions dated
30th August, 2001 between the Director (Marketing) of the Oil
W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 35 of 40

Companies and the representatives of the Federation of All India
Petroleum Traders wherein it had been agreed that in the event of
sales of dispensers being found intact and delivery is found to be
either erratic or short or excess, only the sales from the particular
dispenser unit would be suspended forthwith and the dealer would
be advised to get the dispensing unit recalibrated.
48.

It is contended that in the instant case, as per the

inspection of the respondents, there was only short supply from
one dispenser and that the action of the respondents in
suspending supplies to the entire retail outset and barring sales
was contrary to these binding guidelines arrived at in the meeting
held on 30th August, 2001. Even as per the envisaged penal action
under the Marketing Discipline Guidelines, 2001 where the sales
are found intact, it is submitted that the respondents could only
stop sales and supplies from the dispensing unit till calibration is
carried out by the weight and measure department.
49.

The petitioner submits that the respondents have failed

to consider all relevant factors while passing the impugned order
and have failed to assign reasons in the order. The action and
order of the respondents is stated to be vitiated for this reason. It
is also contended that the allegations against the petitioner did not
W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 36 of 40

match the inspection report. The petitioner has placed reliance on
the decision of this court rendered in the judgment reported at
2003(67) DRJ 709 entitled S.K. Sharma vs Union of India in
support of the submission that the penalties of suspension of sales,
fine and termination would apply only if the weight and measure
seals are tampered with. It is further contended that existence of
an arbitration clause would not bar the jurisdiction of this court
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. In support of this
submission, reliance is placed on the pronouncement of the Apex
Court reported in 2003 (2) SCC 107 entitled Harbans Lal Sahnia &
Ors vs IOC.
50.

The respondents have challenged the maintainability of

the writ petition on the ground that no part of the cause of action
had arisen in Delhi and therefore the writ petition was liable to be
dismissed on the ground of jurisdiction alone. Reliance has been
placed on the aforenoted judicial pronouncement in contending
that the writ petition is also not maintainable on the ground of
availability of alternate efficacious remedy inasmuch as Clause 69
of the agreement provides that in case of any difference or dispute,
the same would be referred by arbitration. The respondents have
also placed reliance on the Marketing Discipline Guidelines, 2001
W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 37 of 40

to contend that the action of the respondents in the instant case
was as per prescribed procedure and applicable law an that the
same cannot be faulted on any legally tenable grounds.
51.

I have noticed the authoritative judicial pronouncements

aforestated to the effect that the dispute relating to violation of
Marketing Discipline Guidelines, short supplies etc do not arise
under the agreement and as such a party could not place reliance
on Clause 68 of the agreement in support of the submission that
the courts in the city of Delhi alone could have jurisdiction to
entertain any suit, application or other proceedings in respect of
such claim.

Furthermore, the retail outlet of the petitioner is

located on Mainpuri in the city of Uttar Pradesh which is beyond
the territorial jurisdiction of this court. The show cause notice has
been issued from Uttar Pradesh and the reply was sent by the
petitioner to Uttar Pradesh.

The order was passed after

consideration thereof at Uttar Pradesh.

Such order has been

impugned in the present writ petition. I find, therefore that no
material fact having a nexus with the lis has arisen within the
territorial jurisdiction of this court.
For all the foregoing reasons and in view of the principles
of law discussed hereinabove, I find that this court does not have
W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 38 of 40

the territorial jurisdiction to entertain and adjudicate upon the
subject matter of the dispute.
Accordingly, the writ petition is dismissed for want of
territorial jurisdiction. It is made clear that nothing contain in the
present judgment has any bearing on the merits of the dispute
between the parties. The petitioner shall be at liberty to invoke his
remedies in an appropriate forum having territorial jurisdiction.
This writ petition came up for hearing on 25th October,
2004 when the following order was passed.
“ Writ Petition 16946/2004 & CM No.
12558/2004
Notice to show cause as to the
respondents as to why rule nisi be not issued,
returnable on 01.01.2005
Learned counsel for the respondent
accepts notice and as prayed for is granted four
weeks time to file counter affidavit. Rejoinder
be filed within two weeks thereafter.
In the meantime, it is directed that
the operation of the impugned letter dated
15.10.2004 is stayed to the extent it directs
suspension of sales and supplies for a period of
15 days with effect from 16.10.2004. However,
this will not permit the petitioner to sell product
from HSD DU No. 1 till re-calibration is done.
This direction is passed specially taking into
consideration the judgment of this Court in S.K.
Sharma vs. Union of India & Others. 2003 (67)
DRJ 709, where it was held that in terms of the
Marketing Discipline Guidelines suspension of
sales cannot take place where there is no
tampering of meter and in the present case there
W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 39 of 40

is no finding of tampering of meter. The seals, if
any, put by the respondent on the other
dispensing units/storage tanks be removed
latest by 26.10.2004
Dasti to learned counsel for the
parties under the signatures of the Court
Master.”
It is directed that the order of stay dated 25th October,
2004 shall continue to operate for a period of eight weeks or till
the filing of a petition in a court having jurisdiction, whichever is
earlier.
GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
December 23, 2005
kr

W.P.(C) 5133, 5167/2005 & 16946/2004

page 40 of 40

