IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
IA 3947/2004 in CS(OS) No. 512/2004
Judgm ent reserved on : July 19,
2006
Dat e of decision: August 23,
2006
RAHUL JAIN & ANR.
... Petitioner
through Mr. Reetesh Singh, Advocate
VERSUS
SHRI PRADEEP KUMAR & ORS. .... Respondents
through Mr. Atul Kumar, Advocate for
defendant no. 1
Mr. G.S. Raghav & Mr. Pankaj Singh,
Advocates for defendant nos. 3 and 4
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

This application raises an interesting issue on first principles

of adjudication on a application under Section 92 of the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908.

The question raised relates to the

maintainability of an application under Section 92 of the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908. One of two applicants who have sought
leave to sue a trust under Section 92 of the Code of Civil
CS(OS) No. 512/2004

page 1 of 24

Procedure, 1908 expired. Thus, the moot which requires to be
answered is whether the two persons who have submitted the
application have to be alive and in existence on the date when the
petition is filed or whether the relevant date of their existence is
the date on which the application is actually taken up for
consideration by the court.
2.

The facts which give rise to the present petition to the extent

necessary for adjudication of the present petition are noticed
hereafter.
Shri Rahul Jain and Shri Surender Kumar filed an
application being IA No. 9572/1999 under Section 92 of the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908 (which is hereafter referred to as the
CPC).

It was averred that late Bhola Nath had

created a

charitable trust in respect of property bearing municipal no. 1042
– 1046 Bazar Sita Ram, Delhi. It is contended that his sons late
Shri Triloki Nath, late Amar Nath and Late Bishambhar Nath were
the first three founder trustees. The plaintiff no. 2 Shri Surender
Kumar claimed that his appointment as a trustee upon the death
of his father late Amar Nath on 10th February, 1991 was
communicated by the other two trustees that is Shri Triloki Nath
and Shri Bishambhar Nath vide a communication dated 16th
CS(OS) No. 512/2004

page 2 of 24

September, 1991. Shri Surender Kumar claims that he assumed
the duties and responsibilities as a trustee vide a communication
dated 6th October, 1991. It has been contended that after assuming
his duties and responsibilities, Shri Surender Kumar found out
that the properties of the trust were being mismanaged and were
not being kept properly by the defendants and further that
defendant no. 1 was neither a trustee nor had any authority to deal
with the trust properties.

Various other averments have been

made challenging the authority of the defendant no. 1 to function
as a trustee and purported acts of mismanagement on the part of
the defendants have been set out in the proposed plaint which was
filed with the IA No. 9572/1999.
3.

This application under Section 92 of the Code of Civil

Procedure, 1908 was filed alongwith the proposed plaint on 15th
September, 1999 and remained pending for several dates.
Unfortunately, plaintiff no. 2 Shri Surender Kumar expired on 16th
September, 2002 before adjudication in IA No. 9572/1999. After
the death of Shri Surender Kumar, the applicant no. 2, an
application was filed under Order 22 Rule 3 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 for substitution on 11th December, 2002. By this
application filed by the defendant no. 2 Shri Rahul Jain, leave was
CS(OS) No. 512/2004

page 3 of 24

sought to substitute Shri Narender Kumar, brother of the deceased
Surender Kumar as a plaintiff no. 2 . This application was taken
up for hearing on 5th March, 2003. It was held by this court that
since the suit was filed by two trustees against the other trustees
who are alleged to be mismanaging the affairs of the trust, the
provisions of Order 22 Rule 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
are not applicable unless and until some other trustee wants to be
impleaded as a trustee. The application was therefore dismissed.
4.

So far as IA No. 9572/1999 seeking leave to sue is concerned,

the same came up for hearing on 20th February, 2004. It is an
admitted position that on this date, only one of the two persons
who had filed the application was surviving. The court took the
view that since at the time of filing of the suit, two applicants were
there, it could not be said that leave to sue should be declined on
account of death of one of the applicants. The application was
allowed. However, it was specifically directed thus :“However, this question will remain open to be
decided in case the defendants raise an objection
against the maintainability of the suit on this
ground in their written statements”
So far as the main petition was concerned, it was directed
that the same be registered as a suit and the defendants were given

CS(OS) No. 512/2004

page 4 of 24

time to file fresh written statements within four weeks.
5.

Immediately, thereafter the defendant nos. 3 and 4 have filed

the present application under Section 114 read with Order 47 Rule
1 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 seeking review of the order
dated 20th April, 2004. It is contended that the civil rule which
was filed by Shri Rahul Jain and Shri Surender Kumar, though
validly filed was rendered incompetent on account of the death of
Shri Surender Kumar and as such the application filed by them
under Section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 deserve to
be turned down. It has been contended that the condition of the
suit being instituted by two or more persons under Section 92 of
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 was mandatory which in the
instant case was not fulfilled. The relevant time of consideration
of this condition being satisfied was the date on which the
application seeking leave to sue was taken up, which was on 20th
April, 2004. Consequently, the leave granted to only one proposed
plaintiff was in apparent and clear violation of the provisions of
Section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. The applicants
have contended that the issue with regard to the maintainability of
the action could not have been postponed till objection was taken
in the written statement inasmuch as this illegality was glaring on
CS(OS) No. 512/2004

page 5 of 24

the face of the record.
6.

Mr. G.S. Raghav, learned counsel appearing for the

defendants has further submitted that the law recognises a
difference between 'filing and institution' as two different and
distinct stages of a suit. Till such time leave is granted under
Section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, there is no
institution of the suit in the eyes of law. Merely filing a proposed
plaint alongwith the application under Section 92, does not mean
that the suit has been instituted when it was filed. Institution
relates to the date on which leave is granted and the suit is
registered in accordance with Order 4 Rule 2 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908. The institution of a suit is effected under the
provisions of Order 6 Rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
On these submissions, it has been contended that the order dated
20th April, 2004 is contrary to law and requires to be reviewed.
7.

On the other hand, Mr. Reetesh Singh learned counsel for

the plaintiff has contended that the requirement of two persons
joining to file the application under Section 92 is merely a
technical requirement. Placing reliance on the pronouncement of
the Apex Court in 2006 1 SCC 75 Uday Shankar Triyar v.
Ram Kalewar Prasad Singh & Anr. it is contended that nonCS(OS) No. 512/2004

page 6 of 24

compliance with the procedural requirement would not defeat the
ends of substantial justice.

Reliance is also placed on the

application under Order 1 Rule 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 filed by the plaintiff on 18th August, 2004 which application
being IA No. 6040/2004 is pending even on date. This application
seeks leave to substitute the plaintiff no. 2 the name of the
applicant. The application has been filed by one Jeet Jain. It is
contended that if this application is allowed, there will be no defect
in the suit inasmuch as the same would have been filed and
maintained on behalf of two defendants. Placing reliance on 110
(2004) DLT 649 Shipping Corporation of India Ltd. v. Machado
Brothers & Ors., it is contended that it is the duty of the court to
take such action as is necessary in the interest of justice and to
make orders to prevent the abuse of process of the court.

It is

contended that the court has inherent powers which are in
addition to and complementary to the powers expressly conferred
under the Code of Civil Procedure and therefore this court has
inherent power to permit impleadment of another applicant so as
to render the present suit maintainable.
8.

Having heard learned counsel for the parties and having

gone through the record, it is to be noted that Section 92 of the
CS(OS) No. 512/2004

page 7 of 24

Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 provides the conditions in which a
suit may be filed in the case of any alleged breach of an express or
constructive trust created for public purposes. The law provides
that such suit can be filed either by the Advocate General or two or
more persons having an interest in the trust. The suit can be
instituted only with the leave of the court. It would be useful to
notice the requirement of the statute in extenso which reads thus :
“Section 92.
Public charities. -(1) In the
case of any alleged breach of any express or
constructive trust created for public purposes of a
charitable or religious nature, or where the
direction of the Court is deemed necessary for the
administration of any such trust, the AdvocateGeneral, or two or more persons having an
interest in the trust and having obtained the
[leave of the court] may institute a suit, whether
contentious or not, in the principal Civil Court of
Original jurisdiction or in any other Court
empowered in that behalf by the State
Government within the local limits of whose
jurisdiction the whole or any part of the subjectmatter of the trust is situate to obtain a decree (a) removing a new trustee;
(b) appointing a new trustee;
(c) vesting any property in a trustee;
[(cc) directing a trustee who has been
removed or a person who has ceased to be a
trustee, to deliver possession of any trust
property in his possession to the person entitled
to the possession of such property;
(d) directing accounts and inquiries;
(e) declaring what proportion of the trust
property or of the interest therein shall be
allocated to any particular object of the trust;
CS(OS) No. 512/2004

page 8 of 24

9.

(f) authorising the whole or any part of the
trust property to be let, sold, mortgaged or
exchanged;
(g) settling a scheme; or
(h) granting such further or other relief as the
nature of the case may require.
2.
Save as provided by the Religious
Endowments Act, 1863 (20 of 1863, [or by any
corresponding law in force in [the territories
which, immediately before the 1st November,
1956, were comprised in Part B States]], no suit
claiming any of the reliefs specified in sub-section
(1) shall be instituted in respect of any such trust
as is therein referred to except in conformity with
the provisions of that sub-section.”
Undoubtedly and admittedly the present suit is a suit

wherein it has been alleged that the defendants are deliberately
violating the conditions of the trust which was created for public
purpose and is of charitable nature and a direction has been
sought for administration of such trust. Therefore the suit clearly
falls within the purview of Section 92 of the CPC. The statute has
provided the conditions required to be fulfilled for the purpose of
institution of the suit. Rule 1 of Order 4 of the CPC mandates that
every suit shall be instituted by presenting a plaint in duplicate to
the court or such officer as is appointed in this behalf. Under rule
2 of Order 4, the particulars of every suit are required to be
entered in a book to be kept for the purpose which is called the
register of civil suits.

CS(OS) No. 512/2004

page 9 of 24

10.

Section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 contains a

prohibition that in order to maintain a suit against the public
charity, no suit can be instituted without leave of the court.
Therefore, merely filing a proposed plaint accompanied by an
application under Section 92 seeking leave to institute a suit would
not amount to institution of the suit within the meaning of the
expression as laid under Rule 1 of Order 4.
11.

In 110(2004) DLT 649 (SC) Shipping Corporation of

India Ltd. v. Machado Brothers & Ors., the Apex Court held
that the courts have all necessary powers under Section 151 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 to make orders to prevent the abuse
of the process of the court.

In this matter, the court was

considering an order whereby a suit was dismissed on the ground
that it had been rendered infructuous by disappearance of the
cause of action. The court held that continuance of the suit which
had become infructuous by disappearance of the cause of action
would amount to abuse of process of court and interest of justice
required that the suit should be disposed of as having becoming
infructuous. For this purpose, it was held that the court would
exercise inherent powers under Section 151 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 to make such an order to prevent the abuse of the
CS(OS) No. 512/2004

page 10 of 24

the process of the court. The principles noticed above were laid
down by the Apex Court in a factual situation which was clearly
distinct from the issue which has been raised before this court and
consequently would have no application to the matter which is
being considered herein.
12.

To the same effect are the principles laid down by the Apex

Court in (2006) 1 SCC 75 Uday Shankar Triyar v. Ram
Kalewar

Prasad

Singh

&

Anr.

In

this

judicial

pronouncement, the court held that the requirements relating to a
pleading, memorandum of appeal or application or petition for
relief were procedural and non-compliance thereof should not
entail automatic dismissal or rejection unless the relevant statute
or rule so mandates. Procedural defects and irregularities which
are curable should not be allowed to defeat substantive rights or to
cause injustice. Procedure which is hand maiden to justice, should
never be made a tool to deny justice or perpetuate injustice by any
oppressive or punitive use.
The Apex Court in this judicial pronouncement also laid
down the well recognised exceptions to this principle which were
enumerated thus :“ (i) where
CS(OS) No. 512/2004

the

statute

prescribing

the
page 11 of 24

13.

procedure, also prescribes specifically the
consequence of non-compliance;
(ii) where the procedural defect is not
rectified, even after it is pointed out and due
opportunity is given for rectifying it;
(iii) where the non-compliance of violation is
proved to the deliberate or mischievous;
(iv) where the rectification of defect would
affect the case on merits or will affect the
jurisdiction of the court; and
(v) in case of memorandum of appeal, there is
complete absence of authority and the appeal is
presented without the knowledge, consent and
authority of the appellant.”
So far as the requirement of the suit under Section 92 being

instituted by two or more persons is concerned, the prohibition is
to be found in the statute itself.

The object and reason for

stipulating that a suit against the public trust would lie at the
instance of the Advocate General or two persons or more who
must seek leave of the court is to be found in public policy that a
trust should not be unnecessarily dragged into litigation at the
instance of any disgruntled trustee or person. The proposed suit
must be at the instance of atleast two persons and therefore
application to seek leave has to be filed by two such persons. The
two persons who are desirous of instituting the suit must therefore
exist on the date when the application under Section 92 seeking
leave to sue is to be heard.
14.

This statutory mandate finds consideration in several

CS(OS) No. 512/2004

page 12 of 24

authoritative and binding judicial precedents.

It has been

conclusively and repeatedly held that the suit under Section 92
must be brought by all the persons to whom the sanction of the
Advocate General has been given and a suit instituted by some of
them only is not maintainable.

In these circumstances, in

NarainLal & Ors. v. Sunder Lal (Dead) & Ors. 1967 3
SCR 916, the court had occasion to consider a case where four
persons obtained the consent of the Advocate General of
Rajasthan to institute a suit against the respondents under Section
92 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. Shortly thereafter, one of
the said four persons died and the suit was instituted by three
survivors. A preliminary issue was taken by the defendants as to
whether the suit filed by three persons, while permission to sue
has been given to four, is maintainable?

It was held by the

Supreme Court that an authority to sue given to several persons is
joint authority and must be exercised by all jointly. A suit by some
of them is not competent. When sanction in the present case was
given to four persons and one of them died before the institution
of the suit, a suit by the remaining three was incompetent.
Therefore sanction must be obtained afresh by the survivors for
the institution of the suit.
CS(OS) No. 512/2004

page 13 of 24

15.

A different situation arose for consideration before the High

Court of Judicature at Chennai. In the judicial pronouncement
reported at AIR 2003 Madras 241 L.M. Menezes & Ors. v.
Most Rev. Arul Das Jamas & Ors., leave to institute a suit
against the trust under Section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 was granted to the plaintiffs. However the trust had not been
impleaded as a party to the proceedings and other persons were
added as defendants in their private capacities. The plaintiffs filed
an application submitting that they had made all parties connected
to the trust as defendants to the suit. However, on account of legal
advice received, they were required to make the trust as a
defendant which was a necessary and proper party to the suit and
they sought impleadment of the trust as a party/defendant. Even
though, it was pleaded that there were clear averments in the
plaint relating to the interest of the plaintiffs qua the trust, the
court held thus :“24. The plaintiffs filed application no. 3668 of
2002 to implead the Trust as the 10th defendant
on the ground that it is a necessary and proper
party. there is no dispute that the Trust is
necessary and proper party, but the only question
is whether the Trust can now be impleaded after
getting the leave without making the Trust as a
party to the suit. The learned counsel for the
plaintiffs contended that, by mistake the Trust is
CS(OS) No. 512/2004

page 14 of 24

not made as a party previously and now,t he
defect can be curred by impleading the Trust.
This is mainly opposed by the contesting
defendants alleging that the ex parte order of
leave was obtained without impleading the Trust.
Once leave of the Court has been obtained for
institution of a particular plaint, no new party can
be impleaded in that plaint. the only remedy is to
obtain leave of the Court afresh and then file a
suit making the Trust as a party. The nonimpleading of the Trust goes to the root of the
;matter. Under the circumstance, I am of the
view that although the Trust is a necessary and
proper party, the impleading should have been
done even in the inception before getting leave.
Now, after getting leave, the plaintiffs want to
cure the defect and this cannot be accepted and it
is nothing but putting the cart before the horse.
It is always open to the plaintiffs, if they are really
interested persons in the Trust, to implead all
necessary parties and file a fresh suit. If the
Trust was already made a party even in the
orig8inal plaint, then it is quite possible that ex
parte leave also could not have been granted to
the plaintiffs. Now, having obtained an ex parte
leave, the plaintiffs cannot be allowed to cure the
material defect by allowing the impleading
application. I am fo the view that the plaintiffs
cannot take advantage of their own mistake and
claim to implead the Trust on the ground that it is
a necessary and proper party. Although the Trust
is a necessary and proper party, considering the
fact that the plaintiffs failed to implead the Trust
at the earliest point of time, now cannot be
permitted to implead the Trust to cure the
illegality.
Hence, the points are answered
accordingly.”
16.

Therefore, in the light of the principles laid down in these

judgments, it is apparent that defect in the application for leave to
CS(OS) No. 512/2004

page 15 of 24

sue in the nature of the number of persons or parties cannot be
permitted to be cured or changed in the proposed suit by way of an
application seeking impleadment of the applicant as a proposed
plaintiff or by adding defendants. Such a defect goes to the root of
the matter.
17.

The prohibition in the instant case deserves to be looked at

from another angle. Law mandates that the application seeking
leave to institute a suit has to be filed by two or more persons
'having an interest in the suit' .

Therefore, at the time of

consideration of the application under Section 92 of the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908 the court has to satisfy that such persons
have an interest in the affairs of the trust. In AIR 1919 Madras
384 entitled T.R. Ramachandra Iyer and another v. P.A.
Parameswaran Munbu and others, the court held that the
right to worship in a temple is not such an 'interest' as will give the
worshipper a right to sue under Section 92 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908. The interest required in the relator/applicant
must be a clear or a present and a substantial, not merely a
remote, fictitious or purely illusory interest. It must be an existing
interest and not merely a contingency. The question whether any
given person has or has not an interest as so defined is a pure
CS(OS) No. 512/2004

page 16 of 24

question of fact which the court should decide on a consideration
of the particular circumstances of each case. The 'interest' which is
required of a person wishing to sue under Section 92 must be a
substantial and not a sentimental or a remote interest.
18.

On

these

principles,

Shollapuryamman

Temple

in

1997

Trust

vs.

AIHCC
Arul

471
Migu

Shollapuri Amman Temple Association (R) & Ors., it was
held that the suit filed by plaintiffs on the ground that the trust
was being mismanaged by trustees and for a declaration that the
plaintiffs were entitled to vesting of trust property and
consequential relief.

The plaintiffs were neither members nor

persons having interest in the trust and it was held that they have
no locus standi to institute the suit and hence the order granting
leave to institute the suit under Section 92 is not proper.
In AIR 1967 SC 1415 Mahant Harnam Singh v.
Gurdial Singh & Anr., it was held that mere residence in a
village where free kitchen is being run for providing food to
visitors does not create any interest in the residents of the village
of such a nature as to claim that they can institute a suit for
removal of the mahant.
19.

The judicial pronouncement of the High court of Judicature

CS(OS) No. 512/2004

page 17 of 24

at Calcutta in AIR (39) 1952 Calcutta 343 Benoy Shankar
Dhandania & Ors. vs. Choteylal Dhandania & Ors. also
has a bearing on the issue before this court. In this case it was
held that even if leave had been obtained when the suit was
originally filed, when a defendant is added, fresh leave to sue must
be obtained. The court rejected the contention on behalf of the
plaintiff that there was no change in the cause of action even when
the defendant was added and therefore no fresh leave was
necessary. The principle laid down was that obtaining of the leave
was imperative because it is the foundation of the jurisdiction of
the court. The court has the jurisdiction to decide the suit against
the parties only if it grants leave which is a condition precedent.
No leave was obtained by the plaintiff to proceed against the newly
added defendants and it follows that the court never got any
jurisdiction to make any decree or order in the suit.
20.

Therefore, so far an an application seeking leave to institute

the suit under Section 92 is concerned, the applicant have to
satisfy the court at the time of consideration that they have
substantial interest in the management of the trust and this
satisfaction has to be recorded by the court at the time of
adjudicating upon the application seeking the leave to institute the
CS(OS) No. 512/2004

page 18 of 24

suit. In the event that one of the two applicant has expired before
the application is considered, it is evident that the court has
occasion only to consider the interest of the one surviving
applicant before it in the affairs of the trust. Therefore, the basic
condition precedent in order to institute the suit against the trust
is not satisfied. Such a single person cannot be given leave to sue
and the same is contrary to the specific mandate of the statute.
The effect in the permission, if granted to the sole applicant cannot
be cured by way of an application under Order 1 Rule 10 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 which comes into play, only after
institution of the suit. This is also for the reason that there has
been no consideration of the interest of the proposed plaintiff who
seeks to be added as a plaintiff in the suit which stands registered.
21.

The principles which would apply to the prohibition

contained in Section 92 so far as institution of a suit against the
trust by less than two persons is concerned, is akin to the
prohibition contained in Section 69 of the Partnership Act, 1932.
This section prohibits an unregistered partnership firm from filing
a suit. So far as the prohibition contain in Section 69 is concerned,
the same has fallen for consideration in several judicial
pronouncements which can be usefully adverted to here.
CS(OS) No. 512/2004

page 19 of 24

22.

In (1994) 1 ArbLR 385 Kelson Construction v.

Versha Spinning Mills Ltd. & Anr., the court held thus :“6. In Loonkaran Sethia etc. v. Mr. Ivan E.
John and others etc. AIR 1977 SC 336 the Hon'ble
Supreme Court has held that the provisions of
Section 69 are mandatory in character and its
effect is to tender suit by a plaintiff in respect of a
right vested in him or acquired by him under a
contract which he entered into as a partner of an
unregistered firm, whether existing or dissolved,
void. What is material is that on the date of
institution of the suit the partnership should have
been registered failing that the suit would fail. In
Shankar Housing Corporation v. Smt. Mohan
Devi and others AIR 1978 Delhi 255, a Division
Bench of this Court had also taken the following
view :
“The point of time contemplated in
Section 69(2) is at the time of the
institution of the suit. That is to
today, the firm must be a registered
firm by the date of the institution of
the suit and the person suing (i.e., all
the partners) must have been shown
in the Register of Firms as partners of
the firm by the date of the institution
of the suit.
Sub-section (1) and (2) of Section 69
are substantives provisions intended
to discourage the non-registration of
firms. The provision in Section 69(2)
is mandatory and makes the
registration of a firm a condition
p;precedent to the institution of a suit
of the nature mentioned in it.”
Similarly another single Bench of this Court
in the case of Kavita Trehan and others v. M/s.
Balsara Hygienic Products Ltd. AIR 1992 Delhi
CS(OS) No. 512/2004

page 20 of 24

92, had held that a suit filed by a partner of a firm
which is not registered on the date of the filing of
the suit would be hit by the provisions of Section
69(2) of the Indian Partnership Act and as such it
is not maintainable and is liable to be dismissed.
In the case of M/s. Shreeram Finance
Corporation v. Yasin Khan and others AIR 1989
SC 1769, the Hon'ble Supreme Court had gone to
the extent of laying down that even if the suit is
instituted by a registered firm, but change in the
constitution of the firm had taken place whereby
one new partner had been added and two had
retired and a minor being admitted to the benefits
of the firm, the suit was filed by the firm after
such change in the constitution but the change
was not notified to the Registrar of Firms, the suit
was not maintainable as the current partners
were not shown in the Register of Firms.”
23.

In the pronouncement of this court in 1994 1 ArbLR 385

Kelson Construction v. Versha Spinning Mills Ltd. &
Anr., the court held that if a suit on the date of its institution is
not maintainable, there was nothing in the language of the section
which by any implication has the effect of validating the same
plaint with effect from the date of the registration of the
partnership. It was further laid down that while it is the duty of
the court to administer justice according to the principles of equity
and good conscience, the courts are not supposed to circumvent or
overlook the mandatory provisions of statute. When a statute does
not permit any suit to be brought, contrary to its specific

CS(OS) No. 512/2004

page 21 of 24

provisions, the courts cannot by the device of interpretation
overcome such legal bar.
24.

In the instant case, a requirement under Section 92 of the

Code of Civil Procedure cannot be held to be a merely technical
bar, non-compliance whereof is only an irregularity. In my view,
the prohibition goes to the root of the jurisdiction of the court and
finds its basis in the spirit, intendment and purpose for which
Section 92 was enacted. Failure to bring the application by two
persons who have an interest in the affairs of the trust on the date
the application is taken up for consideration is a sine qua non for
the maintainability of the application and the institution of the
suit. The requirement of Section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 cannot be compared to the omission to sign or verify the
plaint which is considered irregularity and technical defect
inasmuch as the same entails satisfaction of the court on factual
matters. In the instant case, the applicants have to satisfy the
court that they have a valid and substantial interest in the affairs of
the trust when the application under Section 92 is taken up for
consideration or is allowed.
25.

For this reason, the omission cannot be supplied by making

an application under Order 1 Rule 10 of the Code of Civil
CS(OS) No. 512/2004

page 22 of 24

Procedure, 1908. Undoubtedly, the two persons who make the
application must have a substantial interest in the affairs of the
trust when the application is filed and continue to do so when the
application is taken up for consideration. This court had held that
the provisions of Order 22 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
were not applicable to the application under Section 92 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. The proposed plaintiff on whose
behalf the application being IA 6040/2004 has been filed was not
before the court on 20th April, 2004 when IA 9572/1999 was taken
up for hearing and was allowed. Secondly, no leave to institute the
suit has been granted in favour of the proposed plaintiff and
consequently it cannot be added as a party.
26.

Learned counsel for the applicant has pointed out that so far

an an application under Section 92 is concerned, when it is filed,
the plaint is registered as a civil rule in accordance with the
applicable rules. The filing of the application with the proposed
plaint does not amount to institution of the suit. It is only after
permission and leave to institute the suit is granted that the same
is registered as a suit. In this behalf, the pronouncement of this
court in AIR 1987 Delhi 74 entitled V. Bhagat Vs. Ms. Usha Bhagat
has been relied upon.
CS(OS) No. 512/2004

page 23 of 24

27.

In view of the aforenoticed judicial pronouncements and the

principles of law, it is apparent that the order dated 20th April,
2004 deserves to be reviewed as it suffers from an error which is
apparent in the face of the record in the light of the position in law
noticed above. Even otherwise, the court gave the right to the
defendant to take such an objection in the written statement and
permitted fresh consideration thereof.

Consequently, this

application is allowed. The order dated 20th April, 2004 granting
leave to institute the suit in favour of the plaintiff is hereby
revoked.

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
August 23, 2006
kr

CS(OS) No. 512/2004

page 24 of 24

