*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI

+

Writ Petition (C) No. 4527of 1994

%

Date of decision : 23rd September, 2004.

M.L. GUPTA & OTHERS
....... Petitioners
Through: Mr. Yogesh Sharma, Adv.
with Mr. A.K.Trivedi, Adv.
versus
UNION OF INDIA & OTHERS
....... Respondents.
Through: Mr. Sidharth Mridul, Adv.
with Ms. Anupam Sanghi,
Adv.
ALONG WITH
Writ Petition (C) No. 4780 of 1995
J.P. YADAV

........Petitioner
Through: Mr. Yogesh Sharma, Adv.
with Mr. A.K.Trivedi, Adv.
versus

UNION OF INDIA & OTHERS
....... Respondents.
Through: Mr. Sidharth Mridul, Adv.
with Ms. Anupam Sanghi,
Adv.

WP(C) 4527.94

Page No. 1 of 11

AND
Writ Petition (C) No. 4793 of 1995
EX. CT. NARAYAN SAINEE
........Petitioner
Through: Mr. Yogesh Sharma, Adv.
with Mr. A.K.Trivedi, Adv.
versus
UNION OF INDIA & OTHERS
....... Respondents.
Through: Mr. Sidharth Mridul, Adv.
with Ms. Anupam Sanghi,
Adv.
CORAM:
Hon'ble Justice Dr. Mukundakam Sharma.
Hon'ble Ms. Justice Gita Mittal.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
Yes
Dr. Mukundakam Sharma, J (Oral)
Civil writ petition No.4527/1994 was listed on 21st
September, 2004 when the counsel appearing for the petitioners
and the respondents stated that these matters should be taken up
along with five connected matters, namely, WP (C) Nos.
3739/1995, 3751/1995, 4780/1995, 4793/1995 & 4794/1995.
The hearing of the CW No.4527/1994 was adjourned for today

WP(C) 4527.94

Page No. 2 of 11

with the directions that those writ petitions be also listed today
as they involved similar facts and the issues arising for
consideration are similar. Accordingly, today with the consent
of the counsel appearing for the parties, we have taken up the
three writ petitions, namely, WP (C) Nos.4527/1994, 4780/1995
& 4793/1995 which parties were represented for hearing and
which are being disposed of by a common judgment .
2.

The petitioners herein were recruited on daily wage

basis as Constable in Central Reserve Police Force (C.R.P.F.).
It is the case of the petitioners that all the petitioners have
served the respondents for more than 240 days and, therefore,
they should have been regularised in service. However, it is
stated that instead of regularising their services, the respondents
terminated the services of the petitioners. Hence the present
writ petitions seeking for a direction to the respondents to recall
the order of termination passed against the petitioners and to
regularise the services of the petitioners. Counsel appearing for
the petitioners has drawn our attention to Rule 16 of the Central
Reserve Police Force Rules, 1955. Referring to the said Rules,
particularly to Clause (a), it is submitted by the counsel

WP(C) 4527.94

Page No. 3 of 11

appearing for the petitioners that the petitioners are entitled to
the status of quasi-permanent after completion of one year of
service. The said clause reads as follows:“ Period of Service- (a) All members of the
Force shall be enrolled for a period of three
years. During this period of engagement,
they shall be liable to discharge at any time
on one month's notice by the appointing
authority. At the end of this those not given
substantive status shall be considered for
quasi-permanency under the provision of the
(Central Civil Service (Temporary Service)
Rules, 1965). Those not declared quasipermanent under the said rules shall be
continued
as
temporary
Government
employees unless they claim discharge as per
Schedule to the Act.
Those who are
temporary shall be liable to discharge on one
month's notice and those who are quasipermanent shall be liable to discharge on
three months' notice in accordance with the
said rules, as amended from time to time.)
3.

Relying upon the same provisions, it is also

submitted by counsel appearing for the petitioners that the
petitioners were entitled to at least one month's notice before
their services could be terminated by the respondents even for
the reason their service were otherwise terminated by the
respondents. The next submission of the counsel appearing for
the petitioners is that the order of termination is punitive as the
WP(C) 4527.94

Page No. 4 of 11

respondents themselves have used the word “misconduct” in
one of their communications and, therefore, the nature of order
of termination being punitive, the respondents could not have
terminated the service without conducting an appropriate
inquiry as envisaged under the provisions of the Rules.
We have heard the learned counsel appearing for the
respondents on the aforesaid pleas. During the course of his
arguments counsel for the respondents has drawn our attention
to the provisions of Rule 16 Clause (b) which reads as follows:“16 Period of Service (a) xxx

xxx

xxx

“(b) Should the Central Government decide
at any time to disband the Force or any part of
it (either before termination of the period for
which a member of the Force is enrolled or at
anytime thereafter) he shall be liable to be
discharged, without compensation, from the
date of disbandment.”
4.

Relying on this provision, it was submitted that since the

present case is a case of disbanding of the force or a part thereof,
therefore, the respondents were entitled to discharge the services of the
petitioners without any compensation from the date of the disbandment.
Having regard to the submissions of the counsel appearing for the
parties, we have looked into records placed before us and also the ratio of

WP(C) 4527.94

Page No. 5 of 11

the decisions of the Supreme Court cited at the Bar. Counsel appearing
for the respondents has placed before us the decision rendered by a
Single Judge of this Court in Shiv Bhadur Vs. UOI & Others in CWP
No.2257/1996 disposed of on 17th January, 2000. The facts of the writ
petition is almost similar to the writ petitions which we are disposing of
today by this judgment and common order. We will refer to the said
judgment as and when we deal with the other judgments which were
relied upon by the counsel appearing for the parties.
We find that the petitioners herein were admittedly appointed
on daily wage basis for a period of six months for election duty during
1989 and they were placed in 129 auxiliary battalion. On disbandment of
129 auxiliary battalion after six months, the petitioners were posted to
120 auxiliary battalion. Due to extension of the period of the auxiliary
battalion, the services of all the petitioners were extended for a period of
three/six months from time to time pursuant to the orders of Ministry of
Home Affairs as well as Directorate General, C.R.P.F.

While the

petitioners were so posted with the auxiliary battalion, they refused to go
on duty and also to take their breakfast as a token of their resentment to
show discontentment about auxiliary employment for about four years
and further stated that they would not go on duty till they were

WP(C) 4527.94

Page No. 6 of 11

permanently absorbed in CRPF as permanent employee and auxiliary
battalion must be regularised.
It is stated in the counter affidavit filed by the respondents
that the petitioners actively participated as one of the ring leaders in the
resentment shown on 2nd October, 1993. It is also stated in the counter
affidavit that the services of the petitioners were terminated on
administrative ground on the orders of the higher authorities.
The petitioners are claiming protection under Rule 16.
According to the said provisions, the appointment to the post of
Constable who are members of the force are to be enrolled for a period of
one year. Since the petitioners were appointed on daily wage basis, ex
facie it is apparent that the said appointment of the petitioners cannot be
said to be strictly under the provisions of Rule 16 Clause (a). The
appointment of the petitioners being strictly not in accordance with
Clause (a), it cannot be said that the said provision gets attracted in the
facts and circumstances of this case.
Even if it is assumed, as submitted by counsel appearing for
the petitioners, that their appointments were to be made under the
provisions of 16(a) of the Rules, still in our considered opinion, the
provisions of Rule 16(b) of the C.R.P.F. Rules get attracted to the facts

WP(C) 4527.94

Page No. 7 of 11

and circumstances of the present case. It is clearly pointed out that the
said auxiliary battalion force was disbanded either in entirety or in part
and, therefore, on such disbandment, power is vested on the respondents
to discharge the members of the force without making payment of any
compensation.
The petitioners were appointed on daily wage basis and as
submitted by counsel appearing for the petitioners, their services were to
be regularised at that stage, the respondents are required to judge the
suitability of the petitioners by considering the conduct of the petitioners
as to whether the said petitioners could be regularised. The petitioners
by showing their resentment had exhibited indiscipline while the said
unit was functioning as an auxiliary battalion and they refused to perform
their duties. A report to that effect was sent to the higher authority and
indepth investigation was also conducted after which it was proved and
established that the petitioners played the role of ring leaders and had
actuated and exhorted their colleagues to show their resentment.
The said conduct of the petitioners could be taken notice of
and considered by the respondents at the time of considering as to
whether or not the services of the petitioners could be regularised.
The petitioners were the members of CRPF, a disciplined

WP(C) 4527.94

Page No. 8 of 11

force and, therefore, high degree of discipline is called for which is
necessary to become a member of such disciplined force and the
petitioners have been lacking the same which is proved and established
by the conduct of the petitioners in showing their resentment and
resorting to exhibiting indiscipline while serving in the force. In this
connection, reference may be made to the decision of the Supreme Court
in Radhey Shyam Gupta Vs. U.P. State Agro Industries Corporation Ltd.
and Anr. reported as (1999) 2 SCC 21. In the said decision, the Supreme
Court has held that the employer by opting to pass a simple order of
termination as permitted by the terms of appointment or as permitted by
the rules was conferring a benefit on the employee by passing a simple
order of termination so that the employee would not suffer from any
stigma which would attach to the rest of his career if a dismissal or other
punitive order was passed. It was also held in the said decision that a
termination of the services of a temporary servant or one on probation,
on the basis of adverse entries or on the basis of an assessment that his
work is not satisfactory will not be punitive inasmuch as the above facts
are merely the move and not the foundation.
5.

Counsel appearing for the petitioner during the course of his

submission has relied upon the decision of the Supreme Court in Nar

WP(C) 4527.94

Page No. 9 of 11

Singh Pal Vs. Union of India & Ors. JT 2000 (3) SC 593. The said
decision was rendered by the Supreme Court in the context of an
industrial dispute which was raised. The said decision also pertains to
personnel who was working against permanent post.
6.

The facts of both the cases are, therefore, distinguishable and,

in our considered opinion, the ratio of the said decisions is not applicable
to the facts and circumstances of the present case. In our considered
opinion, therefore, use of the word “misconduct” in one of the
communications by the respondents and also in the counter affidavit
would not make the impugned order punitive in asmuch as the said word,
in our considered opinion, was used by the respondents only by way of
indicating the conduct of the petitioner in showing resentment and
resorting to high degree of indiscipline while remaining a member of the
force. Since the petitioners are working on daily wage basis and are
seeking for regularisation of service at this stage, the conduct and the
service of the petitioner could be taken notice of by the respondents and
in doing so, in our considered opinion, the ratio of the aforesaid decision
of the Supreme Court in Shiv Bhadur Vs. UOI & Others (Supra) and the
decision of the Supreme Court in Radhey Shyam Gupta Vs. U.P. State
Agro Industries Corporation Ltd. and Anr. (Supra) which were rendered

WP(C) 4527.94

Page No. 10 of 11

in the similar facts and circumstances are not applicable.
We, therefore, find no merit in the writ petitions and the same
are dismissed, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.

(Dr.Mukundakam Sharma)
Judge
( Gita Mittal )
Judge
September 23, 2004.
aa

WP(C) 4527.94

Page No. 11 of 11

