IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Date of decision:23rd December, 2005

WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.2838/2005

Telecom Regulatory Authority of India...Petitioner
through Mr.G.L.Sanghi,Sr.Advocate
with Mr.Meet Malhotra and
Mr.Raghvinder Singh,Advocates

VERSUS

The Telecom Disputes and Settlement
Appellate Tribunal & Anr.
...Respondents
through Mr. C.S.Vaidyalingam,
Sr.Advocate with Mr.Arun Kathpalia
and Mr.Anant Kumar, Advocates for
respondent no.2.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment? yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest? yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

By this writ petition the Telecom Regulatory Authority of

India (hereinafter referred to as TRAI) has impugned a decision
:1:

WP(C) 2838/2005

dated 31st January, 2005 of the Telecom Disputes Settlement and
Appellate Tribunal(hereinafter referred to as TDSAT).

An appeal

was filed by the Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited - respondent
no.2 (hereinafter referred to as the MTNL) challenging a regulation
framed by TRAI in exercise of its powers under Section 36 of the
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act(hereinafter referred to as
the Act). The TRAI had called into question the jurisdiction of
TDSAT to entertain the appeal which objection was rejected by the
impugned decision.
2.

In order to appreciate the issues raised in this petition, it is

necessary to examine the statutory scheme as also the spirit,
intendment and purpose of creation of TRAI and the TDSAT. The
TRAI Act 1987 was enacted to regulate the telecommunication
services, adjudicate disputes, dispose of appeals and to protect the
interests of service providers and consumers of the telecom sector,
promote and ensure orderly growth of the telecom sector and for
matters incidental thereto. The TRAI was established under the
statute to regulate the telecommunication services. However during
the functioning of the said authority, certain issues which were
:2:

WP(C) 2838/2005

hindering the growth of the sector cropped up.

These issues

agitated the minds of the executive and the legislature.
Consequently amendments were proposed with the object of
strengthening and increasing investor confidence and creating a
level playing field between public and private operators. It appears
that the Central Government constituted a Group on the telecom and
IT convergence under the Chairmanship of the Finance Minister on
13th December, 1999 with inter alia a brief to consider and make
recommendations to the Central Government with regard

to

strengthening the TRAI through suitable statutory amendments.
Recommendations made by this Group were accepted by the Central
Government. Initially in view of the urgency in the need to remove
the impediments in the growth of the telecom sector, which is a
major infrastructure sector, the President of India promulgated the
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (Amendment) Ordinance
2000 on 24th January, 2000.
3.

Major amendments effected by this Ordinance inter alia

included a distinction between the recommendatory, advisory and
the regulatory function of the authority as envisaged under sub:3:

WP(C) 2838/2005

section 1 of Section 11 of the Act. This amendment also made it
mandatory for the Central Government to seek recommendations of
the TRAI in respect of matters specified in sub clause (i), (ii) of
Section 11(1)(a) of the enactment.
4.

Composition of the TRAI was changed and additional

functions were required to be performed by the authority. These
inter alia included:(i)fixing
terms
and
conditions
of
the
interconnectivity between the service providers;
(ii)laying down standards of quality of service to be
provided by the service providers and ensuring
quality of service.
(iii)making of recommendations on
management of the available spectrum.

efficient

(iv)the tariff setting function of the TRAI was
brought under the purview of sub-section 3 of
Section 11.
(v)A major amendment brought about by this
ordinance was that the decisions taken by the TRAI
in discharge of its functions under Section 11(1)(b),
11(2) and Section 13 which are appealable to the
TDSAT, the Appellate Tribunal, shall not be
subject to audit by the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India.
(vi) An appellate tribunal which was known as
:4:

WP(C) 2838/2005

5.

Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate
Tribunal for adjudicating the disputes between a
licensor and licensee, between two or more service
providers, between a service provider and a group
of consumers, was provided for in the amended
provisions. This Tribunal was also empowered to
hear and dispose of any appeals from the direction,
decision or orders of the TRAI.
The Bill was placed before the Parliament seeking to

replace the earlier Ordinance and amendment to the TRAI Act of
1997 which received the assent of the Parliament and came into
force on 24th of January, 2000.
6.

The respondent no.2 before this Court the Mahanagar

Telephone Nigam Limited, is a State owned Company in the
business of providing telecommunication services while the
respondent no.1 is the statutory appellate tribunal constituted under
Section 14 of the TRAI Act, 1997.
7.

According to the petitioner, in exercise of its powers

under Section 36 of the Act, the TRAI in January, 2003, October,
2003 and January, 2005 made certain regulations regarding
telecommunications interconnection, usage charges. It is averred
that these were determined after an elaborate consultation process
and data collection.
:5:

WP(C) 2838/2005

8.

At this stage it would be appropriate to examine a few

facts which gave rise to the proceedings before the TDSAT in order
to really appreciate the nature of the controversy. In the year 1994,
the Government of India framed the National Telecom Policy with
inter alia an objective of provision of access to all people for certain
basic telecom services at affordable reasonable prices. In view of
the mandate of the telecom policy of 1994 and 1999 to provide
affordable telecom services within the reach of all, rental and local
call charges were fixed at below cost. The resultant deficit, which
was substantial, was subsidised by the high tariff fixed for long
distance

calls.

In

the

year

2001-02,

long

distance

telecommunication sectors were also opened up and private players
started providing long distance services in the domestic as well as
the international sector. The consequential intense competition had
the effect of a steep fall in the tariff for long distance calls both
national and international. In order to compensate for the below cost
rentals in rural and urban areas, an “Access Deficit Charge”('ADC'
for brevity) was introduced through regulatory interventions.
Pursuant to an elaborate consultative process and consideration of
:6:

WP(C) 2838/2005

representations from various stake holders in the industry, meeting
and discussions, the telecommunication Interconnection Usage
Charges(IUC) Regulation 2003 was notified by the TRAI on 24th
January, 2003. So far as the MTNL was concerned, there was thus
recognition of the requirement to pay ADC to it due to the deficit in
rentals for the free calls which it was required to provide to its users
and for the below cost local call charges. In supersession of the IUC
Regulation of January, 2003, the petitioner has notified the
Telecommunication Interconnection Usage Charges Regulation
2003 on 29th October, 2003 which covers further Access Deficit
Charges.

By this process, it was contended that there was a

phenomenal growth in the mobile subscriber base without any
corresponding growth in the subscriber base of the basic service
operators as the MTNL.
As the access deficit could not still be recouped, the
matter was being re-looked at and data was sought from the MTNL
in a call data record format. The respondent has contended that on
6th of January, 2005, the petitioner notified an Interconnect Usage
Charges (4th Amendment) 2005 without considering the data
:7:

WP(C) 2838/2005

submitted by the respondent and in violation of the principles of
natural justice.

The respondent MTNL was aggrieved by the

fixation of the ADC on the ground that it had been effected by
examining traffic to only one service provider; had been effected in
violation of principles of natural justice and had resulted in
aggravation of the deficit which had enured to the MTNL.
9.

The respondent no.2 MTNL challenged the regulations

dated 6th January, 2005 by way of an appeal bearing no. 3 of 2005
before the TDSAT invoking its jurisdiction under Section 14 of the
Act.
10.

The contention of the petitioner is that the regulations

were statutory regulations and the tribunal was a creation of the
statute. The Appellate Tribunal had no jurisdiction to declare the
regulations invalid as an Appellate Forum.
11.

This objection was decided against the petitioner by the

order dated 31st January, 2005 made by the TDSAT which after
detailed consideration of the matter and the law cited before it, held
thus:
(i)“The questions which arise for consideration
:8:

WP(C) 2838/2005

would be:
(a) If TRAI can make Regulations in the discharge
of its functions under sub-clauses(ii), (iii) and (iv)
of clause (b) of sub section (1) of Section 11?
(b) Can Regulations under sub clauses (ii), (iii) and
(iv) be framed under general powers of sub Section
(1) of Section 36 when read with sub-section (2)
thereof?”
(ii) We put it to Mr.Sanghi if any dispute arises
under the Regulations framed by the TRAI could it
be that shall be adjudicated by TRAI and
jurisdiction of TDSAT to determine that dispute
would be barred. His answer was in affirmative.
That looks rather strange to us.
(iii) Can Regulations which are in the nature of a
subordinate legislation overtake the provision of
the Principal Act? If Regulations under sub-clauses
(i) to (ix) of clause (b) of Section 1 of the Act and
also under clause ( c ) are all framed by the TRAI
there will be no direction, decision or order of the
TRAI which could be subject matter of appeal to
TDSAT and that would in effect mean repealing
clause (b) of Section 14 of the Act.
(iv) We also put it to Mr.Sanghi that if there is
contravention of any direction issued by TRAI it is
punishable under Section 29 and what will happen
if there is contravention of any Regulation. He said
it was for the Parliament to amend the law. There
was no clear answer to our question as to what was
the procedure which would have to be gone into
before issuing direction or Regulation. It appears
to us that procedure for issuing direction or
Regulation has to be the same. As to what is the
:9:

WP(C) 2838/2005

difference between a direction and Regulation, it
was the submission of Mr.Sanghi that direction can
be given to a particular service provider and
Regulation can be of general applicability. This is
not correct as we have found in number of cases
that directions have also been issued which are
applicable generally e.g. that what was in Appeal
no.2 of 2004. It does not appear to us the right
approach of the TRAI to clothe a direction in the
garb of Regulation and then tell the TDSAT that it
has no appellate power.
(v) Both the lower authority and the appellate
authority have to exercise their respective
jurisdiction as defined in the Act constituting them.
We could not get any answer which expert body
will consider if the reduction in ADC by TRAI as
claimed by the MTNL, is factually and legally
correct if not TDSAT. As a matter of fact in West
Bengal Electricity case the Supreme Court itself
commended the creation of TDSAT by
recommending a similar expert appellate body be
created under the Electricity Commission Act
dealing with the type of factual and technical
matters and that High Court was not an appropriate
appellate body for that purpose. The question of
exclusive jurisdiction of an expert body like
TDSAT has recently been discussed in the decision
of the Supreme Court in the case of Clariant
International Limited vs. Security Exchange Board
(2004) 8 SCC 524.
(vi) Supreme Court in the case of Cellular
Operators Association of India vs. Union of India
(2003) 3 SCC 186 had clearly spelt out the
functions of TRAI as well as of the TDSAT. It has
been clearly held that TDSAT is an expert body.
: 10 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

Supreme Court in this case examined the extent and
parameters of the jurisdiction of TDSAT under
Section 14 of the Act. Supreme Court also held
that TDSAT was the “only forum for redressing the
grievance of an aggrieved party inasmuch as the
appellate jurisdiction to this Court is only on a
substantial question of law and the jurisdiction of
civil Court for filing a suit is also ousted. It has
already been held by us that the tribunal has the
power to adjudicate any dispute but while
answering the dispute, due weight has to be given
to the recommendation of the TRAI, which consists
of experts.
(vii) A bare comparison of provisions of Section 14
which confers jurisdiction on the tribunal and
Section 18 which confers jurisdiction on the
Supreme Court, would unequivocally indicate that
the Tribunal has much wider jurisdiction than the
jurisdiction of this Court under Section 18, as this
Court would be entitled to interfere only on a
substantial question of law, which arises from the
judgment of the Tribunal and not otherwise.
(viii) Even if the Regulations are valid piece of
subordinate legislation, the jurisdiction of TDSAT
is not barred if any dispute arises under the
Regulation. For example, in the present case it is
the contention of MTNL that its entitlement to
ADC has been wrongly reduced by TRAI on
various non-existent grounds.
(ix) Jurisdiction which the High Court exercises
under Article 226 and 227 of the Constitution is not
the same as is exercised by an expert appellate body
in appeal.

: 11 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

(x) The present case before us which involves
consideration of access deficit charge (ADC) a
matter of highly complicated and technical nature.
Arguments by TRAI is in complete variance with
the observations of the Supreme Court in the West
Bengal Electricity Regulatory Commission case.
(xi) The Supreme Court has also held that at least
one right of appeal be given to the aggrieved party.
Arguments advanced by TRAI would deprive the
aggrieved party the MTNL of the right of appeal.
(xii) In the case of the West Bengal Electricity
Regulatory Commission the Supreme Court has
found subordinate legislation to be valid. That is
not so in the present case before us.
(xiii) TRAI cannot frame Regulation under those
sub-clauses which do not provide for framing of
Regulations. It has certainly power to issue
directions.

12.

(xiv) Even if the Regulation in the present case is a
subordinate legislation, validly made, any dispute
arising thereunder is within the jurisdiction of
TDSAT as conferred upon it by the Act and no
subordinate legislation can take away that
jurisdiction. Any clause in the Regulation which
seeks to divest the TDSAT to adjudicate upon any
dispute is non-est and has to be ignored.”
Aggrieved by this decision, the TRAI has filed the present

writ petition contending that the order of the respondent no.1 was
erroneous in law and amenable to the writ jurisdiction of this Court.
The challenge has been laid by the writ petitioner on the same
: 12 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

grounds which were its objection to the maintainability of the appeal
before the TDSAT.
13.

This writ petition has been strenuously opposed by the

respondent no.2. Objection has been taken to the propriety of the
TRAI filing a writ petition.
It has been urged by Mr.Vaidyalingam, learned senior
counsel for the respondent no.2 that the TRAI can frame regulations
under Section 36(1) only with regard to the matters which are
specifically provided for under the statute.

It is contended that

anything done by the TRAI in discharge of its functions under
Section 11(1)(b), 1(ii), (iii)(iv) can be done only by way of
'directions' and 'decisions'. The TRAI has been statutorily enjoined
to take 'decisions' in the matters relating to Telecommunication
Interconnection Usage Charges( hereinafter referred to as IUC) and
Access Deposit Charges(hereinafter referred to as ADC) and levy
fees and other charges at different rates.
On the other hand, under Section 36 the TRAI is
empowered to make regulations by notification only in respect of the
purposes specifically set out. The contention of the respondent is
: 13 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

that merely because a decision of the TRAI is couched or notified as
a 'regulation', the same does not change its real nature and such a
'decision' is assailable by way of an Appeal under Section 14 of the
statute. Notifying its 'decision' as a 'regulation' is merely a procedure
adopted by the TRAI to give effect to its 'decision' while the real
purpose of the same is to give effect to the 'decision' taken under
Section 11(i)(b), (ii), (iii) and (iv) of the Act.
14.

Reliance has been placed on the pronouncement of the

Constitution Bench of the Apex Court rendered in L Chander Kumar
Vs. Union of India (1997) 2 SCC 261 (paras 91 to 94 on page 308)
wherein it was held by the Supreme Court that the tribunals are
competent even to hear the matters where the vires of statutory
provisions are in question and would also have the jurisdiction to
test the vires of subordinate legislation and rules.
15.

The maintainability of the writ petition is further objected

to by the respondent on the ground that under Section 18 of the
TRAI Act, 1997 an appeal against any order, not being an
interlocutory order of the appellate tribunal, lay to the Supreme
Court on one or more of the grounds specified in Section 100 of the
: 14 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

Code of Civil Procedure. It is contended that in the instant case, the
order passed on the preliminary issue relating to the jurisdiction of
the TDSAT is not an interlocutory order and in fact constitutes a
final determination on the issue of its jurisdiction. It adjudicates
upon and decides rights of parties and consequently is appealable
under Section 18 of the TRAI Act, 1997.

With regard to this

submission, support is sought to be drawn from the principles laid
down by the Apex Court in Shah Babu Lal Khimji Vs. Jaya Ben D.
Kania and another AIR 1981 SC 1786.
16.

Placing reliance on Amarnath vs. State of Haryana (1977)

4 SCC 137 and Central Government of India vs. Gokul Chand AIR
1967 SC 799. it is further contended that the orders which are
relating to merely procedural matters and do not effect rights and
liabilities of the parties or are steps taken towards final adjudication
and for assisting parties in prosecution of cases as they only regulate
procedure would be interlocutory orders.
17.

On facts, according to learned senior counsel for the

respondents, it is urged that the regulation 1 of 2005 which fixes the
ADC is really in the nature of tariff fixation. In view of the statutory
: 15 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

stipulation, there is no manner of doubt that tariff fixation is
appealable under section 14.
18.

The respondent no.2 has further submitted that assuming

the contention of the petitioner was to be accepted that the regulation
1 of 2005 was really a statutory regulation, which partakes the main
statute, then the petitioner can bye pass the provision for statutory
appeal by expressing any 'order', 'direction' or 'decision' as a
'regulation', rendering the provision of appeal totally redundant and
nugatory, which is impermissible.
19.

According to the respondent, the prohibition upon a

tribunal hearing a challenge to statutory provision is only to the
extent that the tribunal cannot hear a challenge to a provision of the
statute under which it was created. In the instant case there was no
challenge to any provision of the TRAI Act or subordinate
legislation creating it but only to the issue of correctness of the
decision of the TRAI relating to levy of the ADC which has been
undertaken in exercise of the powers and functions under Section
11(1)(ib) of the Act.
20.

The respondent no.2 further points out that the contention
: 16 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

of the petitioner that the Supreme Court as the Appellate Court
under Section 18 of the TRAI Act 1997 could not have also decided
the issue of jurisdiction or the legality and validity of regulation 1 of
2005 on principles laid down in the

West Bengal Electricity

Regulatory Commission vs. EEC Limited 2002(8) SCC 715 is
misconceived in law and that it is settled law that every Court and
Tribunal must decide its jurisdiction. Upon a challenge by a party
being aggrieved by such determination, the same could be impugned
by way of a statutory appeal. In the instant case the decision of the
TDSAT is appealable in terms of Section 18 of the TRAI Act.
21.

Respondent no.2 further submits that according to the

petitioner, the regulation 1 of 2005 is delegated legislation which
has been framed by it under Section 36 of the TRAI Act 1997. If
such position was accepted, it would be wholly improper for the
legislative authority to assail any orders passed by the competent
forum while dealing with any legislation made by it.
22.

Having heard learned senior counsel for the parties, the

issues which arise for adjudication in the present case can be
crystallized thus:: 17 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

(I)
Whether the TDSAT being an Appellate
Tribunal constituted under provisions of the
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997
has the jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the vires of
any provisions of the statute where under it has
been created or the vires of subordinate legislation
par-taking the character of the statute which was in
the nature of a regulation framed in exercise of
statutory powers.
(II)
Whether the Appellate Tribunal has the
jurisdiction to examine the question whether the
impugned provision is subordinate legislation in
the nature of a statutory regulation or a mere
direction issued in exercise of the executive
powers of the specialised authority.
(III)
What would be the appropriate forum
for laying a challenge to the adjudication on the
aforestated issues that is to say, whether the same
would be by way of an appeal statutorily provided
or could be laid by invoking the writ jurisdiction of
the High Court under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India.

23.

(IV)
Propriety of the present challenge at the
instance of the expert authority which had framed
the regulation or passed the impugned decision or
direction.
Before dealing with the respective contentions of the

parties, it is necessary to examine the scheme of the concerned
statute.

It would be useful to set out the relevant statutory

provisions of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997

: 18 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

which are as hereunder:“11. Functions of Authority
(1) Not withstanding anything contained in the
Indian Telegraph Act, 1885, the functions of the
Authority shall be to (a) make recommendations, either suo motu or on a
request from the licensor,
(b) discharge the following functions, namely:xxx
(ii) notwithstanding anything contained in the terms
and conditions of the licence granted before the
commencement of the Telecom Regulatory
Authority of India(Amendment) Act, 2000, fix the
terms and conditions of inter-connectivity between
the service providers;
(iii) ensure technical compatibility and effective
inter-connection
between
different
service
providers;
(iv) regulate arrangement amongst service
providers of sharing their revenue derived from
providing telecommunication services;
xxx
(vii) maintain register of inter-connect agreements
and of all such other matters as may be provided in
the regulations;
xxx
(viii) keep register maintained under clause (vii)
open for inspection to any member of public on
payment of such fee and compliance of such other
requirement as may be provided in the regulations;

: 19 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

( c ) levy fees and other charges at such rates and in
respect of such services as may be determined by
regulations.
(2) Nothwithstanding anything contained in the
Indian Telegraph Act, 1885(13 of 1885), the
Authority may, from time to time, by order, notify
in the Official Gazette the rates at which th
telecommunication services within India and
outside India shall be provided under this Act
including the rates at which messages shall be
transmitted to any country outside India:
(4) The Authority shall ensure transparency while
exercising its powers and discharging its functions.
12. Powers of Authority to call for information,
conduct investigations, etc.
xxx
(4) The Authority shall have the power to issue
such directions to service providers as it may
consider necessary for proper functioning by
service providers.
13. Power of Authority to issue directions
The Authority may, for the discharge of its
functions under sub-section (1) of section 11, issue
such directions from time to time to the service
providers, as it may consider necessary.
14. Establishment of Appellate Tribunal
The Central Government shall, by notification,
establish an Appellate Tribunal to be known as the
Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate
Tribunal to(a) adjudicate any dispute(i)between a licensor and a licensee;
: 20 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

(ii)between two or more service providers;
(iii)between a service provider and a group of
consumers.
(b) hear and dispose of appeal against any direction,
decision or order of the authority under this Act.
18. Appeal to Supreme Court
(1)Notwithstanding anything contained in the Cod
of Civil Procedure, 1908(5 of 1908) or in any
other law, an appeal shall lie against any order,
not being an interlocutory order, of the appellate
Tribunal to the Supreme Court on one or more of
the grounds specified in section 100 of that Code.
(2) No appeal shall lie against any decision or order
made by the Appellate Tribunal with the consent
of the parties.
36. Power to make regulations
(1) The Authority may, by notification, make
regulations consistent with this Act and the rules
made thereunder to carry out the purposes of this
Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the
generality of the foregoing power, such regulations
may provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely(d) matters in respect of which register is to be
maintained by the Authority under sub-clause (vii)
of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 11;
(e) levy of fee and lay down such other
requirements on fulfillment of which a copy of
register may be obtained under sub-clause (viii) of
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 11;
: 21 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

(f) levy of fees and other charges under clause ( c )
of sub-section (1) of section11.”

24.

37. Rules and regulations to be laid before
Parliament
Every rule and every regulation made under this
Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days which may
be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the
session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or regulation or
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should
not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any
such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule or regulation.”
The reason for the Constitution of the TRAI is to be found

in the objects and reasons for the statute. The need thereof was
realised long before the statute came into existence and was given
effect to.

The qualifications prescribed for the post of the

Chairperson and other Members of the authority shows the
requirement of specialized knowledge and specialised experience in
telecommunication,

industry,

finance,

accountancy,

law,

management or consumer affairs. There can be no manner of doubt
: 22 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

that the authority has been consciously and carefully created and
constituted in order to effectuate the spirit, intendment and purpose
of the statute.
The Appellate Forum(TDSAT) statutorily provided also
consists of persons with similar expertise and ability. Section 15 of
the TRAI Act excludes the jurisdiction of a civil court to entertain
any suit or proceedings in respect of any matter which the Appellate
Tribunal is empowered to determine. Statutory prohibition has been
laid to grant of an injunction by any court or other authority in
respect of any action taken or to be taken in exercise of the powers
conferred under the enactment. Wide powers have been conferred on
the TDSAT under statutory provisions which are exercisable by a
civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a
suit in respect of matters stated. An appeal against an order passed
by the TDSAT lies only to the Apex Court under Section 18 of the
Act.
25.

The conflict of jurisdiction between an expert appellate

tribunal as the TDSAT vis-a-vis the expert board has arisen for
consideration in cases hitherto before the Apex Court. It has been
: 23 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

authoritatively held that the limitations on the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal have to be found in the statutory provisions whereunder it
is created and the intention of the legislature has to be gathered
therefrom.

Unless the jurisdiction of the appellate authority is

fettered by the statute, it would have the same authority and
jurisdiction as that of the expert board under the statute. It can
exercise its discretionary jurisdiction in the same manner as the
board.
26.

Examination of the scheme of the TRAI Act shows that

the statute provides for integration of power in the TRAI under
Section 11 of the Act by vesting legislative, executive and judicial
powers in the same body.

The petitioner, TRAI, exercises its

legislative powers by making regulations; executive powers by
administering the regulations framed by it, issuing directions, taking
decisions and further by taking action against any entity violating its
regulations, decisions and directions. It exercises its judicial powers
by adjudicating the disputes in the implementation thereof.

27.

The Appellate Forum constituted under Section 14 of the
: 24 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

TRAI Act being the TDSAT is also empowered to exercise its
jurisdiction conferred by statute without any limitation and the
scrutiny by this expert Appellate Forum is of a wide import,
restricted only by the requirement to comply with the constitutional
mandate and the statutory provisions.
28.

The conflict of jurisdiction between an expert appellat

tribunal constituted under a statute vis-a-vis the expert board whose
action/decision is being examined by it, has also arisen for
consideration before the Apex Court.

This issue arose for

consideration in the context of jurisdiction of Securities & Exchange
Board vis-a-vis the Appellate Tribunal under the Securities &
Exchange Board of India Act, 1992.
29.

In

its

authoritative

pronouncement

in

Clariant

International Limited vs SEBI AIR 2004 SC 4236 entitled, it was
held by the Apex Court:“69. The Board is indisputably an expert body. But
when it exercises its quasi judicial functions; its
decisions are subject to appeal. The appellate
Tribunal is also an expert Tribunal. Only such
persons who have the requisite qualifications are to
be appointed as members thereof as would appear
from sub-section (2) of Section 15M of the said Act
which reads thus:: 25 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

“15.M Qualification for appointment as
Presiding Officer or Member of the
Securities Appellate Tribunal--(2) A person shall not be qualified for
appointment as Member of a Securities
Appellate Tribunal unless he is a person
of ability, integrity and standing who has
shown capacity in dealing with problems
relating to securities market and has
qualification and experience of corporate
law, securities laws, finance, economics
or accountancy:
Provided that a member of the Board of
any person holding a post at senior
management
level
equivalent
to
Executive Director in the Board shall not
be appointed as Presiding Officer or
Member of a Securities Appellate
Tribunal during his service or tenure as
such with the Board or within two years
from the date on which he ceases to hold
office as such i the Board”.
72. Throughout the world, specialized adjudicators
are performing numerous roles. There are diverse
specialized tribunals in America as also in the
Common Wealth countries. In certain States,
statutes have been enacted authorizing appeals to
the Administrative Division which jurisdiction used
to be exercised by the High Court alone. The
appeals range from questions of law to selected
questions of fact, to full rehearing of all issues. (see
Stephen Legomsky's 'Specialized Justice).

: 26 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

73. Had the intention of the Parliament been to
limit the jurisdiction of the Tribunal, it could say so
explicitly as it has been done in terms of Section
157 of the Act whereby the jurisdiction of this
Court to hear the appeal is limited to the question
of law.
74. The jurisdiction of the appellate authority under
the Act is not in any way fettered by the statute and,
thus, it exercises all the jurisdiction as that of the
Board. It can exercise its discretionary jurisdiction
in the same manner as the Board.

30.

75. The SEBI Act confers a wide jurisdiction upon
the Board. Its duties and functions thereunder, run
counter to the doctrine of separation of powers.
Integration of power by vesting legislative,
executive and judicial powers in the same body, in
future, may raise several public law concerns as the
principle of control of one body over the other was
the central theme underlying the doctrine of
separation of powers.”
Thus while considering the jurisdiction of an expert

appellate forum which has been constituted under the provisions of
the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 in Clariant
International Limited vs. SEBI AIR 2004 SC 4236, the Supreme
Court held that expert regulatory bodies exercise a wide jurisdiction.
They lay down the law, may prosecute, may punish. Intrinsically,
they act like an internal audit. They may fix the price, area of
operation and so on and so forth. While doing so, they may interfere
: 27 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

with the existing rights of licencees. The court authoritatively held
that the Appellate Tribunal was also like an expert body statutorily
constituted and its powers were wide and circumscribed only by the
restrictions contained in the Constitution and by the statute under
which it is created.
31.

Examination of the scheme of the TRAI Act, 1997 shows

that there is no restriction in the powers of the TDSAT which is an
expert forum constituted under Section 14 of the statute. However
appeals against the orders passed by TDSAT lay only to the Apex
Court under Section 18 of the Act whereby the jurisdiction of the
Apex Court as the appellate court is restricted to issues of law
arising from orders which are not in the nature of interlocutory
orders on grounds specified in section 100 of the Code of Civil
Procedure.
32.

Section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides a

second appeal against every decree passed in appeal by any court
subordinate to the High Court only if the case involves a substantial
question of law and from an appellate decree passed ex parte. The
High Court is required to be satisfied that a substantial question of
: 28 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

law is involved in the case and the appeal shall be heard on that
question.
33.

The jurisdiction of the TDSAT and its powers as an expert

appellate forum was considered by the Apex Court in 2003(3) SCC
186 entitled Cellular Operators Association of India and others
vs. Union of India.
The Court considered the powers of the TDSAT as the
Appellate Tribunal empowered by and under the Act as contained in
Section 15 and arrived at a conclusion that the power of the TDSAT
as an Appellate Tribunal was wide as has been indicated in the
statute itself. In this behalf the law laid down by the Apex Court
reads thus:“8. ............................ Having regard to the very
purpose and object for which the Appellate
Tribunal was constituted and having examined the
different provisions contained in Chapter IV, more
particularly, the provision dealing with ousting the
jurisdiction of the civil court in relation to any
matter which the Appellate Tribunal is empowered
by or under the Act, as contained in Section 15, we
have no hesitation in coming to the conclusion that
the power of the Appellate Tribunal is quite wide,
has been indicated in the statute itself and the
decisions of the court dealing with the power of a
court, exercising appellate power or original
: 29 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

power, will have no application for limiting the
jurisdiction of the Appellate Tribunal under the
Act.
Since the Tribunal is the original
authority to adjudicate any dispute between a
licensor and a licensee or between two or more
service providers or between a service provider
and a group of consumers and since the
Tribunal has to hear and dispose of appeals
against the directions, decisions or order of
TRAI, it is difficult for us to import the selfcontained restrictions and limitations of a court
under the judge-made law to which reference has
already been made and reliance was placed by the
learned Attorney-General. By saying so, we may
not be understood to mean that the Appellate
Tribunal while exercising power under Section 14
of the Act, will not give due weight to the
recommendations or the decisions of an expert
body like TRAI or in the case in hand, GOT-IT,
which was specifically constituted by the Prime
Minister for redressing the grievances of the
cellular operators. We would, therefore, answer
the question of jurisdiction of the Appellate
Tribunal by holding that the said Tribunal has
the power to adjudicate any dispute between
the persons enumerated in clause (a) of Section
14 and if the dispute is in relation to a decision
taken by the Government, as in the case in
hand, due weight has to be attached both to the
recommendations of TRAI which consists of an
expert body as well as to the recommendations of
GOT-IT, a committee of eminent experts from
different fields of life, which had been constituted
by the Prime Minister.
9. So far as the jurisdiction of this Court under
Section 18 is concerned, there is no dispute from
any quarter that the appeal would lie against any
: 30 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

order of the Appellate Tribunal only on the ground
specified in Section 100 of the Code of Civil
Procedure and necessarily,therefore, it must be a
substantial question of law.
The question,
therefore, that remains to be considered is, whether
from the judgment of the Tribunal, the contentions
raised by the appellants can be held to be a
substantial question of law, which requires
interference with the order of the Tribunal.
xxxxxxxxxxx
11. .............................At the outset, it may be stated
that the Tribunal committed an error by holding
that it exercises supervisory jurisdiction. As has
been stated earlier, the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal under Section 14 cannot be held to be
a supervisory jurisdiction, in view of the
language of the statute as well as the fact that it is
the only forum for redressing the grievance of an
aggrieved party inasmuch as the appellate
jurisdiction to this Court is only on a
substantial question of law and the jurisdiction of
a civil court for filing a suit is also ousted. It has
already been held by us that the Tribunal has the
power to adjudicate any dispute but while
answering the dispute, due weight has to be given
to the recommendation of TRAI, which consists of
experts.
The Tribunal also committed yet
another error in holding that the jurisdiction of
the Appellate Tribunal cannot be wider than
that of the Supreme Court. A bare comparison
of the provisions of Section 14, which confers
jurisdiction on the Tribunal and Section 18,
which confers jurisdiction on the Supreme
Court, would unequivocally indicate that the
Tribunal has much wider jurisdiction than the
jurisdiction of this Court under Section 18, as
this Court would be entitled to interfere only on a
: 31 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

34.

substantial question of law, which arises from the
judgment of the Tribunal and not otherwise.”
In this binding pronouncement, the Apex Court

emphasised the distinction between a judicial power in contrast to a
reviewing power in an authority.

While concurring with the

aforenoticed conclusions, additional reasons were assigned for
remitting the matter back to the tribunal in the judgment of
S.B.Sinha, J. Referring to the observations by Amnon Rubinstein in
'Jurisdiction and Illegalities', it was further stated that a :“A judicial power, on the other hand, denotes a
process in which ascertainable legal rules are
applied and which, therefore, is subject to an
objectively correct solution. But that, as will be
seen, does not mean that the repository of such a
power is under an enforceable duty to arrive at that
solution. The legal rules applied are capable of
various interpretations and the repository of power,
using his own reasoning faculties, may deviate
from that solution which the law regards as the
objectively correct one.

35.

The regulatory bodies exercise wide
jurisdiction. They lay down the law. They may
prosecute. They may punish. Intrinsically, they act
like an internal audit. They may fix the price, they
may fix the area of operation and so on and so
forth. While doing so, they may, as in the present
case, interfere with the existing rights of the
licencees.”
Also noticing the celebrated text on 'Judicial Review of
: 32 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

Administrative Law' by HWR Wade and CF Forsyth, it was further
stated thus:-

36.

“31.The rule as regard deference to expert bodies
applies only in respect of a reviewing Court and
not to an expert Tribunal. It may not be the
function of a Court exercising power of judicial
review to act as a super-model as has been stated in
Administrative Law by Bernard Schwartz, 3rd
edition in para 10.1 at page 625; but the same
would not be a case where an expert Tribunal has
been constituted only with a view to determine the
correctness of an order passed by another expert
body. The remedy under Section 14 of the Act is
not a supervisory one. TDSAT's jurisdiction is
not akin to a Court issuing a writ of certiorari.
The Tribunal although is not a Court. It has all
the trappings of a Court. Its functions are
judicial.”
In the light of this position and statement of the legal

principles, so far as the jurisdiction of the TDSAT under Section
14A of the TRAI Act it was stated:“27. TDSAT was required to exercise its
jurisdiction in terms of Section 14-A of the Act.
TDSAT itself is an expert body and its jurisdiction
is wide having regard to sub-section(7) of Section
14-A thereof. Its jurisdiction extends to examining
the legality, propriety or correctness of a
direction/order or decision of the authority in terms
of sub-section (2) of Section 14 as also the dispute
made in application under sub-section (1) thereof.
The approach of the learned TDSAT, being on the
premise that its jurisdiction is limited or akin to the
: 33 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

power of judicial review is, therefore, wholly
unsustainable. The extent of jurisdiction of a Court
or a Tribunal depends upon the relevant statute.
TDSAT is a creature of a statute. Its jurisdiction is
also conferred by a statute. The purpose of
creation of TDSAT has expressly been stated by
the Parliament in the Amending Act of 2000.
TDSAT, thus, failed to take into consideration the
amplitude of its jurisdiction and thus misdirected
itself in law.
33. The regulatory bodies exercise wide
jurisdiction. They lay down the law. They may
prosecute. They may punish. Intrinsically, they act
like an internal audit. They may fix the price, they
may fix the area of operation and so on and so
forth. While doing so, they may, as in the present
case, interfere with the existing rights of the
licensees.
34. Statutory recommendations made by it are
normally accepted by the Central Government, as a
result of which the rights and obligations of the
parties may seriously be affected. It was in the
aforementioned premise Parliament thought of
creating an independent expert tribunal which, if an
occasion arises therefor, may interfere with the
finding of fact, funding of law or a mixed question
of law and fact of the authority. Succinctly stated,
the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is not circumscribed
in any manner whatsoever.
37. There cannot be any doubt whatsoever that
when jurisdiction upon a court or a tribunal is
conferred by a statute, the same has to be construed
in terms thereof and not otherwise. The power of
judicial review of this Court as also of the High
: 34 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

court, however, stand on a different footing. The
power of this Court as also the High Court
although is of wide amplitude, certain restrictions
by way of self-discipline are imposed. Ordinarily,
the power of judicial review can be exercised only
when illegality, irrationality or impropriety is
found in the decision-making process of the
authority.
43.The learned TDSAT should have borne in mind
that its decision on fact and law is final and appeal
lies to this Court in terms of Section 18 of the Act
only on substantial questions of law. It, therefore,
was obliged to determine the questions of law and
facts so as to enable this Court to consider the
matter if any substantial question of law arises on
the face of the judgment.
47.Even the scope of judicial review may also vary
from case to case. It depends upon the nature of
the matter as also the statute involved therein
which is required to be dealt with by the Court.

37.

49. Furthermore, the power of this Court under
Section 18 of the Act cannot be equated with the
power of judicial review. As this Court will be
concerned with a substantial question of law
arising in the case, its jurisdiction would not be
restricted to illegality, irrationality or procedural
impropriety in the decision-making process.”
The authority and jurisdiction of an appellate expert

forum, its importance and necessity, therefore, cannot be belittled or
narrowed down by strict or a narrow interpretation of the statutory
provisions. Its importance is to be found in the observations of the
: 35 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

Apex Court in its earlier judgment in West Bengal Electricity
Regulatory Commission vs. CESC Limited reported at 2002(8)
SCC 715. The three Judge Bench of the Apex Court was
considering the extent of the jurisdiction of the High Court in
exercise of its appellate power under Section 27 of the Electricity
Regulatory Commission Act, 1998 which is almost pari materia with
Section 14 of the TRAI Act with which the present case is
concerned. The court noticed the absence of an expert appellate
authority in the Electricity Regulatory Commission Act, 1998 and
observed thus:“We notice that the Commission constituted under
Section 17 of the 1998 Act is an expert body and
the determination of tariff which has to be made by
the Commission involves a very highly technical
procedure, requiring working knowledge of law,
engineering, finance, commerce, economics and
management. A perusal of the report of the ASCI
as well as that of the Commission abundantly
proves this fact. Therefore, we think it would be
more appropriate and effective if a statutory
appeal is provided to a similar expert body, so
that the various questions which are factual and
technical that arise in such an appeal, get
appropriate consideration in the first appellate
stage also. From Section 4 of the 1998 Act, we
notice that the Central Electricity Regulatory
Commission which has a Judicial Member as also a
: 36 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

38.

number of other Members having varied
qualifications, is better equipped to appreciate the
technical and factual questions involves in the
appeals arising from the orders of the Commission.
Without meaning any disrespect of the Judges of
the High Court, we think neither the High Court
nor the Supreme Court would in reality be
appropriate appellate forums in dealing with
this type of factual and technical matters.
Therefore, we recommend that the appellate
power against an order of the State Commission
under the 1998 Act should be conferred either
on the Central Electricity Regulatory
Commission or on a similar body. We notice
that under the Telecom Regulatory Authority of
India Act, 1997 in Chapter IV, a similar
provision is made for an appeal to a special
Appellate Tribunal and thereafter a further
appeal to the Supreme Court on questions of
law only. We think a similar appellate provision
may be considered to make the relief of appeal
more effective.”
In the light of the aforestated observations, there can be no

manner of doubt that the TDSAT is an expert body and is statutorily
empowered to exercise jurisdiction without any limitation and its
powers are wider than the powers of the appellate court under
Section 18 of the TRAI Act.
39.

In order to answer the first issue as to the jurisdiction of a

tribunal constituted under a special statute to examine the
constitutional validity of a statutory provision or delegated
: 37 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

legislation thereunder, it becomes necessary to examine the
constitutional scheme with regard to the vesting of the powers of
judicial review to a statutory tribunal.
40.

Judicial review in India comprises three aspects: judicial

review of legislative action; judicial review of judicial decisions and
judicial review of administrative actions.
41.

The Supreme Court had an opportunity to state the law

and its views on the power of a tribunal to undertake judicial review
of legislative action. It is well settled that under the Constitutional
scheme in India, legislative acts of parliament are subject to judicial
review particularly when they purport to infringe fundamental
rights. There is no doubt that the Constitution has entrusted the
jurisdiction in construing the provisions of the Constitution of India
and of safeguarding the rights of citizens in courts. Challenge may
be laid to an action or a statute passed by the legislature on the
grounds of the same being without authority or it otherwise
unconstitutionally trespasses on fundamental rights. It is for the
courts to determine such disputes and decide whether the law passed
by the legislature is valid or not. (Re: 1973 (4) SCC 225 His
: 38 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

Holiness Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalvaru vs. State of Kerala
and another); AIR 1956 SC 479 Bidi Supply Company vs. Union of
India; AIR 1952 SC 196 State of Madras vs. V.G.Row).
42.

The thirteen Judge Constitution Bench in His Holiness

Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalvaru vs. State of Kerala and another
reported at 1973(4) SCC 225 considered in detail the power of
judicial review and held that Article 32 and 226 of the Constitution
of India vests the Supreme Court and High

Courts with the

jurisdiction to decide about the constitutional validity of the
provisions of statute. If the provisions of the statute are found to be
violative of any articles of the Constitution, which is the touch stone
for the validity of all the laws, the Supreme Court and the High
Courts are empowered to strike down such provisions and that this is
one of the basic features upon which hinges the system of checks
and balances and

separation of powers recognised by the

constitutional scheme.
43.

In exercise of the power of judicial review into legislative

action, it is well settled that the court has to ensure that the balance
of power envisaged by the Constitution is maintained and that the
: 39 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

legislature and the executive do not, in discharge of their functions
transcript constitutional limitations. At the same time, the courts are
required to oversee that judicial decisions rendered by those in the
subordinate courts and tribunals do not violate the strict standards of
legal correctness and judicial independence. The safeguards and
protection available to the members of the superior judiciary are not
available to those in the subordinate judiciary or to those manning
tribunals created by ordinary legislations and for this reason they
cannot be considered an effective substitute for the higher judiciary
in discharge of the function of constitutional interpretation.
44.

It was, therefore, held by the Apex Court in L.Chandra

Kumar vs. Union of India reported at (1997)3 SCC 261 (in para
78 of the report) that the power of judicial review over legislative
action vested in the Supreme Court under Article 32 and in the High
Courts under Article 226 of the Constitution is an integral and
essential features of the constitution, constituting part of its basic
structure. Ordinarily, therefore, the powers of these Courts to test
the constitutional validity of legislation cannot be ousted or
excluded.
: 40 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

45.

In para 79 of the pronouncement, the Apex Court held that

the powers vested in the High Courts to exercise judicial
superintendence over the decisions of all Courts and Tribunals
within their respective jurisdictions is also part of the basic structure
of the Constitution.
46.

It was further held that though the subordinate judiciary or

tribunals created under ordinary legislations cannot exercise the
power of judicial review of legislative action to the exclusion of the
High Courts or the Supreme Court, there is no constitutional
prohibition against their performing a supplemental, as opposed to a
substitutional role in this report.(para 80 of the report).
47.

At this stage, it would be useful to notice the observations

of the Apex Court with regard to the jurisdiction of the tribunals to
the test validity of the legislation against the constitutional
provisions. In this behalf the Apex Court observed thus:“81. If the power under Article 32 of the
Constitution, which has been described as the
“heart” and “soul” of the Constitution, can be
additionally conferred upon “any other court”,
there is no reason why the same situation cannot
subsist in respect of the jurisdiction conferred upon
the High Courts under Article 226 of the
: 41 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

Constitution. So long as the jurisdiction of the
High Courts under Articles 226/227 and that of
this Court under Article 32 is retained, there is
no reason why the power to test the validity of
legislations against the provisions of the
Constitution cannot be conferred upon
Administrative Tribunals created under the Act
or upon Tribunals created under Article 323-B
of the Constitution. It is to be remembered that,
apart from the authorisation that flows from
Articles 323-A and 323-B, both Parliament and
the State Legislatures possess legislative
competence to effect changes in the original
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and the High
Courts. This power is available to Parliament
under Entries 77, 78, 79 and 95 of List I and to
the State Legislatures under Entry 65 of List II;
Entry 46 of List III can also be availed of both by
Parliament and the State Legislatures for this
purpose.
xxx xxxx
90. We may first address the issue of exclusion of
the power of judicial review of the High Courts.
We have already held that in respect of the power
of judicial review, the jurisdiction of the High
Courts under Articles 226/227 cannot wholly be
excluded. It has been contended before us that
the Tribunals should not be allowed to
adjudicate upon matters where the vires of
legislations is questioned,and that they should
restrict themselves to handling matters where
constitutional issues are not raised. We cannot
bring ourselves to agree to this proposition as
that may result in splitting up proceedings and
may cause avoidable delay. If such a view were
to be adopted, it would be open for litigants to raise
constitutional issues, many of which may be quite
: 42 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

frivolous, to directly approach the High Courts and
thus subvert the jurisdiction of the Tribunals.
Moreover, even in these special branches of law,
some areas do involve the consideration of
constitutional questions on a regular basis; for
instance, in service law matters, a large majority of
cases involve an interpretation of Articles 14, 15
and 16 of the Constitution. To hold that the
Tribunals have no power to handle matters
involving constitutional issues would not serve the
purpose for which they were constituted. On the
other hand, to hold that all such decisions will be
subject to the jurisdiction of the High Courts within
whose territorial jurisdiction the Tribunal
concerned falls will serve two purposes. While
saving the power of judicial review of legislative
action vested in the High Courts under Articles
226/227 of the Constitution, it will ensure that
frivolous claims are filtered out through the
process of adjudication in the Tribunal. The
High Court will also have the benefit of a reasoned
decision on merits which will be of use to it in
finally deciding the matter.”
48.

So far as the instant case is concerned, it has been urged

by Mr.G.L.Sanghi, learned senior counsel for the petitioner, that the
Apex Court has drawn a clear distinction between an ordinary
tribunal constituted under the ordinary legislation and a tribunal as
the Central Administrative Tribunal which is created under Article
323-B of the Constitution which draws its

authorisation from

Articles 323-A and 323-B of the Constitution.
: 43 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

49.

I find that the Apex Court has noticed that the Parliament

and the State Legislature possess the

legislative competence to

effect the changes in the original jurisdiction of the Apex Court and
the High Court under Article 323-A and 323-B of the Constitution
respectively. The Apex Court, in the L Chandra Kumar case(supra),
has noticed that such power to effect changes in the original
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and the High Court is also
available to the Parliament under Entries 77 & 78, 79 and 95 of ListI and to the State Legislature under Entry 65 of List-II and Entry 46
of List-III and that such powers can be availed of both by the
Parliament and the State Legislature for this purpose.
50.

After a detailed analysis of the applicable laws, the Apex

Court however laid down the principles applicable in the following
terms:“93. Before moving on to other aspects, we may
summarise our conclusions on the jurisdictional
powers of these Tribunals. The Tribunals are
competent to hear matters where the vires of
statutory provisions are questioned. However, in
discharging this duty, they cannot act as substitutes
for the High Courts and the Supreme Court which
have, under our constitutional set up, been
specifically entrusted with such an obligation.
: 44 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

Their function in this respect is only supplementary
and all such decisions of the Tribunals will be
subject to scrutiny before a Division Bench of the
respective High Courts. The Tribunals will
consequently also have the power to test the
vires of subordinate legislations and rules.
However, this power of the Tribunals will be
subject to one important exception.
The
Tribunals shall not entertain any question
regarding the vires of their parent statutes
following the settled principle that a Tribunal
which is a creature of an Act cannot declare that
very Act to be unconstitutional. In such cases
alone, the High Court concerned may be
approached directly. All other decisions of these
Tribunals, rendered in cases that they are
specifically empowered to adjudicate upon by
virtue of their parent statutes, will also be subject to
scrutiny before a Division Bench of their respective
High Courts. We may add that the Tribunals will,
however, continue to act as the only courts of first
instance in respect of the areas of law for which
they have been constituted. By this, we mean that
it will not be open for litigants to directly approach
the High Courts even in cases where they question
the vires of statutory legislations (except, as
mentioned, where the legislation which creates the
particular Tribunal is challenged) by overlooking
the jurisdiction of the Tribunal concerned.
99. In view of the reasoning adopted by us, we hold
that clause2(d) of Article 323-A and clause 3(d) of
Article 323-B, to the extent they exclude the
jurisdiction of the High Courts and the Supreme
Court under Articles 226/227 and 32 of the
Constitution, are unconstitutional. Section 28 of
the Act and the “exclusion of jurisdiction” clauses
: 45 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

51.
doubt

in all other legislations enacted under the aegis of
Articles 323-A and 323-B would, to the same
extent, be unconstitutional.
The jurisdiction
conferred upon the High Courts under Articles
226/227 and upon the Supreme Court under
Article 32 of the Constitution is a part of the
inviolable basic structure of our Constitution.
While this jurisdiction cannot be ousted, other
courts and Tribunals may perform a
supplemental role in discharging the powers
conferred by Articles 226/227 and 32 of the
Constitution. The Tribunals created under
Article
323-A and Article 323-B of the
Constitution are possessed of the competence to
test the constitutional validity of statutory
provisions and rules. All decisions of these
Tribunals will, however, be subject to scrutiny
before a Division Bench of the High Court within
whose jurisdiction the Tribunal concerned falls.
The Tribunals will, nevertheless, continue to act
like courts of first instance in respect of the areas of
law for which they have been constituted. It will
not, therefore, be open for litigants to directly
approach the High Courts even in cases where they
question the vires of statutory legislations (except
where the legislation which creates the particular
Tribunal is challenged) by overlooking the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal concerned. Section
5(6) of the Act is valid and constitutional and is to
be interpreted in the manner we have indicated.”
In view of the above discussion, I have no manner of
that it is not open for a litigant to approach a tribunal

constituted under a statute to question vires of a statutory legislation
which created the particular tribunal. However it is open for the
: 46 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

litigant to test the constitutional validity of statutory provisions and
rules before a tribunal created under Article 323-A and 323-B of the
Constitution.
52.

In the light of the authoritative pronouncements of law by

the Apex Court, therefore, it has to be held that the TDSAT in the
instant case, which has derived its jurisdiction under the specific
statutory provisions of the TRAI Act and has not been created under
any constitutional provisions does not have the jurisdiction or the
competence to decide on the constitutionality of a statutory
provision under which it has been created. For the same reasoning,
it would not have the competence to adjudicate on the vires of the
subordinate legislation framed and effectuated in exercise of power
conferred under the same statute.
53.

Having so held, the second issue which has been urged on

behalf of the respondent no.2 requires consideration. It is pointed
out that in the instant case, the challenge relates to the legality and
validity of what has been termed by the petitioner as “regulations”.
Their validity has been assailed before the TDSAT in exercise of its
jurisdiction as an expert tribunal having the expertise and the legal
: 47 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

competence to decide the technical issues. The respondents contend
that the TDSAT was fully competent to examine the legality and
validity of these regulations inasmuch as even though the petitioner
has couched the same as regulations, however examination of the
same would show that they were really in the nature of directions
issued by the TDSAT resulting in reduction of the Access Deficit
Charges.
54.

It is well settled that a tribunal is fully empowered to

examine an issue relating to its jurisdiction. Such a question in the
instant case necessarily requires examination and determination as to
whether the challenge relates to the statutory regulations or whether
the same related to a challenge to directions issued by the petitioner
in exercise of its administrative or executive jurisdiction under the
provisions of the TRAI Act.
55.

The distinction between rules, regulations and their effect

fell for consideration before the apex court in its judgment reported
at (1975) 1 SCC 421 Sukhdev Singh Vs. Bhagat Ram and it was
held as follows:24. Broadly stated, the distinction between rules
: 48 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

and regulations on the one hand and
administrative instructions on the other is that
rules and regulations can be made only after
reciting the
source of power whereas
administrative instructions are not issued after
reciting source of power. Second, the executive
power of a State is not authorised to frame rules
under Article 162. This Court held that the Public
Works Department Code was not a subordinate
legislation (See G.J. Fernandez vs. State of
Mysore). The rules under Article 309 on the other
hand constitute not only the constitutional rights of
relationship between the State and the government
servants but also establish that there must be
specific power to frame rules and regulations.
26. The character of regulations has been decided
by this Court in several decisions. One group of
decisions consists of S.R.Tiwari vs. District Board,
Agra; Life Insurance Corporation of India vs. Sunil
Kumar Mukherjee; Calcutta Dock Labour Board vs.
Jaffar Imam; Mafatlal Naraindas Barot vs.
Divisional
Controller
S.T.C.;
The
Sirsi
Municipality vs. Cecelia Kom Francis; U.P. State
Warehousing Corporation vs. C.K.Tyagi and Indian
Airlines Corporation vs. Sukhdeo Rai.
33. There is no substantial difference between a
rule and a regulation inasmuch as both are
subordinate legislation under powers conferred by
the statute. A regulation framed under a statute
applies uniform treatment to every one or to all
members of some group or class. The Oil and
Natural Gas Commission, the Life Insurance
Corporation and Industrial Finance Corporation are
all required by the statute to frame regulations inter
alia for the purpose of the duties and conduct and
: 49 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

conditions of service of officers and other
employees. These regulations impose obligation on
the statutory authorities. The statutory authorities
cannot deviate from the conditions of service.
xxxxx
This Court has repeatedly observed that whenever a
man's rights are affected by decision taken under
statutory powers, the Court would presume the
existence of a duty to observe the rules of natural
justice and compliance with rules and regulations
imposed by statute.”
56.

The question which was raised before the TDSAT was as

to whether the impugned order 1 of 2005 par took the nature of
subordinate legislation as it was a regulation framed framed under
the provisions of TRAI Act, 1997 or was it merely in the nature of
administrative directions issued by the TRAI under the TRAI Act of
1997. It was open and certainly incumbent upon the tribunal to
examine this issue in order to answer the objections raised by the
petitioner to its jurisdiction.
57.

As noticed hereinabove, after a detailed consideration, the

Tribunal found that the provisions of Section 14, creating and
conferring jurisdiction on it, were much wider than the appellate
jurisdiction of the Apex Court under Section 18 of the TRAI Act.
The Appellate tribunal was of the view that in the instant case, it has
: 50 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

been called upon to adjudicate upon a dispute raised by the MTNL
that its entitlement to the access deficit charges has been wrongly
reduced by the TRAI on non-existent grounds and in violation of
principles of natural justice. Such a dispute, it was observed, was
just the type of factual and technical matter which the Apex Court in
the West Bengal Electricity Regulatory Commission case had held,
could be appropriately and more effectively adjudicated in a
statutory appeal by an expert body so that the factual and technical
questions which arose in such an appeal would get appropriate
consideration at the appellate stage as well.
58.

It is an admitted position that the consideration of the

Access Deficit Charge is a matter of highly complicated and
technical nature. The Tribunal arrived at a conclusion that the TRAI
is empowered to frame regulations circumscribed by the statutory
provisions and that it has no authority to frame regulations in respect
of matters not specifically provided for. In such areas, it only had a
jurisdiction to issue directions.
59.

According to the petitioner,

the notification has been

finalised and issued after an elaborate consultation process involving
: 51 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

all stake holders.

Such consideration and consultation is not

required to be undertaken in the event of a legislative exercise being
undertaken to either frame statutes or notify statutory rules and
regulations.
60.

Section 11(4) mandates that the TRAI shall ensure

transparency while exercising its powers and discharging its
functions.

On behalf of TRAI it has been pointed out that the

advertisements were issued and all stake holders were permitted
participation while a public hearing was effected prior to issuance of
the impugned notification. I find force in the contention that such
actions are not consistent with discharge of legislative functions and
powers which do not mandate compliance with provisions of natural
justice and hearing while discharging legislature functions.
61.

In order to appreciate the manner in which the TRAI is to

function, it becomes necessary to closely examine the provisions of
Section 11 of the TRAI Act, 1997 which provides the source of
statutory powers of the authority.
In the instant case, it has been contended by the petitioner
that it has framed Regulation I of 2005 in exercise of the powers
: 52 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

conferred on it under Section 36 read with Section 11(1)(b) of the
TRAI Act. Even the regulation so stipulates.
62.

Access Deficit Charge which is the subject matter of the

grievance is a deficit arising due to rental revenue being below cost
based rental minus any net surplus revenue on local calls as well as
minus any government financial support provided to operators. The
power to do so is to be found in the provisions of Section 11(1)(b) of
the TRAI Act whereunder the TRAI is empowered to fix the terms
and conditions of interconnectivity between the service provider, in
short technical compatibility and effective interconnection between
the service providers and ensures compliance of the terms and
conditions of the licence.

Perusal of the regulation which was

impugned before the TDSAT itself shows that the TRAI has itself
stated that by the “regulation” it is intended to fix the terms and
conditions of the interconnectivity and to ensure a effective
interconnection between the different service providers, regulate
arrangement amongst them of sharing their revenue derived from
providing telecommunication services.
63.

For this reason also, it would appear that the impugned
: 53 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

decision of the respondents is in the nature of an exercise of the
executive jurisdiction of the respondents and is not a legislative
exercise.
64.

Examination of the provisions of Section 36 whereby the

TRAI is empowered to make regulations shows that it is specifically
mentioned therein that regulations would be made by notification in
respect of the subjects set out therein. Section 36(2)(e) empowers
the TRAI to make regulations in respect of the subject matter of
Section 11(1)(b)(viii) and Section 11(1)(c) of the Act. In this view
of the matter, I have no manner of doubt that the TRAI can validly
make regulations in respect of only such subject matters which have
been specifically specified under Section 36 of the enactment. It is
necessary to bear in mind the spirit, intendment and purpose of the
TRAI Act, 1997 and the functions which the authority is required to
discharge.

Both the Appellate Forum and the TRAI consist of

experts who are required to go into technical questions which arise
for consideration.

The Appellate Authority is specifically

empowered to hear and dispose of appeals against directions,
decisions and orders of the TRAI.
: 54 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

65.

In this view of the matter, it cannot possibly be

successfully contended that an issue relating to the fixation of the
access deficit charges cannot be agitated before the TDSAT which is
specifically empowered to hear such grievance under the provisions
of Section 14(b) of the TRAI Act, 1997.
66.

It is the contention of the petitioner to the effect that TRAI

can make regulations in respect of all its functions

under all

statutory provisions and that the jurisdiction of the TDSAT to
examine disputes in respect thereof would be barred.

If this

objection were to be sustained, it would not be open to any person to
impugn any action of the petitioner on the ground that the same was
an exercise of legislative powers under the statute. Such could never
has been the intention of the legislature. The result, in case such a
contention was to be sustained, would be that the jurisdiction of
TDSAT to examine the disputes being raised by different persons
including service providers would be ousted in almost all the cases
inasmuch as the TDSAT has been held to be legally incapable of
examining the vires of the statutory provisions and subordinate
legislation which confer power and jurisdiction on the tribunal.
: 55 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

67.

There is no dispute whatsoever that the questions raised

by the respondent MTNL are factual and technical matters. The
issue relates to the fixation of an appropriate figure as the access
deficit charge is based on a complicated matrix of facts and figures.
Dispute has been raised by the MTNL that its entitlement to the
access deficit charges has been wrongly reduced.

A close

examination of the statutory scheme would show that the legislature
has clearly differentiated between statutory provisions which will
require framing and notifications of regulations and those for which
power has been conferred to issue directions.
68.

Perusal of the statement of objects and reasons for the Bill

which sought to replace the TRAI(Amendment) Ordinance 2000
shows that it was intended to clearly lay down the functions of the
TRAI which included fixation of terms and conditions of interconnetivity between service providers and also mandated that
decisions of the authority taken discharge of its functions under
Section 11(1)(b) and 11(2) and 13 which are appealable to the
Appellate Tribunal shall not be subject to audit by the Comptroller
and Auditor General of India.
: 56 :

Section 11(1)(b) of the statute
WP(C) 2838/2005

provides for the fixation of the terms and conditions of interconnectivity between the service providers.
69.

I find force in the submissions on behalf of the

respondents to the effect that the access deficit charges would be
covered within the ambit of the expression “terms and conditions of
inter-connectivity” between the service providers and hence any
direction or decision in respect thereof has to be appealable to the
appellate tribunal constituted under Section 14 of the statute. The
TDSAT specifically is even otherwise empowered to hear and
dispose of appeals from any directions, decision or decision or order
of the TRAI by virtue of the powers vested in it under Section 14(b)
of the Act. The challenge made by the petitioner on this ground has
therefore to be answered against it.
70.

In the instant case there is no manner of doubt that the

TRAI was fully competent to issue directions in respect of the access
deficit charges for which it has been statutorily empowered.
Therefore, I find force in the contentions on behalf of the
respondents to the effect that merely because it has notified its
decision as a regulations and may even have followed the same
: 57 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

procedure to give effect to the same, it cannot have the effect of
converting such directions into statutory regulations. I find that the
real purpose of the TRAI was to give effect to a decision taken under
Section 11 of the Act and, therefore, there is no prohibition to the
maintainability of the appeal before the TDSAT.
71.

The

respondents

have

strenuously

contended

that

acceptance of the submission of the petitioner would have the effect
of denuding the Supreme Court of the appellate jurisdiction which
has been statutorily conferred on it. Placing reliance on certain
observations made by the Apex Court in K.S.Venkataraman and
company vs. State of Madras 1996(2) SCR 229 it has been pointed
out that the Apex Court held thus:“It has been held by this Court that the jurisdiction
conferred upon the High Court by s.66 of the
Income tax Act is a special advisory jurisdiction
and its scope is strictly limited by the section
conferring the jurisdiction. It can only decide
questions of law that arise out of the order of the
Tribunal and that are referred to it. Can it be said
that a question whether a provision of the Act is
ultra vires of the Legislature arises out of the
Tribunal's order? As the Tribunal is a creature of
the statute, it can only decide the dispute
between the assessee and the Commissioner in
terms of the provisions of the Act. The question
: 58 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

of ultra vires is foreign to the scope of its
jurisdiction. If an assessee raises such a question,
the Tribunal can only reject it on the ground that it
has no jurisdiction to entertain the said objection or
decide on it. As no such question can be raised or
can arise on the Tribunal's order, the High Court
cannot possibly give any decision on the question
of the ultra vires of a provision. At the most the
only question that it may be called upon to decide is
whether the Tribunal has jurisdiction to decide the
said question. On the express provisions of the Act
it can only hold that it has no such jurisdiction.
The appeal under s.66A(2) to the Supreme Court
does not enlarge the scope of the said jurisdiction.
This Court can only do what the High Court can.
The said machinery provisions cannot be construed
in vacuum: they must be collated with the charging
sections; that is to say, the Act provided for a
machinery for deciding disputes that arise under the
substantive provisions of the Act. To illustrate:
suppose there is provision in the Act to the effect
that the said Act does not apply to indivisible
building contracts. Can the officer decide that the
Act applies to such building contracts? Such a
decision, if given, will not be under but outside the
Act. Take another illustration: suppose this Court
has held that a provision authorising the taxing of
an indivisible building contract is ultra vires the
power of the State Legislature and, therefore, void;
in that event, how can an authority functioning
under the Act tax such a contract on the basis of a
provision declared to be ultra vires and, therefore,
non-existent? If it does, it will be assessing not
under the Act but outside it. The same legal
position will flow though there is no such previous
declaration by a competent court, but a charging
: 59 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

provision is in fact and in law ultra vires the
Legislature. Any assessment made on the basis of
such a void provision cannot be a decision under
the provisions of the Act. Briefly stated, the
procedural machinery under the Act can be utilized
only to decide disputes that arise under the
substantive provisions of the Act which are not
ultra vires.
The proposition that an authority constituted under
the Act cannot, unless expressly so authorised,
question the validity of the Act or any provisions
thereof, is sound and is also supported by
authority.”(at pages 248-249)
“We agree with the said observation. There is,
therefore, weighty authority for the proposition
that a tribunal, which is a creature of a statute,
cannot question the vires of the provisions under
which it functions.(page 251)
The legal position that emerges from the
discussion may be summarized thus : If a statute
imposes a liability and creates an effective
machinery for deciding questions of law or fact
arising in regard to that liability, it may, by
necessary implication, bar the maintainability of
a civil suit in respect of the said liability. A
statute may also confer exclusive jurisdiction on
the authorities constituting the said machinery
to decide finally a jurisdictional fact thereby
excluding by necessary implication the
jurisdiction of a civil court in that regard. But
an authority created by a statute cannot question the
vires of that statute or any of the provisions thereof
whereunder it functions. It must act under the Act
and not outside it. If it acts on the basis of a
: 60 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

72.

provision of the statute, which is ultra vires, to that
extent it would be acting outside the Act. In that
event, a suit to question the validity of such an
order made outside the Act would certainly lie in a
civil court.”(pages 251-252).”
In view of Section 18 of the TRAI Act, 1997 an appeal

would lie to the Apex Court against an order passed by the TDSAT
on grounds which are specified under Section 100 of the Code of
Civil Procedure.

Section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure

provides a second appeal to the High Court from a decree passed in
appeal by a court subordinate to it if the High Court is satisfied that
the courts involves a substantial question of law.

On such

considerations an appeal may lie from an appellate decree passed ex
parte. Therefore the statute mandates that the appeal would lie only
on a substantial question of law.
73.

Under Section 18 of the TRAI Act, the jurisdiction of the

Apex Court as the appellate forum against orders of the TDSAT is
restricted to only questions of law and the jurisdiction of the civil
court for filing a suit has also been ousted.
It has also been stipulated that an appeal would lie if the
order of the appellate tribunal was not an interlocutory order.

: 61 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

In Shah Babu Lal Khimji vs. Jaya Ben AIR 1981 SC
1786, the Supreme Court was required to consider an objection
relating to maintainability of an appeal against the order passed by a
Single Judge of the High Court. It was held by the Apex Court that
an appeal would lie to the Division Bench against a judgment of a
trial judge.

Every interlocutory order cannot be regarded as a

judgment but only those orders would be judgments which decided
matters of moment or effected

vital and valuable rights of the

parties and which worked serious injustice to the party concerned.
An interlocutory order in order to be a judgment, must contain the
traits and trappings of finality. This may be either when the order
decides the questions in controversy in an ancilliary proceedings or
in the suit itself or in a part of the proceedings. Placing reliance on
AIR 1953 SC 196 Asrumati Dabi vs. Kumar Rupender Deb Raj Kot,
the Apex Court observed that a judgment within the meaning of
clause 15 of the Letters Patent would have to satisfy two tests.
Firstly, the judgment must be a final pronouncement which puts an
end to the proceedings as far as the court dealing with it is
concerned. Secondly, the judgment must involve the determination
: 62 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

of some right or liability though it may not necessarily be a decision
on merits.
74.

In Shah Babu Lal Khimji, it was further held that in

finding out whether the order is a“judgment” it has to be found out
as to whether the order effects the merits of the actions between the
parties by determining some right or liability.
75.

The Apex Court in Shah Babu Lal Khimji has specifically

held that orders deciding objections to the maintainability of the suit
on grounds such as limitation; absence of notice under Section 80 of
the Code of Civil Procecdure; bar against competency of the suit
against the defendant even though the suit is kept alive amounts to a
judgment against which the parties would have a right to prefer an
appeal.
76.

In Amarnath vs State of Haryana AIR 1997 SC 2185

the Apex Court held that interlocutory orders appealable must be
those which effects the rights & liabilities of the parties concerning a
particular aspect would be assailed before the superior courts.
77.

In the instant case, the TDSAT has found that the

petitioner has couched its directions as 'regulations' to give it a
: 63 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

semblance of an exercise of legislative function in order to urge that
TDSAT had no jurisdiction to entertain the challenge made by the
respondents. The appellate tribunal had as a fact found that the
appeal was maintainable before it. So far as the objections to the
maintainability of the appeal are concerned, the appellate tribunal
had finally determined its jurisdiction.
78.

It was further held that

it was the charge of the

appellant(respondent no.2 herein) that its regulation was in the
nature of subordinate legislation which par took the main legislation
and that the proceedings before the tribunal were wholly without
jurisdiction on the ground that a tribunal cannot decide the vires of
the statutory provisions under which it was constituted.

This

objection went to the root of the jurisdiction of the tribunal and was
decided against the petitioner. This Court has arrived at a finding
that the Regulation 1 of January, 2005 though

couched as a

regulation, were really in the nature of a direction fixing the ADC
under Section 11 sub-Section (1b) of the TRAI Act.
79.

At this stage, I am examining the objection raised by the

respondent with regard to the maintainability of the present writ
: 64 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

petition on the ground of availability of an alternative efficacious
remedy.
In 1985(1) SCC 641 Indian Express Newspapers(P)
Ltd. vs. Union of India and others, it was held that a subordinate
legislation may be questioned on grounds of

(i) legislative

competence on which the plenary legislation which delegated the
power is also subject; (ii)being ultra vires appearance a statute of
the constitution in that it fails to take into account the very vital facts
which either expressly or by necessary implication are required to be
taken into consideration by the statute or the constitution or that it
does not conforms to the statutory or constitutional requirements;
(iii) being in conflict with any other statute; (iv) being so arbitrary
that it could not be said to conform to the statute or be violative of
Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
It was reiterated by the Court that subordinate legislation
cannot be questioned on grounds of violation of principles of natural
justice which challenge is available against administrative action. It
also cannot be challenged merely on the ground that it is not
reasonable or that it has not taken into account relevant
: 65 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

circumstances which the court considers relevant.
A distinction however was drawn between delegation of a
legislative function of which the question of reasonableness cannot
be inquired into and the investment by statute to exercise particular
discretionary powers.

In the later case, the question may be

considered on all grounds on which administrative action may be
questioned, such as, non application of mind, taking irrelevant
matters into consideration, failure to take relevant matters into
consideration, violation of principles of natural justice etc.
80.

In this context it becomes necessary to examine the

jurisdiction of the appellate forum to examine issues relating to vires
of statutory provisions. The scope of consideration and limits of
powers of the appellate tribunal fell for consideration before the
apex court in the petition filed by the West Bengal Regulatory
Commission. It is noteworthy that provisions similar to those under
the TRAI Act, 1997 are to be found in the Electricity Regulatory
Commission Act, 1998 which was examined by the Apex Court in
The West Bengal Electricity Regulatory Commission case.
81.

It would also be useful to set out in extenso the principles
: 66 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

of law laid down by the Supreme Court in its judgment reported at
(2002) 8 SCC

715 West Bengal Electricity Regulatory

Commission vs. CESC Limited Etc. which read thus:-

31.
Being
aggrieved
by
the
said
determination of tariff, the Company, as stated
above, preferred the statutory appeal before the
High Court, making the Commission alone the
respondent. The High Court while rejecting the
impleadment application of the appellant
organizations, proceeded to re-fix the tariff by only
following the principles of Schedule VI to the 1948
Act and to the exclusion of other requirements of
Section 29 of the 1998 Act. In the said process it
re-fixed the average tariff for the year 2000-01 at
Rs.3.96 per unit and at Rs.4 per unit for the year
2001-02. In the course of its judgment the High
Court also came to the conclusion that the
Regulations framed by the Commission,
especially the ones pertaining to the right of the
consumers to be heard in the proceedings, as also
applications of the principles to be followed in
determining he tariff, were contrary to law and
directed in no uncertain terms that these
Regulations will have to be modified to bring
them in conformity with its observations in the
judgment, and further stated that failure to do so
might result in the invocation of the High Court's
power under the Contempt of Courts Act. In
deciding the validity of the Regulations, the High
Court proceeded on the basis that while
entertaining the power of appeal under Section
27 of the 1998 Act, it also has the power vested
: 67 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

in it under Articles 226 and 227 of the
Constitution of India. It also held that the nonobstante clause found in Section 29 of the 1998 Act
and the other overriding provisions found in the
1998 Act could not come in the way of the
applications of the Sixth Schedule to the 1948 Act
alone, while determining the tariff by the
Commission. On factual aspects, it reversed many
of the findings of the Commission to which
separate references will be made by us when we
take up those issues for consideration.
xxxxxxxxxxxx
42.
The question for our consideration is
whether the High Court sitting as an appellate
court under Section 27 of the Act has the
jurisdiction to go into the validity of the
Regulations framed under the Act and if so,
factually the Regulations as found by the High
Court are contrary to the statute.
xxxxxxxxxxxx
44.
Having held on merits that the
Regulations are not arbitrary and are in conformity
with the provisions of the Act, we will now
consider whether the High Court could have gone
into this issue at all in an appeal filed by the
respondent Company. First of all, we notice that
the High Court has proceeded to declare the
Regulations contrary to the Act in a proceeding
which was initiated before it in its appellate power
under Section 27 of the Act. The appellate power
of the High Court in the instant case is derived
from the 1998 Act. The Regulations framed by
the Commission are under the authority of
subordinate legislation conferred on the
Commission in Section 58 of the 1998 Act. The
: 68 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

Regulations so framed have been placed before
the West Bengal Legislature, therefore they
have become a part of the statute. That being
so, in our opinion the High Court sitting as an
appellate court under the 1998 Act could not
have gone into the validity of the said
Regulations in exercise of its appellate power.
45.
This Court in the case of K.S.
Venkataraman & Co. (p) Ltd. v. State of Madras
after discussing the judgment of the Calcutta High
Court in the cases of (i) Raleigh Investment Co.
Ltd. v. Governor General in Council, (ii) United
Motors (India) Ltd. v. State of Bombay, and (iii)
M.S.M.M. Meyyappa Chettiar v. ITO held :
“There is, therefore, weighty authority
for the proposition that a tribunal,
which is a creature of a statute, cannot
question the vires of the provision
under which it functions.”
46.
From the above decision, we hold that
the High Court while exercising its statutory
appellate power under Section 27 of the 1998
Act could not have gone into the validity of the
Regulations which are part of the statute itself.
47.
While deciding the above issue, the High
Court also held that while exercising the appellate
power by it under any particular statute, it also
simultaneously exercises its constitutional power of
writ under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution
of India.
48.
We do not think that the High Court was
correct in this view of its.
: 69 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

49.
In the case of Dhulabai v. State of M.P. a
Constitution Bench of this Court held :
“(3)
Challenge to the provisions of
the particular Act as ultra vires cannot be
brought before Tribunals constituted
under that Act. Even the High Court
cannot go into that question on a
revision or reference from the decision
of the Tribunals.”
50.
From the above observations of this
Court in the said judgment extracted hereinabove,
it is clear that even the High Court exercising its
power of appeal under a particular statute
cannot exercise the constitutional power under
Articles 226 or 227 of the Constitution. The
position of course would be entirely different if the
aggrieved party independently challenges the
provision by way of a writ petition in the High
Court invoking the High Court's constitutional
authority to do so. Therefore, we are of the
considered opinion that the High Court sitting as
an appellate court under a statute could not
have exercised its writ jurisdiction for the
purpose of declaring a provision of that law as
invalid when there was no separate challenge by
way of a writ petition. In the instant case we
notice that as a matter of fact none of the parties
had challenged the validity of the Regulations,
therefore the question of the High Court's suo
motu exercising the writ power in a statutory
appeal did not arise. For the reasons stated above
we hold that the High Court could not have gone
into the question of validity of the Regulations
while entertaining a statutory appeal under the
1998 Act. We also hold that the Commission had
: 70 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

82.

the necessary statutory power.”
The principles which are applicable to a challenge before

the appellate court relating to vires of statutory provisions under
which it was constituted would apply mutatis mutandis to a
challenge to regulations framed under the authority of subordinate
legislation conferred on the appellate court under the TRAI Act.
83.

I am bound by the dicta laid by the Apex Court to the

effect that even a High Court, sitting as an appellate court under the
provisions of the Electricity Regulatory Commission Act, 1998,
could not have gone into the validity of the regulations framed
thereunder in exercise of its appellate power.
This being the position in law, there can be no manner of
doubt that the appellate court under the TRAI Act, 1997 cannot go
into the validity of the regulations framed and notified by the TRAI
in exercise of its powers under Section 36 of the TRAI Act.
In the light of such restriction on the jurisdiction of the
appellate court, it cannot possibly be urged with any success that the
petitioner has an alternative, adequate, efficacious remedy and the
writ petition deserves to be rejected for this reason.

: 71 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

84.

It is well settled that refusal to hear a writ petition on the

ground of availability of an alternative efficacious remedy is a rule
of convenience and is not an absolute prohibition to hearing of
issues raised by a petitioner under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India.
In AIR 1969 SC 556 Babu Ram Prakash Chandra
Maheshwari Vs. Anturim Zila Parishad, Muzaffar Nagar, the
Court observed that there are at least two well recognised exceptions
to the doctrine with regard to the exhaustion of statutory remedies.
Observing that existence of an adequate alternative legal remedy is a
thing to be taken into consideration in the matter of granting writ. It
was held that it should however be remembered that the rule of
exhaustion of the statutory remedies before a writ is granted is a rule
of self-imposed limitation, a rule of policy and discretion rather
than a rule of law and the court may therefore in exceptional cases
issue a writ, such as a writ of certiorari, notwithstanding the fact the
statutory remedies have not been exausted.
So far as the accepted exceptions to the rule are concerned
it is well settled that where proceedings are taken before a tribunal
: 72 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

under a provision of law, which is ultra vires, it is open to a party
aggrieved thereby to move the High Court under Article 226 for an
appropriate writ quashing them on the ground that they are
incompetent without his being obliged to wait until those
proceedings run their full course. In the second place, the doctrine
would have no application in a case where the impugned order has
been made in violation of the principles of natural justice.
85.

The principles governing consideration of an objection

relating to maintainability of a writ petition on the ground of
availability of an alternate remedy are well settled by binding
judicial precedents. The remedy has to be efficacious and adequate.
In an appropriate case, the court may entertain a writ petition despite
availability of such remedy. In this behalf, the principles laid down
by the Apex Court in (2003) 2 SCC 107 Harbans Lal Sahnia and
Anr. vs. Indian Oil Corporation require to be noticed which read
thus:“7. So far as the view taken by the High Court that
the remedy by way of recourse to arbitration clause
was available to the appellants and therefore the
writ petition filed by the appellants was liable to be
dismissed is concerned, suffice it to observe that
: 73 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

86.

the rule of exclusion of writ jurisdiction by
availability of an alternative remedy is a rule of
discretion and not one of compulsion. In an
appropriate case, in spite of availability of the
alternative remedy, the High Court may still
exercise its writ jurisdiction in at least three
contingencies: (i) where the writ petition seeks
enforcement of any of the fundamental rights; (ii)
where there is failure of principles of natural
justice; or (iii) where the orders or proceedings are
wholly without jurisdiction or the vires of an Act is
challenged. (see Whirlpool Corpn. vs. Registrar of
Trade Marks).
The present case attracts
applicability of the first two contingencies.
Moreover, as noted, the petitioners' dealership,
which is their bread and butter, came to be
terminated for an irrelevant and non-existent cause.
In such circumstances, we feel that the appellants
should have been allowed relief by the High Court
itself instead of driving them to the need of
initiating arbitration proceedings.”
In the instant case, the challenge is to the levy of the

ADC. The statutory provision by which power is conferred to frame
regulations does not include subjects mentioned in Section 11(1b).
Examination of a challenge to a direction under Section 11(1)(b) can
be laid before the TDSAT. However, the challenge to the
jurisdiction of the TDSAT to examine an objection as to the
jurisdiction based on a plea that the directions were in the nature of a
statutory regulations and hence was subordinate legislation for all

: 74 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

purposes, can certainly be examined in a writ petition before this
court. The petitioner in the instant case has sought the issuance of a
writ on the plea that the subordinate tribunal has usurped the
jurisdiction which does not belong to it. When such a situation is
shown, issuance of a writ would be as of right and would certainly
not be beyond the discretionary powers of this court.
The issue raised by the petitioner in the instant case thus
related to the very jurisdiction and competency of the proceedings
before the TDSAT.
In view of the aforenoticed principles of law, in my view,
the objection on the ground of availability of an alternative
efficacious remedy ought not to be permitted as a bar to the
maintainability of the present writ petition.
87.

Having thus answered questions posed as no.I, II, III, the

last issue which remains for consideration relates to the objection
raised by the respondent on the propriety of the challenge by the
TRAI by way of the present petition.
88.

Reliance is placed on behalf of the respondent no.2 on

AIR 1952 Bombay 165 Mohd Oomer, Mohd. Noorullah vs.
: 75 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

S.M.Noorudin.

In this matter, the Bombay High Court was

considering a case where an order made by the Registrar of Trade
Marks had been impugned before it. The Court commented on the
propriety of the Registrar to have appeared before the Court for the
purposes of elucidating his own judgment and pointing out errors in
the judgments of the first appellate court. The court was of the view
that the Registrar was nothing except the court of first instance and
he had to submit the judgment of the lower appellate court.
In the instant case the TRAI has not exercised any judicial
power and the Regulation I of 2005 assailed by the respondent is
certainly not in the nature of judgment. The same has been held to
be a decision in discharge of the executive functions of the TRAI
under Section 11(1)(d) of the TRAI Act. As noticed by the Apex
Court, TRAI is an expert body in the field of regulation of
telecommunication services. For this reason the observations by the
Apex Court in AIR 1952 Bombay 165 do not apply to the present
case.
In AIR 1964 SC 477 Syed Yakoob vs. K S
Radhakrishnan and others the other case relied upon by the
: 76 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

respondent no.2, the Court was considering the validity of the order
passed by the State Transport Authority, Madras under the Motor
Vehicles Act which had been assailed before the High Court holding
that the authority and the appellate tribunal were proper and
necessary parties but their position was akin to that of courts or other
tribunals against whose decisions writ proceedings are filed and they
are not interested in the merits of the disputes in any sense. To my
mind, nothing said in this precedent could be applicable in the
instant case.
89.

The petitioner has answered this objection placing

reliance on the pronouncements of the Apex Court wherein
challenges have been made by statutory authorities. In 1993(3) SCC
24 Municipal Committee, Bhatinda vs Land Acquisition Collector, a
challenge was laid by the Municipal Committee Bhatinda to a
judgment by the High Court whereby it has been held that it has no
locus standi to file the writ petition.

This case arose out of

proceedings under the Land Acquisition Act. The Municipal
Committee,Bhatinda was the beneficiary of the acquisition and the
acquisition was being effected by the Land Acquisition Collector at
: 77 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

its instance. It is well settled that the beneficiary of the acquisition
is a necessary and proper party to all phases of the acquisition as it
has a valuable stake in the matter. For this reason, the principles laid
down by the Supreme Court in this case would have no application
in the instant case.
In the pronouncement of the Apex Court in State of Orissa
vs. Union of India 1995 Supp(2) SCC 154, which has been relied
upon by the petitioner, the State Government was the owner of the
mines and minerals in question. It had challenged an order of the
Central Government dated 10th May, 1978 directing it to issue a
mining lease in favour of a particular party. It could not possibly be
contended that it had no locus standi to challenge an order which
was directly effecting the mines and minerals of which it was an
owner. The TRAI cannot possibly claim that it is effected by the
challenge to the Regulations of 2005 made by the respondent no.2.
For this reason, this judgment is also of no assistance to the
respondent.
90.

I have held that the Regulation I of 2005 was in the nature

of a direction issued by the TRAI which has been statutorily
: 78 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

enjoined to consider all relevant matters and make appropriate
directions in respect of the matters set out in Section 11(1)(b) of the
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997. The respondent
has submitted that the Regulation 1 has been issued by TRAI in
exercise of its executive fiat. The material, reasons and
considerations which weighed with the authority in issuing the
directions are necessarily to be found with the petitioner. There is
no adversarial party on the other side before the TDSAT.

The

respondent has itself arrayed the TRAI as a party respondent to its
appeal before the TDSAT.

In these circumstances, there can

possibly be none other than the authority whose direction has been
challenged which would be best equipped to defend the same. In
these circumstances, it is not possible to hold that it was not proper
for the petitioner to make a challenge to the orders passed by the
TDSAT by way of the present writ petition or that this writ petition
deserves to be rejected on the ground of judicial impropriety.
91.

For all the foregoing reasons, I find no infirmity with the

decision dated 31st January, 2005 of the Telecom Disputes
Settlement and Appellate Tribunal.
: 79 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

92.

The present writ petition is devoid of legal merit and is

hereby dismissed.

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
December 23, 2005
JK

: 80 :

WP(C) 2838/2005

