IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 6550/2005
Reserved on 26th May, 2006
Date of decision: 23rd August, 2006
M/S HMT LIMITED

........Petitioner
through: Mr. Sudhir Nandrajog,
Advocate
VERSUS

DEEPAK KUMARSHRI BALI
.... Respondents
through: Mr. Sanjoy Ghose,
Advocate
WITH
WP (C) No.19709/2005
SHRI DEEPAK KUMAR BALI
.... Respondents
through: Mr. Sanjoy Ghose,
Advocate
VERSUS
M/S HMT LIMITED

........Petitioner
through: Mr. Sudhir Nandrajog,
Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.

WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.1

1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

The fundamental issue which requires to be answered in the

instant case relates to the appropriate authority which would have
jurisdiction over the matter relating to the service of a workman who
stands terminated as well as relieved from the place where he was
working, to another state. The issue gets complicated in as much as the
contention of the workman is that the order of transfer being mala fide, is
wholly without jurisdiction and is illegal and consequently the order of
termination of service of the workman, which is based on the allegation
that the workman did not comply with such illegal order, is, therefore,
also rendered nonest and without jurisdiction. It is the submission of the
respondent that the place wherefrom the workman was transferred, would
be the place which would have territorial jurisdiction over the subject
matter of such a dispute which has been sustained by the industrial
adjudicator in its award dated 22nd September, 2004.

Thereby the industrial

reference, at the instance of the workman, has been answered in favour of the
workman holding that the transfer order was illegal and consequently, the
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.2

workman ought not to have been terminated from service for reasons of noncompliance thereof. However, instead of awarding the consequential relief of
reinstatement of service with continuity and back wages, the industrial
adjudicator has directed payment of Rs.3,00,000/- lakhs as compensation for
illegal action of the management.
2.

Aggrieved by the findings returned in the industrial award dated

22nd September, 2004, M/s HMT Ltd., management and employer in question,
has filed WP (C) No. 6550/2005. At the same time, the workman is aggrieved
by the refusal to direct reinstatement into service and the award of
compensation of Rs.3,00,000/- and has assailed the same by way of WP (C)
No.19709/2005.
For the purposes of convenience, reference herein is made to the

management as the petitioner and the workman as the 'respondent'.
3.

In order to appreciate the respective contentions, it is

necessary to notice a few facts. It is certainly a contradiction in terms
that there is no dispute on the material dates. To the extent necessary, the
same are, therefore briefly noticed hereafter.

The workman joined

service with the petitioner in September, 1978 as a service mechanic.
His letter of appointment contained a clause of transfer. Consequently,
after his initial posting at Allahabad, he was posted to Hyderabad and

WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.3

thereafter to various locations including Delhi Marketing & Service
Office on the 16th July, 1983.

By a letter dated 17th September, 1987

(exh. MW 1/4), the respondent Shri D.K. Bali was transferred to the
HMT Tractor Division at Pinjore and was required to report for duty to
Shri A.K . Babbar, Joint General Manager (PT). Consequent upon his transfer,
the respondent was relieved from his service at Delhi on 30th September, 1987
(exh. MW 1/5) and was required to report at Pinjore.

The petitioner has

contended that the respondent refused to accept the transfer order and also did
not report for duty to his place of posting at Pinjore. However, it is contended
that the respondent was aware of his transfer on the ground that he had

submitted representations dated 2nd October, 1987 and 21st October, 1987
against this transfer, thereby establishing his knowledge of the same and
also the fact of his having been relieved from duty.
4.

The petitioner has contended

that the workman was

repeatedly reporting to the management that the frequent tours and
travels, required for the marketing job, had seriously disrupted his life
and therefore he requested that the duty entrusted to him be of such
nature whereby he was not required to undertake such journeys. The
petitioner has claimed that as an enlightened employer, as a very special
case, it had agreed to transfer the services of the workman to the factory

WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.4

at Pinjore to perform the same duties and responsibilities without being
required to undertake tours in the discharge of his duties. Such transfer, having
been effected on the request of the workman, the petitioner set up a case that
there there was no mala fide or illegality in his order of transfer.

5.

The workman has stated that he did not join duty for personal

reasons. The management advised the workman vide letters dated 14th
October, 1987 (exh. MW 1/6) and 11th November, 1987 (exh. MW 1/6)
to report for duty at Pinjore by 23rd October, 1987 and 20th November,
1987 respectively.
communications.

However, the workman did not care for such
The workman is also stated to have spurned all

reasonable instructions of the petitioner to report for duty and to meet the
company's chief medical officer at Pinjore.
6.

The workman's continued obstinacy and absence necessitated

the charge-sheets dated 29th December, 1987 and 5th January, 1988.
Thereafter, a regular departmental inquiry was initiated. This inquiry
was conducted after due notice to the respondent at Pinjore. By a report
dated 14th April, 1988, the inquiry officer found the charges regarding
unauthorised absence from duty and disobedience proved against the
petitioner.
7.

However, before the inquiry report was finalised and

WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.5

submitted, at the stage when the inquiry was at an advanced stage, the
workman tendered his resignation dated 4th April, 1988. According to
the petitioner, this resignation letter was motivated with the intent to
avoid disciplinary action while the respondent has contended that this
resignation letter was compelled to be sent by him on account of the
extreme mental pressure to which he was being subjected by certain
officers of the petitioner.

While the petitioner contends that the

resignation letter was not under pressure and was wholly voluntary,
according to the respondent the same was on account of duress and was
involuntary.
8.

Certain facts, which intervened, are necessary to be noted

before adverting to the contention of the respondent that the resignation
letter was under duress and procured.

The respondent admittedly sent

the resignation letter dated 4th April, 1988 (exh. MW 2/7) by a registered
post.

This resignation was accepted by Shri A.K. Babbar, General

Manager vide a letter dated 10th May, 1988 (Exh. MW 1/21).
Admittedly, no grievance was made by the petitioner with regard to his
resignation letter nor any contention was raised by him that the same was
under duress or was involuntary for a long period. The respondent accepted the
legality and the bindingness of the same. In fact, by a legal notice sent
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.6

through the respondent's lawyer, which was dated 9th July, 1988, the
respondent/workman sought settlement of his dues to which he was
entitled on account of his resignation from the management. In this
communication, the respondent also admitted his absence from 21st
September, 1985 to 4th April, 1988. The respondent sought settlement of
his dues on the ground that he has submitted his resignation letter. In
this communication the workman sought thus:“That my client despite his best efforts was not able to
convince the Delhi Staff and was forced to tender
resignation on 4.4.1988 and the same was accepted
vide your letter dated 5.4.1988 and my client was
directed vide your this letter that he sould contact your
accounts department (wages), H.M.T. Ltd. Pinjore for
finalisation of his accounts.”
9.

The respondent also admitted his absence from 21 st September, 1985 to

4th April, 1988. The workman has accepted on record that despite receipt of the
letter dated 3rd March, 1987 addressed by the joint General Manager to him, the
respondent did not bother to appear before the Chief Medical Officer at Pinjore
and also that he has not protested to anybody with regard to his resignation till
such time that he approached the conciliation officer under the Industrial

Disputes Act, 1947 at Delhi.
The workman has contended that he also did not lodge any report to the
police with regard to the alleged threat which he has subsequently
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.7

claimed and that he made complaints only to the Prime Minister and
other authorities in this behalf. The workman admitted receipt of money
for attending a training programme at Pinjore which he neither attended
nor reimbursed to the management.

Claiming sickness w.e.f. 15th

January, 1987 to 30th January, 1987, the workman had not bothered to
give any fitness certificate to the management.
10.

M/s HMT Ltd., the petitioner herein, has placed reliance on

another letter dated 15th December, 1988 purportedly sent in response to
the letter of the respondent dated 15th November, 1988. In this letter,
M/s HMT Ltd. stated thus:“In continuation to our letter of even No. dated 15.7.1988
and with reference to legal notice dated 15.11.88 served
upon the company through your advocate Sh. Sandeep Roy,
we further clarify for your information the payments made
to you on you resignation from the services of the
company, as per details amount:1. (a) Dues payable
Salary for the month of Sept. '87
(1.9.87 to 20.9.87)
Annual Bonus for the year 1986-87
Interim Relief from 1.1.87 to 20.9.87
(paid less due to oversight Leave
encashment)

: Rs. 857.00
: Rs.1,961.00
: Rs. 420.00

Total : Rs.4,703.00
(b) Dues recoverable
WP (C) No.6550/2005

: Rs.1,524.00
Page No.8

One month's notice payable
: Rs. 500.00
Festival advance (balance recoverable) ___________
Total : Rs.2,024.00
Net amount payable after adjustment
of Company's dues (paid vide
(-)
Cheque No.024885, dt.13.7.88)

: Rs.4,703.00
: Rs.2,204.00
Rs.2,679.00

(c) Salary for the month of August'87 : Rs.1,260.00
(1.8.87 to 31.8.87) already paid through
Marketing Office, Chd.
2.

(a) Details of P.F. Amounts
Employee's own contribution
90% of Employer's contribution
Interest on P.F.Amount
Total amount payable

: Rs.11,269.00
: Rs.10,142.00
: Rs. 631.00
Rs.

22,042.00
(b) Recoverable effected from P.F.Amount
P.F. Loan
: Rs. 450.00
Interest on P.F. Loan
: Rs. 446.00
T.A. Advance
: Rs. 4,838.00
Net Amount paid
(Already paid vide cheque
No.855982, dt. 13.7.1988)

Rs. 5,734.00
: Rs.22,042.00
: (-) Rs. 5,734.00
Rs.16,038.00

3.
No option for L.T.C. encashment received, hence
not payable, as per rules of the company.
4.
Gratuity paid Rs.7034/- vide D.D. No.242492
dated 16.9.1988 and already sent to you vide letter
No.2310/P/wages, dated 30.9.1988.
5.
A cheque No.QDK 030568 dated 10.12.1988 for
Rs.1296/- is enclosed herewith towar the final settlement of
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.9

your dues as per the following details:

Annual Bonus for the year 1987-88

Rs. 936.00

Balance of Interim relief

Rs. 360.00
Rs.1,296.00

It may please be noted that out of Rs.2220/- payable to you
as interim relief from 1.1.1986 onwards Rs.1440/- have
been deducted for the period 1.1.1986 to 31.12.1986 as per
Company's rules and as such only Rs.780/- were payable to
you. Out of this amount, Rs.420/- have already been paid
to you vide cheque No.QDK 024885, dt.13.7.1988 as
indicated in para 1 above. The balance of Rs.360/- which
remained unpaid is included in the cheque referred to in
para 5 above.
6.
Regarding your leave encashment, Rs.1465/- for
25 days earned leave to your credit as on 30.9.1987 have
already been adjusted and paid as indicated in para 1 above.
7.
Reply to legal notice dt. 15.11.1988 served upon
the company by you through your advocate is being sent
separately. We would like to make it clear here again that
all your dues payable to you by the company stand paid to
you and nothing is payable to you as per four account
Books.
Please note that no future correspondence in this
regard will be entertained.”
10.

This communication was received by the respondent again

without objection, protest or demur. It is only long thereafter that on the
21st February, 1989, the respondent, for the first time, made a complaint
to the conciliation officer stating that the resignation letter was not
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.10

voluntary but was compelled on account of the pressure put on the
respondent by Shri J.P. Saxena, the superior of the respondent in the
organisation. The workman also sent letters of protest to the Prime
Minister dated 23rd January, 1987 and 4th February, 1987.
11.

Therefore, it appears that the workman had submitted a

resignation letter on 4th April, 1988. The same was accepted only after
what would constitute deliberation, on the 10th May, 1988. Certainly the
respondent had adequate time to reconsider between the submission and
acceptance of his resignation.

The petitioner made no grievance in

respect of either of his resignation or its acceptance when he caused the
legal notice to be issued for settlement of his dues as a consequence on
the 9th July, 1988 sent almost after more than two months of the
acceptance of the resignation letter. There was not a whisper of an allegation
that the resignation was involuntary or had been submitted under duress. This
letter was followed up by another letter 15th November, 1988.

12.

By the letter dated 15th December, 1988, the HMT gave the

clarification of the dues which were paid to the workman as a
consequence of acceptance of his resignation letter. Amounts towards
provident fund, salary dues, bonus festival advances, provident fund etc.
were tendered and paid by cheque dated 13th July, 1988.
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.11

The

respondent/workman was paid gratuity by a cheque dated 16th September,
1988 sent to him on 30th September, 1988.

A further cheque dated 10th

December, 1988 was enclosed with this letter dated 15th December, 1988

and the full explanation with regard to the amounts was set out
thereunder. This communication was in answer to a second legal notice
sent by the respondent seeking settlement of dues which was dated 15th
November, 1988 which was a sequel to the legal notice dated 9th July,
1988.
ground

In this letter, the respondent sought settlement of his dues on the
that

he

has

submitted

his

resignation

letter.

The

respondent/workman had stated thus in this communication:“That my client despite his best efforts was not
able to convince the Delhi Staff and was forced to
tender resignation on 4.4.1988 and the same was
accepted vide your letter dated 5.4.1988 and my
client was directed vide your this letter that he
should contact your accounts department (wages),
H.M.T. Ltd. Pinjore for finalisation of his
accounts.”
13.

Therefore, even assuming in favour of the workman that he

was harassed by his superior Shri J.P. Saxena in order to secure eviction
of flat which has been urged before this court and he was under
tremendous personal pressure on account of the sickness of his son and
wife, however, at no point of time, the respondent evinced any intention

WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.12

of withdrawing the resignation letter.
14.

The petitioner protested for the first time in its communication

dated 21st February, 1989 again almost two months after M/s HMT Ltd.
had responded to the petitioner's communication.
15.

Having so noticed, it is necessary to consider the petitioner's

submission to the effect that the resignation letter was not voluntary but
was necessitated on account of the circumstances created by the officials
of the petitioner as a result of which the petitioner was under a lot of
pressure and duress.

The letter dated 21st February, 1989 sent by the

petitioner through his lawyer alleged thus:“2.
That my client was made target of red-tappism
and was harassed by your Delhi office and he was
transferred from Delhi to Pinjore office because the
officers in Delhi wanted to sort out some of their personal
differences and consequent upon he was relieved on
30.9.1987 from Delhi office and was directed to join at
Pinjore.
3.

That my cleint despite his best efforts was not able
to convince the Delhi Staff and was forced to
tender resignation on 4.4.1988 and the same was
accepted vide your letter dated 5.4.1988 and my client

was directed vide your this letter that he should
contact your accounts department (wages), H.M.T.
Ltd. Pinjore for finalisation of his accounts.
4.

That my client complied with the directions of your
letter whereby he was asked to contact the

WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.13

Accounts Deptt (wages) and he wrote many letters
to the accounts section that they should finalise his
accounts viz. Salary, adhoc payment, L.T.C.
encashment, annual bonus, earned and sick leave
including all other facilities which are available to
a general employee of this great govt. undertaking,
but nothing was done and it seems that the
accounts deptt. Is also playing a hide and seek
policy with poor employee of H.M.T. Ltd. and thus
is bent upon creating all sort of troubles for him
and is not releasing the funds and is also not giving
the clearance slip which otherwise is required for
taking the refund of the provident fund. That all
the relevant record of the service of my client
including his service book is in you possession and
as such it is incumbent upon your accounts
department to give a true statement of account in
respect of the service rendered to your office by my
client.
I, through this notice call upon you that your direct your
accounts department to settle the accounts of my client
within 15 days from the receipt of this notice, failing
which I have clear and positive instructions to file a suit
for rendation of accounts in the appropriate court of law
and shall also file a suit for recovery against HMT Ltd. in that
case the litigation whatsoever shall be at your cost and risks.”
16.

The respondent has alleged that he was subjected to

harassment by Shri J.P. Saxena, D.J.K., Chandigarh and other officers of
the Delhi, Chandigarh and Pinjore offices. According to the petitioner,
when he was transferred to the Delhi office on 16th July, 1983, he was
compelled by Shri J.P. Saxena to take on rent a flat bearing no.D-1-C/8C
, Janak Puri, New Delhi, belonging to one of his relatives. Despite the
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.14

workman's unwillingness to take this flat as he wanted to reside with his
brother who was living in Delhi, the workman was compelled to do so on
account of the pressure of Shri J.P. Saxena who was his superior at work
and occupied a position where he could have created difficulties in the
employment of the respondent. It is after an assurance by Shri J.P. Saxena
that the workman could remain in possession of the flat as a tenant till such
time he wishes to do so as he would not be required to vacate the flat against
his wishes and that the he would not be required to enhance the rent, the
respondent took such flat on rent. However, after an expiry of a short period,
disputes arose and Shri JP Saxena asked the respondent either to enhance the
rent or to immediately vacate. As this was not

possible for various reasons, Shri J.P. Saxena came to the Delhi office
and told the workman that if he failed to vacate the flat, he would be in
difficulties.

The respondent has claimed that the said Shri Saxena

threatened to finish his life.
17.

The respondent/workman has admitted that between 1978 and

1980, he was transferred from place to place. He was posted at
Ahemadabad and thereafter at Hyderabad and was transferred to Delhi
only on 16th July, 1983. He has placed on record medical records of his
son showing that he was suffering from epilepsy and that of his wife, to
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.15

assert that he was under tremendous pressure. The respondent also does
not dispute that his position in Delhi required him to travel a lot and that
his posting to the factory at Pinjore was effected where more than 5000
employees were engaged.
18.

The respondent's principal case was that he was residing in

sufferance at the tenanted house against his wishes from the period when
he was transferred to Delhi in 1983. The order of transfer was issued
only in September, 1987. However, the case of the petitioner in his claim
petition was that only “after a short period” dispute arose with regard to
the flat and the respondent was asked by Shri J P Saxena to enhance the
rent or to immediately vacate. There is neither any particular date on
which such threats were given nor any complaint or grievance in writing
to any person or authority setting out the same.

The petitioner also

made no complaint whatsoever after his resignation letter which was
accepted after a month and thereafter he caused a legal notice to be
addressed where general unspecific allegations regarding officers in
Delhi wanting to sort out personal differences, were levelled. Even here the
respondent/workman did not lay any challenge to the resignation letter. On the
contrary he sought settlement of dues as a consequence thereof.

19.

From the perusal of the record, it is also evident that the

WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.16

respondent had no intention whatsoever of abiding by the order of
transfer. He appears to have addressed letters dated 23rd January, 1987
and 4th February, 1987 (Page 499 of the LCR) to the Prime Minister of
India and letters dated 27th March, 1987 (Page 50 of the paper book) and
a letter dated 6th April, 1987 to the General Manager of the petitioner
making out some complaints.

However, the fact remains that the

respondent/workman has, at no point of time, wanted to withdraw his
resignation. On the contrary, he sought implementation of the same and
settlement of his dues as a consequence.
20.

In the light of the respondent's contention to the effect that he

was compelled to take the premises on rent, it would appear that the
respondent would have rejoiced on an opportunity to vacate the same.
The sickness of his wife and son also lend credibility to the statement
made on behalf of the petitioner that the workman was seeking a job
which did not require him to move from place to place and consequently
he would have been more comfortable at the job to which he was posted
at Pinjore. In Delhi the respondent was in the marketing division of the
petitioner which has his factory and plant at Pinjore.
21.

The respondent sought settlement of the dues and terminal

benefits and accepted the dues which were paid over a period of time.
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.17

The acceptance of the resignation was also not in haste as to indicate that
it was to effectuate any mala fides to get rid of the services of the
workman. Furthermore, the legal notices sent by the respondent were
sent more than three months later on 9th July, 1988 and on 15th
November, 1988. Such communications were sent through a lawyer
under legal advice.

Certainly by this point of time, the respondent

would have adequately deliberated over the consequences of his actions
and would have taken appropriate steps.
22.

The respondent has placed reliance on the pronouncement of

the Apex Court in 2003 (1) SCC 701 entitled Dr. Prabha Atri Vs. State
of Uttar Pradesh & Others. in support of the submission that for the
reasons stated, the resignation letter ought not to have been so treated. In
this case, Dr. Prabha Atri had sent a letter dated 9th January, 1999 stating
thus:-

“Your letter is uncalled for and should be withdrawn I
have been working in this hospital since 10-5-1978 and
have always worked in the best interest of the patients.
It is tragic, instead of taking a lenient view of my
sickness you have opted to punish me.”

23.

On a consideration of these assertions on behalf of the

petitioner, the court had held that the letter did not convey any
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.18

spontaneous intention to give up or relinquish her office accompanied by
any act of relinquishment.

To constitute a resignation, it must be

unconditional and with an intention to operate as such. At best, placing
reliance on an earlier pronouncement in (1984) 2 SCC 141 entitled P.K.
Ramachandra Iyer Vs. Union of India, the Apex Court held that such
communication may amount to a threatened offer more on account of
exasperation, to resign on account of a feeling of frustration born out of
an idea that she was being harassed unnecessarily but not, at any rate,
amounting to a resignation, actual and simple.
24.

In the instant case, the workman tendered a resignation on

purported ground of harassment but thereafter he did not notify any
intention to withdraw the same. Not only did he wait for its acceptance
but thereafter repeatedly addressed legal notices seeking settlement of his
dues pursuant thereto. The respondent accepted the payments made by
the petitioner also. In his cross-examination, he admitted that he had not
made any grievance or complaint with regard to the alleged harassment
which he received at the hands of the officials of the petitioner.
25.

In this behalf, in 2004 (2) SCC 193 entitled Punjab National

Bank Vs. Virender Kumar Goel the Apex Court laid down the principles
thus:WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.19

“Before we advert further, we may at this stage, notice
the operative directions rendered in the judgment
sought to be reviewed/clarified, strictly relevant for
the purpose of disposal of the present applications.
This Court inter alia held that the request of an
employee seeking voluntary retirement would not take
effect until and unless it was accepted in writing by
the competent authority and, therefore, this Court
upheld the right of the employee to withdraw his
option from voluntary retirement before the same was
accepted.”

This Court further held in paragraphs 114 and 115 of the
judgment as under: (SCC p.764)

“114. However, it is accepted that a group of
employees accepted the ex gratia payment. Those who
accepted the ex gratia payment or any other benefit
under the Scheme, in our considered opinion, could not
have resiled therefrom.
115.
The Scheme is contractual in nature. The
contractual right derived by the employees concerned,
therefore, could be waived. The employees concerned
having accepted a part of the benefit could not be
permitted to approbate and reprobate nor can they be
permitted to resile from their earlier stand.”

Finally, in paragraph 130 of the judgment this Court issued
the following directions: (SSC p.768)
“130. 1. The appeals preferred by the nationalized banks
arising from the High Courts are dismissed except the
cases where the employees concerned have accepted a
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.20

part of the benefit under the Scheme; However, in
respect of such of the employees who despite
acceptance of a part of the retirement benefit under the
Scheme had continued under the orders of the High
Court and have retired on attaining the age of
superannuation, this order shall not apply.
2.

The appeals filed by State Bank of India are allowed.

3.

The appeals arising from the judgments of the
Uttranchal High Court are allowed and the judgments
of the said High Court are set aside.

4.

The appeals arising from the judgments of the Punjab
and Haryana High Court in relation to ten writ petitions
which were filed by the employees for a direction upon
the Bank that the benefits under the Scheme be paid to
them are set aside and the matters are remitted to the
High Court for consideration thereof afresh on merits
and in accordance with law.”
XXX

XXX

XXX

6.

In these applications, we are concerned with Directions
1, 2 and 3.

7.

in the backdrop of the directions aforesaid, we now
proceed to examine the present applications.
XXX

XXX

XXX

10. In our view this contention would be of no assistance to
the respondent. He knew very well that the money
deposited in his account was part of the benefits under
the Scheme. He also knew it very well that his request
for VRS was accepted after the Scheme had expired,
yet he had withdrawn the amount deposited and utilised
the same. The fact that the respondent had withdrawn a
part of the benefit under the Scheme is not disputed and
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.21

it could not be. To substantiate the contention, the
applicant has submitted a photocopy of the respondent's
Bank Account No.27980 (Annexure R-1). It clearly
appears from Annexure R-1 that a part of the retirement
benefit was deposited in the respondent's bank account
on 12-1-2001 and 15-1-2001 he had withdrawn rupees
three lakhs. Again on 28-2-2001 he had withdrawn
rupees fifty thousand.
11. This fact, however, was not brought to the notice of this
Court at the time of the hearing. However, the fact
remains that the incumbent had accepted the benefits
under the Scheme and utilisation thereof would
squarely be covered by Direction 1 as noticed above.
Therefore, the judgment dated 17-12-2002 is reviewed
to the extent that the appeal arising out of the judgment
and order of the Uttranchal High Court is dismissed and
the judgment of the High Court is upheld.
XXX

XXX

XXX

16. We make it clear that the sentence, “accepted a part of
the benefit under the Scheme”, which appeared in our
direction as noticed above, would include the
withdrawal of the benefit and utilisation thereof. By no
stretch of imagination, unilateral deposit of a part of
benefit under the Scheme into the bank account, that
too after withdrawal of the application, when the same
was neither withdraw nor utilised by the employee
concerned.”

26.

Thus, the action taken by the respondent/workman, fully

knowing the consequence thereof and accepting the payments, would
bind the workman in any subsequent grievance in respect thereof.
27.

In 2003 (2) SCC 721 entitled Bank of India Vs. O.P.

WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.22

Swarnakar, two questions arose for determination before the court. The
first being whether the Scheme is an offer, as contended on behalf of the
Bank or an invitation inviting offers from employees; and secondly,
whether the optees having accepted the payments/benefits under the
Scheme could be permitted to resile therefrom. On the first question, it
was held that the said Scheme was contractual in nature, that it
constituted an invitation and not an offer; and that no consideration
passed in terms of the Scheme so as to constitute an agreement. Under
the circumstances, it was held that revocation was possible and effective at any
time before acceptance as up to such acceptance, no legal obligation existed.
On the second question, it was held that those employees who have accepted
the payments/benefits under the Scheme cannot approbate and reprobate nor

can they be permitted to withdraw.
28.

Placing reliance on the principles laid down in the afore-

noticed pronouncement, in (2004) 4 SCC 484 entitled Punjab National
Bank Vs. S. Ranveer Singh Bawa and Another, the Apex Court held
thus:“5.
In the case of Bank of India v. O.P. Swarnakar
this Court observed that estoppel is based upon the
acceptance and retention of benefits, by one having
knowledge or notice of the benefits from a contract or a
transaction. The doctrine of estoppel is a branch of the rule
against assumption of inconsistent positions. One who
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.23

knowingly accepts the benefit of a contract is estopped
from denying the binding effect on him of such contract.
This rule has to be applied to do equity. It was accordingly
held that those optees who knowingly received the payments
and utilized them were not entitled to withdraw from VRS.
In the case of Punjab National Bank v. Virender Kumar Goel
the applicant Bank submitted that some of the optees having
accepted the benefits under VRS cannot be permitted to
withdraw therefrom. In that matter, several review petitions
were filed and in some of those review petitions, it was
found that the optees were aware of the credits in their
accounts and they had even withdrawn the amounts
deposited and had utilized the same and consequently in such
cases, this Court did not permit the optees to withdraw from
VRS. To the same effect is the order passed by this Court in
the case of Bank of India v. Pale Ram Dhania. In the light of
the above judgments, we have to consider the facts of the
present case.
8.
From the averments herein, it is clear that
Respondent 1 had two savings bank accounts Nos. 4775 and
4777. He had withdrawn his option on 22-12-2000 and
yet without any objection he receives three credits in
his account on 27-12-2000 and yet without any objection

he receives three credits in his account on 27-122000, 25-1-2001 and 29-1-2001 on account of salary
(including notice pay). Thereafter, he repays his car
loan; invests Rs.30,000/- in PPF and Rs1,42,406.40 in
fixed deposit for three years, which is a long-term
investment.
Therefore, the principle of estoppel
extensively discussed by this Court in the case of Bank
of India v. O.P. Swarnakar applies to the payments in
his accounts; that he never objected to such payments
and that he had appropriated the amounts for his
benefit. Therefore, he cannot resile from the Scheme.”

29.

From the facts noticed above, it is not possible to hold that the

workman was compelled or the resignation letter was not of the volition
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.24

of the petitioner. Even if the petitioner felt uncomfortable and therefore
tendered the resignation, he had sufficient opportunity to ponder over his
actions and their consequences before the resignation was accepted. The
petitioner opted to stand by his resignation letter. In this view of the
matter, I have no hesitation in holding that respondent/workman, in the
instant case, had sought to bring his employment to an end by his letter
dated 4th

April, 1988 and sought payment pursuant thereto.

The

workman thereafter has deliberated and demanded payments from his
employer.

When ordered, he has voluntarily accepted the payments

made by the petitioner and consequently cannot assail the same on
purported grounds of the resignation letter being involuntary or having
been given in duress.

The allegations of the petitioner do not

inspire any confidence.
30.

The other issue raised in the instant case, relates to the

territorial jurisdiction.

The petitioner has raised an objection to the

authority of the government to make an order of reference at Delhi and
the maintainability of the industrial adjudication at Delhi. It has been
contended that the services of the respondent/workman stood transferred
by an order made on 17th September, 1987 to Pinjore in Haryana and that
his services were relieved w.e.f. 30th September, 1987.
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.25

It is further

asserted that no part of the cause of action had arisen at Delhi and hence
the proceedings were without jurisdiction.
31.

In the instant case, there is no challenge to the conditions of

the service which was specifically incorporated in the appointment letter.
The respondent accepted receipt of the transfer order dated 17th
September, 1987 and also the order relieving him from service on 30 th
September, 1987.
32.

The respondent was in full knowledge of this. Though he did

not join but he had sent telegrams dated 2nd & 6th October, 1987 in which
he has accepted that he has received the relieving order and the notice
dated 21st October, 1987 seeking payment of wages. On account of his
absence from duty, a charge-sheet was issued to the petitioner from
Pinjore and a disciplinary inquiry was conducted against him at Pinjore.
The order terminating his services was also passed at Pinjore.

The

petitioner further submits that the respondent submitted a resignation
dated 4th April, 1988 to Pinjore which was also accepted on 15th
December, 1988. The notice seeking settlement of dues were also issued
to Pinjore and payments were made to the respondent from Pinjore at
Haryana.
33.

On the other hand, it has been vehemently contended by Mr.

WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.26

Sanjoy Ghose, learned counsel appearing for the respondent, that the
order of transfer of the respondent/workman was itself without
jurisdiction which was so challenged by the respondent.

The order

terminating the services of the petitioner emanates from his refusal to
comply with such illegal transfer and consequently is also illegal on this
plea. It is contended that the reference at Delhi is competent and in
accordance with law.
34.

Undoubtedly, in the instant case, there has been no challenge

to the order of transfer by the respondent/workman. The respondent has
accepted the reference of the industrial dispute whereby only the issue
relating to the voluntariness of the resignation has been referred for
adjudication.
35.

The appointment letter of the respondent contained a clause

permitting transfer of his services. The respondent has accepted the
same and has been transferred from time to time. The Industrial Dispute
Act, 1947 is a social welfare legislation which does not contain any
specific provision providing the territorial limits for exercise of powers
thereunder by the authorities. However, objections relating to territorial
jurisdiction have repeatedly arisen for consideration before the Apex
Court as well as before the High Courts.
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.27

36.

It would be useful to examine the consideration of the

question as to the limits, if any, of territorial jurisdiction of the industrial
adjudicators by the courts. In 1962(1)LLJ 409 Indian Cable Company
Limited vs. Its Workmen, the Court held that the Industrial Disputes Act
1947 contained no provision bearing on the question of the territorial
jurisdiction of the appropriate Government and that such a question must
consequently be decided on principles governing the jurisdiction of
courts to entertain actions or proceedings. The court cited with approval
the decision of the Bombay High Court rendered in Lalbhai Tricumlal
Mills vs. Vin(D.M) and others 1956(1) LLJ 557 at page 558 wherein the
High Court had held that the Act did not deal with the cause of action
nor did it indicate what factors will confer jurisdiction upon the court and
consequently the well known tests of jurisdiction would require to be
complied with to establish as to which court or tribunal would have
jurisdiction in the matter.
37.

In the Workmen of Shri Ranga Vilas Motors(P) Ltd. Vs. Sri

Rangavilas Motors(P) Ltd. and others 1967 SC 1040, an employee had
challenged his order of transfer from Bangalore in Karnataka to Krishna
Giri in Tamilnadu as being illegal for the reason that the conditions of
service did not permit such a transfer. Ultimately the management had
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.28

framed charges against the employee and removed him from service.
The employee challenged the order of transfer as well as order of his
dismissal.

The dispute raised by the workman was referred for

adjudication by the labour authorities at Bangalore for adjudication to the
labour court which was also located at Bangalore in the following terms
:“1. Whether the order of the management of Sri
Rangavilas Motors(Private) Ltd., in transferring the
workman Sri R.Mahalingam, Foreman, from their
branch at Fort, Bangalore, to Krishnagiri, is illegal or
unjustified.
If so, is the workman entitled to
reinstatement in Bangalore Branch with benefits of
back wages or to any other relief.”
38.

In the Ranga Vilas Motors case supra, the workman had

actually challenged the order of transfer.

In this case, the court,

therefore, did not have occasion to consider the effect of an order of
transfer which is not obeyed by an employee without making any
challenge thereto which is the issue raised in the present case. There is,
therefore, material variance in the fact situation which was before the
Supreme Court and the present case. By the impugned order of reference
before this court, only the issue of the legality of the order of dismissal
was referred to the industrial adjudicator for adjudication. Consequently,
in my view, the judgment rendered by the Supreme Court in Ranga Vilas
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.29

Motors (supra) would not have any application.
39.

I find that this issue also arose for consideration before the

Division Bench of the Calcutta High court in Indian Express
Newspaper(Bombay) Pvt. Ltd. vs. State of West Bengal 2005 LLR 594
wherein it was held by the Division Bench that upon passing of an order
of transfer the situs of employment of the employee changes to the place
of transfer. In this case an employee of the

Indian Express

Newspaper(Bombay) Pvt. Ltd. was transferred from Calcutta to Bombay.
Without joining at the place of transfer, the employee raised a dispute at
Calcutta and the issue which arose before the High Court was as to
whether the West Bengal Government was the appropriate Government
to make an order of reference under Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes
Act.
40.

In facts similar to those of the instant case, the employee in

this case also contended that the West Bengal Government would be the
appropriate Government in view of the fact that he was based at Calcutta
and that the order of transfer and order of termination of his service was
served at Calcutta.
After detailed consideration of the entire law on the subject
the court observed thus:WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.30

“37. We have carefully considered to submissions
made on behalf of the respective parties and the law
regarding jurisdiction which has been considered in
various cases both from the view point of the
Industrial Disputes Act and the Constitution of India.
As was observed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the
Ranga Vilas case (vide supra), jurisdiction would have
to be decided not only on the basis of the situs of
employment, that is, where the dispute arises and the
effects thereof are felt, but also on the interconnected
question relating to cause of action. The question of
control of an employee came up for consideration in
the Lipton case (vide supra), relied upon Sri Mitra, but
as pointed out by Sri Oil Mohammed, appearing for
the State, the said matter was decided on the sole
question of control and did not take into consideration
either the question relating to situs of employment or
cause of action.
The aforesaid contention was
considered by the Full Bench of the Patna High Court
in the case of Paritosh Kumar Pal, 1984 (2) LLN 617,
(vide supra), in which while placing reliance on the
Ranga Vilas case it was observed that the ratio of the
Lipton case is confined to the point that the Tribunal
where the Head office is situated would have
jurisdiction to take cognizance of an industrial dispute
but not for the converse that situs of employment
would also have the same effect. In fact, it was also
observed with reference to the decision of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the case of Indian Cable Company,
reported in 1962 LLJ 409, that the Industrial Disputes
Act does not contain any provision bearing on the
question of cause of action, which must, consequently,
be decided on the principles governing the jurisdiction
of Courts to entertain actions or proceedings.”
“40. The basis of the findings of the learned Single
Judge in the first writ application and that of the
Tribunal thereafter on remand and the subsequent
findings of the learned Single Judge on the second writ
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.31

application is that when Sri Sampat's services were
terminated he was stationed in the Calcutta office of
the newspaper company. While Sri Sampat was no
doubt served with the order of termination of his
service in Calcutta, we are constrained to say that the
same would not vest the State Government in West
Bengal with authority under S. 2 (a) (ii) of the
Industrial Disputes Act to make a reference under S.
10 of the said Act. Firstly, at the said point of time the
Calcutta office of the newspaper company no longer
had control over Sri Sampat whose services had been
transferred to Bombay and it was the Bombay office
which had control over his services. That Sri Sampat
was in Calcutta and was served with the notice of the
order of termination of his service in Calcutta is only
because of the fact that he had chosen not to comply
with the order of transfer, dated 1 August, 1988, by
which he had been transferred to Bombay with effect
from 5 August, 1988, and had not also challenged the
same before any forum. Sri Sampat may have made
representations to the Bombay office with regard to
such order of transfer, but the same was never the
subject-matter of any judicial or quasi-judicial
proceeding and it is only after he was served with the
order of termination of his service that Sri Sampat
raised a dispute in respect thereof. In our view,
notwithstanding the fact that Sri Sampat had been
served with such order in Calcutta, his situs of
employment being Bombay, he ought to have raised an
industrial dispute relating to the termination of his
services in Bombay and the Government of
Maharashtra would have been the appropriate
Government to make a reference under S. 10 of the
aforesaid Act in respect of such dispute.
42. Cause of action is basically a concept within the
meaning of the Code of Civil Procedure as also Art.
226 of the Constitution of India. As was pointed out
in Umasankar Chatterjee case, 1982 (2) LLN 7531
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.32

(vide supra), the order of removal undoubtedly gave
rise to a cause of action for the appellant therein to
institute an action for the establishment of his right to
be in service. The impugned order of removal having
become effective in Calcutta where it was received by
the appellants a part of the cause of action must be
held to have arisen in Calcutta within the jurisdiction
of this Court. As was pointed out by Sri Mitra,
Umasankar Chatterjee case was one under Art. 226 of
the Constitution and Cl. (ii) of Art. 226 was under
consideration in the said case. The position under the
Industrial Disputes Act is a little different and cause of
action will have to be related to either the theory of
“control” or the theory relating to “situs of
employment.” In view of the facts disclosed in the
instant case, not only control but also situs of
employment as far as Sri Sampat's service is concerned
was in Bombay. Two of the main tests in deciding
jurisdiction, in our view, indicate that the State of
Maharashtra and not the State of West Bengal would
have been the appropriate Government before whom
Sri Sampat should have raised the dispute with regard
to the termination of his services. We are unable to
agree with the views expressed either by the learned
Tribunal or the two learned Single Judges while
disposing of the two writ petitions, being W.P. No.
116 of 1998 and W.P. No. 228 of 2001. In our view,
the State of West Bengal was not the appropriate
Government to make the reference on the dispute
raised by Sri Sampat and the same was without
jurisdiction.”
41.

In Siemens Limited vs. Presiding Officer Additional

Industrial Tribunal-cum-Additional Labour Court, Hyderabad 2003
LLR 116 the High Court of Andhra Pradesh also had occasion to
consider an issue relating to the jurisdiction of the Government. In this
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.33

case the transferability was one of the conditions of service of the
employee. The employer had its Head Office in Chennai and Branches at
Hyderabad and other places.

The employee who was located at

Hyderabad was transferred to Manipal in Karnataka. The transfer order
indicated that the services of the workman stand transferred to the
Manipal office. The workman refused to go to the place of transfer and
tried to attend his office at Hyderabad whereupon the management
informed him that he had seized to have any link with the Hyderabad
office on the notified date. The workman still did not join duty pursuant
to his order of transfer, whereupon the management issued a show cause
notice as to why disciplinary action should not be taken against him.
This employee also, as in the instant case, did not participate in the
inquiry despite it being adjourned from time to time.

The enquiry

therefore was proceeded ex-parte at the Bangalore office where the
workman was supposed to report for duty. The disciplinary authority
passed the order of termination which was served upon the petitioner.
The petitioner raised the dispute before the labour court aggrieved by the
order of termination wherein the issue arose as to the maintainability of
the industrial dispute before the labour court to whom it stood referred.
42.

The labour court ultimately held that it had jurisdiction to

WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.34

entertain the dispute which finding was assailed before the Andhra
Pradesh High Court. Placing reliance on the pronouncement of the Full
Bench of the Patna High Court in Paritosh Kumar Pal's case(supra), the
court observed thus:“36. In my considered view, by virtue of the transfer
orders dated 9-9-1994 and the subsequent letter dated
6-10-1994, wherein it was mentioned that the
workman ceased to be an employee at Hyderabad, his
situs of employment becomes the office of Manipal.
Therefore, as contended by the counsel for the
management, just because the workman stayed
illegally at Hyderabad without proceeding to Manipal
or just because he was pursuing legal remedies at
Hyderabad, it cannot validate the illegal stay of the
workman at Hyderabad and confer the jurisdiction on
the Courts in Andhra Pradesh.
37. The other contention of the workman is that the
question of disobedience would arise only when the
transfer order is lawful and that by transfer his service
conditions and other emoluments were affected.
Admittedly transferability was one of the service
conditions. Except contending that the transfer is
illegal and his service conditions and emoluments are
affected, no relevant material is produced by the
workman. Therefore, in my view this is a vague
contention and merits only for rejecting.”
43.

Further the court distinguished the Sri Rangavilas Motors(P)

Ltd. case(supra) in para 39 of the judgment noticing that transferability
was one of the conditions of service in the case before the Andhra
Pradesh High Court while the challenge before the Apex Court in the Sri
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.35

Ranga Vilas Motors (P) Ltd. case was to the order of transfer on the
ground of want of authority to transfer.
44.

The High Court in these circumstances further noticed as

follows:“36.
In my considered view, by virtue of the
transfer orders dated 19-9-1994 and the subsequent
letter dated 6-10-1994, wherein it was mentioned that
the workman ceased to be an employee at Hyderabad,
his situs of employment becomes the office at
Manipal. Therefore, as contended by the counsel for
the management, just because the workman stayed
illegally at Hyderabad without proceeding to Manipal
or just because he was pursuing legal remedies at
Hyderabad, it cannot validate the illegal stay of the
workman at Hyderabad and confer the jurisdiction on
the Courts in Andhra Pradesh.
37.
The other contention of the workman hat
the question of disobedience would arise only when
the transfer order is lawful and that by transfer his
service conditions and other emoluments were
affected. Admittedly transferability was one of the
service conditions. Except contending that the
transfer is illegal and his service conditions and
emoluments are affected, no relevant material is
produced by the workman. Therefore, in my view
this is a vague contention and merits only for
rejecting.
40.
But coming to the case on hand,
transferability was one of the conditions of service.
Therefore, transferring the workman from one place
to other is not violative of the terms and conditions
and therefore, the contention of the workman that
transfer itself was illegal cannot be countenanced and
also the law laid down by the Supreme Court in
Rangavilas case (cited 1 supra) cannot be applied on
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.36

all fours, even though the same is unexceptionable.
To put it more precisely his dispute before the
Industrial Tribunal is mainly against the termination
and incidentally the orders of transfer were
challenged.
41.
From the above it is clear that the
workman committed misconduct in not joining at the
new station. Further I one again reiterate that I am in
full agreement with the Full Bench judgment of the
Patna High Court and hold that the situs of
employment would become paramount in raising the
industrial dispute. Since the situs of the employment
of the workman was at Manipal with effect from 310-1994, as indicated in the order of transfer dated
19-9-1994 and notice dated 6-10-1994 and the same
was treated as misconduct, by the office at Bangalore.
42.
In other words he ceases to be an
employee of Hyderabad office with effect from 3-101994 and supposed to have born at the new station at
Manipal, within the jurisdiction of Bangalore Office.
Therefore, as contended by the learned counsel for
the Management, no cause of action arose for the
workman at Hyderabad with effect from 3-10-1994
and mere stay at Hyderabad does not create any
legal right to agitate his grievance about his
termination after the cessation at Hyderabad office.
At the most his stay at Hyderabad office. At the most
his stay at Hyderabad is only illegal and as rightly
pointed,t he same amounts to absenting himself from
attending the duties at the new station. To put it in a
different way, his stay at Hyderabad even after the
cessation, must be for a valid reason. Further as it is
already noticed, his grievance before the Tribunal
was primarily regarding the termination. Hence in
my view the workman had created an artificial cause
of action to raise the dispute at Hyderabad, by
incidentally questioning the orders of transfer also
while challenging the orders of termination. Hence
in view of the judgments referred to supra and also
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.37

for the foregoing reasons, I am of the considered
view that Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court at
Hyderabad has no jurisdiction to entertain the
application filed by the workman under section 2A(2)
of the Industrial Disputes Act and accordingly the
impugned judgment is no judgment in the eye of law
for want of jurisdiction and the same is liable to be
set aside.”
45.

In this behalf it would appropriate to also advert to the Full

Bench pronouncement of the High Court of Judicature at Patna in
Paritosh Kumar Pal Vs. State of Bihar 1985(33) BLJR 150. In this
case the court was called upon to answer a question as to whether the
situs of employment of the workman would determine the locus for the
territorial jurisdiction of the tribunal to entertain a dispute arising from
the termination of his service under the Industrial Disputes Act 1947.
46.

Shri Paritosh Kumar Pal, the writ petitioner had been

appointed as a medical cum sales representative of the respondent
company. On certain disputes arising between the writ petitioner and his
employer company the petitioner was charge sheeted and thereafter his
services were terminated. The employee raised an industrial dispute in
the State of Bihar which was contested by the employer on a question
relating to the maintainability of the reference by the State of Bihar for
the reason that the employer was carrying on its business at and from

WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.38

Calcutta and the establishment at Calcutta. It was contended that the writ
petitioner was carrying on the business of the employer in Bihar under
the directions and supervision of the Calcutta office of the employer.
Observing that the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure on the point
of jurisdiction are not applicable with the full force of their technical
rigour, yet in their absence from the Industrial Disputes Act 1947, the
broader general principles underlying them would undoubtedly be
relevant. In this behalf the court noticed several judicial pronouncements
on the subject thus:“11. In the light of the above, the authority which
deserves pride of place is Lalbhai Tricumlal Mills Ltd.
v. Dhonubhai Motilal Vin and others, (4) which has
the repeated stamp of approval by the final Court. The
facts of this case are closely similar to the present one
because therein also substantially the dispute pertained
to the termination of employment admittedly at
Bombay where the workman was employed whilst the
headquarters of the employer industry was in
Ahmedabad. The workman had even complained and
sought reinstatement with the head office of the Mills
at Ahmedabad and the same being declined he raised
an industrial dispute before the Labour Court in
Bombay. On behalf of the employers objection was
raised with regard to jurisdiction which was rejected
by the Labour Court and the same was again
strenuously urged before the High Court. Even the
specific point that the approach for reinstatement had
been made by the workman at Ahmedabad and the
industrial dispute, therefore, arose on declining the
same under Section 42 (4) of the Act was pointedly
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.39

urged on behalf of the employer-company. This,
however, was categorically rejected by Chief Justice
Chagla speaking for the Division Bench with the
following observations:“Now the Act does not deal with the causes of action,
nor does it indicate what factors will confer
jurisdiction upon the Labour Court. But applying the
well known tests of jurisdiction, a Court or Tribunal
would have jurisdiction if the parties reside within
jurisdiction or if the subject-matter of the dispute
substantially arises within jurisdiction. And therefore
the correct approach to this question is to ask ourselves
where did this dispute substantially arise and in our
opinion the only answer to that question can be that
the dispute substantially arose in Bombay and not in
Ahmedabad. What is the dispute? The dispute is not
as to whether the employee approached the employer
in Ahmedabad and no agreement was arrived at. The
dispute is whether the employer was justified in
dismissing the employee, and inasmuch as the
employment was in Bombay and the dismissal was in
Bombay, it is difficult to understand how it can
possibly be urged that the dispute did not substantially
arise in Bombay. What Mr. Bhagwati says is that there
is no dispute till an approach is made by the employee
under the proviso to Section 42 (4).
It is true that there would be no industrial dispute till
the procedure laid down in the proviso to Section 42
(4) is satisfied, but in a more important sense there
would be no dispute at all if there had been no
dismissal by the petitioner of respondent No. 5.”
And again:
“If that is going to be the subject-matter of the inquiry
before the Labour Court that subject-matter arose in
Bombay and not in Ahmedabad. We express no
opinion as to whether the Ahmedabad Court would
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.40

equally have jurisdiction or not.
We are only
concerned with deciding whether on these facts the
Bombay Labour Court has jurisdiction, and in our
opinion if as in this case the employee was employed
in Bombay and dismissed in Bombay and he is making
a complaint about his dismissal and wants
reinstatement and compensation, the Bombay Labour
Court has jurisdiction to decide this application. We,
therefore, agree with the Industrial Court in the view it
has taken.”
From the above it would appear that the aforesaid case
in a way covers the issue herein on all fours by holding
that the subject-matter of the industrial dispute arises
at the situs of employment of the workman. However,
in the above case the question whether there can also
be concurrent jurisdiction at Bombay and Ahmedabad
was left open by the Bench.
12. What next calls for notice is the fact that the
aforesaid enunciation of the law was quoted verbatim
and affirmed by the Constitution Bench of the
Supreme Court in India Cable Co. Ltd. v. Its
Workmen, (1962)1 Labour Law Journal 409. This in
terms was more explicitly re-affirmed in Sri
Rangavilas Motor's case (supra) on which, rightly, firm
reliance has been placed on behalf of the writ
petitioner.”
47.

After consideration of these precedents the court held as

follows:“13. Now an incisive analysis of the aforesaid
authoritative enunciation of law would indicate that
three clear cut principles for determining jurisdiction
emerge therefrom. For clarity these may be first
separately enumerated as under:

WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.41

(i) Where does the order of the termination of services
operate?
(ii) Is there some nexus between the industrial dispute
arising from termination of the service of the workman
and the territory of the State?
(iii) That the well-known test of jurisdiction of a civil
court including the residence of the parties and the
subject-matter of the dispute substantially arising
therein would be applicable.”
48.

In this case the Full Court Bench held that the situs of the

workman's employment in the case of termination of his services is
patently the paramount factor if not being wholly conclusive as to the
authority which would have the jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the
industrial dispute between the workman and his employer. It is within
the area of employment that the order of termination operates and the
workman loses his right to hold the post and receive wages therefor. The
Full Bench held that, therefore, on the anvil of the principle of where the
impugned order operates, the situs of the employment of the workman is
patently significant.
49.

It was further held that on the second question raised as to the

industrial dispute having some nexus with the territory of the State, the
situs of employment of the workman assumes importance. The Full
Bench held that once a firm finding is arrived at that the workman was
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.42

employed within a specific territory or State, the termination of his
services thereunder has an obvious and direct nexus with such territory
of such State. Such a nexus may not be necessarily between the territory
of the state with the industry or its head quarters.
50.

In the facts of the case, the court was of the view that the

employee was located in the State of Bihar and the order of termination
would being there and in these circumstances it was held that the State of
Bihar was the appropriate Government and the reference by it was
consequently valid.
51.

Even in civil litigation, where territorial jurisdiction is

determined by the place where the cause of action arises or situs of the
person sued, it has been held by the Apex Court that it is not every fact
pleaded by a litigant which gives rise to a cause of action and only such
facts as are necessary to adjudicate upon the lis would constitute a cause
of action conferring territorial jurisdiction upon a court.
52.

In a judgment reported at AIR 1985 SC 1289 = (1985) 3 SCC

217 State of Rajasthan vs Swaika Properties, certain properties
belonging to a company which had its registered office in Calcutta were
sought to be acquired in Jaipur and the notice under Section 52 of the
Rajasthan Urban Improvement were served upon the company at
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.43

Calcutta. Basing its right to maintain the writ petition at Calcutta High
Court, it had been contended that service of the notice within the
territorial jurisdiction of the Calcutta High Court empowered that court
to exercise jurisdiction in the matter. The Apex Court held that the entire
cause of action for challenging the acquisition of the land under Section
152 of the Rajasthan Urban Improvement Act had arisen within the
territorial jurisdiction of the Rajasthan High Court.

The factum of

service of the notice at Calcutta was held unnecessary for grant of an
appropriate writ, order or direction under Article 226 of the Constitution
for quashing the notice issued by the Rajasthan Government. It was thus
held that the High Court at Calcutta had no jurisdiction to entertain the
writ petition.
53.

Thus, mere receipt of a notice or an order would not form part

of bundle of facts which are necessary for effective adjudication of the
lis. Therefore the mere receipt of the order of termination of service at
Delhi by the workman would not create jurisdiction in the industrial
authorities at Delhi to consider the complaint made by the respondent or
to exercise jurisdiction under Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act
1947.
54.

Even if it was found that a part of cause of action has arisen

WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.44

within the jurisdiction of a court, it has been laid down by the apex court
that on principles of forum non-conveniens or otherwise, a court may
refuse to exercise jurisdiction in the matter.
In this behalf, reference may be made to a recent judgment
reported at (2004) 6 SCC 254 entitled Kusum Ingots & Alloys Ltd. vs
Union of India & Anr. the Apex Court has considered this issue further
and held thus :“26.
The view taken by this Court in U.P.
Rashtriya Chini Mill Adhikari Parishad that the situs
of issue of an order or notification by the
Government would come within the meaning of the
expression “cases arising” in clause 14 of the
(Amalgamation) Order is not a correct view of law
for the reason hereafter stated and to that extent the
said decision is overruled. In fact, a legislation, it is
trite, is not confined to a statute enacted by
Parliament or the legislature of a State, which would
include delegated legislation and subordinate
legislation or an executive order made by the Union
of India, State or any other statutory authority. In a
case where the field is not covered by any statutory
rule, executive instructions issued in this behalf shall
also come within the purview thereof. Situs of office
of Parliament, legislature of a State or authorities
empowered to make subordinate legislation would
not by itself constitute any cause of action or cases
arising. In other words, framing of a statute, statutory
rule or issue of an executive order or instruction
would not confer jurisdiction upon a court only
because of the situs of the office of the maker
thereof.”

WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.45

55.

It is noteworthy that the doctrine of forum conveniens is also

guiding the courts in adjudicating upon and deciding issues, objections
relating to territorial jurisdiction. This doctrine find its base in
convenience to parties and applies the principles that the court having the
closest connection to the lis would guide the court in deciding as to an
objections relating to territorial jurisdiction of the courts. In this behalf
in (2004) 6 SCC 254 Kusum Ingots & Alloys Ltd. vs Union of India, the
court held thus :
“10.
Keeping in view the expressions used in
clause (2) of Article 226 of the Constitution of India,
indisputably even if a small fraction of cause of action
accrues within the jurisdiction of the Court, the Court
will have jurisdiction in the matter.
30.
We must however, remind ourselves that
even if a small part of cause of action arises within
the territorial jurisdiction of the High Court, the same
by itself may not be considered to be a determinative
factor compelling the High Court to decide the matter
on merit. In appropriate cases, the Court may refuse
to exercise its discretionary jurisdiction by invoking
the doctrine of forum conveniens. [See Bhagat Singh
Bugga v. Dewan Jagbir Sawhney, Madanlal Jalan v.
Madanlal, Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. v. Jharia Talkies
& Cold Storage (P) Ltd., S.S. Jain & Co. v. Union of
India and New Horizons Ltd. v. Union of India.]”
56.

This court has earlier had occasion to consider these

principles which would guide adjudication on this issue in the judgment
rendered on 24th April, 2006 in WP (C) No.3388/2003 Lohia Starlinger
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.46

& Anr. Vs. Govt. of NCT of Delhi & Others.
57.

The Industrial Disputes Act 1947 is concerned with disputes

between the employer and the employee and as such the position
thereunder is not on all fours with the general civil law. Cause of action
under the Industrial Disputes Act 1947 has to be construed and is
relatable to the “situs of employment” or the “control over the service of
the employee”.
58.

Mere allegations of the employee or the place his residence

would not confer jurisdiction upon the authorities under the Industrial
Disputes Act 1947 to deal with the matter.
59.

The respondent chose not to question the order of transfer in

any industrial adjudication or judicial proceedings and has questioned
only the order of termination of his services. The situs of employment of
the respondent being at Pinjore, such a dispute could have been raised
only at Pinjore.

So far as civil litigation and writ jurisdiction is

concerned it has been held that the same can be instituted in any court
where even a part of cause of action has arisen. Cause of action is not
defined in the Code of Civil Procedure but has been judicially interpreted
to mean every fact, which, if traversed, would be necessary for the
plaintiff to prove in order to support his right to the judgment of the
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.47

court. It is that bundle of facts which, taken together with the applicable
law, entitles the plaintiff to relief against the defendants.
60.

Thus binding judicial precedents have held that broadly

speaking those very considerations which apply to civil litigation in
constituting cause of action would be applicable even in the case of
industrial disputes which would encompass all those facts on the basis of
which a person invokes the provision of said enactment. However, a
close examination of the same compels this court to hold that though the
well known principles of territorial jurisdiction governing the civil courts
which are based on the concept of cause of action would be equally
applicable to determine the jurisdiction under the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947, however there remains a fine distinction in specific areas. So
far as a dispute relating to service in the nature of a challenge to either an
order of transfer or termination of service is concerned, territorial
jurisdiction would have to be relatable to the situs of employment and
control of the employer over the employment. In a given case, there may
be a concurrent jurisdiction in different states where parties may fairly
have the option to choose the forum. I am fortified in this view by the
principles laid down by the apex court in the Indian Cable Company case
(supra) and the Ranga Vilas Motors Private Limited case (supra).
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.48

61.

However, upon an order of transfer which says it takes effect

immediately

and

directs

that

the

workman

would

stand

relieved, the situs of employment changes to the place of transfer. The
place from where the workman is transferred loses all control over the
employment of the workman as in the instant case. This is more so, when the
order of transfer is not even assailed by the workman.

62.

In the instant case, the industrial adjudicator has held that the

dispute between the parties arose at Delhi where the workman worked at
his last posting. Consequently, it was held that the Labour Court at Delhi
has the jurisdiction to entertain the dispute between the parties. In view
of the foregoing discussion, such a conclusion is not supported by the
judicial pronouncement on the subject.

The petitioner has placed

reliance on the pronouncement of this court in 96 (2002) DLT 825
entitled D.L.F. Universal Limited Vs. Govt. of NCT of Delhi & Ors.
wherein the principles laid down in Paritosh Kumar Pal (Supra) were
applied to the facts of the case and it was held that the industrial dispute
would be required to have some nexus with the territory of the state
where the industrial reference is contemplated and that the situs of the
employment of the workman assumes signal importance. The facts
similar as those in the instant case, it was held that the situs of the
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.49

employment of the workman was at Gurgaon and not at Delhi and as
such, the jurisdiction would be of the competent court at Gurgaon and
not at Delhi.

In 2000 (56) DRJ (Supp.) 274, entitled New Delhi

General Mazdoor Union Vs. Govt. of Delhi & Others, the petitioner had
challenged the refusal of the respondent to make a reference of the
dispute raised by the petitioner union on the ground that the
establishment was situated in Haryana and therefore could not be referred
for Delhi for want of jurisdiction. This court held that while making or
refusing to make a reference, “the appropriate government” discharges
administrative functions.

While performing such functions, the

government does not have the jurisdiction to decide the dispute between
the parties. However, it is permissible for the government while forming
an opinion to take admitted facts into consideration and if the
government, making the reference, is not a proper government within the
meaning of Section 2 (a) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, the
reference will not be a valid reference. It was also held that where
certain disputed question of facts are involved, on consideration of such
an issue, the proper course would be to raise a preliminary objection
before the Tribunal. The correctness of the order on the preliminary
question can then be challenged before the writ court.
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.50

63.

Adverting to the pleadings before the conciliation officer, it

was found that there was no dispute that the workers, on whose behalf
the dispute was raised, were the workers of Management Development
Institute whose administrative office was located at Gurgaon district in
Haryana and they were being paid wages through contractor in Haryana.
The provident fund of the employees was also under the jurisdiction of
R.P.F.C. Situated at Faridabad in Haryana and their services were
allegedly terminated in Haryana.

Therefore, no part of the cause of

action arose in Delhi and it was held that the proper government was not
the Government of Delhi and as such, the order passed was held to be
justified.
64.

In these circumstances, the respondent ceased to be an

employee of the office at Delhi on the date when he was relieved from
service and he is supposed to have been called to the new station which
was situated at Pinjore to which he stood transferred. Mere continuation
of his stay at the place wherefrom the respondent has been transferred,
does not create any legal right to adjudicate his grievance by his
termination after the cessation of his employment at the office wherefrom
he is transferred.

His continuous stay at such place is illegal and

amounts to his absenting himself from attending duties at the new
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.51

station.

Continued stay at the place wherefrom an employee is

transferred must be for valid reasons and authorised by the employer. In
the instant case, the respondent was called upon to report for medical
examination which also he did not do. He was repeatedly notified to join
duty. However, he chose not to join duty and clearly intimated his
employer of his unwillingness to comply with the order of transfer.
65.

Certainly, the workman cannot be permitted to create an

artificial cause of action to raise a dispute at a place wherefrom he has
been transferred by incidently questioning an order of transfer while his
challenge is only to the order of termination of service. In the instant
case, upon issuance of the order of transfer and its receipt by the
respondent, the Delhi office of the petitioner no longer had any control
over his services which stood transferred to Pinjore. It was the Pinjore
office alone which has the control over all matters relating to the service
of the respondent.
66.

Learned counsel for the respondent made a fervent prayer that

on the acts complained of, the respondent workman has been reduced to
a state of abject penury. Mr. Ghose has submitted that the case set up by
the workman was truthful and he deserved to be granted relief even on
compassionate and human grounds. However, this would be possible
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.52

only if the petitioner could make out a case on legal grounds. It has been
repeatedly pronounced by the Apex Court that relief on humanitarian
grounds which would be contrary to well settled principles of law cannot
be granted. This issue has arisen for consideration in matters relating to
cases of admission of students where admissions are effected by
educational institutes de hors rules and in matters relating to
appointments on compassionate basis.

In L.I.C. Vs. Ms. Asha

Ramchandra Ambekar & Another, reported in AIR 1994 SC 2148 :
1994 (2) SCC 718 : 1994-II-LLJ-173 the law has been laid down in the
following terms:

“19.
Thus apart from the directions as to
appointment on compassionate ground being against
statutory provisions, such direction does not take note
of this fact. Whatever, it may be the Court should not
have directed the appointment on compassionate
ground. The jurisdiction under mandamus cannot be
exercised in that fashion.”

67.

In Latham v. Richard Jhonson & Nephew Ltd., reported in

1911-13 AER (Reprint) page 117, FARWELL L, J. observed:

“We must be careful not to allow our sympathy with
the infant plaintiff to affect our Judgment. Sentiment
is a dangerous Will O' the Wisp to take as a guide in
the search for legal principles.”
WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.53

68.

In the State of Tamil Nadu & Ors. Vs. St. Joseph Teachers

Training College, reported in 1991 (3) SCC 87, the Apex Court
observed that Court cannot grant relief on humanitarian ground contrary
to law.
69.

In Central Board of Secondary Education & Ors. Vs.

Adarsh Kumar Sedhwrayer & Ors., reported in 1998 (2) CHN 61, the
same principle has been reiterated.
70.

In Central Board of Secondary Education Vs. Nikhil Gulati

& Another, reported in 1998 (3) SCC 5, it has been held:

“ Occasional aberrations such as these whereby
ineligible students are permitted under Court orders, to
undertake Board and or University examinations, have
caught the attention of this court many a time. To add
to it further, the Courts have almost observed that the
instance of such aberrations should not be treated as a
precedent in future. Such casual directions by the
court is nothing but an abuse of the process; more so
when the High Court at its level itself becomes
conscious that the decision was wrong and was not
worth repeating as a precedent. And yet it is repeated
time and again. Having said this much, we hope and
trust that unless the High Court can justify its decision
on principle and precept, it should better desist from
passing such orders, for it puts the “Rule of Law” to a
mockery and promotes rather the “Rule of Man”.”

WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.54

71.

In CBSE & Anr. Vs. P. Sunil Kumar & Anr., reported in

1998(5) SCC 377, it has been held:
“We are conscious of the fact that our order setting
aside the impugned directions of the High Court
would cause injustice to these students. But to permit
students of an unaffiliated institution to appear at the
examination conducted by the Board under orders of
the Court and then to compel the Board to issue
certificates in favour of those who have undetaken
examination would tantamount to subversion of law
and this Court will not be justified to sustain the orders
issued by the High Court on misplaced sympathy in
favour of the students.”

72.

In view of the foregoing discussion, the finding of the

industrial adjudicator to the effect that the workman having last worked
at Delhi, jurisdiction to entertain and adjudicate upon the subject matter
of the dispute was at Delhi, cannot be sustained. The same is clearly
contrary to the well settled principles of law.

The situs of the

employment of the workman clearly stood transferred to Pinjore,
Haryana and the appropriate government having jurisdiction over
industrial disputes arising at Pinjore, Haryana alone would have the
jurisdiction to make a reference on the complaint of the respondent for
adjudication of an appropriate authority under the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947 within its jurisdiction.

WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.55

For all the foregoing reasons, W.P. (C) No.6550/2005 has to
be allowed. The award dated 22nd September, 2004 is, therefore, set
aside and quashed.
In view of the above, there is no merit in the Writ Petition (C)
No.19709/2005 which is hereby dismissed.
In view of the above, all pending applications being CM
No.4595/2005, CM No.814/2006 & CM No.1695/2006 are also hereby
disposed.
Before parting with these cases, I would be failing if I do not
put on record the assistance rendered to this court by Shri Sanjoy Ghose,
learned counsel who was appointed as amicus curie vide orders dated
21st August, 2006 on behalf of the workman, who has rendered able
assistance in the matters both on the factual aspects as well as the legal
contentions urged by him on behalf of the workman. The Delhi High
Court Legal Services Committee shall pay a sum of Rs.11,000/- (Rupees
eleven thousand only) to Mr. Sanjoy Ghose towards fees in these matters.
Any amount already paid may be adjusted out of the fees ordered to be
paid.
There shall be no orders as to costs.

WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.56

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
AUGUST 23, 2006
aa

WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.57

WP (C) No.6550/2005

Page No.58

