IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
O.M.P. No. 554/2006
Judgment reserved on: December 20,
2006
Date of decision: January 23,
2007
DR. KUMARADAS
.... Petitioner
through: Mr. Rajeev Nayyar, Sr. Adv. with Mr. Sagar
Pathak,
Advocate
VERSUS
THE INDIAN MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS'
CO-OP. PHARMACY & STORES LTD. & ORS.
....Respondents
through: Mr. S. Nandkumar, Mr. S. Muthukrishnan,
Mr. G. Anandaselvan & Mr. Sathis Kumar,
Advs.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J
1.

By this petition under Section 9 of the Arbitration &

Conciliation Act, 1996, the petitioner has invoked the jurisdiction
of this court contending that he has raised an arbitration dispute
before the Central Registrar appointed under the provisions of the
O.M.P. No. 554/2006

page 1 of 31

Multi State Co-operative Societies Act, 1984 before the Central
Registrar at New Delhi under Section 84 of the Act. It is pointed
out that by virtue of Section 84 sub-section 5 of the statute, the
provisions of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 are
applicable to the arbitration proceedings under the Multi State
Co-operative Societies Act, 1984 and consequently this court has
jurisdiction under Section 9 to grant the relief prayed for.
2.

The undisputed factual matrix to the extent necessary

for adjudication in the present case are noticed hereafter. The
Indian Medical Practitioners' Co-op. Pharmacy and Stores Ltd. is a
co-operative society registered under the Multi State Co-operative
Societies Act, 1984 which is engaged in the business of
manufacture of medicines in all the three systems of Indian
medicines namely, Sidha, Ayurvedha and Unani. The society is
stated to have been established in the year 1944 and its members
are doctors in the three systems of the Indian medicine numbering
over fourteen and thousand at present.
3.

As per the scheme of the

Multi State Co-operative

Societies Act, 1984, it provides for a Board to administer and
manage the affairs of the society. The members of the board are
elected by the general body of the society. The election of the
O.M.P. No. 554/2006

page 2 of 31

members of the Board is governed by Section 35 of the statute
while Section 37 provides the restriction on holding of office for
more than two tenures by the office bearers of the Board.
So far as removal of elected members of the board are
concerned, the same is permitted under Section 47 of the statute.
It provides the only circumstances in which the elected members
of the board can be removed from the board and the manner in
which such removal can take place.
4.

These provisions which have been placed before this

court by either side would require to be considered in extenso and
reads thus:“S. 35. Election of members of board:(1)
The superintendence, direction and
control of the preparation of the electoral rolls
for, and the conduct of, elections of the
members of the board of such multi-State cooperative societies or class of multi-State cooperative societies as the Central Government
may, by general or special order, notify, shall be
vested in such returning officers as may be
appointed by the Central Registrar in this
behalf.
(2)
The vote at such elections shall be by
secret ballot.
(3)
The term of office of the elected
members of the board shall be such, not
exceeding three years from the date of election,
as may be specified in the bye-laws of a multiState co-operative society:
Provided that the elected members
O.M.P. No. 554/2006

page 3 of 31

shall continue to hold office till their successors
are elected or nominated under the provisions
of this Act or the rules or the bye-laws and
assume the charge of their office.
(4)
No person shall be eligible to be
elected as a member of the board of a multiState co-operative society unless he is a member
of the general body of that society.
(5)
The Central Government may make
rules generally to provide for or to regulate
matters in respect of elections of members of
the board.
xxxx
xxxx
xxxx
S. 37. Restrictions on holding of office:No person shall be eligible to hold the
office of a president or chairman or vicepresident or vice-chairman on the board of a
multi-State co-operative society, after he has
held the office as aforesaid during two
consecutive terms, whether full or part:
Provided that a person who has
ceased to hold the office of a president or
chairman continuously for one full term of three
years shall again be eligible for election to the
offices aforesaid.
Explanation—Where
any
person
holding the office of the president or vicepresident or chairman or vice-chairman at the
commencement of this Act is again elected to
that office after such commencement, he shall
for the purpose of this section, be deemed to
have held office for one term before such
election.
xxxx
xxxx
xxxx
S. 45. Elections of Members of Board:(1)
The conduct of elections to the board
of a multi-State Co-operative Society shall be the
responsibility of the existing board.
(2)
The election of members of board
O.M.P. No. 554/2006

page 4 of 31

shall be held by secret ballot in the manner as
may be prescribed.
(3)
The election of the members of the
board shall be held in the general meeting of the
members of the multi-State Co-operative
Society.
(4)
The elected members of the board
shall, if the bye-laws of such society permit, be
eligible for re-election.
(5)
The term of office of the elected
members of the board shall be such, not
exceeding five years from the date of elections,
as may be specified in the bye-laws of a MultiState Co-operative Society:
Provided that elected members shall
continue to hold office till their
successors are elected or nominated
under the provisions of this Act or
the rules or bye-laws and assume
charge of their office.
(6)
Where the board fails to conduct
election of the members of the board, the
Central Registrar shall hold the election within a
period of ninety days from the date when such
election became due.
(7)
No person shall be eligible to be
elected as a member of the board of a multiState Co-operative Society unless he is a
member of the general body of that society.
(8)
The expenses for holding election by
the Central Registrar shall be borne by the
multi-State Co-operative society.
(9)
The Central Government may make
rules generally to provide for or to regulate
matters in respect of election of members of the
board.
xxxx
xxxx
xxxx
S. 47. Removal of Elected members by
General Body:An elected member of a board, who
O.M.P. No. 554/2006

page 5 of 31

has acted adversely to the interests of multiState Co-operative society, may on the basis of a
report of the Central Registrar or otherwise be
removed from the board upon a resolution of
the general body passed at its meeting by a
majority of not less than two-third of the
members present and voting at the meeting:
Provided that the member concerned
shall not be removed unless he has
given a reasonable opportunity of
making a representation in the
matter.”
5.

My attention has also been drawn to the bye-laws which

govern the functioning of the respondent no.1-society. Bye-laws 14
and 30 of the society are relevant for the purposes of the present
case. As per bye-law 30, the general body is the only competent
body which is empowered to elect the members of the board of
directors. Bye-laws 14 and 30 of the society relied upon by both
sides read thus:“Bye-law No. 14:
MANAGEMENT
Subject to such resolution as the
General Body, may from time to time pass the
Executive Management of the affairs of the
Society shall vest in a Committee.
The
Committee shall consist of not more than 17
members of whom two shall be nominated by
the Government of Madras and 2 by the
Government of Andhra Pradesh from among the
medical officers of the department of Indian
Medicine. Notwithstanding anything contained
in this by-law the nominated Directors shall
hold office for a period of 3 years or until their
O.M.P. No. 554/2006

page 6 of 31

successors are nominated.
The members of the committee other
than those nominated by the Governments of
Madras and Andhra Pradesh shall be elected by
the General Body for a period of 3 years from
among the members.
For the period of office of the member
of the Committee, the year shall begin from 1st
August irrespective of the date of election or
assumption of office. After the members of the
Board of Directors are elected by the General
Body they shall elect from among themselves a
President and Vice-president. One third of the
members elected to the committee shall retire
annually from office by rotation and the retiring
members shall vacate their office on the date of
expiry of their term unless the period is
extended by the Registrar under Section
27(3)(C) of the Madras Co-operative Societies
Act, 1961.
The vacancies caused by the
retirement of the members shall be filled by
election at the General Body meeting held for
the purpose. Retiring members shall be eligible
for re-election.
Note:—For the purpose of this clause
as nearly as may be, one third of the members
elected to the committee at the first election
after the commencement of the Act shall retire
at the end of the first year after such election
and as nearly as may be another one third of the
members elected as aforesaid shall retire at the
end of 2nd year after such election, the members
so to retire at the end of the first two years
aforesaid being determined by lot by the
committee.
Any interim vacancy or any vacancy
which has not been filled up at the time of the
original election may be filled up by the
remaining members of the committee by cooption for unexpired portion of the original
period. It shall be competent to the General
O.M.P. No. 554/2006

page 7 of 31

Body to remove at any time any member of the
committee and elect another in his place from
the same electoral area and the member so
elected shall hold office only for the unexpired
portion of the original period. The proceedings
of the Committee shall not be invalidated on
account of any vacancy or vacancies of the
committee which remains unfilled.
Any member of the Committee may at
any time resign from his office by sending a
letter of resignation to the President of the
Society, but such resignation shall take effect
only from the date on which it is accepted by the
Committee.
xxxx

xxxx

xxxx

Bye-law No. 30:GENERAL BODY
The ultimate authority in all matters
relating to the administration of the society shall
be the General Body of the members who shall
meet from time to time and at least once a year
to conduct the work of the society. The General
Body shall not, however, interfere with the
orders of the Board of Directors in respect of
matters delegated to it under the by-laws. The
following among other members shall be dealt
with by the General Body:
(1) The election and removal of the Board of
Directors;
(2) The annual report due to the Registrar of
Co-operative societies;
(3) The Registrar's annual audit order;
(4) The amendment or repeal of any existing by
law or the enactment of a New By-law;
(5) The expulsion of a member;
(6) The consideration of any complaint which
any individual members may prefer against
the Board of Directors.
(7) The returns that may be prescribed by the
O.M.P. No. 554/2006

page 8 of 31

local Government; and
(8) Consideration of the annual budget.”
6.

There is no dispute that the petitioner was elected as the

President of the Society in the elections held in the year 1995.
Elections held thereafter in the month of December, 1998 for the
office of the new Board of Directors were challenged by one Dr. M.
Vinobaji by way of a Writ Petition No. 19992/1998 in the High
Court of Judicature at Chennai. By an interim order dated 17th
December, 1998, the court restrained the newly elected office
bearers from taking charge without orders of the court. The order
dated 17th December, 1998 was confirmed by the High Court by its
order dated 27th January, 1999 prima facie holding that the
election was not in accordance with law and it was directed that
the newly elected office bearers would not assume charge till
disposal of the writ petition.
My attention has been drawn to an observation in the
order dated 27th January, 1999 whereby the court prima facie held
that the

office bearers under the Multi State Co-operative

Societies Act, 1984 already stand elected and are in office can
continue to hold the same till the new office bearers assume
charge. It was held that the amendment restricting the tenure by

O.M.P. No. 554/2006

page 9 of 31

period of the office bearers was prospective and cannot effect the
existing office bearers.
7.

In this view of the matter, the court returned a prima

facie finding that so far as the board of directors, which was
existing in 1998 pursuant to the elections held in 1995, was
concerned, it could continue in office till the new office bearers
assume charge which would be after vacation of the interim
orders passed by the High Court of Chennai.
The position therefore, is that the petitioner continues as
the President of the respondent no.1-society by virtue of the
elections held in 1995 and under orders of the High Court of
Chennai dated 27th January, 1999.

The writ petition is still

pending and the orders passed are stated to be continuing even on
date.
The petitioner herein is stated to be the respondent in
the writ petition before the High Court of Chennai.
8.

Before this court, the petitioner has placed another

order dated 2nd September, 2003 passed by the High Court of
Chennai in Writ Misc. Petition No. 20937/2003 which was filed in
Writ Petition No.16747/2003. This writ petition was filed by one
Dr. G. Jayakumar inter alia against the Central Registrar of Co-op.
O.M.P. No. 554/2006

page 10 of 31

Societies; the Indian Medical Practitioners' Co-op. Pharmacy and
Stores Ltd. as well as against the present petitioner as respondent
no. 4. Dr. G. Jayakumar, the petitioner had sought an injunction
restraining the present petitioner from functioning as the
President of the Board of Directors of the Society herein.
9.

I find that by a detailed order dated 2nd September,

2003, the court rejected the submissions made on behalf of Dr. G.
Jayakumar, petitioner therein that Dr. Kumaradas (petitioner
herein) has functioned for more than two terms as President which
was statutorily prohibited under Section 44 of the Multi State Cooperative Societies Act, 2002. The court was of the view that the
Act of 1984 was amended with effect from 16th August, 2002 and
the tenure of the office bearers was restricted only from such date.
For this reason, it could not impact the present petitioner from
continuing to hold the office. The court also relied upon the earlier
order dated 27th January, 1999 under which the present petitioner
was continuing to hold office. On such finding, the writ misc.
petition seeking interim injunction was dismissed.
Thus, the petitioner continues to hold office by virtue of
two orders which are final and binding.
10.

The present petition has been necessitated inter alia on

O.M.P. No. 554/2006

page 11 of 31

the ground that a section of workers of the society went on strike
with effect from 28th of October, 2006. The petitioner has asserted
that Dr. V.R. Seshadri, respondent no. 12 herein had refused to
place the demands of the workers before him despite repeated
demands. The petitioner had required the respondent no. 12 who
is also the Secretary of the Society to convene a meeting of the
Board of Directors on 11th of November, 2006 at 11.00 a.m. in this
behalf. The agenda for this meeting was to consider the on-going
strike by the employees of the Society and to restore normalcy to
its affairs. There is a dispute as to the proceedings of this meeting.
According to the petitioner, some of the Directors pressed for
resignation of the entire Board to which the petitioner did not
agree. The respondent no. 9 who was the Vice-President gave his
resignation letter and stated that he was prepared to resign if the
entire board wanted him to do so. The petitioner however resisted
such move of an en-masse resignation on the ground that the same
would cripple the affairs of the Society on which the group of the
Directors pressing for resignation walked out.

At this stage,

according to the petitioner, the respondent no. 12 also followed
taking the minute book of the society with him as the agenda for
which the meeting had been convened could not be discussed.
O.M.P. No. 554/2006

page 12 of 31

As the respondent no. 12 was refusing to correctly record
the proceedings of the meeting, the petitioner sent a telegram to
him in this behalf. However, the respondent no. 12 disobeyed the
instructions of the petitioner with ulterior motive.
11.

This position is disputed by Mr. S. Nandkumar, learned

counsel who is representing the Society before this court and relies
on a communication dated 13th November, 2006 sent by
respondent no. 12 which so far as the meeting dated 11th
November, 2006 is concerned, records thus:“10 Directors including yourself and VicePresident came to attend the Meeting and all the
10 Directors including you signed the Minutes
Book.
Even before commencement of the
Meeting majority of the Board of Directors
requested you to tender your resignation for the
post of the Presidentship of Impcops. Coming to
know about the moods of the Directors you
abruptly left the venue of the Meeting without
saying anything refusing to participate in the
Meeting. It is not there that certain Board of
Directors pressed for the resignation of the entire
Board.
After your abrupt exit refusing to
participate in the Meeting the Vice-President Dr.
K. Parameswaran handed over his resignation
letter which he had brought with him to me.
Subsequent to that the other 8 Directors who had
assembled for the Meeting decided to hold the
Meeting in Impcops Head Quarters and moved to
the Head Quarters and assembled there. They
elected Dr. S. Krishnamurthy to preside over the
Meeting and conduct the Meeting.
After that the Board of Directors
O.M.P. No. 554/2006

page 13 of 31

Meeting was held and Dr. S. Krishnamurthy
presided over the Meeting. In the Meeting
including Dr. S. Krishnamurthy, 8 Directors
participated.
They
passed
unanimously
'No
Confidence' resolution against you and they also
unanimously resolved to remove you from the
post of President of Impcops and President of
Board of Directors with immediate effect.
Board of Directors also passed a
resolution unanimously electing Dr. D.S.
Jayakaran as the President of the Board of
Directors and as well as the President of the
Society.
In view of the abovesaid resolutions
passed by the Board of Directors, you are no
longer the President of the Board of Directors and
the President of IMPCOPS.
In conclusion of the meeting all the
eight Directors, including Dr. S. Krishnamurthy,
who presided over the Board of Directors
meeting, signed in the minutes book.”
12.

The petitioner has also submitted that he learnt from the

newspaper that he has been removed from the post of President
and the respondent no. 3 has been appointed in his place. In these
circumstances, the petitioner has asserted that this removal was in
violation of the statutory provisions as well as bye-laws of the
society.
13.

The

petitioner

first

assailed

the

action

of

the

respondents by way of Writ Petition No. 43810/2006 which was
filed before the High Court of Judicature at Madras. By an order

O.M.P. No. 554/2006

page 14 of 31

passed on 14th November, 2006, the court was of the view that the
petitioner has an alternative remedy under Section 84 of the Multi
State Co-operative Societies Act, 2002 which provides a remedy of
arbitration and that the petitioner was required to be relegated to
such alternative remedy.

The court also noticed that as the

provisions of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 were
applicable to the proceedings of the arbitrator, the petitioner had
adequate remedy to seek interim relief. Consequently, the writ
petition was disposed of on 14th November, 2006 with the
following directions:“(a).
The petitioner shall be at liberty to file
an appropriate application before the 13th
respondent raising a dispute.
(b)
Exercising power under Sub Sections
(3) and (4) of Section 84, the 13th respondent
shall either take up the dispute for adjudication
by himself or appoint a legally trained person as
Arbitrator to adjudicate the dispute between the
petitioner and the contesting respondents and
ensure that such adjudication either by himself or
by his nominee is completed within a period of
three months, after affording all opportunities to
the petitioner as well as the contesting
respondents to appear and also to adduce
evidence.
(c)
The Arbitrator so appointed shall also
go into the question as to whether the dispute
raised by the petitioner is referable to Arbitration
under Section 84(1) of the Act.”

O.M.P. No. 554/2006

page 15 of 31

14.

In view of the order dated 14th November, 2006, the

petitioner has invoked the jurisdiction of the Registrar of Cooperative Societies under Section 18 of the statute by a
communication dated 23rd of November, 2006 and the matter is
stated to be pending there. However, aggrieved by the action of
his sudden removal, the petitioner has filed the present petition
seeking injunction.

The petitioner has placed reliance on the

above noted provisions of the statute and the rules of the bye-laws
of the Society to contend that the petitioner could have been
removed only by the general body of the Society.
Strong reliance is also placed on the orders dated 27th
January, 1999 and 2nd September, 2003 of the High Court of
Madras to contend that the petitioner could not have been
removed so long as these orders continue to operate.
15.

This petition was filed on the 24th November, 2006. By

an interim order dated 27th November, 2006, this court restrained
the respondents from giving effect to the removal of the petitioner
as set out in the communication dated 13th November, 2006. It
was further directed that the respondents shall maintain status
quo as existed on 11th November, 2006.
16.

The petition has been vehemently opposed by Mr. S.

O.M.P. No. 554/2006

page 16 of 31

Nandkumar, learned counsel appearing for the respondents who
has submitted that the petitioner has completed two tenures as
President in 1998 and therefore has no right whatsoever to
continue as President in the light of Section 37 of the statute.
17.

It has further been contended that the President is

elected from the board of directors. The petitioner has not been
removed as a primary member of the society or as a member of the
board of directors.

He has only been removed from his

appointment as a President of the Board of Directors which the
Board is fully competent to do so.
18.

It has further been submitted that in the light of the law

laid down by the Supreme Court in AIR 1993 SC 2042, Mohan
Lal Tripathi Vs. District Magistrate, Rae Bareilly & Ors.,
the removal of the petitioner by the Board of Directors is an action
taken by the representative body of the electorate itself and
consequently cannot be faulted. It is pointed out that it is an
electorate which appoints the Board of Directors and the Board of
Directors which has a right to appoint its President, has also a
right to reject.
19.

Learned counsel for the respondents has also submitted

that the two full Bench judgments of the High Courts of Kerala and
O.M.P. No. 554/2006

page 17 of 31

Punjab and Haryana relied upon by the petitioner did not consider
the pronouncement of the Apex Court in AIR 1993 SC 2042,
Mohan

Lal Tripathi Vs. District

Magistrate, Rae

Bareilly & Ors. and consequently, would not bind the
adjudication in the present matter.
20.

It has further been submitted that the removal of the

petitioner as President of the Society was wholly in public interest
inasmuch as there was strong opposition to his continuation as
President and that the workers were on strike because of the
continuation of the President alone.
21.

I have heard learned counsels for the parties and

perused the available record. I find that issues similar to those as
have been raised by the petitioner before this court were raised
before the Division Bench of the High Court of Bombay in AIR
1982 Bombay 216, Hindurao Balwant Patil & Anr. Vs.
Krishnarao Parshuram Patil & Ors. The court was required
to consider the submissions as have been made by the respondents
before this court. It appears that the Co-operative Society Act
applicable in Bombay did not contain a provision to remove the
office bearers prior to the completion of their tenure.

The

respondents were relying on the provisions of Section 16 of the
O.M.P. No. 554/2006

page 18 of 31

General Clauses Act to urge that the authority which appoints the
office bearers would have the right to remove the office bearers by
vote of no confidence.

In this behalf, the Division Bench of

Bombay High Court has observed thus:“10. .....A right to contest the election and the
right to move for setting aside an election or right
to recall the person already elected are not
common law rights.
These rights must be
conferred by the statute and therefore can be
enforced only in accordance with and subject to
the conditions laid down therein by the statute
concerned. The right guaranteed by Art. 19(1)(c)
is a fundamental right common to all citizens. It
is a right which can be enjoyed by all and
everybody. This has no reference to the right
conferred or created by a particular statute.
The Co-operative Societies Act has been
enacted having regard to the directive principles
of the State Policy as enshrined in the
Constitution of India. Co-operative movement is
a socio-economic and moral movement. To say
the least it is a part of the scheme of
decentralization and deconcentration of power.
Collective power intoxication cannot be equated
with co-operation. In the very nature of the said
movement it must not be only self-regulated but
the constraints and restraints are inherent in the
movement itself. The rights conferred or created
by the statute are coupled with duty. Fixity of
tenure helps proper administration and
management of the society.
Co-operative
movement cannot be permitted to be polluted or
chocked by internal or individual strike nor it can
be permitted to be polluted by party politics.
Whenever the legislature thought that a person is
not fit to continue as a member of the board,
specific provisions are made for his removal. A
O.M.P. No. 554/2006

page 19 of 31

person is elected as Chairman or Vice-Chairman
for a particular term. His office is not controlled
by the provisions of the Act. It is not an office at
will and therefore, to such an office Section 16 of
the General Clauses Act, cannot apply.”
22.

It is noteworthy that a similar view had been expressed

by the Division Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in its
judgment reported at ILR 1975 AP 242, Veeramachaneni
Venkata Narayana Vs. The Deputy Registrar of Co-op.
Societies, Eluru & Ors. In this case, the Division Bench of the
court had been of the view that the power of removal of the office
bearer by the vote of no confidence could not be read or inferred in
a statute or could be taken as an implied power.
23.

The judgments of the Division Bench of the High Courts

of Andhra Pradesh and Bombay were relied upon by the Full
Bench of the Punjab & Haryana High Court in its pronouncement
reported at AIR 1991 Punjab & Haryana 149, Jagdev
Singh

Vs.

The

Registrar,

Co-operative

Societies,

Haryana & Ors. In this case, the court considered the law
extensively and also closely examined other enactments which
contained the similar provisions as the Multi State Co-operative
Societies Act. Herein also the powers of removal of office bearers
of executive bodies were specifically conferred. The court noticed
O.M.P. No. 554/2006

page 20 of 31

that if the same legislature, for some other local bodies, had
specifically conferred the power of removal of office bearers by a
vote of no confidence, then the omission of such power in the Cooperative Act of Punjab and Haryana gained significance. Relying
on the doctrine of casus omissus, the court held that omission in a
statute is not to be lightly interfered with. It was held that in the
light of the omission in the Co-operative Act and the Rules, the
legislature never intended to give such a power of removal by a
vote of no confidence to the members of the Committee/Directors
of the Co-operative Bank in question.
24.

My attention has been drawn to the pronouncement of

the Full Bench of the High Court of Kerala reported in AIR 2002
Kerala 325, S. Lakshmanan Vs. V.Velliankeri Member of
Board of Directors. In this behalf, the following question fell
for consideration before the Full Bench for decision:“Whether absence of a specific provision in the
Kerala Co-operative Societies Act, 1969 and the
Rules framed thereunder will stand in the way of
any motion for loss of confidence relating to
President of a co-operative society?”
The same issue has been raised by the petitioner before
this court.
25.

On behalf of the respondents herein, reliance was placed

O.M.P. No. 554/2006

page 21 of 31

on Section 16 of the General Clauses Act and the similar provisions
in the State enactment to urge that when a power to make any
appointment is conferred by a statute unless a contrary intention
appears, the authority having such power of making the
appointment shall also have the power to remove or dismiss any
person so appointed whether by itself or by any other authority in
exercise of such power.
The admitted position under the Kerala Co-operative
Societies Act was also that there was no provision in the Act or the
Rules made thereunder or the Bye-laws of the Society which
enables or prescribes the procedure for passing of a no confidence
motion by the elected Managing Committee against the President
or any other office bearer, nor there was any provision indicating
the consequences of such a no confidence motion being passed.
After an extensive consideration of judicial pronouncements of
different High Courts, the court was of the view that the doctrine
of casus omissus is squarely applicable to the situation. Placing
reliance on the Interpretation of Statutes by Maxwell, the court
observed thus:“16.
The committee is elected by following
the procedure prescribed under the Act and the
Rules and is guaranteed a tenure as prescribed in
O.M.P. No. 554/2006

page 22 of 31

the Bye-laws, by virtue of Rule 39(1). It can only
be removed by the procedure prescribed in the
Act or the Rules or the Bye-laws. The only
contingency under which the Committee may be
removed before the end of its tenure is indicated
in Section 33(1) of the Act. Section 33(1) of the
Act envisages the passing of a no-confidence
motion by the General Body which results in
wholesale removal of the Committee. Barring
this provision, there is no other provision by
which an elected individual member of the
Committee can be removed. We are, therefore,
unable to accept the contention of the appellants
that such a drastic power can be read into the Act,
even where there are no provisions. The doctrine
of 'casus omissus' is squarely applicable to the
situation.
In page 33 of the Maxwell's
Interpretation of Statutes, 12th Edition it is stated
as under :“It is a corollary to the general rule of
literal construction that nothing is to be added to
or taken from a statute unless there are adequate
grounds to justify the inference that the
Legislature intended something which it omitted
to express. Lord MERSEY said : It is a strong
thing to read into an Act of Parliament words,
which are not there and in the absence of clear
necessity it is a wrong to do”.....
“We are not entitled”, said Lord
LOREBURN L.C., “to read into an Act of
Parliament unless clear reason for it is to be
found within the four corners of the Act itself”.
It is not for the Court to supply what is an
omission in the statute. The Court must interpret
the provision as they are without additing
anything. This is one of the basic canons of
construction of a statute. (See in this connection,
Maruthi Wires Industries Pvt. Ltd. v. S.T.O., 1st
Circle, Mattancherry, (2001) 3 SCC 735 : (AIR
2001 SC 1413).”

O.M.P. No. 554/2006

page 23 of 31

26.
judicial

Yet another distinction which was pointed out in this
pronouncement, which would have bearing on the

arguments raised before this court on behalf of the respondents, is
the difference which was drawn by the court between the
expression 'appointment to a post' and 'election to a post'. Such a
distinction was drawn by the Division Bench of the High Court of
Kerala in its pronouncement reported at (1999) 3 Kerala LT
680, Chacko Vs. Jaya Varma.

The Division Bench

emphasised such a distinction which was pointed out in
Ramanatha Aiyar's Law Lexicon, Reprint Edition 1987 as under:“17.......The
term 'appointment' is to be
distinguished from 'election'. The former is an
executive act, whereby a person is named as the
incumbent of an office and invested therewith, by
one or more individuals who have the sole power
and right to select and constitute the officer.
Election means that the person is chosen by a
principle of selection in the nature of a vote,
participate by the public generally or by the entire
class of persons qualified to express their choice
in this manner.”
27.

The Full Bench of the High Court of Kerala also noticed

the distinction between the Directors of a company incorporated
under the provisions of Companies Act, 1956 who appoint a
Managing Director from within themselves and the election of an
executive body of an organisation.
O.M.P. No. 554/2006

page 24 of 31

The fine distinction thus which has to be borne in mind
is that the office bearers of a society under the Multi-State Cooperative Societies Act are not appointed by a board. The board of
directors or the governing body of a Committee elects such office
bearers. In the case in hand, so far as respondent no.1-society is
concerned, I find that bye-law no. 14 provides that after the
members of board of directors are elected by the general body,
they shall elect from among themselves a President and a VicePresident of the society.
28.

In this behalf, a Division Bench of the Bombay High

Court in its pronouncement reported at AIR 1982 Bombay 216,
Hindurao

Balwant

Patil

&

Anr.

Vs.

Krishnarao

Parshuram Patil & Ors. made observations to the effect that it
cannot be forgotten that the Co-operative Societies Act has been
enacted having regard to the directive principles of the State policy
as enshrined in the Constitution of India. Co-operative movement
is a socio-economic and moral movement. To say the least, it is a
part of the scheme of decentralisation and de-concentration of
power. Collective power intoxication cannot be equated with cooperation. In the very nature of the said movement it must not be
only self-regulated but the constraints and restraints are inherent
O.M.P. No. 554/2006

page 25 of 31

in the movement itself. The rights conferred or created by the
statute are coupled with duty.

Fixity of tenure helps proper

administration and management of the society.

Co-operative

movement cannot be permitted to be polluted or chocked by
internal or individual strike nor it can be permitted to be polluted
by party politics. Co-operative capitalism despotism is not cooperation. On the other hand, co-operation is a substitute for selfinterest of the benefit of whole community.

Therefore, if the

society itself while framing and adopting its own code of conduct
in the form of bye-laws, which are to be duly approved by the
Registrar, has not made any provision for removal of the
Chairman and Vice-Chairman by passing a vote of no-confidence,
it cannot be said that the step taken by the Society or Registrar in
that behalf is not a regulatory one nor is in the interest of the
society or the general public. The so-called mandate theory cannot
be pushed to ridiculous extremes to convert co-operative
movement into an arena or akhada of power politics. Whenever
the Legislature thought that a person is not fit to continue as a
member of the Board, specific provisions are made for his
removal. A person is elected as Chairman or Vice-Chairman for a
particular term. His office is controlled by the provisions of the
O.M.P. No. 554/2006

page 26 of 31

Act. It is not an office at will and therefore, to such an office
Section 16 of the General Clauses Act cannot apply.
29.

Thus, the Full Bench of the Kerala High Court held that

the Managing Committee of a Co-operative Society constituted
under the Kerala Co-operative Societies Act, 1969 and the Rules
framed thereunder has no right to move or consider a motion for
loss of confidence in the President, Vice-President and Treasurer
or any other office bearer of the Managing Committee which has
been elected in accordance with the rules.
30.

The

respondents

have

heavily

relied

on

the

pronouncement of the Apex Court in AIR 1993 SC 2042,
Mohan

Lal Tripathi Vs. District

Magistrate, Rae

Bareilly & Ors. In this case, challenge was laid to the validity of
the no confidence motion passed on the 29th March, 1990 under
Section 87-A of the U.P. Municipalities Act by the board against
the appointment which was effected by the electorate directly
under Section 43 (2) of the Act as President of the Rae Bareilly City
Municipal Board. One of the grounds of challenge was on the
ground of absence of a specific provision applying under Section
47-A and 87-A of the Act to the President elected by the electorate.
31.

There is no dispute that in the statute in question,

O.M.P. No. 554/2006

page 27 of 31

Section 87-A specifically provided for a motion of a no confidence
against the President and the manner in which the same would be
proceeded with. Section 47-A provided the manner in which the
President was required to proceed when a vote of no confidence is
moved against him.
Thus, there was no dispute that the legislature had
provided a provision of removal of a president by vote of no
confidence. The issue raised is this case then was that the vote of
no confidence passed by the board was proper irrespective of
whether the president was elected by the board or the electorate.
It was held by the court that the removal of the president by the
board which was elected by the electorate was in fact proper and in
public interest.
32.

There is material difference between the issue urged

before the Apex Court and the question raised before this court.
The undisputed position in the present case is that the Multi-State
Co-operative Societies Act or the State enactments in this behalf
contained no provision for removal of the office bearers of the
board by the members of the board. In my view the principles laid
down by the Full Bench of Kerala and the Division Bench of
Bombay would guide adjudication in the present matter.
O.M.P. No. 554/2006

page 28 of 31

33.

I find force in the submission of Mr. Sagar Pathak,

learned counsel for the petitioner who has argued the matter, to
the effect that the statute, rules and the bye-laws of the society are
silent on the removal of the President.
Certainly, the doctrine of casus omissus would apply and
prohibit this court from reading such power into the legislation
which has been excluded by the legislature.
34.

So far as legislation on holding of office after two

consecutive terms as has been incorporated in Section 37 of the
Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act is concerned, I find that the
High Court of judicature at Chennai has already considered the
same in its two orders passed on 27th January, 1999 and 2nd
September, 2003 which would bind consideration of the issue
urged before this court.
Inasmuch as such amendments to the Multi-State Cooperative Societies Act came into force with effect from 2002, the
same may not apply to the case of the petitioner for the reasons
recorded in these orders.
35.

There is yet another reason for the petitioner to be

entitled to relief in the present petition. I find that the petitioner is
continuing in office by virtue of order dated 27th January, 1999.
O.M.P. No. 554/2006

page 29 of 31

The prayer for prohibiting the petitioner from functioning as
President was rejected by the High Court of Madras in its order
dated 2nd September, 2003 which has been noticed hereinabove.
There is no dispute that the order dated 2nd September,
2003 has attained finality and that the order dated 27th January,
1999 continues to operate and bind the parties even on date.
In this view of the matter also, I find force in the
submission of the petitioner that he is entitled to continue in office
as President of the society.
36.

So far as legality and validity of the Resolution dated 11th

November, 2006 which has been communicated to the petitioner
in the letter dated 13th November, 2006 is concerned, the
petitioner has already invoked the remedy by way of the
arbitration proceedings.
Section 9 of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996
empowers this court to pass such orders as are necessary to
preserve the subject matter of the arbitration.
In the light of the foregoing discussion, I have no
hesitation in holding that this petition has to be allowed.
The respondents are consequently restrained from
giving effect to the removal of the petitioner as communicated to
O.M.P. No. 554/2006

page 30 of 31

the petitioner in the letter dated 13th November, 2006 issued by
the respondent no. 4. The parties shall maintain status quo as
existing on the 11th of November, 2006.
The petitioner has claimed a right to continue in office
by virtue of order dated 27th January, 1999. It is made clear that
the present order shall continue to operate till such time the order
dated 27th January, 1999 is varied, modified or set aside by any
court.
This petition is allowed in the above terms.
(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
January 23, 2007
SD

O.M.P. No. 554/2006

page 31 of 31

