IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 8541/2007 & CM No.16106/2007
Date of decision: 23th November, 2007
ARVIND BHANDARI
... Petitioner
through: Petitioner in person.
VERSUS
MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF DELHI & ANR. ....Respondents
through: Mr. Rajiv Dutta, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
1.Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the Judgment?
2.To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3.Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
GITA MITTAL, J (Oral)
1.

This writ petition has been filed by Mr. Arvind Bhandari

who claims that he is the successor-in-interest of Shri Dharam
Pal Bhandari who was the owner of premises no.4/11, East Patel
Nagar, New Delhi – 110 008.

The petitioner, as successor of

late Shri Dharam Pal Bhandari who died on 14th January, 1997,
entered into a collaboration agreement with the builder
Mr.Vinay Gogia on 15th October, 2003 for raising construction on
this plot.

There is no dispute that a new building has been

raised on the premises which according to the petitioner, was
completed around September/October, 2004.
2.

The present writ petition has been filed by the petitioner

complaining that the builder raised illegal construction on the
WP (C) No.8541/2007

Page No.1

plot in question in collusion with the engineers of the MCD who
permitted the same for extraneous considerations.

It is an

admitted position in the writ petition that the other portions of
the building have already been sealed by the MCD. According
to the writ petitioner, he apprehends sealing action by the MCD
of the second floor portion of the flat on the rear side which he
is occupying and a prayer has been made by the petitioner that
he may be given six months' time to demolish the unauthorised
portions in his flat to bring it within the parameters of the law.
The petitioner has premised this prayer on the ground that he is
69 years of age and has no other alternative accommodation in
Delhi.
3.

The petitioner has also prayed for further direction to the

MCD to take action against other properties in the area where
there is unauthorised and illegal construction.
4.

When the writ petition came up for hearing on 19th

November, 2007, time was sought by the petitioner to place an
affidavit

setting

out

the

unauthorised

constructions

and

deviations in the flat which is occupied by him. The petitioner
has filed an affidavit dated 22nd November, 2007 wherein the
following illegalities have been set out:“3. The said flat is jutting out approximately 1/2'
feet into the backlane. There is no traffic in this
lane. The vegetable vendors and hawkers are
doing their respective business undisturbed.
WP (C) No.8541/2007

Page No.2

4.
The portions required to be demolished in my
flat to bring it with in the frame – work of municipal
building by laws are detailed below:(a) One bathroom-cum-toilet in the rear side.
(b) The entire balcony.
(c) The length of the master bedroom tot he
extent of 2 feet.”
5.

Copy of this affidavit has been handed over in court to

Mr. Kapil Dutta, learned counsel representing the MCD.

On

these facts, it has been prayed by the petitioner that this court
restrained the MCD from sealing his portion of the property.
6.

Mr. Kapil Dutta, learned counsel for the MCD, on advance

notice has contested this writ petition. It has been contended
that the property in question is one of the 54 properties in Patel
Nagar wherein action has been directed by the Division Bench
of this court. It has been contended that engineers of the MCD
are facing contempt action for non-compliance

of the orders

passed by the Division Bench. So far as the instant property is
concerned, the MCD has pointed out that the rear side flat of
the property no.4/11, East Patel Nagar, New Delhi owned by the
petitioner was initially sealed on 10th /11th

October,

2007.

However, in utter disregard of the orders of the court and
directions of the Monitoring Committee as well as the legal
provisions which govern the matter, the petitioner tampered
with the seal on the 19th October, 2007, 27th October, 2007, 7th

WP (C) No.8541/2007

Page No.3

November, 2007 and 13th November, 2007. The building
department of Karol Bagh Zone, MCD has lodged complaints
with the Police Station Patel Nagar in this behalf vide letters
dated 5th September, 2007, 20th October, 2007, 29th October,
2007, 8th November, 2007 and 14th November, 2007.
7.

Action for the sealing is being taken under orders of the

Division Bench in Kalyan Sanstha Social Organisation Vs. Union
of India & Ors. WP (C) No.4582/2003.
8.

Requests by the MCD for police force for compliance with

the orders of the Division Bench as well as the directions of the
Monitoring Committee appointed by the court, have been
sought so that compliance with the order is ensured and action
for sealing is taken in future.
9.
is

In view of the foregoing facts, it is to be noticed that there
admittedly

not

only

unauthorised

construction

but

construction has been effected over the back lane which is
encroachment over public property.

The petitioner has

contended that there is no traffic in this lane and only the
hawkers are doing their business. Whatever be the user of the
public property but it is not open for anybody to encroach upon
it. In any case projections over public streets are specifically
barred under statute.
10. I find that there is not even a whisper in the writ petition

WP (C) No.8541/2007

Page No.4

with regard to the prior sealing action undertaken by the MCD.
It has been pointed out that sealing action has been undertaken
by the MCD on 10-11th October, 2007 which stands tampered.
In my view, the writ petitioner has concealed material facts
which were required to be placed before this court.

An

impression is sought to be created that the petitioner is
apprehending sealing action at the behest of the MCD whereas
the property has been already sealed and the seal has been
tampered.
11. The petitioner has orally tried to explain his action of
tampering with the seal by contending that the same was
imperative inasmuch as the petitioner could not have been
expected to sleep in the park of colony and he had nowhere to
go. No person can take law into his own hands and is required
to seek due process of law in order to seek any relief as in the
instant case. The provisions of Delhi Municipal Corporation Act,
1957 clearly provided remedy to a person who is aggrieved by
any action of the MCD. The action of the MCD is stated to be
pursuant to the orders passed by the Division Bench and the
Monitoring Committee which also the petitioner has concealed.
12. It is trite that concealment of material facts and availing of
legal procedure by such acts have been held to amount to
criminal contempt of court by the Apex Court.

WP (C) No.8541/2007

Be that as it

Page No.5

may, in the instant case, the petitioner is certainly disentitled to
exercise of discretion in his favour under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India.
12. The petitioner has admitted not only statutory violations
but even encroachment over public land. The action of the MCD
is based on the orders of the court.
For all the foregoing facts, I find no merit in this writ
petition and the writ petition and application are hereby
dismissed.
Dasti.

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
November 23, 2007
aa

WP (C) No.8541/2007

Page No.6

