IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 4087/2004
Judgment reserved on: 3rd October, 2005
Dat e of decision: December 23, 2005
D.T.C.

... Petitioner
through Mr. Alok Shankar, Advocate
VERSUS

BALWAN SINGH
(Deceased through legal heirs)
....
Respondents
through Ms. Rasmeet K. Charya,
Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
No
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? No
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
No
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

By way of this writ petition, the DTC has impugned an

order dated 28th October, 2002 passed by the Industrial Tribunal
dismissing its application seeking approval of the disciplinary
action taken by it against the deceased workman under Section 33
(2) (b) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
W.P.(C) 4087/2004

page 1 of 10

2.

Sh. Balwan Singh was employed as a driver with the

DTC. He was served with a chargesheet dated 14th August, 1992
wherein it was alleged that he has been unauthorisedly absent
from duty with effect from 18th June, 1992 to 8th July, 1992 without
any information. Based on the workman's past record of three
years, it was also alleged that Shri Balwan Singh had remained
absent unauthorisedly for 79 days. The DTC has contended the
workman failed to submit any reply to the notice to show cause
and the chargesheet. Further all the charges levelled against the
workman were proved.

In these circumstances an order of

removal from service was passed against Shri Balwan Singh which
was dated 26th April, 1993 and one month wages were also
simultaneously sent by a money order of the same date.
3.

The industrial tribunal decided the issue with regard to

the legality and validity of the inquiry against the employer vide an
order dated 27th November, 1992. However on the request of the
DTC to prove the misconduct, it was permitted to lead evidence
before the Industrial Tribunal.

The matter had proceeded to

evidence and the Industrial Tribunal considered the matter in
detail.
4.

Before the Industrial Tribunal, it was on record that the

W.P.(C) 4087/2004

page 2 of 10

period of absence prior to the year 1992 was treated as leave
without pay and that so far as the period from 18th June, 1992 to 8th
July, 1992 was concerned, the wages of the respondent/workman
stood deducted.
In these circumstances, it was held by the Industrial
Tribunal that the chargesheet had been issued for a period which
had been treated as leave without pay. For this reason vide its
order dated 28th October, 2002, the Industrial Tribunal held that
such leave without pay could not be treated as misconduct and
accordingly answered the issue as to whether the workman is
guilty of misconduct against the management. The application of
the DTC seeking approval of its disciplinary action against the
respondent under Section 33 (2) (b) of the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947 was therefore dismissed vide the order dated 28th October,
2002.
Aggrieved by this dismissal, the DTC has assailed the
order dated 28th October, 2002 by way of the present writ petition.
5.

I have heard learned counsel for the parties at length.

While reliance has been placed by the petitioner on the
pronouncement of the Apex Court reported at AIR 2004 SC 4161
entitled DTC vs Sardar Singh, the respondent has vehemently
W.P.(C) 4087/2004

page 3 of 10

contested the writ petition. Challenge has been made principally
on the grounds of delay and laches on the part of the petitioner to
contend that the DTC has impugned an order passed on 28th
October, 2002, almost two years after its passing. It has further
been contended that grave injustice would result to the respondent
inasmuch as the workman has expired and that the writ petition is
being pursued by his widow and children. Even otherwise, on
merits it has been contended that the workman had submitted
applications which are available on the record of the DTC and the
DTC had treated his absence as leave without pay which amounted
to its regularisation.
6.

So far as the objection on delay is concerned, it has been

submitted that the DTC had initially filed Writ Petition(Civil)
1844/2004 impugning the order dated 27th January, 1998 whereby
the inquiry conducted by the DTC was vitiated and the order dated
28th October, 2002 whereby DTC's application under Section 33
(2) (b) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 was dismissed. It has
been submitted that the DTC was directed by the court to file
separate petitions impugning the two orders separately. In these
circumstances it is submitted that the present writ petition has
been filed impugning only the order dated 28th October, 2002.
W.P.(C) 4087/2004

page 4 of 10

7.

Further delay is explained on the ground that DTC had

applied for certified copy of the order dated 28th October, 2002
which was made available to the DTC only on 6th January, 2003.
The matter was delayed at the hands of counsel who handed over
an incomplete file to the DTC. Despite the matter being entrusted
to another counsel for filing of the writ petition, the writ petition
could not be filed for want of record.

The same had to be

reconstructed. However even though the petition was ready for
filing in the month of October, 2003, the learned counsel who had
prepared the writ petition shifted residence and in this process,
the file of the case was misplaced. It has been stated that the
entire file had to be reconstructed and the petition redrafted and
filed.
8.

In these circumstances, I am satisfied by the explanation

rendered by the writ petitioner explaining the delay in filing the
writ petition. It is noteworthy that the statute does not prescribe a
period of limitation for filing a writ petition. However it is well
settled that such remedy must be invoked only within reasonable
time. The certified copy of the order having been made available
on 6th January, 2003, it cannot be possibly contended that the
filing of this writ petition on or around 11th March, 2004 was
W.P.(C) 4087/2004

page 5 of 10

unreasonably delayed by the petitioner disentitling the petitioner
to maintain the same before this court on the ground of
unexplained delay and laches.
9.

So far as the merits of the case is concerned, the Apex

Court has authoritatively pronounced the law in DTC vs Sardar
Singh(supra) in the following terms :“10.
When an employee absents himself
from duty, even without sanctioned leave for
very long period, it prima facie shows lack of
interest in work. Para 19(h) of the Standing
Order as quoted above relates to habitual
negligence of duties and lack of interest in the
Authority's work. When an employee absents
himself from duty without sanctioned leave the
Authority can, on the basis of the records, come
to a conclusion about the employee being
habitually negligent in duties and an exhibited
lack of interest in the employer's work. Ample
material was produced before the Tribunal in
each case to show as to how the concerned
employees were remaining absent for long
periods which affect the work of the employer
and the concerned employee was required at
least to bring some material on record to show as
to how his absence was on the basis of
sanctioned leave and as to how there was no
negligence. Habitual absence is a factor which
establishes lack of interest in work. There
cannot be any sweeping generalisation. But at
the same time some telltale features can be
noticed and pressed into service to arrive at
conclusions in the departmental proceedings.
11.
Great emphasis was laid by learned
counsel for the respondent-employee on the
absence being treated as leave without pay. As
W.P.(C) 4087/2004

page 6 of 10

was observed by this Court in State of Madhya
Pradesh v. Harihar Gopal [1969 (3) SLR 274]
by a three-judge Bench of this court, even when
an order is passed for treating absence as leave
without pay after passing an order of
termination that is for the purpose of
maintaining correct record of service. The
charge in that case was, as in the present case,
absence without obtaining leave in advance. The
conduct of the employees in this case is nothing
but irresponsible in extreme and can hardly be
justified.
The charge in this case was
misconduct by absence.
In view of the
Governing Standing Orders unauthorised leave
can be treated as misconduct.
12.
Conclusions regarding negligence and
lack of interest can be arrived at by looking into
the period of absence, more particularly, when
same is unauthorised.
Burden is on the
employee who claims that there was no
negligence and/or lack of interest to establish it
by placing relevant materials. Clause (ii) of Para
4 of the Standing Order shows the seriousness
attached to habitual absence. In clause (i)
thereof, there is requirement of prior
permission. Only exception made is in case of
sudden illness.
There also conditions are
stipulated, non-observance of which renders the
absence unauthorised.”
10.

In the instant case, the findings arrived at by the

Industrial Tribunal were erroneous as it was held that the DTC had
treated the petitioner's unauthorised absence as leave without pay
which amounted to its regularisation. Consequently, the tribunal
had rejected the application seeking approval of disciplinary action
taken against the workman by the petitioner against the workman.
W.P.(C) 4087/2004

page 7 of 10

The Apex Court however has held that the action of the
management in treating unauthorised absence as leave without
pay does not amount to its regularisation and that the same would
continue to be covered within the sweep of 'misconduct' . In given
circumstances, as noticed by the court, the same would entitle the
employer to take disciplinary action and impose penalty upon the
workman.
11.

It has been submitted on behalf of the respondent that

the workman had submitted leave applications and that the same
are available on the record of the DTC.
12.

The Apex Court has held that the burden of proof of the

fact that there was no negligence or lack of interest on the part of
the workman is upon the workman who so states. The question as
to whether a leave application was submitted or not, whether the
same was bonafide, whether the same was sanctioned or rejected,
whether the workman remained absent without sanction of leave,
whether the workman was ailing, the date of submission of the
application, the date of its sanction/rejection, the period for which
the application was actually submitted and period for absence for
which no application is made etc. are all questions of fact which
are required to be proved by oral/documentary evidence which has
W.P.(C) 4087/2004

page 8 of 10

to be adduced before the industrial adjudicator in accordance with
law.

The effect of rejection, its communication or non-

communication; the effect of failure to pass orders on the
application(s) of the workman are to be raised and pressed before
the industrial adjudicator. The person claiming would be entitled
to call for production of records from the authorities to prove its
case and would have to stand the test of cross examination.
Similarly the management would have an opportunity to prove its
case and to establish that the circumstances of the case fell within
the parameters of misconduct or negligence laid down in DTC vs
Sardar Singh (supra) and the other statutory provisions governing
the same.
13.

For the reasons noticed hereinabove, the order dated

28th October, 2002 passed by the Industrial Tribunal is not
sustainable in law. Accordingly the same is hereby set aside and
quashed and the matter is remanded for fresh adjudication to the
Industrial Tribunal No. III. The Industrial Adjudicator shall give
an opportunity to both parties in accordance with law to prove
their respective contentions and thereafter pass an award in
accordance with the settled principles of law.
This writ petition is accordingly allowed.
W.P.(C) 4087/2004

page 9 of 10

14.

The litigation expenses which were paid to the workman

in terms of the order dated 13th August, 2004 shall be
unconditionally released in favour of the legal heirs of Shri Balwan
Singh, respondent herein, in case the same has not been done
alread

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
December 23, 2005
kr

W.P.(C) 4087/2004

page 10 of 10

