IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 16064/2004
Judgment reserved on: 25 th November, 2005
Date of decision: December 23, 2005
ANAND KUMAR
... Petitioner
through Mr. Nitin Bhardwaj, Advocate
VERSUS
THE MANAGEMENT STATE BANK OF INDIA
.... Respondents
through Mr. Rajiv Kapoor, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

By way of this writ petition an Award dated 6th May, 2004 by

the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court has
been impugned by the workman whereby the reference was answered
against him. The entire challenge by the petitioner is raised on the
plea that he had placed sufficient material on record and had
established that he was appointed by the respondent bank to do
W.P.(C) No. 16064/2004

page 1 of 19

miscellaneous jobs including the work of a waterman with effect from
1st May, 1984 on a last drawn salary of Rs.325/- per month. Placing
reliance on a document dated 1st September, 1989, it is contended
that this document constituted a letter of appointment which
established that the petitioner had been engaged by the bank. In
these circumstances, according to the petitioner/workman, the action
of the respondents in terminating the services of the workman on 27th
March, 1990 tantamounted to retrenchment as defined under Section
2 (oo) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. The same having been
effected without compliance of Section 25F of the enactment,
rendered the action of the respondents illegal entitling the petitioner
to reinstatement with all consequential benefits.
2.

The respondent has repudiated the contentions of the

petitioner.

It has come in the evidence that there is a local

implementation committee which runs the canteen in the branch of
the bank. The composition of this committee is from members of all
categories of the staff working at the local branch/office.

The

respondent bank has nothing to do with the affairs of this local
implementation committee which runs the canteen. The committee

W.P.(C) No. 16064/2004

page 2 of 19

is an independent and voluntary association formed by employees for
their own welfare.

The petitioner was engaged by this local

implementation committee as a canteen boy and during this period
he was bringing drinking water from the ground floor to the second
floor of the bank premises which was of barely half an hour duration
for which he was paid a mutually a daily wage rate. The recruitment
to the posts in the bank has to be as per its recruitment rules. All
appointments are made after proper advertisement, test/interview.
In the instant case, there is nothing on record to show tht any
appointment of the petitioner was effected by the bank after following
any rules and guidelines. The bank placed material on record to
show that it was a local implementation committee which
discontinued the services of the petitioner with effect from 28th
March, 1990.

Since there was no privily or contract with the

petitioner in terms of payment of salary etc. it had to be and was
rightly held that the petitioner was not entitled to any amount.
3.

The petitioner has placed strong reliance on the photocopy of

the document dated 1st November, 1989 which was produced before
the industrial adjudicator in support of his employment by the bank.

W.P.(C) No. 16064/2004

page 3 of 19

Perusal of this document shows that the same is a photocopy and has
been signed by the petitioner and two witnesses. The document is
hand written in vernacular purporting to be an agreement entered
into between the petitioner and the manager of the respondent bank
of its Kirti Nagar branch. Perusal of this document shows that the
petitioner had agreed to supply fresh water in glasses, jug, etc and to
fill the water in the desert cooler and undertake their weekly cleaning
with effect from 1st December, 1989 to 30th October, 1990 as per the
needs of the bank.

For this period, the remuneration which the

petitioner was to receive was clearly stipulated.
4.

This document was not proved in the evidence in accordance

with law and was not even put to the management in its evidence.
The petitioner also did not refer to this document in his affidavit by
way of evidence. The document, is at the face of it, not an agreement
between the bank and the petitioner. It is also not signed by any
person authorised to execute the same on behalf of the bank. In the
affidavit by way of evidence filed by the petitioner on 23rd September,
1996, the petitioner claimed to be appointed as a peon/waterman
with effect from 1st May, 1994 and claimed that his last drawn salary

W.P.(C) No. 16064/2004

page 4 of 19

was Rs.325/5.

There is material variance in the dates from which the

petitioner has claimed to have been employed. In the statement of
claim filed by the petitioner, he had claimed that he was appointed
with effect from 1st May, 1984 while in evidence he has stated that he
was appointed on 1st May, 1994.

In his cross examination, the

petitioner stated that he was working as a “watchman” and not as a
peon. He further stated that he was not given any appointment letter
by the bank from 1st May, 1984 and that he was being paid only Rs.2
per day for filling water. So far as his appointment was concerned,
the workman could not deny that he was appointed by the local
implementation committee but submitted that his appointment was
by the manager of the bank.
6.

It is well settled that the primary burden of proof to establish a

plea rests on a person so claiming. In this behalf reference can be
appropriately made to the judicial pronouncement in (2001) 9 SCC
713 (715) State of Gujarat & Ors. vs Pratamsingh Narsinh Parmar;
2004 LLR 351 (para 49) Nilgiri Coop. Marketing Society Ltd. vs State
of Tamil Nadu; 2001 LLR 148 Dhyan Singh vs Raman Lal; 1996 Lab.

W.P.(C) No. 16064/2004

page 5 of 19

I.C. 202 Swapan vs First Labour Court, West Bengal and 1973 Lab.
I.C. 398 N.C. John vs TTS & CE Workers Union; Thus burden lies on
a person claiming the establishment to be an industry to place
positive facts before the court in this behalf. For this reason, the
primary burden to establish relation of employment also lies on the
workman who is claiming the same.
7.

The present case therefore has to be examined in the light of

this legal position.
8.

The

respondent

bank

had

specifically

urged

that

no

appointment letter was issued to the petitioner and he had never
marked his attendance or presence in any attendance register and he
was never paid wages or other benefits by the bank. No evidence to
the contrary has been pointed out.
9.
is not

Even the post on which the petitioner has claimed employment
certain. In the order dated 20 th February, 2002 of

the Central Government referring the dispute for adjudication,
reference is made to the petitioner being engaged as a canteen boy.
However, in the claim filed the workman has stated that he was
appointed to perform the job of peon/waterman.

W.P.(C) No. 16064/2004

page 6 of 19

10.

In 2000 (5) SCC 531 entitled State Bank of India & Ors. vs State

Bank of India Canteen Employees' Union (Bengal circle) & Ors. it has
been held that the local implementation committee is not a bank. The
observations of the Apex Court in this pronouncement in this behalf
are noteworthy and are to the following effect :“29. Learned counsel for the employees referred
to clause (12) of the scheme which provides that
a canteen should be run on “no-profit-no-loss”
basis. The said clause also makes it clear that the
subsidy provided is only to the extent of funds
made available and that members concerned of
LIC would ensure that articles are purchased on
cash payment and no liability is incurred from
any source. It has nothing to do with the
running of the canteens by the Bank. It is part of
the scheme which provides how efficiently LIC
should run the canteens.
34. Further, we entirely agree with the decision
rendered in RBO case by the three-Judge Bench
and the facts in the present case are similar to
the facts of that case. Presuming that the
privilege of providing canteen facilities to the
employees exists, yet it would be difficult to hold
that the Bank should provide the said facility by
running a canteen by itself. To promote canteen
facilities by providing subsidy or other facilities
is altogether different from running the canteen.
Running of a canteen in a small branch having
staff strength less than a particular limit may not
be economical, but may be a waste. It has been
pointed out by the learned counsel for the Bank
that in some areas, staff strength may be less
than 10.
Further, the appointment of the
W.P.(C) No. 16064/2004

page 7 of 19

employees by the Bank has been regulated by the
State Bank of India General Regulations, which
are statutory Regulations framed by Reserve
Bank of India with the previous sanction of the
Central Government in exercise of powers
conferred by sub-section (3) of Section 50 of the
State Bank of India Act, 1955. In the case of
employees of canteens run by LIC, the Bank does
not have any control in their appointment and
the aforesaid Recruitment Rules are not required
to be observed.
36. Further, whether the Bank should provide
canteen facilities in a branch having a staff
strength of 100 or more employees on the basis
of bipartite agreement between the Bank
management and the All-India SBI Staff
Federation, is a matter of policy decision and
may depend upon viability and other factors of
running of such canteens at other branches. It is
for the Bank to decide in which branches canteen
facilities should be provided and not by the
employees of the canteens run by the Local
Implementation Committees.
At the most,
employees of the Bank can raise such a
contentions.”
11.

It now becomes necessary to examine the plea on behalf of the

petitioner that the bank has made an admission to the effect that the
petitioner was appointed by the bank and that the workman's
services were actually terminated. It is noteworthy that pleas of the
bank have to be seen in their entirety. There is nothing on record
which could persuade this court to hold that there was an admission

W.P.(C) No. 16064/2004

page 8 of 19

that the petitioner has been appointed as an employee of the
respondent bank. There is a categorical statement on the part of the
respondent that it had never employed the petitioner and that the
petitioner had never marked any attendance in the register or
received salary from the respondent bank. There is also no document
to show that the petitioner was an employee of the respondent bank.
12.

An objection has been taken by the petitioner that the

respondent bank failed to produce any document to show that the
petitioner was engaged by the local implementation committee. In
this behalf, it was only if the petitioner had discharged the onus and
burden of proof cast on him and had placed some material on record
to indicate that he had been employed by the respondent bank that
the respondent bank would have been required to displace the case
set up by the petitioner by leading positive evidence.
13.

In (2005) 5 SCC 100 Manager, Reserve Bank of India vs S.

Mani & Ors., it was held by the apex court that it is only if the initial
burden of proof, which was on the workman, was discharged to some
extent, that a finding can be returned in respect of the defence of the
management.

Furthermore, a plea having been set up by the

W.P.(C) No. 16064/2004

page 9 of 19

workman, the initial burden of proof was on the workman to show
that he had been employed by the respondent bank in the claim
capacity on the stated terms. The circumstances in which the court
may draw an adverse inference against the management has been
succinctly set down thus :“22, An adverse inference, therefore, was drawn for
non-production of the attendance register alone, and
not for non-production of the wage-slips. Reference to
“other relevant documents” must be held to be vague
as the appellant herein had not been called upon to
produce any other documents for the said purpose.
23. It appears that the learned Tribunal considered
the matter solely from the angle that the appellant had
failed to prove its plea of abandonment of service by
the respondents.
24. The question came up for consideration before
this Court recently in Siri Niwas wherein it was held :
(SCCp.198, para 15)
“15. A court of law even in a case where
provisions of the Evidence Act apply, may
presume or may not presume that if a party
despite possession of the best evidence had
not produced the same, it would have gone
against his contentions. The matter, however,
would be different where despite direction by
a court the evidence is withheld. Presumption
as to adverse inference for non-production of
evidence is always optional and one of the
factors which is required to be taken into
consideration is the background of facts
involved in the lis. The presumption, thus, is
not obligatory because notwithstanding the
intentional
non-production,
other
W.P.(C) No. 16064/2004

page 10 of 19

circumstances may exist upon which such
intentional non-production may be found to
be justifiable on some reasonable grounds.”
25. Referring to the decision of this Court in Indira
Nehru Gandhi v. Raj Narain this court observed :(Siri
Niwas case, SCC p. 199, para 19)
“19. Furthermore a party in order to get
benefit of the provisions contained in Section
114 III. (g) of the Evidence Act must place
some evidence in support of his case. Here the
respondent failed to do so.”
26. In Hariram this Court observed : (SCC p. 250,
para 11)
“11. The above burden having not been
dischasrgsed and the Labour Court having held
so, in our opinion, the Industrial Court and the
High Court erred in basing an order of
reinstatement solely on an adverse inference
drawn erroneously.”
27. As noticed hereinbefore, in this case also the
respondents did not adduce any evidence whatsoever.
Thus, in the facts and circumstances of the case, the
Tribunal erred in drawing an adverse inference.
Burden of proof
28. The initial burden of proof was on the workmen
to show that they had completed 240 days of service.
The Tribunal did not consider the question from that
angle. It held that the burden of proof was upon the
appellant on the premise that they have failed to prove
their plea of abandonment of service stating :
“It is admitted case of the parties that all
the first parties under the reference CRs Nos. 1
to 11 of 1992 have been appointed by the
second party as ticca mazdoors. As per the
first parties, they had worked continuously
from April 1980 to December 1982. But the
second party had denied the abovesaid claim of
continuous service of the first parties on the
W.P.(C) No. 16064/2004

page 11 of 19

ground that the first parties has not been
appointed as regular workmen but they were
working only as temporary part-time workers
as ticca mazdoor and their services were
required whenever necessity arose that too on
the leave vacancies of regular employees. But
as strongly contended by the counsel for the
first party, since the second party had denied
the abovesaid claim of continuous period of
service, it is for the second party to prove
through the records available with them as the
relevant records could be available only with
the second party.”
29. The Tribunal, therefore, accepted that the
appellant had denied the respondents' claim as regards
their continuous service.
30. In Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani it was
stated : (SCC p. 26, para 3)
“3. .....In our opinion the Tribunal
was not right in placing the onus on the
management without first determining on the
basis of cogent evidence that the respondent
had worked for more than 240 days in the
year preceding his termination. It was the
case of the claimant that he had so worked
but this claim was denied by the appellant. It
was then for the claimant to lead evidence to
show that he had in fact worked for 240 days
in the year proceding his termination. Filing
of an affidavit is only his own statement in his
favour and that cannot be regarded as
sufficient evidence for any court or tribunal to
come to the conclusion that a workman had,
in fact, worked for 240 days in a year. No
proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240
days or order or record of appointment or
engagement for this period was produced by
the workman. On this ground alone, the
W.P.(C) No. 16064/2004

page 12 of 19

award is liable to be set aside.”
31. In Siri Niwas this Court held : (SCC pp. 197-198,
para 13)
“13. The provisions of the Evidence Act,
1872 per se are not applicable in an industrial
adjudication. The general principles of it are,
however, applicable. It is also imperative for
the Industrial Tribunal to see that the
principles of natural justice are complied with.
The burden of proof was on the respondent
workman herein to show that he had worked
for 240 days in the preceding twelve months
prior to his alleged retrenchment. In terms of
Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947, an order retrenching a workman would
not be effective unless the conditions
precedent therefor are satisfied. Section 25-F
postulates the following conditions to be
fulfilled by an employer for effecting a valid
retrenchment :
(i) one month's notice in writing
indicting the reasons for retrenchment or
wages in lieu thereof;
(ii) payment of compensation
equivalent to fifteen days' average pay for every
completed year of continuous service or any
part thereof in excess of six months.”
It was further observed : (SCC p. 198, para 14)
“14. .... As noticed hereinbefore, the
burden of proof was on the workman. From the
award it does not appear that the workman
adduced any evidence whatsoever in support of
his contention that he complied with the
requirements of Section 25-B of the Industrial
Disputes Act. Apart from examining himself in
support of his contention he did not produce or
call for any document from the office of the
appellant herein including the muster rolls. It
W.P.(C) No. 16064/2004

page 13 of 19

is improbable that a person working in a local
authority would not be in possession of any
documentary evidence to support his claim
before the Tribunal. Apart from muster rolls he
could have shown the terms and conditions of
his offer of appointment and the remuneration
received by him for working during the
aforementioned period.
He did not even
examine any other witness in support of his
case.”
32. Yet again in Hariram it was opined : (SCC p.
250, para 10)
“10. .... We cannot but bear in mind the
fact that the initial burden of establishing the
factum of their continuous work for 240 days in
a year rests with the respondent applicants.”
14.

In (2005) 3 SCC 409 entitled Karnataka State Road Transport

Corporation & Anr. vs S.G. Kottuprappa & Anr., the Apex Court held
thus :“13.
Regulation 10 provides for procedure for
appointment, sub-regulation (5) whereof reads as
under :“10. (5) A selected candidate waiting
for being appointed regularly in accordance
with these Regulations may be appointed as a
temporary employee before such regular
appointment against a short-term vacancy or
as a substitute in place of regular employee
under suspension pending enquiry or
suspension as a measure of punishment or on
leave for a period not less than one month but
not exceeding 3 months.”
15.

In (2005) 3 SCC 241 entitled Cholan Roadways Ltd. Vs G.

W.P.(C) No. 16064/2004

page 14 of 19

Thirugnanasambandam, the court observed thus :“14. The learned Presiding Officer, Industrial
Tribunal, as noticed hereinbefore, opined that the
passengers of the bus should have been examined. It
does not appear from the order dated 29-4-1988
passed by the Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal
that the respondent herein made any prayer for
cross-examining the passengers who travelled in the
ill-fated bus and who were examined by the said Shri
M. Venkatesan. It is evident from the order of the
learned Tribunal that only in the sow-cause notice
filed by the respondent in response to the second
show-cause notice, was such a contention raised.
The learned Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal in
his impugned judgment further failed to take into
consideration that even if the statements of the said
passengers are ignored,t he misconduct allegedly
adduced by Shri M. Venkatesan together with the
circumstantial evidence brought on record. The
learned Single Judge of the High Court although
referred to the sketch drawn by PW 1 on the site (Ext.
P-2) and 4 photographs (Ext. P-8) but ignored the
same observing that unless witnesses were examined
in support of the two exhibits, it is not possible to
draw any inference therefrom. The Division Bench
of the High Court did not examine the materials on
record independently but referred to the findings of
the Industrial Tribunal as also the learned Single
Judge to the effect that from their judgments it was
apparent that the driver had not been driving the bus
rashly and negligently.”
16.

Perusal of the record of the instant case shows that the

petitioner miserably failed to discharge the primary burden of proof
which was cast on him. There is no material which could at all
W.P.(C) No. 16064/2004

page 15 of 19

indicate even, let alone, establish a relationship of employment
between the respondent bank and the petitioner.
17.

In view of the facts which have been established on record, the

judgment of the Apex Court reported at (2003) 8 SCC 248 Haryana
Tourism Corporation Limited vs Fakir Chand & Ors. has no bearing
on the issues raised in the present case. The petitioner has miserably
failed to establish a relationship of employment with the respondent.
The petitioner before this court cannot possibly be held to be entitled
to reinstatement or to compensation from the respondent.
18.

The parameters and scope of judicial review on issues of fact in

industrial awards have been circumscribed within narrow limits by
judicial pronouncement.

Noteworthy in this behalf are the

observations of the Apex Court in AIR 2000 SC 1508 entitled
Indian Overseas Bank Vs. I.O.B. Staff Canteen Workers'
Union & Another in which it was held thus:“The learned single Judge seems to have
undertaken an exercise, impermissible for him in
exercising
writ
jurisdiction,
by
liberally
reappreciating the evidence and drawing
conclusions of his own on pure questions of fact,
unmindful, though aware fully, that he is not
exercising any appellate jurisdiction over the
awards passed by a Tribunal, presided over by a
W.P.(C) No. 16064/2004

page 16 of 19

Judicial Officer. The findings of fact recorded by a
fact-finding authority duly constituted for the
purpose and which ordinarily should be considered
to have become final, cannot be disturbed for the
mere reason of having been based on materials or
evidence not sufficient or credible in the opinion of
the writ Court to warrant those findings at any
rate, as long as they are based upon some material
which are relevant for the purpose or even on the
ground that there is yet another view which can b
reasonably and possibly one taken. The Division
Bench was not only justified but well merited in its
criticism of the order of the learned single Judge
and in ordering restoration of the Award of the
Tribunal. On being taken through the findings of
the Industrial Tribunal as well as the order of the
learned single Judge and the judgment of the
Division Bench, we are of the view that the
Industrial Tribunal had overwhelming materials
which constituted ample and sufficient basis for
recording its findings, as it did, and the manner of
consideration undertaken, the objectivity of
approach adopted and reasonableness of findings
recorded seem to be unexceptionable. The only
course, therefore, open to the writ Judge was the
relevant criteria laid down by this Court, before
sustaining the claim of the canteen workmen, on
the facts found and recorded by the fact-finding
authority and not embark upon an exercise of reassessing the evidence and arriving at findings of
ones own, altogether giving a complete go-bye
even to the facts specifically found by the Tribunal
below.”
19.

In this context the law laid down by the Apex Court in Sadhu

Ram vs. Delhi Transport Corporation, AIR 1984 SC 1967

W.P.(C) No. 16064/2004

page 17 of 19

observed :
“Para 5.... nor do we think that it was right for the High Court
to interfere with the Award of the Industrial Tribunal under Article
226 on a mere technicality. Article 226 is a device to secure and
advance justice and not otherwise. In the result, we allow the
appeal, set-aside the judgment of the High Court and restore the
Award of the Presiding Officer.”
20.

In Harbans Lal vs. Jag Mohan, (1985) 4 SCC 333 the court

ruled :
“P ara 5 .... The limitations on the jurisdiction of the High
Court under Article 226 of the Constitution are well settled. The
Writ Petition before the High Court prayed for a Writ in the nature
of certiorari, and it is well known that a Writ in the nature of
certiorari may be issued only if the order of the inferior tribunal of
subordinate court suffers from an error of jurisdiction, or from a
breach of the principles of natural justice or is vitiated by a manifest
or apparent error of law. There is no sanction enabling the High
Court to reappraise the evidence without sufficient reason in law
and reach finding of fact contrary to those rendered by an inferior
court or subordinate court. When a High Court proceeds to do so, it
acts plainly in excess of its power.”
21.

In Calcutta Port Shramik Union vs Calcutta River

Transport Association & Ors. 1988 (Supp.) SCC 768, the court
further observed that :
“Para 10. The object of enacting the enacting the Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947 and of making provision therein to refer disputes
to Tribunals for settlement is to bring about industrial peace.
Whenever a reference is made by the Government to the Industrial
W.P.(C) No. 16064/2004

page 18 of 19

Tribunal, it has to be presumed ordinarily that there is a genuine
industrial dispute between the parties which requires to be resolved
by adjudication. In all such cases, an attempt should be made by
Courts exercising powers of judicial review to sustain as far as
possible the Awards made by the Industrial Tribunal instead of
picking holes here and there in the Awards on rival points and
ultimately frustrating the entire adjudication process before the
Tribunals by striking down the Awards in hyper technical grounds.
Unfortunately, the orders of the Single Judge and of the Division
Bench have resulted in such frustration and have made the Award
fruitless on an untenable basis.”
22.

In Sudhoo vs M/s Haji Lal Mohd. Biri Works & Ors.

1990 Lab.I.C. 1538 it was held that the High Court should not have
interfered with the findings of the fact reached by the prescribed
authority on appreciation of evidence.
23.

In the instant case also the petitioner has assailed he award

only on issues of fact which would be impermissible. The petitioner
failed to discharge the primary burden of proof cast on him.
For all the foregoing reasons, I find no merit in this petition
which is hereby dismissed.

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
December 23, 2005
kr

W.P.(C) No. 16064/2004

page 19 of 19

