IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
CIVIL SUIT (OS) No.941 OF 2001
rd

Date of Decision 23 May, 2007

DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
... Petitioner
through: Ms. Anusuya Salwan, Advocate

VERSUS
S.S. JETLY

.....Respondent
through: Mr. Vivekanand, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
GITA MITTAL, J. (Oral)
1.

The plaintiff has filed the present suit for recovery of Rs.1,04,78,947/-

against the defendant who was awarded a contract for construction of surbathing ghat at downstream side of Wazirabad barrage on the the banks
of the river Yamuna, Delhi. The defendant's tender for this work found to
be the lowest and was accepted by the Delhi Development Authority, plaintiff
herein, at an estimated cost of Rs.3,73,87,935/- and the tendered amount of
Rs.3,53,32,387/-. The defendant was issued an acceptance letter and the
CS (OS) No.941/2001

Page No.1

work was awarded to it vide letter no.EE/ED-12/A-1 (652)/95-96/574 dated
st

1 May, 1975.
2.

As per the terms and condition of the contract stated in the letter
th

awarding the work, the stipulated date of the start of the work was 11 May,
th

1995 while the stipulated date of completion of the work was 11 August,
1996, i.e. the work was to be completed within a period of fifteen months.
The formal agreement being 1/EE/ED-12/A/95-96 between the parties was
th

executed and signed on 4 May, 95.
3.

The plaintiff has averred that the defendant could not undertake and

carry out the work in accordance with terms and conditions of the agreement
and it was that the progress of work on the part of the defendant was slow
despite every cooperation from the plaintiff having been extended to it. Even
nineteen months after the stipulated date of completion over, the defendant
was able to complete only about 44.70% of the work. The plaintiff has urged
that it was compelled to issue a show cause notice under clause 3 of the
agreement between the parties to show cause as to why the contract should
not be rescinded for the reasons stated in this notice. The defendant gave a
th

reply dated 12 May, 1998 which was found to be wholly unsatisfactory. As a
result the executive engineer recommended rescission of the contract which
was approved by the chief engineer which was approved by the chief

CS (OS) No.941/2001

Page No.2

st

engineer on 9 May, 1999. The work was consequently rescinded by the
executive engineer concerned in exercise of power under Clause 3 of the
th

agreement vide letter no.803 dated 29 May, 1998.
4.

In addition thereto, the Executive Engineer on consideration of the
th

th

matter found that from 11 August, 1996 to 29 May, 1998 when the work
was rescinded, a delay of 169 days was on account of hindrances attributable
to the plaintiff while the remaining delay of about 488 days was attributable
to the defendant.

In these circumstances, the executive engineer

recommended the defendant's case for extension of time with levy of
compensation under Clause 2 of the agreement.

The Superintending

Engineer consequently decided to levy compensation of Rs.37,38,790/- being
equivalent to 10% of the estimated cost of the contract in exercise of powers
under Clause 2 of the agreement. In these circumstances, according to the
plaintiff, for the default of the defendant, it was compelled to get the balance
work completed by another agency and that it was compelled to incur
additional expenses of Rs.95,39,257/-. In addition to these amounts, the
plaintiff has claimed the amount payable under Clause 10(c)(c) towards the
balance work which comes to Rs.9,39,690/-. For these reason, the plaintiff
has claimed a total sum of Rs.1,04,78,947/- from the defendant in the present
suit.

CS (OS) No.941/2001

Page No.3

The defendant has filed their written statement disputing the claims of
the plaintiff.
5.

It is noteworthy that the present suit has been filed by the Delhi

Development Authority, plaintiff, seeking recovery of the amount which has
been incurred by the plaintiff for the work got done by it at the cost of the
defendant. Another suit has been filed by the Delhi Development Authority
being CS (OS) No.161/2000 for recovery of the amount claimed by it against
the defendant towards liquidated damages levied under Clause 2 of the
contract.
6.

In the present case, issues have not been framed.

However, the

defendant has made a submission that this court in exercise of powers under
Section 89 of the Code of Civil Procedure, this court should refer the disputes
to an arbitrator. The submission is that the disputes are of technical nature
requiring consideration of technical terms as well as details of the steps taken
by the defendant for timely completion of the work and the examination of
the reasons for the delay in its execution. The defendant has also relied on
the judgment of the High Court of Kerala reported at 2007 (1) Arb. LR 405
(Kerala) Afcons Infrastructure Limited Vs. Cherian Varkey Construction
nd

Company and the order dated 22

March, 2007 passed in CS (OS)

No.134/2006 entitled Sukumar Jain Vs. Delhi Development Authority

CS (OS) No.941/2001

Page No.4

passed by this court (A.K. Sikri, J) to urge that in the facts and circumstances
of the present case, this court has ample power to refer the matter to
arbitration.
7.

Having heard learned counsel for the parties and having perused the

judicial pronouncements cited before this court, I find that the statute has
mandated that the court shall divert the parties to mode of settlement outside
of the court system if it there appears to the court that there exist element of
the settlement in the matter which may be acceptable to the parties.
The scope and parameters of the court's jurisdiction to refer the parties
to a civil sent to arbitration fell for conciliation before the High Court of
Kerala in 2007 (1) Arb. & LR 405 (Kerala) Afcons Infrastructure Ltd. Vs.
Chenai Varking Construction Company.
8.

After considering the issues and the legal provisions at length, the court

held that the existence of an arbitration agreement satisfying Section 7 of the
Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 was not a sine qua non for a reference
under Section 89(1)(a). In this behalf, the court held thus:“45. If such an arbitration agreement satisfying Section 7 of the
1996 Act was sine qua non for a reference under Section 89(1)(a),
that would only be a reference under Section 8 of the 1996 Act
and the words “as if” in Section 89(2)(a) would become
unnecessary and redundant. The language of Section 89(2)(a)
makes it clear that the arbitration contemplated under Sections
89(1)(a) and 89(2)(a) is not a reference under Section 8 of the
1996 Act and hence the words “as if” are used in Section
CS (OS) No.941/2001

Page No.5

89(2)(a). Having considered all these aspects, I am persuaded to
overrule the objection raised on contentions 1 & 2 raised by Sri
Ramesh Chander.”
9.

In this pronouncement the court has also held that on a construction

and interpretation of Section 89 of the statute, it has to be held that the court
can make a reference to the disputes for arbitration and appoint the arbitrator.
In this behalf, the observation of the court in para 66 of this pronouncement
deserves to be read in extenso and read thus:“66. The ninth contention relates to the power of the court to
refer the parties to a specified arbitrator. Sri M. Ramesh Chander
submits that under Section 89 there can only be a reference for
arbitration and no reference to any arbitration and does not
specifically refer to any reference to the arbitrator. The counsel
expresses a doubt as to whether this means and implies that
reference can be made for arbitration as indicated in Section 8 of
1996 Act. Going strictly by the language of Sections 89(1)(a) and
89(2)(a) such a doubt certainly arises. But an interpretation
cannot be resorted to divorced of the context and the purpose
which has to be served under Section 89. If this court were to
make a reference only for arbitration without specifying any
arbitrator, it would necessarily involve a further dispute regarding
the identity of the arbitrator obliging the parties to go before the
Chief Justice under Section 11 to get the arbitrator appointed.
Such procedure instead of contributing to expedition in the
settlement of dispute and disposal of case would contribute to
further unnecessary delay and protraction. So, such a construction
which would oblige the parties to go before the Chief Justice again
to get the arbitrator appointed under Section 11 after a compulsory
reference against their volition is made under Section 89, must
certainly be avoided.
67. There are other indications also in support of this
conclusion. If that interpretation were accepted, reference of the
parties for conciliation to any conciliator in the absence of such
CS (OS) No.941/2001

Page No.6

agreement for conciliation will also be difficult as there is no
provision from the plain language of Section 89 enabling the court
to appoint a conciliator. This inevitably would lead to a further
procedure for an appointment of a conciliator for the purpose of
Sections 89(1)(a) and 89(2)(a) of the Code insofar as it relates to
conciliation.
The power for reference for arbitration and
conciliation which appears in Sections 89(1)(a) and (b) and
89(2)(a) must hence certainly be interpreted to in her in it the
power and the jurisdiction of the court to refer the parties to a
specified arbitrator or conciliator. In the instant case this may not
pose any problem as there is unanimity on the identity of the
arbitrator. But, Sri Ramesh Chander points out that going by the
strict language of Section 89, such appointment of an arbitrator
may not be possible. I take the view that the power under
Sections 89(1)(a) and 89(2)(a) to refer the parties for arbitration
would and must necessarily include, imply and inhere in it the
power and jurisdiction to appoint the arbitrator also.”
10.

An issue was raised before the court of a case where the parties do not

agree to make the reference to arbitration. The court construed the provision
of Section 89 and held that on a plain reading of the statute and consideration
of the tenor of Section 89, in an appropriate case even the auction of referring
unwilling party to arbitration is available to the court. In this behalf, in para
69 of the judgment, placing reliance on the decision of the Apex Court in
2005 (6) SCC 344 Salem Advocate Bar Association (TN) Vs. Union of
India, the court observed thus:“Having considered all the contentions raised for and
against the proposition that courts have the power even when
parties do not agree to make a reference for arbitration, I do
certainly sail to the conclusion in favour of the plain and apparent
tenor of Section 89 that in an appropriate case the option of
referring unwilling parties to arbitration is certainly available with
CS (OS) No.941/2001

Page No.7

the court. No contention is found to be sufficient to persuade me
to go against the apparent tenor of Section 89(1) as explained by
the Supreme Court in SBA-II. The traditional concept of
arbitration being reference to the adjudicated decision of a private
judge, should not be imported into Section 89(1) while
appreciating and understanding the width and amplitude of the
power vested in the court under Section 89. I also take the view
that it would not be proper to introduce the requirement of
separating arbitration from the other three modes because of the
traditional understanding of the concept of arbitration.”
It is therefore well settled that reference to an arbitrator can be made
even by consent of volition of all the parties to dispute pending before the
court.
11.

A contention was also urged before the High Court of Kerala to the

effect that Order 10 Rule 1(A)(B) & (C) which has been introduced
subsequent to the amendment of the CPC whereby Section 89 of the CPC was
introduced on the statute, do not contemplate a reference for arbitration by
the court without the consent of parties. This contention was considered by
the court at great length and it was held thus:“48. It would be apposite at the outset to note that if the
substantive provision in the Code confers a power in the courts to
make a reference, it would be improper and impermissible to
argue against such provision in the statute with the help of the
rules framed or not framed. That certainly cannot be the law.
The decisions of the Supreme Court in Shree Vijay Cotton & Oil
Mills Ltd. Vs. State of Gujarat (1991) 1 SCC 262 (para 16) and
M.V. Elizabeth Vs. Harwan Investment & Trading Pvt. Ltd.,
1993 Supp (2) SCC 433 (Para 64) clearly lay down this
proposition.

CS (OS) No.941/2001

Page No.8

49. A careful reading of Rules 1A to 1C of Order 10 must
leave one with the unmistakably impression that the rule making
authorityi had not considered the possibility of the parties not
agreeing for any one of the four methods available under Section
89. The rules do not contemplate the procedure that is to be
followed by the court in the event of disagreement between the
parties. Evidently Rules 1A to 1C deal only with former
eventuality, where the parties agree to resort to the one of the
four methods of dispute resolution. It considers only the
possibility of an agreement in respect of conciliation, judicial
settlement or mediation, because so far as arbitration is
concerned, as rightly pointed out by the learned counsel for the
petitioners, there can be no course of the matter returning to the
regular courts for further adjudication. Order 10 Rules 1A to 1C,
therefore, do not cover the entire gamut of possibilities, which
may arise under Section 89(1). It would, therefore, be myopic to
come to any conclusion on the basis of Order 10 Rules 1A and IC
about the power of the court to make reference in the latter
eventually referred to in paragraph 55 of SBA-II, i.e. Where the
parties do not agree for any of the four courses. That Rules 1A to
1C do not speak of a compulsory reference against the volition
and without consent of the parties to any one of the modes cannot
be given any undue importance as those rules do not speak of
compulsory reference for conciliation, judicial settlement and
mediation also. Rule 1A assumes that the parties shall opt for
one of the modes. The arrangements laboriously built with the
aid of Rules 1A to 1C of Order 10, cannot be reckoned as
sufficient to sail to th e conclusion that arbitration deserves to be
treated differently from the other three methods of dispute
resolution for the purpose of Section 89. The forth contention
raised cannot also in these circumstances succeed.”
In this view of the matter, in the light of the principles laid down in the
judgment, there would be no requirement of seeking the consent of the parties
before making a reference to arbitration to disputes in exercise of power
conferred by Section 89 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

CS (OS) No.941/2001

Page No.9

12.

I find that in similar circumstances as arise in the present case, this

court placing reliance on the pronouncement in Afcons Infrastructure
nd

Limited (Supra) by an order passed on 22

March, 2007 in CS (OS)

No.134/2006 has referred the questions raised in the case to arbitration and
disposed of the suit in terms thereof.
13.

I have noticed the briefly the facts of the present in case on which the

present suit is based. The defendant has also filed the written statement on a
consideration of the pleading of the parties, the disputes which would require
to be considered for adjudication can be crystallised thus:I.
Whether the delay for non-completion of the work within
th
the stipulated period or thereafter till 29 May, 1998 occurred for
the fault of the defendant? If not, to what effect?
II.
Whether the termination of the contract at the risk and cost
th
of the defendant by the plaintiff on 29 May, 1999 was legal,
valid and justified? If so, to what effect?
III
Whether the balance work was got executed and
completed at the risk and cost of the defendant?
IV If the issue at no.3 is answered in favour of the plaintiff,
what was the law or extra cost incurred by the plaintiff for
completing the balance work?
V
Whether the balance work was got executed and
completed on the same terms and conditions and with the same
drawing as was issued to the defendant? If not, to what effect?
VI Whether the plaintiff is not entitled to any amount from the
defendant for the reason and ground stated in the written
statement?
CS (OS) No.941/2001

Page No.10

VII What amount, if any, the plaintiff is entitled to against the
defendant?
VIII Whether the plaintiff is entitled to interest on the amount
awarded to it? If so, on what amount, at what rate and for what
period?
th

IX Whether the order dated 29 May, 1998 passed by the
th
plaintiff terminating the contract and the letter dated 12
November, 1998 of the plaintiff levying penalty under Clause 2
are illegal, arbitratory, unjustified, fraudulent, without
jurisdiction, mala fide and of no legal consequence and effect?
14.

In view of the aforenoticed position in law and having regard to the

nature of disputes, in my view, the matter is best left to be redressed by
recourse to arbitration by a technical expert who would be best placed to
adjudicate and decide upon the respective contentions.

In CS (OS)

No.134/2006, which was also a matter where the DDA was a defendant, the
disputes between the parties have been referred for arbitration to the
th

arbitration of Mr. S.S. Jain, Superintending Engineer (Arbitration), 7 Floor,
Vikas Minar, New Delhi (Mobile No.9868027512).

The defendant has

submitted that it has no objection if the disputes in the present case are also
referred to his arbitration.
15.

Accordingly, in exercise of this court jurisdiction under Section 89 of

the Code of Civil Procedure, the above formulated disputes are referred to the
arbitration of Shri S.S. Jain. The arbitrator shall be paid a fee of Rs.50,000/and shall give his award within a period of six months from today. The fees
CS (OS) No.941/2001

Page No.11

and expenses which are incurred by the arbitrator shall be shared equally.
16.

The plaint and written statement and replication of the defendant are on

record which shall be treated as the statement of claim, counter statement of
fact and rejoinder before the arbitrator. The arbitrator will give his decision
on the above issues which have been crystallized for the purposes of
arbitration.
17.

Since the matter has been referred to arbitration under Section 89 of the

Code of Civil Procedure, I further exercise jurisdiction under Section 16 of
the Court Fee Act and direct that the plaintiff shall be entitled to refund of the
amount of the court fee which has been affixed on the plaint. The registry
shall issue the requisite certificate to the plaintiff to receive the amount from
the collector.
th

The parties shall appear before the learned arbitrator on 6 September,
2007 at 11.00 a.m. The suit is disposed of in the above terms.

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
May 23, 2007
aa

CS (OS) No.941/2001

Page No.12

