IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 721/2003
Judgmen t reserved on: 7th September, 2005
Da te of decision: December 23, 2005
MCD

... Petitioner
through Mr. Gaurang Kanth and
Mr. Sohail Ashraf, Adv.
VERSUS

JAGDISH PRASAD
.... Respondents
through Mr. K.K. Rai and
Mr. Harshendu Kumr, Adv.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

The factual position in the instant case is almost undisputed

and a brief reference thereto would suffice. Sh. Budh Singh was
employed as

a Beldar with the Municipal

Corporation of

Delhi(petitioner herein) and he died in harness on 26th September,
1992. The workman left behind him his son, the present respondent
W.P.(C) No. 721/2003

page 1 of 20

who was living with him at the time of his death. It is admitted that
the elder son of the deceased Sh. Karan Singh and the second son Sh
Charan Singh(already expired) had been living separately during the
lifetime of late Sh. Budh Singh.

Therefore the respondent was the

only person who was entitled to seek employment on compassionate
basis.
2.

Sh. Jagdish Prasad the claimant submitted an application for

appointment on compassionate basis and completed all documents
required by the management vide its letter dated 8th June, 1993.
Since the respondent received no decision on his application, he
agitated the matter before the conciliation officer under the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. It is stated that the Delhi Municipal
Workers Union espoused the his case and repeatedly requested the
Municipal Corporation of Delhi to make the appointment of the
respondent on compassionate ground.
3.

This claim of the respondent was resisted by the petitioner and

finally the appropriate government referred the matter for
adjudication to the Industrial adjudicator on the following terms :“Whether Sh. Jagdish Prasad is entitled for
appointment in M.C.D. on compassionate
W.P.(C) No. 721/2003

page 2 of 20

grounds, if no, what directions are necessary in
this respect?”
4.

The matter proceeded to evidence and by an Award dated 5th

December, 2001, the industrial adjudicator answered the reference in
affirmative holding that the respondent was entitled for appointment
on compassionate grounds in the MCD. The industrial adjudicator
carefully issued a direction to the MCD to “reconsider the case of
claimant for appointment on compassionate basis for the post of
LDC”.

Further direction was made that the claimant be given

suitable employment, if possible, within 60 days from the date of
publication of the Award.
5.

This award has been assailed by the MCD before this court

principally on the ground that the respondent was not covered under
the policy dated 30th June, 1997 which covered the jurisdiction of the
MCD to make appointment on compassionate basis. It has been
vehementally urged that the petitioner could not have been given any
employment on the ground that his application stood rejected vide an
order dated 1st December, 1993. According to the petitioner, the
respondent no. 1 concealed the fact that two

elder sons of the

deceased were earning hands and that the condition of the family was
W.P.(C) No. 721/2003

page 3 of 20

not in distress at the time of death of his father.
6.

Perusal of the record of the writ petition shows that even

according to the petitioner, the financial status of the respondent has
been stated thus :“3. During the cross-examination of the
respondent the respondent stated that he
supplied the pouches of gutkha etc for livelihood
and was earning Rs.1500/- He further asserted
that he and his brother have their own houses.
His house in the area of 44 sq. yards valuing
about Rs.1,25,000. He had apportioned the
amount of Rs.44000 received from the
management pursuant to the death of his father.
4.
Vide the impugned award the Hon'ble
Tribunal held that the reason given by the
management was that two of the sons of
deceased were earning hand but it was not
disclosed as whether the respondent was also a
working hand. The copy of the application of
the workman showed that he was dependent on
his father and it was also reported that the
financial position of the family was bad. The
Hon'ble Tribunal held that the respondent had
ancestral house and he received the dues of his
father. In fact no person of the family was
employed with the Corporation or with any
other stable employer. The Hon'ble Tribunal
concluded that the work of the respondent was
not of a stable and regular nature and therefore
respondent was entitled for appointment in the
petitioner corporation on compassionate
grounds.”
7.

The only ground for assailing the findings of the industrial

W.P.(C) No. 721/2003

page 4 of 20

adjudicator is that the respondent was not covered under the scheme
of engagement on compassionate basis for the reason that the
respondent had inherited a house from his father and had received
the terminal dues which became accruable upon demise of Sh. Budh
Singh. There is no dispute that the two other sons of late Sh. Budh
Singh were living independently of the deceased even at the time of
his death. There is no material placed by the MCD nor any contention
that these two sons were supporting the deceased or his dependents
including the respondent in any manner either before his death or
thereafter. The industrial adjudicator has as a fact found that the
brother of the respondent was working in some general store; that
both of his brothers were married having two children each; that they
were living separately in their houses. The adjudicator has also found
that even the amount of Rs.40,000/- received from the MCD upon
death of Sh. Budh Singh was equally apportioned by them.
8.

The respondent had admittedly submitted an application

wherein he was shown as dependent upon Budh Singh. A survey
report of an independent agency was also on record and was
considered by the industrial adjudicator which found that Sh. Jagdish

W.P.(C) No. 721/2003

page 5 of 20

Prasad respondent herein was a married person and was
unemployed. According to this survey report the financial position of
the family was bad.
9.

The communication dated 1st December, 1993 of the MCD

rejecting the application of the respondent was on the sole ground
that his case did not fall under the laid down policy.
10.

Perusal of the policy of the MCD governing appointments on

compassionate basis shows that the same is applicable to :
“ a. To a son or daughter or near relative of a
Government servant who dies in harness
including death by suicide, leaving his family in
immediate need of assistance, when there is no
other earning member in the family.
b.
In exceptional cases when a department is
satisfied that the condition of the family is
indigent and is in great distress, the benefit of
compassionate appointment may be extended to
a son/daughter/near relative of a Government
servant retired on medical grounds under rule
38 of Central Civil Services ( Pension ) Rules,
1972, or corresponding provisions in the Central
Civil Service Regulations before attaining the age
of 55 years. In case of Group 'D' employees
whose normal age of superannuation is 60 years,
compassionate appointment may be considered
where they are retired on medical grounds
before attaining the age of 57 years.”
So far as the eligibility is concerned, certain exceptions are

W.P.(C) No. 721/2003

page 6 of 20

provide which read as under :“ c. Departments are, however, competent to
relax temporarily educational qualifications in
the case of appointment at the lowest level i.e.
Group 'D' or LDC post, in exceptional
circumstances where the condition of the family
is very hard, such relaxation will be permitted
upto a period of two years beyond which no
relaxation of educational qualifications will be
admissible and the services still unqualified, are
liable to be terminated.
d.
Where a widow is appointed on
compassionate ground to a group 'D' post, she
will be exempted from the requirements of
educational qualifications, provided the duties of
the post can be satisfactorily performed without
having the educational qualification of Middle
standard prescribed in the Recruitment Rules.”
11.

There is no dispute that the respondent/workman was eligible

for consideration for appointment and that his case has been rejected
only on the ground that his brothers were earning hands. As noticed
above, it has been held by the Apex Court that earning of other
relatives would have no bearing on the consideration of an
application by a relative of a deceased workman unless it could
possibly be shown that they were contributing to the support of the
family and the applicant before the court. There is no such material
before the industrial adjudicator or before this court.

W.P.(C) No. 721/2003

page 7 of 20

Even the terminal benefits were divided between the three
brothers. Earning from selling gutka which would be in the nature of
a sporadic trade and the income therefrom of the amount of
Rs.1500/- can hardly be termed as sufficient income. This amount
falls well below the notified minimum wages determined by the
statutory authorities.
So far as the ownership of the house is concerned, it has been
noticed by the industrial adjudicator that the house was inherited by
the workman. It is the case of the respondents themselves that the
respondent was living with his father and a property which is
occupied by the applicant as his residence can by no measure be
termed as gainful employment inasmuch as such as inhabited
property is not a source of income to the owner or the occupant.
The submission on behalf of the MCD to the effect that the
respondent/workman was gainfully employed or otherwise possessed
of such income amounts rendering him outside the ambit and
purview of the scheme dated 30th June, 1997 for appointment on
compassionate basis is wholly baseless and misconceived.

The

submission of the petitioner must therefore necessarily be rejected.

W.P.(C) No. 721/2003

page 8 of 20

12.

In industrial adjudication, the function of an industrial tribunal

is confined to administration of justice in accordance with law alone.
By virtue of Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 it can
confirm rights and privileges on either party though they may not be
within the terms of existing agreement. The tribunal is not confined
only to interpret or give effect to contractual rights and obligations of
the parties but can create new rights and obligations between them
which it considers essential for keeping industrial peace (Re: LLJ 921
entitled Bhartiya Bank Limited vs Employees of Bhartiya Bank
Limited).
The award of the industrial adjudicator may contain settlement
of a dispute which a court could not order if it was bound by ordinary
law but the tribunal is not restricted in any way by these
limitations(see 1949 LLJ 245 entitled F.C. Western India Automobile
Association vs Industrial Tribunal).
Industrial adjudication is beyond application of statutory law
alone. The concept of social justice has become an integral part of
industrial adjudication and it is idle for any party to suggest that
industrial adjudication can or should ignore the claims of social

W.P.(C) No. 721/2003

page 9 of 20

justice in dealing with industrial dispute.

The concept of social

justice is not narrow, one sided or pedantic and is not confined to
industrial adjudication alone. Its sweep is all comprehensive and is
based on the basic idea of socio-economic equality; its aim being to
assist the removal of socio-economic disparities and inequilities. In
dealing with industrial matters, it does not adopt a doctrinaire
approach and is revised to yield the adopts a realistic and pragmatic
approach (see 1958 SCR 651 entitled M/s Crown Aluminium Works
vs Their Workmen and 1964 3 SCR 724 entitled J.K. Cotton and Spin
Yielding Limited vs Appellate Tribunal of India). The concept of
social justice derives recognition in the constitutional mandate and in
the resolve of the courts to ensure social justice to all.
13.

It is considerations of this social justice which are the basis for

confirming legality and constitutionality of the action of the
authorities to make an exception to the normal

method of

recruitment and appointment to public office by permitting
appointments on compassionate considerations in the event of
demise of an employee. It is an absolute principle of functioning that
appointments in public service are required to be made strictly on the

W.P.(C) No. 721/2003

page 10 of 20

basis of notified invitations for applications and considerations of
merit. Appointment by any other mode is impermissible. Statutory
authorities or public authorities are prohibited from indicating any
other procedure other than the notified procedure or to relax
qualifications laid down by the rules.

To this strict rule, some

exceptions have been carved out in the interest of social justice and to
meet certain contingencies. One of such exception has been carved
out to balance the interest between the destitute condition of those
seeking employment in normal course and those placed under a
threat of destitution on account of demise of an employee of the
organisation on whom such person seeking the appointment was
dependent.
14.

While giving such compassionate employment, care has to be

taken that it is not unduly unfair with the rights of those other
persons who are eligible to seek appointment against a post which
would have been available but for the provision enabling
appointment being made on compassionate grounds to the
dependants of the deceased employee (see 2003 (7) SCC 511 entitled
State of Manipur vs Mohd. M.D. Rajaiudin).

W.P.(C) No. 721/2003

page 11 of 20

15.

Considerations which should guide authorities while giving

appointment in public offices on such basis have remained
obfuscated. However binding principles have been laid down by the
Apex Court setting down the parameters and considerations for
making such appointments. Appointment on compassionate ground
cannot be claimed as matter of right and such appointment cannot be
made applicable to all types of posts irrespective of the nature of
service rendered by the deceased employee. A claim for appointment
on compassionate basis has been considered as reasonable and
permissible on the basis of the sudden crisis occurring in the family
of an employee who has served the state and died while in service.
However the rules, regulations, administration instructions and
orders in this behalf must stand the test on the touchstone of Article
14 and 16 of the Constitution of India (see 1996 (5) SCC 308 entitled
State of Haryana vs Rani Devi).
16.

Appointment on compassionate basis is not another source of

recruitment but merely an exception to the aforesaid requirement
taking into consideration the effect of the death of the employee
while in service leaving his family without any means of livelihood.

W.P.(C) No. 721/2003

page 12 of 20

In such cases the object is to enable the family to get over sudden
financial crisis. But again such appointments on compassionate
ground have to be made only in accordance with the rules,
regulations or administrative instructions taking into consideration
the family condition of the family of the deceased(see 1994 (4) SCC
138 Umesh Kumar Nagpal vs State of Haryana and 2003 (7) SCC 704
State of Haryana & Anr vs Ankur Gupta).
17.

An application seeking appointment on compassionate basis

has necessarily to be considered expeditiously. In Jagdish Prasad vs
State of Bihar & Anr. 1996 (1) SCC 301 compassionate appointment
was sought by a son of a deceased employee who died when he was in
harness. At the time of the death, the applicant was a minor of only
about four years. It was held by the Apex Court that it could not be
said that he was entitled to be appointed after he attained majority
long thereafter. If such a contention was to be accepted, it would
amount to another mode of recruitment of the dependent of a
deceased government servant which cannot be encouraged, dehors
the recruitment rules.
18.

In several cases the courts have had occasions to examine the

W.P.(C) No. 721/2003

page 13 of 20

cases of family members of deceased employees who were minors at
the time of the death of the employee while in service. Even though
compassionate appointment was offered to the widow of the
deceased, however the option to be appointed was sought to be
exercised on behalf of minor children/sons. Upon the minor child
attaining

majority,

applications

seeking

appointment

compassionate basis were sought to be enforced.

on

In these

circumstances, it has been observed that such applications were
made with the object of enabling the family to tide over in sudden
crisis but the purpose was to obtain employment out of turn, on
“compassionate basis” for the applicant, which would benefit for his
while life time. It has been held that this was beyond Article 16 of the
Constitution and cannot constitute a reasonable and intelligible
differentia (see Rajender Poddar vs State of Bihar & Anr., 1991 L&I
Cases 959; 54 (2001) DLT 746 MCD vs Veer Mohd). It is apparent
that when an application is belated or delayed, the penury on account
of the sudden of an employee's demise dissipates and there would be
no warrant or justification for violating the equalities guaranteed
under Article 14 & 16 of the Constitution.

W.P.(C) No. 721/2003

page 14 of 20

19.

A distinction has to be however drawn between a delayed

application by a petitioner that would defeat a request for
compassionate appointment and a timely application that has been
kept pending for a very long time. Such a delay in deciding a justified
request would not defeat the request.
20.

It is well settled that High Courts and administrative tribunals

cannot confer benediction impelled by sympathetic consideration to
make appointment on compassionate grounds if the regulations
framed therein do not contemplate or provide so (see 1994 (4) SCC
138 entitled Umesh Kumar Nagpal vs State of Haryana).
21.

The person seeking employment on compassionate basis

cannot insist for an appointment at a particular post alone (see 1998
AIR SC 2230 entitled Director of Education(Secondary) & Anr. vs
Pushpendra Kumar & Ors. etc.).
22.

It is well settled law that considerations of sympathy cannot

guide a court while considering a matter relating to appointment on
compassionate basis. The applicable regulations and rules have to be
strictly followed. It is well settled law that no mandamus will be
issued directing for an appointment to made on compassionate basis

W.P.(C) No. 721/2003

page 15 of 20

(see 1994 (2) SCC 718 entitled LIC vs Asha Ramchhandra
Ambekar(Mrs.) & Anr.)
23.

It is also well settled that the jurisdiction of a High Court for

issuing a mandamus under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
cannot be exercised to direct appointment on compassionate basis.
The court can merely direct consideration of the claim of the
applicant (see 1994 (2) SCC 718 entitled Life Insurance Corporation
of India vs Asha Ramchhandra Ambekar(Mrs.) & Anr.
24.

Compassionate employment cannot be granted after a lapse of

a reasonable period which must be specified in the rules regarding
the consideration for such employment as it is not a vested right
which can be exercised at any time in the future. The object of such
employment being to enable the family to overcome a financial crises
which it faces on account of death of the sole bread earner. It is
obvious that employment on compassionate basis cannot be claimed
and offered, whatever the lapse of time and after the crisis is over
(see 1994 (4) SCC 158 entitled Umesh Kumar Nagpal vs State of
Haryana).
25.

It has been held by the Apex Court that in the absence of a

W.P.(C) No. 721/2003

page 16 of 20

vacancy, it is not open to an authority to appoint a person to any post
and it will be a gross abuse of the powers of the public authority to
appoint persons when vacancies are not available. If persons are so
appointed and paid salaries, it will be a mere misuse of public funds,
which is totally unauthorised. Normally, even if the tribunal find that
a person is qualified to be appointed to a post under the kith and kin
policy, the tribunal should only give a direction to the appropriate
authority to consider the case of a particular applicant in the light of
the relevant rules and subject to availability of the post. A tribunal
has no power either to direct the appointment of any person to a post
or direct authorities concerned to create a supernumary post and
then appoint a person to such post (see 1996 (4) SCC 560 entitled
Road Transport Corporation vs Dinesh Kumar; 2001 (9) SCC 394
Municipal Council, Ambala vs Balvinder Singh & Ors.)
26.

One of the most material considerations which would entitle a

person to consideration and seek appointment on compassionate
basis is the financial condition of the family of the deceased and the
applicant seeking such appointment. In 2005 (10) SCC 289 entitled
Govind Prakash Verma vs LIC & Ors, the Apex Court held as follows

W.P.(C) No. 721/2003

page 17 of 20

:“6. In our view, it was wholly irrelevant for the
departmental authorities and the learned Single
Judge to take into consideration the amount which
was being paid as family pension to the widow of the
deceased(which amount, according to the appellant,
has now been reduced to half) and other amounts
paid on account of terminal benefits under the
Rules. The scheme of compassionate appointment is
over and above whatever is admissible to the legal
representatives of the deceased employee as benefits
of service which one gets on the death of the
employee. Therefore, compassionate appointment
cannot be refused on the ground that any member of
the family received the amounts admissible under
the Rules.
So far as the question of gainful
employment of the elder brother is concerned, we
find that it had been given out that he has been
engaged in cultivation. We hardly find that it could
be considered as gainful employment if the family
owns a piece of land and one of the members of the
family cultivates the field. This statement is said to
have been contradicted when it is said that the elder
brother had stated that he works as a painter. This
would not necessarily be a contradiction much less
leading to the inference drawn that he was gainfully
employed somewhere as a painter. He might be
working in his field and might casually be getting
work as painter also. Nothing has been indicated in
the enquiry report as to where he was employed as a
regular painter. The other aspects, on which the
officer was required to make enquiries, have been
conveniently omitted and not a whisper is found in
the report submitted by the officer. In the above
circumstances, in our view, the orders passed by the
High Court are not sustainable. The respondents
have wrongly refused compassionate appointment to
W.P.(C) No. 721/2003

page 18 of 20

the appellant. The inference of gainful employment
of the elder brother could not be acted upon. The
terminal benefits received by the widow and the
family pension could not be taken into account.”
27.

There

is

no

respondent/application

dispute
was

before

entitled

this

court

that

to consideration

application in the post in which he had applied.

of

the
the

The industrial

adjudicator had only directed consideration of the application and
making of the appointment if the same were possible. It is settled
law that such an appointment has to abide by the rules applicable in
this behalf. It has been found that the rejection of the respondent's
application was on erroneous grounds.
Accordingly, I find no merit in this writ petition which is hereby
dismissed.
The petitioners shall consider the application of the respondent
in terms with the award and in the light of the principles of law
noticed herein. This consideration shall be effected within a period
of six weeks and decision thereon shall be communicated to the
respondent.
The respondent shall be entitled to costs which are quantified at
Rs.5,500/W.P.(C) No. 721/2003

page 19 of 20

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
December 23, 2005
kr

W.P.(C) No. 721/2003

page 20 of 20

