IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1574/2005
Judgment reserved on : May 23rd, 2005
Da te of decision: May 24th, 2005
MRIDULA PRIYADARSHANI
... Petitioner
through Mr. R.K. Saini and
Mr. N.R. Sharma, Advocates
VERSUS
UNIVERSITY OF DELHI & ORS. .... Respondents
through Ms. Beenashaw Soni, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

The petitioner has challenged a condition imposed for eligibility

for seeking admission to the B.A.(pass) Course of the Non-Formal
Education Cell whereby it is required that in order to be eligible for
enrolment with this course, the candidate should have passed the
Senior Secondary Certificate(class 12th examination) conducted by
the Central Board of Secondary Education from a school and
W.P.(C) 1574/2005

page 1 of 14

examination centre(in the case of private candidates) located within
the National Capital of Delhi jurisdiction or the University.
2.

The undisputed facts giving rise to the present petition are

noticed hereinafter. The petitioner is a resident of Delhi living in
Vinod Nagar. She undertook the class 10th examination conducted by
the Central Board of Secondary Education from the Mayur Public
School located behind Mother Dairy in the I.P. Extension at Delhi.
Thereafter the petitioner enrolled herself for pursuing the class 12th
course and examination with the National Institute of Open
Schooling with its credited institution namely the Green Field Public
School located at Ghaziabad, U.P.
3.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the

National Institute of Open Schooling is a government institute which
functions from Delhi. The same studying material is supplied to
candidates who are registered all over the country and all candidates
in its institutes undertake the same examination at the same time. So
far as this method of schooling is concerned, there are no formal
classes held and classes which are run are only intended to be
facilitators for the benefit of the student. According to Mr. R.K.

W.P.(C) 1574/2005

page 2 of 14

Saini, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, candidates who
are undertaking the class 12 course with the National Institute of
Open Schooling have no option with regard to the centre from where
the examination is taken. As such the petitioner, though a resident of
Delhi, was alloted and had to undertake the class 12th examination
from Ghaziabad.
4.

The petitioner is stated to have passed the senior secondary

school examination conducted by the National Institute of Open
Schooling in the year 2004.

It stated that the certificate of the

petitioner placed on record has been issued at Delhi.
After so finishing her class 12th, the petitioner was desirous of
continuing her education in the Non-Formal System of Education.
Consequently, she made an application to the Non-Formal Education
Cell(External Candidates) of the University of Delhi for its B.A.(Pass)
Course on 30th October, 2004. Copy of the prospectus has been
placed before the court and has been read extensively to contend that
the petitioner was domicile in Delhi and had taken her class 12th
examination from Delhi. As such the petitioner still being domiciled
in Delhi was eligible and entitled to be enrolled with the Non-Formal

W.P.(C) 1574/2005

page 3 of 14

Education Cell of the respondent no. 1 and to take the examinations
which are to commence from the 26th May, 2005.
5.

The petitioner has filed the writ petition feeling aggrieved by

the letter dated 11th January, 2005 of the respondents requiring her to
submit an attested copy of the admission ticket of class 12th
examination or any other documents for verification of the
Examination Centre at Delhi.
The writ petition contains the following prayers :“(a) A writ of Certiorari calling for the
records of the case and peruse the same;
(b) A Writ of Certiorari quashing the
stipualtion made/condition prescribed as a
Specific Condition of eligibility for enrolment as
an
external
candidate
into
B.A.(Pass)/B.Com.(Pass) course, being eligibility
condition no. 2(b) (i) at page 9 of Handbook of
Information 2004-2005 issued by the NonFormal Education Cell(External Candidates), to
the effect that the candidates who have passed
the Senior School Certificate (Class 12)
examination even though conducted by an
authority established by law and situated within
NCT of Delhi should have passed from a school
and examination centre (in the case of private
candidates) located within the National Capital
of Delhi, being illegal, arbitrary, discriminatory,
unjust and unconstitutional.
(c) A writ of Mandamus commanding
the respondents to accept the application form
submitted by the Petitioner and give her
W.P.(C) 1574/2005

page 4 of 14

6.

admission/enrollment as an external candidate
for B.A.(Pass) course under the system of Nonformal Education in the Non-Formal Education
Cell of the University of Delhi for the academic
year 2004-05.
(d) A writ of mandamus commanding the
respondents to pay the costs of this petition to
the Petitioner.
(e) Any other Writ, Order or Direction
which may be deemed fit and proper on the facts
and the circumstances of the case and in the
interest of justice.”
The entire submissions of the petitioner rest on the argument

that the respondents have incorporated a wholly arbitrary condition
in the Hand Book of Information of the Non-Formal Education
Cell(External Candidates) for the year 2004-2005 which has no
nexus with the object sought to be achieved.

It is stated that

respondents are only concerned with the domicile of the petitioner.
7.

Reliance has been placed on several orders passed by different

High Courts in support of the submission that a candidate who is
pursuing the senior secondary course with the National Institute of
Open Schooling has no option so far as the choice of the examination
centre is concerned.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has also

placed reliance on the judgment reported at JT 1992 (4) SC 292
entitled Ms. Mohini Jain vs State of Karnataka & Ors. to contend that

W.P.(C) 1574/2005

page 5 of 14

education is a fundamental right and the respondents cannot defeat
such right of the petitioner by imposition of arbitrary conditions.
Furthermore, learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance
on the pronouncement of the Apex Court reported at AIR 1978 SC
597 (para 56) entitled Menaka Gandhi vs Union of India.
8.

On the other hand Ms. Beenashaw Soni, learned counsel

appearing for the respondents has vehemently objected to the
challenge made in the present petition. It has been submitted that
knowing fully well the conditions laid down in the Hand Book of
Information, the petitioner still applied for admission to the NonFormal Education Cell even though she was not eligible for the same
and as such no direction can be made for her enrollment. It is also
stated that the respondents have carefully considered the matter and
have provided different alternatives even for non-formal education
and different eligibilities for each alternative. Candidates who have
not undertaken the class 12th examination have the option of
pursuing non-formal education with the School of Open Learning
wherein there is no prohibition whatsoever with regard to the place
of learning. The condition imposed is reasonable and is necessary

W.P.(C) 1574/2005

page 6 of 14

keeping in view the limited number of seats and to give effect to the
spirit, intendment and purpose of the course and curriculum.
9.

I have given my considered thought to the submissions made

before me and perused the available record. Before adverting to the
submissions made, it is necessary to notice the different kind of
options available to candidates who are desirous of pursuing nonformal education under the University of Delhi. The respondents
have made one option available to pursue the courses with the School
of Open Learning. Perusal of the prospectus of this institution shows
that the only eligibility condition prescribed therein is as follows :“1. Admission is open to candidates from all
over India.
2.
Admission is also open to Indian nationals
working in Indian missions abroad and also to
their dependents, subject to their taking the
University Examination at any of the following
places :
1. Accra(Ghana), 2. Adis Ababa(Ethiopia), 3.
Beijing (China), 4. Beirut (Lebanon), 5.
Bon(Germany), 6. Brasilia (Brazil), 7. Buenos
Aires(Argentina), 8. Cairo (Egypt), 9. Hong
Kong, 10. Jakarta (Indonesia), 11. Kabul
(Afghanistan), 12. Kualalumpur ( Malaysia), 13.
Kuwait, 14. London(U.K.), 15. Mnila, 16.
Mauritius, 17. Mexico, 18. Moscow(Russia), 19.
Nairobi(Kenya), 20. Ottawa(Canada), 21.
Singapore, 22, Stockholm (Sweden), 23.
Sydney(Australia),
24.
Tehran(Iran),
25.
W.P.(C) 1574/2005

page 7 of 14

Tokyo(Japan), 26. Washington(U.S.A.).”
Therefore, it is noteworthy that there is no prohibition to
admission on account of residence or of place of having taken the
class 12th examination. A candidate is only required to produce the
certificate of having passed the senior secondary school certificate
examination/intermediate

examination

or

an

examination

recognized as equivalent thereto.
10.

The petitioner was in the knowledge of availability of this

option.

The Brochure of the School of Open Learning has been

placed on court record by the petitioner. This school is providing
what were known as correspondence courses.
11.

On the other hand, in the other scheme provided for non-

formal education which is conducted by the Non-Formal Education
Cell(External Candidates), the Hand Book of Information provides
for the following stipulations which are

necessary for the

adjudication of the present case :“(b) SPECIFIC CONDITIONS :
(i)

B.A.(Pass)/B.Com.(Pass)

Senior
W.P.(C) 1574/2005

Persons who have passed the
School
Certificate(Class
12)
page 8 of 14

Examination conducted by the Central
Board of Secondary Education, New
Delhi, or an examination recognized as
equivalent, thereto and conducted by any
other authority established at law and
situated within he National Capital
Territory of Delhi to which the powers of
the University extend, and from a school
and examination centre(in the case of
private candidates) located within the
National Capital of Delhi Jurisdiction of
the University, shall be eligible for
enrollment as an external candidate for
the B.A.(Pass)/B.Com(Pass) Examination
of the University.”
12.

Perusal of the aforestated clause shows that in order to be

eligible for admission to the above courses, the candidate who has
taken the senior secondary certificate examination as a private
candidate has to have taken the same from a school and examination
centre located within he National Capital of Delhi jurisdiction or the
University.
13.

The comparison of the two eligibility clauses one of the School

of Open Learning and the other of the Non Formal Education Cell
aforestated shows that the respondents have made a clear and
considered differentiation in the eligibility conditions. I find force in
the submissions on behalf of the respondents to the effect that the

W.P.(C) 1574/2005

page 9 of 14

respondent no. 1 had given an option to candidates who had not
pursued schooling or taken the class 12th examination in Delhi, to
pursue their further education in the University of Delhi from the
School of Open Learning.
14.

It has been pointed out on behalf of the respondents that these

conditions merely implement the conditions for admission to
examinations which have been laid down and approved by the
Academic Council and the Executive Council of the University as have
been mentioned in para no. 6(ii) on page no. 325 of the Ordinance
VII Chapter III of the University Calender Volume I which is to the
following effect :“(a_' approved by the Academic Council and
Executive Council of the University which
stipulates that “any person who has passed the
Senior School Certificate(Class 12) Examination
conducted by the Central Board of Secondary
Education, New Delhi or an examination
recognized as equivalent thereto and conducted
by any other authority established by law and
situated within the territorial limits to which the
powers of the University extend and from as
School/an Examination centre(in the case of
private candidates? Located within he territorial
jurisdiction of the University, shall be eligible for
enrollment as an external candidate for the
B.A.(Pass)/B.Com(Pass) examination of the
University.”
W.P.(C) 1574/2005

page 10 of 14

15.

I find that no challenge has been laid to the provisions of

Ordinance VII or any other statutory provisions by the petitioner.
16.

There are only a limited number of seats and bearing in mind

the prayer for admissions to the limited seats in Delhi, the
respondent no. 1 has considered the matter and so prescribed the
eligibility conditions.
17.

In my view, the petitioner had the option of pursuing her non-

formal education from the School of open Learning. I find nothing
arbitrary or unreasonable in the eligibility stipulations contained in
the Hand Book of Information for the Non-Formal Education Cell.
The stipulations and restrictions have a direct nexus with the object
sought to be achieved which is to control and regulate admissions
and provide seats to candidates who are residents of Delhi and have
pursued their schooling at Delhi.

The requirement of being a

resident in Delhi would only an additional condition.
18.

It is also to be noticed that the petitioner knew this eligibility

condition when she applied for admission and therefore, can also
cannot be permitted to challenge the same.
19.

It has also been pointed out by the respondents that the

W.P.(C) 1574/2005

page 11 of 14

petitioner did not make available
processing her application.

all documents necessary for

She was required to submit the

documentary proof of her examination centre along with her
application.

The Hand Book of Information had contained a

stipulation to the effect that such applications which are found
incomplete in any respect in default of certificate would be
summarily rejected.

The petitioner submitted an incomplete

application. In this behalf, the respondents have been constrained to
address her a letter dated 11th January, 2005 to make good the
discrepancies in her application failing which her admission could be
cancelled. She did not comply with the discrepancy later dated 11th
January, 2005.

Even thereafter, two further reminders were

addressed to her to remove the discrepancies only whereafter she
made available the requisite information.
20.

It is also to be noticed that the petitioner did not have a choice

with regard to the examination centre wherefrom she undertook her
examination. In view of the judgments cited before me by learned
counsel for the petitioner, the same is left to the discretion of the
institution. However, the petitioner did have a choice with regard to

W.P.(C) 1574/2005

page 12 of 14

accredited institution wherefrom she took enrolment.

For this

reason, the argument of the learned counsel based on lack of choice
for chosing her centre is devoid of merit.
21.

I may also notice the argument made by learned counsel for the

petitioner to the effect that the restriction of admission to those
persons who have undertaken the examination of the National
Institute of Open Schooling at Delhi is wholly misconceived in view of
the fact that the course content as well as the examination of all
candidates who are undertaking the examination is the same all over
the country.
In my view, this submission also does not further the case of
the petitioner at all. The position with regard to the candidates who
have taken or are taking the secondary school examination conducted
by the Central Board of Secondary Education is also the same.
However, the universities are permitted to impose such eligibility
conditions which are deemed necessary. The Non-Formal Education
Cell of the University of Delhi has the eligibility conditions after due
application of mind. Effect has been given to the statutory scheme
contained in Ordinance VII of the University Calender.

W.P.(C) 1574/2005

page 13 of 14

For all the foregoing reasons, I find no merit in the petition
which is hereby dismissed.
There shall be no order as to costs.
GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
May 24th, 2005(kr)

W.P.(C) 1574/2005

page 14 of 14

