IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 6964/1999
Judgment reserved on: March 30,
2006
Dat e of decision: April 24, 2006
K. CHANDRIKA
... Petitioner
through: Ms. Rashmeet K. Charya, Advocate
VERSUS
INDIAN RED CROSS SOCIETY & ANR. .... Respondent
through: Mr. V.K. Rao, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

The petitioner in this case was appointed by the Indian

Red Cross as a lower division clerk by an order dated 19th
November, 1979 in the pay scale of Rs.260-6-290-EB-6-326-8366-EB-8-390-10-400. Her letter of appointment contained the
following stipulation :“The post is temporary at present but is likely
to continue.
Her services are therefore
terminable without notice and without
assigning any reason.”
W.P.(C) No.6964/1999

page 1 of 27

2.

On 28th April, 1980 the petitioner applied for maternity

leave. In the application, at serial no. 11 she gave as her address
during the leave period :3/90, Ramesh Nagar,
New Delhi.
This leave application of the petitioner, which was in the
proper format, was also exhibited before the industrial adjudicator
as Exhibit WW1/1.
3.

The petitioner has contended that her leave was duly

sanctioned and she proceeded thereon. The duration of the leave
was three months. While on leave, the petitioner was surprised to
receive a communication dated 7th July, 1980 from the
respondents wherein it was stated that her services stood
terminated with effect from the afternoon of 3rd May, 1980 and
that an intimation in this effect had been sent to her vide a
memorandum dated 3rd May, 1980.

The respondent had also

stated that this letter of 3rd May, 1980 had been posted by them to
the address given by her in her typing test and joining report. A
copy of the memorandum was enclosed therewith.

The

memorandum dated 3rd May, 1980 which was enclosed with this
letter stated thus :-

W.P.(C) No.6964/1999

page 2 of 27

“

INDIAN RED CROSS SOCIETY
HEADQUARTERS
1-Red Cross Road
New Delhi-110001

No. 280/Adm/Registered A.D./891
MEMORANDUM
As directed by the SecretaryGeneral Smt. Chandrika K. is informed that
her services have been terminated w.e.f. The
afternoon of to-day, 3rd May, 1980.
Sd/Kewal Krishan
Administrative Officer”
The address on this memorandum of the petitioner was
reflected as L-69, Kirti Nagar, New Delhi 110015.
4.

Aggrieved

by

these

communications

from

the

respondent, the petitioner has asserted that she has not received
the communication dated 3rd May, 1980 and that the copy of this
letter was sent to her only when she reported for duty. A notice of
demand from the petitioner resulted in no positive response. As a
consequence the petitioner made a complaint to the labour
authorities which was referred to the labour court for adjudication
by an order of reference dated 28th May, 1981 which was on the
following terms :“Whether termination of services of Smt. K.
Chandrika is illegal and/or unjustified and if so,
to what relief is she entitled and what directions
W.P.(C) No.6964/1999

page 3 of 27

5.

are necessary in this respect?”
In the statement of claim which was filed before the

industrial adjudicator, the petitioner disputed receipt of the
communication dated 3rd May, 1980 when it was sent in May, 1980
as alleged. She challenged the communication as malafide and
also as violative of the provisions of Section 12 of the Maternity
Benefits Act, 1961. The workman had reiterated the stand she had
taken in her claim statement on the ground that the termination of
her service without assignment of reasons was arbitrary and
malafide and also illegal as having been effected when she had
proceeded for on maternity leave. The workman also produced
material to the effect that she was unable to get alternative
employment despite best efforts and that she continued to be
unemployed. As a result a prayer was made for reinstatement to
the respondent with full back salary and other benefits for the
intervening period besides continuity of service. The industrial
adjudicator examined the matter at length and by an award dated
7th June, 1999 held that the action of the management could not be
held to be justified as neither opportunity had been given to the
workman to explain her position nor any notice given to her.
The

W.P.(C) No.6964/1999

page 4 of 27

industrial tribunal clearly held that the services of the workman
were terminated illegally and unjustifiably.
These findings of fact by the industrial adjudicator have
not been assailed on behalf of the respondent/management and
consequently have attained finality.
6.

However, the labour court was of the view that the

workman had received the letter dated 3rd May, 1980 which was
not disclosed by her and that despite the receipt of this letter and
expiry of her leave period, she did not report for duty. For this
reason, the industrial adjudicator concluded that the workman had
no intention of joining duty with the management. As such, the
relief of reinstatement and consequential benefits was denied to
her and only salary for a period of three months of her maternity
leave till 5th August, 1990 was awarded in her favour by the award
dated 7th June, 1999.

Aggrieved by denial of the relief of

reinstatement into service with continuity of service and back
wages with continuity of service, the petitioner has filed the
present petition.
7.

Having heard parties at length, I find that the workman

in her leave application dated 28th April, 1980 had clearly informed
the management of the address at which she would be available
W.P.(C) No.6964/1999

page 5 of 27

during the period of her absence. There is no dispute that such an
application

was

received

by

the

respondents.

Yet

the

communication dated 3rd May, 1980 was admittedly sent by the
respondent to the address given on the original application
seeking employment of the petitioner.

The petitioner has

vehemently disputed receipt of the communication.

There is

nothing on record which establishes that the letter dated 3rd May,
1980 was actually received by the petitioner on 6th May, 1980.
Admittedly, the communication has not been sent to the address
which was informed by her. In these circumstances, it cannot be
held that the petitioner had received the communication dated 3rd
May, 1980 on 6th May, 1980.
8.

The petitioner has placed reliance on Section 12 of the

Maternity Benefits Act, 1961 which reads as follows :“12.
Dismissal
during
absence or pregnancy. -(1) When a woman
absents herself from work in accordance with
the provisions of this Act, it shall be unlawful
for her employer to discharge or dismiss her
during or on account of such absence or to give
notice of discharge or dismissal on such a day
that the notice will expire during such absence,
or to vary to her disadvantage any of the
conditions of her service.
(2)(a)
The discharge or dismissal of a
woman at any time during her pregnancy, if
the woman but for such discharge or dismissal
W.P.(C) No.6964/1999

page 6 of 27

would have been entitled to maternity benefit
or medical bonus referred to in section 8, shall
not have the effect of depriving her of the
maternity benefit or medical bonus :
Provided that where the dismissal is
for any prescribed gross misconduct, the
employer may, by order in writing
communicated to the woman, deprive her of
her maternity benefit or medical bonus or
both.
[(b)
Any woman deprived of maternity
benefit or medical bonus, or both, or
discharged or dismissed during or on account
of her absence from work in accordance with
the provisions of this Act, may, within sixty
days from the date on which order of such
deprivation or discharge or dismissal is
communicated to her, appeal to such authority
as may be prescribed, and the decision of that
authority on such appeal, whether the woman
should or should not be deprived of maternity
benefit or medical bonus, or both, or
discharged or dismissed shall be final.]
(c)
Nothing contained in this subsection shall affect the provisions contained in
sub-section(1).”
9.

At this stage, reference may appropriately be also made

to the pronouncement of the Apex Court in 2000 Labour
Industrial Cases 1033 Municipal Corporation of Delhi vs
Female Workers(Muster Roll) & Another. The court in this
matter was called upon to consider the availability of maternity
benefits under the Maternity Benefits Act to muster roll
employees.

Upon a detailed consideration of the spirit and

W.P.(C) No.6964/1999

page 7 of 27

intendment of the statute, the court held thus :“10.
Since Article 42 specifically speaks
of “just and humane conditions of work” and
“maternity relief”, the validity of an executive
or administrative action in denying maternity
benefit has to be examined on the anvil of
Article 42 which, though not enforceable at
law, is nevertheless available for determining
the legal efficacy of the action complained of.
11.
The Parliament has already made
the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961. It is not
disputed that the benefits available under this
Act have been made available to a class of
employees of the petitioner-Municipal
Corporation. But the benefit is not being
made available to the women employees
engaged on muster-roll, on the ground that
they are not regular employees of the
Corporation. As we shall presently see, there
is no justification for denying the benefit of
this Act to casual workers or workers
employed on daily wage basis.
12.
Section 2 of the Maternity Benefit
Act, 1961 deals with the applicability of the
Act. Section 3 contains definitions. The word
“child” as defined in Section 3(b) includes a
'still-born' child. “Delivery” as defined in
Section 3(c) means the birth of a child.
“Maternity Benefit” has been defined in
Section 3(h), which means the payment
referred to in sub-section (1) of Section 5.
“Woman” has been defined in Clause (o) of
Section 3 which means “a woman employed,
whether directly or through any agency, for
wages in any establishment.” “Wages” have
been defined in Clause (h) of Section 3 which
provides, inter alia, as under :“Wages means all remunerations
paid or payable in cash to a woman”.
Section 5 provides, inter alia, as
W.P.(C) No.6964/1999

page 8 of 27

under :
“5.
Right to payment of
maternity benefit (1)
Subject to the provisions
of this Act, every woman shall be entitled to,
and her employer shall be liable for, the
payment of maternity benefit at the rate of the
average daily wage for the period of her actual
absence, that is to say, the period immediately
proceeding the day of her delivery, the actual
day of her delivery and any period
immediately following that day.
Explanation – For the purpose of
this sub-section, the average daily wage means
the average of the woman's wages payable to
her for the days on which she has worked
during the period of three calender months
immediately preceding the date from which
she absents herself on account of maternity,
the minimum rates of wages fixed or revised
under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 or ten
rupees, whichever is the highest.
(2)
No woman shall be entitled to
maternity benefit unless she has actually
worked in an establishment of the employer
from whom she claims maternity benefit, for a
period of not less than eighty days in the
twelve months immediately proceeding the
date of her expected delivery.
........
Explanation - For the purpose of calculating
under this sub-section the days on which a
woman has actually worked in the
establishment, the days for which she has
been laid off or was on holidays declared
under any law for the time being in force to be
holidays with wages during the period of
twelve months immediately preceding the
date of her expected delivery shall be taken
into account.
(3)
The maximum period for which any
W.P.(C) No.6964/1999

page 9 of 27

woman shall be entitled to maternity benefit
shall be twelve weeks which not more than six
weeks shall precede the date of her expected
delivery.
........
........
34.
Delhi is the capital of India. No
other City or Corporation would be more
conscious that the City of Delhi that India is a
signatory to various International covenants
and treaties. The Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, adopted by the United Nations
on 10th of December, 1948, set in motion the
universal thinking that human rights are
supreme and ought to be preserved at all
costs. This was followed by a series of
Conventions. On 18th of December, 1979, the
United Nations adopted the “Convention on
the Elimination of all forms of discrimination
against women”. Article 11 of this Convention
provides as under :“Article 11
1.
States Parties shall take
all appropriate measures to eliminate
discrimination against women in the field of
employment in order to ensure, on a basis of
equality of men and women, the same rights,
in particular ;
(a)
The right to work as an
inalienable right of all human beings;
(b)
The right to the same employment
opportunities, including the application of the
same criteria for selection in matters of
employment:
(c)
The right to free choice of
profession and employment, the right to
promotion, job security and all benefits and
conditions of service and the right to receive
vocational training and retraining, including
apprenticeships, advanced vocational training
and recurrent training:
W.P.(C) No.6964/1999

page 10 of 27

(d)
The right to equal remuneration,
including benefits, and to equal treatment in
respect of work of equal value, as well as
equality of treatment in the evaluation of the
quality of work:
(e)
The right to social security,
particularly
in
cases
of
retirement,
unemployment, sickness, invalidity and old
age and other incapacity to work, as well as
the right to paid leave.
(f)
The right to protection of health and
to satisfy in working conditions, including the
safeguarding of the function of reproduction.
2.
In order to prevent discrimination
against women on the grounds of marriage or
maternity and to ensure their effective right to
work. States Parties shall take appropriate
measures:
(a)
To prohibit subject
to the
imposition of sanctions, dismissal on the
grounds of pregnancy or of maternity leave
and discrimination in dismissals on the basis
of marital status:
(b)
To introduce maternity leave with
pay or with comparable social benefits without
loss of former employment, seniority or social
allowances:
(c)
To encourage the provision of the
necessary supporting social services to enable
parents to combine family obligations with
work responsibilities and participation in
public life, in particular through promoting
the establishment and development of a
network of child-care facilities:
(d)
To provide special protection to
women during pregnancy in types of work
proved to be harmful to them.
3.
Protective legislation relating to
matters covered in this article shall be
reviewed periodically in the light of scientific
and technological knowledge and shall be
W.P.(C) No.6964/1999

page 11 of 27

revised, repealed or extended as necessary.”
(Emphasis supplied)
35.
These
principles
which
are
contained in Article 11, reproduced above,
have to be read into the contract of service
between Municipal Corporation of Delhi and
the women employees (muster roll): and so
read these employees immediately become
entitled to all the benefits conceived under the
Maternity Benefit Act, 1961. We conclude our
discussion by providing that the directions
issued by the Industrial Tribunal shall be
complied with by the Municipal Corporation
of Delhi by approaching the State Government
as also the Central Government for issuing
necessary Notification under the Proviso to
Sub-section (1) of Section 2 of the Maternity
Benefit Act, 1961, if it has not already been
issued. In the meantime, the benefits under
the Act shall be provided to the women
(muster roll) employees of the Corporation
who have been working with them on daily
wages.”
10.

In 2005 VII AD (Delhi) 435 Bharti Gupta(Mrs.)

vs Rail India Technical and Economical Services
Limited(Rites) & Ors., this court was required to decide on an
issue where an employee has been dismissed on account of
pregnancy. Upon a detailed consideration of the provisions of the
statute, this court ruled that the grant of maternity benefits was as
per the mandate of law. The court held thus :“9.

The nature of maternity benefits and the

W.P.(C) No.6964/1999

page 12 of 27

entitlement of employees have been clearly spelt
out by provisions of the Act. The provisions of the
enactment apply to establishments, which have
been defined in an expansive manner. Being a
benevolent and social welfare legislation, the term
“establishment” has to be construed liberally to
include RITES.
10. Sections 4 & 5 of the Act oblige every
employer of an establishment to extend maternity
benefits under the Act, including leave/pay and
maternity bonus. Section 12 underscores the
independent and inflexible nature of the liability
to mandate that no one can be dismissed on
account of pregnancy. It is a non-discriminatory
provision. Section 27 mandates that provisions of
the Act would have overriding effect.
12.
Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution
guarantee equality, Article 15 (3) enables the State
to make special provision for women. The Act
makes provisions that are in furtherance of two
objectives-affirmative action (Sections 4, 5 and
27) and non-discrimination (Sections 12, 21 and
23). Their universality is undeniable.”
11.

In the instant case, the petitioner had applied for

maternity leave with effect from 3rd May, 1980.

Her services

appeared to have been terminated with effect from the same date.
The order of termination does not disclose any reasons
whatsoever. However, the manner in which her termination has
been effected would go a long way to indicate that the same may
have been on account of her pregnancy. I therefore find force in
the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the
findings of the industrial adjudicator to the effect that her services
W.P.(C) No.6964/1999

page 13 of 27

were terminated illegally and unjustifiably which have attained
finality, are based in law. It has been held that the petitioner did
not receive the communication claimed to have been sent by the
management.
12.

However, the question which has been raised and

requires to be answered is as to the appropriate relief which the
petitioner deserves to have been granted after the labour court
came to such a conclusion. The workman has been agitating her
rights by raising a demand after she sought to join duty after her
leave expired and ever since. The reference of her dispute was
made by the order of the competent government which is dated
26th December, 1981 which culminated in the award which was
passed on 7th June, 1999. This matter has been languishing in this
court ever since. The services of the petitioner was terminated
when she proceeded on maternity leave.

Her agony upon the

termination of her services must have been compounded by the
long drawn out adjudication. The petitioner was a workman who
was not placed at the higher echeleons of service and would be
nursing a grievance against the social injustice meted out to her
because she was compelled to take leave to give birth to a child. In
the facts and circumstances of the present case, in my view,
W.P.(C) No.6964/1999

page 14 of 27

interests of justice meritted that the petitioner was reinstated in
service with continuity of service for the purposes of computation
of service benefits.
13.

However, so far as the relief of back wages is concerned,

it has been pointed out by learned counsel for the respondent that
the workman's services were terminated in 1980 and several years
have passed since.
14.

It would be useful to consider the principle laid in

judicial pronouncements on this question. In AIR 1979 SC 75
entitled Hindustan Tin Works(P) Ltd. Vs The Employees
Of The Hindustan Tin Works which holds the field even
today, the Apex Court was required to consider the issue and upon
a detailed consideration, authoritatively ruled thus:“9. It is no more open to debate that in the field of
industrial jurisprudence a declaration can be
given that the termination of service is bad and
the workman continues to be in service The
spectre of common law doctrine that contract of
personal service cannot be specifically enforced or
the doctrine of mitigation of damages does not
haunt in this this branch of law. The relief of
reinstatement with continuity of service can be
granted where termination of service to found to
be invalid. It would mean that the employer has
taken away illegally the right to work of the
workman contrary to the relevant law or in breach
of contract and simultaneously deprived the
workman of his earnings. If thus the employer is
W.P.(C) No.6964/1999

page 15 of 27

found to be in the wrong as a result of which the
workman is directed to be reinstated, the
employer could not shirk his responsibility of
paying the wages which the workman has been
deprived of by the illegal or invalid action of the
employer.
Speaking realistically, where
termination of service is questioned as invalid or
illegal and the workman has to go through the
gamut of litigation, his capacity to sustain himself
throughout the protracted litigation is itself such
an awesome factor that he may not survive to see
the day when relief is granted. More so in our
system where the law's proverbial delay has
become stupefying. If after such a protracted
time and energy consuming litigation during
which period the workman just sustains himself,
ultimately he is to be told that though he will be
reinstated, he will be denied the back wages
which would be due to him, the workman would
be subjected to a sort of penalty for no fault of his
and it is wholly undeserved.
Ordinarily,
therefore, workman whose service has been
illegally terminated would be entitled to full back
wages except to the extent he was gainfully
employed during the enforced idleness. That is
the normal rule. Any other view would be
premium on the unwarranted litigative activity of
the employer. If the employer terminate the
service illegally and the termination is motivated
as in this case, viz. To resist the workman's
demand for revision of wages, the termination
may well amount to unfair labour practice. In
such circumstances reinstatement being the
normal rule, it should be followed with full back
wages.
..............................On top of it they were forced to
litigation upto the apex court and now they are
being told that something less than full back
wages should be awarded to them. If the services
were not terminated the workmen ordinarily
would have continued to work and would have
W.P.(C) No.6964/1999

page 16 of 27

earned their wages. When it was held that the
termination of services was neither proper nor
justified, it would not only show that the
workmen were always willing to serve but if they
rendered service they would legitimately be
entitled to the wages for the same. If the
workmen were always ready to work but they
were kept away therefrom on account of invalid
act of the employer, there is no justification for
not awarding them full back wages which were
very legitimately due to them. A division Bench of
the Gujarat High Court in Dhari Gram Panchayat
vs. Safai Kamdar Mandal [197-I LLI 508], and a
division Bench of the Allahabad High Court in
Postal Seals Industrial Co-operative Society Ltd.
vs. Labour Court II, Lucknow and others [1971-I
LLJ 327], have taken this view and we are of the
opinion that theh view taken therein is correct.”
“10.
..................This Court held that the
workmen concerned did not have any opportunity
of explaining why their services should not be
terminated and, therefore, reinstatement was
held to be the appropriate relief, and set aside the
order of the Tribunal. It was observed that there
was no justification for not awarding full back
wages from the day they offered to resume work
till their reinstatement.”
“11. In the very nature of things there cannot be a
straight jacket formula for awarding relief of back
wages. All relevant considerations will enter the
verdict. More or less,it would be a motion
addressed to the discretion of the Tribunal. Full
back wages would be the normal rule and the
party objecting to it must establish the
circumstances necessitating departure. At that
stage the Tribunal will exercise its discretion
keeping in view all the relevant circumstances.
But the discretion must be exercised in a judicial
and judicious manner. The reason for exercising
W.P.(C) No.6964/1999

page 17 of 27

discretion must be cogent and convincing and
must appear in the race of the record. When it is
said that something is to be done within the
discretion of the authority,that something is to be
done according to the rules of reason and justice,
accordingly to law and not humour. It is not to be
arbitrary vague and fanciful but legal and
regular.”
“13. Now, if a sacrifice is necessary in the overall
interest of the industry or a particular
undertaking, it would be both unfair and
inequitous to expect only one partner of the
industry to make the sacrifice.
Pragnatism
compels common sacrifice on the part of both.
The sacrifice must come from both the partners
and we need not state the obvious that the labour
is a weaker partner who is more often called upon
to make the sacrifice. Sacrifice for the survival of
an industrial undertaking cannot be an unilateral
action. It must be a two way traffic. The
management need not have merry time to itself
making the workmen the sacrificial goat. If
sacrifice is necessary, those who can afford and
have the cushion and the capacity must bear the
greater brust making the shock of sacrifice as less
poignant as possible for those who keep body and
soil together with utmost difficulty.”
“14. The appellant wants us to give some thing
less than full back wages in this case which the
Labour Court has awarded. There is nothing to
show whether the Managing Director has made
any sacrifice; whether his salary and perks have
been adversely affected; whether the managerial
coteric has reduced some expenses on itself. If
there is no such material on record, how do we
expect the workmen, the lest affording of the
weaker segment of the society, to make the
sacrifice, because sacrifice on their part is denial
of the very means of livelihood.”
W.P.(C) No.6964/1999

page 18 of 27

15.

An issue relating to termination of the services of

workers employed in government projects and schemes on expiry
of the project or schemes arose for consideration before the Apex
Court. In its judgment reported at (2003) 4 SCC 27 entitled
S.M.Nilajkar and others vs. Telecom District Manager,
Karnataka, the court has answered the issue in favour of the
workman.
16.

It was argued by the respondent in this case that there

was delay in raising the dispute by the workman and that they
deserve to be non-suited on this ground.

However after a

consideration of the matter, the Apex Court was of the view that
though there was a delay, however the same would not fatal and
that the employee could not be blamed for the same. For this
reason it was held that the order of the Single Judge whereby relief
of back wages was denied to the workman while the reinstatement
was ordered was held to be just and reasonable.
17.

In a recent case before the Apex Court it was urged that

existence of several industries in the area where the management
was located showed the possibility for the workman to obtain
gainful employment.

A prayer for grant of back wages

was

opposed on this ground. In its judgment reported at 2004(VIII)
W.P.(C) No.6964/1999

page 19 of 27

AD SC 444 M/s Nicks(India)Tools Vs. Ram Surat and
another the Apex Court held thus:“18. This leaves us to consider the next limb of
the argument of Shri U.U.Lalit, learned senior
counsel who contended that the Labour Court
having come to the conclusion that in Ludhiana
where the appellant's factory is situated, there are
large number of other industries hence it was
always possible for the respondent workman to
have obtained a gainful employment on that
basis, was justified in confining the back wages to
only 25% of the full back wages, and the High
Court in this regard erred in reversing that
finding by not taking into consideration the
additional material produced by the management
in regard to this aspect of the case, i.e. of the
respondent being gainfully employed during the
relevant period. He also relied on two judgments
of this Court in the case of PGI of Medical
Education and Research, Chandigarh vs. Raj
Kumar 2001(2)SCC 54 and MP State Electricity
Board vs, Harina Bee (SMT) 2003(6) SCC 141.”
“20. Reliance placed by the learned counsel for
the appellant in the case of PGIU of Medical
Education and Research, Chandigarh(supra), in
our opinion, does not take the case of the
appellant any further. In that case, this Court
held that the Labour Court being the final court
of facts the superior courts do not normally
interfere with such finding of facts unless the
said finding of fact is perverse or erroneous or
not in accordance with law. In the instant case,
we have already noticed the basis ground on
which the Labour Court reduced the back wages
was based on a judgment of the High Court of
Punjab & Haryana which, as further noticed by
us, was overruled by a subsequent judgment of a
Division Bench. Therefore, the very foundation
W.P.(C) No.6964/1999

page 20 of 27

of the conclusion of the Labour Court having
been destroyed, the appellant could not derive
any support from the above cited judgments of
that Court. Similarly, in the case of M.P.State
Electricity Board(supra), this Court only said
that it is not an inevitable conclusion that every
time a reinstatement is ordered, full back wages
was the only consequence. This Court, in our
opinion, did not preclude that even in cases
where full back wages are legally due, the
superior courts are precluded from doing so
merely because the Labour Court has on an
erroneous ground has reduced such back wages.
In the instant case, we have noticed that the trial
court apart from generally observing that in
Ludhiana, there must have been job
opportunities available, on facts it did not rely
upon any particular material to hold either such
job was in fact available to the respondent and
he refused to accept the same or he was
otherwise gainfully employed during the period
he was kept out of work. On the contrary, it is
for the first time before the writ court the
appellant tried to produce additional evidence
which was rightly not considered by the High
Court because the same was not brought on
record in a manner known to law. Be that as it
may, in the instant case we are satisfied that the
High Court was justified in coming to the
conclusion that the appellant is entitled to full
back wages.”
18.

The issue as to grant of an appropriate relief after

holding that the termination of service was held to be illegal, fell
for consideration before the Division Bench of this Court in its
pronouncement reported at 1982(1) SLJ 255 Management of
Delhi Transport Corporation vs. Shri Ram Kumar &
W.P.(C) No.6964/1999

page 21 of 27

Another. The court held as follows:“13. Mr.Malhotra then sought to urge that even
though reinstatement may be ordered the
workman is not entitled to full back wages. We
cannot agree. 'Ordinarily, therefore, a workman
whose service has been illegally terminated would
be entitled to full back wages except to the extent
he was gainfully employed during the enforced
idleness. That is the normal rule. Any other view
would be a premium on the unwarranted
litigative activity of the employer'. 'If after such a
protracted time and energy consuming litigation
during which period the workman just sustains
himself, ultimately he is to be told that though he
will be reinstated, he will be denied the back
wages which would be due to him, the workman
would be subjected to a sort of penalty for no fault
of his and it is wholly undeserved' Hindustan Tin
case(supra). Mr.Malhotra then contends that full
back wages cannot be paid because it cannot be
expected that the workman must have been out of
employment for all this period. Now the evidence
of workman is clear wherein he has stated that
ever since dismissal he had been unemployed.
Mr. Malhotra seeks to catch on to the further part
of his evidence where he stated that he did not
make any efforts to get a job and says that this
shows an attitude of slackness on the part of the
employee which should deprive him of
entitlement to full back wages. We feel that Mr.
Malhotra misappreciates the principles on which
full back wages are paid. The principle is that
when an employee after protracted litigation with
the employer succeeds in showing that the
termination of his services was unjustified he
would normally be entitled to reinstatement with
full back wages excepting of course if it could be
shown that he had been gainfully employed in the
meanwhile. Thus full back wages would be
normal rate and the party objecting to it must
W.P.(C) No.6964/1999

page 22 of 27

establish
the
circumstances
necessitating
departure. See Gujarat Steel Tubes Ltd. vs. Its
Mazdoor Sabha. Thus if the employer wishes to
show that workman was gainfully employed he
must establish and prove that fact no
presumption of being gainfully employed can be
raised. It is not disputed that no evidence has
been led or even shown on the record by the
appellant which shows that the workman was at
any time in between employed elsewhere. In that
view there would be no justification for denying
him full back wages. The mere fact of long time
having elapsed is certainly not a reason to deny
him his normal relief of reinstatement, because as
said in Panitole Tea Estate case(P.240) “if his
dismissal was wrongful then merely because
proceedings for adjudication of the industrial
disputes have taken a long time is by itself no
reason for not directing his reinstatement if it is
otherwise justified being in accordance with
normal rule”.
19.

In a Single Bench decision of this Court reported at

114(2004)DLT

358

Management

of

Asiatic

Air

conditioning and Refrigeration(P) Ltd. vs. POALC-X and
another this Court has considered the judicial pronouncements on
the subject.

After a detailed consideration of the law on the

subject, several factors which are required to be taken into
consideration in awarding back wages have been noticed. Inter
alia, relevant factors which would weigh with the court in awarding
back wages would include the time involved in the litigation and
causes of the delay; the status of the management as a public body
W.P.(C) No.6964/1999

page 23 of 27

meant for public benefit; possibility of the worker being gainfully
employed; nature of the alleged misconduct; ensuing financial
burden; delay in raising an industrial dispute; duration of the
employment and the nature of the employment.
20.

It has been held by the Apex Court in Hindustan Tin

Works Limited (supra) that so far as the circumstances which
would necessitate departure from the normal circumstances of
grant of full back wages are concerned, the party which is objecting
to such an order must establish the circumstances which would
enable the court to draw the exception.
21.

In the instant case there is neither any pleading nor any

evidence to enable this Court to draw any conclusion which would
dis-entitle the workman to grant of the full back wages in terms of
the law laid down by the Apex Court or by this court.
22.

The petitioner in her claim statement in para 10 has

stated that she has tried to get alternative employment which she
has not been able to get and as such she is still unemployed. In
her evidence she has deposed that she is entitled to full salary for
the period since 3rd May, 1980. No material to the contrary has
been placed on record. Therefore the petitioner has remained
unemployed ever since her dismissal and none of the other factors
W.P.(C) No.6964/1999

page 24 of 27

or circumstances which would have justified denial of full back
wages has been brought on record. In these circumstances, in view
of the principles of law laid down in the afore noticed authoritative
pronouncements by which I am bound, the workman cannot be
denied the award of the full back wages.
23.

However, a vehement submission has been made by Mr.

V.K. Rao, learned counsel for the respondent that the Indian Red
Cross Society was constituted under an Act of the parliament being
Act XV of 1920. It is a humanitarian organisation for aid to the
destitutes and calamities. Its main function is disbursement of aid
and donations received at the time of disasters and natural
calamities to the destitutes and it does not carry on any industrial
activity. In its written statement, the respondent stated that apart
from a token grant from the Government of India, its expenditure
is met overwhelmingly out of donations and membership
subscriptions from public and sister societies.
In this view of the matter, I find force in the submission
of learned counsel for the respondent that grant of full back wages
would cast an onerous and perhaps unfair burden on the
respondent. Though no fault for the delay in adjudication can be
apportioned to the petitioner, but at the same time, the entire
W.P.(C) No.6964/1999

page 25 of 27

period

taken

cannot

be

attributed

to

the

respondent.

Undoubtedly, the respondent is required to render a yeoman's
service and has to rise to the occasion to provide aid and succour
whenever disaster, natural or man made, has stricken. Its funds
are meant for those in destitution and penury for reasons utterly
beyond their control.
It is trite that the courts in writ jurisdiction must mould
relief to balance equities and also that ends of pubic interest would
override all private interests.
24.

Therefore upon a careful consideration of the entire

factual conspectus, I am of the view, that in the instant case, so far
as the grant of back wages is concerned, the workman may be
called upon to do a sacrifice which would be purely in public
interest and therefore deserves to be paid wages at equivalent to
50% of the wages which she should have been entitled to with
effect from 3rd May, 1980.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondent is directed to reinstate the petitioner in
service with continuity of service for the purpose of computation of
service benefits within a period of four weeks from today.
The respondent shall also pay to the workman back
W.P.(C) No.6964/1999

page 26 of 27

wages with effect from 3rd May, 1980 at a rate equivalent to 50% of
the basic pay which was being paid to her when she proceeded on
leave. The respondent shall effect computation of the amount to
which the petitioner is entitled in terms of the present order and
communicate the same to the petitioner within four weeks and to
effect payment within four weeks thereafter.
The petitioner shall be entitled to costs of the present
litigation which are assessed at Rs.10000/- to be paid within four
weeks.

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
April 24, 2006
kr

W.P.(C) No.6964/1999

page 27 of 27

