IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 17057-59/2004
Judgment reserved on : 20 th January,
2005
Date of decision:February 24th, 2005
SH. ONKAR NATH PATHAK & ORS.... Petitioners
through Mr. Lallan Tewari, Advocate
VERSUS
I.G.N.O.U. & ANR. .... Respondents
through Mr. Sandeep Sethi, Sr. Advocate
with Mr. Aly Mirza, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

In these writ petitions three persons have claimed that

though they fall under the category of “Wards of ex-servicemen”,
they have been denied admission to the B.Ed Course in the
reserved category where reservation has been provided to wards of
ex-servicemen

by

W.P.(C). 17057-59/2004

the

Indira

Gandhi

National

Open

page 1 of page 14

University(hereinafter abbreviated as IGNOU) arrayed as party
respondent in these petitions in such category on the ground that
even though they may be sons of ex-service men, however, they do
not fall within the definition “Ward” being employed sons who are
not dependent on the ex-service men. This decision has been
impugned on the ground of arbitrariness and illegality.
2.

According to the petitioners, they had purchased the

prospectus and application form in May, 2004 from IGNOU on
payment of Rs.5,000/- seeking admission to the B.Ed course. The
duly filled up applications form were submitted well within the last
date of submission on 29th July, 2004. The petitioners were issued
admission card/hall tickets for participating in the entrance
examination which was to be conducted IGNOU at its center code
0707 at the Department of Commerce and Business at Jamia Milia
Islamia. According to the petitioners they were permitted to take
the entrance exam by IGNOU on 9th August,
2004 against the admit cards issued to them.
The petitioners were declared as having passed their
entrance exam in the result declared on 29th September, 2004 and
were taking steps to commence the course conducted by the
respondent.
W.P.(C). 17057-59/2004

page 2 of page 14

3.

However, vide an order dated 5th October, 2004

enclosed at annexure P-1 to the petition, the regional centers were
notified to the effect that the expression “wards” in the brochure
implies only dependent children of the notified categories in
whose favour reservation has been made.

Accordingly, the

regional

University

centers

were

notified

by

the

that

married/employed daughters and employed sons of ex-service
men would not be eligible for the benefit of 5% reservation for
admission to the B.Ed programme.
4.

According to the petitioner, based on this direction from

IGNOU, the University, the petitioners have not been permitted
admission to the B.Ed course despite their having succeeded in the
entrance

examination

conducted

by

the

respondent

and

satisfaction of all the eligibility requirements.
5.

On the other hand, according to the respondents, the

reservation of 5% seats was approved by the academic council of
IGNOU at its 18th meeting held on 3rd October, 1988. Approval
was granted to reservation of 5% seats from the 1990th Section
onwards to those programmes of IGNOU where seats were
limited. It has been pointed out that reservation is not only for the
“wards” of ex-service men but the reserved category has seven
W.P.(C). 17057-59/2004

page 3 of page 14

components. According to the respondents, the 5% seats thus
reserved are also intended for “wards” of war widows as well as
service personnel. Counsel for the respondents contends that the
expression “wards” is applicable only to dependent children. This
benefit will not be available even to a married daughter. According
to the respondents, as per the dictionary, the expression “Wards”
means dependent's minor children.
Reliance has been placed on the instances cited by the
respondents relating to Government of India Rules whereby only
dependent children of ex-service men are eligible for the benefits
of LTC and medical facilities.
6.

The other limb of the submissions on behalf of the

respondents is that there is no challenge to the action of the
University on any allegations of mala fide or discrimination by the
respondents. Reliance has been placed on the judgment of this
court reported at 96(2002) DLT 812 entitled Sqn. Ldr. A
Choudhary vs Union of India in support of the submission that
the challenge to the action of the respondents in the writ petition is
wholly misconceived.
7.

I have carefully heard the submissions made by learned

counsel appearing for both parties.
W.P.(C). 17057-59/2004

The entire gamut of
page 4 of page 14

arguments centers around the meaning of the expression “ward”.
Keeping in view the context in and purpose for which the same has
been introduced into the scheme of admission, in order to
appreciate the submissions made on behalf of the parties, it is
necessary to examine the scheme for admission to the Bachelor of
Education(B.Ed) course conducted by IGNOU.
8.

It appears that the respondent IGNOU had made

available what has been termed as 'Students Handbook And
Prospectus' which contains the application form and guide for
applicants for admission to the Bachelor of Education(B.Ed)
course which was to commence in 2004. According to clause 2.1 of
this prospectus, reservation was provided in the following terms :“2.1

Reservation
The university provides reservation of
seats for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, War
Widows,
Wards
of
Ex-servicemen
of
military/para-military forces and physically
handicapped candidates according to Government
of India rules.”
It is thus apparent that reservation of seats were
provided for war widows and not only wards of such widows.
Against this, reservation has been provided for wards of ex-service
men of military/para military forces. The categories specified have

W.P.(C). 17057-59/2004

page 5 of page 14

been qualified by the words “according to Government of India
Rules”.
9.

The entire purpose of reservation in favour of any

specified category is to give effect to the mandate of the
Constitutional provisions in order to ensure social justice to
otherwise backward or not so progressive sections of society. The
reservation contrary to such principles would suffer from the vice
of arbitrariness and discrimination and could be successfully
challenged on such basis.

Therefore, reading such beneficial

provisions which provide reservation in any other manner would
be contrary to the constitutional provisions and hence stand
vitiated.
10.

The expression “wards” is not explained anywhere in the

prospectus and therefore, has to derive its meaning given to it in
common parlance.
Therefore, it is the interpretation given by“learned
senior counsel on behalf of the respondents to the expression
“ward” would normally have to be accepted as there would
possibly be no other meaning thereof.
11.

The restriction to reservation of only 5% seats from the

1990th session onwards beyond the aforestated seven categories
W.P.(C). 17057-59/2004

page 6 of page 14

was approved by the academic council of IGNOU at its 18th
meeting as stated in the counter affidavit filed by the respondents.
This reservation is not stricted only to wards of ex-service men but
also to several other categories.
In the aforestated circumstances, at first blush, it would
appear that the action of the respondent in its clarification of the
expression “wards of ex-servicemen” cannot be impugned on any
legally tenable grounds.
12.

This is for another reason as well. Examination of the

scheme of the reservation would show that so far as reservation for
war widows is concerned, the same is not stricted to their wards
alone. All these categories are entitled to reserved seats. On the
other hand, it is only “wards of ex-service men”who have been held
to be entitled admission to the reserved seats.
Therefore, in order to give effect to the laudable
principles of state policy as well as the scheme of reservation
permitted by constitutional provisions which is to facilitate
upliftment of the sections of the society which needs beneficial
measures as reservation, it is necessary that the reservation would
normally be restricted to dependent children of ex-service men.
13.

Having arrived at such conclusion that the respondents

W.P.(C). 17057-59/2004

page 7 of page 14

maybe justified in so interpreting the expression wards of exservicemen, but the matter does not end here. The court would be
failing in its duty if the scheme of admissions to the B.Ed courses
was not specifically noticed.
14.

However matters do not end here and the issue has to be

examined from another angle.
The scheme of examination has been provided under
Chapter 4 of the prospectus. According to the brochure, the
Bachelor of Education(B.Ed) programme of IGNOU aims at
developing the understanding and competencies required by
practicing teachers for effective teaching-learning process at the
secondary stage. It is stated that the programme also provides
opportunities of sharing experiences gained by practicing teachers.
The programme enables in-service teachers to select and organise
learning experiences according to the requirement of learners
while at the same time providing knowledge and developing in
them an understanding of areas such as educational evaluation,
school management, etc.

Therefore the respondents have

provided the following eligibility conditions for seeking admission
to the Bachelor of Education(B.Ed) programme :“Eligibility
W.P.(C). 17057-59/2004

page 8 of page 14

In-service teachers within
i)
A bachelor degree or a higher degree
from any recognised university.
ii)
Two years' full time teaching experience
on temporary/permanent basis in a primary,
secondary/higher/senior
secondary
school
recognised by the central or a state government or
a union territory. The experience certificate
should be issued by the Principal, or
Headmaster/Headmistress.
The requisite
teaching experience of two years must be
completed on or before the last date of submission
of application as notified in the advertisement.
Those appearing in qualifying (Bachelor or a
higher degree) examination can also apply. But
the candidate granted provisional admission on
this basis will be required to submit the proof of
having passed the qualifying examination by 31st
October, 2004 otherwise the provisional
admission will stand cancelled.”
15.

From the above, it is apparent that the eligibility

conditions which have been prescribed by the respondents for the
Bachelor of Education programme envisage that the candidate
would be in-service teachers with two years full time teaching
experience on temporary/permanent basis in schools recognised
by the Central or the State Government or the Union Territory.
The candidate is required to produce an experience certificate
issue by the principal. The candidate is also required to produce a
Bachelor Degree or a higher degree from any recognised
university.

Even though an exception is provided to for this

W.P.(C). 17057-59/2004

page 9 of page 14

qualification to the extent that a candidate would be given
provisional admission on the basis that he/she was appearing in
the qualifying bachelor or higher degree examination but proof of
having passed such examination was to be produced by 31st
October, 2004.
However irrespective of whether the candidate was
undergoing the qualifying examination, the requirement of two
years full-time teaching experience was mandatory and only inservice teachers are eligible for admission to the Bachelor of
Education programme.
16.

It is noteworthy that the reservation provided under the

rules as detailed hereinabove does not contain any restriction on
the reservation in terms of the course being applied for.

The

reservation applies uniformally to all the courses including the
Bachelor of Education programme. Having regard to the eligibility
conditions prescribed by the respondents themselves, it is
apparent that if the interpretation of the expression “ward” as has
been urged before this court and as discussed above is applied,
there would be no candidate who would be less than 21 years or
would be dependent upon the ex-servicemen parent who could
take the benefit of the prescribed reservation. Therefore, there
W.P.(C). 17057-59/2004

page 10 of page 14

would be an exclusion by implication of such persons from
consideration and entitlement to the reservation in the Bachelor of
Education programme. In the face of no such exclusion having
been notified or provided in the student handbook and prospectus,
such exclusion cannot be applied by implication.
17.

The respondents have placed before me a photocopy of

the office note sheets to support the contention that the action of
the respondents is based on due consideration. Perusal thereof
shows that several regional centers of the respondent had already
granted admission to wards of ex-servicemen without restricting
the application of the reservation to wards who were dependents.
The query from regional centers which was placed for
consideration before the respondents was only with regard to
whether married daughters and sons above 21 years of age of the
ex-servicemen were eligible for admission to B.Ed. under the
reserved quota for wards of ex-servicemen.

The restrictive

interpretation to the expression “wards” to show that the same is
restricted to dependent children was given on the 24th September,
2004 and thereafter put up to the office chairman of the
respondent no. 1.

The resultant conflict in the prescribed

eligibility conditions and such implementation of the reservation
W.P.(C). 17057-59/2004

page 11 of page 14

was also noted in the noting sheets recorded on 7th October, 2004
but the same was not considered and stands unresolved.
18.

In view of the afore stated position, it is apparent that

though the restriction or the reservation to dependent wards may
be permissible in other disciplines.

But candidates seeking

admission under such reserved category deserve to be informed
about such exclusion or restriction prior to the submission of
application forms.

However keeping in view the eligibility

conditions prescribed by the respondents themselves for the
Bachelor of Education programme for the pertinent Academic
Session, and no exclusion to the reservation policy having been
provided in the notified student handbook and prospectus, there
can be no warrant for excluding the petitioners from consideration
and grant of admission.
19.

As per the handbook, the course envisages theory papers

as well as practicals. The instructional system provided in the
handbook includes a multimedia approach that is the student is
provided self-instructional print media, audio/video/assignments
councelling sessions and practical work in school and workshops.
The programme consists of four group of courses for which a total
of 48 credits are granted. Assignments have to be completed and
W.P.(C). 17057-59/2004

page 12 of page 14

councelling sessions are also given.

Evaluation is based on

continuous evaluation of periodic compulsory assignments and
terminal examinations are conducted. As per the handbook, for
the candidates of the academic year January, 2005, the first
terminal examination would be held in December, 2005.

The

induction programme for the January cycle was to be held on the
8th and 9th January, 2005. Therefore there can be no legitimate
objection on the ground of delay in joining the course by the
petitioner. No such objection was raised before me.
20.

According to the writ petitioners, the respondents

had passed the order granting admission to them. The petitioners
had taken all steps pursuant to the letter dated 24th September,
2004. However, instead of permitting the petitioners to proceed
in the course, the respondents placed on its notice board the
communication received from the respondent no. 1 which was
communicated to the regional centers by e-mails dated 5th
October, 2004.

Pursuant thereto the petitioners were not

permitted to deposit their fees and papers when they reported on
the 12th October, 2004. The matter has remained pending in this
court for this entire period.
Accordingly, it is directed that the petitioners shall be
W.P.(C). 17057-59/2004

page 13 of page 14

permitted to submit their application forms and fees in terms of
the orders passed by the respondent in their favour on the 29th
September, 2004 and offer made to the petitioner on the 14th
October, 2004 and be permitted to undertake the Bachelor of
Education programme.
21.

This

shall

not

preclude

the

respondents

from

considering the matter and prescribing any special provisions in
respect of availability of reserved seats to candidates seeking
admission to the Bachelor of Education programme for the future
courses. The respondents shall notify all prospective candidates of
such stipulations in the Handbook and Prospectus published and
circulated for the future courses. This is also the purport of the
directions given by this court in the case of Sqn. Ldr. A. Choudhary
(supra) which has been relied upon by the respondents.
This petition is allowed in the above terms.
There shall be no order as to costs.

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
February 24th, 2005
kr

W.P.(C). 17057-59/2004

page 14 of page 14

