IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 8986/2005
Judgmen t reserved on: 16th March,
2006
Da te of decision: 24th April, 2006
SULTAN SINGH
..... Petitioner
through Ms. Jyoti Singh and Mr. Ankur
Chibber,
Advocates
VERSUS
DTC

...Respondent
through Ms.Saroj Bidawat, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

The instant case raises a question as to whether an employer

can be permitted to contend that it can be permitted to prove a case
entirely different from the charge against the workman and still it

W.P. (C) No. 8986/2005

Page 1 of 21

urge that the workman was guilty of the case which was proved and
not of the case with which he was charged.

As a corollary, the

question which has arisen as to whether the workman would be
precluded from raising an objection to this effect in a writ petition
filed by him impugning such action of his employer and the award of
the industrial adjudicator on such plea, if he had not specifically
raised the same in any proceedings prior thereto.
2.

The petitioner in the instant case was employed as a driver with

the DTC with effect from 1st August, 1975. On 26th October, 1983 he
was on duty with bus no. DLP 1230 on the Delhi-Shimla route.
Allegations were levelled against the petitioner to the effect that when
the checking officials gave a signal and blew the whistle to the
petitioner to stop the bus for checking at Dhalli, he did not care to
stop the bus but sped away. In this behalf, a charge sheet dated 18th
November, 1983 was issued to the petitioner, the relevant portion
whereof reads thus:“CHARGE SHEET
You are required to explain as to why disciplinary
action under Clause 15 (2) of the D.R.T.A.
(Condition of Appointment & Service Regulations,
1952 read with Road Transport Corporation Act
1950 and Delhi Transport Law (Amendment) Act,
W.P. (C) No. 8986/2005

Page 2 of 21

3.

1971, should not be taken against you for the
following irregularities:“That on 26.10.83 while you were on
duty with bus No. DLB-1230 on DelhiShimla route, the checking officials gave a
signal and whistle to stop the bus at Dhalli
at 19.15 hrs. for checking purpose but you
did not care the same and sped away the
bus. This shows your malafide intention in
dealing with the corporation's business and
you also mixed up with the conductor for
N.I.O.Ts.
Your above action tantamount to
misconduct within the meaning of Para 19
(b), (f), (h) & (m) of the standing order
governing
the
conduct
of
D.T.C.
Employees.”
On the basis of this charge sheet, an inquiry was held. There is

no dispute that in this inquiry, there was no evidence brought on
record against the petitioner to the effect that he did not stop the bus
at Dhalli. On the contrary, it was stated in the evidence on behalf of
the DTC that the bus did not stop at Kanda Ghat but stopped at
Dhalli. However, the inquiry officer submitted a report dated 26 th
June, 1984 holding the petitioner guilty of the charges with which he
had been charged.

In these circumstances, the depot manager

imposed a punishment on the petitioner of this stoppage of his next
increment with cumulative effect. The petitioner preferred an appeal
dated 24th July, 1984 under the rules to the competent authority
W.P. (C) No. 8986/2005

Page 3 of 21

which was rejected by an order passed on 19th September, 1984. The
second appeal preferred by the petitioner was rejected on 25th
February, 1985.
4.

Thereafter, the petitioner was advised and had filed a suit for a

declaration to the effect that order dated 26th June, 1984 be quashed
and declared as null and void and a decree be passed in favour of the
petitioner removing the punishment imposed upon the petitioner. A
suit filed by the petitioner was dismissed on 15th December, 1990 and
the appeal against the same was also dismissed vide judgment dated
21st October, 1994 by the Additional Senior Civil Judge. The plea on
which the petitioner had challenged the order imposing the penalty
was on the plea that the inquiry was conducted in violation of
principles of natural justice but the petitioner failed to lead evidence
on this issue and did not give any evidence about the competence of
the disciplinary authority on which plea also he had challenged the
order of punishment. In these circumstances, the civil court held
against the petitioner.
5.

The petitioner thereafter set up an industrial dispute which was

referred for adjudication by the appropriate government vide its

W.P. (C) No. 8986/2005

Page 4 of 21

order dated 24th May, 1996 on the following terms of reference:
“Whether the punishment of stoppage of next
due one increment with cumulative effect
imposed on Sh. Sultan Singh is illegal and/or
unjustified and if so, what relief is be entitled
and what directions are necessary in this
respect?”
The industrial tribunal had proceeded to record evidence in the
matter and after a detailed consideration had answered the reference
against the petitioner vide its award dated 2nd April, 2003. This
award has been assailed by the petitioner by way of the present writ
petition.

From the award it appears that the petitioner had

challenged the order dated 26th June, 1984 on the ground that the
same was based on a false and fabricated report and a baseless
charge.
6.

An issue was framed with regard to validity of the disciplinary

inquiry which was decided against the petitioner vide an order dated
31st May, 2001. It was held that the inquiry officer had not violated
the principles of natural justice.
7.

In the discussion in the award dated 2nd April, 2003, the labour

court has noticed that as per the charge sheet Exhibit MW1/1, the
workman on 26th October, 1983 while on duty with bus no. DEP 239

W.P. (C) No. 8986/2005

Page 5 of 21

on the Delhi-Shimla route, the checking staff/officials gave a signal
and whistle to stop the bus at Dhalli at about 19.50 hours for
checking purpose but the workman did not care to heed the same and
took the bus away intentionally. The industrial tribunal held that the
charges stood proved against the workman definitely and the same
constituted misconduct. The industrial tribunal was of the view that
the charges were very serious with respect to a driver but he has only
been punished with stoppage of one increment with cumulative effect
and for this reason held that the punishment was not unjustified or
illegal in any manner and was not disproportionate to the charges
levelled against him.

In these circumstances, the reference was

answered against the workman.
8.

Before this court, the principal ground of challenge to the

award and the proceedings of the industrial tribunal are on the
ground that the industrial tribunal had completely ignored the
evidence which was produced before it to the effect that the
petitioner had stopped the bus at Dhalli and hence there the DTC had
levelled a false charge against the petitioner. To put it otherwise, it is
contended that DTC had failed to prove the charges levelled against

W.P. (C) No. 8986/2005

Page 6 of 21

the petitioner.
9.

It is noteworthy that in the report submitted by the checking

officials which was relied upon by the respondents, it was stated that
they were waiting at Kanda Ghat and that the bus arrived at about
1700 hours when they had given a stop signal by raising their diaries
and blowing whistles. However the driver did not stopped the bus at
Kandaghat. Consequently the checking staff had tried to chase the
bus by following it in a Himachal Roadways bus but they could not
catch the DTC bus up to Dhalli. The driver, that is the petitioner, had
stopped the bus at Dhalli when he was asked reasons for not stopping
it at Kandaghat.
10.

There is therefore material contradictions in the time and place

of the occurrence and the misconduct. Thus there is contradiction in
material particulars in the charge with which the petitioner was
charged and the report of the checking staff which was relied upon by
the DTC to hold the petitioner guilty.
11.

The petitioner has pointed out that written statements were

taken from several passengers wherein no complaints were made and
the same did not support the charge against the petitioner in any

W.P. (C) No. 8986/2005

Page 7 of 21

manner. Furthermore, the petitioner had produced a witness Shri
Kuldeep who with his family was travelling on seat nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
and 7 who made a clear statement that no inspectors were found
standing at Kandaghat nor any sound of whistle was heard and
further that the two inspectors had checked the tickets of this witness
and his family at Dhalli. This witness had even made a statement on
oath before the industrial adjudicator to the effect that the bus had
stopped at Kandaghat and nearly 8-10 passengers had got down
while two or three passengers had boarded the bus. He also proved
on record 12 tickets which were purchased by this family of six people
from the Delhi to Shimla route and from Shimla to Dhalli. It is
noteworthy that the industrial adjudicator had completely failed to
consider the evidence of this witness who stated that the conductor
was sitting in the back of the bus at his seat.
12.

It is noteworthy that the documentary evidence on record in the

nature of way bills, way vouchers which established that there were
passengers who had got in to the bus at not only at Kandaghat but
also at several stops between Kandaghat and Dhalli including Sogi,
Tara Devi, Shimla, Lakra Bazar, Sanjoli etc. This, according to the

W.P. (C) No. 8986/2005

Page 8 of 21

petitioner, contradicted the checking staff in its statement that they
could not catch up with the bus between Kandaghat and Dhalli.
13.

However, these material facts do not need to detain this court

inasmuch as the principal issue remains as to whether the fact that
there was no evidence in support of the charge sheet which was
levelled against the petitioner and consequently he could have been
held guilty of any other allegations. Undoubtedly, the petitioner was
charged with having failed to stop the bus at Dhalli. There is not an
iota of evidence either in the inquiry proceedings or before the
industrial tribunal to this effect.

On the contrary, the witnesses

produced by the respondent have themselves stated that the bus had
not stopped at Kandaghat. The petitioner was never charged with the
charge that he had failed to stop at Kandaghat.
14.

The purpose of serving a delinquent with a charge sheet is to

make known to him the allegations with which he is charged and the
case he is expected to meet. The contents of the charge sheet would
have a material bearing on the defence of the workman.

The

importance of the charge sheet cannot in any case be watered down
or ignored by raising a plea to the effect that the workman had

W.P. (C) No. 8986/2005

Page 9 of 21

committed some misconduct, even though he was not charged with
the same. Undoubtedly, stringent rules of the law of evidence and
procedure are not applicable to departmental proceedings. However,
it is a fundamental requirement of law and justice that the principles
of natural justice are strictly adhered to and non-observance may be
permissible only in exceptional circumstances or statutory provisions
may warrant their non-observance. A workman who is charged with
misconduct is put to notice of the allegations against him which he is
required to meet in his defence and evidence. The failure to prove
the allegations would defeat the case of the management.

A

workman cannot be found guilty of the offence he is charged with if
the management fails to prove the same by cogent and reliable
evidence in support or if the evidence of the management points
towards some act other than that with which the workman is
charged.
15.

It is an admitted case that there is no evidence in support of the

charge with which the workman was charged. The workman has
consistently taken a stand that the case against him was false and
fabricated. Undoubtedly, the petitioner has not specifically pointed

W.P. (C) No. 8986/2005

Page 10 of 21

out that the management had not led evidence in support of the
charge. However, the failure to say so in such specific terms would
not preclude the workman from pointing out the fact that the
management had failed to prove the charges against him.
16.

The contention of the workman is supported by the pleas set up

in the counter affidavit by the respondents themselves. It has been
stated by the respondent in the counter affidavit that there has been a
typographical mistake in the place and time in the charge sheet. In
the light of this admission on the part of the respondent, there is
force in the contentions of the petitioner that the respondents had
failed to prove the charges on which the inquiry was held against the
workman and that the inquiry report was consequently based on no
material.

For this reason, the punishment imposed upon the

petitioner also cannot be sustained.
17.

From the copy of the judgment passed by the Civil Court it is to

be seen that the petitioner had contended that the allegations in the
charge sheet were made arbitrarily by the DTC and that the inquiry
report had arrived at findings to the contrary. It may also be noticed
that the respondent was conscious of the charges it had levelled

W.P. (C) No. 8986/2005

Page 11 of 21

against the petitioner. It led evidence before the industrial tribunal
as if the charge sheet was correct. It is for the first time in the
counter affidavit filed before this court, that the respondent has set
up a plea of a typographical error.
18.

In the light of the aforestated discussion, it is an admitted case

that the articles of charge with which the petitioner was charged were
not proved. The workman was charged with not having stopped the
bus at Dhalli while the witnesses of the respondent in fact stated that
he had stopped at Dhalli. Consequently, the workman could not have
been held guilty of the charges with which he was charged in the
charge sheet dated 18th November, 1983. In my view, the industrial
tribunal has fallen into error also in ignoring the material evidence
on this aspect which was led by the petitioner and in upholding the
penalty imposed upon the petitioner. The finding of guilt of the
petitioner is based on no evidence.
19.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on

the pronouncement of the Apex Court in (1977) 2 SCC 491 State
of Haryana vs. Ratan Singh in support of the contention that in
the absence of evidence, a workman cannot be held guilty of the

W.P. (C) No. 8986/2005

Page 12 of 21

allegations with which he has been charged. It was held thus by the
Apex Court:
“It is well settled that in a domestic enquiry the
strict and sophisticated rules of evidence under the
Indian Evidence Act may not apply. All materials
which are logically probative for a prudent mind
are permissible. There is no allergy to hearsay
evidence provided it has reasonable nexus and
credibility. It is true that departmental authorities
and administrative tribunals must be careful in
evaluating such material and should not glibly
swallow what is strictly speaking not relevant
under the Indian Evidence Act. For this proposition
it is not necessary to cite decisions nor text books,
although we have been taken through case law and
other authorities by counsel on both sides. The
essence of a judicial approach is objectivity,
exclusion of extraneous materials or considerations
and observance of rules of natural justice. Of
course, fairplay is the basis and if perversity or
arbitrariness, bias or surrender of independence of
judgment vitiate the conclusions reached, such
finding, even though of a domestic tribunal, cannot
be held good.
However, the courts below
misdirected themselves, perhaps, in insisting that
passengers who had come in and gone out should
be chased and brought before the tribunal before a
valid finding could be recorded. The 'residuum'
rule to which counsel for the respondent referred,
based upon certain passages from American
Jurisprudence does not go to that extent nor does
the passage from Halsbury insist on such rigid
requirement. The simple point is, was there some
evidence or was there no evidence - not in the sense
of the technical rules governing regular court
proceedings but in a fair commonsense way as men
W.P. (C) No. 8986/2005

Page 13 of 21

of understanding and worldly wisdom will accept.
Viewed in this way, sufficiency of evidence in proof
of the finding by a domestic tribunal is beyond
scrutiny. Absence of any evidence in support of a
finding is certainly available for the court to look
into because it amounts to an error of law apparent
on the record. We find, in this case, that the
evidence of Chamanlal, Inspector of the flying
squad, is some evidence which has relevance to the
charge levelled against the respondent. Therefore,
we are unable to hold that the order is invalid on
that ground.”
20.

In 1997 6 SCC 650 (para 4) Ahmedabad Municipal

Corporation vs. Virender Kumar Jayanti Bhai Patel, it has
been held that the High Court in exercise of its powers of judicial
review under Article 226 can examine the record to see if there was
any evidence to support the findings arrived at against the workman.
It has further been held in AIR 2001 SC 8 (para 19) Saurashtra
Cement and Chemical Industries Vs. UOI, that in exercise of
the powers to judicial review, this court would examine as to whether
the findings against the delinquent are based on no evidence or are
legally untenable. To the same effect are the principles laid down by
the Apex Court in AIR 1964 SC 477 Sayeed Yakub vs. K.S.
Radhakrishnan.
21.

Ms. Saroj Bidawat, learned counsel for the respondent has

W.P. (C) No. 8986/2005

Page 14 of 21

vehemently urged that even though the charge sheet was to the effect
that the petitioner did not stop at Dhalli, however the entire evidence
which was led by the DTC was to the effect that the workman did not
stop at Kandaghat. Therefore, the petitioner knew the case of the
respondent and has never objected to the same anywhere. It has
been contended that for this reason teh workman cannot raise this
issue at this stage.
22.

I have noticed hereinabove that the consistent case of the

workman was that the charges against him were false and fabricated.
In my view, the plea raised by the workman to the effect that the
charges against him were not proved

would be covered in this

submission. The importance of the charge sheet is well established
and the respondent cannot urge a technical plea of there being no
specific challenge, even though in the instant case, the petitioner has
consistently urged that the charges against him were false and
fabricated.
23.

The respondents have placed reliance on the pronouncement of

the Gujarat High Court in 1996 (5) SLR 547 Himanshu S.
Rajyaguru & Ors. vs. State of Gujarat & Anr. In this case it

W.P. (C) No. 8986/2005

Page 15 of 21

was held that a second writ petition challenging an order which had
been challenged in an earlier writ petition on different grounds was
not maintainable.
This judgment is clearly distinguishable on the facts of the case
inasmuch as in the instant case the petitioner has not filed any writ
petition impugning the industrial award hitherto. In any case, I have
held that the workman has consistently been challenging the action
taken by the respondent on the ground that the allegations in the
charge sheet were false and fabricated. Therefore, the principles laid
down by the Gujarat High Court in this judgment would not apply to
the instant case.
24.

In 1996 8 SLR 388 Gurnail Singh vs. Presiding Officer

also relied upon by learned counsel for the respondent, it was held by
the High Court of Punjab and Haryana that the findings of fact
returned by the industrial adjudicator were based on illegally
admissible evidence and consequently the High Court would not have
jurisdiction to interfere with such findings in exercise of its powers
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
This is not so in the instant case. The admitted position before

W.P. (C) No. 8986/2005

Page 16 of 21

the disciplinary authority and before the industrial adjudicator was
that the allegations made in the charge sheet were not supported by
any legally admissible evidence. On the contrary, the witnesses of
the respondents had supported the petitioner that he had stopped the
bus at Dhalli. In this view of the matter, this judgment does not
further the case of the respondent.
25.

In 1996 6 SLR 654, Delhi Administration vs. Y. Singh

& Ors., this court held that the award of the labour court could be
tested only in the light of such material which were placed before the
industrial tribunal. Fresh material or further material which was not
before the tribunal should not normally be allowed to be placed
before the court. I am unable to agree with the submission of learned
counsel for the respondent that the petitioner Sultan Singh is relying
on any fresh material in support of his contention that the
respondents had failed to prove the charges against him.
26.

For the same reason, the principles laid down by the Apex

Court in

(2003) 9 SCC 5419 S K M & Ors. vs. State of Bihar & Ors., to

W.P. (C) No. 8986/2005

Page 17 of 21

the effect that it was not open for the appellant to take a stand that
the High Court had erroneously recorded its submissions before the
Apex Court.

Such a submission could only have been made by

moving an appropriate application before the High Court.

The

Supreme Court held that statement of fact as to what transpired at
the hearing recorded in the judgment of the court, are conclusive of
the facts so stated and no one can contradict such statement by
affidavit or other statements.
It is not so in the instant case.
27.

It would be useful to consider the principles laid down by the

Supreme Court in its judgment reported at (1997) 6 SCC 650
Allahabad Municipal Corporation vs. V. Kumar wherein the
court held thus:“4.
High Courts under Article 226 of the
Constitution are entitled to issue directions, writs
and orders for correcting the record of the inferior
courts or tribunals. It is true that the High Court
while exercising its jurisdiction under Article 226
of the Constitution, cannot convert itself into a
court of appeal and assess the sufficiency or
adequacy of the evidence in support of the finding
of fact reached by the competent courts or the
tribunals, but this, however, does not debar the
High Court from its power to enquire whether
there is any evidence in support of a finding
W.P. (C) No. 8986/2005

Page 18 of 21

recorded by the inferior court or tribunal. It is well
established that there is a
difference between a finding based on no evidence.
If the finding of fact recorded by the tribunal is
based on no evidence, such a finding would suffer
from error of law apparent on the face of record.”
28.

As noticed hereinabove, in the instant case admittedly there is

no evidence to support the allegations made against the petitioner.
Admittedly the charge on which the inquiry was held and the
proceedings held before the industrial adjudicator was not proved or
established against the petitioner and therefore, the punishment
imposed is illegal.
The instant case does not relate to a case where this court is
required to test the findings returned by the industrial adjudicator on
sufficiency or adequacy of evidence. The award of the industrial
tribunal is clearly not sustainable in the light of the well settled
principles of law and therefore, deserves, to be set aside and
quashed.
In view of the foregoing discussion, this writ petition is allowed.
The award dated 2nd April, 2003 passed by the industrial tribunal is
hereby set aside and quashed.
As a consequence, the order dated 26th June, 1984 imposing the
W.P. (C) No. 8986/2005

Page 19 of 21

penalty of stoppage of increment with cumulative effect and the
orders passed on the appeal of the petitioner dated 19th September,
1984 and 26th February, 1985 are not sustainable in law.
There shall be no order as to costs.

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
April 24, 2006
Kr

W.P. (C) No. 8986/2005

Page 20 of 21

