IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 2316/1996
Judgm ent reserved on: March 9, 2006
Dat e of decision: April 24, 2006
M/S AUTOMOBILE ASSOC. UPPER INDIA ...
Petitioner
through Mr. Lalit Bhasin, Ms. Ratra Diwedi
and Ms. Shruti Mahinderu, Advocate
VERSUS
THE P.O.LABOUR COURT II & ANR. ...
Respondents
through Mr. R.S. Rathi, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

This writ petition raises a very fundamental issue in

industrial adjudication.

The question which requires to be

answered is as to whether a workman can rest his case solely on a
plea set up by the management, thereby, shifting the onus and
burden of proof of proving his claimed employment totally upon
W.P. (C) No. 2316/1996

Page 1 of 22

the management. It appears that the respondent no. 2 Shri Chotey
Lal set up a plea that he was employed with the Automobile
Association of India, petitioner herein, as a watchman on a
monthly salary of Rs.300/- per month. It was claimed that he was
working with the management for the last seven years and was
appointed at the car parking behind the LIC Building.

The

workman set up a claim that his services were illegally terminated
on 22nd September, 1989 and that wages of Rs.3200/- for the
period November, 1988 to September, 1989 were due and payable
to him. Further an amount of Rs. 4950/- was claimed as arrears
for the period 1987 to 1988 at the rate of Rs.562/- and Rs.262/per month amounting to Rs. 3144/- and arrears from 1986 to 1987
at the rate of Rs.412/- per month and at the rate of Rs.112/- per
month which amounted to to Rs.1244/- The respondent no. 2 also
claimed back wages as a period 1985 to 1986 amounting to
Rs.3200/2.

Against this claim, the petitioner herein had denied

regular employment of the workman with the petitioners and the
entire claim set up by the workman.

The petitioner had also

disputed any relationship of employment of the respondent no. 2.
3.

According to the petitioner, it was engaged in providing

W.P. (C) No. 2316/1996

Page 2 of 22

services to its members and the motoring community. Certain
persons were operating voluntarily as car park attendants in and
around the area of the Connaught Place looking after the cars and
other vehicles parked in these areas. Such persons had formed a
union namely the Car Parking Attendants Union (registered)
having its office at 5/6 Sciendiia House, New Delhi. These car
parking attendants were not employed by any person but used to
earn their livelihood with the money so collected as tips from
persons parking their vehicles in available parking places in this
area. In order to encourage and help the members of the union by
assisting them through education and guidance, the petitioner
decided to provide free cotton uniforms once a year to the
members of this registered union of the car attendants and also to
pay a sum of Rs.150 per month by way of an honorarium which
was in the nature of a washing allowance to such members of the
union who were nominated by it. For this purpose, the petitioner
entered into an agreement dated 1st January, 1987 with the car
parking attendants Union.

This agreement stipulated that the

relationship of the Automobile Association of India with the
members of the Car Parking Attendants Union would not be that
of employer and employee and the union was required to take an
W.P. (C) No. 2316/1996

Page 3 of 22

undertaking from all its members in this behalf.
4.

The respondent no. 2 Shri Chotey Lal was one of the

members of the Car Parking Attendants Union who was
nominated by the Union or operating as a car attendant. The
petitioner had provided him a uniform and a sum of Rs.150/- as
honorarium was being paid by the petitioner to the attendants in
terms of the aforenoticed arrangement.

The purpose of this

agreement was a social cause and benovalent to society inasmuch
as incidents of car thefts were on the increase in the city.
5.

It appears that the respondent no. 2 approached the

appropriate government raising a dispute that his services were
illegally terminated. The plea raised by the respondent no. 2 were
as have been noticed hereinabove and included a claim that he was
an employee of the petitioner. In exercise of its powers under
Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, the appropriate
government referred the matter for adjudication to the industrial
adjudicator vide a notification dated 24th September, 1990 on the
following terms :“Whether the termination of the services of
Shir Chotey Lal is illegal and/or unjustified
and if so, to what relief is he entitled and what
directions are necessary in this respect?”

W.P. (C) No. 2316/1996

Page 4 of 22

6.

The petitioner contested the claim set up by the

respondent no. 2 denying employment of the respondent no. 2.
The matter proceeded to evidence. After a consideration of the
material placed before it, the industrial adjudicator held that the
respondent no. 2 was an employee of the petitioner; that the
petitioner had failed to establish the case set up by it that the
respondent no. 2 was engaged on the basis of a contract and
rejected the documentary evidence produced by the petitioner on
the ground that the same had not been specifically mentioned in
the written statement filed by it. After so holding, the industrial
adjudicator answered the reference in favour of the workman vide
its award dated 20th March, 1996 holding that his services had
been terminated illegally inasmuch as the petitioner had failed to
comply with the provisions of Section 25F of the Act and held that
the workman was entitled to reinstatement into service with
continuity of service and full back wages with effect from 22nd
September, 1989 which was the alleged date of the illegal
termination.
7.

The petitioner has assailed this award dated 20th March,

1996 by way of the present writ petition. It has been contended
that the onus to prove employment with the management lies
W.P. (C) No. 2316/1996

Page 5 of 22

wholly on the workman who is so claiming and that in the instant
case the workman had failed to discharge this burden on it caste
on him by law. It has further been contended on behalf of the
petitioner that the industrial adjudicator had failed to notice that
even the terms of the agreement had been incorporated in the
written statement filed by the petitioner and consequently the
evidence led by the petitioner could not have been ignored. The
petitioner has explained that the construction placed by the
industrial adjudicator on the letter dated 9th January, 1989 is also
erroneous inasmuch as the same was merely a letter to ensure that
the antecedents of the car attendants were verified and for no
other reason.
8.

Learned counsel for the respondents had also submitted

that industrial adjudicator has fallen into error in denying
reinstatement into service on the ground that the respondent no. 2
has been reinstated into service. Such plea has been set up even in
the counter affidavit filed by the respondent no. 2.
9.

Having heard the learned counsel for the parties and

perused the available record, it is noteworthy that the workman
had set up a case of seven years of the employment with the
petitioner on a monthly wages of Rs.300/- per month. It is settled
W.P. (C) No. 2316/1996

Page 6 of 22

law that a plea is to be proved by a party who has set up the same.
Therefore, undoubtedly, the workman had to prove that he was
employed by the petitioner as well as the wages which were being
drawn by him and the period for which he had been employed.
10.

It is well settled that the primary burden of proof to

establish a plea rests on a person so claiming.
reference

can

be

appropriately

made

to

In this behalf
the

judicial

pronouncement in (2001) 9 SCC 713 (715) State of Gujarat & Ors.
vs Pratamsingh Narsinh Parmar; 2004 LLR 351 (para 49) Nilgiri
Coop. Marketing Society Ltd. vs State of Tamil Nadu; 2001 LLR
148 Dhyan Singh vs Raman Lal; 1996 Lab. I.C. 202 Swapan vs
First Labour Court, West Bengal and 1973 Lab. I.C. 398 N.C. John
vs TTS & CE Workers Union;

Thus burden lies on a person

claiming the establishment to be an industry to place positive facts
before the court in this behalf.

For this reason, the primary

burden to establish the relationship of employment also lies on the
workman who is claiming the same.
11.

In this behalf, it was only if the respondent had

discharged the onus and burden of proof cast on him and had
placed some material on record to indicate that he had been
employed by the petitioner that the petitioner would have been
W.P. (C) No. 2316/1996

Page 7 of 22

required to displace the case set up by the respondent by leading
positive evidence.
12.

In (2005) 5 SCC 100 Manager, Reserve Bank of India vs

S. Mani & Ors., it was held by the apex court that it is only if the
initial burden of proof, which was on the workman, was
discharged to some extent, that a finding can be returned in
respect of the defence of the management. Furthermore, a plea
having been set up by the workman, the initial burden of proof was
on the workman to show that he had been employed by the
petitioner in the claim capacity on the stated terms.

The

circumstances in which the court may draw an adverse inference
against the management have also been succinctly set down thus :“22,
An adverse inference, therefore, was
drawn for non-production of the attendance
register alone, and not for non-production of the
wage-slips.
Reference to “other relevant
documents” must be held to be vague as the
appellant herein had not been called upon to
produce any other documents for the said purpose.
23.
It appears that the learned Tribunal
considered the matter solely from the angle that the
appellant had failed to prove its plea of
abandonment of service by the respondents.
24.
The question came up for consideration
before this Court recently in Siri Niwas wherein it
was held : (SCCp.198, para 15)
“15.
A court of law even in a
case where provisions of the Evidence Act
apply, may presume or may not presume
W.P. (C) No. 2316/1996

Page 8 of 22

that if a party despite possession of the best
evidence had not produced the same, it
would have gone against his contentions.
The matter, however, would be different
where despite direction by a court the
evidence is withheld. Presumption as to
adverse inference for non-production of
evidence is always optional and one of the
factors which is required to be taken into
consideration is the background of facts
involved in the lis. The presumption, thus,
is not obligatory because notwithstanding
the intentional non-production, other
circumstances may exist upon which such
intentional non-production may be found to
be justifiable on some reasonable grounds.”
25.
Referring to the decision of this Court in
Indira Nehru Gandhi v. Raj Narain this court
observed :(Siri Niwas case, SCC p. 199, para 19)
“19.
Furthermore a party in
order to get benefit of the provisions
contained in Section 114 III. (g) of the
Evidence Act must place some evidence in
support of his case. Here the respondent
failed to do so.”
26.
In Hariram this Court observed : (SCC p.
250, para 11)
“11.
The
above
burden
having not been dischasrgsed and the
Labour Court having held so, in our opinion,
the Industrial Court and the High Court
erred in basing an order of reinstatement
solely on an adverse inference drawn
erroneously.”
27.
As noticed hereinbefore, in this case also
the respondents did not adduce any evidence
whatsoever. Thus, in the facts and circumstances of
the case, the Tribunal erred in drawing an adverse
inference.
Burden of proof
28.
The initial burden of proof was on the
W.P. (C) No. 2316/1996

Page 9 of 22

workmen to show that they had completed 240 days
of service. The Tribunal did not consider the
question from that angle. It held that the burden of
proof was upon the appellant on the premise that
they have failed to prove their plea of abandonment
of service stating :
“It is admitted case of the parties
that all the first parties under the reference
CRs Nos. 1 to 11 of 1992 have been
appointed by the second party as ticca
mazdoors. As per the first parties, they had
worked continuously from April 1980 to
December 1982. But the second party had
denied the abovesaid claim of continuous
service of the first parties on the ground that
the first parties has not been appointed as
regular workmen but they were working
only as temporary part-time workers as
ticca mazdoor and their services were
required whenever necessity arose that too
on the leave vacancies of regular employees.
But as strongly contended by the counsel for
the first party, since the second party had
denied the abovesaid claim of continuous
period of service, it is for the second party to
prove through the records available with
them as the relevant records could be
available only with the second party.”
29.
The Tribunal, therefore, accepted that the
appellant had denied the respondents' claim as
regards their continuous service.
30.
In Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani
it was stated : (SCC p. 26, para 3)
“3.
.....In our opinion the
Tribunal was not right in placing the onus
on the management without first
determining on the basis of cogent
evidence that the respondent had worked
for more than 240 days in the year
preceding his termination. It was the case
of the claimant that he had so worked but
W.P. (C) No. 2316/1996

Page 10 of 22

this claim was denied by the appellant. It
was then for the claimant to lead evidence
to show that he had in fact worked for 240
days in the year proceeding his
termination. Filing of an affidavit is only
his own statement in his favour and that
cannot be regarded as sufficient evidence
for any court or tribunal to come to the
conclusion that a workman had, in fact,
worked for 240 days in a year. No proof of
receipt of salary or wages for 240 days or
order or record of appointment or
engagement for this period was produced
by the workman. On this ground alone,
the award is liable to be set aside.”
31.
In Siri Niwas this Court held : (SCC pp.
197-198, para 13)
“13.
The provisions of the
Evidence Act, 1872 per se are not applicable
in an industrial adjudication. The general
principles of it are, however, applicable. It
is also imperative for the Industrial Tribunal
to see that the principles of natural justice
are complied with. The burden of proof was
on the respondent workman herein to show
that he had worked for 240 days in the
preceding twelve months prior to his alleged
retrenchment. In terms of Section 25-F of
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, an order
retrenching a workman would not be
effective unless the conditions precedent
therefor are satisfied.
Section 25-F
postulates the following conditions to be
fulfilled by an employer for effecting a valid
retrenchment :
(i)
one month's
notice in writing indicting the reasons for
retrenchment or wages in lieu thereof;
(ii)
payment
of
compensation equivalent to fifteen days'
average pay for every completed year of
W.P. (C) No. 2316/1996

Page 11 of 22

continuous service or any part thereof in
excess of six months.”
It was further observed : (SCC p. 198, para 14)
“14.
....
As
noticed
hereinbefore, the burden of proof was on the
workman. From the award it does not
appear that the workman adduced any
evidence whatsoever in support of his
contention that he complied with the
requirements of Section 25-B of the
Industrial Disputes Act.
Apart from
examining himself in support of his
contention he did not produce or call for any
document from the office of the appellant
herein including the muster rolls. It is
improbable that a person working in a local
authority would not be in possession of any
documentary evidence to support his claim
before the Tribunal. Apart from muster rolls
he could have shown the terms and
conditions of his offer of appointment and
the remuneration received by him for
working during the aforementioned period.
He did not even examine any other witness
in support of his case.”
32.
Yet again in Hariram it was opined :
(SCC p. 250, para 10)
“10.
.... We cannot but bear
in mind the fact that the initial burden of
establishing the factum of their continuous
work for 240 days in a year rests with the
respondent applicants.”
13.

In (2005) 3 SCC 241 entitled Cholan Roadways Ltd. Vs

G. Thirugnanasambandam, the court observed thus :“14.
The learned Presiding Officer,
Industrial Tribunal, as noticed hereinbefore,
opined that the passengers of the bus should have
been examined. It does not appear from the order
W.P. (C) No. 2316/1996

Page 12 of 22

dated 29-4-1988 passed by the Presiding Officer,
Industrial Tribunal that the respondent herein
made any prayer for cross-examining the
passengers who travelled in the ill-fated bus and
who were examined by the said Shri M.
Venkatesan. It is evident from the order of the
learned Tribunal that only in the sow-cause notice
filed by the respondent in response to the second
show-cause notice, was such a contention raised.
The learned Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal
in his impugned judgment further failed to take
into consideration that even if the statements of
the said passengers are ignored,t he misconduct
allegedly adduced by Shri M. Venkatesan together
with the circumstantial evidence brought on
record. The learned Single Judge of the High
Court although referred to the sketch drawn by
PW 1 on the site (Ext. P-2) and 4 photographs
(Ext. P-8) but ignored the same observing that
unless witnesses were examined in support of the
two exhibits, it is not possible to draw any
inference therefrom. The Division Bench of the
High Court did not examine the materials on
record independently but referred to the findings
of the Industrial Tribunal as also the learned
Single Judge to the effect that from their
judgments it was apparent that the driver had not
been driving the bus rashly and negligently.”
14.

Engagement and appointment in service can be

established directly by the existence and production of an
appointment letter, a written agreement or by circumstantial
evidence of incidental and

ancillary records which would

be in the nature of attendance register, salary registers, leave
record, deposit of provident fund contribution and employees state

W.P. (C) No. 2316/1996

Page 13 of 22

insurance contributions etc.

The same can be produced and

proved by the workman or he can call upon and caused the same
to be produced and proved by calling for witnesses who are
required to produce and prove these records. The workman can
even

make

an

appropriate

application

calling

upon

the

management to call such records in respect of his employment to
be produced. In these circumstances, if the management then fails
to produce such records, an adverse inference is liable to be drawn
against the management and in favour of the workman.
15.

In the instant case, the workman filed an affidavit by

way of evidence on the 29th April, 1993 and closed his evidence.
Thus, the only evidence in support of the plea of employment was
the self serving affidavit filed by the workman and nothing beyond
that to support his claimed plea of service of seven years. In view
of the principles laid down by the Supreme Court in Range Officer
vs S.T. Hadimani, such affidavit by itself is wholly insufficient to
discharge the burden of proof on the workman.
16.

Against

this

evidence

put

up

by

the

workman/respondent no. 2 herein, the petitioner had denied the
claim of employment of the respondent no. 2 with the petitioner.
It had been stated that the workman had been appointed pursuant
W.P. (C) No. 2316/1996

Page 14 of 22

to a contract. The petitioner has vehemently urged that not only
was the contract pleaded but the terms of the agreement had been
incorporated in the written statement which was filed by the
petitioner and subsequently proved.
Undoubtedly, the management is required to lead
evidence in order to prove the pleas which had been taken by it.
The petitioner had pleaded that there was no privity of contract of
service between the parties as claimed by the workman.

The

petitioner had proved on record as Exhibit MW1/2 which was the
agreement dated 1st January, 1987 between the Automobile
Association of Upper India and the Car Parking Attendants Union.
Further,

the letter written by

the Car Park

Attendants

Union(Registered) to the Office of the Labour Commissioner
which was dated 8th January, 1990 was proved on record as
Exhibit WW 1/M1. This was so exhibitted as the same was put to
the workman and he had admitted his signatures thereon as well
as receipt of a copy of the letter. While the agreement dated 1st
January, 1987 clearly showed that the Automobile Association of
India had entered into an arrangement with the Car Parking
Attendants Union of which the respondent no. 2 was a member as
part of its public service activity to its members and the general
W.P. (C) No. 2316/1996

Page 15 of 22

motoring community.

The intention of the petitioner was

encouraging and helping the Car Parking Attendants Union by
assisting the attendants through education, guidance and
incentives like free uniforms and the honorarium. This agreement
unconditionally

stipulated

that

the

disbursement

of

the

honorarium and the free uniforms would not create any
relationship of employment between the Automobile Association
of Upper India and the members of the Car Parking Attendants
Union. In reiteration of this stipulation, the members of the Car
Park Attendants Union had certified that they are doing voluntary
service for which visitors and customers

may make voluntary

payment of tips without any compulsion the Automobile
Association of Upper India was giving incentives by providing free
uniforms and honorariums at the rate of Rs.150/- per month to 29
of the members of the union which helps them to live honestly and
with pride. The signatories to this letter dated 8th January, 1990
had stated that they are not employees of the Automobile
Association of Upper India which was therefore not required to
maintain any attendance register, issue letter of appointment,
salary registers etc. The members of the Car Park Attendants
Union which included the respondent no. 2, by way of this
W.P. (C) No. 2316/1996

Page 16 of 22

communication dated 8th January, 1990( Exhibit WW1/M1) had
also affirmed the statements made by the Automobile Association
of Upper India in its letter no. 8360 sent to the Labour
Commissioner.
17.

It is noteworthy that the respondent no. 2 has admitted

in his evidence that he was getting a uniform from the petitioner
as had been claimed by it.
18.

The witness who was examined by the petitioner namely

Shri J.R. Kochar had clearly stated that the parking spaces where
these parking attendants who were nominated by the Car Park
Attendants Union were nominated were not in the control of the
association and are deputed only by the Car Park Attendants
Union in free parking areas only. This witness has deposed that it
was this union of the attendants which exercised full control on its
members and that the attendants are working as volunteers
looking after cars and other vehicles in various parkings in the
Connaught Place and were not directed, deputed or instructed by
the Automobile Association of Upper India at all. None of these
depositions
examination.

of this witness
The

was

industrial

subjected

adjudicator

to any
has

cross

completely

overlooked this material evidence on behalf of the petitioner. The
W.P. (C) No. 2316/1996

Page 17 of 22

industrial adjudicator has refused to examine the agreement which
was proved on record as MW1/1 on the ground that there is no
specific pleadings with regard to this agreement in the written
statement and has discarded the evidential revalue of the letter
dated 8th January, 1990 which was Exhibit WW1/M1 on the
ground that the workman did not know the contents of the
document or the English language used in this document. I find
however that these findings are not supported by the copies of the
records which has been placed before this court and are therefore
erroneous. A letter dated 9th January, 1989 appears to have been
put to the witness of the management in its cross examination
which was sent by him to the SHO, Connaught Place, New Delhi.
The witness has explained that this letter pertained to the period
January, 1989 while the case in hand pertained to the year 1983.
In any case, the petitioner has explained that such communication
were addressed to the SHO to check the antecedents of the persons
who were working as car parking attendants voluntarily to whom
the petitioner wished to provide uniform and that this letter was in
response to a letter received from the SHO, Connaught Place, New
Delhi.

I find force in the submissions made on behalf of the

petitioner inasmuch as these car parking attendants were being
W.P. (C) No. 2316/1996

Page 18 of 22

deputed to look after vehicles in free parking areas and were
thereby performing a public service without any sanction from any
authority. The police was an authority obviously concerned with
the safety and security of the property of the public which was
visiting these public areas.
19.

In these circumstances, the refusal to consider the

documents proved on record by the petitioner was not justified. In
any case, even if such evidence was to be ignored, still the
workman had to conclusively establish the case set up by it before
the industrial adjudicator by cogent and reliable oral and
documentary evidence. The workman has failed to establish his
case and has failed to produce and prove any records.
20.

I therefore find force in the submission on behalf of the

petitioner to the effect that the findings of the industrial
adjudicator to the effect that the respondent no. 2 was an
employee of the petitioner is based on no evidence whatsoever and
hence is without jurisdiction.
21.

There is yet another angle to the matter. The industrial

adjudicator has recorded that the workman had been reinstated by
the management with effect from 1st October, 1989. It has been
stated in the award that this has been admitted by the workman
W.P. (C) No. 2316/1996

Page 19 of 22

and consequently there is no need for passing any direction to
reinstate the workman into service.

Shri R.S. Rathi, learned

counsel appearing for the workman has vehemently contended
that the workman had never so admitted inasmuch as he was
never reinstated into service. Even in the counter affidavit dated
11th July, 2001 filed before this court, the respondent no. 2 has
stated that he was working till 22nd September, 1989 and since
then he is not an employee of the petitioner.
22.

Before this court, an issue has been raised with regard to

the real identity of the respondent no. 2. It has been contended
that Chotey Lal who had filed the claim had expired and on his
request, his son was working as a parking attendant.

It is

contended that the person who is contending the present case is
not even the real Chotey Lal.
23.

In view of what has been held by me hereinabove, it is

not necessary for me to go into these controversy of facts which in
any case is wholly, legally impermissible. I may notice an implied
admission by the respondent no. 2 in his counter affidavit wherein
he has denied that the respondent no. 2 was not being paid the
honorarium.
24.

In view of what is noticed hereinabove, the respondent

W.P. (C) No. 2316/1996

Page 20 of 22

no. 2 workman failed to discharge the burden of proof on him of
establishing a relationship of employment with the petitioner. The
award dated 20th March, 1996 is therefore based on no evidence
and is not sustainable.
The petition is allowed. The award dated 20th March,
1996 is hereby set aside and quashed.
There shall be no order as to costs.

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
April 24, 2006
kr

W.P. (C) No. 2316/1996

Page 21 of 22

