IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 18460/2004
Judgment reserved on: 15th February,
2005
Date of decision: 24th February, 2005
SH. VIKAS HAPPA
... Petitioner
through Mr. Chandra Prakash, Advocate
VERSUS
UNIVERSITY OF DELHI & ANR.... Respondents
through Mr. Anurag Mathur, Advocate for
Respondent no. 1
Mr. A.P.S. Ahluwalia, Advocate
for Respondent no. 2
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

By way of this writ petition the petitioner is seeking a

direction to the respondents directing them to permit the
petitioner to shift from the B.Sc (Hon) Zoology Course to
B.Sc.(Hon) Bio Chemistry course in the same institution. The facts
giving rise to the present petition briefly stated are that the
petitioner passed his 12th class senior secondary examination in
W.P.(C) 18460/2004

Page 1 of page 12

the year 2004 securing 72.4% marks in Physics, Chemistry and
Biology which were necessary for admission to both Zoology and
Bio Chemistry. The petitioner applied for admission to the Delhi
University and was allocated a seat in the B.Sc(Honors Zoology)
Course run by the Deshbandhu College arrayed as respondent no.
2 herein.
2.

According to the petitioner he was not aware of certain

benefits awarded by the Government of India

through the

Ministry of Human Resources and Development. Vide a Circular
bearing no. F 10-1/2003-Dest (U) dated 5th December, 2003
certain concessions for wards of Kashmiri migrants in the matters
of their admission to educational institutes in other parts of the
country during the academic session 2004-2005 were granted.
Amongst the concessions granted therein, the Kashmiri migrant
was entitled to relaxation in cut-off percentage up to 10% subject
to the minimum eligibility requirement as well as increase in
intake capacity up to 5% course wise.
3.

The petitioner submits that he is a ward of Kashmiri

migrant and his father has been given identify card by the Deputy
Commissioner, Delhi, copy whereof has been placed on record.
The petitioner has submitted that as he was not aware of this
W.P.(C) 18460/2004

Page 2 of page 12

concession to which he was entitled and as such had not availed of
the same. In these circumstances as the minimum percentage of
marks to which admission was given in the course of B.Sc(Honors
Bio Chemistry) was 81% against the 72.4% secured by the
petitioner, he did not secure admission to this course. Instead he
had to take admission in a course i.e. B.Sc(Hons) Zoology in which
he had no interest.
4.

The petitioner submits that being a Kashmiri migrant, as

per the circular of the Government of India, he was entitled to a
concession of 10% in the cut-off and consequently was entitled to
admission in the B.Sc(Hons) Bio Chemistry course as he would be
above the cut-off figure of percentage for admissions if he was
given the relaxation in the percentage.
The petitioner submits that the number of seats
available in B.Sc.(Hons) (Bio Chemistry) in the respondent no. 2
as per the bulletin of information, is only 20 seats. Upon giving
benefit of the prescribed increase in the intake capacity up to 5%,
23 seats would be available for admissions.

According to the

petitioner he meets the eligibility criteria for admission to the Bio
Chemistry course and further that securing admission to the
migrants in terms of the Government directive does not in any way
W.P.(C) 18460/2004

Page 3 of page 12

impinge upon the seat availability or course allocation to the other
general category candidates.
5.

It is therefore contended on behalf of the petitioner that

he filed an application seeking a shift from the Zoology course to
the Bio Chemistry Course. According to the petitioner he made an
application to the respondent no. 2 and thereafter to the
respondent no. 1 as well on the 2nd November, 2004 and 9th
November, 2004. It is submitted that as no reply was forthcoming
nor any orders made on his application were conveyed to the
petitioner, he was compelled to seek relief from this Hon'ble Court
in the present writ petition.
6.

The respondent no. 2 has filed its counter affidavit

controverting the allegations made in the writ petition and
contending that the petitioner cannot take advantage of his own
wrongs. According to the respondents, the petitioner is guilty of
not complying with the rules and regulations laid down by the
Ministry of Human Resources

and Development under the

scheme for Kashmiri migrants. It is pointed out the respondent
no. 1 released a press note in July, 2004 informing students who
were Kashmiri migrants in various schools informing them about
the available concessions. It is pointed out that these concessions
W.P.(C) 18460/2004

Page 4 of page 12

were already in existence even in the year 2003. Vide the press
release published on 6th July, 2004, the respondent no. 1
specifically notified the eligible candidates to make applications
for registering wards of Kashmiri migrants for admission to
various courses for the session 2004-2005. As per the schedule
notified, the application forms were distributed from 10 a.m. to 1
p.m. on 8th, 9th and 10th July, 2004.

A central procedure for

effecting the admissions was conducted by the respondent no. 1.
All application forms received from the Academic Branch I, were
to be submitted to the respondent no. 1 directly. The allotment of
courses and colleges was all undertaken by the respondent no. 1.
The date notified for this purpose was the 13th July, 2004 by 1 p.m.
It is further pointed out that it was the respondent no. 1 alone
which issued provisional admission slips after verification of the
candidates on 13th July, 2004 after 3 p.m.

Thereafter, the

registration of the forms together with original certificates
including proof of migrant status were accepted.
7.

According to the respondents, all admissions to science

courses are centralised and that the course and college allocation is
effected by the University - respondent no. 1 above.

The

candidates could be admitted by colleges only on the issuance of
W.P.(C) 18460/2004

Page 5 of page 12

the provisional admission slips by the Delhi University.

The

petitioner was also granted admission by respondent no. 2 against
such admission slip given to him by respondent no. 1. It has been
pointed out that respondent no. 2 could not consider any
application other than the requisite provisional admission slip
issued by the respondent no. 1 for the purposes of admissions and
that the respondent no. 2 had no authority or jurisdiction to
change the course being pursued or allotted to a candidate to some
other course for which the University respondent no. 1 had not
issued the provisional admission slip.

Instances

have

cited

where provisional admission slips were issued by the respondent
no. 2 to Kashmiri migrants on 13th July, 2004.
8.

According to the respondents, the writ petition is highly

belated and the petitioner is not entitled to any relief. It has been
pointed out that the petitioner attended barely one or two
classes/lectures from July, 2004 and the respondent no. 2 college.
According to the respondents, the petitioner had even applied for
withdrawal of his original documents/certificates through an
application dated 30th July, 2004.

Such application was also

signed by the petitioner's father and it was undertaken by them to
return the certificates by 4th August, 2004.
W.P.(C) 18460/2004

Page 6 of page 12

It was stipulated therein that if the candidate fails to
return such original documents having taken them back, his
admission was liable to be cancelled.

The respondents have

submitted that in the aforestated facts it appeared as if the
petitioner was pursuing some other course. The respondents have
also commented that the petitioner had never claimed that he was
a Kashmiri migrant even in the application form submitted by him
for admission to the course.
9.

I have considered the material placed before me and

given my anxious thought to the submissions made on behalf of
the parties.

The respondents have published public notices

placing before the public at large that the Kashmiri migrants are
treated separately for the purposes of admission of various courses
of Science, Arts, Social Sciences, Commerce and Maths. Copy of
one such notice has been placed on record and has been perused
by me. The petitioner cannot be heard to contend that despite the
public notice having been published in newspapers, the petitioner
was not aware of the special status of Kashmiri migrants or of the
benefits/concessions available to them. The respondents have also
placed on the record a copy of a letter dated 5th July, 2004
addressed by the respondent no. 1 to all colleges in Delhi
W.P.(C) 18460/2004

Page 7 of page 12

informing the addressee as to the dates as well as extension in the
date of admission relaxation in the cut-off percentage etc. The
respondent no. 1, through its Registrar, also informed the public
that registration would be conducted from 8th to 10th July, 2004
and that the Deputy Registrar-Academics would send the names of
candidates for admission to the institutions/colleges on 13th July,
2004 after 3 p.m. to enable students to complete formalities before
commencement of classes on 16th July, 2004. The respondent also
published a schedule of dates for registration of wards of Kashmiri
migrants for admission to various undergraduate courses in
Science, Arts, Maths etc and pursuant thereto processed the
applications received and issued provisional admission slips for
the same on the 5th July, 2004. Certificates which were required to
be submitted were also detailed in this application.
10.

It is noteworthy that several eligible candidates took

advantage of the special status given to Kashmiri migrants and
were granted admissions in their desired courses.

Two such

instances have been placed on record by the respondents.
The principle ground of defence to the writ petition is
based on the assertions that all candidates who were seeking
entitlement under the Kashmiri migrant quota had endorsed their
W.P.(C) 18460/2004

Page 8 of page 12

such status being a Kashmiri migrant on the application forms
itself seeking admission to the University itself. Copy of one such
admission form relating to another student of the respondent no. 1
has been placed on record. Perusal of the form shows that against
the claim of “Remarks”,

it has been clearly set out that the

candidate was a Kashmiri migrant.
As against this, the petitioner on 30th July, 2004 did not
make any such remark on his application.

Perusal of the

application form submitted by the petitioner for admission to the
respondent no. 2 shows that the petitioner has not disclosed his
status as the Kashmiri migrant nor claimed any concession
thereon when he was admitted on the 7th July, 2004.
11.

The petitioner appears to have withdrawn all his original

documents necessary for confirmation of the admission by the
respondent no. 2.

The reasons given on his application for

withdrawal of such originals is on the purported ground of
registration in employment exchange and admission for computer
course at NIIT. On the application form, the petitioner had given
the following undertaking :“ UNDERTAKING
(a)
W.P.(C) 18460/2004

I have cleared all my college
Page 9 of page 12

dues and returned all College and University
property in my possession.
(b)
I hereby undertake to return
the originals to the college office by 4th August
2004 barring which my admission is liable to be
cancelled and no claim of refund of fees will be
made in case I do not return the originals to the
college office by the specified date.
Sd/Signature of Students
Sd/Father's Signature
Date 30/7/04”
This undertaking was signed by not only the petitioner
but also counter signed by his father.
12.

The course to which the petitioner was admitted was a

science discipline and necessarily entailed theory and practical
classes. In this view of the matter, the conduct of the petitioner
suggests that he appears to have had no intention whatsoever of
continuing to pursue any course with the respondent no. 2. The
course commenced in July, 2004.
13.

The Apex Court has repeatedly cautioned courts with

regard to interference with exercise of discretion by the competent
expert authorities in matters relating to academics. The academic
session of the present course would be nearing its end. In this
view of the matter, even if the petitioner was granted admission to

W.P.(C) 18460/2004

Page 10 of page 12

the course at this highly belated stage, the petitioner would not be
able to meet the requisite academic discipline which is required to
be enforced and would not be able to attain the necessary
prescribed percentage of attendance in the course.
14.

There is yet another reason as to why the petition cannot

be granted. The allocation of seats and courses is effected by the
respondent no. 1. The original admissions had been made only
upon the provisional slips having been issued by the respondent
no. 1.

The petitioner approached the respondent no. 2 for

processing of his application instead of making the representation
in this behalf to the respondent no. 1. The respondent no. 2 had
no authority or jurisdiction to grant admission or permit change of
the course.
For all the foregoing reasons the prayer made in the writ
petition cannot be granted. The respondents have issued public
notices

which

were

circulated.

Several

candidates

made

applications pursuant thereto. The petitioner cannot be heard to
contend that he was not aware of such notices which were
published and circulated by the respondent no. 1.
In this view of the matter there is no merit in the

W.P.(C) 18460/2004

Page 11 of page 12

petition which is hereby dismissed.

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
February 24th, 2005
kr

W.P.(C) 18460/2004

Page 12 of page 12

