IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Judgmen t reserved on: 24th January, 2006
Da te of decision: 24th April, 2006
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 3388/2003
M/s Lohia Starlinger Limited & Anr.
... Petitioners
through Mr.Nikhil Nayyar, Advocate
VERSUS
Govt. of NCT of Delhi & Ors.
...Respondents
through Mr.Santosh Kumar Yadav, Advocate
for respondent no.1.
Mr.Anshul Raj, Advocate for
respondent no.3.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

The effect of an order of transfer on the situs of

appointment of the workman for the purposes of determination of
the territorial jurisdiction of the appropriate Government
exercising jurisdiction under the Industrial Disputes Act to
entertain a complaint arising from the termination of services of
an employee for not obeying such order of transfer and remaining
absent from the place of transfer is the question raised by the
:1:

WP(C) 3388/2003

petitioner in the instant case.
2.

There is no dispute to the factual matrix. The petitioner

no.1 is admittedly a company which is based in Kanpur and had
appointed the respondent no.3 as a Receptionist-cum-Telephone
Operator in terms of letter of appointment dated 17th December,
1992. This letter of appointment inter alia contained the following
stipulations:“5. You will be posted in NEW DELHI but your
job is transferable anywhere in India.
6. You may be transferred to any of our group
companies on the same terms and conditions.
3.

8. Terms & Conditions-As per Annexure B”
Annexure B to the letter set out in detail the duties and

responsibilities and other terms and conditions which the
respondent no.3 was required to accept and include inter alia the
following:“b) The Management may transfer you for work
in
any
section/department/project
site/division/office/ sister concern, any where in
India. Whether existed or started later on as it
may consider necessary at its discretion from time
to time without detriment to your status and
emoluments.”
4.

The

respondent

no.3 accepted

these

terms

and

conditions and accepted the terms of the letter of appointment and

:2:

WP(C) 3388/2003

the terms and the conditions thereof and submitted her acceptance
on 24th December, 1992 in the following terms:“ACCEPTANCE:
I have read and understood the above terms and
condition of employment and hereby signify my
acceptance of the same.”
There is no dispute that the petitioner was posted at
Delhi and that her terms of appointment stipulated that she could
be posted anywhere in India.
5.

The petitioner has contended that on account of

exigencies of service vide letter dated 5th July, 2000 her services
were transferred from Delhi office to the registered office situated
at D-3/A, Panki Industrial Estate, Kanpur with immediate effect.
This letter of 5th July, 2000 informed the respondent no.3 that“You are hereby relieved from Delhi Office with
immediate effect and requested to report for your
duties to Lt. Col. M.S. Bisht, Administrative
Manager at our Regd. Office at Kanpur latest by
15th July 2000.
You will be paid a sum of Rs. 1000/- (Rs. One
Thousand only) per month as Special Allowance
from the date you resume your duties at Kanpur,
which shall be withdrawn immediately when you
are re-transferred to Delhi.
We shall also reimburse you shifting expenses for
shifting of your house-hold goods, including
transit expenses on yourself and your children
from Delhi to Kanpur subject to maximum one
month's Basic Salary. You can also draw an
:3:

WP(C) 3388/2003

advance of Rs. 3000/- for your shifting expenses
for which you will have to submit detailed
expenses to Lt. Col. M.S. Bisht.

6.

All other terms & conditions of your appointment,
as stipulated in your letter of appointment, shall
remain unchanged.
Please subscribe your
signature on duplicate copy of this transfer order
and return to us for our records.”
Vide letters dated 21st July, 2000, 25th August, 2000 and

4th September, 2000, the respondent no.3 informed the petitioners
of her inability to join at Kanpur. Emphasis has been led on behalf
of the petitioners to the fact that the order of transfer dated 5 th Juy,
2000 was issued from Kanpur and that all representations were
addressed by the respondent no.3 to the Head Office at Kanpur.
The petitioners extended the time given to the respondent no.3 to
join upto 24th July, 2000 vide letter dated 15th July, 2000.
However the respondent no.3 informed the petitioners that her
husband was employed at Delhi in a non-transferable job and she
had three children studying in Delhi.

Consequently she was

unable to join at Kanpur and could not maintain two
establishments on account of financial constraints.

In her

communication dated 21st July, 2000 the respondent no.3, after
requesting the petitioner to accommodate her at Delhi, wrote
thus:-

:4:

WP(C) 3388/2003

7.

“In case it is not possible to accommodate me at
Delhi Office, I would request you that a suitable
compensation may please be paid to me so that I
can meet the expenses of studies etc., of my
children.”
The petitioners rejected the respondent's request vide

letter dated 27th July, 2000 notifying her that having regard to the
financial constraints she could draw advance of Rs.5,000/- instead
of Rs.3,000/- towards her shifting expenses.

A reminder was

issued to the respondent no.3 on 19th August, 2000 informing the
respondent no.3 that she had neither reported for duty at Kanpur
and had also not made any request for any leave and was absent
from duty with effect from 24th July, 2000. She was notified that
she should immediately comply with the directions given in the
transfer letter dated 5th July, 2000 failing which necessary
disciplinary action would be taken against her.

A cheque

purported to be towards her salary for the month of July, 2000
was enclosed. This letter and cheque was sent from Kanpur to the
respondent no.3. The respondent no.3 however did not comply
with the order of transfer and in these circumstances she was
given a last opportunity vide letter dated 31st August, 2000 for
complying with the order of transfer and reporting for duty latest
by 7th September, 2000. The respondent no.3 still did not comply

:5:

WP(C) 3388/2003

and alleged that the transfer order was mala fide and intended to
get rid of her services and not on account of exigencies of work.
8.

In these circumstances, the petitioner issued a charge

sheet dated 21st September, 2000 from Kanpur levelling the
following charges against the respondent no.3:“1. That you were transferred from Delhi to
Kanpur vide transfer order dt. 05/07/2000 and
were directed to report for duty at Kanpur by 24th
July, 2000 and later on at your request by 7th
September, 2000.
2. That instead of obeying reasonable order of the
superiors which were strictly in accordance with
the terms & conditions of appointment letter dt.
17/12/1992 duly accepted by you, you have
deliberately failed to comply with the orders
which amounts to deliberate disobedience of
orders.
3. That you have thus started absenting yourself
from your duties w.e.f. 7th September, 2000 and
have also shown your complete dis-indication to
report for duty at Kanpur. You are thus loosing
your salary on the one hand and have also invited
disciplinary action on the other hand.”
9.

The respondent no.3 sent a reply dated 27th September,

2000 to the charge sheet at Kanpur.

Finding the same as

unsatisfactory the petitioner initiated disciplinary proceedings
against respondent no.3

at Kanpur and appointed an inquiry

officer in this behalf on 12th October, 2000. The date of inquiry

:6:

WP(C) 3388/2003

was set as 23rd October, 2000 and the respondent no.3 was
notified in this behalf by a registered letter.

On this date of

hearing one Shri O.P.Tiwari appeared as the authorised
representative of the respondent no.3 and filed the authority letter.
However thereafter respondent no.3 did not appear either
personally or through her representative. Information of the next
date of hearing which was fixed for 1st November, 2000 was sent
by the registered letter dated 24th October, 2000.

Still no

appearance was put in despite service. Again despite a registered
letter dated 13th November, 2000 intimating the next date of
hearing and grant of final opportunity to her, the respondent no.3
did not appear in the matter. The respondent no.3 however sent a
letter dated 10th November, 2000 informing the inquiry officer
that the inquiry at Kanpur was illegal and without jurisdiction.
In these circumstances ex-parte proceedings were taken
against the respondent no.3 which culminated in an inquiry report
dated 26th December, 2000 whereby the inquiry officer held that
the charge of absentism and disobedience of orders of the
petitioner stood proved by it and she was guilty of all the charges
with which she had been charged.
The inquiry officer sent a copy of the inquiry report to
:7:

WP(C) 3388/2003

the respondent no.3 vide a registered letter dated 27th December,
2000.
10.

After

consideration

of

the

inquiry

report

the

management concurred with the findings of the inquiry officer and
decided to dismiss the respondent no.3 from service with
immediate effect.

Vide letter dated 11th January, 2001 the

respondent no.3 ws informed of the decision of the petitioner and
a cheque towards full and final payment of her dues was enclosed
therewith.
11.

The respondent no.3 at this stage sent a demand notice

to the petitioner endorsing copies thereof the office of the labour
officer and the Conciliation Officer at Karam Pura, New Delhi
against the order of dismissal.
12.

This was replied to by the petitioner vide letter dated

28th March, 2001. The respondent no.3 thereafter approached the
office of the conciliation officer making a complaint against her
dismissal seeking reinstatement in service at Delhi will full back
wages and continuity of service. The petitioner had objected to the
very maintainability of the conciliation proceedings at Delhi on
grounds of want of jurisdiction of the labour authorities at Delhi
apart from disputing the merits of the complaint made by
:8:

WP(C) 3388/2003

respondent no.3. However despite the objections raised by the
petitioner the conciliation officer proceeded in the matter and
submitted a report to the respondent no.1. The respondent no.1 in
complete disregard of the objections raised by the petitioner
issued an order of reference bearing no.F24(4589)/2001 dated 1st
April, 2002 whereby it referred the dispute raised by the
respondent no.3 for adjudication to the labour court. The order of
reference was in the following terms:“Whether dismissal from services of Smt. Bimla
Sharma, w/o Sh. M.L. Sharma is illegal and/or
unjustified and if so, to what sum of money as
monetary relief along with consequential benefits
in terms of existing laws/Govt. Notifications and
to what other relief is she entitled and what
directions are necessary in this respect?”
13.

Aggrieved by this order of reference the petitioner

immediately make a representation dated 17th May, 2002 to the
respondent no.1 seeking a reconsideration of the order of
reference. However the respondent no.1 vide its letter dated 31st
July, 2002 informed the petitioner that since the matter has
already been referred to the labour court for adjudication, it would
need to make the submissions in terms of its objections before the
labour court.
14.

Pursuant to the order of reference, it is pointed out that
:9:

WP(C) 3388/2003

the dispute raised by the respondent no.3 has been registered as
ID no.10/02 by the labour court and notice had been issued to the
petitioner for appearance on 15th November, 2002.
15.

Aggrieved by the order of reference dated 1st of April,

2002 and the refusal of the respondent no.3 to consider the
objections of the petitioner communicated by the letter dated 31st
July, 2002 and the issuance of notice by the labour court, the
petitioner has filed the present writ petition assailing the legality
and validity of the same before this Court.
The petitioner has challenged the very jurisdiction of the
respondent no.1 to entertain the complaint made by the
respondent no.3 on the ground of territorial jurisdiction on the
ground that the letter of appointment which was issued to the
respondent no.3 permitted it to transfer the respondent no.3
anywhere in India and on transfer of her services to Kanpur having
been effected the respondent no.1 had no jurisdiction to entertain
a dispute raised at her instance. The other limb of the petitioners'
challenge is based on the stipulation contained in the letter of
appointment which clearly provided that the courts at Kanpur
would have jurisdiction in case of any dispute between the parties.
16.

The petitioner has contended that on the passing of the
: 10 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

order of transfer, which was in terms of the letter of appointment
accepted by the respondent no.3, the situs of respondent no.3's
employment changed from Delhi to Kanpur. The respondent no.3
did not challenge the order of transfer and did not seek any
industrial adjudication thereon. She refused to join at the place of
transfer and disobeyed the directions of the petitioner. The charge
sheet against alleged absentism and disobedience on the part of
the respondent no.3 which were also not challenged by her. She
permitted the disciplinary proceedings to go on and it is only after
the order of dismissal was issued from the Kanpur that respondent
no.3 raised grievance at Delhi. It is contended that the situs of her
employment had changed to Kanpur and that nothing has
happened at Delhi except the receipt of the orders of dismissal by
the respondent no.3 at Delhi. According to the learned counsel for
the petitioner this sole fact is wholly insufficient to clothe the
Government of NCT of Delhi with the necessary jurisdiction to
entertain a complaint and the grievance of the respondent no.3 or
to pass an order of reference thereon.
17.

In this behalf reliance is placed on the pronouncement

of the Full Bench of the High Court of judicature at Patna reported
at 1985(33) BLJR 150 Paritosh Kumar Pal Vs. State of Bihar; the
: 11 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

Division Bench pronouncement of the Calcutta High Court in
Indian Express Newspaper(Bombay) Pvt. Ltd. vs. State of West
Bengal 2005 LLR 594; and a Single Bench decision of the High
Court of Andhra Pradesh in Siemens Limited vs. Presiding Officer
Additional Industrial Tribunal-cum-Additional Labour Court,
Hyderabad 2003 LLR 116.
18.

On the other hand the learned counsel for the

respondent no.3 has vehemently contended that three tests have
been laid down by the Apex Court in order to establish the nexus
of the dispute with the place where the reference or adjudication is
sought. In the instant case the respondent no.3 resided at Delhi
and was admittedly employed at Delhi where she worked
throughout her service. The order of transfer was served at the
respondent no.3 at Delhi where also the order of dismissal was
served upon her.
19.

Placing reliance on the pronouncement of the Apex

Court in Workmen of Sri Rangavilas Motors(P) Ltd. vs Sri Ranga
Vilas Motors (P) Ltd. AIR 1967 SC 1040, it is contended by Shri
Anshul Raj, Advocate for respondent no. 3 that the Apex Court in
this case had held that the place where from the employee was
transferred would have jurisdiction to entertain a dispute raised at
: 12 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

the instance of the employee. Learned counsel for the respondent
has also cited 1962(1)LLJ 409 between Indian Cable Company
Limited vs. Its Workmen in support of his contention that the
respondent no.1 was the competent government to pass the order
of reference and that the adjudication was maintainable at Delhi.
It has further been submitted that the Industrial
Disputes Act 1947 is a social welfare legislation and does not
provide any territorial limits for exercise of the of the powers by
the authorities and for this reason alone no fault can be found in
the order of reference.
20.

So far as the stand of the respondent no.1 is concerned,

it is pointed out that the respondent no.3 had given her address as
that of Delhi. The address given of the petitioner was also the
address of his Delhi office and it had also been stated that the
respondent no.3 had been working in Delhi.

In these

circumstances the respondent no.1 was of the view that it was the
appropriate Government for the purpose of disputes between the
parties in the Industrial Disputes Act 1947 as the workman had
been employed at Delhi.
21.

Having heard the learned counsel for the parties and

perused the available record, I find that there is no dispute that the
: 13 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

letter of appointment stipulated that the respondent no.3 could be
transferred anywhere in India. The respondent no.3 had agreed to
the condition that she can be transferred to any of the group
companies of the petitioner and had accepted the terms and
conditions knowing the implications thereof. It has been pointed
out that the prior to her employment with the petitioner the
respondent no.3 had rendered service with M/s Kelvinator of
India Limited in their office located in Faridabad, Haryana.
Therefore the order of transfer dated 5th July, 2000 cannot be
challenged on any ground that the petitioner did not have the
authority to transfer her service.
22.

It is noteworthy that no industrial adjudication was

sought by respondent no.3 when the petitioner issued the order of
transfer directing that her services stood transferred and she stood
relieved forthwith. She made a polite request for consideration of
the difficulties with which she was faced with regard to her family
circumstances in giving effect to the order of transfer and
requested the petitioner to accommodate her at Delhi.

The

respondent no.3 was aware that it may not be possible to
accommodate her at Delhi and consequently in her letter dated 21st
July, 2000 had requested the petitioner that in case it was not
: 14 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

possible for the petitioner to accommodate her at Delhi she may be
paid suitable compensation. This was clearly not accepted by the
petitioner which, after giving her opportunity to comply with its
directions, issued a charge sheet for her unauthorised absence and
a refusal to obey the orders of transfer. It is the order of dismissal
dated 11th January, 2001 issued from Kanpur which has been
complained of by the respondent no.3.
23.

It would be necessary to consider the judgments relied

upon by the respondent no. 3 first in support of its contentions.
The respondent no.3 has primarily urged a contention that the
Industrial Disputes Act does not deal with the situs of occurrence
of the cause of action as conferring territorial jurisdiction and that
the statute does not indicate any factors which would confer or
restrict territorial jurisdiction of the appropriate Government or
the industrial adjudicator.
24.

In

1962(1)LLJ

409

between

Indian

Cable

Company Limited vs. Its Workmen, the Court held that the
Industrial Disputes Act 1947 contained no provision bearing on
the question of the territorial jurisdiction of the appropriate
Government and that such a question must consequently be
decided on principles governing the jurisdiction of courts to
: 15 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

entertain actions or proceedings. The court cited with approval
the decision of the Bombay High Court rendered in Lalbhai
Tricumlal Mills vs. Vin(D.M) and others 1956(1) LLJ 557 at page
558 wherein the High Court had held that the Act did not deal with
the cause of action nor did it indicate what factors will confer
jurisdiction upon the court and consequently the well known tests
of a jurisdiction would require to be complied with to which the
court or tribunal would have jurisdiction in the matter.
25.

In

Workmen of Shri Ranga Vilas Motors(P)

Ltd. Vs. Sri Rangavilas Motors(P) Ltd. and others 1967
SC 1040 an employee had challenged his order of transfer from
Bangalore in Karnataka to Krishna Giri in Tamilnadu as being
illegal for the reason that the conditions of service did not permit
such a transfer. Ultimately the management had framed charges
against the employee and removed him from service.

The

employee challenged the order of transfer as well as order of his
dismissal. The dispute raised by the workman was referred for
adjudication

by

the

labour

authorities

at

Bangalore

for

adjudication to the labour court which was also located at
Bangalore in the following terms :“1. Whether the order of the management of Sri
: 16 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

Rangavilas Motors(Private) Ltd., in transferring
the workman Sri R.Mahalingam, Foreman, from
their branch at Fort, Bangalore, to Krishnagiri, is
illegal or unjustified. If so, is the workman
entitled to reinstatement in Bangalore Branch
with benefits of back wages or to any other relief.”
26.

In this case the Apex Court held thus:“(14) Therefore, the appeal must succeed unless
the company can satisfy us that the points decided
against it should have been decided in its favour.
This takes us to the other points.
Mr.
O.P.Malhotra strongly urges that the State
Government of Mysore was not the appropriate
Government to make the reference. He says that
although the dispute started at Bangalore, the
resolution sponsoring this dispute was passed in
Krishnagiri, and, that the proper test to be applied
in the case of individual disputes is where the
dispute has been sponsored. It seems to us that
on the facts of this case it is clear that there was a
separate establishment at Bangalore and
Mahalingam was working there. There were a
number of other workmen working in this place.
The order of transfer, it is true, was made in
Krishnagiri at the Head office, but the order was
to operate on a workman working in Bangalore.
In our view the High Court was right in holding
that the proper question to raise is : where did the
dispute arise? Ordinarily, if there is a separate
establishment and the workman is working in
that establishment, the dispute would arise at that
place. As the High Court observed, there should
clearly be some nexus between the dispute and
the territory of the State and not necessarily
between the territory of the State and the industry
concerning which the dispute arose. This Court in
Indian Cable Co. Ltd. vs. Its Workmen, (1962) 1
Lab LJ 409 (SC) held as follows:-

: 17 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

“The Act contained no provisions
bearing on this question, which must,
consequently, be decided on the
principles governing the jurisdiction
of Courts to entertain actions or
proceedings. Dealing with a similar
question under the provisions of the
Bombay Industrial Relations Act,
1946, Chagla, C.J. Observed in Lalbhai
Tricumlal Mills Ltd. vs. Vin. 1956-1
Lab LJ 557, 558: (AIR 1955 Bom 463
at p.464):
“But what we are concerned
with to decide is: where did the
dispute substantially arise? Now, the
Act does not deal with the cause of
action, nor does it indicate what
factors will confer jurisdiction upon
the labour Court. But applying the
well-known tests of jurisdiction, a
Court or Tribunal would have
jurisdiction if the parties reside within
jurisdiction or if the subject-matter of
the dispute substantially arises within
jurisdiction”.
In our opinion, those
principles are applicable for deciding
which of the State has jurisdiction to
make a reference under S.10 of the
Act”.
Applying the above principles to the
facts of this case it is quite clear that
the subject matter of the dispute in
this case substantially arose within the
jurisdiction
of
the
Mysore
Government.
16. Mr. Malhotra urges that the finding of the
: 18 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

Labour Court that the transfer was illegal was
perverse. It is not necessary to go into this
question because once it is held that there is an
agreement
between
the
company
and
Mahalingam that he could not be transferred
from Bangalore, the transfer would be bad. The
Labour Court had observed that one of the terms
of agreement was that the company had agreed
not to transfer Mahalingam to any place out of
Bangalore for a period of ten years; the company
had transferred Mahalingam from Bangalore to
the Head Office at Krishnagiri and this action of
the company was in contravention of the terms of
the agreement.”
27.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that

the Apex Court had occasion to consider a challenge to an order of
transfer in its pronouncement in the case entitled Workmen of
Shri Ranga Vilas Motors(P) Ltd. Vs. Sri Rangavilas Motors(P) Ltd.
and others AIR 1967 SC 1040 and had arrived at a conclusion that
the appellant had established a nexus between the dispute and the
territory of the dispute where the same was raised and that in this
case the Government of Mysore which exercised the jurisdiction
over Bangalore, from where the appellant had been transferred,
had jurisdiction in the matter. It has been urged by the learned
counsel for the petitioner that this case is clearly distinguishable
from the instant case on a bare reading of the facts and that the
principles laid down in this case would have no applicability to the

: 19 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

instant case.
It is well settled that judicial precedents cannot be relied
upon without a consideration of the factual matrix of the case in
hand vis-a-vis the fact situation on which the judicial precedent
cited before it is passed. In this behalf it would be appropriate to
advert to the observations of the Apex Court in JT 2002(1) SC
482 Haryana Financial Corporation and Another vs.
Jagdamba Oil Mills and another wherein the court held thus:“19. Courts should not place reliance on decisions
without discussing as to how the factual situation
fits in with the fact situation of the decision on
which reliance is placed. Observations of Courts
are not to be read as Euclid's theorems nor as
provisions of the statute. These observations
must be read in the context in which they appear.
Judgments of courts are not to be construed as
statutes.
To interpret words, phrases and
provisions of a statute, it may become necessary
for judges to embark into lengthy discussions but
the discussion is meant to explain and not to
define. Judges interpret statutes, they do not
interpret judgments. They interpret words of
statutes, their words are not to be interpreted as
statutes. In London Graving Dock Co. Ltd. v.
Horton [1951 AC 737 at P. 761], Lord Mac Dermot
observed:
“The matter cannot, of course, be settled merely
by treating the ipsissima vertra of Willes, J. as
though they were part of an Act of Parliament and
applying the rules of interpretation appropriate
thereto. This is not to detract from the great
weight to be given to the language actually used
: 20 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

by that most distinguished judge.”
In Home Office v. Dorset Yacht Co. [1970 (2) AII
ER 294] Lord Reid said, “Lord Atkin's speech.......
is not to be treated as if it was a statute definition.
It
will
require
qualification
in
new
circumstances.” Megarry, J. in (1971) 1 WLR
1062 observed: “One must not, of course,
construe even a reserved judgment of even
Russell L.J. as if it were an Act of Parliament.”
And, in Herrington v. British Parliament Board,
[(1972) 2 WLR 537] Lord Morris said:
“There is always peril in treating the words of a
speech or judgment as though they are words in a
legislative enactment, and it is to be remembered
that judicial utterances made in the setting of the
facts of a particular case.”
Circumstantial flexibility, one additional or
different fact may make a world of difference
between conclusions in two cases. Disposal of
cases by blindly placing reliance on a decision is
not proper.
20. The following words of Lord Denning in the
matter of applying precedents have become locus
classicks:
“Each case depends on its own facts and a close
similarity between one case and another is not
enough because even a single significant detail
may alter the entire aspect. In deciding such
cases, one should avoid the temptation to decide
cases (as said by Cordozo) by matching the colour
of one case against the colour of another. To
decide, therefore, on which side of the line a case
falls, the broad resemblance to another case is not
at all decisive.”
xxxx
xxxx
xxxx
“Precedent should be followed only so far as it
: 21 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

marks the path of justice, but you must cut the
dead wood and trim off the side branches else you
will find yourself lost in thickets and branches.
My plea is to keep the path to justice clear of
obstructions which could impede it.”
28.

In the Ranga Vilas Motors case supra, the workman had

actually challenged the order of transfer.
29.

In this case before the Apex Court the court did not have

occasion to consider the effect of an order of transfer which is not
obeyed by an employee without making any challenge thereto
which is the issue raised in the present case. In this view of the
matter, there is material variance in the fact situation which was
before the Supreme Court and the present case. The impugned
order of reference in this case also refers the issue of the legality of
the order of dismissal alone for adjudication. Consequently, in my
view, the judgment rendered by the Supreme Court in Ranga Vilas
Motors (supra) would not have any application.
I find that this issue arose for consideration before the
Division Bench of the Calcutta High court in Indian Express
Newspaper(Bombay) Pvt. Ltd. vs. State of West Bengal
2005 LLR 594 wherein it was held by the Division Bench that
upon passing of an order of transfer the situs of employment of the
employee changes to the place of transfer. In this case an
: 22 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

employee of the Indian Express Newspaper(Bombay) Pvt. Ltd.
was transferred from Calcutta to Bombay. Without joining at the
place of transfer, the employee raised a dispute at Calcutta and the
issue which arose before the High Court was as to whether the
West Bengal Government was the appropriate Government to
make an order of reference under Section 10 of the Industrial
Disputes Act.
In similar facts as the instant case, the employee in this
case also contended that the West Bengal Government would be
the appropriate Government in view of the fact that he was based
at Calcutta and that the order of transfer and order of termination
of his service was served at Calcutta.
30.

After detailed consideration of the entire law on the

subject the court observed thus:“37.
We have carefully considered to
submissions made on behalf of the respective
parties and the law regarding jurisdiction which
has been considered in various cases both from
the view point of the Industrial Disputes Act and
the Constitution of India. As was observed by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the Ranga Vilas case
(vide supra), jurisdiction would have to be
decided not only on the basis of the situs of
employment, that is, where the dispute arises and
the effects thereof are felt, but also on the
interconnected question relating to cause of
action. The question of control of an employee
: 23 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

came up for consideration in the Lipton case
(vide supra), relied upon Sri Mitra, but as pointed
out by Sri Oil Mohammed, appearing for the
State, the said matter was decided on the sole
question of control and did not take into
consideration either the question relating to situs
of employment or cause of action. The aforesaid
contention was considered by the Full Bench of
the Patna High Court in the case of Paritosh
Kumar Pal, 1984 (2) LLN 617, (vide supra), in
which while placing reliance on the Ranga Vilas
case it was observed that the ratio of the Lipton
case is confined to the point that the Tribunal
where the Head office is situated would have
jurisdiction to take cognizance of an industrial
dispute but not for the converse that situs of
employment would also have the same effect. In
fact, it was also observed with reference to the
decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case
of Indian Cable Company, reported in 1962 LLJ
409, that the Industrial Disputes Act does not
contain any provision bearing on the question of
cause of action, which must, consequently, be
decided on the principles governing the
jurisdiction of Courts to entertain actions or
proceedings.”
“40. The basis of the findings of the learned
Single Judge in the first writ application and that
of the Tribunal thereafter on remand and the
subsequent findings of the learned Single Judge
on the second writ application is that when Sri
Sampat's services were terminated he was
stationed in the Calcutta office of the newspaper
company. While Sri Sampat was no doubt served
with the order of termination of his service in
Calcutta, we are constrained to say that the same
would not vest the State Government in West
Bengal with authority under S. 2 (a) (ii) of the
Industrial Disputes Act to make a reference under
S. 10 of the said Act. Firstly, at the said point of
: 24 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

time the Calcutta office of the newspaper
company no longer had control over Sri Sampat
whose services had been transferred to Bombay
and it was the Bombay office which had control
over his services. That Sri Sampat was in Calcutta
and was served with the notice of the order of
termination of his service in Calcutta is only
because of the fact that he had chosen not to
comply with the order of transfer, dated 1 August,
1988, by which he had been transferred to
Bombay with effect from 5 August, 1988, and had
not also challenged the same before any forum.
Sri Sampat may have made representations to the
Bombay office with regard to such order of
transfer, but the same was never the subjectmatter of any judicial or quasi-judicial proceeding
and it is only after he was served with the order of
termination of his service that Sri Sampat raised a
dispute in respect thereof.
In our view,
notwithstanding the fact that Sri Sampat had
been served with such order in Calcutta, his situs
of employment being Bombay, he ought to have
raised an industrial dispute relating to the
termination of his services in Bombay and the
Government of Maharashtra would have been the
appropriate Government to make a reference
under S. 10 of the aforesaid Act in respect of such
dispute.
42. Cause of action is basically a concept within
the meaning of the Code of Civil Procedure as also
Art. 226 of the Constitution of India. As was
pointed out in Umasankar Chatterjee case, 1982
(2) LLN 7531 (vide supra), the order of removal
undoubtedly gave rise to a cause of action for the
appellant therein to institute an action for the
establishment of his right to be in service. The
impugned order of removal having become
effective in Calcutta where it was received by the
appellants a part of the cause of action must be
held to have arisen in Calcutta within the
: 25 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

jurisdiction of this Court. As was pointed out by
Sri Mitra, Umasankar Chatterjee case was one
under Art. 226 of the Constitution and Cl. (ii) of
Art. 226 was under consideration in the said case.
The position under the Industrial Disputes Act is
a little different and cause of action will have to be
related to either the theory of “control” or the
theory relating to “situs of employment.” In view
of the facts disclosed in the instant case, not only
control but also situs of employment as far as Sri
Sampat's service is concerned was in Bombay.
Two of the main tests in deciding jurisdiction, in
our view, indicate that the State of Maharashtra
and not the State of West Bengal would have been
the appropriate Government before whom Sri
Sampat should have raised the dispute with
regard to the termination of his services. We are
unable to agree with the views expressed either by
the learned Tribunal or the two learned Single
Judges while disposing of the two writ petitions,
being W.P. No. 116 of 1998 and W.P. No. 228 of
2001. In our view, the State of West Bengal was
not the appropriate Government to make the
reference on the dispute raised by Sri Sampat and
the same was without jurisdiction.”
31.

In

Siemens

Limited

vs.

Presiding

Officer

Additional Industrial Tribunal-cum-Additional Labour
Court, Hyderabad 2003 LLR 116 the High Court of Andhra
Pradesh also had occasion to consider an issue relating to the
jurisdiction of the Government. In this case the transferability was
one of the conditions of service of the employee. The employer
had its Head Office in Chennai and Branches at Hyderabad and
other places. The employee who was located at Hyderabad was
: 26 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

transferred to Manipal in Karnataka. The transfer order indicated
that the services of the workman stand transferred to the Manipal
office. The workman refused to go to the place of transfer and
tried to attend his office at Hyderabad whereupon the
management informed him that he had seized to have any link
with the Hyderabad office on the notified date. The workman still
did not join duty pursuant to his order of transfer, whereupon the
management issued a show cause notice as to why disciplinary
action should not be taken against him. This employee also, as in
the instant case, did not participate in the inquiry despite it being
adjourned from time to time.

The enquiry therefore was

proceeded ex-parte at the Bangalore office where the workman
was supposed to report for duty. The disciplinary authority passed
the order of termination which was served upon the petitioner.
The petitioner raised the dispute before the labour court aggrieved
by the order of termination wherein the issue arose as to the
maintainability of the industrial dispute before the labour court to
whom it stood referred.
32.

The labour court ultimately held that it had jurisdiction

to entertain the dispute which finding was assailed before the
Andhra

Pradesh

High

Court.
: 27 :

Placing

reliance

on

WP(C) 3388/2003

the

pronouncement of the Full Bench of the Patna High Court in
Paritosh Kumar Pal's case(supra), the court observed thus:“36. In my considered view, by virtue of the
transfer orders dated 9-9-1994 and the
subsequent letter dated 6-10-1994, wherein it was
mentioned that the workman ceased to be an
employee at Hyderabad, his situs of employment
becomes the office of Manipal. Therefore, as
contended by the counsel for the management,
just because the workman stayed illegally at
Hyderabad without proceeding to Manipal or just
because he was pursuing legal remedies at
Hyderabad, it cannot validate the illegal stay of
the workman at Hyderabad and confer the
jurisdiction on the Courts in Andhra Pradesh.
37. The other contention of the workman is that
the question of disobedience would arise only
when the transfer order is lawful and that by
transfer his service conditions and other
emoluments were affected.
Admittedly
transferability was one of the service conditions.
Except contending that the transfer is illegal and
his service conditions and emoluments are
affected, no relevant material is produced by the
workman. Therefore, in my view this is a vague
contention and merits only for rejecting.”
33.

Further the court distinguished the Sri Rangavilas

Motors(P) Ltd. case(supra) in para 39 of the judgment noticing
that transferability was one of the conditions of service in the case
before the Andhra Pradesh High Court while the challenge before
the Apex Court in the Sri Ranga Vilas Motors (P) Ltd. case was to
the order of transfer on the ground of want of authority to transfer.
: 28 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

34.

The High Court in these circumstances further noticed

as follows:“36.
In my considered view, by virtue of the
transfer orders dated 19-9-1994 and the
subsequent letter dated 6-10-1994, wherein it
was mentioned that the workman ceased to be
an employee at Hyderabad, his situs of
employment becomes the office at Manipal.
Therefore, as contended by the counsel for the
management, just because the workman stayed
illegally at Hyderabad without proceeding to
Manipal or just because he was pursuing legal
remedies at Hyderabad, it cannot validate the
illegal stay of the workman at Hyderabad and
confer the jurisdiction on the Courts in Andhra
Pradesh.
37.
The other contention of the workman
hat the question of disobedience would arise
only when the transfer order is lawful and that
by transfer his service conditions and other
emoluments were affected.
Admittedly
transferability was one of the service conditions.
Except contending that the transfer is illegal and
his service conditions and emoluments are
affected, no relevant material is produced by the
workman. Therefore, in my view this is a vague
contention and merits only for rejecting.
40.
But coming to the case on hand,
transferability was one of the conditions of
service. Therefore, transferring the workman
from one place to other is not violative of the
terms and conditions and therefore, the
contention of the workman that transfer itself
was illegal cannot be countenanced and also the
law laid down by the Supreme Court in
Rangavilas case (cited 1 supra) cannot be
applied on all fours, even though the same is
unexceptionable. To put it more precisely his
dispute before the Industrial Tribunal is mainly
: 29 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

against the termination and incidentally the
orders of transfer were challenged.
41.
From the above it is clear that the
workman committed misconduct in not joining
at the new station. Further I one again reiterate
that I am in full agreement with the Full Bench
judgment of the Patna High Court and hold that
the situs of employment would become
paramount in raising the industrial dispute.
Since the situs of the employment of the
workman was at Manipal with effect from 3-101994, as indicated in the order of transfer dated
19-9-1994 and notice dated 6-10-1994 and the
same was treated as misconduct, by the office at
Bangalore.
42.
In other words he ceases to be an
employee of Hyderabad office with effect from 310-1994 and supposed to have born at the new
station at Manipal, within the jurisdiction of
Bangalore Office. Therefore, as contended by
the learned counsel for the Management, no
cause of action arose for the workman at
Hyderabad with effect from 3-10-1994 and mere
stay at Hyderabad does not create any legal
right to agitate his grievance about his
termination after the cessation at Hyderabad
office. At the most his stay at Hyderabad office.
At the most his stay at Hyderabad is only illegal
and as rightly pointed,t he same amounts to
absenting himself from attending the duties at
the new station. To put it in a different way, his
stay at Hyderabad even after the cessation, must
be for a valid reason. Further as it is already
noticed, his grievance before the Tribunal was
primarily regarding the termination. Hence in
my view the workman had created an artificial
cause of action to raise the dispute at
Hyderabad, by incidentally questioning the
orders of transfer also while challenging the
orders of termination. Hence in view of the
judgments referred to supra and also for the
: 30 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

foregoing reasons, I am of the considered view
that Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court at
Hyderabad has no jurisdiction to entertain the
application filed by the workman under section
2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act and
accordingly the impugned judgment is no
judgment in the eye of law for want of
jurisdiction and the same is liable to be set
aside.”
35.

In the instant case there is no challenge to the condition

of transfer which was specifically incorporated in the letter of
appointment of the respondent no.3. Respondent no.3 has also
not challenged the order of transfer on the ground of want of
jurisdiction. In the first representation given by the respondent
no.3, she has accepted the administrative exigencies which
necessitated her transfer.

When she made the request to the

petitioner to the effect that in case of its inability to accommodate
her at Delhi she may be given compensation. The allegations of
mala fide were raised long after the petitioner informed her that it
was not possible to accede to her request. The order of transfer
dated 5th July, 2000 clearly indicated that the respondent no.3
stood relieved from Delhi office with immediate effect and she was
requested to report for duties to the administrative manager at
Kanpur latest by 15th July, 2000.

All communications were

addressed to the respondent no.3 from the office of the petitioner
: 31 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

at Kanpur and she also made all representations to the same office.
In these circumstances the bald allegation of mala fide in the
issuance of the order of transfer, in these proceedings which is not
supported by any other material or facts is noticed only to be
rejected.
36.

I am in respectful agreement with the principles laid

down by the Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court in its
pronouncement in the Indian Express Newspaper Bombay Pvt.
Ltd. case(supra) and the Single Bench pronouncement of the
Andhra Pradesh High Court in Siemens Limited case whereby it
has been held that the employee seizes to be the employee of the
office at the place of transfer on the notified date and he is
supposed to have been called at the new station to which he stands
transferred. Mere continuation of stay at the place whether the
employee has been transferred does not create any legal right to
adjudicate his grievance by his termination after the cessation of
his employment at the office wherefrom he is transferred; his
continuous stay at such place is illegal and amounts to absenting
himself from attending duties at the new station. Stay at the place
wherefrom an employee is transferred must be for valid reasons.
37.

A workman cannot create an artificial cause of action to
: 32 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

raise a dispute at a place wherefrom he/she has been transferred
by incidently questioning the order of transfer while challenging
the order of termination of service.

In the instant case upon

issuance of the order of transfer and its receipt by the respondent
no.3, the Delhi office of the petitioner no longer had any control
over respondent no.3 whose services stood transferred to Kanpur
and it was the Kanpur office which had control over all services of
the respondent no.3.

The respondent no.3 has chosen not to

question the order of transfer in any industrial adjudication or
judicial proceedings and has questioned only the order of
termination of her service. The situs of employment of respondent
no.3 being Kanpur, such a dispute could have been raised only at
Kanpur.
38.

So far as civil litigation and writ jurisdiction is

concerned it has been held that the same can be instituted in any
court where even a part of cause of action has arisen. Cause of
action is not defined in the Code of Civil Procedure but has been
judicially interpreted to mean every fact, which, if traversed, would
be necessary for the plaintiff to prove in order to support his right
to the judgment of the court. It is that bundle of fact which, taken
together with the applicable law, entitles the plaintiff to relief
: 33 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

against the defendants.
39.

However, even in civil litigation, it has been held by the

Apex Court that it is not every fact pleaded by a litigant which
gives rise to a cause of action and only such facts as are necessary
to adjudicate upon the lis would constitute a cause of action
conferring territorial jurisdiction upon a court.

Even if it was

found that a part of cause of action has arisen within the
jurisdiction of a court, it has been laid down by the apex court that
on principles to form non-conveniens or otherwise, a court may
refuse to exercise jurisdiction in the matter.
40.

In this behalf, reference may be made to a recent

judgment reported at (2004) 6 SCC 254 entitled Kusum
Ingots & Alloys Ltd. vs Union of India & Anr. the Apex
Court has considered this issue further and held thus :“26.
The view taken by this Court in U.P.
Rashtriya Chini Mill Adhikari Parishad that the
situs of issue of an order or notification by the
Government would come within the meaning of
the expression “cases arising” in clause 14 of the
(Amalgamation) Order is not a correct view of
law for the reason hereafter stated and to that
extent the said decision is overruled. In fact, a
legislation, it is trite, is not confined to a statute
enacted by Parliament or the legislature of a
State, which would include delegated legislation
and subordinate legislation or an executive order
made by the Union of India, State or any other
: 34 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

statutory authority. In a case where the field is
not covered by any statutory rule, executive
instructions issued in this behalf shall also come
within the purview thereof. Situs of office of
Parliament, legislature of a State or authorities
empowered to make subordinate legislation
would not by itself constitute any cause of action
or cases arising. In other words, framing of a
statute, statutory rule or issue of an executive
order or instruction would not confer
jurisdiction upon a court only because of the
situs of the office of the maker thereof.”
41.

It is noteworthy that the doctrine of forum conveniens is

also guiding the courts in adjudicating upon and deciding issues,
objections relating to territorial jurisdiction. This doctrine find its
base in convenience to parties and applies the principles that the
court having the closest connection to the lis would guide the court
in deciding as to the objections relating to territorial jurisdiction of
the courts. In this behalf in (2004) 6 SCC 254 Kusum Ingots
& Alloys Ltd. vs Union of India, the court held thus :
“10.
Keeping in view the expressions used in
clause (2) of Article 226 of the Constitution of
India, indisputably even if a small fraction of cause
of action accrues within the jurisdiction of the
Court, the Court will have jurisdiction in the
matter.
30.
We must however, remind ourselves
that even if a small part of cause of action arises
within the territorial jurisdiction of the High
Court, the same by itself may not be considered
to be a determinative factor compelling the High
Court to decide the matter on merit.
In
: 35 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

appropriate cases, the Court may refuse to
exercise its discretionary jurisdiction by invoking
the doctrine of forum conveniens. [See Bhagat
Singh Bugga v. Dewan Jagbir Sawhney,
Madanlal Jalan v. Madanlal, Bharat Coking
Coal Ltd. v. Jharia Talkies & Cold Storage (P)
Ltd., S.S. Jain & Co. v. Union of India and New
Horizons Ltd. v. Union of India.]”
42.

The Industrial Disputes Act 1947 is concerned with

disputes between the employer and the employee and as such the
position thereunder is not on all fours with the general civil law.
Cause of action under the Industrial Disputes Act 1947 has to be
construed and is relatable to the “situs of employment” or the
“control over the service of the employee”.
43.

Mere allegation of the employee or the place his

residence would not confer jurisdiction upon the authorities under
the Industrial Disputes Act 1947 to deal with the matter.
44.

In a judgment reported at AIR 1985 SC 1289 = (1985) 3

SCC 217 State of Rajasthan vs Swaika Properties, certain
properties belonging to a company which had its registered office
in Calcutta were sought to be acquired in Jaipur and the notice
under Section 52 of the Rajasthan Urban Improvement were
served upon the company at Calcutta. Basing its right to maintain
the writ petition at Calcutta High Court, it had been contended

: 36 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

that service of the notice within the territorial jurisdiction of the
Calcutta High Court empowered that court to exercise jurisdiction
in the matter. The Apex Court held that the entire cause of action
for challenging the acquisition of the land under Section 152 of the
Rajasthan Urban Improvement Act had arisen within the
territorial jurisdiction of the Rajasthan High Court. The factum of
service of the notice at Calcutta was held unnecessary for grant of
an appropriate writ, order or direction under Article 226 of the
Constitution for quashing the notice issued by the Rajasthan
Government. It was thus held that the High Court at Calcutta had
no jurisdiction to entertain the writ petition.
45.

Thus, mere receipt of a notice or an order would not

form part of bundle of facts which are necessary for effective
adjudication of the lis. Therefore the mere receipt of the order of
termination of service at Delhi by the respondent no.3 in the
instant case would not create jurisdiction in the respondent no.1 to
consider the complaint made by the respondent no.3 or to exercise
jurisdiction under Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act 1947.
46.

In this behalf it would appropriate to also advert to the

Full Bench pronouncement of the High Court of Judicature at
Patna in a dispute between Paritosh Kumar Pal Vs. State of
: 37 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

Bihar 1985(33) BLJR 150. In this case the court was called
upon to answer a question as to whether the situs of employment
of the workman would determine the locus for the territorial
jurisdiction of the tribunal to entertain a dispute arising from the
termination of his service under the Industrial Disputes Act 1947.
47.

Shri Paritosh Kumar Pal, the writ petitioner had been

appointed as a medical cum sales representative of the respondent
company. On certain disputes arising between the writ petitioner
and his employer company the petitioner was charge sheeted and
thereafter his services were terminated. The employee raised an
industrial dispute in the State of Bihar which was contested by the
employer on a question relating to the maintainability of the
reference by the State of Bihar for the reason that the employer
was carrying on its business at and from Calcutta and the
establishment at Calcutta.

It was contended that the writ

petitioner was carrying on the business of the employer in Bihar
under the directions and supervision of the Calcutta office of the
employer.

Observing that the provisions of the Code of Civil

Procedure on the point of jurisdiction are not applicable with the
full force of their technical rigour, yet in their absence from the
Industrial Disputes Act 1947, the broader general principles
: 38 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

underlying them would undoubtedly be relevant. In this behalf the
court noticed several judicial pronouncements on the subject
thus:“11. In the light of the above, the authority which
deserves pride of place is Lalbhai Tricumlal Mills
Ltd. v. Dhonubhai Motilal Vin and others, (4)
which has the repeated stamp of approval by the
final Court. The facts of this case are closely
similar to the present one because therein also
substantially the dispute pertained to the
termination of employment admittedly at
Bombay where the workman was employed whilst
the headquarters of the employer industry was in
Ahmedabad. The workman had even complained
and sought reinstatement with the head office of
the Mills at Ahmedabad and the same being
declined he raised an industrial dispute before the
Labour Court in Bombay. On behalf of the
employers objection was raised with regard to
jurisdiction which was rejected by the Labour
Court and the same was again strenuously urged
before the High Court. Even the specific point
that the approach for reinstatement had been
made by the workman at Ahmedabad and the
industrial dispute, therefore, arose on declining
the same under Section 42 (4) of the Act was
pointedly urged on behalf of the employercompany.
This, however, was categorically
rejected by Chief Justice Chagla speaking for the
Division Bench with the following observations:“Now the Act does not deal with the causes of
action, nor does it indicate what factors will
confer jurisdiction upon the Labour Court. But
applying the well known tests of jurisdiction, a
Court or Tribunal would have jurisdiction if the
parties reside within jurisdiction or if the subjectmatter of the dispute substantially arises within
: 39 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

jurisdiction. And therefore the correct approach
to this question is to ask ourselves where did this
dispute substantially arise and in our opinion the
only answer to that question can be that the
dispute substantially arose in Bombay and not in
Ahmedabad. What is the dispute? The dispute is
not as to whether the employee approached the
employer in Ahmedabad and no agreement was
arrived at. The dispute is whether the employer
was justified in dismissing the employee, and
inasmuch as the employment was in Bombay and
the dismissal was in Bombay, it is difficult to
understand how it can possibly be urged that the
dispute did not substantially arise in Bombay.
What Mr. Bhagwati says is that there is no dispute
till an approach is made by the employee under
the proviso to Section 42 (4).
It is true that there would be no industrial dispute
till the procedure laid down in the proviso to
Section 42 (4) is satisfied, but in a more
important sense there would be no dispute at all if
there had been no dismissal by the petitioner of
respondent No. 5.”
And again:
“If that is going to be the subject-matter of the
inquiry before the Labour Court that subjectmatter arose in Bombay and not in Ahmedabad.
We express no opinion as to whether the
Ahmedabad Court would equally have jurisdiction
or not. We are only concerned with deciding
whether on these facts the Bombay Labour Court
has jurisdiction, and in our opinion if as in this
case the employee was employed in Bombay and
dismissed in Bombay and he is making a
complaint about his dismissal and wants
reinstatement and compensation, the Bombay
Labour Court has jurisdiction to decide this
application.
We, therefore, agree with the
Industrial Court in the view it has taken.”
: 40 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

From the above it would appear that the aforesaid
case in a way covers the issue herein on all fours
by holding that the subject-matter of the
industrial dispute arises at the situs of
employment of the workman. However, in the
above case the question whether there can also be
concurrent
jurisdiction
at
Bombay
and
Ahmedabad was left open by the Bench.
12. What next calls for notice is the fact that the
aforesaid enunciation of the law was quoted
verbatim and affirmed by the Constitution Bench
of the Supreme Court in India Cable Co. Ltd. v. Its
Workmen, (1962)1 Labour Law Journal 409. This
in terms was more explicitly re-affirmed in Sri
Rangavilas Motor's case (supra) on which, rightly,
firm reliance has been placed on behalf of the writ
petitioner.”
48.

After consideration of these precedents the court held as

follows:“13. Now an incisive analysis of the aforesaid
authoritative enunciation of law would indicate
that three clear cut principles for determining
jurisdiction emerge therefrom. For clarity these
may be first separately enumerated as under:
(i) Where does the order of the termination of
services operate?
(ii) Is there some nexus between the industrial
dispute arising from termination of the service of
the workman and the territory of the State?
(iii) That the well-known test of jurisdiction of a
civil court including the residence of the parties
and the subject-matter of the dispute
substantially arising therein would be applicable.”
: 41 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

49.

In this case the Full Court Bench held that the situs of

the workman's employment in the case of termination of his
services is patently the paramount factor if not being wholly
conclusive. It is within the area of employment that the order of
termination operates and the workman loses his right to hold the
post and receive wages therefor.

The Full Bench held that,

therefore, on the anvil of the principle of where the impugned
order operates, the situs of the employment of the workman is
patently significant.
It was further held that on the second principle attracted
to the industrial dispute having some nexus with the territory of
the State, the situs of employment of the workman assumes
importance.

The Full Bench held that once a firm finding is

arrived at that the workman was employed within a specific
territory or State, the termination of his services thereunder has an
obvious and direct nexus with such territory of such State. Such a
nexus may not be necessarily between the territory of the state
with the industry or its head quarters.
50.

In the facts of the case, the court was of the view that the

employee was located in the State of Bihar and the order of
termination would being there and in these circumstances it was
: 42 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

held that the State of Bihar was the appropriate Government and
the reference by it was consequently valid.
The judicial precedent has held that broadly speaking
those very considerations which apply to civil litigation in
constituting cause of action would be directed even in the case of
industrial disputes which would encompass of those

of

facts on the basis of which a person invokes the provision of said
enactment. However, a close examination of the same compells
this court to hold that though the well known principles of
territorial jurisdiction governing the civil courts which are based
on the concept of cause of action would be equally applicable to
determine the jurisdiction under the Industrial Disputes Act,
however they remains a find distinction in specific areas. So far as
a dispute relating to service in the nature of a challenge to either
an order of transfer or termination of service is concerned,
territorial jurisdiction would have to be relatable to the situs of
employment and its control over the employment. In a given case,
there may be a concurrent jurisdiction in different states where
parties may fairly have the option to choose the forum. I am
fortified in this view by the observations in all the Apex Court in
Indian Cable Company case (supra) and have been in the Ranga
: 43 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

Vilas Motors Private Limited case (supra).
However, upon an order of transfer which says it takes
effect immediately and directs that the workman would stand
the situs of employment changes to the place of transfer. The
place where the workman is transferred from list of control over
the employment of the workman as in the instant case. More so,
when the order of transfer is not even assailed by the workman.
51.

In the instant case the nexus between the industrial

dispute and the territory of the respondent no.1 is not satisfied and
the respondent no.1 would not be the appropriate Government to
exercise jurisdiction under the Industrial Disputes Act in respect
of the complaint made by the respondent no.3. I, therefore, hold
that the respondent no.1 was not competent to make the order of
reference dated 1st April, 2002. The petitioner stood transferred to
Kanpur the order of termination of her services at Kanpur was
effected after holding disciplinary proceedings at Kanpur.

It

would be the authorities at Kanpur who would have the
jurisdiction to deal with the complaint, if at all made, by
respondent no.3. Accordingly the order dated 1st April, 2002 is
quashed.

Consequently thereupon the proceedings arising

therefrom is also incompetent and is hereby quashed.
: 44 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

52.

Needless to say that the respondent no.3 shall be at

liberty to approach the appropriate Government which would have
jurisdiction in the matter in accordance with law.
53.

This writ petition is allowed in above terms.

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
April 24, 2006
JK

: 45 :

WP(C) 3388/2003

