*
+

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
W.P.(C) 13162/2004
Judgment reserved on: 3rd February, 2005
Date of decision : February 24th, 2005

%

SONIA JASPAL
THROUGH

PETITIONER
MR. S.R. Sharma, Advocate with
Col. S. R. Kalkal, Advocate

VERSUS
STATE COUNSEL FOR EDUCATION
RESEARCH & TRAINING & OTHERS
THROUGH

RESPONDENTS.

Mrs. Avnish Ahlawat with
Ms. Latika Choudhry, advocates.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the judgment ?
Yes
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in
the Digest?
Yes

1.

This writ petition has been filed seeking a mandamus

directing the respondent to grant admission to the petitioner in
the Diploma course in Elementary Teacher Education for the
session 2004-06. The petitioner is claiming entitlement to the
admission in 2% quota of seats which were reserved for
candidates under the Education For All (EFA) category.
WP(C) 13162/2004

page1 of page22

2.

According to the petitioner, she hails from village

Mundka falling under District Institute of Education Training
(DIET), Old Rajinder Nagar, Delhi.

She claims to have

conducted teaching classes for thirty illiterate persons running in
two batches w.e.f. 14th August, 2001 to March, 2003.

The

petitioner submits that this teaching programme was conducted
by her under the Education Policy of the Delhi Government to
eradicate illiteracy. The petitioner submits that she was required
to educate only ten illiterate persons for one year and that she
has ably fulfilled the requirement entitling her to the issuance of
the certificate under this programme.
3.

Respondent No.1 is stated to be running courses of

Elementary Teaching Training Education and is a creation of the
respondent No.2. The petitioner submits that the courses are run
through nine District Institutes of Education Training (`DIETS'
for brevity) by the respondent No.1 and 2. In addition there are
four private recognised institutes offering seats only for female
candidates offering these courses. The respondents are stated to
WP(C) 13162/2004

page2 of page22

have declared and issued the

prospectus setting out the

conditions for eligibility, availability of seats including seats
under the prescribed quotas

for the diploma course in the

elementary teacher education.

So far as candidates seeking

entitlement to admission on the ground of their being education
for all volunteers is concerned, the brochure provides
reservation for a total of twenty seats in various DIETs and
private institutes.
4.

The petitioner appears to have applied for the entrance

test for the diploma in elementary teacher education under the
EFA category. She was declared successful in the result of the
entrance exam declared on 14.7.2004 in the Navbharat Times
and has claimed that she has been placed at number four in the
order of merit.

The petitioner was asked to report for

counselling on 21.7.2004.

However, the Principal at DIET,

Moti Bagh, New Delhi is stated to have recorded that the
petitioner did not have any certificate of having participated in
the Education For All Programme except a certificate of the
WP(C) 13162/2004

page3 of page22

Area Co-ordinator.
5.

The petitioner's case is that the respondent did not give

her admission to the Government DIET and again declared the
results of successful candidates for admission in the private
DIETS on 27.7.2004. She claims that she was placed first in the
order of merit as per the public notice dated 27.7.2004 in the
Navbharat Times.
6.

The petitioner has pointed that she cannot be made to

suffer for the fault of the respondents. According to the writ
petitioner, the

respondent No.1 has not appointed a

committee to evaluate the learners.

core

It is the case of the

petitioner that respondent is exercising hostile discrimination
against her claiming that an identically placed petitioner in CWP
NO. 7341/2002 was granted admission pursuant to an order
passed by the Hon'ble Court in her favour on 31.1.2003.
7.

The petitioner has placed

reliance on a certificate

dated 27.3.2004 which has been placed on record as annexure P12, to urge that she has substantially complied with the
WP(C) 13162/2004

page4 of page22

requirement under the scheme for admission and that denial of
admission to her was totally unjustified and arbitrary
necessitating the filing of the present writ petition.
8.

The respondents have entered appearance and have

filed a detailed counter affidavit in opposition to the averments
made by the petitioner. Counter affidavit has been filed by Ms.
Daljeet Kaur who is stated to be Deputy Director of Education,
District West B of the Directorate of Education, Government of
NCT of Delhi. According to learned counsel appearing for the
respondent, Daljeet Kaur is the person concerned with issuance
of the certificate also in the instant case. According to the
respondent the petitioner has rightly been denied admission by
respondent No.1. Respondents absolutely deny the fact that
petitioner ever took the teaching programme under the
Education for All Scheme of respondent No.2. According to the
respondents, a detailed procedure has to be followed for running
the EFA Centre and evaluation of learners at the centre. Several
steps for taking the EFA programme have to be undertaken by a
WP(C) 13162/2004

page5 of page22

participant which includes collection of material supplied by the
authority, getting periodic and regular evaluation of the
attendance record of the learners which is supervised by a
district coordinator through Associate Co-ordinator.

The

appointment of the Area Co-ordinator and supply of material is
done at the instance of Deputy Director of Education who is the
District Coordinator under the programme. The petitioner has
never taken any material nor furnished weekly reports to the
Associate Co-ordinator. The petitioner has not taken even the
attendance register or material which is furnished by the
volunteers carrying out the EFA programme. The hierarchy of
verification, supervision and reporting has not been followed or
maintained in the case of the petitioner. As such, according to
the respondents, the petitioner never undertook the EFA classes
and the petitioner was disentitled to the admission under the
quota reserved for participants in the EFA programme which is a
category for which reservation of seats has been provided by the
respondents.
WP(C) 13162/2004

page6 of page22

9.

In order to support the submissions orally made, the

respondents have also produced original record relating to one
other candidate namely Ramandeep Kaur as a sample for this
Court to appreciate the manner in which an EFA centre is run
and evaluation of the course as well as the learners is undertaken
by the respondents. I find that in order to run an Education For
All Centre, the respondents have stipulated the following:a)
Volunary Instructor (V.I.)- Any person who is
interested in running a learning centre, should have at least 10
learners in one class.
b)
V.I will decide place for taking classes as well as
convenient time of running the classes.
c)
V.I will contact the Principal of the nearest
Government school-Area Coordinator- for material required to
run the classes.
d)
V.I will give a list of learners along with the
particulars and address to the Area Coordinator/ Master Trainer.
e)
V.I will request for getting himself/ herself trained in
conducting classes under the EFA programme.
f)
District Coordinator will arrange 3/5 days training of
V.I.s for smooth running of the classes.

WP(C) 13162/2004

page7 of page22

g)
Area Coordinator will write to District coordinator
(DDE) through the Associate Coordinator (Education Officer/
other designated person) for the material to run the classes.
h)
DDE (District Coordinator) will write to the DIET
concerned for supplying the material to the V.I through the Area
Coordinator.
All the above mentioned steps have been followed in
the example case of Ramandeep Kaur produced before me.
10.

It is noteworthy that a volunteer instructor produces

the attendance register, result sheet of evaluation conducted and
names of learners regularly before the Area Coordinator.
Regular reports are required to be submitted to the Zonal Office
by the Area Coordinator and an application is to be made for
issuance of the certificate.

The certificate is issued by the

Directorate of Education in a format. I find that the certificate
issued to Ramandeep Kaur was in the following term:
“EDUCATION FOR ALL
GOVT. of N. C. T. OF DELHI
DIRECTORATE OF EDUCATION
DISTRICT WEST, NEW MOTI NAGAR
NEW DELHI-110 015
Certified that Ms. Ramandeep Kaur D/o Shri
Jaspal Singh resident of 1/1 Ashok Nagar, New Delhi has
WP(C) 13162/2004

page8 of page22

worked for the Education For All Campaign w.e.f. October,
1996 to June 1997.
Eleven (11) learners in her class have
already completed Third Primer and the Evaluation has not/ has
been conducted and Twelve/Eleven (11) learners have passed
the test.
Sd/MT
11.

sd/sd/Area Coordinator EC

sd/-”
DDE (West)

It is noteworthy that internal valuation of EFA learners

is conducted by the DIET under which the volunteer is
registered. The evaluation is done by holding a test and the
result is forwarded to the concerned school run by respondent
No.2. There is no such record available in the instant case. An
attendance register is also issued by respondent No.2 and the
same has to be verified by the Coordinator of the candidate.
12.

I have also carefully examined the decision dated

31.1.2003 in CWP No. 7341/2002. In this case, the petitioners
were possessed of a certificate issued by respondents but there
was a dispute with regard to its correctness.

In these

circumstances, the Court had made direction for scrutiny of
WP(C) 13162/2004

page9 of page22

records and arrived at the conclusion which formed part of the
judgment. The decision specifically records as follows;
“However, it is made clear that this writ is
founded on the special facts which led to a
reverification and can not be a precedent where
such a factual situation does not exist.”
13.

The petitioner can place no reliance on the judgment

rendered in this case.
14.

The present record shows that the petitioner appears to

have made a request for starting an EFA Centre and had
approached one Sh. Asurvedh who was the EFA incharge in the
Government Co-education Senior Secondary School , Ranhola
Delhi-41. After her initial meeting, the petitioner did not take
any follow up action for appointment of an Area Coordinator.
The respondents have placed a letter from Sh. Asurvedh to this
effect on record. The petitioner also did not at any point of time
collect the required material for running the classes nor gave any
list of her learners along with particulars to the authorities. It is
WP(C) 13162/2004

page10 of page22

an admitted position that the petitioner was never trained in
conducting classes under the EFA programme. Since no Area
Coordinator was ever appointed, there was no question of any
request from such Coordinator for assignment of material for
running the classes. Further the requisite communication by the
Deputy Director Education who is the District Coordinator to
the concerned DIET for supplying material to the voluntary
instructor which was the petitioner in the instant case, through
the Area Coordinator was never made. No weekly progress
reports were ever sent by any Area Coordinator to any person
appointed as the Associate Coordinator. No report of any Centre
maintained by the petitioner was ever sent to the District
Coordinator, i.e. the concerned Deputy Director Education.
There is nothing on record to show supervision by the District
Coordinator or the Area Coordinator or the Associate
Coordinator of any EFA centre run by the petitioner.
15.

The petitioner for the first time appears to have made

a claim that she is running a centre and its evaluation in April
WP(C) 13162/2004

page11 of page22

2004 to the Principal of the DIET in Keshavpuram.
16.

Vide a letter dated 16.4.2004, the Principal of the

DIET at Keshavpuram informed the petitioner that her case did
not fall under the jurisdiction of the DIET at Keshavpuram as
Keshavpuram was in the West District and Village Mundka to
which the petitioner belonged was not in the West District.
Thereafter the petitioner appears to have approached the
Principal of Boys Senior Secondary School, Mundka seeking
evaluation of her learners Centre on 7.7.2004.
17.

Around the same time the petitioner appears to have

written to respondent No.3 on 21.7.2004. This letter has been
placed on the writ record as annexure P.8 and reads to the
following effect:“To
Director
SCERT
Varun Marg
Defence Colony
New Delhi-24.
Sir,
WP(C) 13162/2004

page12 of page22

It is submitted that I Miss Sonia
Jaspal (EFA) education for all as volunteer
of DIET has passed examination but I do
not possess EFA certificate which is
awarded by DIET. I shall be able to
produce this certificate within two months,
therefore I may be granted two months
time. I shall be very grateful to you for
this. I may be granted admission on
temporary basis.
Thanking you,

21.7.2004

18.

Yours Sincerely
Sd/Sonia Jaspal
Roll No. 27926
Category EFA”

There is an endorsement on this letter from the

officials of the respondent No.1 which reads:
“She
does not have any certificate of EFA
except Area Coordinator.”

19.

Sd/21.7.2004”
Therefore it is the case of the petitioner herself that

she was aware of the requirement of the EFA Certificate and

WP(C) 13162/2004

page13 of page22

that she was not possessed of the same.
20.

The contention of the petitioner that the Brochure did

not require the petitioner to obtain a certificate in any specific
formate and that the only requirement stipulated in the brochure
for the admission in the EFA category was to the following
effect:“Following conditions must be satisfied for availing
reservation under aforesaid reserved categories,
In case a candidate selected for counselling under
reserved category fails to produce certificates of that
particular category, he/she will not be considered tor
admission.
EFA Volunteers Certificate from Associate Coordinator
countersigned by the competent authority
authorized by Joint Secretary DSSAS for
working at least one year in EFA subject
to scrutiny by competent authority. A
certificate of Internal evaluation whereby
at least 10 learners from the DIET faculty
of DIETs and counter signed by
concerned Principal, DIET, Delhi.”
21.

The petitioner has placed reliance on a document

which bears signature dated 27.3.2004 marked as annexure P-12
WP(C) 13162/2004

page14 of page22

to the present petition. In order to appreciate the purport thereof
it would be useful to set out the same in its entirety.
“Govt. Boys Senior Sec. School
Mundka, Delhi-110041
Ref.No. M.DK 212A/04

Dated 27.3.2004

TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN
It is certified that Sonia Jaspal D/o Late
Shri Rajender Jaspal, the Volunteer of EFA
(Education for all) centre in H.No. 202, Vill.
Mundka from 14 August 2001 to March 2003.
The Number of learners in her centre is 30 which
are divided into two batches both contain 15
learners. Timings are 3.00 pm to 4.00 pm and
4.00 pm to 5.00 pm.
Her area co-ordinator is Mr. Asurvedh,
who is a fine art teacher in Govt. Co-ed. Sr. Sec.
School, Ranhola. The supervision of her EFA
centre is continously done by Mr. Asurevedh.
Sonia has taught every lessons and topic to her
learners. Now they are completely literate. She
has submitted one application in Keshav Puram,
DIET for evaluation of her learners. Now she is
waiting for response from Keshav Puram DIET.”
22.

This certificate on the school letter head does not state

WP(C) 13162/2004

page15 of page22

the name or designation of the authority which is issuing it.
23.

The above letter bears handwritten comments of

Principal Govt. Boys Sr. Sec. School, Mundka, Delhi-41, which
are to the following effect:“Miss Sonia Jaspal has done good work
of EFA as per verification done by Area
Coordinator Mr. Asurvedh from time to time.
Also I personally supervised the coaching centres
which were running very successfully. I wish all
the best for the said volunteer.'

24.

Sd/
Principal, Govt. Boys Sr. Sec.
School, Mundka, Delhi-41.”
The Petitioner has asserted that this certificate was

sufficient for her to meet the requirements of the respondents set
out in the aforementioned brochure.
25.

Perusal of this certificate shows that it does not state as

to which authority has issued the same. The certificate has been
typed but there are no signatures below the typed portion. It
contains only some hand written comments/ certificate at the
bottom which purports to be in the writing of the Principal of

WP(C) 13162/2004

page16 of page22

Govt. Boys Sr. Sec. School, Mundka, Delhi who has put the date
as 27.3.2004. The contents of the hand written certificate are
contrary to the typed portion of the certificate. According to the
typed portion of the certificate, supervision of the EFA Centre
was done by one Sh. Asurvedh who has been described as “Area
Coordinator”. However the hand-written portion states that the
principal has personally supervised the coaching centre. Again
Mr. Asurvedh has merely signed the same below the handwritten certificate given by the school principal as an EFA
Incharge.

The name or authority of the person issuing the

certificate is not mentioned.
26.

It is further noteworthy that Sh. Asurvedh has

explained the circumstances in which he signed on the material
produced by the petitioner. The respondents have enclosed a
letter written to the Dy. Director Education of District West
wherein Sh. Asurvedh has stated that after the petitioner
expressed an intention to start an EFA Centre to him she did not
meet him thereafter. It was only on 27.3.2004 that the petitioner
WP(C) 13162/2004

page17 of page22

approached him through Principal of Govt. Boys Sr. Secondary
School Mundka and requested him to visit classes. Accordingly,
Sh. Asurvedh visited two learning centres and gave report on the
same letter on the same day.
27.

Therefore according to Sh. Asurvedh himself, he has

not conducted any assessment nor submitted any reports as a
co-ordinator of the petitioner's centre and that the only visit
made by him to any centre run by the petitioner for the first time
was on 27.3.2004.
28.

It has been vehemently urged on behalf of the

petitioner that Sh. Asurvedh has signed on lists of learners etc.
which have been filed along with the writ petition. In the face
of the assertion made by Sh. Asurvedh in his letter to the
respondents, I have no reason to disbelieve the respondents that
Sh. Asurvedh has not actually verified the lists of learners and
that there has not been any assessment of the centres of the
petitioner other than the signatures of Sh.Asurvedh given as
explained by him on 27.3.2004. There are no regular reports as
WP(C) 13162/2004

page18 of page22

were required to be sent. There is no record available which is
contemporaneous in time with the claimed period of having run
the centres by the petitioner.
29.

The respondents have also submitted that the Principal

of the Govt. Boys Sr. Secondary School Mundka has issued
Annexure P-12 the certificate on 27th March, 2004 three days
prior to his retirement. It has been pointed out that Principal of
school had no jurisdiction to issue such certificate. There is no
material whatsoever to support the petitioner's contention that
any EFA centre or classes were conducted prior to 10th March,
2004.
30.

The petitioner has also on 26th March, 2004

approached the Principal of the DIET at Keshavpuram Govt.
School with the request to issue an EFA certificate but the same
was refused by him on the ground that the case of the petitioner
did not fall under the North district.
31.

It is only thereafter that the petitioner has attempted to

procure the certificate from the school at Mundka.
WP(C) 13162/2004

page19 of page22

32.

I also find from the record that the petitioner was

conscious of the requirement by the respondents to enable her to
get admission.

The petitioner has addressed a letter dated

21.7.2004 to respondent No.3 wherein she has stated that she
does not possess the requisite certificate and has prayed for two
months time to procure the same.

Mere signatures of any

document laid before an authority cannot be held to be proof of
the correctness of the contents in a case as the present. The
signatory has clearly explained the manner and date of
signatures.
33.

Even on 27.3.2004, the petitioner has addressed a

communication to the Assistant Education Director seeking
evaluation of the candidates of the Centre claimed by her and
has forwarded the same through the Principal of the Govt. Boys
Sr. Secondary School for necessary action.
34.

Therefore the argument made before this Court on

behalf of the petitioner that the document issued by the Principal
of the Govt. School at Mundka is the requisite certificate is
WP(C) 13162/2004

page20 of page22

devoid of any merit and is hereby rejected.
34.

In view of the afore stated position on record it is not

possible to hold that the petitioner was possessed of the requisite
certificate of having participated in the Education For All
Scheme as required for entitlement for admission to the diploma
in Elementary Teacher Education conducted by the respondents.
Respondents have disputed the existence of the centre itself and
there is no record of assessment and evaluation of the Centre or
the

learners

as

claimed

by

the

petitioner

which

is

contemporaneous in time with the claimed dates of participation
in the programme. For this reason it is held that the petitioner is
also not possessed of any certificate issued by the Deputy
Director of Education as per prescribed procedure to enable her
to secure admission to the course under such quota.
35.

For all the foregoing reasons I find no merit in the

petition which is hereby dismissed.
36.

There is no order as to costs.

WP(C) 13162/2004

page21 of page22

GITA MITTAL, J.
24th February, 2005.
kv

WP(C) 13162/2004

page22 of page22

