IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 6876/2005
Judgment reserved on : 30th May, 2005
Date of decision: August 25, 2005
AKHIL NARANG
... Petitioner
through Mr. K.U. Bhan, Advocate
VERSUS
VICE CHANCELLOR & ORS.
.... Respondents
through Mr. Anurag Mathur, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

By way of this writ petition the petitioner has challenged the

communication dated 2nd March, 2005 issued by the respondent no. 3
W.P.(C) 6876/2005

page 1 of 27

cancelling the admission granted to the petitioner for the B.Com(Pass) Part I
course. The petitioner is stated to have been born on the 13th November,
1988 and passed the matriculation examination conducted by the Central
Board of Secondary Education in the year 2002. Thereafter, the petitioner
passed the intermediate examination conducted by the Central Board of
Secondary Education in the year 2004 securing a first division.

The

petitioner applied for enrolment and admission to the School of Open
Learning of the University of Delhi in July, 2004 seeking admission to the
B.Com.(Pass) Part I course conducted by the respondent nos. 2 and 3. The
candidature of the petitioner was duly accepted and he deposited the annual
course fee for the course on the 3rd August , 2004 as well as his original
certificates. The petitioner was issued an identity card and the library card
by the School of Open Learning and also issued the study material for the
B.Com.(Pass) Part I Course in the first week of September, 2004. The
petitioner was permitted to and regularly attended all the personal contact
programmes, lectures and discussions and was preparing for the annual
examination of the course which were to be conducted in the month of
April, 2005.
2.

To the utter dismay of the petitioner, more than eight months after the

W.P.(C) 6876/2005

page 2 of 27

completion of the admission procedure, in the first week of March, 2005,
the petitioner received a communication/order dated 2nd March, 2005
bearing no. 04-05/3347 whereby his admission was cancelled on the ground
that the petitioner has not completed 16 years of age at the time of his
admission for the session 2004-2005.
3.

The communication dated 2nd March, 2005 reads as under :“

SCHOOL OF OPEN LEARNING
UNIVERSITY OF DELHI
SOUTH STUDY CENTRE
SOUTH MOTI BAGH,
NEW DELHI – 110021.
Date : 2/3/2005
No. 04-05 3347
Mr. Akhil Narang,
EI,A Omvihar Phase-V.
Uttam Nagar,
New Delhi – 110059.
Sub: Cancellation of Provisional Admissions
Ref : Roll Number 0402-02-002172

Dear Student,
On scrutiny of your admission case. It has been
found that you have not completed 16 years of age at the
time of admission which is minimum requirement of 1st
year admission for the session 2004-2005. In this
connection this is to inform you that you are not eligible
for admission this year and provisional admission granted
you is hereby stand cancelled. However as per University
rules admission fees paid by you will be refunded in due
W.P.(C) 6876/2005

page 3 of 27

course of time.

4.

Yours sincerely,
Sd/Co-ordinator”
The petitioner, and, on his behalf his father, immediately submitted

representations to the respondents but receiving no reply thereto, was
constrained to file the present writ petition impugning the decision of the
respondents primarily on the ground of a promissory estoppel and for the
reason that the respondents had the power to exempt compliance with any
requirement under Ordinance X C of the Delhi University Calender.
5.

The petitioner has made the following prayers in the writ petition :“a) To set aside the impugned communication/order
dated 02.03.2005 issued by the respondent no. 3
cancelling the admission of the petitioner.
b)
To issue appropriate writ/directions/orders to
respondents, thereby confirming the admission of the
petitioner in B.Com (pass) Part-I Course and allow him to
continue his studies.
c)
Any other relief which this Hon'ble Court may deem
fit and proper in the light of above facts and
circumstances.”

6.

The respondents appeared in answer to the notice to show cause and

filed a counter affidavit. The respondents have contended that the age of
eligibility for admission to a degree course in the Delhi University has been
provided in Ordinance 1 (2 A) of the University Calender (Volume II) and

W.P.(C) 6876/2005

page 4 of 27

have stated that the power to relax the age limit has been vested in the Vice
Chancellor for a maximum period of one year. It was stated that in the
prospectus for admission to under-graduate courses in the School for Open
Learning (earlier known as the School of Correspondence Courses and
Continuing Education), the age requirement has been stipulated as 17 years
as on 1st October of the year in which admission is taken, in consonance
with the provisions of the aforestated Ordinance. In view of this specific
stipulation, the power of relaxation has been conferred on the Vice
Chancellor only upto a maximum of one year. In these circumstances, it is
submitted that there is no power in any authority to relax the age limit of a
period beyond one year.
7.

So far as the instant case was concerned, according to the

respondents, the petitioner was born on 13th November, 1988 and therefore
on 1st October, 2004 was approximately only 15 years and 10 months.
Therefore, even if exemption of the age limit of a period of one year was
granted, the petitioner was still not of age and therefore he did not fulfil the
eligibility requirement.
It has further been submitted that the petitioner and his father gave an
undertaking that the petitioner fulfilled the eligibility requirement and that
W.P.(C) 6876/2005

page 5 of 27

in case he was found ineligible subsequently, his admission was liable to be
cancelled.
8.

Delay in the scrutiny of the application was sought to be explained on

the ground that the applications in most cases are received through post and
that initially there is no detailed scrutiny of the certificates, documents and
other particulars. It is only upon completion of the initial stage of process
of admission of students by the stipulated last date, that the process for
scrutiny of individual applications and eligibilities is undertaken.

The

respondent states that upon such scrutiny, it was found that the petitioner
did not complete the age of 17 years as on 1st October, 2004 or even 16
years to entitle him to admission upon the maximum condonation of the one
year, permissible under the Ordinance.

In these circumstances, the

admission of the petitioner was expeditiously cancelled and it was decided
that the fees paid by him would be refunded.

The respondents have

contended that apart from the petitioner, there were 12 other candidates
whose admission was so cancelled.
9.

It is further submitted that the petitioner was duly notified that his

admission was purely provisional and subject to scrutiny and verification of
the eligibility requirements and documents and that the petitioner could not
W.P.(C) 6876/2005

page 6 of 27

claim any rights on the plea that he was granted admission in September,
2004.

The respondents have asserted that in view of the petitioner's

ineligibility, delay in cancelling the admission does not regularise his
admission nor confer or create any rights in the petitioner.
10.

I have heard learned counsels for the parties. The original record

relating to the application of the petitioner has also been produced before
me.
11.

Before adverting to the facts of the instant case, it becomes necessary

to notice the legal provisions which govern the instant case and which read
as follows :“Ordinance 1 (2 A) of the University Calender Volume II
No person shall be qualified for admission tot he
University unless before the first day of October in the year
in which he seeks admission, he is 17 years of age or if he
seeks admission to the 1st year of the Post Graduate
Degree/Diploma Courses LL.B., B.Lib. Sc., or B.Ed.
Course he is 20 years of age or if he seeks admission to
M.Phil. Course he is 22 years of age.
Provided that the Vice Chancellor may, on the basis
of individual merits, relax the age limit up to a maximum
period of one year.”
“OrdinanceX C-Permisive Provisions
The Academic council may, in exceptional
cases grant exemption from the operation of any of the
W.P.(C) 6876/2005

page 7 of 27

Ordinances governing admission of students, migration,
the courses to be pursued by them, attendance at lectures or
sessional or other work or the examination of candidates
and authorise what is proper to be done instead in such
cases, provided that no such exemption and authority shall
be deemed to have been granted unless not less than twothirds of the members present of the Academic Council
voted in favour of the motion for such exemption and
authority made by or with the written authority of the ViceChancellor; and
Provided further that this two-thirds majority
voting for the exemption should not be less than half the
total strength of the Academic Council at the time”
12.

I further find that the School of Open Learning has stipulated the age

requirement for eligibility for admission in its prospectus and has provided
the following stipulation:“Age Requirements
No person shall be qualified for admission
to the School in the first year of the B.A.
(pass)/B.A.(Hons.)/B.Com.(Hons.)
course,
unless
he/she is seventeen years of age, before the first day of
October in the year in which he/she seeks admission;
and in the Second Year unless he/she is eighteen years
of age before the first day of October in the year he/she
seeks admission.
Relaxation in age limit upto a maximum
period of one year may be made by the Vice-Chancellor
on individual merit of each case.
No student is entitled to admission if
he/she is less than Seventeen years of age on the 1st
day of October of the year of admission. Similarly
admission will not be allowed to candidates with 11
W.P.(C) 6876/2005

page 8 of 27

years schooling.”

13.

There can, therefore, be no dispute that a candidate seeking admission

to any course in the School of Open Learning is required to have completed
17 years of age before the first day of October in the year in which
admission is sought. There can also be no dispute to the fact that the Vice
Chancellor is empowered to grant relaxation in age limit only up to a
maximum period of one year on the individual merit of each case and
nothing beyond.
14.

The petitioner was admittedly born on 13th November, 1988 and he

was seeking admission to the B.Com.(Pass) Part I Course in the year 2004.
Therefore, in terms of the requirements of the University Calender as well
as the prospectus of the School of Open Learning, the petitioner was
required to have completed 17 years of age by 1st October, 2004. In case
this was not so, then in order to be eligible for admission and exemption of
one year of age as per the stipulations, noticed hereinabove, the petitioner
was required to have completed 16 years of age by 1st October, 2004.
15.

By virtue of his date of birth, as on 1st October, 2004, the petitioner

was completing only 15 years and about 10 months of age and remained
W.P.(C) 6876/2005

page 9 of 27

deficient by about 2 months.
16.

It has repeatedly been held that in matters of education especially

admissions and examinations, compassion or generosity would not guide
courts while pronouncing judgments. It is also settled law that no admission
can be granted in violation of statutory rules and that courts cannot direct
universities to disobey or violate the very statutes to which it owes its very
existence.
In this behalf, I can usefully advert to the judicial pronouncements
reported in (1993) 4 SCC 401 entitled Guru Nanak Dev University vs
Parminder Kr. Bansal & Ors.; JT 1992 (5) SC 175 entitled State of
Maharashtra vs Vikas Sahebrao Roundale & Ors.; 1995 Supp (1) SCC 304
entitled Dental Council of India vs Harpreet Kaur Bal & Ors.; JT 1991 (2)
SC 343 entitled State of Tamil Nadu & Ors vs St. Joseph Teachers Training
Institute & Anr.; (1986) 2 SCC 667 entitled A.P. Christians Medical
Educational Society vs Government of Andhra Pradesh & Anr.; (1994) 1
SCC 175 entitled State of Punjab & Ors. Vs Renuka Singla & Ors.; AIR
1998 SC 2235 entitled C.B.S.E. & Anr. Vs P. Sunil Kumar & Ors. And AIR
1994 SC 43 entitled St. John's Teacher Trining Institute(for Women),
Madurai, etc vs State of Tamil Nadu & Ors. etc.
W.P.(C) 6876/2005

page 10 of 27

17.

The Ordinance 1 (2 A) of the University Calender (Volume II) and

the clause contained in the prospectus is clear and unequivocal so far as the
eligibility based on the age of the candidate is concerned and the petitioner
was clearly not eligible for grant of admission.
18.

Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner had sought to explain the

declaration given by the petitioner and his father to the effect that petitioner
was of age on the admission form stating that they verily believed that the
petitioner was eligible as he had passed his senior secondary examination
conducted by the Central Board of Secondary Education which had not
objected to his candidature either at the class 10 th or at the school leaving
stage.

It was also contended that the University Calender permitted

exemption of the eligibility condition under Ordinance X C of the
Ordinances.
19.

I find that so far as the age limit is concerned, a power to grant

condonation has been specifically granted to the Vice Chancellor under the
proviso of Ordinance 1 (2 A) of the University calender (Volume II) and the
same is relaxable up to a maximum period of one year only. Such specific
power having been granted under the specific provision governing the age
limit, no resort can be taken to the general provisions of Ordinance X C
W.P.(C) 6876/2005

page 11 of 27

wherein a residuary power is granted to the Academic Council.
20.

It has been pointed that the prospectus of the School of Open

Learning of the Delhi University also contained a similar restriction.
21.

The petitioner required exemption of a period of more than one year

which was clearly not permissible legally and as such the petitioner could
not have been given admission to the course to which he was admitted.
22.

No relief can be given to the petitioner for continuation in the course.
I would, therefore reject the writ petition.

23.

However, in my view dismissal of the writ petition does not conclude

the matter. I find that the petitioner had submitted his application form on
6th August, 2004 to the School of Open Learning, University of Delhi. The
application form contained a column for the date of birth against which the
petitioner had clearly stated that he was born on 13th November, 1988.
Alongwith the application form, the petitioner had enclosed certificates
including the mark sheets issued by the Central Board of Secondary
Education wherein the same date of birth was mentioned.
24.

The application form for admission contains a printed declaration

which reads as under :“I declare that the particulars given above are correct. I
W.P.(C) 6876/2005

page 12 of 27

further declare that I am eligible in terms of age and the
percentage of marks as per requirement for the above
course otherwise my admission may be cancelled and the
required fee be forfeited. I agree to be abide by the rules
and regulations given therein. I further declare that I shall
submit myself to the disciplinary jurisdiction of the
Principal of the School, the Vice-Chancellor and other
authorities of the University who may be vested with the
power to exercise discipline under the Act, the Statutes, the
Ordinances and the rules framed by the University in this
behalf.”
Much emphasis has been laid by learned counsel for the respondents
on this declaration.
This was in small print and was undoubtedly signed by the petitioner
as well as his father. There is no dispute that the petitioner has given the
correct date of birth in the application. I, therefore, find no reason to
disbelieve the statement on behalf of the petitioner that they erroneously
understood and believed that the petitioner was eligible as he had
undertaken the school leaving exams without any objection.
25.

The same application form contains the following certification by the

office of the respondents.
“In token of having verified necessary documents admit
provisionally Mr./Miss/Mrs.
to the
First/Second/Third
year
of
the
B.A.(Pass)/B.Com.(Pass)/B.A.(Hons.)
English/B.A.(Hons.) Pol. Science/B.Com.(Hons.)”
W.P.(C) 6876/2005

page 13 of 27

This certificate bears the signatures of the person who received the
application for its submission and the date when it was so certified.
26.

The petitioner was required to and had deposited the fees upon grant

of admission to the B.Com.(Pass) course on the 1st September, 2004. He
was given registration no. 4-02-02-002172.
27.

Nothing further was done by the respondents and almost the entire

academic session was permitted to end till the respondents sent the letter
dated 2nd March, 2005 to the petitioner cancelling his admission. I find that
there is no explanation for the delay from 6th August, 2004 when the
petitioner submitted his application form till the service of the letter of
cancellation of the petitioner's admission to him.
28.

In this regard, I may refer to the manner in which the respondents

have proceeded on the file. There are no separate notings in the file of the
petitioner. However a photocopy of a note sheet of another file has been
placed on record. This contains a note dated 21 st February, 2005 which
reads as follows :“Placed below 13 cases of below age(list attached)
admitted during the session 2004-05 in B.A.(P)/B.Com.(P).
As per prospectus the student must have atleast 17 years of
W.P.(C) 6876/2005

page 14 of 27

age and one year age can be relaxed with the approval of
the Vice Chancellor, University of Delhi. Theses cases are
belong to the below age category, which were admitted
inadvertently during the rush period of admission.
Therefore, these students are not eligible for admission in
B.A./B.Com.(P) 1st year for the session 2004-05.
However keeping in view of above mentioned facts
theses cases may be cancelled and fees paid by them may
be refunded as per university rules.”
29.

Therefore, the only excuse for granting admission to the petitioner

and permitting him to undertake the course was “inadvertence”. Assuming
that there was inadvertence during “rush period of admission”, there can be
no excuse for permitting almost an entire academic session to lapse before
even detection of such inadvertence. While the petitioner may have been
under age and therefore inelgible to pursue a degree course in the University
of Delhi, he may have been eligible to pursue other technical or educational
courses in order to enable him to acquire further skills so that he does not
lose an entire academic year. It cannot be contended that an academic year
it is of no significance in the life of a student. Loss of a whole year may
irreparably jeopardise or damage the academic interests of a student and a
professional career. One year's delay may have the consequences of loss of
seniority or promotional avenues in the future. Seen in the light of the cut

W.P.(C) 6876/2005

page 15 of 27

throat competition faced by the students of today, every day becomes
invaluable. Such action by virtue of the delay on the part of the respondents
becomes unpardonable and reprehensible.
30.

In any case, the petitioner was entitled to be told at the earliest that he

was not eligible to undertake the course till he completed 17 years of age on
the 1st October of the year in which he sought admission or in any case, 16
years of age to entitle him to exemption of the prescribed period.
31.

The letter sent to the petitioner on 2nd March, 2005 was on a printed

format. The respondents have still retained the admission fees paid by the
petitioner and stated that the same would be refunded to him in “due course
of time”. There is nothing on the file or in the counter affidavit to show that
the fees has been actually refunded to the petitioner.
32.

At this stage, it becomes necessary to notice judicial pronouncements

which have not persuaded the respondents to move despite the anguish
repeatedly expressed by this court. While considering a matter of
cancellation of admissions and delay on the part of the Delhi University to
pass orders as back as in 1968, several observations were made by this
court. The judgment of the Division Bench of this court was reported at
AIR 1968 Delhi 131 entitled University of Delhi vs Ashok Kumar
W.P.(C) 6876/2005

page 16 of 27

Chopra & Anr. Thirty five years ago the Division Bench observed thus:“xxx As far as the present cases are concerned, there
can be no doubt whatever that the University owed a
duty to the students concerned either to approve or
to reject the provisional admission made by the
Principals of the Colleges within a reasonable time.
Though the University has the power of approval or
rejection from the very nature of that power, it must be
held that it is a power coupled with a duty. When the
applications were taken from the students by the
Principals of the College for forwarding the same to the
University, the Principals were acting as agents of the
University and the University also along knew that on
the strength of the provisional admission granted to
them by the Principals, the students are continuing their
studies in the college and if they are to be told that they
were not eligible for admission, they should be told as
at an early time. What can be the reasonable time
within which the University can reject the
provisional admission of the students should be
determined after taking into account the fact that
they were young students studying in the colleges
and for them every year matters in their life and
career and the course itself for which they sought
admission was of three years' duration. As pointed out
already Shir Ashok Kumar Chopra was informed of the
rejection in November 1966. The common feature is
that this rejection was communicated to the students
after the three students have completed one year in
the college. xxx We are unable to find any support for
his case in the above sentence since we have already
held that the University owed a duty towards the
students to make known to them within a reasonable
time whether the University had approved of their
admission or not. In the absence of a compelling
command or context, we are not disposed to accept the
W.P.(C) 6876/2005

page 17 of 27

contention of the learned counsel for the appellant that
the University has got the power to reject a provisional
admission till the publication of the results of the
University examination and, therefore, at no time
anterior to the said publication of the results the
students can proceed on the belief that the University
has approved of their admissions to accept such a
contention will be to encourage and to put a premium
on callous indifference on the part of the University
officials and to allow them to play havoc with the life
and career of thousands of young men and women
seeking admission into the portals of University. Shri
Avadh Behari did not deny and could not have denied
that there had been inordinate delay on the part of the
University in scrutinising the various applications and
coming to a decision whether to confirm or to reject the
provisional admissions already made by the Principals
of the Colleges but sought to explain it away by
pleading that such delay was inevitable since about
16,000 students sought admission and the staff
employed by the University was a very small one.
This can hardly be an acceptable explanation when
the consequences to the students in case of delayed
rejection are so serious and disastrous. When the
University has undertaken the task, it must keep
itself equal to it and such an explanation of
inconvenience and, economy cannot, from the very
nature of the case, be an answer, much less an
effective answer, for failure to discharge the first
and the most elementary duty it owed to the
students. xxx”
33.

These observations of the Division Bench of this court made more

than 35 years ago have also not made an iota of differences to the

W.P.(C) 6876/2005

page 18 of 27

functioning of the University. The Bench had observed extensively on the
parameters of “reasonable time”.
34.

I may also advert to the observations by this court in yet another

Division Bench pronouncement relating to admission to a course in the
Delhi University. In the judgment reported at 43 (1991) DLT 670 entitled
Kanishka Aggarwal vs University of Delhi, this court observed thus:“33. What do we find in this case? It is the
Professor-in-charge who may make provisional
admissions. It is he, who, as the so-called Convener,
may admit provisionally even those who do not find
their names in any of the Lists. There was no Waiting
List and as many as 72 vacancies were crying to be
filled up on the very last date of admissions. The
petitioner was there. So were the like of him. They
were all waiting in the wings with money in their
wallets to pay admission fees. They were invited.
They paid the fees. (It was argued by Mr. Rao that the
petitioner must have named the person who had
invited him to pay the fees. We regard it immaterial.
There was some Barkes some-where who was willing
a la David Copperfield. And, then how could fees be
deposited without the other side willing to accept?
Have we not heard and heard again that line from the
Goblin Market : “One may lead a horse to water,
twenty cannot make him drink?”) They were issued
regular receipts for the same. Let us not forget that as
per Clause IX of the Bulletin fees is to be paid only by
an “applicant selected for admission”. Let us also not
forget that before the payment of fees, the applicants
admitted provisionally have to produce all the requisite
certificates in original and their confirmation is to be
W.P.(C) 6876/2005

page 19 of 27

made by none other than the Professor-in-charge
himself, and as per the applicant, he had actually
produced those certificates. (See Clause VII (c) ) As
per Clause IX (3). The applicant also furnished two
copies of his latest passport size photograph, the same
being essential to “effect his/her admission by payment
of fees”. He was allotted a roll number. He was
issued even the requisite identity card. He was also
assigned to one of the seven sections. He even started
attending the lectures.
And later, in all the
communications of he University he was shown to
have been provisionally admitted. Does all this not
constitute a representation? What is all this if not the
requisite 'conduct'? Was the applicant not justified,
under the circumstances, to raise the assumption ?(See
: Sanatan Gaurda v. Brahampur University, JT 1990
(2) SC (57).
35. xxx
36. We hold that the plea of estoppel is available
and applicable.
37. Let us assume, the plea of estoppel is not
available. Still, should the applicant be allowed to be
thrown out? Should we deprive him of the rainbow of
today and make his tomorrows bleak, barren and
ominous? Whom shall we be serving thereby? An inefficient, if not corrupt, system which has been
spreading its fangs year after year? The Rip Van
Winkles who refused to come out of their deep
slumber even in the face of the reverberations caused
by loud protests of foul play and demand for a CBI
enquiry? Those who found it well high impossible to
even transfer certain clerical staff inspite of pressing
demand by the teaching community? Should we serve
them or this innocent student who bought a dream with
his time and money? He played no fraud. His only
fault was his assumption that vistas or knowledge were
W.P.(C) 6876/2005

page 20 of 27

being opened to him. Must he suffer for this
innocence? Where lies his fault? How much do we
wish, somebody had whispered to the University : un
pey de charite, voyons'.
38. Yes, Wells is right (Situated Decision making 63
S. Cal. L. Rev. 1727 (1990)) in pointing out that
judges remain impartial spectators while hearing the
witnesses and going through reports, but at the end of
the trial they become agents by interacting not only
with those who are involved in the case, but with
unknown others also whose cases will be decided in
accordance with this case and ultimately they become
“situationalists” or “formalists” inspite of their having
been trained in the same legal system. John Dewey
(Logical Method and Law, in 15th Middle Works 18891924, 68 (1983)) quotes Justice Holmes as saying :
“The whole outline of the law is the resultant of a
conflict at every point between logic and good sensethe one striving to work fiction out to consistent
results, the other restraining and at last overcoming the
effort when the results become too manifestly unjust”.
Though Dewey points out that Holmes uses
“logic” in a narrow “sylogistic” sense, and himself
advocates “experimental logic”(P 69), let us say, the
formalist judge represents logic, while the
situationalist judge represents good sense. With
respect, it is the situationalist judges we find working
in Rajendra Prasad Mathur v. Karnataka University
1986 Supp. SCC 740 ; Thaper Institute of Engineering
and Technology Patiala v. Abhinav Taneja and others,
JT 1990 (3) SC 72 and Ashok Chand Singhvi v.
Jodhpur University, AIR 1989 SC 823. For, in all
these cases, the Supreme Court protected the interests
of the students though found having been initially
ineligible for admission. Who would not love to be in
W.P.(C) 6876/2005

page 21 of 27

such august company?”
35.

It would be appropriate to also notice here the observations of this

court in the judgment reported at 2002(III) AD (Delhi) 81 entitled Liya
Belliappa vs CBSE & Anr. to the following effect :“13. Learned counsel for respondent no. 1 has
relied upon a Supreme Court judgment in Civil
Appeal No. 2662 of 1998 CBSE & Anr. Vs. P.
Sunil Kumar and Ors. in which the Apex Court
has deprecated the practice of allowing the students
to appear in the examinations of the Board or the
Universities and then ultimately regularising the
same by taking sympathetic view in the matter. It is
also observed that the Courts by their fiat cannot
direct the Universities to disputes to which they owe
their existences. Learned counsel also relies upon
the orders passed by the Apex Court in SLP18853/97 Central Board of Secondary Education
vs Nikhil Gulati and Anr. On 13.2.1998 in which
once again the practice of permitting ineligible
students to undertake Board or University
examinations was disapproved. However it was
also added that unless the High Court can justify its
decision on principle and precept it should better
desist from passing such orders as it puts the rule of
law to mockery. It is true that the Courts must not
countenance in-fraction of rules nor should interfere
with the rules, guidelines and policies made by the
experts in academic matters but in a case like the
present one where a student is shown to be put in
an extremely disadvantageous position without any
fault on his part the Court has the duty to intervene
and set the equities right to ensure that the student is
W.P.(C) 6876/2005

page 22 of 27

not made to suffer without any fault on his part.”
Undoubtedly the admissions of the petitioners
cannot be disturbed in such manner and at such
stage and the impugned decisions deserve to be
quashed to balance equities.”
36.

I had occasion to consider the delay in taking action on the part of the

Delhi University in three writ petitions by three students. Migration of
these students which had been permitted was cancelled at the end of the
academic year.

In the judgment passed on 9th February, 2005 in Writ

Petition(Civil) 20013/2004 entitled Radhika Garg vs Delhi University &
Anr., delayed action of the University was set aside and holding that its
action must be prompt especially having regard to the fact that academic
careers are involved.
37.

Undoubtedly the petitioner was not of age and not eligible to be

admitted.

Such conditions have been laid under statutory ordinances.

These stipulations of age requirements are based on considerations of
welfare and ability of the students. As noticed above, the Apex Court has
deprecated grant of relief to students dehors statutory stipulations on
considerations of sympathy and compassion.

As a result, despite my

findings on the action of the respondents, no relief qua his admission can be
given to the petitioner. However, it is evident that the officials of the
W.P.(C) 6876/2005

page 23 of 27

University of Delhi have unreasonably delayed scrutiny of the application of
the petitioner and have caused loss and damage of an entire year to the
petitioner. All judgments noticing the disastrous consequences of delay in
acting on the part of this University have not made a writ of a difference to
its style of functioning.

As back as in 1968, the Division Bench had

observed that scrutiny of the admission forms was the first and most
elementary duty owed by the University to the students.

In these

circumstances, I therefore propose to compensate the petitioner by imposing
costs by way of damages on the University of Delhi and its officers.
I am fortified in so ordering by the pronouncement of the Apex Court
reported at JT (1993) VI SC 307 entitled Lucknow Development
Authority vs N.K. Gupta.
38.

The Division Bench of this court in a judgment reported at 54 (1994)

DLT 513 (DB) entitled Dr. Ravinder Kumar Mathur vs Union of India
& Ors. had occasion to consider delay on the part of officials-respondents
relating in the right of a petitioner to join a M.D.(CHA) course. It was
observed that even if the career of the petitioner was not marred by the
delay, his valuable rights were frustrated. The court observed that the
officers of the Delhi Administration slept over the application of the
W.P.(C) 6876/2005

page 24 of 27

petitioner for study leave in that case without any reason causing irreparable
loss and damage to him as he lost his seat on account of the delay. The
Delhi University refused to permit this petitioner to join on the ground that
he was late even though no fault was attributable to him. Reliance was
placed on the pronouncement of the Apex Court in the Lucknow
Development's case(supra) and held as under:“In these circumstances, we propose to recompensate
the petitioner by imposing heavy cost by way of
damages on Delhi Administration and its officers. This
cost we tentatively quantify at Rs.one lakh though it
does appear to us that this will be a poor consolation to
the petitioner, but we cannot help otherwise.”
The court further directed production of the records and filing of the
affidavits by the authorities.
39.

After production of the file and further consideration of the matter,

vide the judgment reported at 1999 III AD(Delhi) 833 again entitled Dr.
Ravinder Kumar Mathur vs Union of India & Ors., the court granted
further damages to the tune of Rs.5 lakhs to the petitioner in addition to the
amount ordered vide the earlier judgment which had been delivered on 8th
April, 2004.
The University of Delhi was a party-respondent in the writ petition

W.P.(C) 6876/2005

page 25 of 27

which was decided by the aforenoted judgment.
40.

In a judgment reported at 1996(3) AIJ 17 entitled Saroj Rani &

Anr. Vs State of Haryana & Ors., also the court noticed the wastage of
precious time of students resulting from irresponsible action on the part of a
college and awarded compensation.
41.

It is apparent that despite repeated judgments specifically requiring

the University to act expeditiously and emphasising expedition in
consideration of applications for admission by the University, the same have
been of no consequence.

Deadlines and schedules notified by the

University are being strictly enforced. The University has a reciprocal duty
to act expeditiously especially in matters relating to scrutiny of application
forms and completion of admission procedure.

It was so held by the

Division Bench in Ashok Kumar Chopra's case(supra).

The admission

procedure which commences in July/August of a calender year cannot be
permitted to spill over into the next year or to the end of the academic
session.
42.

In the instant case, the petitioner has been deprived of a full academic

year on account of delay in scrutiny of his application and deserves to be
compensated. In compensating the petitioner, I am guided by the quantum
W.P.(C) 6876/2005

page 26 of 27

of compensation awarded by the Division Bench in 54(1994) DLT 513 and
1999 III AD(Delhi) 833. The petitioner in these reported judgments was
seeking admission to the post-graduate course, while the petitioner before
this court has suffered at the threshold of his college education, in my view
an amount of Rs.50,000/- deserves to be awarded as compensation to the
petitioner for the loss of an entire academic year.
43.

Accordingly, it is directed that the respondents shall pay a sum of

Rs.50,000/- to the petitioner as compensation. The respondents shall also
refund to the petitioner the fees received by them. The amounts payable
under the directions of this court shall be paid within a period of four
weeks from today.
This writ petition is disposed of in the above terms with costs which
are quantified at Rs.10,000/-

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
August 25, 2005
kr

W.P.(C) 6876/2005

page 27 of 27

