IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.5947/2003
Judgment reserved on : May 10th , 2005
Date of decision: August 25th , 2005
PAWAN KUMAR JAIN
... Petitioner
through: Mr. Pradeep Dewan,
Advocate & Mr. Rajiv
Samaiyar, Advocate
VERSUS
PARDUMAN JAIN & ORS.
..... Respondents
through: Mr. M.L. Srivastava,
Advocate with Mr . Mukesh
Kumar, Advocate for
Respondent Nos.1& 2.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in Yes
the Digest?
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

This writ petition has been filed by the petitioner under

Articles 226 & 227 of the Constitution of India aggrieved by an order
dated 30th July, 2003 whereby the learned Arbitral Tribunal was pleased
to direct his impleadment as a party to the arbitration proceedings even
WP (C) No.5947/2003

Page 1

though he was not a party to the arbitration agreement.
2.

The facts giving rise to the present petition are within a

narrow compass.

To the extent that the same are not disputed and are

necessary, the same are set out hereunder.
3.

Shri Sandeep Jain (respondent no.2 herein), Shri Parduman

Jain (respondent no.1 herein), Ms. Ritika Jain (respondent no.3 herein)
and Mr. S.K. Jain & Sons HUF (respondent no.4 herein) entered into a
partnership dated 2nd April, 2001. These parties had agreed to carry on
business in partnership under the name and style of M/s Vardhman
Computer Embroidery which was to engage in the business of
embroidery on job basis and to render consultancy services. The partners
were at liberty, however, to undertake any other line(s) of business in
addition to or in substitution of this present business. The partnership
was stated to be effective from 2nd April, 2001 and would continue till it
was dissolved in a manner mutually decided by the partners. Clause 5 of
the partnership deed provided that the business shall be managed by the
partners themselves or by any of them or their authorised agents
peacefully and diligently to the best interest of the firm and in
accordance with the policy and decision taken by the partners from time
to time.

WP (C) No.5947/2003

Page 2

4.

Clause 12 of the partnership deed relevant for the purposes of

adjudicating the issues raised in the present writ petition reads as under:“12. ARBITRATION
THAT all the disputes relating to this
partnership business between the partners or their
representatives, if cannot be settled mutually, the same
shall be referred to arbitration and entire proceedings
thereof shall be governed as per provisions of the
Arbitration Act.”
5.

It appears that certain disputes arose between the respondent

nos.1 & 2 on the one side and respondent no. 3 on the other. These
disputes related to removal of books of accounts and documents as well
as withdrawal of amount from the accounts of the partnership firm.
According to the petitioner, business was being exclusively looked after
by respondent nos.1 & 2.

The respondent no.3 (daughter of the

petitioner) is stated to be a student who was pursuing a regular course of
study as a day scholar in a college while respondent no.4 is stated to be
an HUF firm and its Karta was a busy Chartered Accountant who, due to
paucity of time, could not devote his time to the affairs of the partnership
firm.
6.

The respondent no.3 is stated to have made a demand upon

the respondent nos.1 & 2 to render the accounts of partnership firm with

WP (C) No.5947/2003

Page 3

the intention of protecting the books of accounts, vouchers bill books etc.
which were lying in the custody of respondent nos.1 & 2 and in order to
save them from destruction.
7.

Respondent no.3 is stated to have filed a petition on the

original side of this court under Section 9 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act on 4th September, 2002. This petition was registered as
OMP No.283/2002 and was entitled Ritika Jain Vs. Shri Parduman Jain
& Ors.

By way of this petition, the respondent no.3 prayed for

appointment of a receiver to preserve the books of accounts and records
of the firm and for grant of an ad-interim injunction. It has been stated
that an advocate was appointed as a receiver to take into custody the
records of the firm from the possession of the respondent nos.1 & 2 vide
an order dated 6th September, 2002 in these proceedings.
8.

Subsequently, vide an order made on 12th December, 2002 in

the OMP No.283/2002, the court was pleased to appoint Shri K.P.
Verma, District Judge (Retired) as a sole arbitrator to resolve the matter.
Both parties to the petition were directed to remain present before the
sole arbitrator on 21st December, 2002. It is stated that pursuant to the
order dated 12th December, 2002, the sole arbitrator who has been
arrayed as respondent no.5 before this court, entered upon the reference.

WP (C) No.5947/2003

Page 4

The respondent nos. 3 & 4 filed their claims against the respondent nos.1
& 2 before the learned sole arbitrator, respondent no.5. The respondent
nos.1 & 2 also filed their reply thereto and also raised a counter claim
against respondent nos.3 & 4.
9.

While the matter was pending before the Sole Arbitrator, the

respondent nos.1 & 2 filed an application dated 8th March, 2003 praying
for impleadment of the present petitioner in the arbitration proceedings.
The application was made on the averment that the petitioner Mr. Pawan
Kumar Jain, Mr. S.K. Jain (respondent no.4 herein) and Ms. Ritika Jain
(respondent no.3 herein) had entered into a criminal conspiracy and
fraudulently obtained large sums of money from respondent nos.1 & 2
through cheques and cash memos in M/s Urvee Creation by way of loan.
In this behalf, these respondents referred to a report dated 26 th July, 2002
addressed to the SHO, Police Station Seelampur, Delhi by Mr. Pawan
Kumar Jain. Further allegations were made to the effect that the present
petitioner was managing and procuring the material and work for the
concern being the principal beneficiary thereof and also for his daughter,
the respondent no.3 herein. It was alleged that the petitioner, being the
main person in the entire episode and in the run of the business, was an
essential party and without his presence, the arbitration proceedings

WP (C) No.5947/2003

Page 5

cannot be properly adjudicated upon. An allegation was made that the
partners were merely `de jure' partners while the petitioner was a `de
facto' partner.
10.

The respondent no.3 filed a reply vehemently disputing all

averments made in the application. It was stated that the petitioner was
not a party to the arbitration agreement or proceedings and that in case
the respondent nos.1 & 2, who had filed the application, had any claim
against the present petitioner, they would have to take recourse to such
proceedings as are available in accordance with law. It was also pointed
out that the proceedings before the arbitrator related to dissolution of the
partnership and rendition of accounts by respondents nos.1 & 2 and that
the petitioner was never a partner in the partnership firm Vardhman
Computer Embroidery in respect of which arbitration proceedings were
going on.
11.

The learned Arbitrator passed an order dated 30th July, 2002

allowing the application and directed that the present petitioner should be
impleaded as a claimant on the ground that his interest appears to be
similar to the other claimants and at variance with the interest of
respondent nos. 1 & 2. This order has been impugned by way of the
present writ petition by the petitioner on the plea that the petitioner was

WP (C) No.5947/2003

Page 6

not a party to the arbitration agreement or the subject matter of claims.
It has been further submitted that the disputes between the petitioner on
the one hand and respondent nos.1 & 2 on the other were matters which
were wholly beyond the arbitration agreement and were beyond the
purview of the arbitration proceedings. It has further been argued that
the order of the learned Arbitrator has been passed on sheer conjectures
and surmises and the learned arbitrator appears to have been influenced
only by the fact that the petitioner was the father of the respondent no.3.
12.

The respondent nos. 1 & 2 have supported the order dated

30th July, 2003 passed by the learned arbitrator on the same grounds as
were urged before the learned arbitrator submitting that the petitioner is
the father of the respondent no.3 and brother-in-law of the Karta of
respondent no.4 and further that it was the petitioner who was looking
after the accounts and business on behalf of the respondent no.3.
According to these respondents, it was the petitioner who was more or
less acting as representative of his daughter and brother-in-law who were
alleged to be sleeping partners in the business. Reliance has also been
placed by the respondent no.1 & 2 on the role played by the petitioner in
proceedings before the police as well as his actions on behalf of the
respondent nos.3 & 4 and in the creation and closure of the partnership

WP (C) No.5947/2003

Page 7

business.
13.

I have given my considered thought to the issues raised and

submissions made by the parties. Before addressing the other issues, I
may refer to the provisions of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 relied
upon by the respondent nos.1 & 2 in support of their plea that the
petitioner could have been impleaded as a party. Reliance has been
placed on Section 6 of the enactment which reads as under:“6.Mode of determining existence of partnership- In
determining whether a group of persons is or is not a
firm, or whether a person is or is not a partner in a
firm, regard shall be had to the real relation between
the parties, as shown by all relevant facts taken
together.
Explanation 1.- The sharing of profits or of gross
returns arising from property by persons holding a joint
or common interest in that property does not of itself
make such persons partners.
Explanation 2.- The receipt by a person of a share of
the profits of a business, or of a payment contingent
upon the earning of profits or varying with the profits
earned by a business, does not of itself make him a
partner with the persons carrying on the business:
(a) by a lender of money to persons engaged or about
to engage in any business,
(b) by a servant or agent as remuneration.
(c) by the widow or child of a deceased partner, as
annuity, or
(d) by a previous owner or part owner of the business,
as consideration for the sale of the goodwill or share
WP (C) No.5947/2003

Page 8

thereof, does not of itself make the receiver a partner
with the persons carrying on the business.”
14.

Based on this statutory provision, it has been urged that the

legislature intended that persons who have conducted themselves in such
manner as the petitioner are to be treated as partners in a partnership
firm.
15.

I have carefully perused the replies filed by the respondents

No.1 & 2 before the arbitrator and this court.

Other than averments to

the effect that the petitioner was interfering in the business or that
amounts were withdrawn or deposited by him and also he was a party to
the police complaint, there is no averment that the petitioner was a
representative of any of the parties to the partnership. There is also no
allegation to the effect that the petitioner was authorised by any legal
document whereby he was appointed as an agent or representative of a
party to the partnership deed to act for or on their behalf.

The

application for impleadment was based on the sole assertion that two of
the partners, that is, respondent nos.3 & 4 were acting in collusion with
the petitioner and they had a conspiracy amongst each other prior to even
commencement of the partnership business.

For this purpose, reliance

was placed on the relationship between the petitioner and respondent
nos.3 & 4 in support of the submission that the petitioner was a de facto
WP (C) No.5947/2003

Page 9

partner and his presence was necessary for the complete and effective
adjudication of the disputes.
Perusal of Section 6 of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932
would show that the same is of no assistance to respondent nos.1 & 2. In
the instant case, there is a written partnership deed which would govern
the issue as to who were persons who constituted the partnership firm. A
bald assertion to the effect that the respondent nos. 3 & 4 had hatched the
conspiracy with the petitioner, would not lead to a conclusion that the
petitioner was a partner in the partnership firm. In any case, the stand
taken in the application for impleadment would appear unjustified in as
much as the said respondents have themselves taken recourse to filing
civil litigation against the petitioner.
16.

In this behalf, the court is concerned not only with an

agreement to function as a partner but also with the consent and
agreement to refer disputes inter se such partners to arbitration.
Therefore, while a set of persons may get together and enter into a
partnership deed, but the partnership deed may still not have a arbitration
clause or the parties may not have agreed to refer disputes to arbitration.
17.

In the instant case, clause 12 of the partnership deed

contained the arbitration clause wherein disputes relating to the

WP (C) No.5947/2003

Page 10

partnership business between parties or their representatives were
referable to arbitration.
18.

My attention has been drawn to the provisions of Section 7(1)

of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 by the respondents nos.1 &
2. Perusal thereof shows that an arbitration agreement is in writing if it
is contained in a document signed by the parties.
19.

It is abundantly clear that the partnership deed was not signed

by the petitioner. The arbitration clause and agreement was contained in
Clause 12 of the partnership deed. Therefore, admittedly, the petitioner
is not a party to any arbitration agreement.
20.

It has also been pointed out that the respondent nos.1 & 2

have filed two civil suits for recovery against the petitioner. I find force
in the submission made on behalf of the petitioner that if the petitioner
was a party to the arbitration agreement, then there would have been no
necessity for filing the suit against him by the respondent nos.1 & 2.
21.

I also find that the learned Arbitrator has been pursuaded to

allow the application and direct impleadment of the petitioner as a
claimant on the submissions of the respondent nos. 1 & 2 to the effect
that the possibility cannot be ruled out that Shri Pawan Kumar Jain might
have played some significant role in the running of the business and that

WP (C) No.5947/2003

Page 11

it may ultimately be found that Shri Pawan Kumar Jain misappropriated
the funds of Vardhman Computer Embroidery and withheld its records
even though he was officially not a partner or employee of that firm.
22.

In the event of it being so found and held, it is apparent that

the partnership and or its partners would have to take recourse to an
appropriate remedy available in accordance with law for recovery of such
amount as are due and payable by the petitioner.
23.

The petitioner has placed reliance on the judgment reported at

2001 (1) Arbitration Law Reporter 430 entitled Subhash Chug &
Company Vs. Girnar Limited to contend that the provisions of Section
5 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 cannot and should not
supersede or override the constitutional power of High Court given under
Articles 226 & 227 of the Constitution of India. The powers are
supervisory but wide and that no remedy having been provided under the
Arbitration & Conciliation Act, the same would be subject to control by
constitutional provisions. This pronouncement has been cited in support
of maintainability of the writ petition.
24.

In the pronouncement of the Apex Court reported at (2003) 5

SCC 531 entitled Sukanya Holdings Private Limited Vs. Jayesh H.
Pandya & Anr., the court was concerned with the matter arising out of

WP (C) No.5947/2003

Page 12

suit for declaration relevant portion thereof reads as under:“A suit for dissolution of the partnership firm and
accounts and inter alia challenging the conveyance deed
executed by the partnership firm in favour of one W was
filed by Respondent 1. On the same day, an arbitration
petition under Section 8 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996, was filed by the appellant,
another partner in the firm. The High Court rejected the
petition taking the view that in the suit apart from the
relief of dissolution and accounts, the plaintiff has
prayed for other reliefs. All the defendants to the suit
are not parties or partners in the partnership firm and the
terms of the partnership deed including the arbitration
clause are not binding on them. Only part of the subject
matter could at the most be referred to arbitration.
Further, there is no power conferred on the court to add
parties who are not parties to the agreement in the
arbitration proceedings. The Court also negatived the
alternative prayer for referring part of the subject-matter
in respect of those parties who are parties to the
partnership agreement which contains arbitral clause on
the ground that such procedure is not contemplated
under the Act.
Section 89 CPC cannot be resorted to for interpreting
Section 8 of the Act as it stands on a different footing
and it would be applicable even in cases where there is
no arbitration agreement for referring the dispute for
arbitration. Further, for that purpose, the court has to
apply its mind to the condition contemplated under
Section 89 CPC and even if application under Section 8
of the Act is rejected, the court is required to follow the
procedure prescribed under the said section.
Lastly, considering the language used in
Section 8, it is not necessary to refer to the decisions
rendered by various High Courts interpreting Section 34
of the Indian Arbitration Act, 1940 which gave a
WP (C) No.5947/2003

Page 13

discretion to the court to stay the proceedings in a case
where the dispute is required to be referred for
arbitration.
xxx

xxx

xxx

8.
Power to refer parties to arbitration where
there is an arbitration agreement- (1) A judicial
authority before which an action is brought in a matter
which is the subject of an arbitration agreement shall, if
a party so applies not later than when submitting his
first statement on the substance of the dispute, refer the
parties to arbitration.
(2) The application referred to in sub-section (1) shall
not be entertained unless it is accompanied by the
original arbitration agreement or a duly certified copy
thereof.
(3) Notwithstanding that an application has been made
under sub-section (1) and that the issue is pending
before the judicial authority, an arbitration may be
commenced or continued and an arbitral award made.
13.
Secondly, there is no provision in the Act
that when the subject-matter of the suit includes
subject-matter of the arbitration agreement as well as
other disputes, the matter is required to be referred to
arbitration. There is also no provision for splitting the
cause or parties and referring the subject-matter of the
suit to the arbitrators.
14.
Thirdly, there is no provision as to what is
required to be done in a case where some parties to the
suit are not parties to the arbitration agreement. As
against this, under Section 24 of the Arbitration Act,
1940, some of the parties to a suit could apply that the
matters in difference between them be referred to
arbitration and the court may refer the same to
arbitration provided that the same can be separated from
WP (C) No.5947/2003

Page 14

the rest of the subject-matter of the suit. The section
also provided that the suit would continue so far as it
related to parties who have not joined in such
application.
15.
The relevant language used in Section 8 is: “in a
matter which is the subject of an arbitration agreement”,
the court is required to refer the parties to arbitration.
Therefore, the suit should be in respect of “a matter”
which the parties have agreed to refer and which comes
within the ambit of arbitration agreement. Where,
however, a suit is commenced- “as to a matter” which
lies outside the arbitration agreement and is also
between some of the parties who are not parties to the
arbitration agreement, there is no question of
application of Section 8. The words “A matter” indicate
that the entire subject-matter of the suit should be
subject to arbitration agreement.
16. The next question which requires consideration iseven if there is no provision for partly referring the
dispute to arbitration, whether such a course is possible
under Section 8 of the Act. In our view, it would be
difficult to give an interpretation to Section 8 under
which bifurcation of the cause of action, that is to say,
the subject-matter of the suit or in some cases
bifurcation of the suit between parties who are parties to
the arbitration agreement and others is possible. This
would be laying down a totally new procedure not
contemplated under the Act. If bifurcation of the
subject-matter of a suit was contemplated, the
legislature would have used appropriate language to
permit such a course. Since there is no such indication
in the language, it follows the bifurcation of the subjectmatter of an action brought before a judicial authority is
not allowed.
25.

In these facts, the Apex Court referred to Section 8 of the

Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 which reads as under:WP (C) No.5947/2003

Page 15

“8. Power to refer parties to arbitration where there is
an arbitration agreement- (1) A judicial authority before
which an action is brought in a matter which is the
subject of an arbitration agreement shall, if a party so
applies not later than when submitting his first
statement on the substance of the dispute, refer the
parties to arbitration.
(2)
The application referred to in sub-section (1)
shall not be entertained unless it is accompanied by the
original arbitration agreement or a duly certified copy
thereof.
(3)
Notwithstanding that an application has been
made under sub-section (1) and that the issue is pending
before the judicial authority, an arbitration may be
commenced or continued and an arbitral award made.”
26.

Applying the statutory provision to the aforestated facts, the

court held as under:“13.
Secondly, there is no provision in the Act
that when the subject-matter of the suit includes
subject-matter of the arbitration agreement as well as
other disputes, the matter is required to be referred to
arbitration. There is also no provision for splitting the
cause or parties and referring the subject-matter of the
suit to the arbitrators.
14.
Thirdly, there is no provision as to what is
required to be done in a case where some parties to the
suit are not parties to the arbitration agreement. As
against this, under Section 24 of the Arbitration Act,
1940, some of the parties to a suit could apply that the
matters in difference between them be referred to
arbitration and the court may refer the same to
arbitration provided that the same can be separated
from the rest of the subject-matter of the suit. The
section also provided that the suit would continue so
WP (C) No.5947/2003

Page 16

far as it related to parties who have not joined in such
application.
15.

xxx

xxx

xxx

xxx

16.
The next question which requires
consideration is – even if there is no provision for
partly referring the dispute to arbitration, whether such
a course is possible under Section 8 of the Act. In our
view, it would be difficult to give an interpretation to
Section 8 under which bifurcation of the course of
action, that is to say, the subject-matter of the suit or in
some cases bifurcation of the suit between parties who
are parties to the arbitration agreement and others is
possible. This would be laying down a totally new
procedure not contemplated under the Act.
If
bifurcation of the subject-matter of a suit was
contemplated, the legislature would have used
appropriate language to permit such a course. Since
there is no such indication in the language, it follows
that bifurcation of the subject-matter of an action
brought before a judicial authority is not allowed.”
27.

Accordingly, the Apex Court dismissed the appeal filed

before it.
28.

I am bound by this authoritative judicial pronouncements

which are to the effect that a person who is not a party to the arbitration
agreement cannot be made party to the arbitration proceedings before
the Arbitral Tribunal. Admittedly, the petitioner was not a party to the
Arbitration Agreement and has not signed the agreement between the
parties. In the instant case, there is no material in support of the assertion
that the petitioner was acting as a representative of the respondent no.3 in
WP (C) No.5947/2003

Page 17

the matter.

In any case, there is no evidence in support of such

appointment by either of respondent no.3 or respondent no.4.
29.

The disputes between the respondent nos.1 & 2 on the one

hand and petitioner on the other are not disputes arising under Clause 12
of the Partnership Deed dated 2nd April, 2001 and, as such, cannot be the
subject matter of arbitration before the Arbitral Tribunal. In the event of
the respondent nos.1 & 2 having any claim against the petitioner,
recourse has to be taken to appropriate remedy in accordance with law.
The pending arbitral proceedings between the respondents no.1 to 4 are
not an appropriate forum for adjudication of disputes between the
petitioner and respondent nos. 1 & 2. The same are beyond the terms of
the arbitration clause and agreement between the parties. In any case, the
respondent nos.1 & 2 are stated to have taken recourse to civil suits in
respect of their claim and the parties have to be diverted to such remedy.
30.

I may also notice that the learned arbitrator in his order dated

30th July, 2003 has noticed that the claimant had undertaken to produce
the petitioner Shri Pawan Kumar Jain as a witness. Respondent nos.1 &
2 were seeking impleadment of the petitioner only for the reason that he
had been actively interfering with and had entered into a conspiracy
before commencement of the partnership. The petitioner as a witness can

WP (C) No.5947/2003

Page 18

be cross-examined on all these aspects in the arbitration proceedings, if
and when the petitioner is required to give evidence.
31.

In view of the afore-stated position in the facts of the case and

the judicial pronouncements, the order dated 30th July, 2003 is contrary to
the law laid down by the Apex Court and statutory provisions and cannot
be permitted to stand.
32.

I, accordingly, hereby set aside and quash the order dated 30 th

July, 2003 and direct that the respondent no.5 shall proceed in the matter
in accordance with the procedure prescribed by law.
The writ petition is allowed.
Parties are left to bear their own cost.

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
August 25th , 2005
aa

WP (C) No.5947/2003

Page 19

