IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
IA No. 3702/2004 and IA No. 6033/2002 in CS(OS) No.
2021/2000
Judgment reserved on: September 14,
2006
Da te of decision: September 25, 2006
SHRI RAM SWAROOP
... Plaintiff
through Mr. H.M. Sethi, Advocate
VERSUS
SHRI S.J.P.S. KANWAR
.... Defendant
through Mr. Arun Birbal, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

This application (IA No. 3702/2004) has been filed by the

defendant under Order 37 Rule 4 of the Code of Civil Procedure
praying for setting aside of the ex parte judgment and decree dated
23rd April, 2004.
2.

The plaintiff had filed the present suit seeking recovery of

Rs.25 lakhs under the summary procedure provided under the
provisions of Order 37 Rule 4 of the Code of Civil Procedure. So

CS(OS) No. 2021/2000

page 1 of 15

far as the proceedings before this court are concerned, it is
undisputed that the defendant filed the memo of parties and the
application seeking leave to defend within the period statutorily
prescribed for the same. The application filed by the defendant
seeking leave to defend being IA 6033/2002 was listed before the
court on 6th November, 2003.

On this date, counsel for the

plaintiff was stated to be out of town and the matter was adjourned
to 13th February, 2004.
3.

On 13th February, 2004, there was no appearance on behalf

of the defendant. In these circumstances IA 6033/2002 of the
defendant under Order 37 Rule 3 CPC seeking leave to defend was
dismissed in default. The suit was thereafter posted on 23rd April,
2004.
In view of the dismissal of the leave to defend application of
the defendant and his non-appearance, on 23rd April, 2004, it was
held that the averments made in the plaint are deemed to have
been admitted and the decree in the sum of Rs.25 lakhs with costs
was passed in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendant.
It was further directed that the plaintiff would be entitled to
pendente lite and future interest at the rate of 12% per annum
from the date of filing of the suit till realisation.
CS(OS) No. 2021/2000

page 2 of 15

4.

The present application has been filed shortly thereafter

under the provisions of Order 37 Rule 4 of the Code of Civil
Procedure praying for setting aside of the ex-parte decree dated
23rd April, 2004. Undoubtedly, Order 37 of the Code of Civil
Procedure provides a summary procedure in respect of certain
suits which have been specified in sub-rule 2 of Rule 2 therein.
5.

In the instant case, the suit was decreed on 23rd April, 2004

on account of dismissal of the defendant's application seeking
leave to defend. By way of IA No. 3702/2004, the applicant has
explained the circumstances in which the defendant had failed to
put in appearance on 13th February, 2004. It has been pointed out
by learned counsel for the applicant that on 6th November, 2003,
counsel was awaiting listing of the case on the top floor of the
court premises. He had rushed to the court when the matter was
about to reach but by the time he reached the court room, the
matter stood adjourned. Learned counsel states that a day before
6th November, 2003, he had been informed by the plaintiff's
counsel that an adjournment would be sought as he was in a
personal difficulty on the next date of hearing.
6.

In these circumstances, the defendant's counsel has stated

that he made enquiries from the court staff about the status of the
CS(OS) No. 2021/2000

page 3 of 15

case when he was informed that the matter stood adjourned at the
request of the plaintiff's counsel. The applicant has pleaded a
mistaken understanding on the part of the defendant's counsel in
noting the next date of hearing as 13th May, 2004 instead of 13th
February, 2004 which was actually given. Thus, the next date in
the present case was wrongly carried forward to 13th May, 2004 in
the diary of the counsel as well.
Consequently, when the matter was called out on 13th
February,

2004,

none

appeared

on

behalf

of

the

defendant/applicant and IA 6033/2002 was dismissed for default
of appearance. As the applicant and his counsel were not aware of
the listing of the case on 23rd April, 2004, none appeared on this
date as well and as a result the suit was decreed as noticed above.
7.

It is also pointed out that on both the aforenoticed dates, the

name of the counsel for the defendant was also not reflected in the
cause list. For this reason, the listing of the matter escaped notice
when the daily cause list was checked as well. These facts were
revealed to the defendant's counsel only on or around 6th May,
2004 when an inspection of the court file was applied for to
complete the record of the case. It was only thereupon that the
applicant and counsel learnt for the first time about the dismissal
CS(OS) No. 2021/2000

page 4 of 15

of the application for leave to defend and the decree passed in the
suit. The present application was filed immediately thereafter.
8.

The application has been vehemently opposed on behalf of

the plaintiff who has contended that these facts which have been
noticed above do not constitute special circumstances for setting
aside the decree and no substantial ground has been laid before
this court for setting aside the ex parte decree.
9.

The defendant had filed IA No. 6033/2002 seeking leave to

defend inter alia contending that the documents which were relied
upon by the plaintiff in order to file the suit did not amount a
written contract. It is stated that no consideration in respect of the
transaction which the document was stated to evidence was stated
nor any details or particulars of the amount in respect of which the
agreement was arrived at, set out therein. The defendant had
challenged that the document was not even in the writing of the
defendant and that the same did not amount to a written contract
in the eyes of law. According to the defendant for this reason the
suit filed on the basis of the document dated 27 th July, 1997 was
not maintainable under the provisions of Order 37 of the Code of
Civil Procedure. The defendant asserts that for these reasons as
well, it is entitled to an opportunity to contest the suit.
CS(OS) No. 2021/2000

page 5 of 15

10.

Learned counsel for the plaintiff has contended that at the

stage of consideration of an application under Order 37 Rule 4 of
the CPC, this court cannot go into the merits of the leave to defend
application and the reasons thereof set out by the defendant.
11.

In this behalf, it would be useful to advert to the provisions

of Order 37 Rule 4 of the CPC which provides thus :-

12.

“4. Power to set aside decree – After
decree the Court may, under special
circumstances set aside the decree, and if
necessary stay or set aside execution, and may
give leave to the defendant to appear to the
summons and to defend the suit, if it seems
reasonable to the Court so to do, and on such
terms as the Court thinks fit.”
The Apex Court in AIR 2003 SC 1322 Rajni Kumar vs

Suresh Kumar Malhotra had occasion to consider the
principles applicable to consideration of an application under
Order 37 Rule 4 and held thus :“8. The
expression
'special
circumstances' is not defined in the C.P.C. nor is
it capable of any precise definition by the Court
because problems of human beings are so varied
and complex. In its ordinary dictionary meaning
it connotes something exceptional in character,
extraordinary, significant, uncommon. It is an
antonym of common, ordinary and general. It is
neither practicable nor advisable to enumerate
such circumstances. Non-service of summons
will undoubtedly be a special circumstance. In
an application under Order 37, Rule 4, the Court
has to determine the question, on the facts of
CS(OS) No. 2021/2000

page 6 of 15

each case, as to whether circumstances pleaded
are so unusual or extraordinary as to justify
putting the clock back by setting aside the
decree; to grant further relief in regard to postdecree matters, namely, staying or setting aside
the execution and also in regard to pre-decree
matters viz., to give leave to the defendant to
appear to the summons and to defend the suit.
9.
In considering an application to set aside
ex parte decree, it is necessary to bear in mind
the distinction between suits instituted in the
ordinary manner and suits filed under Order 37,
C.P.C. Rule 7 of Order 37 says that except as
provided thereunder the procedure in suits
under Order 37 shall be the same as the
procedure in suits instituted in the ordinary
manner. Rule 4 of Order 37 specifically provides
for setting aside decree, therefore, provisions of
rule 13 of Order 9 will not apply to a suit filed
under Order 37. In a suit filed in the ordinary
manner a defendant has the right to contest the
suit as a matter of course. Nonetheless, he may
be declared ex parte if he does not appear in
response to summons, or after entering
appearance before framing issues: or during or
after trial. Though addressing arguments is part
of trial, one can loosely say that a defendant who
remains absent at the stage of argument, is
declared ex parte after the trial.
In an
application under Order 9, Rule 11, if a
defendant is set ex parte. But an application
under Order 9, Rule 13 could be filed on any of
the grounds mentioned thereunder only after a
decree is passed ex parte against defendant. If
the Court is satisfied that (1) summons was not
duly served, or (2) he was prevented by sufficient
cause from appearing when the suit was called
for hearing, it has to make an order setting aside
the decree against him on such terms as to cost
or payment into Court or otherwise as it thinks
fit and thereafter on the day fixed for hearing by
CS(OS) No. 2021/2000

page 7 of 15

Court, the suit would proceed as if no ex parte
decree had been passed. But in a suit under
Order 37 the procedure for appearance of
defendant is governed by provisions of Rule 3
thereof. A defendant is not entitled to defend the
suit unless he enters appearance within ten days
of service of summons either in person or by a
pleader and files in Court in address for service
of notices on him. In default of his entering an
appearance, the plaintiff becomes entitled to a
decree for any sum not exceeding the sum
mentioned in the summons together with
interest at the rate specified, if any, up to the
date of the decree together with costs. The
plaintiff will also be entitled to judgment in
terms of sub-rule (6) of Rule 3. If the defendant
enters an appearance, the plaintiff is required to
serve on the defendant a summons for judgment
in the prescribed form. Within ten days from the
service of such summons for judgment, the
defendant may seek leave of the court to defene
the suit, which will be granted on disclosing such
facts as may be deemed sufficient to entitle him
to defend and such leave may be granted to him
either unconditionally or on such terms as the
Court may deem fit. Normally the Court will not
refuse leave unless the Court is satisfied that
facts disclosed by the defendant do not indicate
substantial defence or that defence intended to
be put up is frivolous or vexatious. Where a part
of the amount claimed by the plaintiff is
admitted by the defendant to be due from him,
no leave to defend the suit can be granted unless
the admitted amount is deposited by him in
Court. Inasmuch as Order 37 does not speak of
the procedure when leave to defend the suit is
granted, the procedure applicable to suits
instituted in the ordinary manner, will apply.
10. It is important to note here that the power
under Rule 4 of Order 37 is not confined to
setting aside the ex parte decree, it extends to
CS(OS) No. 2021/2000

page 8 of 15

staying or setting aside the execution and giving
leave to appear to the summons and to defend
the suit. We may point out that as the very
purpose of Order 37 is to ensure an expeditious
hearing and disposal of the suit filed thereunder,
Rule 4 empowers the Court to grant leave to the
defendant to appear to summons and defend the
suit if the Court considers it reasonable so to do,
on such terms as Court thinks fit in addition to
setting aside the decree.
Where on an
application, more than one among the specified
reliefs may be granted by the Court all such
reliefs must be claimed in one application. It is
not permissible to claim such reliefs in
successive petitions as it would be contrary to
the letter and spirit of the provision. That is why
where an application under Rule 4 of Order 37 is
filed to set aside a decree either because the
defendant did not appear in response to
summons and limitation expired, or having
appeared, did not apply for leave to defend this
suit in the prescribed period, the Court is
empowered to grant leave to defendant to appear
to the

summons and to defend the suit in the same
application. It is, therefore, not enough for the
defendant to show special circumstances which
prevented him from appearing or applying for
leave to defend, he has also to show by affidavit
or otherwise, facts which would entitle him leave
to defend the suit. In this respect, Rule 4 of
Order 37 is different from Rule 13 of Order 9.”
13.

In the light of the principles laid down by the Supreme

CS(OS) No. 2021/2000

page 9 of 15

Court, it is necessary to examine the circumstances on which leave
to defend was sought by the applicant in IA 6033/2002. These
two applications have consequently been heard together.

This

application of the defendant has been filed under Order 37 Rule
3(5) primarily on the ground that the suit of the plaintiff does not
disclose that it is based on recovery of a debt or liquidated demand
in money payable by the defendant. It has further been stated that
the document dated 27th July, 1997 is neither a negotiable
instrument nor a contract. The same does not arise out of any
statutory enactment nor is a guarantee deed and consequently
proceedings under Order 37 of the Code of Civil Procedure based
thereon are wholly untenable.
14.

In the light of the objections taken, it becomes necessary to

examine the document dated 27th July, 1997 on which the suit is
based. The same reads as follows :-

“Received Rs.25 lakhs from Shri Ram Swaroop
President of Sarvpriya Sehkari Awas Samiti as
advance against purchase of land in U.P. on behalf
of the society mentioned above.”
The document in original has been placed before the court.
This document neither mentions the total area of the land to be

CS(OS) No. 2021/2000

page 10 of 15

purchased nor its location. The sale consideration of the land is
also not mentioned nor the rate at which the same is to be
purchased. There is no mention of the total consideration which is
payable to the defendant for undertaking the transaction.
Undoubtedly, the essential terms and conditions on which the
transaction was to be completed are not laid out and prima facie it
is not possible to hold that the document evidences a concluded
contract between the parties which could be enforced in law.
15.

Another material fact to my mind is the statement in this

document that the amount has been paid on behalf of a society.
Undoubtedly, the suit has been filed by the plaintiff in his personal
capacity. The suit claims payment in cash of Rs.25 lakhs without
any other evidence of the payment other than this receipt. The
defendant/applicant has denied receipt of the payment either from
the plaintiff or any other person on behalf of the Sarvpriya Sehkari
Awas Samiti Limited. It has been contended that the defendant
was induced to enter his signatures on blank stamp papers and
other papers for the purposes of completion of formalities for
enrolment as a member of this society by the plaintiff. According
to the defendant, the plaintiff took these signatures stating that the
documentation cannot be completed without checking the samiti
CS(OS) No. 2021/2000

page 11 of 15

records. This was to enable the defendant to acquire a residential
plot in the colony which was being developed by the samiti. The
defendant/applicant has submitted that this document which has
been dated as 27th July, 1997 was not in his handwriting. The
defendant claims that he paid Rs.10,000/- also in cash to the
plaintiff towards the miscellaneous expenses for enrolment of the
society which was to be accounted for at the time of execution of
formal receipts and documentation.
There is a bare denial to the assertions of the defendant in
the reply which was filed by the plaintiff.

The defendant has

questioned the very transaction pointing out that a society could
not conduct a cash transaction unsupported by any other records,
even if a transaction of this volume was legally so permitted.
16.

Having regard to the complete facts and circumstances relied

upon by the defendant, it cannot be held that the defence urged on
behalf of the defendant is sham or moonshine or that the same
does not disclose a triable issue. The applicant denied the very
cause of action for the suit. A bare look at the agreement renders
the same suspect. The same is not witnessed by any other person.
Certainly, the handwriting does not match the signatures. The
contents of the document read with the assertions in the plaint
CS(OS) No. 2021/2000

page 12 of 15

further lends suspicion to the pleaded transaction. Certainly, it
cannot be held that the defence set up by the defendant is
moonshine or can be rejected without anything more established
and proved in accordance with law by the plaintiff.

In my view,

the present case is not such in which the defendant does not
deserve to be granted leave to defend.
17.

The defendant/applicant has therefore placed adequate

grounds on the merits of the dispute in support of the reasons and
circumstances justifying its prayer for setting aside the ex parte
decree dated 23rd April, 2004 and grant of the application under
Order 37 Rule 3 (5) of the CPC.

In the light of the above

discussion, the applicant has thus made out special circumstances
justifying exercise of discretion in its favour.
18.

It is well settled that rules of procedure are hand maiden to

the ends of justice. It cannot be disputed that the defendant was
pursuing the present matter diligently and no negligence can be
attributed to the defendant till the non-appearance on 13th
February, 2004.

The defendant regularly appeared before the

court and took all steps within the time statutorily prescribed
except for the non-appearance on 13th February, 2004.

The

explanation given for the non-appearance on this date of hearing
CS(OS) No. 2021/2000

page 13 of 15

is also a plausible and a reasonable one. IA No. 3702/2004 filed
by and on behalf of the defendant is supported by an affidavit of
the counsel who has been conducting the case on behalf of the
defendant. The application has been filed without undue delay
upon learning of the ex-parte decree. In my view, the applicant
has given sufficient explanation for the circumstances in which the
applicant was not present on 13th February, 2004. The same is
bonafide. The ex parte decree was passed on the sole ground that
the application seeking leave to defend under Order 37 Rule 3 of
the CPC was dismissed for default of appearance.
The order dated 13th February, 2004 and the decree dated
23rd April, 2004 deserves to be set aside.
In view of the above discussion, IA No. 3702/2004 and IA
No. 6033/2002 of the defendant have to be allowed.
The decree dated 23rd April, 2004 is also hereby set aside.
The order dated 13th February, 2004 dismissing the application of
the defendant for the failure to appear is hereby set aside. As a
consequence of the above discussion, the defendant is granted
leave to defend the suit.
There shall be no order as to costs.

CS(OS) No. 2021/2000

page 14 of 15

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
September 25, 2006
kr

CS(OS) No. 2021/2000

page 15 of 15

