IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 10034/2006 & CM Nos. 7486/2006
& 13958/2007
Reserved on: 23rd October, 2007
Da te of decision: 25th October, 2007
Shri Rakesh Saini
... Petitioner
through: Shri Mukesh Kumar Verma, Advocate
VERSUS
Government of NCT of Delhi & Ors.
....Respondents
through: Mr. Ajay Verma and Mr. Amit Mehra,
Advs. for the respondent/DDA
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the Judgment? No
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? No
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest? No
GITA MITTAL, J
CM No. 13958/2007
This application has been filed by the petitioner under Order 1
Rule 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure praying for impleadment of the
Delhi Metro Rail Corporation as a party to the present proceedings.
The writ petition has been filed by the petitioner assailing the
action of the DDA and a prayer has been made against dispossession
from the subject land. So far as the claim of the petitioner to continue
in possession is concerned, the same is directed only against the
Delhi Development Authority.
In its reply, the DDA has adverted to the Delhi Metro Rail
W.P.(C) No. 10034/2006

page 1 of 9

Corporation for the limited purpose of supporting its contention that
the land is required for a public purpose. This fact was pleaded by
the DDA only for the purposes of expeditious disposal and
adjudication in the matter.
The fact that the DDA has allotted the land to any other
authority would be irrelevant so far as the examination of the claim of
the right, title and interest of the petitioner herein is concerned.
In this view of the matter, the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation is
neither a necessary nor a proper party for the purposes of complete
and effective adjudication of the present case.
This application is accordingly dismissed.
W.P. (C) No. 10034/2006 & CM No. 7486/2006
1.

Shri Rakesh Saini has filed W.P.(C) No. 10034/2006 praying

for an order of restraint against the respondents from dispossessing
him from the

land measuring 30 bighas in khasra no. 50 min.

situated in Chiragha Janubi (South), Delhi.
The petitioner has placed reliance on an allotment made by the
Government of India through the Ministry of Rehabilitation vide a
letter dated 14th March, 1950 and the Chief Commissioner Delhi vide
the letter dated 23rd March, 1950 allotting a parcel of land to the
Jheel Kuranja Cooperative Milk Producers Society Limited on
leasehold basis. No lease deed in terms of these letters has been
placed on record.

However by the reliance on these letters the

petitioner admits that the land is owned by the respondents herein.
W.P.(C) No. 10034/2006

page 2 of 9

2.

So far as the legal right of the petitioner is concerned, there is

not an iota of material placed before this court to evidence allotment
of the land to the petitioner either by the respondents or by the Jheel
Kuranja Cooperative Milk Producers Society Limited. To support his
allotment the petitioner has placed reliance on certain receipts
purportedly issued to him by the Jheel Kuranja Cooperative Milk
Producers Society Limited for different dates. The petitioners have
also claimed that their possession on the land is lawful and they have
every right to continue and occupy the same.

According to the

petitioner, the Jheel Kuranja Cooperative Milk Producers Society
Limited has made payments of lease money towards the subject land
to the Delhi Development Authority.

In this behalf copy of letter

dated 21st September, 2005 addressed by the

Jheel Kuranja

Cooperative Milk Producers Society Limited to the DDA enclosing a
challan of deposit of payment in the Central Bank has been relied
upon.
3.

So far as the rights of the Jheel Kuranja Cooperative Milk

Producers Society Limited are concerned it appears that in the year
1967 this society has apprehended dispossession and had filed a suit
for injunction against the DDA. The trial court dismissed the suit as
not being maintainable for want of a statutory notice under Section
53 B of the Delhi Development Act.
4.

The Jheel Kuranja Cooperative Milk Producers Society Limited

assailed the judgment of the trial court before this court by way of
W.P.(C) No. 10034/2006

page 3 of 9

RFA No. 236/1971. It appears that some statement was made by the
counsel for the DDA on 26th July, 1977. In view of the statement
made by the counsel for the DDA the appeal was disposed of as not
pressed. Unfortunately the petitioner has not placed the undertaking
or statement given by counsel for the DDA in the appeal filed by the
society.
5.

However the petitioner has also placed reliance before this

court on certain orders passed by the trial court in a suit No.
196/2003 dated 6th October, 2005 which was filed by Shri Hari
Chand Saini who had filed W.P.(C) No. 9980/2006) as well as a
judgment dated 15th February, 2005 passed in a suit No. 231/2003
filed by Shri Kishan Kumar Sharma as well as Shri Hari Chand Saini.
It appears that in the suit filed by Shri Hari Chand Saini the court
noticed that the case of the DDA was that the plaintiffs were in
possession of the land and consequently the DDA could evict the
plaintiffs only by adopting due process of law. The judgment dated
6th October, 2005 is to the same effect.
6.

The Delhi Development Authority has disputed the payments

purportedly made by the Jheel Khuranjha Cooperative Society to it.
It has been contended that such deposit as is relied upon by the
petitioners was made without the consent, permission or demand
from the DDA and deposit of some amount in the account of the DDA
without its knowledge in such manner cannot result in creation of any
right or legal relationship between the person depositing and the
W.P.(C) No. 10034/2006

page 4 of 9

DDA.
7.

In the counter affidavit which has been filed by the DDA, it has

been contended that the land in question was placed under the
management and control of the DDA by virtue of a Nazul Agreement,
1937. Reliance has been placed on the record of rights contained in
jamabandies of the subject land wherein the ownership of the land
has been shown as that of the government. In this behalf even the
revenue records relied upon by the petitioners reflect that the land
was owned by the government.
8.

According to the DDA the land was given to the Jheel Kuranja

Cooperative Milk Producers Society Limited on a short term lease by
a resolution dated 25th May, 1950. Such lease was cancelled on 16th
October, 1967 and petitioner's claiming under such society would
have no right, title and interest in the subject land.
9.

In the counter affidavit which was filed by the DDA, it was

stated that pursuant to proceedings under the Public Premises
(Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971, an order of eviction
dated 10th May, 2002 was passed. However, copy of the order which
was enclosed did not relate to the property of the petitioner. The
respondents have placed the copy of the eviction order relating to this
property which was passed against Shri Kabool Singh.
It is noteworthy that the order of eviction records that the
petitioner had filed objections to the notice which had been issued to
him urging that he was not an unauthorised occupant being a
W.P.(C) No. 10034/2006

page 5 of 9

member of the aforenoticed society. It appears that an application
had been made by the Jheel Kuranja Cooperative Milk Producers
Society Limited for impleadment in these proceedings which was
also rejected by a detailed consideration. Apart from the cancellation
of the lease in favour of the society it has been contended that in any
case the lease had also expired by efflux of time in 1977.
10.

It is admitted by Mr. Mukesh Kumar Verma, learned counsel

for the petitioner that Shri Kabool Singh was the father of Shri
Rakesh Saini, the present petitioner. In the oral submission it has
been orally contended that the petitioner has assailed this order of
eviction by way of the statutory appeal which is stated to be pending.
It is therefore apparent that the writ petitioner has deliberately
concealed passing of the eviction order against his predecessor in
interest.
This is certainly a material fact which the petitioner was bound
to have disclosed in the writ petition.
The petitioner would be liable to be non-suited for concealment
of this material fact and document.
11.

It is noteworthy that the order of eviction passed by the Estate

Officer has also noticed proceedings in a W.P.(C) No. 3791/1991
entitled Smt. Dhan Kaur Vs. DDA which was decided on 12th August,
1993. Smt. Dhan Kaur had set up a claim identical to that of the
petitioners and had sought permission for use and occupation on the
basis that the said society was a lessee.
W.P.(C) No. 10034/2006

It appears that this

page 6 of 9

contention was negated by this Court and it was held that the Jheel
Kuranja Cooperative Milk Producers Society Limited did not have any
subsisting right, title or interest in the subject land and therefore
anyone claiming to be the society cannot legally continue to use and
occupy the land. It was the eviction order which notices that the
court had held that there was no trespassers and encroachers and for
this reason the writ petition was dismissed.
12.

In view of the above there is no material before this court to

show any legal right of the petitioner to continue to use and occupy
the subject land.
13.

Mr. Ajay Verma learned standing counsel for the DDA has

submitted that action has been taken against the petitioner Shri
Rakesh Saini in accordance with law. It has further been submitted
in the counter affidavit that the Delhi Development Authority has
allotted land admeasuring 31.95 hectares

to the Metro Rail

Corporation Limited for allignment, station and yard at Yamuna
Khadir on permanent basis in the khasra no. 50 min being a national
project of public importance which was approved by the Delhi
Government. Possession of this land is to be handed over to the
Delhi Metro Rail Corporation upon payment of the premium by it and
that in the meantime in view of the importance of the project,
permission for earth filling was given to the corporation on 5th
September, 2005 in compliance with the minutes of the meeting held
on 18th August, 2005. The writ petition is also opposed on grounds
W.P.(C) No. 10034/2006

page 7 of 9

of public interest.
14.

The grievance of the petitioners is that the respondents can take

action against the petitioners only in accordance with law. In the
instant case, the respondents initiated proceedings under the Public
Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 and have
passed an order against the petitioner. Therefore it cannot possibly
be contended or held that due process has not been followed against
the petitioner.
15.

The petitioner has not placed a single letter to evidence

allotment of the subject land even from the Jheel Kuranja
Cooperative Milk Producers Society Limited wherefrom he is
claiming to derive title. Some isolated receipts of payments do not
create title in immovable property.
16.

It is trite that a person seeking an order of restraint against

another must establish a legal right to continue to occupy the same.
(Ref: Navin Chand Godha Vs. Union of India 2003 (70)
DRJ 721)
17.

In Ramniklal N. Butta Vs. State of Maharashtra

reported at 1997 (1) SCC 134, the Apex Court held that the power
under Article 226 is discretionary.

It will be exercised only in

furtherance of interests of justice and not merely on the making out
of a legal point.
Before this court, no legal point has been made out.
In the afore-noticed facts, the petitioner has failed to make out
W.P.(C) No. 10034/2006

page 8 of 9

any legal right to continue to occupy the premises.
The respondents have taken action against the petitioner in
accordance with law under the applicable statute. As a result, no
order can be passed in favour of the petitioner in the present
proceedings.
The writ petition and the application are accordingly dismissed.

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
October 25, 2007
SD

W.P.(C) No. 10034/2006

page 9 of 9

