IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 4236/2003
Date of decision : 25th October, 2004
NAVNEET SINGH CHAUHAN
... Petitioner
through Mr. H.G.R. Khattar, Advocate
VERSUS
UOI & ORS.
through

.... Respondents
Ms. Saroj Bidawat, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE JUSTICE DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, J (ORAL)
1.

This writ petition is filed by the petitioner praying for quashing of the

order passed by the respondents dated 9th September, 2002 whereby the
petitioner was dismissed from service and also the order dated 11th February,
2003 whereby the appeal of the petitioner was rejected.
2.

The petitioner was enrolled in Border Security Force as a Recruit

Constable on 13th June, 1993 at Kheda District Gujarat. In the verification role
submitted by the petitioner at the time of his enrollment, he had declared his
WP (C) No.4236/2003

page 1 of 4

date of birth as 2nd August, 1973.

It was also stated by him in the said

verification role that he is a resident of Gujarat.
3.

Subsequently, however, sometime in 1997, the respondents received

a complaint signed by Amar Singh Chauhan, Ex-Jt Secretary, Gujarat Pradesh
Youth Congress, that the petitioner is not a resident of Gujarat but a resident of
Village Pattiya Chheda Singh, P.O.- Kanjiyana, Distt- Farrukhabad (U.P.).
After receipt of the aforesaid complaint, the respondents got a verification done
during the process of which it was disclosed that the petitioner was actually
born on 10th January, 1970.
4.

During the process of the aforesaid verification the respondents also

collected transfer certificate form as also the records from the Middle Level
Education Board, Allahabad, Uttar Pradesh pertaining to the petitioner. Copies
of the same are also placed on record.
5.

It is also stated in the counter affidavit by the respondents that the

petitioner got himself enrolled in BSF by producing a fake education/domicile
certificate that he passed SSC/SCC from Higher Secondary School of
Murasgam, U.P. in 1991 which is situated in his district Farrukhabad, U.P. It is
also stated therein that the petitioner changed his date of birth and obtained
bogus certificate of passing IX standard giving bribe to Swami Atmadev
Gopalanand Higher Secondary School Ugarpur Distt- Farrukhabad, U.P. and
got

admission

in

Seth

CL

Hindi

High

School,

Rakhial

Road,

Ahmedabad(Gujarat) in 1991 and passed SSC on this basis.
WP (C) No.4236/2003

page 2 of 4

6.

The aforesaid facts it is stated are disclosed from the verification which

was carried out by the respondents through Inspector of Distt. Education, DisttFarrukhabad(U.P.).
7.

The respondents had also ordered for a court of inquiry to investigate

into the circumstances under which the petitioner was enrolled in BSF. In the
said inquiry, it was found that the petitioner got enrolled in BSF by producing a
fake certificate.
8.

Pursuant to the findings of the court of inquiry, a record of evidence was

also ordered by the respondents. In the record of evidence, the petitioner was
given opportunity to cross examine the witness.
9.

Thereafter the petitioner was ordered to be tried by summary security

force court which was held at BN HQ Ramgarh 133 on 9th September, 2002 for
an offence committed by him under Section 23 of the BSF Act. During the
said trial, the petitioner admitted his guilt and accordingly he was found guilty
by the said court and was awarded the sentence of dismissal from service with
effect from 9th September, 2002.
10.

A statutory petition was also filed by the petitioner against his conviction

by the summary security force court which was considered by the respondents
and was dismissed and was rejected being devoid of merit.
11.

We have heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties on the pleas

which were raised by the petitioner before us that the action taken by the
respondents is illegal and without jurisdiction. It was also submitted by him
WP (C) No.4236/2003

page 3 of 4

that the petitioner has submitted sufficient evidence on record to indicate that
his date of birth was 2nd August, 1973 and that there was no occasion of
submitting any false information to the respondents.
12.

The documents on record are relied upon by the respondents to indicate

that the petitioner's date of birth is 10th January, 1970. The records of the
middle education board as also of the registration and transfer certificate form
prove and establish that the date of birth of the petitioner was 10 th January,
1970. The contention of the counsel appearing for the petitioner is that he had
also placed several documents in support of the plea of the petitioner that his
actual date of birth is 2nd August, 1973 which conclusively establish his case.
13.

We are of the opinion that the aforesaid contention gives rise only to

issues of disputed nature which cannot be possibly considered in a writ petition.
It is stated that the said documents were placed by the petitioner before the
respondents which were considered by them. As a matter of fact, the petitioner
also pleaded guilty before the respondents in the summary security force court.
In that view of the matter, we find no merit in this petition and the
petition is dismissed.

DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, J

GITA MITTAL, J
OCTOBER 25, 2004
kr
WP (C) No.4236/2003

page 4 of 4

