IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 2321/1984
Judgm ent reserved on : February 24,
2006
Da te of decision: 25 April, 2006
NARINDER KUMAR MIDHA
...
Petitioner
through: Mr. G.N. Aggarwal, Advocate
VERSUS
DDA & ANR.
....Respondent
through: Ms. Poonam Aggarwal with Mr.
Amit Seth, Advocate for DDA
Ms. Jhum Jhum Sarkar, Adv. for resp. no. 2

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment? Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in
the Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J
1.

The present writ petition relates to an application made

by a person whose property was allegedly demolished during the

WP (C) No. 2321/1984

Page No.1 of 34

Emergency and who made a claim pursuant to a policy in the year
1978 to resettle such persons whose houses were demolished
during Emergency at their original places. This policy was notified
by the Delhi Development Authority pursuant to the decision of
the Central Government.

With the intention of the Central

Government to restore status quo ante demolition,

the Delhi

Development Authority notified the policy.
As per this policy which has been placed before this
court, it envisaged two categories of persons i.e. persons who were
occupying or owning unacquired land and persons in the acquired
portions of the land. The policy had been carefully evolved in
order that it genuinely covered all those persons who are affected
by the demolition and also provided checks so that the same could
not be misused. The relevant extracts of this policy which was
notified is as under:“(i) There are two categories of persons who have
to resettled in Arjun Nagar Area-persons in
unacquired red portion and persons in acquired
portion. It is proposed that persons whose lands
were not acquired but whose houses were
demolished be given plots on free-hold basis in
exchange of their land. Persons whose lands were
acquired before demolition are proposed to be
allotted plots on lease-hold basis on usual terms
and conditions.
(iii) Eligibility of persons may be determined on
WP (C) No. 2321/1984

Page No.2 of 34

the basis of ownership documents submitted by
the persons whose houses were demolished. All
the persons whose property was demolished
whether they were residing in the houses or not at
the time of demolition may be eligible even if they
own any other house or plot in Delhi. Persons
who hold General Power of Attorney may also be
eligible provided they produce an affidavit from
the person who has executed General Power of
Attorney to the effect that he has no objection to
alternative allotment of plot being made to person
holding General Power of Attorney. In addition
to this, he may also be required to execute an
Indemnity Bond in favour of Delhi Development
Authority indemnifying DDA against any claim
which may be made subsequently by the original
owner of the plot. The long term lessees may also
be eligible for allotment of alternative plots
provided they produce no objection certificate
from the lessors. However, tenants may not be
considered for allotment of plots.
(iv) Persons whose land has not been acquired
may not be required to pay anything towards the
cost of the land. However, they may be required
to pay development charged @ Rs. 27/- per sq.
mtr. This amount be subject to adjustment after
the completion of works. Allotees of leasehold
plots will have to pay a nominal amount of Rs. 1/per sq. mtrs. towards the cost of land in addition
to Rs. 27/- per sq. mtr. towards development
charges.
They will have to refund the
compensation for the land including solutium,
interest, etc. which has been paid by the Land
Acquisition Collector to them.
In case no
compensation has been paid, the allotee will have
to give an undertaking that he would not claim
any compensation including enhancements for
the land.
(v)
Owners of such plots which were not
constructed upon or which were not occupied
would not be eligible for allotment of alternative
WP (C) No. 2321/1984

Page No.3 of 34

2.

plots under this scheme. They can, however,
claim allotment under the normal policy of Large
Scale Acquisition, Development & Disposal of
land in Delhi. Owners of commercial/industrial
structures will also not be eligible for the
alternative allotments in this area. They can
claim allotment of commercial/industrial sites
under the policy of the Delhi Development
Authority, if they have not already availed of this
opportunity.
(vii) The allotment would be made in full and
final settlement of the claims of the applicants so
far as the Delhi Development Authority is
concerned, Delhi Development Authority would
not pay any compensation for the structures. The
claimants, can however seek relief from the Delhi
Administration as such cases are being
considered
by
Settlement
Commissioner
appointed for this purpose by the Delhi
Administration.”
Pursuant to this decision of the Government of India,

the Delhi Development Authority had taken out the following
public notice on 7th June, 1978 in national dailies:
“ Rehabilitation of Arjun Nagar Plot
Holders
In pursuance of Government of India's decision
to resettle at their original places, those, who were
forcibly removed from residential areas during
Emergency,
rehabilitation scheme for Arjun
Nagar area has been prepared by DDA. Plotholders affected by demolition in residential areas
of Arjun Nagar are requested to submit their
claims in the following form for allotment of plots
in Arjun Nagar Rehabilitation Scheme.
1. Name, Father's/husband's name and address
of the claimant.
2. House/plot no. and Khasra No. of the structure
demolished.
WP (C) No. 2321/1984

Page No.4 of 34

3. Area of the plot.
4. (a) Proof of ownership (attach a photostat
copy of the sale deed)
(b) Whether the plot is free from
encumbrances (attach a certificate from
Government pleader or concerned Revenue
Officer).
5. Whether any alternative allotment of land or
flat/tenement was earlier made. If so, details
thereof.
6. Whether the plot falls in land acquired by
Government.
Signature of the
claimant
Claims
will
be
received
by
Commissioner (Settlement) DDA, Vikas Marg, 5th
Floor, Indraprastha Estate, New Delhi up to the
7th June, 1978.
Shri
3.

G.C.

Srivastava,
Commissioner (Settlement).”
From the submissions made before this court and the

records produced, I find that there is no material dispute to the
factual matrix. The petitioner made an application dated 29th of
May, 1978 to Shri G.C. Srivastava, Commissioner (Settlement),
DDA wherein, so far as proof of ownership was concerned, it was
clearly stated that photostat copy of the Sale Deed is attached.
The applicant also mentioned that House No. B2-7/2 Khasra No.
312 in Khata No. 3/10, Arjun Nagar stood demolished. So far as
the column relating to whether the plot fell in land acquired by the
WP (C) No. 2321/1984

Page No.5 of 34

Government is concerned, the applicants stated that this was not
in his knowledge. It was also stated that the Sale Deed was in the
name of the father of the applicant, late Shri Hans Raj Midha, and
the names of all the legal heirs including his four sons, Om
Prakash Midha, Prem Prakash Midha, Narinder Kumar Midha and
Dr. Harish Chander Midha and one daughter Pushpa Rani were
mentioned therein.
4.

On the 10th of November, 1978, by a letter F.1 (9)/78-AC

(S)/DDA addressed by the Vice Chairman of the DDA to the
Secretary of the Government of India, Ministry of Works and
Housing, the details of the policy which were being followed
pursuant to the Central Government decision to resettle persons
whose properties had been affected, it was informed that action for
rehabilitation of the people had already been initiated and that 173
applications were received from the evictees of Arjun Nagar in
response to the advertisement issued by DDA in May, 1978. It was
also informed that these applications were being examined by a
Committed

constituted

under

the

chairmanship

of

the

Commissioner (Settlement) of the DDA and that allotment had
already been made to 122 persons on the basis of the same policy.
Formal approval of the Government to the policy was requested to
WP (C) No. 2321/1984

Page No.6 of 34

be conveyed.
5.

In the meantime, it appears that by a letter dated 14th

December, 1978, the DDA informed the petitioner that his
application dated 29th May, 1978 could not be acceded to on the
ground that the “petitioner's case is not covered by the
Government decision to rehabilitate the persons whose houses
were demolished during Emergency.”
6.

The

petitioner

thereupon

addressed

a

detailed

representation dated 9th of January, 1979 to the Vice-Chairman of
the DDA.

It was informed that the plot which measured 660

square yards was purchased by the petitioner's father Shri Hans
Raj Midha by a registered Sale Deed dated 3rd of March, 1960 and
construction was effected thereupon. One Shri Hari Shanker was
appointed to look after the construction work as the petitioner's
father was old. This house had been trespassed and part of the
house was broken into by Shri Hari Shanker against whom a case
was filed. This person, Shri Hari Shanker was convicted in the suit
no. 193/71 dated 29th May, 1975 by the court of Shri Balbir Singh,
Metropolitan Magistrate by an order dated 29th January, 1976. It
was further pointed out that the judgment of the Magistrate was
affirmed in appeal no. 24/1975 dated 25th of July, 1977 and copies
WP (C) No. 2321/1984

Page No.7 of 34

of the judgment were enclosed whereby Hari Shanker was
sentenced to six months rigorous imprisonment and fine of Rs.
500/- was also imposed. The house was demolished during the
period of Emergency which was imposed in the year 1975 and the
material was taken away by the DDA. So far as electricity and
water bills are concerned, it was stated that there was no water or
electricity connection in the house and water was drawn by
handpump. The petitioner produced the proof of ownership and
possession and had explained that his name was not in the survey
list or the survey done by the DDA for the afore- stated reasons
pointing out that alternative plots were given to even persons who
had no legal right in the plots which were demolished.

The

entitlement to the plots was reasserted.
7.

Shri Hans Raj Midha who was represented by legal

representatives i.e. his sons and daughters noticed above filed a
suit bearing no. 961/1969 and 193/1971 praying for possession,
mesne profits and rendition of accounts against the trespasser
Hari Shankar which was decreed in his favour vide a judgment and
decree dated 29th July, 1975. In this judgment, the learned Judge
noticed thus:“1. This is a suit for recovery of possession, mean
WP (C) No. 2321/1984

Page No.8 of 34

profits and for accounts. The case of the plaintiffs
as made out in the plaint may be stated briefly as
follows.
2. The plaintiff is the owner of the plot bearing
Khasra No. 312 khata No. 3/10, Arjun Nagar,
having purchased the same from Tokh Ram, Ram
Kalan, Tok Chand and Chain Sukh on 10.6.58.
The plaintiff started construction over this plot
and appointed the defendant to look after the
construction. The defendant got signed some
blank papers and written papers on the pretext
that those papers were required to be submitted
to
different
authorities
regarding
the
construction. The defendant also took about Rs.
4000/- from the plaintiff towards the costs of
construction. The plaintiff asked the defendant
for accounts and receipt but the defendant was
unable to give the same. The defendant further
threatened the plaintiff that he would not allow
the plaintiff to enter the premises. The plaintiff
filed a suit for permanent injunction against the
defendant restraining him from interfering in the
construction and possession of the plaintiff over
the plot in question. The defendant during the
pendency of the suit committed trespass on the
plot and the rooms constructed therein. The
plaintiff withdraw the suit with permission to file
a fresh suit. The defendant has neither vacated
the property nor paid any damages or rendered
accounts of the money taken by him from the
plaintiff and hence the suit. The plaintiff has
claimed recovery of possession an enquiry into
the mean profits and rendition of accounts.”
8.

After the detailed consideration of evidence and

documents on record, the following decree was passed in favour of
the plaintiff:“This suit coming on this day for final disposal
WP (C) No. 2321/1984

Page No.9 of 34

before me in the presence of Shri P.N. Bhardwaj,
Advocate for the plaintiff and none for the
defendant, it is ordered that a preliminary decree
for rendition of accounts of the expenses made for
the construction and of the money received from
the plaintiff is passed in favour of the plaintiff and
against the defendant. A decree for possession in
respect of the premises and plot bearing Khasra
No. 312 Khata No. 3/10 at Arjun Nagar, Delhi is
also passed in favour of the plaintiff against the
defendant. The quantum of mesne profits would
be adjudicated in an enquiry under Order 20 Rule
12 (1) clauses (b) and (c) and thereafter a final
decree in respect of the mesne profit shall be
passed under Order 20 Rule 12 (2) C.P.C. The
defendant is granted one month's time to vacate
the property in suit within this time he will submit
his accounts in writing of the sum of Rs. 4000/to the court and thereafter if necessary a
commissioner shall be appointed to go into the
accounts.”
It appears that the defendant was also convicted in the
criminal case by Shri Balbir Singh, Metropolitan Magistrate.
9.

On the representation dated 9th of January, 1979, by a

communication dated 7th February, 1979 the petitioner was
informed thus:“Your request for allotment of alternative plot
cannot be acceded to as the same is not covered
under the policy of rehabilitation of the evictees
at their original place. You are advised to
approach Land & Building Deptt., Delhi Admn.
for allotment of alternative plot under the
Scheme of 'Large Scale Acquisition, Development
& Disposal of Land in Delhi.”

WP (C) No. 2321/1984

Page No.10 of 34

10.

From a perusal of this communication, it appears that

the DDA accepted that the petitioner was a plot owner at Arjun
Nagar as claimed but was of the view that the property of the
petitioner was covered under the scheme of large scale acquisition.
It is here that the DDA has fallen into an error inasmuch as the
policy of the DDA which had been noticed hereinabove clearly
envisaged such properties which stood acquired but were
demolished under the emergency were covered. So far as such
properties were concerned, the policy provided that if the lands
were acquired before demolition, the compensation for the land
including the solatium, interest etc. which has been paid by the
Land Acquisition Collector to them would require to be refunded.
In case, no compensation had been paid, the allottee would have to
give an undertaking that he would not claim any compensation
including for enhancement of the same for the land.
So far as plots which were not constructed upon and
were not occupied, such plots alone not be entitled to alternative
plots under this scheme but owners of such properties could claim
allotment under the other policy of large scale acquisition,
development and disposal of land in Delhi. Interestingly, in the
letter dated 7th February, 1979 or in the earlier communication of
WP (C) No. 2321/1984

Page No.11 of 34

14th December, 1978, there was no dispute that the petitioner's
father was not the owner pursuant to the sale deed which had been
produced by him.
11.

The respondents accepted the petitioner's ownership

and the fact that there was construction stood established by a
decree of the court. It is noteworthy that emergency was declared
in June 1975 while the court decree in favour of the possession was
passed on 29th July, 1975. The petitioner has stated that the entire
Arjun Nagar was demolished during the subsistence of the
emergency period on the 23rd of September, 1975.
12.

It appears as asked to do so by the DDA the petitioner

had approached the Land Building Department for an alternative
plot.

By a letter dated 27th May, 1980, the Land & Building

Department of the Govt. of NCT of Delhi informed the petitioner
that cases of Arjun Nagar for allotment of alternative plot were
being directly processed by the DDA and that the petitioner should
contact the Delhi Development office for this purpose. A copy of
this communication was also endorsed to the DDA.
13.

This time, when the petitioner approached the DDA, by

a letter dated 16th of November, 1982, it informed the petitioner
that it was not covered under the policy formulated for
WP (C) No. 2321/1984

Page No.12 of 34

rehabilitation of evictees of Arjun Nagar on the ground that the
petitioner's name does not appear in the survey list of evictees. The
petitioner thereafter repeatedly represented to the DDA vide
letters dated 14th December, 1983, 29th May, 1984 and thereafter
requesting allotment of the alternative plot in terms of the policy
and even informing that it was ready to deposit all development
charges. Having failed to get any positive response, the petitioner
has filed the present writ petition seeking allotment of the
alternative plot as well as compensation for his property which was
demolished by the authorities during the emergency period.
14.

The writ petitioner has arrayed the Delhi Development

Authority as respondent no. 1 and the Delhi Administration
through the Secretary, Land and Building Department as
respondent no. 2.
15.

The DDA, respondent no. 1 has filed a reply on the

affidavit of Shri M.P. Jain, Secretary.

It has been stated that

Khasra No. 301 on which the land of the petitioner was located,
was acquired by the respondent no. 2 and its possession was
delivered to the respondent no. 1 on 23rd of September, 1975. In
the counter affidavit, it is stated that

Arjun Nagar was a non-

authorised colony having non-authorised structures which were
WP (C) No. 2321/1984

Page No.13 of 34

demolished during Emergency. Under the scheme formulated in
pursuance to the Government of India's decision to resettle such
persons who were displaced in the Emergency from Arjun Nagar,
the DDA had prepared a scheme and applications were invited by
the respondent no. 1. The DDA had submitted that survey of the
area was conducted and a list of evictees was prepared and as the
petitioner's name does not figures in the Survey List of evictees,
hence the petitioner was not covered for allotment. It has further
been submitted as a second reason that the petitioner did not give
any proof of ownership or possession of any structure in Arjun
Nagar and for this reason as well, he was not covered. A third
reason which has been given is that since the land of the petitioner
stood acquired, he was required to apply under the scheme for
alternative allotment under the Large Scale Acquisition and
Disposal of Land.
16.

In view of the stand taken by the DDA, its original

record was called for and has been examined. My attention has
been drawn to the original application form submitted by the
petitioner wherein the petitioner has given details of the Sale Deed
dated 3rd of March, 1960. A copy of the sale deed which was
enclosed with the application is also available in the record of the
WP (C) No. 2321/1984

Page No.14 of 34

DDA. The petitioner has repeatedly made representations
enclosing copy of the court judgment and decree which have never
been refuted by the DDA. Therefore, so far as the first objection or
ground on which the petitioner's application has been rejected
which is to the effect that the petitioner had not given proof of
ownership, is factually incorrect and also contrary to the record of
the DDA. So far as the possession is concerned, the petitioner had
established that this property stood trespassed upon and a decree
in his favour was passed on 29th July, 1975. Emergency had been
declared in June, 1975 and the property was demolished in
September, 1975.
17.

Clause (iii) of the policy as noticed herein above notices

that the persons whose properties were demolished whether they
were residing in the houses or not at the time of demolition may be
eligible even if they own any other house or plot in Delhi.
Therefore, it is evident that a person who was owner of a plot of
land on which construction existed was eligible whether or not he
was occupying the property or not. In the instant case, there was a
court decree recognising the ownership of land and existence of a
premises thereon. A court of competent jurisdiction had ruled and
dereed possession in favour of the petitioner. Thus, he was not in
WP (C) No. 2321/1984

Page No.15 of 34

possession when the decree was passed or at the time of the
demolition only on account of the illegal trespass.
The Delhi Development Authority has taken therefore
an erroneous stand that 'only the occupants of the structures at the
time of demolition' fell for allotment within the ambit of this
scheme or that the petitioner was therefore not eligible. This, in
my view, in the light of the judicial pronouncement in favour of the
petitioner by the civil court, is, in any case, a wholly erroneous
construction of the expression 'possession'.
18.

This policy of rehabilitating persons whose properties

were demolished in Arjun Nagar was applicable to plot holders
who had some construction on the plot which was demolished and
was not restricted to persons in physical possession of the same.
The difference between this policy which was intended
to rehabilitate such owners and the policy for alternative allotment
under the Large Scale Acquisition of land was that the latter policy
was concerned with alternative plots for persons whose lands were
acquired.
19.

Perusal of the original record shows that the application

of the petitioner was rejected on the sole ground that he was not
residing in the property in question and for none other. The letter
WP (C) No. 2321/1984

Page No.16 of 34

dated 14th December, 1978 however reads that the petitioner is
covered under this scheme. The counter affidavit gives yet another
and further reason that the petitioner had not given proof of the
ownership and that his name did not feature in the survey list.
20.

It is trite that an administrative decision taken on an

application has to satisfy the triple tests of the decision being
based on relevant material, discloses application of mind and is
not mala fide.

In the pronouncement of the Supreme Court

reported at AIR 1978 SC 851 entitled Mohinder Singh Gill
and Anr. Vs. The Chief Election Commissioner, Delhi
and others, the apex court held thus:“8. The second equally relevant matter is that
when a statutory functionary makes an order
based on certain grounds, its validity must be
judged by the reasons so mentioned and cannot
be supplemented by fresh reasons in the shape of
affidavit or otherwise. Otherwise, an order bad in
the beginning may, by the time it comes to court
on account of a challenge, get validated by
additional grounds later brought out. We may
here draw attention to the observations of Bose J.
in Gordhandas Bhanji (AIR 1952 SC 16) (at p. 18):
“Public orders publicly made, in exercise of a
statutory authority cannot be construed in the
light of explanations subsequently given by the
officer making the order of what he meant, or of
what was in his mind, or what he intended to do.
Public orders made by public authorities are
meant to have public effect and are intended to
affect the acting and conduct of those to whom
WP (C) No. 2321/1984

Page No.17 of 34

21.

they are addressed and must be construed
objectively with reference to the language used in
the order itself”.
Orders are not like old wine becoming better as
they grow older.”
The consideration on the file must show application of

mind and it has been held that it is adviseable that reasons for the
orders are recorded and the administrative order is speaking. In
this behalf, it would be appropriate to advert to the principles laid
down by the apex court in AIR 1994 SC 536 entitled Modi
Industries Ltd. Vs. State of U.P., wherein it was stated by the
apex court that even administrative decisions must bear reasons
for some of them may have more vital consequences on the rights
of the parties than even judicial decisions. In this behalf, the court
placed reliance on the earlier landmark decision of the Supreme
Court in AIR 1970 SC 150 : 1970 (I) SCR 457 entitled A.K.
Kraipak Vs. Union of India.
22.

It would be useful to consider the law laid down by the

apex court in this behalf in AIR 1990 SC 1984 entitled S.N.
Mukherjee Vs. Union of India wherein the court considered
the requirement of principles of natural justice with regard to the
recording of reasons for administrative decisions. In this behalf, it
was authoritatively stated thus:-

WP (C) No. 2321/1984

Page No.18 of 34

“34. The decisions of this Court referred to above
indicate that with regard to the requirement to
record reasons the approach of this Court is more
in line with that of the American Courts. An
important consideration which has weighed with
the Court for holding that an administrative
authority exercising quasi-judicial functions must
record the reasons for its decision, is that such a
decision is subject to the appellate jurisdiction of
this Court under Article 136 of the Constitution as
well as the supervisory jurisdiction of the High
Courts under Article 227 of the Constitution and
that the reasons, if recorded, would enable this
Court or the High Courts to effectively exercise
the appellate or supervisory power. But this is
not the sole consideration.
The other
considerations which have also weighed with the
Court in taking this view are that the requirement
of recording reasons would (i) guarantee
consideration by the authority; (ii) introduce
clarity in the decisions; and (iii) minimise chances
of arbitrariness in decision-making.
In this
regard a distinction has been drawn between
ordinary Courts of law and tribunals and
authorities exercising judicial functions on the
ground that a Judge is trained to look at things
objectively uninfluenced by considerations of
policy or expediency whereas an executive officer
generally looks at things from the stand point of
policy and expediency.
35. Reasons, when recorded by an administrative
authority in an order passed by it while exercising
quasi-judicial functions, would no doubt facilitate
the exercise of its jurisdiction by the appellate or
supervisory authority.
But the other
considerations, referred to above, which have also
weigher with this Court in holding that an
administrative authority must record reasons for
its decision are of no less significance. These
considerations show that the recording of reasons
WP (C) No. 2321/1984

Page No.19 of 34

by an administrative authority serves a salutary
purpose, namely, it excludes chances of
arbitrariness and ensures a degree of fairness in
the process of decision-making. The said purpose
would apply equally to all decisions and its
application cannot be confined to decisions which
are subject to appeal, revision or judicial review.
It may, however, be added that it is not required
that the reasons should be as elaborate as in the
decision of a Court of law. The extent and nature
of the reasons would depend on particular facts
and circumstances. What is necessary is that the
reasons are clear and explicit so as to indicate that
the authority has given due consideration to the
points in controversy. The need for recording of
reasons is greater in a case where the order is
passed at the original stage. The appellate or
revisional authority, if it affirms such an order,
need not give separate reasons if the appellate or
revisional authority agrees with the reasons
contained in the order under challenge.
36. Having considered the rationale for the
requirement to record the reasons for the decision
of an administrative authority exercising quasijudicial functions we may now examine the legal
basis for imposing this obligation.
While
considering this aspect the Donoughmore
Committee observed that it may well be argued
that there is a third principle of natural justice,
namely, that a party is entitled to know the reason
for the decision, be it judicial or quasi-judicial.
The Committee expressed the opinion that “there
are some cases where the refusal to give grounds
for a decision may be plainly unfair; and this may
be so, even when the decision is final and no
further proceedings are open to the disappointed
party by way of appeal or otherwise” and that
“where further proceedings are open to a
disappointed party, it is contrary to natural justice
that the silence of the Minister or the Ministerial
WP (C) No. 2321/1984

Page No.20 of 34

Tribunal should deprive them of the opportunity.”
(p. 80) Prof. H.W.R. Wade has also expressed the
view that “natural justice may provide the best
rubric for it, since the giving of reasons is
required by the ordinary man's sense of justice.”
(see Wade, Administrative Law, 6th Edition p.
548). In Siemens Engineering Co. case (AIR 1976
SC1785) (supra) this court has taken the same
view when it observed that “the rule requiring
reasons to be given in support of an order is, like
the principles of audi alteram partem, a basic
principle of natural justice which must inform
every quasi-judicial process.”
this decision
proceeds on the basis that the two well-known
principles of natural justice, namely (i) that no
man should be a Judge in his own cause and (ii)
that no person should be judged without a
hearing, are not exhaustive and that in addition to
these two principles there may be rules which
seek to ensure fairness in the process of decisionmaking and can be regarded as part of the
principles of natural justice. This view is in
consonance with the law laid down by this Court
in A.K. Kraipak V. Union of India, (1970) 1
SCR 457: (AIR 1970 SC 150), wherein it has
been held:
“The concept of natural justice has undergone a
great deal of change in recent years. In the past it
was thought that it included just two rules,
namely (i) no one shall be a Judge in his own
cause (nemo debet esse judex propria causa) and
(ii) no decision shall be given against a party
without affording him a reasonable hearing (audi
alteram partem). Very soon thereafter a third
rule was envisaged and that is that quasi-judicial
enquiries must be held in good faith, without bias
and not arbitrarily or unreasonably. But in the
course of years many more subsidiary rules came
to be added to the rules of natural justice. (pp.
468-69) (of SCR) : (at pp. 156-57 of AIR).

WP (C) No. 2321/1984

Page No.21 of 34

37. A similar trend is discernible in the decisions
of English Courts wherein it has been held that
natural justice demands that the decision should
be based on some evidence of probative value.
(See
R.v.
Deputy
Industrial
Injuries
Commissioner ex P. Moore, (1965) 1 QB 456;
Mohan v. Air New Zealand Ltd., 1984 AC 808).
38. The object underlying the rules of natural
justice “is to prevent miscarriage of justice” and
secure “fair play in action.” As pointed out earlier
the requirement about recording or reasons for its
decision by an administrative authority exercising
quasi-judicial functions achieves this object by
excluding chances of arbitrariness and ensuring a
degree of fairness in the process of decision
making. Keeping in view the expanding horizon
of the principles of natural justice,we are of the
opinion, that the requirement to record reason
can be regarded as one of the principles of natural
justice which govern exercise of power by
administrative authorities. The rules of natural
justice are not embodied rules. The extent of
their application depends upon the particular
statutory framework whereunder jurisdiction has
been conferred on the administrative authority.
With regard to the exercise of a particular power
by an administrative authority including exercise
of judicial or quasi-judicial functions the
legislature, while conferring the said power, may
feel that it would not be in the large public
interest that the reasons for the order passed by
the administrative authority be recorded in the
order and be communicated to the aggrieved
party and it may dispense with such a
requirement. It may do so by making an express
provision to that effect as those contained in the
Administrative Procedure Act, 1946 of U.S.A. and
the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review)
Act, 1977 of Australia whereby the orders passed
by certain specified authorities are excluded from
WP (C) No. 2321/1984

Page No.22 of 34

the ambit of the enactment. Such an exclusion
can also arise by necessary implication from the
nature of the subject matter, the scheme and the
provisions of the enactment. The public interest
underlying such a provision would outweigh the
salutary purpose served by the requirement to
record the reasons. The said requirement cannot,
therefore, be insisted upon in such a case.
39.
For the reasons aforesaid, it must be
concluded that except in cases where the
requirement has been dispensed with expressly or
by necessary implication, an administrative
authority exercising judicial or quasi-judicial
functions is required to record the reasons for its
decision.”
23.

The

petitioner

has

strongly

urged

that

non-

communication of the reasons for the decision taken by the
respondent would be fatal as was held by the Supreme Court in
AIR 1976 SC 437 entitled Ajantha Industries & Ors. Vs.
The Central Board of Direct Taxes wherein the court stated
the requirement of law thus:“9. ......The question then arises whether the
reasons are at all required to be communicated to
the assessee. It is submitted on behalf of the
Revenue, that the very fact that reasons are
recorded in the file, although these are not
communicated to the assessee, fully meets the
requirement of Section 127 (1). We are unable to
accept this submission.
10. The reason for recording of reasons in the
order and making these reasons known to the
assessee is to enable an opportunity to the
WP (C) No. 2321/1984

Page No.23 of 34

assessee to approach the High Court under its
writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the
Constitution or even this Court under Article 136
of the Constitution in an appropriate case for
challenging the order, inter alia, either on the
ground that it is mala fide or arbitrary or that it is
based
on
irrelevant
and
extraneous
considerations. Whether such a writ or special
leave application ultimately fails is not relevant
for a decision of the question.
11.
We are clearly of opinion that the
requirement of recording reasons under Section
127 (1) is a mandatory direction under the law
and non-communication thereof is not saved by
showing that the reasons exist in the file although
not communicated to the assessee.”
24.

In any case, it is well settled that the record of the

authority must show application of mind and the reasons may
exist on the file. In the instant case, the reason which exists on the
file as contained in the noting dated 14th September, 1978 is that
the application was rejected because the petitioner was not
residing on the property in question while the counter affidavit has
expanded the same as noticed hereinabove to incorporate other
reasons. The noting refers to a communication to the petitioner
which is not referred in the counter affidavit or served on the
petitioner. It ignores the document of ownership on record and
therefore, cannot be permitted to stand. This has been held to be

WP (C) No. 2321/1984

Page No.24 of 34

contrary to the policy of the DDA on which basis it was effecting
allotments.
25.

The respondent no. 2 has also taken a stand that the

persons who were found in occupation on the premises at the time
of demolition were to be allotted plots under the rehabilitation
scheme and that the petitioner failed to satisfy this condition and
hence could not be allotted the plot.
26.

Interestingly, in para 2 of the counter affidavit, the

respondent no. 2 has stated thus:
“2. From those evictees, who were not present at
the site at the time of demolition, applications
were invited by the answering respondent upto
31.7.1978. Those who applied within the
stipulated period, were considered to be
rehabilitated if they fulfilled the conditions. It is
pertinent to submit that the petitioner did not
apply within that stipulated period and hence
now is not eligible to be rehabilitated within the
framework of that scheme (emphasis supplied).”
Therefore, even according to the respondent no. 2,
applications were invited from those who were not present on the
site whose properties were demolished.

The reason for not

making an allocation in favour of the petitioner is that his
application was belated.
27.

So far as the Survey List is concerned, there is no

WP (C) No. 2321/1984

Page No.25 of 34

disclosure by the respondent as to the details thereof. It is not
possible to take out as to the place where this survey list was
prepared or its date. The survey list is vaguely stated to have been
prepared at the time the demolition was effected.

The policy

notices that certain owners whose buildings were demolished may
not be occupants and takes into consideration trespasers and
tenants etc. even. No such survey list has been placed before the
court. The policy relied upon by the DDA does not refer to any
survey list.

No order of any competent authority directing

preparation of such list or conduct of a survey has been placed
before the court.

Even the authority of the person(s) who

prepared such list is known. Therefore, in any case, a material
circumstance which would demolish the case of the respondent is
the fact that it is not the respondent's case at all that any allotment
of plot has been made against the property of the petitioner to any
person.
28.

When this writ petition came up for hearing on the 24th

of April, 2000, in view of the stand taken by the respondents and
from the record produced, it was noticed that the land involved in
the present writ petition fell within the Khasra No. 312 in Khata
No. 3/10, Arjun Nagar, New Delhi some of which appeared to have
WP (C) No. 2321/1984

Page No.26 of 34

been acquired by the Delhi Administration vide an award no.
13/71-72. This court therefore directed the respondent no. 2 to
place before the court a copy of the aforesaid award and all
relevant records indicating that the land involved in the writ
petition was acquired and possession taken over on 27th of
September, 1995. This direction was issued to the respondent no. 2
while respondent no. 1 was directed to place before the court the
relevant scheme as well as all relevant documents in its custody in
support of their case.
29.

The writ petition again came up for hearing on 14th of

November, 2000 when after noticing the case of the petitioner,
this court recorded thus:“I have perused the policy of DDA. Prima facie, I
am of the view that the petitioner's case is purely
covered within the policy of rehabilitation of Arjun
Nagar plot holders.
Therefore, I direct
respondent to place on record as to whether any
other plot holders have been allotted plot in terms
of the policy in relation to plot measuring 660 sq.
yds. bearing Khasra No. 312 in Khata No. 3/10,
Arjun Nagar, New Delhi. Respondent would also
file on record as to whether anyone in the name of
Hari Shanker has been allotted plot in Arjun
Nagar.
Let the photocopy of the Sale Deed entered into by
late Hans Raj Midha dt. 10th June, 1959 be
supplied to Ms. Shalini Verma, counsel for
respondent/DDA within two weeks. Affidavit in
terms thereof be filed within four weeks
WP (C) No. 2321/1984

Page No.27 of 34

thereafter.”
30.

DDA took almost two years to file this affidavit which

was filed only on the 25th July, 2003. In the affidavit filed by Shri
Suresh P.Padhy, Director LM (Headquarters) DDA, it was stated
that information with regard to the compensation is to be given by
the Land Acquisition Collector (LAC) and that from the record, it
was revealed that the names of Shri Bhullan Singh, Shri Ishar Dass
Sharma, Shri Wason Singh and Shri Maya Singh were considered
for allotment of alternative plots against Khasra No. 312. The
affidavit does not disclose the holdings of these persons or details
of land owned by them.
31.

DDA further submitted that compensation of land in

Khasra No. 312 min (0-12), Village Humayun Pur which was
acquired under award no. 13/71-72 was made by the DDA and an
enhancement case under Section 30-31 was pending in this regard.
It is noteworthy that the affidavit does not disclose the status of
the property of the petitioner. Certainly, no allotment has been
affected against the petitioner's property and land of 660 sq. yards
only out of this reason.
32.

The petitioner has stated on an affidavit that the

petitioner has not been given any compensation till date and that
WP (C) No. 2321/1984

Page No.28 of 34

according to its knowledge, no award has been made till date with
regard to the petitioner's built up property of 660 square yards.
There is nothing to the contrary available from the record of the
DDA produced before this court or in any pleadings filed in this
petition by either of the respondents.
33.

In view of the above, it would therefore appear that the

petitioner had submitted proof of ownership of the plot along with
this application. The other grounds set up in the counter affidavit
cannot support the order rejecting the claim of the petitioner in
the light of the principles laid down in Mohinder Gill's case (supra)
and in any case are contrary to the explicit terms of the policy.
34.

Therefore, the father of the petitioner was the owner of

the plot measuring 660 square yards bearing Khasra No. 312 in
Khata No. 3/10, Arjun Nagar, New Delhi.
This plot was apparently acquired by the Land and
Building Department. Compensation in this behalf has not been
received either by the petitioner or his predecessor in interest.
This property was demolished on the 27th of September, 1975.
The respondent no. 1 was implementing a policy to
rehabilitate the property owners of Arjun Nagar whose properties
were wrongly demolished during the emergency period.
WP (C) No. 2321/1984

This

Page No.29 of 34

scheme was independent of the policy of the respondent no. 2 for
allotment of plot under the scheme relating to large scale
acquisition of land. The intendment of the Govt. was to mitigate
the hardship caused to these persons by the sudden and coercive
dispossession and displacement by the demolition in Arjun Nagar.
The scheme so evolved and being implemented, was restricted to
this location.
In view of the foregoing discussion, I find that the
application of the petitioner seeking allotment of the plot under
the rehabilitation scheme for Arjun Nagar was wrongly rejected
and that the petitioner was entitled to allotment of a plot in terms
thereof.
35.

The

petitioner

has

placed

reliance

on

the

pronouncement of a Division Bench of this court reported in 25
(1984) DLT 301 entitled Om Prakash Gupta Vs. DDA
wherein the court held thus:“Furthermore, we have no doubt that the
resolution creates a promissory estoppel in favour
of the petition. It is clearly stated that if the
evictees adduced satisfactory proof of having
occupied land at the Loha Mandi Motia Khan for
10 years and also paid damages, they are to be
allotted plots at the reserve price. This is a clear
term which was followed by a period of
verification and after verification the petitioners
WP (C) No. 2321/1984

Page No.30 of 34

have been found to be entitled to get the plots.
They have all paid the damages. There is no
contest on the facts. Accordingly, acting on the
representation of the Delhi Development
Authority, the petitioners have paid the damages,
and also, have suffered the disadvantage of being
without plots for the last nine years. Surely, this
is a case to which the principles of promissory
estoppel apply. We are, therefore, of the view that
the decision of the Supreme Court in The Union
of India Vs. M/s Anglo Afghan Agencies etc.,
AIR 1968 SC 718, Century Spinning and
Manufacturing Co. Ltd. and another Vs.
Ulhasnagar Municipality, AIR 1971 SC 1021
and other similar cases in fully applicable to the
fact of this case.”
36.

In the context of land which was acquired pursuant to

the scheme of acquisition under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, it
has been held that no person has a vested right through allotment
of an alternative plot. However, in the instant case, the policy
under which the petitioner is claiming relates to the demolition
whereby property owners were illegally and forcibly evicted by
demolition action taken during the emergency period. The Central
Government itself recognised the need to rehabilitate such person.
Respondents have admittedly made allotments to several persons
under this policy and the petitioner was denied allotment of the
plot on reasons and grounds which were totally contrary to the
notified policy.

WP (C) No. 2321/1984

Page No.31 of 34

37.

On behalf of the respondent no. 1, an objection was

taken to the effect that as per the prayer made by the writ
petitioner it was seeking allotment of a plot against the acquisition
of its property. It is settled law and does not need any elaboration
that a relief shall be moulded in the light of the facts which are
brought on record and which would ensure ends of justice.
38.

In the instant case, the petitioner has sought favourable

consideration of application for allotment of plot which was made
in terms of the policy which was advertised and notified by the
DDA in 1978. The application was made by the petitioner to the
officer who was notified by the authorities for consideration for the
allotment of an alternative plot on the ground that its property in
Arjun Nagar was wrongly demolished.
39.

The writ petition has challenged rejection of this

application. Respondents have also admitted that such a policy
was dehors the general policy relating to the scheme of allotment
of alternative plots against the large scale acquisition.
40.

There is no dispute to the findings and judgment of the

civil court with regard to the construction on the petitioner's plot.
This fact has not been disputed or denied by the respondents
anywhere on record. It has not even been considered anywhere.
WP (C) No. 2321/1984

Page No.32 of 34

No objection or query was raised upon the petitioner. Therefore,
the objections on behalf of the respondents would deserve to be
rejected on this ground as well. For all the afore going reasons,
this writ petition deserves to be allowed.
41.

It has been held that the respondents wrongfully

rejected the application of the petitioner.

As a consequence

thereof, the petitioner was entitled to allotment of an alternative
plot in terms of the policy which was notified in the public
advertisement affiliated by the DDA in the public notice dated 25 th
of May, 1978. The respondent no. 1 is accordingly directed to
make an allotment of a plot to the petitioner in terms of the
scheme advertised on 25th of May, 1978. Such allotment shall be
made within a period of six weeks from the date of this judgment.
The petitioner shall be treated at par with other persons who were
alloted the plot in the year 1978 and shall be required to make
payment of only charges as have been demanded from similarly
placed persons. The petitioner shall be notified of any amount
which he would be required to pay in terms of the notified policy.
42.

I may notice that the petitioner has made a second

prayer in the writ petition requiring the respondents to pay
damages for the construction which was illegally demolished. The
WP (C) No. 2321/1984

Page No.33 of 34

scheme under which the petitioner is to be allotted a property
clearly postulates that no compensation would be admissible to
such property owners who are being considered for allotment of
the plots.

Therefore, the petitioner would not be entitled to any

such damages for the reason that the petitioner is being given an
alternative developed plot by the DDA.
43.

It is noteworthy that this writ petition was filed in the

year 1984 and has remained pending in this court for all these
years. The petitioner has been deprived of a plot to which he was
entitled wrongfully. The order made by the respondent no. 1 is
contrary to the policy which it had formulated and implemented.
Undoubtedly, the cost of construction which the petitioner would
bear would be manifold since 1984 and there can possibly be no
compensation of the deprivation of the property to the petitioner.
This writ petition is allowed in the above terms.
In these circumstances, in my view the petitioner
deserves to be paid costs of the present litigation by the
respondent no. 1 which are quantified at Rs.25,000/-.
(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
April 25, 2006
SD
WP (C) No. 2321/1984

Page No.34 of 34

