IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
CM Nos.11937/2004, 14302/2004, 1050/2005, 4116/2005 &
15054/2005
in
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 10941/2004
Judgm ent reserved on : December 15, 2005
Da te of decision: April 26, 2006
IRCON INTERNATIONAL LTD.
... Petitioner
through Mr. U.N. Badawat, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. B.L. Anand and Mr. Saurabh Mishra, Adv.
VERSUS
UOI & ORS.
... Respondents
through Mr. Suresh Kait, Adv. For resp. no. 1
Mr. Sanjay Parikh, Adv. for resp. nos. 2-21, 24,
26-32, 34, 35, 37-38
Mr. Rakesh K. Garg, Adv. For resp. no. 23
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
CM No. 11937/2004 (filed by respondent nos. 2-21, 24, 2632, 34, 35, 37-38) and CM No. 14302/2004 (filed by respondent

W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 1 of 43

no. 23 Shri Triloki Nath Sharma)
1.

The writ petition was filed in July, 2004 and by an order passed

on 14th July, 2004, this court had stayed the operation of the award
dated 27th April, 2004 subject to the petitioner depositing an amount
of Rs.1,00,000/- with the Registrar General of this court.

The

respondents/applicants in this application are claiming to be
unemployed workmen in whose favour the award dated 27th April,
2004 has been passed and are praying for grant of interim wages
during the pendency of the writ petition with effect from the date of
the award.
2.

The petitioner has filed a reply challenging the claim of the

workmen and urging that they are disentitled to the grant of the
interim relief on various technical reasons including a challenge to
the correctness of the affidavit filed by the workman and also on the
merits of the controversy which has been raised in the main writ
petition. The application was opposed largely on the ground that the
application was an abuse of the process of this court and has been
filed malafide. It has also been urged vehemently with all the force at
command of Shri U.N. Bachawat, learned senior counsel for the

W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 2 of 43

petitioner that unless a proper affidavit is filed, the application under
Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 will not be
considered. In this behalf, reliance was placed on (2005) 5 SCC
337(para 26) Vivekanand Sethi vs Chairman, J&K Bank Ltd. and
Others and AIR 2003 SC 66 M/s Satnam Overseas (Export) Vs State
of Haryana & Another. It has been contended that the workmen
knew that the affidavit was not proper and yet persisted with the
submission that it was correct. For this reason, the workman was
disentitled to relief.
3.

In this behalf, Mr.Sanjay Parikh,

learned counsel for the

applicants had also placed reliance on (1998) 5 SCC (513 and
524) State of W.B. And Others vs Shivananda Pathak And
Others to the effect that strict rules of procedures have no
applicability to writ proceedings.
4.

I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the

available record. So far as the record is concerned, there can possibly
be no dispute to the same. My attention has been drawn to the fact
that prior to the filing of this application, the workmen had filed CM
10076/2004 which was also filed under Section 17B of the Industrial

W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 3 of 43

Disputes Act. This application was filed on or around 16th August,
2004 on behalf of the workmen on the plea that they were all
unemployed since the date of the illegal termination of their service
and that they have nothing to survive on and were consequently on
the verge of starvation. Consequently, the workmen prayed for grant
of interim wages by this application filed on 16th August, 2004.
However, an objection was taken with regard to the affidavit which
was filed in support of the application.

The application was

supported by the sole affidavit of Shri Surender Singh, Advocate who
was the general secretary of the Rashtriya Mazdoor Congress(INTEC)
U.P. It was stated that respondent nos. 2-38 are members of this
union

which

is

affiliated

with

the

Rashtriya

Mazdoor

Congress(INTEC) which was espousing the cause of the workmen.
5.

In the light of this objection, by an order passed on 27th August,

2004, this application was dismissed with liberty to the respondents
to file a fresh application under Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947. It has been urged on behalf of the petitioner by learned
counsel that this application was dismissed on an objection pointed
out by the petitioner to the effect that there was no affidavit in

W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 4 of 43

accordance with law in support of the application.
6.

Apprehending a technical objection with regard to the

maintainability of a subsequent application for the same relief, the
workmen thereafter filed CM 11423/2004 seeking recalling of the
order dated 27th August, 2004 whereby CM 10076/2004 was
dismissed. The workmen also prayed in this application for leave to
the respondent nos. 2-38 to withdraw CM 10076/2004 with liberty to
file a fresh application for the relief prayed therein.
By an order dated 28th September, 2004, this court disposed of
this application granting liberty to the workmen to file a fresh
application.
7.

It is thereafter that the present application has been filed on or

about 5th October, 2004 which was supported by the affidavit of Shri
Surender Singh, Advocate as general secretary of the Rashtriya
Mazdoor Congress(INTEC) as well as individual affidavits of the
applicants being respondent nos. 2-9, 10-21, 24, 26-32, 34-35 and 3738.
8.

This application came up for hearing on 8th October, 2004

when the following order was passed :-

W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 5 of 43

“8.10.2004
Present : Mr.Saurabh Mishra
petitioner
Ms. Kusum Singh
respondent

for

the

for

the

W.P.(C) 10941/2004 & CM 11937/2004
Learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner submits that he would verify before
the next date of hearing the last drawn wages
by the workman and also take instructions for
depositing said amount in consonance of the
provisions of Section 17B of the Act. Renotify
on 7.12.2004.
In the meanwhile liberty to file
reply also granted.
Sd/Swatanter Kumar, J”
9.

It would appear that the petitioner was thereupon required to

deposit the amount in consonance with the provisions of Section 17B
of the Act. This aspect of the matter appears to have escaped notice
and on subsequent dates the matter travelled into filing of a reply to
the application.
On 7th December, 2004, the petitioner sought time and was
granted time to file a reply in response to this application being CM
1197/2004 before the next date of hearing.
10.

In the meantime, respondent no. 23 Shri Triloki Nath Sharma

filed CM 14302/2004 under Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes
W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 6 of 43

Act, 1947 and notice was issued to the petitioner on this application
as well.
11.

The matter was thereafter listed on 16th December, 2004 when

the court noticed that an additional affidavit dated 15th December,
2004 has been filed by the petitioner.

The respondents were

permitted to file a reply of this affidavit. Time was also given to the
petitioner to file a reply to CM 14302/2004 filed by respondent no.
23. It was further directed that the application under Section 17B of
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 would be heard in the first instance
and thereafter the main matter would be taken up for hearing.
12.

The petitioner however has filed CM 1050/2005 stating that the

application under Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act be
dismissed as the workmen have given wrong information about the
last drawn wages. These applications were taken up for hearing on
28th September, 2005 when an objection was raised by learned senior
counsel appearing for the petitioner that the affidavits which were
filed in support of the applications of the respondents were not in
accordance with the law. The following order was recorded on 28th
September, 2005 :-

W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 7 of 43

“2 8.09.2005
Present :
for the
Singh &
respondent

Mr. U.N.Bachawat, Sr.Advocate with
Mr.B.L.Anand,
Mr.Saurabh Mishra & Mr.A.P.Nagrath
petitioner
Mr.Sanjay Parekh with Mr. Surender
Ms.Kusum Suri for the

+CM 10076/2004 & CM 14302/2004 in W.P ( C )
No. 10941/2004
An objection has been raised by the learned
senior counsel appearing for the petitioner that
the affidavits which have been filed by the
workmen in support of these applications are not
in accordance with law. It is pointed out that the
verification of the affidavits is not correct and,
therefore, the depositions of facts in the affidavit
does not deserve any credence. Reliance in this
behalf has been placed in three judgments of the
Apex Court reported in AIR 1967 SC 295, AIR
1982 SC 65 para 12 & AIR 1992 SC 65. It is further
submitted that there being no affidavit in
accordance with Section 17B of the Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947, these applications have to be
rejected. The statement
of employment or
unemployment of a workman is submitted which
is purely within his knowledge of the workmen,
subject to any material which the management is
able to place in contravention thereto. It is
submitted that the affidavits of the workmen
wherein it has been stated that the depositions is
either “to the best of knowledge and belief” or “to
the best of knowledge” clearly shows that there is
no deposition in law with regard to the fact
W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 8 of 43

13.

unemployment of the workman.
Learned senior counsel appearing for the
petitioner has further contended that the
affidavits have been filed and sworn on or around
12.9.2004, while the application states that it has
been filed on 4.10.2004. It is contended that for
this reason as well, there is no affidavit in support
of the application.
Learned counsel appearing for the
applicants prays for an opportunity to examine
this matter.
List for further consideration on 16.11.2005.
It is made clear that there is no expression
of opinion in the order which has been noted
regarding the submissions made on behalf of the
petitioner today. ”
In this background, respondent nos. 2-22 and 23 filed fresh

affidavits in support of their applications wherein it was reiterated
that the applicants were unemployed from the date of illegal
termination of service and were undergoing immense financial
problems due to non-payment of Section 17B benefits.

An oral

request was made to permit the workmen to place the same on record
which was accepted by the order passed on 16th November, 2005.
Opportunity was given to the petitioners to place their response to
these affidavits. The petitioner has however filed CM 15054/2005
stating that the petitioner has a good case on merits and that the writ
petition be heard and disposed of simultaneously with the disposal of

W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 9 of 43

the application under Section 17B. The petitioners also filed a reply
to the additional affidavits which were filed by respondent nos. 2-3,
5, 9, 12-21, 24, 26-32, 34-35, 37-38 and to that filed separately by
respondent no. 23.
14.

I may notice the case of the respondents in the present

applications seeking interim wages (CM 11937/2004 & CM
14302/2004). In these applications, the workmen have stated that in
accordance with Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947,
after the publication on 5th May, 2004 of the industrial award dated
27th April, 2004, all the respondents/workmen whose services had
been terminated illegally, became entitled to reinstatement in terms
of the industrial award. It has been stated that the workmen were
unemployed since the date of the illegal termination of their services
and that they had nothing to survive on and were at the verge of
starvation.

The workmen have stated in the application that an

earlier application under Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947 had been withdrawn by the respondents herein with liberty to
file a fresh application.

The workmen have prayed for grant of

interim wages on the basis of last drawn wages from the date of the

W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 10 of 43

award and during the pendency of the writ petition.
15.

This application was supported by affidavits which were

objected to on behalf of the petitioner. It was pointed out that the
verification stated that the contents of the affidavit were true and
correct to the best of the knowledge and belief of the deponent. It has
also been objected that the address of the workmen as shown in these
affidavits was at different places in different states as Uttar Pradesh,
Bihar, Uttaranchal and Madhya Pradesh, yet all the affidavits were
shown as having been attested by one notary public on 12th
September, 2004 at Agra which was wholly impossible.
16.

In these circumstances, fresh affidavits of all the workmen were

filed giving their addresses and stating that at the time of deposition
and attestation of the affidavits, the workmen were in Delhi. The
affidavits categorically state that the workmen are unemployed since
the date of termination of their service on 3rd June, 1998 till date. It
is also stated that grave difficulty is being faced on account of
deprivation of the wages.

These affidavits have been sworn and

attested on 28th October, 2005.
17.

It has been vehemently objected on behalf of the petitioner that

W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 11 of 43

in view of the fact that the petitioner has a good case on the merits,
consequently these applications ought not to be granted and that the
writ petition deserves to be heard immediately. In this behalf, I have
already noticed hereinabove, the order dated 16th December, 2004
wherein it has been directed that the application under Section 17B of
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 would be heard in the first instance
and thereafter the main petition would be taken up for hearing. No
objection has been raised by the petitioner at the time this order was
recorded.
18.

It has further been contended that the manner in which the

workmen have filed applications under Section 17B and the affidavits
in support thereof would show that an incorrect statement with
regard to the unemployment was being made.

According to the

petitioner, in CM 10076/2004, which is the first application filed
under Section 17B, it was stated that all the 37 workmen were
unemployed.

Upon directions being given by this court to file

individual affidavits, only 32 respondents filed the affidavits. After
defects were pointed out in the affidavits which were filed, only 30
affidavits have been filed.

W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

The petitioner has submitted that

Page 12 of 43

respondent no. 20 Shri Vijay Singh has sworn a false affidavit. It has
been submitted that he is an ex-serviceman and that on account of
the service rendered by him in the Indian Air Force wherefrom he
has retired, he is receiving retirement pension.

For reasons of

concealment of the fact of his being a pensioner, he is disentitled to
grant of any order in his favour granting him wages. It is further
submitted that Shri Dinesh, respondent no. 30 had filed an
individual claim before the labour court at Faridabad which he had
subsequently withdrawn. According to the petitioner, therefore, this
would be admission of the fact that he may not be a party to the
industrial adjudication which culminated in the Award dated 27th
April, 2004 and consequently he would be disentitled to award of any
wages under Section 17b of the Industrial Disputes Act.
19.

So far as respondent no. 23 Shri Triloki Nath Sharma

is

concerned, it has been stated that he is residing in the village where
he is working as agriculture labour. So far as such engagement is
concerned,

it

would

be

appropriate

to

refer

to

judicial

pronouncements in this behalf.
20.

The jurisdiction to grant interim wages during the pendency of

W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 13 of 43

an establishment's challenge to an industrial award granting
reinstatement to workman is contained in Section 17B of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. The statutory provision reads thus :“17B.
Payment of full wages to
workman pending proceedings in higher
courts - Where in any case, a Labour Court,
Tribunal or National Tribunal by its award directs
reinstatement of any workman and the employer
prefers any proceedings against such award in a
High Court or the Supreme Court, the employer
shall be liable to pay such workman, during the
period of pendency of such proceedings in the High
Court or the Supreme Court, full wages last drawn
by him, inclusive of any maintenance allowance
admissible to him under any rule if the workman
had not been employed in any establishment during
such period and an affidavit by such workman had
been filed to that effect in such Court.
Provided that where it is proved to the
satisfaction of the High Court or the Supreme Court
that such workman had been employed and had
been receiving adequate remuneration during any
such period or part thereof, the Court shall order
that no wages shall be payable under this section for
such period or part, as the case may be.”
By judicial expansion, it has been held by the Apex Court that
the jurisdiction of the High Court which is seized of a writ petition
making such a challenge on behalf of the management, is not
confined to the rigours and restrictions laid down under Section 17B.
It has also been held that the wages which are awarded to the
W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 14 of 43

workman are in the nature of non-refundable subsistence allowance
and that equities have to be balanced while considering an
application for grant of interim wages.

The wages which are

amended are not confined to the last drawn wages and the workman
however has to establish that he is not gainfully employed in order to
be entitled to an order for award of wages.
21.

The previous view of several High Courts to the effect that

Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act precluded the High Court
from grant of any amount in excess of the limitation of last drawn
wages as provided in Section 17B was not accepted by the Apex Court.
In this behalf, the Apex Court by judicial pronouncement has
expanded the scope of permissible relief which the High Court may
grant while considering an application for grant of interim wages to a
workman during the pendency of a challenge to an award directing
reinstatement into service of the workman is concerned.
It would be useful to also notice the view taken by the Supreme
court while considering what would be a fair interpretation of wages
to be given to a workman.

The authoritative and binding

pronouncements of law on this aspect is also to be found in the

W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 15 of 43

pronouncements of the Apex Court in (1999) 2 SCC 106 Dena
Bank vs Kirtikumar T. Patel and JT 2001 (Supp. I) SC 229
entitled

Regional

Authority,

Dena

Bank

&

Anr.

v

Ghanshyam.
22.

In (1999) 2 SCC 106 Dena Bank vs Kirtikumar T. Patel

wherein the court held thus :“23. As regards the powers of the High Court
and the Supreme Court under Article 226 and 136
of the Constitution, it may be stated that Section 17B, by conferring a right on the workman to be paid
the amount of full wages last drawn by him during
the pendency of the proceedings involving
challenge to the award of the Labour Court,
Industrial Tribunal or National Tribunal in the
High Court or the Supreme Court which amount is
not refundable or recoverable in the event of the
award being set aside, does not in any way preclude
the High Court or the Supreme Court to pass an
order directing payment of a higher amount tot he
workman if such higher amount is considered
necessary in the interest of justice. Such a direction
would be dehors the provisions contained in
Section 17-B and while giving the direction, the
court may also give directions regarding refund or
recovery of the excess amount in the event of the
award being set aside. But we are unable to agree
with the view of the Bombay High Court in Elpro
International Ltd. that in exercise of the power
under Articles 226 and 136 of the Constitution, an
order can be passed denying the workman the
benefit granted under Section 17-B.
The
conferment of such a right under Section 17-B
W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 16 of 43

23.

cannot be regarded as a restriction on the powers of
the High Court or the Supreme Court under Articles
226 and 136 of the Constitution.”
Equally well settled is the principle that the jurisdiction of the

High Court to make an appropriate order granting interim wages to a
workman who has an award directing his reinstatement into service
is derived not from Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947
alone.

Such source of power is to be found in Article 226 of

Constitution of India which empowers the High Courts to examine
the legality and validity of industrial awards. This issue also arose for
consideration before the Apex Court in JT 2001 (Supp. I) SC 229
entitled Regional Authority, Dena Bank & Anr. vs
Ghanshyam. The Apex Court held thus:“12. We have mentioned above that the import of
Section 17-B admits of no doubt that Parliament
intended that the workman should get the last
drawn wages from the date of the Award till the
challenge to the Award is finally decided which is
in accord with the Statement of the Objects and
Reasons of the Industrial Disputes (Amendment)
Act, 1982 by which Section 17-B was inserted in the
Act. We have also pointed out above that Section
17-B does not preclude the High Courts or this
Court from granting better benefits – more just
and equitable on the facts of a case – than
contemplated by that provision to a workman. By
interim orders the High Court did not grant relief
in terms of Section 17-B, nay, there is no reference
W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 17 of 43

to that Section in this case the question of payment
of “full wages last drawn” to the respondent does
not arise. In the light of the above discussion the
power of the High Court to pass the impugned
order cannot but be upheld so the respondent is
entitled to his salary in terms of the said order.
13. It must, however, be pointed out that while
passing an interlocutory order the interests of the
employer should not be lost sight of. Even though
the amount paid by the employer under Section 17B to the workman cannot be directed to be
refunded in the event he loses the case in the writ
petition (see Dena Bank case) any amount over
and above the sum payable under the said
provision, has to be refunded by him. It will,
therefore, be in the interests of justice to ensure, if
the facts of the case so justify, that payment of any
amount over and above the amount payable under
Section 17-B to him, is ordered to be paid on such
terms and conditions as would enable the employer
to recover the same.”
24.

These issues have arisen for consideration in several cases and

also stand stated in judicial pronouncements of this court as well. I
may advert to the judgment of this court reported at 2002 II AD
Delhi 112 DTC vs Presiding Officer, Labour Court No. 1,
Delhi & Ors. wherein the court held thus :“7. Management counsel have belaboured the
observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Dena
Bank 1 (supra) to the effect that the wages
contemplated under Section 17-B of the I.D. Act
partake of the nature of a subsistence allowance and
hence should not exceed the actual wages last drawn
W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 18 of 43

by the workman at that point of time when his
employment was terminated. In the first place, this
observation was made in the context of the payments
made pursuant to orders under Section 17-B of the
I.D. Act being non-recoverable and non-adjustable.
Secondly, the Court must endeavour to give a
purposeful interpretation to a statutory provision, in
conformity with its Objects. The only exception or
limitation is where the language used is such that the
only meaning extractable does not permit such an
interpretation. Thus, if a subsistence allowance was
intended to be given in Section 17-B of the I.D. Act, it
could have been easily stated so. A pedantic
approach is always to be deprecated. In C.W.P. No.
2112 of 1999 it has been highlighted by Mr.
Sabharwal himself that the workperson was a dailywager and she was earning only Rs.11/- and that the
DDA would submit that it is these wages that should
be granted to her.
Even if Mr. Sabharwal's
arguments were to be accepted, can this sum of
Rs.11/- be considered as a 'subsistence allowance'.
This submission has strengthened my resolve and
understanding that under Section 17-B of the I.D.
Act, the wages should not fall below the time when
orders under the Section are to be passed, a
moderation may reasonably be effected. It was his
contention, however, that while minimum wages
could be ordered in place of `last drawn wages' if
these are below the minimum wages, once this is
carried out there would be no further justification for
ordering the payments under Section 17-B of the I.D.
Act to keep pace with the increase in the minimum
wages, once this is carried out there would be no
further justification for ordering the payments under
Section 17-B of the I.D. Act to keep pace with the
increase in the minimum wages. To the contrary,
Ms. Sunita Bhardwaj, who appears for the workmen
drew attention to the enduring observations of the
W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 19 of 43

Hon'ble Supreme Court in Crown Aluminium
Works Vs. Their workemn, 1958 (1) LJJ 1 to the
effect that there is “one principle which admits of no
exceptions. No industry has a right to exist unless it
is able to pay to its workmen at least a bare
minimum wages. It is quire likely that in underdeveloped countries, where unemployment prevails
on a very large scale, unorganised labour may be
available on starvation wages, but the employment
of labour on starvation wages cannot be encouraged
or favoured in a modern democratic welfare State.”
Even though these observations were made whilst
the Court was concerned with the fixation of a wage
structure, they are of ubiquitous application. In
Sanjit Roy Vs. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1983
SC 328 it has been observed that in so far as
Rajasthan Famine Relief Works Employees
(Ememption from Labour Laws) Act exempts and
excludes the applicability of the Minimum Wages
Act in relation to workmen employed in famine relief
work and permits payment less than the Minimum
Wages, it offends Article 23 of the Constitution and
is ultra vires. Similar views have also been
expressed in Peoples Union for Democratic
Rights and others Vs. Union of India and
others, AIR 1982 SC 1473. On the strength of all
these precedents it appears inevitable and
inescapable that wherever wages
are in
contemplation, they cannot fall below the minimum
wages, whether the inquiry is on wage fixation, fair
wage or interim relief under Section 17-B of the I.D.
Act, or whatever.
25.

The judgment of the learned Single Judge in DTC vs Presiding

Officer, Labour Court I & Ors. was assailed before the

Division

Bench which rejected the challenge thereto in its judgment reported
W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 20 of 43

at 2003 VI AD Delhi 2005 also entitled DTC vs Presiding
Officer. The Division Bench held thus :“6. On the issue of whether the payment under
Section 17B of the Act should be from the date of the
award, the learned Single Judge's judgment analyzing
the legislative intendment is unassailable.
The
learned Single Judge in our view has rightly come to
the following finding after taking into account the law
laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Dena
Bank II:
“Before S.17-B was introduced there was no bar
for Courts for awarding wages.
Of course the
workmen had no right to claim it, this section
recognizes such a right. To construe it in a manner
detrimental to workmen would be to defeat its object.”
This further fortifies the view that the wages to be
granted in this Section can be from the date of the
Award especially since the 'Objects' of the amendment
clearly indicate/specify so. In Regional Authority,
Dena Bank & Another V. Ghanshyam, JT 2001
(Suppl.1) SC 229, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has
considered its previous view in Dena Bank I (Supra)
and observed that “the workman should get the last
drawn wages from the date of the Award till the
challenge to the Award is finally decided......”. On first
principles, the Apex Court has held that Orders under
Section 17-B of the I.D. Act should commence with
effect from the date of the Award, thus leaving no
scope any longer for debate.”
Thus on the issue of the date from which
payment under Section 17-B is to be made, we affirm
the view taken by the learned Single Judge.
7.
In so far as reliance by the appellants on Dena
Bank I on the question of minimum wages exceeding
last drawn wages is concerned, the issue was
crystallized by the Hon'ble Supreme Court as to
W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 21 of 43

whether the 'full wages drawn' contemplated by
Section 17-B of the Act meant wages drawn at the time
of termination of employment or wages which would
have been drawn on the date of the Award. It is only
in this context that the Hon'ble Supreme Court
observed that the phrase “full wages last drawn” must
be given its plain and material meaning.”
26.

The Division Bench of this court in Indra Perfumery vs

Sudarshab therein has also held that this court is amply empowered
to direct payment of wages with effect from the date of passing of the
award.

The court in Indra Perfumery Co. Thr. Sudershab

Oberoi vs. Presiding Officer & Ors. 2004 III AD (Delhi) 337
held:“10. The Court is examining the legislation, which
is a welfare legislation. The Labour Court on
arriving at a conclusion that dismissal/termination
is illegal, has to direct reinstatement of the
workman with full back wages. In the instant case,
in view of the order, the workman was entitled to
not only the back wages, but was also entitled to get
current wages, unless he had refused to work. If the
employer, instead of reinstating the workman,
challenges the award and obtains stay order, the
workman will not get the benefit of the order which
ought to flow from the date of the order. It is in
view of this, when an order is made by the Labour
Court, the benefit must flow from the date of the
order passed. Section 17B of the Act protects both
the sides during the pendency of the proceedings in
the High Court and if the proceedings are not
pending, then the workman cannot be denied the
W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 22 of 43

denied the benefit of the order made by the Labour
Court. It is in view of this, it would be just and
proper to say that the workman is entitled to get the
benefit of the order from the date of the passing of
the order.”
27.

In the Sanjit Roy case (supra) related to a case where the

workman was engaged for famine relief and it was urged by the state
that for this reason applicability of the Minimum Wages Act was to be
excluded. Even in these facts the final court held thus :“4. If this be the correct position in law, it is
difficult to see how the constitutional validity of the
Exemption Act in so far as it excludes the
applicability of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 to the
workmen employed in famine relief works can be
sustained.
Article 23, as pointed out above,
mandates that no person shall be required or
permitted to provide labour or service to another on
payment of anything less than the minimum wage
and if the Exemption Act, by excluding the
applicability of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948,
provides that minimum wage may not be paid to a
workman employed in any famine relief work, it
would be clearly violative of Article 23.
The
respondent however contended that when the State
undertakes famine relief work with a view to
providing help to the persons affected by drought
and scarcity conditions, it would be difficult for the
State to comply with the labour laws, because if the
State were required to observe the labour laws, the
potential of the State to provide employment to the
affected persons would be crippled and the State
would not be able to render help to the maximum
number of affected persons and it was for this reason
W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 23 of 43

that the applicability of the Minimum Wages Act,
1948 was excluded in relation to workmen employed
in famine relief work. This contention, plausible
though it may seem is, in my opinion, unsustainable
and cannot be accepted. When the State undertake
famine relief work, it is no doubt true that it does so
in order to provide relief to persons affected by
drought and scarcity conditions but nonetheless, it is
work which enures for the benefit of the State
representing the society and if labour or service is
provided by the affected persons for carrying out
such work, there is no reason why the State should
pay anything less than the minimum wage to the
affected persons. It is not as if a dole or bounty is
given by the State should pay anything less than the
minimum wage to the affected persons. It is not as if
a dole or bounty is given by the State to the affected
persons in order to provide relief to them against
drought and scarcity conditions nor is the work to be
carried out by the affected persons worthless or
useless to the society so that under the guise of
providing work what the State in effect and
substance seeks to do is to give a dole or bounty to
the affected persons. The Court cannot proceed on
the basis that the State would undertake by way of
famine relief, work which is worthless and without
utility for the society and indeed no democratic State
which is administered by a sane and sensible
Government would do so because it would be sheer
waste of human labour and resource which can
usefully be diverted into fruitful and productive
channcels leading to the welfare of the community
and creation of national asset or wealth. It is
difficult to appreciate why the State should require
the affected persons to provide labour or service on
work which is of no use to the society, instead of
simply distributing dole or bounty amongst the
affected persons. There is no reason why the State
W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 24 of 43

should resort to such a camouflage.
The
presumption therefore must be that the work
undertaken by the State by way of famine relief is
useful to the society and productive in terms of
creation of some asset or wealth and when the State
exacts labour or service from the affected persons for
carrying out such work, for example, a bridge or a
road, which has utility for the society and which is
going to augment the wealth of the State, there can
be no justification for the State not to pay the
minimum wage to the affected persons. The State
cannot be permitted to take advantage of the
helpless condition of the affected persons and exact
labour or service from them on payment of less than
the minimum wage. No work of utility and value can
be allowed to be constructed on the blood and sweat
of persons who are reduced to a state of helplessness
on account of drought and scarcity conditions. The
State cannot under the guise of helping these
affected persons exact work of utility and value from
them without paying them the minimum wage.
Whenever any labour or service is taken by the State
from any person, whether he be affected by drought
and scarcity conditions or not, the State must pay, at
the least, minimum wage to such person on pain of
violation of Article 23 and the Exemption Act in so
far as it excludes the applicability of the Minimum
Wages Act, 1948 to workmen employed on famine
relief work and permits payment of less than the
minimum wage to such workmen, must be held to be
invalid as offending the provisions of Article 23. The
Exemption Act cannot in the circumstances be relied
upon by the respondent as exempting it from the
liability to pay minimum wage to the workmen
engaged in the construction work of Madanganj
Harmara Road.”
28.

In People's Union for Democratic Rights vs Union of

W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 25 of 43

India AIR 1982 SC 1472, it was held by the Supreme Court that :“......we are, therefore, are of the view that where a
person provides labour of service to another for
remuneration which is less than the minimum wages,
the labour or service provided by him clearly falls
within the scope and ambit of the words 'forced
labour' under Article 23. Such a person would be
entitled to come to the court for enforcement of his
fundamental right minimum wages to him so that the
labour or service provided by him ceases to be 'forced
labour' and the breach of Article 23 is remedied.
I must, therefore, hold consistently with this
decision that where as person provides labour or
service to another for remuneration which is less
than the minimum wages, the labour or service
provided by him clearly falls within the meaning of
the words 'forced labour' and attracts the
condemnation of Article 23. Every person who
provides labour or service to another is entitled at the
least to the minimum wage and if anything less than
the minimum wage is paid to him he can complain of
violation of his fundamental right under Article 23
and ask the court to direct payment of the minimum
wages to him so that the breach of Article 23 may be
abated.”
29.

It is therefore well settled that the obligation to pay minimum

wages is as derived from the provisions of the Constitution. It is also
well settled that minimum wages notified by the authorities are a fair
amount of what would be required to be paid to a workman to enable
the workman to keep body and soul together.

W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 26 of 43

Therefore, for the sole purpose of arriving at an adequate
amount of subsistence allowance, the minimum wages notified by
authorities are a fair index and would require to be paid to the
workman.
Thus, while exercising jurisdiction under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India, the court is adequately empowered to grant
relief beyond the restriction of Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes
Act and can make an order granting interim wages beyond the last
drawn wages.

It has also been pronounced in several judicial

pronouncements including by the Division Bench of this court that an
order in this behalf can be made effective from the date of passing of
the industrial award in favour of the workman and that the minimum
wages notified by the authorities under the Minimum Wages Act are
a fair amount that deserves to be paid to the workman as subsistence
allowance.
30.

So far as the expression “gainful employment in an

establishment” is concerned, it has been held by the courts that the
self-employment too is not employment in an establishment. This
question fell for consideration before the Apex Court in (1984) 4

W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 27 of 43

SCC 635 entitled Rajinder Kumar Kundra Vs. Delhi
Administration while considering the question relating to award of
back wages, the court noticed thus:“It was next contended on behalf of the
appellant that reinstatement with full back
wages be awarded to him. Mr. P.K. Jain, learned
counsel for the employer countered urging that
there is evidence to show that the appellant was
gainfully employed since the termination of
service and therefore he was not entitled
to
back wages. In support of this submission Mr.
Jain pointed out that the appellant in his crossexamination has admitted that during his forced
absence from employment since the date of
termination of his service, he was maintaining
his family by helping his father-in-law Tara
Chand who owns a coal depot, and that he and
the members of his family lived with his fatherin-law and that he had no alternative source of
maintenance.
If
this
is
gainful
employment, the employer can contend
that the dismissed employee in order to
keep his body and soul together had
taken to begging and that would as well
be a gainful employment. The gross
perversity with which the employer had
approached this case has left us stunned. If the
employer after an utterly unsustainable
termination order of service wants to deny back
wages on the ground that the appellant and the
members of his family were staying with the
father-in-law of the appellant as there was no
alternative source of maintenance and during
this period appellant was helping his father-inlaw of the appellant as there was no alternative
W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 28 of 43

source of maintenance and during this period
appellant was helping his father-in-law Tara
Chand who had a coal depot, it cannot be said
that the appellant was gainfully employed. This
cannot be said to be gainful employment so as to
reject the claim for back wages. There is no
evidence on the record to show that the
appellant was gainfully employed during the
period of his absence from service. Therefore,
the appellant would be entitled to full back
wages and all consequential benefits.”

31.

In 2000 1 LLJ 1012 entitled Taj Services Limited Vs.

Industrtial Tribunal - 1 & Others it has been held that:“ 6. Workmen can be denied the benefits under
Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes Act only
when it is proved to the satisfaction of
the Court that the workmen have been
employed and have been receiving
adequate remuneration during the
period of pendency of the writ petition.
In the case of workmen other than
respondent Nos. 2, 4 & 10 there is no
allegation by the management that they
have been employed and have been
receiving adequate remuneration during
the pendency of the writ petition. Even in
the case of the respondent Nos.2, 4 & 10 the
allegation is that they are running their own
business but the said allegation is denied by the
learned Counsel for the respondents. According
to the learned Counsel for the respondents, even
if the survival of himself and his family, it will
not disentitle the workman for the benefits
W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 29 of 43

under Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes
Act. The learned Counsel for the respondents
also contended that the proviso to Section 17-B
of the Industrial Disputes Act would be attracted
only in the case of the employment under
another employer and receivinHg adequate
remuneration. I find force in the contention of
the learned Counsel. As per Section 17-B the
workman is required to file an affidavit to the
effect that he had not been “employed in any
establishment”. Hence under the proviso to
Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes
Act what is required to be proved by the
employer is that the workman had been
employed in any establishment and had
been receiving adequate remuneration
from such employment. Being employed
for remuneration in an establishment
means employment under another
employer. It is different from running
one's own business or trade in order to
remain alive to see the end of the
litigation. Hence I accept the contention of the
learned Counsel for workmen that respondents
2, 4 and 10 cannot be denied the benefit under
Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes Act on
the ground that they are running their own
business and are receiving profit from such
business.
7.
At any rate, apart from the
averments in the reply of the employer,
there is no sufficient material before this
Court to come to the conclusion that
respondent Nos. 2, 4 and 10 have been
running the alleged business. Also there is
nothing to prove that they have been receiving
adequate remuneration. Once the workman has
W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 30 of 43

filed an affidavit to the effect that he had not
been employed in any establishment during the
period of pendency of the proceedings in Court, t
he onus is on the employer to prove to the
satisfaction of the Court that the workman had
been so employed and had been receiving
adequate remuneration. In this case the
employer has not discharged his duty of
proving to the satisfaction of this Court
that the above mentioned three workmen
had been employed in any establishment
and had been receiving adequate
remuneration during the pendency of the
writ petition. Hence I do not find any reason
to deny the benefits of Section 17-B of the
Industrial Disputes Act to the workmen
including respondent Nos. 2, 4 & 10.”

32.

It would be useful to advert to the pronouncement of this court

reported at 109 (2004) DLT 1 entitled M/s Birdhi Chand
Naunag Ram Jain Vs. P.O., Labour Court No.IV & Others.
In this case in answer to the workman's application under Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 management allegation that
the workman was selling miscellaneous items in front of Birla
Mandir, New Delhi, the workman filed a rejoinder that the amount
generated by this activity was not sufficient to sustain his family.
Upon

consideration

W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

of

the

rival

Page 31 of 43

contentions

and

judicial

pronouncements on this issue, the court held thus:“In any event, self-employment is not a norm for
denying back wages as the Section 17-B of the ID Act
clearly stipulates employment in an establishment.
Respondent No.3/applicant is clearly not employed in
any establishment. If in order to sustain himself, the
respondent no.3enters into a self-employed vocation,
it cannot be termed as `employment in an
establishment' contemplated by Section 17-B of the ID
Act. However, therefore the plea of Mr. Sabharwal
which merits consideration is that the writ petition
was filed in September, 1999 and the application
under Section 17-B of the ID Act was filed only on 1st
September, 2001. There is no explanation given for
this delay. Accordingly, payment under Section 17-B
is not to be made for the period starting from October,
1999 to August, 2001 as as the respondent
No.3/applicant has failed to give any reason for not
filing the application earlier.”
33.

In the light of the principles of law aforenoticed, isolated

engagement as agricultural labour would not be considered as such
gainful employment which would disentitle to the workman to grant
of interim wages.
34.

I may notice that Section 17B merely requires the workman to

show that he has an industrial award in his favour directing the
management to reinstate him which is challenged and that he is not
gainfully employed. No formal procedure as to the manner in which
such a prayer is to be made to the court other than the workman
W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 32 of 43

being required to show on affidavit.
35.

I may now deal with the submission that though the application

was filed on 4th October, 2004, affidavits which could be considered
as having been properly attested have been sworn only on 28th
October, 2005. For this reason, it is contended that the date of
presentation of the application claiming relief under Section 17B can
take effect only with effect from the date on which these affidavits
were filed.
36.

Undoubtedly, the date on which an application and affidavit in

this behalf is presented before a court, may guide exercise of
discretion in favour of the workman. However, in the instant case,
the workman had filed an application (CM No.10076/2004) seeking
interim wages at the earliest on 27th August, 2004. The application
which was filed was a joint application on behalf of respondent nos.
2-37 through the general secretary of the trade union which was
espousing their cause. There is no dispute that the workmen are
spread over, not only in different places in the same city but are
located in different states as far flung as

Uttar Pradesh, Bihar,

Uttaranchal and Madhya Pradesh. The workmen have complained of

W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 33 of 43

termination of their service with effect from 3rd June, 1998.

No

material has been placed before this court with regard to any of the
workers having any source of income or being so financially placed so
as to be able to subsist on their own steam. In these facts, this court
was required to keep in mind the financial status of the workmen
who undoubtedly have been running from pillar to post in seeking
the order for grant of interim wages to them. By an order dated 18 th
August, 2004, the petitioner was directed to deposit a sum of
Rs.7,500/- towards litigation expenses of the workmen which could
be withdrawn by the general secretary of the Rashtriya Mazdoor
Congress.
37.

It also cannot be disputed that the workman have filed the

application (CM No. 10076/2004) on the first date after they entered
appearance on 18th August, 2004. It cannot therefore be contended
that the workers have delayed seeking relief before this court. It is
not the petitioner's contention that the workmen are persons with
legal background or conversant with filing of applications or the
manner in which verification of affidavits is to be effected. The cause
of the workmen was espoused by the union which representing them

W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 34 of 43

in the industrial adjudication.

The first application in these

circumstances had been filed on behalf of the workmen by the union
whose general secretary had filed the affidavit in support.

The

workmen can also not be faulted in their belief and assessment that
the affidavit of the general secretary was sufficient compliance with
the requirement of Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
The workmen could very well have sought leave to place their
individual affidavits on record. But none was present on their behalf
to do so on 27th August, 2004 when this application was disposed of.
38.

When the second application CM No. 10076/2004 was filed, it

was accompanied by affidavits of all the workmen, the verification
was incorrect. The workmen have been permitted to file additional
affidavits to which the petitioner has filed its response. In any case,
the defect was not in the substance of the affidavit but in the
verification for which no fault can be attributed to the respondents.
The objection raised by the petitioner can be tested on the anvil of the
principles which apply to amendments of pleadings to correct such
defects in pleadings or their verification.

As a result of the

amendment, the defect is cured. The curing of the defect would

W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 35 of 43

relate back to the date of filing of the application.
39.

In the instant case, no material has been placed before this

court to establish a case of gainful employment of the workmen since
the date of passing of the industrial award in their favour.
40.

I may also notice that as back as on 8 th October, 2004, a

statement was made on behalf of the petitioner that he would verify
the last drawn wages of the workmen and take instructions for
depositing the amount in consonance with the provisions of Section
17B of the Act. There has been no compliance of this statement and
the amount in consonance with the provisions of Section 17B of the
Act has also not been deposited.

For this reason as well, the

petitioner cannot possibly be permitted to urge that delay ought to
defeat relief of the respondent, though in my view there is no such
delay in the instant case.
In this background, I am unable to agree with learned counsel
for the petitioner that the respondents have deserved to be held
guilty of abuse of process of law or that the application is malafide.
So far as the requirement of adjudicating on the application under
Section 17B prior to the writ petition is concerned, additionally,

W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 36 of 43

reference may be made to the binding judicial pronouncements of the
Apex Court in (2000) 9 SCC 535 Republican Party of India vs Union
of India And Others.

I also find force in the submissions made by

Mr. Sanjay Parikh, Advocate representing the respondent/applicant
that the prayer of the workmen be not rejected on hyper
technicalities and that there is no objection on the merits of the
workman's application except technical objections with regard to
manner of verification of affidavits.
41.

Inasmuch as this court is adequately empowered to grant wages

with effect from the date of the award, especially in a case where
repeated applications have been made on behalf of the workmen but
orders thereon could not be passed for technical defects, I am of the
view that the workmen deserve to be granted wages with effect from
the date of passing of the award in their favour in the light of the law
laid down by the Apex Court.
42.

The petitioner has not challenged the fact that Shri Dinesh,

respondent no. 30 was a party to the industrial adjudication before
the industrial tribunal. On the contrary, he has been arrayed as a
respondent/party by the petitioner itself before this court.

W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 37 of 43

It,

therefore, does not lie in the mouth of the petitioner to submit that
the workman may not have been a party in the industrial
adjudication which has culminated in the impugned award.

No

categorical statement with regard to the respondent having been
before the industrial tribunal has been made even in the present case.
Shri Dinesh respondent no. 30 has placed on record an affidavit
(page 629) setting out the circumstances in which under wrong
advice he has persuaded to also file a separate case at Faribabad
which he has withdrawn.

Copy of the order passed has been

enclosed. No material whatsoever has been placed before this court
of any gainful employment of respondent no. 30 Shri Dinesh. In
these circumstances, it cannot possibly be held that he was gainfully
employed or that he would not be entitled to grant of wages.
43.

It is a settled principle of law that interim wages which are

admissible during the pendency of the challenge by the management
to an industrial award directing reinstatement into service of the
workmen, have been held to be in the nature of non-refundable
subsistence allowance. Undoubtedly, Section 17B mandates that a
workman who is not gainfully employed would be entitled to an order

W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 38 of 43

granting wages in his favour. Certainly a person who has retired
from his service is not gainfully employed and pension is paid to him
on account of his service after he has superannuated. Therefore, it
cannot possibly be contended that the respondent no. 20, who is
admittedly a pensioner, is gainfully employed. However, the amount
which is being received by him towards the pension from the Indian
Air Force would certainly require to be deducted from the amount
which he would be entitled to be paid by virtue of an order passed in
the present proceedings.
44.

In view of the above, CM No. 11937/2004 and CM 14302/2004

are allowed in respect of the workmen who have filed the affidavits.
The petitioner shall make payment of wages to the workmen at a rate
whichever is higher between the last drawn wages and the wages
which are notified by the statutory authorities from time to time.
This payment shall however be subject to the applicants filing
undertaking by way of affidavit setting out their latest address within
a period of two weeks undertaking that in the event of this court
holding in favour of the petitioner in the writ petition, it shall be
liable to reimburse the the differential amount between the wages

W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 39 of 43

last drawn and the amount paid under orders of this court.
45.

It is however further directed that the respondent no. 20 shall

file an undertaking by way of an affidavit in this court within a period
of two weeks from today setting his correct and complete address as
well as the disclosure of the amount, if any, being received by him on
account of pension from the Indian Air Force. Respondent no. 20
shall give an undertaking to this court to the effect that in the event of
the petitioner succeeding in the challenge made by it in the writ
petition, he shall be liable to reimburse the differential between the
wages last drawn and the amount which is paid under orders of this
court to him. The petitioner shall make payment of wages in terms
of the directions made in the preceding paras to respondent no. 20
after deducting the amount which he is receiving as pension from the
amount ordered to be paid to the workman.
46.

Arrears in terms of the order passed today shall be paid to the

workman at the address disclosed in the undertaking within a period
of four weeks from today.
47.

Month by month wages shall be paid to the workmen at the

same address disclosed in the undertaking on or before the 10 th day

W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 40 of 43

of each English calendar month.
These applications are allowed in the above terms.
48.

CM NO. 1050/2005 (filed by the petitioner)
By this application the petitioner is praying that the application

filed by 32 workmen under Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act
is supported by affidavits which are no affidavits in the eyes of law for
the reason that the same are incorrectly verified and also they are not
residents of or were present at Agra where the affidavits were
attested.

It was further objected that one of the workman Shri

Dinesh was pursuing an industrial adjudication at Faridabad.
Inasmuch as the application has been considered and decided only in
respect of such workmen who have sworn and filed proper affidavits
in accordance with the provisions of Section 17B of the Industrial
Disputes Act and further that Shri Dinesh, respondent no. 30 has
filed a detailed affidavit explaining the circumstances in which the
proceedings at Faridabad were initiated and withdrawn, in my view
nothing survives in this application which is accordingly dismissed.
49.

CM No. 4116/2005
This application has been filed by the petitioner under Section

W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 41 of 43

151 of the CPC placing statement of last drawn wages of the workman
on record and seeking a dismissal of the application filed under
Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act for the reason that
incorrect wages have been stated to be the last drawn wages.
Inasmuch as it has been held that the workman would be required to
be paid at the rate whichever is higher between the wages which were
paid to the workman at the time of their disposal and minimum
wages as are notified by the statutory authorities from time to time,
this application does not detain this court any further. The statement
of wages last drawn is taken on record.
50.

CM NO.15054/2005
By this application the petitioner is praying for hearing and

disposal of the writ petition simultaneously with disposal of the
application under Section 17B on 15th December, 2005.

Long

arguments have been addressed on the applications under Section
17B on behalf of the petitioner and orders have been reserved
thereon. Therefore, hearing in the writ petition was not possible. In
this view of the matter, this application is accordingly disposed of.
These applications are disposed of in the above terms.

W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 42 of 43

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
April 26, 2006
kr

W.P. (C) No. 10941/2004

Page 43 of 43

