IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 4692/2004
Judgment reserved on: 19th December, 2005
Dat e of decision: 26th April, 2006
SHAKUNTLA
... Petitioner
through Mr. R.P. Sharma, Advocate
VERSUS
M/S. TAMANNA SPECIAL SCHOOL .... Respondents
through Mr. Pramod Gupta, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

This writ petition has been filed by the petitioner aggrieved by

an industrial award dated 7th February, 2004 holding that the project
on which she was engaged was not an “industry”. From the facts
proved on record, the petitioner herein was engaged as a helper with
the job of cleaning one room utilised for educating slum children in
W.P.(C) 4692/2004

page 1 of 28

1992 and an additional room from 1999 coupled with the duty of
filling a water pitcher intended for the children.
2.

The respondent is a non-governmental organisation which

commenced running a Balwadi project for giving children of Ekta
Basti in R.K. Puram, Delhi which was named as the 'Badwadi
Karyakram'. This project was being run in the slum and J.J. Clusters
of the Ekta Vihar which was meant to give education to children of
labourers, street vendors and house maids etc.

The project was

operating from one room. Only three people including the petitioner
were engaged for the purpose. After some time, the parents of these
slum children made an appeal to the Commissioner, MCD to allocate
one more room for the project. The Tamana Association which was
running the project also requested the officials of the MCD to grant
some more space. Finally, vide a letter dated 4th March, 1999, use of
one additional room was permitted for the purposes of the project by
the Municipal Corporation of Delhi.
3.

The respondents have placed material on record to the effect

that funding for the project was primarily through donations and
contributions from people from all walks of life who have concern for

W.P.(C) 4692/2004

page 2 of 28

weaker sections of the society and families with low income groups
who do not have the time and means to take care of their children or
to ensure basic education to them. The parents of the children were
required to pay a nominal contribution varying from Rs.5/- to
Rs.10/- which was also not paid by most of the children. The money
collected from such contributions was insufficient, it is stated, to run
the project for even one week.
4.

The representatives of the project were required to go from

dwelling to dwelling and to persuade the parents to allow the children
to attend this programme else they would be given into the vices of
begging, gambling, hooch smuggling, etc if they remain unengaged.
The project involved trips for the children to places of importance as
the Rajghat, Rashtrapati Bhawan, Parliament House, India Gate,
Zoo, Children Parks etc.
5.

The petitioner was engaged as a helper since 1992 with duty

hours from 9 a.m. to 1 p.m., which was increased to 8.30 a.m. to 2.30
p.m., for six days with effect from 12th May, 1998. The petitioner was
being paid a salary of Rs.1,000/- per month.

Due to financial

constraints, the project could not be continued and a notice dated

W.P.(C) 4692/2004

page 3 of 28

20th January, 2001 was exhibitted whereby it was notified to all that
the project would be closed. The project was closed with the consent
of the employees involved in the work as well as the Ekta Basti
inhabitants.
6.

It is noteworthy that the employees who were engaged in this

project were offered adjustment in another project being run by the
Tamana Association which was called the 'School For Drop Out
Children'.

Apart from the petitioner Mrs. Laxmi Bhatia and Mrs.

Reena Samuel, the other employees who were engaged in the Ekta
Basti project were offered adjustment in the other project. Though
Mrs. Laxmi Bhatia and Mrs. Reena Samuel joined this other project,
the petitioner herein did not join the project.
The respondent contends that the workman took her salary for
the month of April, 2001 and never turned up for the project.
Thereafter the petitioner raised a demand notice dated 12th April,
2001 upon the respondent contending that she is entitled to wages as
well as resumption of duty from 4th April, 2001 when her services
were illegally terminated. This demand notice was served upon the
Director of the Tamana Special School being run at Vasant Vihar,

W.P.(C) 4692/2004

page 4 of 28

New Delhi.

The dispute raised by the petitioner resulted in a

reference by the appropriate government under Section 10 of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
7.

It is noteworthy that the workman had set up a plea that she

was employed by the Tamana Special School and she raised a claim
alleging illegal termination of her service as well as entitlement to
reinstatement with full back wages and consequential reliefs. The
respondent contested the claim set up by the petitioner stating that
the petitioner was engaged on the aforenoticed project which had
been closed down and that the workman was offered opportunity to
join another project or a similar project.

After a detailed

consideration of the matter, the reference was answered against the
workman by an award dated 7th February, 2004. Aggrieved thereby,
the petitioner has filed the present writ petition impugning and
assailing this award.
8.

The petitioner has contended that the award was without

jurisdiction and that the labour court had no authority to go into the
issue as to whether the respondent was an industry or not. The main
thrust of the petitioner's challenge is based on the contention that the

W.P.(C) 4692/2004

page 5 of 28

award is not sustainable inasmuch as the labour court permitted an
additional affidavit of the management to be taken on record behind
the back of the workman and denied opportunity to the petitioner to
assail the same.
9.

The issue as to whether the respondent was an industry within

the meaning of Section 2(j) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 or not
is jurisdictional and goes to the root of the matter. There is no
dispute that the respondent association is a non-governmental
organisation engaged in providing opportunities to the children of
the under privileged. The project where the petitioner was engaged
as a helper was a Balwadi Karyakram run by the respondent in a slum
and J.J.colony. The petitioner has cleverly couched her engagement
at the project as an employment with the Tamana Special School
which is stated to be the NGO which was running the project.
However, the petitioner does not disclose her duties or assignment.
10.

The respondents had filed an affidavit by way of evidence in

support of its case on 7th March, 2003.

On 8th July, 2003, the

representative of the petitioner was present before the Labour Court
when the matter was listed. The respondents sought permission of

W.P.(C) 4692/2004

page 6 of 28

the labour court to file an additional affidavit. No objection
whatsoever was raised by the authorised representative of the
petitioner and the request of the management was allowed.
On the next date of hearing fixed on 28th July, 2003, the
respondent filed its additional evidence by way of an affidavit. The
matter was thereafter adjourned to enable the petitioner/workman to
effectively cross-examine the management witness. The witness of
the management was cross examined on 10th September, 2003
whereafter the matter was kept for arguments and judgment.
11.

In view of the objections raised by the petitioner, the original

record of the labour court had been called for and has been perused.
The aforestated position is born out by the record.

In these

circumstances, it is not open to the petitioner to possibly contend
that the additional affidavit of the respondent was taken on record
behind its back. The petitioner failed to take any objection when the
request of the management was allowed. No objection was taken by
the petitioner on the several dates when the matter was listed
thereafter or when the affidavit was filed or adjourned for cross
examination of the deponent by the petitioner.

W.P.(C) 4692/2004

page 7 of 28

Therefore, I find no force in the submission of the petitioner
that the additional affidavit was taken on record behind its back or
that it was denied opportunity to effectively cross examine the
management's witness.
12.

The jurisdiction of this court while examining a challenge to an

industrial adjudication is not in the nature of appellate or revisional
jurisdiction.

In exercise of the extraordinary jurisdiction under

Article 226 of the Constitution of India, such discretion can be
exercised within limited parameters which have been deleniated by
the Apex Court in several binding judicial pronouncements. In this
behalf, reference may appropriately be made to the pronouncement
of the Apex Court.
13.

Noteworthy in this behalf are the observations of the Apex

Court in AIR 2000 SC 1508 entitled Indian Overseas Bank
Vs. I.O.B. Staff Canteen Workers' Union & Another in which
it was held thus:“The learned single Judge seems to have
undertaken an exercise, impermissible for him
in exercising writ jurisdiction, by liberally
reappreciating the evidence and drawing
conclusions of his own on pure questions of fact,
unmindful, though aware fully, that he is not
W.P.(C) 4692/2004

page 8 of 28

exercising any appellate jurisdiction over the
awards passed by a Tribunal, presided over by a
Judicial Officer. The findings of fact recorded
by a fact-finding authority duly constituted for
the purpose and which ordinarily should be
considered to have become final, cannot be
disturbed for the mere reason of having been
based on materials or evidence not sufficient or
credible in the opinion of the writ Court to
warrant those findings at any rate, as long as
they are based upon some material which are
relevant for the purpose or even on the ground
that there is yet another view which can b
reasonably and possibly one taken.
The
Division Bench was not only justified but well
merited in its criticism of the order of the
learned single Judge and in ordering restoration
of the Award of the Tribunal. On being taken
through the findings of the Industrial Tribunal
as well as the order of the learned single Judge
and the judgment of the Division Bench, we are
of the view that the Industrial Tribunal had
overwhelming materials which constituted
ample and sufficient basis for recording its
findings, as it did, and the manner of
consideration undertaken, the objectivity of
approach adopted and reasonableness of
findings recorded seem to be unexceptionable.
The only course, therefore, open to the writ
Judge was the relevant criteria laid down by this
Court, before sustaining the claim of the canteen
workmen, on the facts found and recorded by
the fact-finding authority and not embark upon
an exercise of re-assessing the evidence and
arriving at findings of ones own, altogether
giving a complete go-bye even to the facts
specifically found by the Tribunal below.”

W.P.(C) 4692/2004

page 9 of 28

14.

In Sangram Singh v. Election Tribunal, Kotah and

another, AIR 1955 SC 425, the court held thus :“13. The jurisdiction which Arts.226 and 136 confer
entitles the High Courts and this Court to examine
the decisions of all Tribunals to see whether they
have acted illegally. That jurisdiction cannot be
taken away by a legislative device that purports to
confer power on a tribunal to act illegally by enacting
a statute that its illegal acts shall become legal the
moment the tribunal chooses to say they are legal.
The legality of an act or conclusion is something that
exists outside and apart from the decision of an
inferior tribunal.
It is a part of the law of the land which cannot
be finally determined or altered by any tribunal
of limited jurisdiction. The High Courts and the
Supreme Court alone can determine what the
law of the land is 'vis a vis' all other courts and
tribunals and they alone can pronounce with
authority and finality on what is legal and what
is not. All that an inferior tribunal can do is to
reach a tentative conclusion which is subject to
review under Arts. 226 and 136. Therefore, the
jurisdiction of the High Courts under Art.226
with that of the Supreme Court above them
remains to its fullest extent despite S.105.
1.
(14)
That, however, is not to say that the
jurisdiction will be exercised whenever there is an
error of law. The High Courts do not and should
not, act as Courts of appeal under Art.226. Their
powers are purely discretionary and though no
limits can be placed upon that discretion it must
be exercised along recognised lines and not
arbitrarily; and one of the limitations imposed by
W.P.(C) 4692/2004

page 10 of 28

the Courts on themselves is that they will not
exercise jurisdiction in this class of case unless
substantial injustice has ensued, or is likely to
ensure. They will not allow themselves to be
turned into Courts of appeal or revision to set
right mere errors of law which do not occasion
injustice in a broad and general sense, for, though
no legislature can impose limitations on these
constitutional powers it is a sound exercise of
discretion to bear in mind the policy of the
legislature to have disputes about these special
rights decided as speedily as may be. Therefore,
writ petitions should not lightly enetertained in
this class of case.
A.M.Allison and another v. B.L.Sen and others, AIR
1957 SC 227,
(17) There are moreover special reasons why we
should not interfere with the orders of the Deputy
Commissioner, Sibsagar, in these appeals. The
matters do not come to us by way of appeal directly
from the orders of the Deputy Commissioner,
Sibsagar.
They were the subject, in the first
instance, of proceedings under Article 226 of the
Constitution in the High Court of Assam.
Proceedings by way of certiorari are 'not of course”.
(Vide Halsbury's 'Laws of England', Hailsham
(Edition, Vol.9, paras 1480 and 1481, pp.877-878).
The High Court of Assam had the power to refuse
the writs if it was satisfied that there was no failure
of justice, and in these appeals which are directed
against the orders of the High Court in application
under Art.226, we could refuse to interfere unless we
are satisfied that the justice of the case requires it.
But we are not so satisfied. We are of opinion that,
having regard to the merits which have been
concurrently found in favour of the respondents
both by the Deputy Commissioner, Sibsagar, and the
W.P.(C) 4692/2004

page 11 of 28

High Court, we should decline to interfere.”
15.

In DTC v. The Presiding Officer & Ors., WP(C)

2575/1986 decided on 30.11.2004 (S.B.), the court held thus :“16. It was further submitted that the scope of
judicial review is very limited in such cases. The
High Court can quash an award of the Industrial
Tribunal when it has committed an error of law
apparent on the face of the record or when the
findings of fact are perverse. Reference was made
to J.D.Jain vs. Management of State Bank of
India, (1982) 1 SCC 143.
It was submitted,
relying upon Indian Overseas Bank vs. I.O.B.
Staff Canteen Workers' Union, (2000) 4
SCC 245 that the writ court does not exercise
appellate jurisdiction over findings of fact arrived
at by the Industrial Tribunal. Findings of fact
should be considered as final and should not be
disturbed.
“for the mere reason of having been
based on materials or evidence not sufficient or
credible in the opinion of the writ court to warrant
those findings, at any rate, as long as they are based
upon some material which are relevant for the
purpose or even on the ground that there is yet
another view which can reasonably and possibly be
taken.”
27.Quite apart from the above, learned counsel for
the Workmen is right when he says that this
Court should interfere with a decision of a
Tribunal under Article 226 of the Constitution
only if there is substantial injustice.
In
Sangram Singh vs. Election Tribunal, AIR
1955 SC 425 the Supreme Court in paragraph
W.P.(C) 4692/2004

page 12 of 28

14 of the Report said:
“The High Courts do not, and should not, act as
Courts of appeal under Art.226. Their powers are
purely discretionary and though no limits can be
placed upon that discretion it must be exercised
along recognised lines and not arbitrarily; and one
of the limitations imposed by the Courts on
themselves is that they will not exercise jurisdiction
in this class of case unless substantial injustice has
ensured, or is likely to ensue. They will not allow
themselves to be turned into Courts of appeal or
revision to set right mere errors of law which do not
occasion injustice in a broad and general sense, for,
though no legislature can impose limitations on
these constitutional powers it is a sound exercise of
discretion to bear in mind the policy of the
legislature to have disputes about these special
rights decided as speedily as may be.”
28.To the same effect are the observations of the
Supreme Court in A.M.Allison vs. B.L.Sen,
AIR 1957 SC 227 wherein it was said:
“......Proceedings by way of certiorari are “not of
course”. ((Vide Halsbury's 'Laws of England',
Hailsham (Edition, Vol.9, paras 1480 and 1481,
pp.877-878). The High Court of Assam had the
power to refuse the writs if it was satisfied that
there was no failure of justice, and in these appeals
which are directed against the orders of the High
Court in application under Art.226, we could refuse
to interfere unless we are satisfied that the justice
of the case requires it. But we are not so satisfied.
We are of opinion that, having regard to the merits
which have been concurrently found in favour of
the respondents both by the Deputy Commissioner,
W.P.(C) 4692/2004

page 13 of 28

Sibsagar, and the High Court, we should decline to
interfere. ”
16.

This court in the judgment dated 30th November, 2004 in DTC

vs P.O. Industrial Tribunal & Anr. (supra) also held thus :
“16. It was further submitted that the scope of
judicial review is very limited in such cases. The
High Court can quash an award of the Industrial
Tribunal when it has committed an error of law
apparent on the face of the record or when the
findings of fact are perverse. Reference was made to
J.D. Jain vs. Management of State Bank of
India, (1982) 1 SCC 143. It was submitted,
relying upon Indian Overseas Bank vs. I.O.B.
Staff Canteen Workers' Union, (2004) 4 SCC
245 that the writ court does not exercise appellate
jurisdiction over findings of fact arrived at by the
Industrial Tribunal. Findings of fact should be
considered as final and should not be disturbed
“for the mere reason of having been
based on materials or evidence not
sufficient or credible int he opi8nion of
the writ court to warrant those findings,
at any rate, as long as they are based
upon some material which are relevant
for the purpose or even on the ground
that there is yet another view which can
reasonably and possibly be taken.”
27. Quite apart from the above, learned counsel
for the Workmen is right when he says that this
Court should interfere with a decision of a Tribunal
under Article 226 of the Constitution only if there is
substantial injustice. In Sangram Singh vs.
Election Tribunal, AIR 1955 SC 425 the
Supreme Court in paragraph 14 of the Report said :
“The High Courts do not, and should not,
W.P.(C) 4692/2004

page 14 of 28

act as Courts of appeal under Art.226.
Their powers are purely discretionary
and though no limits can be placed upon
that discretion it must be exercised along
recognised lines and not arbitrarily; and
one of the limitations imposed by the
Courts on themselves is that they will not
exercise jurisdiction in this class of case
unless substantial injustice has ensued,
or is likely to ensue. They will not allow
themselves to be turned into Courts of
appeal or revision to set right mere
errors of law which do not occasion
injustice in a broad and general sense,
for, though no legislature can impose
limitations on these constitutional
powers it is a sound exercise of
discretion to bear in mind the policy of
the legislature to have disputes about
these special rights decided as speedily
as may be.”
28. To the same effect are the observations of the
Supreme Court in A.M. Allison vs B.L. Sen, AIR
1957 SC 227 wherein it was said :
“... Proceedings by way of certiorari are”not
of course”. (Vide Halsbury's 'Laws of
England', Hailsham Edition, Vol. 9, paras
1480 and 1481, pp. 877-878). The High
Court of Assam had the power to refuse the
writs if it was satisfied that there was no
failure of justice, and in these appeals
which re directed against the orders of the
High Court in applications under Art. 226,
we could refuse to interfere unless we are
satisfied that the justice of the case requires
it. But we are not so satisfied. We are of
opinion that, having regard to the merits
which have been concurrently found in
W.P.(C) 4692/2004

page 15 of 28

favour of the respondents both by the
Deputy Commissioner, Sibsagar, and the
High Court, we should decline to interfere.”
17.

In AIR 1955 SC 425 Sangram Singh vs Election

Tribunal, Kotah & Anr. it was held thus :“13. The jurisdiction which Arts. 226 and 136
confer entitles the High Courts and this Court to
examine the decisions of all Tribunals to see
whether they have acted illegally.
That
jurisdiction cannot be taken away by a legislative
device that purports to confer power on a tribunal
to act illegally by enacting a statute that its illegal
acts shall become legal the moment the tribunal
chooses to say they are legal. The legality of an
act or conclusion is something that exists outside
and apart from the decision of an inferior
tribunal. xxx
14. That, however, is not to say that the
jurisdiction will be exercised whenever there is an
error of law. The High Courts do not, sand should
not, act as Courts of appeal under Art. 226. Their
powers are purely discretionary and though no
limits can be placed upon that discretion it must
be exercised along recognised lines and not
arbitrarily; and one of the limitations imposed by
the Courts on themselves is that they will not
exercise jurisdiction in this class of case unless
substantial injustice has ensued, or is likely to
ensue. They will not allow themselves to be
turned into Courts of appeal or revision to set
right mere errors of law which do not occasion
injustice in a broad and general sense, for though
no legislature can impose limitations on these
constitutional powers it is a sound exercise of
discretion to bear in mind the policy of the
W.P.(C) 4692/2004

page 16 of 28

legislature to have disputes about these special
rights decided as speedily as may be. Therefore,
writ petitions should not be lightly entertained in
this class of case.”
18.

In AIR 1957 SC 227 A.M. Allison & Anr. Vs B.L. Sen &

Ors. it was held thus :“17. xxx Proceedings by way of certiorari are
“not of course”. (Vide Halsbury's 'Laws of
England', Hailsham Edition, Vol.9, paras 1480
and 1481, pp. 877-878). The High Court of
Assam had the power to refuse the writs if it was
satisfied that there was no failure of justice, and
in these appeals which are directed against the
orders of the High Court in applications under
Art. 226, we could refuse to interfere unless we
are satisfied that the justice of the case requires
it. But we are not so satisfied. We are of opinion
that, having regard to the merits which have
been concurrently found in favour of the
respondents both by the Deputy Commissioner,
Sibsagar, and the High Court, we should decline
to interfere.”
19.

So far as the objection of the respondent that the project was

not covered within the definition of 'industry' under Section 2 (j) of
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, reference has to be made to the
binding and authoritative enunciation of the law by the Apex Court in
Banglore Water Supply & Sewerage Board vs A. Rajappa
& Ors. (1978) 2 SCC 213 wherein the court has authoritatively

W.P.(C) 4692/2004

page 17 of 28

laid the principles thus:“102. Can charity be 'industry'? This paradox can be
unlocked only by examining the nature of the activity
of the charity, for there are charities and charities.
The grammer of labour law in a pluralist society tells
us that the worker is concerned with wages and
conditions of service, the employer with output and
economies and the community with peace,
production and stream of supply. This complex of
work, wealth and happiness, firmly grasped, will
dissolve the dilemma of the law bearing on charitable
enterprises. Charity is free ; industry is business.
Then how? A lay look may scare ; a legal look will see
; a social look will see through a hiatus inevitable in a
sophisticated society with organisational diversity
and motivational dexterity.
103. If we mull over the major decisions, we get a
hang of the basic structure of 'industry' in its legal
anatomy. Bedrocked on the grundnorms, we must
analyse the elements of charitable economic
enterprises, established and maintained for satisfying
human wants. Easily, three broad categories emerge;
more may exist. The charitable element enlivens the
operations at different levels in these patterns and
the legal consequences are different, viewed from the
angle of 'industry'. For income-tax purposes, Trusts
Act or company law or registration law or penal code
requirements the examination will be different. We
are concerned with a benignant disposition towards
workmen and a trichotomy of charitable enterprises
run for producing and/or supplying goods and
services, organized systematically and employing
workmen, is scientific.
104. The first is one where the enterprise, like any
other, yields profits but they are siphoned off for
altruistic objects. The second is one where the
institution makes no profit but hires the services of
W.P.(C) 4692/2004

page 18 of 28

employees as in other like businesses but the goods
and services, which are the output, are made
available, at low or no cost, to the indigent needy who
re priced out of the market. The third is where the
establishment is oriented on a humane mission
fulfilled by men who work, not because they are paid
wages, but because they share the passion for the
cause and derive job satisfaction from their
contribution. The first two are industries, the third
not. What is the test of identity whereby these
institutions with eleemosynary inspiration fall or do
not fall under the definition of industry ?
105. xxx
106. It is common ground that the first category of
charities is disqualified for exemption. If a business
is run for production and or supply of goods and
services with an eye on profit, it is plainly an
industry. The fact that the whole or substantial part
of the profits so earned is diverted for purely
charitable purposes does not affect the nature of the
economic activity which involves the co-operation of
employer and employee and results in the production
of goods and services.
The workers are not
concerned about the destination of the profits. They
work and receive wages. They are treated like any
other workmen in any like industry. All the features
of an industry, as spelt out from the definition by the
decision of this Court, are fully present in these
charitable businesses. In short, they re industries.
The application of the income for philanthropic
purposes, instead of filling private coffers, makes no
difference either to the employees or to the character
of the activities. Good Samaritans can be clever
industrialists.
107. The second species of charity is really n
allotropic modification of the first. If a kind-hearted
businessman or high-minded industrialist or serviceminded operator hires employees like his nonW.P.(C) 4692/2004

page 19 of 28

philanthropic counterparts and, in co-operation with
them, produces and supplies goods or services to the
lowly and the lost, the needy and the ailing without
charging them any price or receiving a negligible
return, people regard him as of charitable disposition
and his enterprise as a charity. But then, so far as the
workmen are concerned, it boots little whether he
makes available the products free to the poor. They
contribute labour in return for wages and conditions
of service. For them the charitable employer is
exactly like a commercial-minded employer. Both
exact hard work, both pay similar wages, both treat
them as human machine cogs and nothing more. The
material difference between the commercial and the
compassionate employers is not with reference to the
workmen but with reference to the recipients of
goods and services. Charity operates not vis-a-vis the
workmen in which case they will be paying a liberal
wage and generous extras with no prospect of strike.
The beneficiaries of the employer's charity are the
indigent consumers. Industrial law does not take
note of such extraneous factors but regulates
industrial relations between employers and
employers, employers and workmen and workmen
and workmen. From the point of view of the
workmen there is no charity. For him charity must
begin at home. From these strands of thought flows
the conclusion that the second group may
legitimately and legally be described as industry. The
fallacy in the contrary contention lies in shifting the
focus from the worker and the industrial activity to
the disposal of the end product. This law has nothing
to do with that. The income-tax law may have, social
opinion may have.
xxxx
xxxx
xxxx
108. Some of the appellants may fall under the
second category just described. Wile we are not
investigating into the merits of those appeals, we may
W.P.(C) 4692/2004

page 20 of 28

as well indicate, in a general way, that the Gandhi
Ashram, which employs workers like spinners and
weavers and supplies cloth or other handicraft at
concessional rates to needy rural consumers, may not
qualify for exemption. Even so, particular incidents
may have to be closely probed before pronouncing
with precision upon the nature of the activity. If
cotton or yarn is given free to workers, if charkhas
are made available free for families, if fair price is
paid for the net product and substantial charity thus
benefits the spinners, weavers and other
handicraftsmen, one may have to look closely into the
character of the enterprise. If employees are hired
and their services are rewarded by wages – whether
on cottage industry or factory basis – the enterprises
become industries, even if some kind of concession is
shown and even if the motive and project may be to
encourage and help poor families and find them
employment.
A compassionate industrialist is
nevertheless an industrialist.
However, if raw
material is made available free and the finished
product is fully paid for – rather exceptional to
imaging – the conclusion may be hesitant but for the
fact that the integrated administrative, purchase,
marketing, advertising and other functions are like in
trade and business. This makes them industries.
Noble
objectives, pious purposes,
spiritual
foundations and developmental projects are no
reason not to implicate these institutions as
industries.
xxxx
140. 'Industry', as denied in Section 2(j) and
explained in Banerji (supra), has a wide import.
(a) Where (i) organised by co-operation between
employer and employee (the direct and substantial
element is chimerical) (iii) for the production and/or
distribution of goods and services calculated to
satisfy human wants and wishes (not spiritual or
W.P.(C) 4692/2004

page 21 of 28

religious but inclusive of material things or services
geared to celestial bliss e.g. making, on a large scale
prasad or food), prima facie, there is an 'industry' in
that enterprise.
(b) Absence of profit motive or gainful objective is
irrelevant, be the venture in the public, joint, private
or other sector.
(c) the true focus is functional and the decisive test
is the nature of the activity with special emphasis on
the employer-employee relations.
(d) If the organisation is a trade or business it does
not cease to be one because of philanthropy
animating the undertaking.
141. xxx
142. Application of these guidelines should not stop
short of their logical reach by invocation of creeds,
cults or inner sense of incongruity or outer sense of
motivation for or resultant of the economic
operations. The ideology of the Act being industrial
peace, regulation and resolution of industrial
disputes between employer and workmen, the range
of this statutory ideology must inform the reach of
the statutory definition. Nothing less, nothing more.
(a) The consequences are (i) professions, (ii) clubs,
(iii) educational institutions, (iv) co-operatives, (v)
research institutes (vi) charitable projects and (vii)
other kindred adventures, if they fulfil the triple tests
listed in I (supra), cannot be exempted from the
scope of Section 2(j).
(b) A restricted category of professions, clubs, cooperatives and even gurukulas and little research
labs, may qualify for exemption if, in simple
ventures, substantially and, going by the dominant
nature criterion, substantively, no employees are
entertained but in minimal matters, marginal
employees are hired without destroying the nonemployee character of the unit.
(c) If, in a pious or altruistic mission many employ
W.P.(C) 4692/2004

page 22 of 28

themselves, free or for small honoraria or like return,
mainly drawn by sharing in the purpose or cause,
such as lawyers volunteering to run a free legal
services clinic or doctors serving in their spare hours
in a free medical centre or ashramites working at the
bidding of the holiness, divinity or like central
personality, and the services are supplied free or at
nominal cost and those who serve are not engaged for
remuneration or on the basis of master and servant
relationship, then, the institution is not an industry
even if stray servants, manual or technical, are hired.
Such elemosynary or like undertakings alone are
exempt – not other generosity, compassion,
developmental passion or project.”
20.

In the instant case, the respondent has stated that it was

running the project on purely paid contributions received from the
public and by notional payments by the parents of the slum children
of Rs.5/- or Rs.10/- which also were not being paid by them. The
Apex

Court

has

drawn

a

clear

distinction

between

such

establishments which would fall within the definition of industry and
those which will not. The petitioner was aware of the nature of the
project when he joined it. From the nature of its activities the project
falls clearly within the exceptions carved out in para 142 (c) of the
judgment in Bangalore Water Supply case and is not covered under
the definition of 'industry' in Section 2 (j) of the statute.
21.

In this regard reference can also be appropriately made to the

W.P.(C) 4692/2004

page 23 of 28

pronouncement of the Apex Court in JT 2003 (3) SC 615 M.D.,
U.P. Land Development Corporation & Anr vs. Amar Singh
& Ors. In this pronouncement, the court held thus:“10. The letter dated 22.2.1993 of the joint secretary,
U.P. Government extracted above, in clear terms states
that 260 posts of different categories were created for
the appellant-corporation, against which 140 posts
were already occupied by the incumbents and 120
posts were still left vacant; those 120 posts were kept
suspended and in lieu thereof permission was given to
fill 107 posts temporarily newly created for the purpose
of U.P. Sodic Land Reclamation Project sponsored by
the World Bank. From these odcuments it is clear that
the respondents were never recruited as against
regularly sanctioned posts on a regular basis. Reading
of these documents and the contentions raised on
either side go to show that the appointments of the
respondents were temporary under the 'Million Wells
Scheme' aforementioned. When the work of the
scheme had come to an end, the respondents were not
entitled to claim regularisation of their services. Even
though their services were continued after 31.3.1994 by
virtue of an interim order passed in the writ petition,
they cannot claim benefit of regularisation of their
services as a matter of right. This Court in State of
Himachal Pradesh v. Nodha Ram and Ors. in para 4
has stated thus:
“4. It is seen that when the project is
completed and closed due to non-availability
of funds the employees have to go along with
its closure. The High Court was not right in
giving the directions to regularise them or to
continue them in other places. No vested right
W.P.(C) 4692/2004

page 24 of 28

is created in temporary employment.
Directions cannot be given to regularise their
services in the absence of any existing
vacancies nor can directions be given to the
State to create posts in a nonexistent
establishment.
The court would adopt
pragmatic approach in giving directions. The
directions would amount to creating of posts
and continuing them despite non-availability
of the work. We are of the considered view
that the directions issued by the High Court
are absolutely illegal warranting our
interference. The order of the High Court is,
therefore, set aside.”
22.

In JT 2001 (7) SC 80 Bharat Bhawan Trust vs. Bharat

Bhawan Artists Association & Anr. the court held thus :“8. The Bharat Bhawan Trust, as is clear from its
object, to which we have adverted to earlier, is
engaged only in the promotion of art and
preservation of artistic talent. Such activities are not
one of those in which there can be a large scale of
production to involve the cooperation of efforts of
the employer and the employee nor can it be said
that the production of the plays will be a systematic
activity to result in some kind of service. Therefore,
it is doubtful, in spite of the wide connotation given
to 'industry' in BWSSB v. A. Rajappa's case (supra),
if the appellant can be classed as an 'industry' under
the definition given under Section 2(j) of the ID Act
and we need not finally decide this aspect in the
present case.”
23.

There is yet another circumstance which would weigh against

W.P.(C) 4692/2004

page 25 of 28

grant of any relief to the petitioner, even if her contention that her
employer was an industry was to be sustained. The petitioner has not
challenged the fact that the other two employees were also employed
by the respondent on this project. In view of its pending closure, all
of them including the petitioner were offered adjustment in the other
project being run by the respondent called the 'School for Drop Out
Children'. It is also admitted that these two persons joined the same
while the petitioner did not. The petitioner did not disclose such an
offer in the claim filed by her. These facts have been brought out only
by the respondent. The petitioner set up a plea of illegal termination
which has been completely disbelieved by the Labour Court. In this
view of the matter, the findings of fact arrived at by the Labour Court
deserve to be sustained.
24.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on 2005

LLR 541 Sports Authority of India vs Sports Authority of India
Kamgar Union & Others in support of the contention that the
respondent was an industry within the meaning of the expression
given in Section 2 (j) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
The court had found that the Sports Authority of India was a

W.P.(C) 4692/2004

page 26 of 28

society which employs large number of persons in different cadre and
positions for discharge of its objects; it is not a welfare society which
is working for no profit for no return. It was also observed that it was
not a charitable institution.

It was on the basis of its contents,

functions that it was held that this Authority is an industry within the
purview of Section 2 (j) of the Act.
Similarly the pronouncements in 2005 LLR 796 Principal,
Amar Shaheed Inter College vs Presiding Officer, Labour Court and
2004 LLR 83 Delhi Administration vs Presiding Officer, Labour
Court are clearly distinguishable on the facts of the case. In 2004
LLR 83 the petitioner was engaged in the activity of manufacture of
garments while in 2005 LLR 796, the appellant was running an
educational institution.

Neither of these functions fell in the

excepted categories.
In the instant case, the nature of activities performed by the
respondents is clearly distinguishable and the source of finding is
from sheer charity. Therefore these judgments are of no support to
the petitioner.
The project cannot possibly be termed as an industry and for

W.P.(C) 4692/2004

page 27 of 28

this reason also the claim set up by the petitioner in the present writ
petition is wholly misconceived. No other point has been urged.
For all the foregoing reasons, I do not find any merit in the writ
petition which is hereby dismissed. There shall be no order as to
costs.

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
April 26, 2006
kr

W.P.(C) 4692/2004

page 28 of 28

