REPORTABLE
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.9 of 2003
Date of decision :27th October, 2004
COL.O.P. BAJAR (RETD.) & ORS.
... Petitioners
through Mr. S.M. Dalal
Advocate
VERSUS
UOI & OTHERS

.... Respondents
through Mr. Adish C. Aggarwala
Advocate
AND

W.P. (C) No.27/2003
LT. COL. PARTAP SINGH & ORS.
Petitioner
through Mr. S.M. Dalal
VERSUS
UOI & OTHERS

Respondents
through Mr. Adish C. Aggarwala
Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE JUSTICE DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the Judgment?
W.P. (C) No.27/2003

page 1 of 5

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, J (ORAL)
1.
These writ petitions invoke similar questions of facts and law
and, therefore, we propose to dispose of these writ petitions by this
common judgment and order. These writ petitions were filed by the
petitioners challenging the order of the respondents directing for
recovery of payment made on the ground of fixation of pay on reemployment. Notices were issued on these petitions.
2.

During the pendency of these petitions, the respondents have

filed a counter affidavit contending inter alia that similar recoveries are
also sought to be made in respect of about 1333 retired officers due to
pay fixation in respect of re-employed officers at the time of
implementation of Fourth Central Pay Commission's Recommendations.
Therefore, a reference was made by the Service Headquarters with the
proposal that in view of peculiar facts, there could be a waiver of
recoveries on account of fixation of pay on re-employment of Defence
Service Officers. The said recommendations and proposals sent by the
Service Headquarters are pending with the Ministry of Defence for
considerations and no decision has been taken so far.
3.

When the matter was taken up today, the counsel for the

W.P. (C) No.27/2003

page 2 of 5

respondents has placed before us a communication from the Ministry of
Defence dated 26th October, 2004 which refers to Army Headquarters
letter dated 26th October, 2004 on the subject of fixation of pay on reemployment of Defence Service Officers - proposal for waiver of past
recoveries.

It is indicated therefrom that a proposal for waiver of

recovery on account of the fixation of pay on re-employment of Defence
Service Officers is under consideration of the Ministry of Defence. The
contents of the said letter which are relevant are extracted below:-

4.

“2. The proposal for waiver of recovery on account of
the fixation of pay on re-employment of Defence
Service Officers is under consideration of this
Ministry. The total number of affected officers of the
three Services are about 1333. The details of the
amount to be waived in respect of each officers have
been called from Service Headquarters. On receipt of
the relevant information, the proposal will be taken up
by this Ministry with the Ministry of Finance, Deptt.
Of Expenditure for waiver of recovery. The same is
likely to take some time.”
In view of the aforesaid position, it is submitted by the

learned counsel appearing for the respondents that the Ministry could
and should be given some time to take a decision in the matter.
5.

We have considered the rival submissions of the counsel

appearing for the parties. In our considered opinion since a proposal has
already been mooted for waiver of recoveries on account of reemployment of Defence Service Officers and the same is under active
W.P. (C) No.27/2003

page 3 of 5

consideration of the Ministry of Defence, we direct that a decision on the
said proposal shall be taken by the Ministry of Defence as early as
possible in as much as the said question involves the question of fixation
of pay of about 1333 officers. All the particulars shall be collected by
the Service Headquarters and a decision thereto shall be taken by the
Ministry of Defence within two months from today. Thereafter, the said
matter shall be placed before the Ministry of Finance, Department of
Expenditure for taking a final decision in the matter which shall be taken
within six weeks from the date of receipt of the communication from the
Ministry of Defence.
6.

Having gone through the records, we are of the considered

opinion that the aforesaid proposal needs a sympathetic consideration of
both the concerned Ministries, namely Ministry of Defence as also
Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure. We have no hesitation
in our mind that while considering the said proposal, both the Ministries
will take a holistic view in the matter. It is also made clear that till a
final decision is taken by the Ministry of Defence as also by Ministry of
Finance and, may be, by the Ministry of Personnel, no steps shall be
taken for effecting recoveries from the petitioners on account of fixation
of pay of the petitioners.

W.P. (C) No.27/2003

page 4 of 5

Any decision taken on the aforesaid subject by the concerned
Ministries shall be communicated to the petitioners as expeditiously as
possible.
7.

Thereafter, if the petitioners are still aggrieved, it shall be

open to the petitioners to approach this Court with a fresh petition and
the same shall be considered.
9.

In terms of the aforesaid observations and directions, the

petitions stand disposed of.
Copies of the order shall be furnished dasti to the counsel
appearing for the parties.

DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA
(JUDGE)
GITA MITTAL
(JUDGE)
OCTOBER 27, 2004
aa

W.P. (C) No.27/2003

page 5 of 5

