IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 6587/2005
Judgment reserved on: May 16th, 2005
Date of decision: May 27th, 2005
RICHA MALHAN THROUGH RAJBIR SINGH
... Petitioner
through Ms. Geeta Luthra, Advocate
VERSUS
ARMY PUBLIC SCHOOL & ORS
.....Respondents
through Mr. R. Ojha, Advocate
for respondent no. 1
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the Judgment?
No
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
No
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
No
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

This writ petition has been filed by the petitioner

praying for the following reliefs :“a)
Directing the respondent
school to allow the petitioner
to
appear for re-test Class-XI by
awarding her 5 grace marks in
Physics subject;
b)
Pass such order or further
orders that this Hon'ble Court may
W.P.(C) 6587/2005

page 1 of 9

2.

deem fit and proper in the facts and
circumstances of the case.”
There is no dispute to the factual matrix.

The

petitioner has secured 67.2% marks in the class 10th Board
examinations. She was admitted to the science stream in
class 11th. Unfortunately, before the time the petitioner was
to take the examinations, she started having high fever.
She was advised blood test in order to get the correct
diagnose of the cause of her illness. On the 23rd February,
2005, the petitioner received the haematology/serology of
her blood test whereby it was reported as under :“Widal is Strongly +ve('Positive')”
The petitioner was thus diagnosed as suffering
from entric fever commonly known as typhoid.
3.

Despite treatment and regular check ups, the

petitioner had not recovered when her class 11 th final
examination commenced.

The petitioner took all the

examinations on the scheduled date despite her sickness.
The final examination started on 4th March, 2005 and ended
on 17th March, 2005.

Unfortunately when the result was

declared on 30th March, 2005, the petitioner has been
detained in class 11th for not getting the passing marks in
W.P.(C) 6587/2005

page 2 of 9

two subjects i.e. physics and chemistry.
4.

The petitioner contends that according to the

promotion policy of the respondent school, they conduct retest for students who have failed in different subjects.
However, a student has to have obtained at least

25%

marks in each subject to be promoted. If a student scores
less than 25% in any subject, even if the summative total is
33% or more, the student is treated as failed/re-test as the
case may be.
The petitioner is aggrieved by the refusal of the
school to permit a re-test to her in physics and chemistry.
5.

As per the policy of the respondents, re-test is

permissible to the student only if he/she fails in a
maximum two subjects where the student has secured
more than 20% marks in the failing subject.
6.

According to the petitioner, the respondents grant

grace marks to a child as per their policy and the petitioner
as such ought to be granted grace marks up to 10 marks in
two papers i.e. 5 grace marks in each subject.

The

petitioner submits that the present case is a fit case for

W.P.(C) 6587/2005

page 3 of 9

exercise of such discretion in her favour.
7.

The petitioner is stated to have got 31 marks in

chemistry and 27.4 marks in physics which are the two
subjects in which she has failed. Learned counsel for the
petitioner submits that if she is given 5 marks in physics,
then she would be entitled to take the re-test. The claim of
the petitioner is based principally on the plea that the
petitioner could not pass these two subjects only on
account of her sickness and that the rule and policy of the
respondents should not be interpreted to her prejudice in
these circumstances.
8.

Learned counsel for the respondents on the other

hand has vehemently opposed grant of the writ petition and
submits that the provision of re-test/compartment in the
school as per its policy in class 9th and 11th is permissible
only in a minimum in two subjects in which the child has
secured more than 20% marks.

If the child secures less

than 20% marks in one subject, he/she is declared as
failed.
It is further submitted that if a child secures less

W.P.(C) 6587/2005

page 4 of 9

than 25% marks in the annual examination in any subject,
even if the summative total is 33% or more, the child would
stand failed/re-test as the case may be. The provision for
awarding grace marks for promotion for class 9th and 11th is
a maximum or total of 10 grace marks in any two subjects
with the condition of maximum of 5 marks in one subject.
The prayer of the petitioner is opposed on the ground that
the petitioner never disclosed to the school prior to 1st April,
2005 that she was having fever between 26th February,
2005 to 15th March, 2005.

The respondents rejected the

request vide their letter dated 11th April, 2005.

It is

submitted that the grace marks are awarded only for the
purposes of promotion and not for the purposes of
participating in a re-test.

It is further submitted that

special consideration is to be given to children who are
medically unwell and submit medical certificates in advance
and that no medical certificate is entertained from failed
students.
In support of his submission that the rules have to
be strictly complied, reliance has been

W.P.(C) 6587/2005

placed on eh

page 5 of 9

pronouncement of this court in 58(1995) DLT 328 entitled
Master Manish Sood vs Lt. Governor & Ors. and 109(2004)
DLT 71 entitled S.K. Puri & Ors. Vs Lt. Governor, NCT of
Delhi & Ors.
9.

I have given my considered thought to the issues

raised and have carefully perused the available record. It is
not disputed that if the petitioner had submitted a medical
certificate

and

had

not

participated

in

the

entire

examination on the ground of sickness, the respondents
would have permitted her to participate in the re-test
examination for all the subjects and would have promoted
the petitioner to the next class. There is no challenge to the
authenticity or the genuineness of the medical reports and
certificates of the petitioner. The only fault attributed to the
petitioner is that despite her sickness, she took the
examination.
10.

I find that the petitioner is stated to have worked

hard despite her ill-health and had taken the examination
because she did not want her sickness to come in the way
of her taking the same. The submissions made on behalf of

W.P.(C) 6587/2005

page 6 of 9

the respondents may be tested thus.
Despite her sickness, the petitioner secured 74
marks in English, 43 in Biology, 31 in Chemistry and 27.5
in Physics. The petitioner is being denied the benefit of retest in Physics only because she is 2.5 marks short of the
necessary the 30%. The petitioner has a necessary 30% in
Chemistry which should have entitled her to the re-test.
11.

The judgments cited by the respondents are clearly

distinguishable in the facts of the present case.

In S.K.

Puri's case, the child had secured less than 40% marks in
three subjects.

It was not a case where there was any

mitigating circumstances and yet an absolute claim for
entitlement to promotion was set up.

It was in these

circumstances that the claim of the petitioner was denied.
12.

In 58(1999) DLT 328 entitled Master Manish Sood

vs Lt. Governor & Ors., the court held that there must be
clear injustice or blatant abuse of power which would entitle
a child to exercise of discretion in its power. Perusal of the
facts of the case shows that in this case the student had
scored badly in all subjects.

W.P.(C) 6587/2005

There were no mitigating

page 7 of 9

circumstances as sickness.
I find reference has been made to a Rule 35 of the
“Instructions'

Regarding

Assessment,

Evaluation

and

Promotion of the Students” published by the Directorate of
Education, Delhi whereby it was necessary to secure only
25% marks in the failed subject to take a re-test or
compartment.
13.

In the instant case, if the petitioner had not taken

any examination whatsoever on the ground of her sickness,
she would have been entitled to take the compartment
examination/re-test. The award of grace marks is made to
failed students for promotion purposes without taking a retest.

The petitioner is seeking to take the examination

again and not promotion with award of grace marks without
taking a re-test. In my view a student who has failed in the
aggregate is worse off than a student who may have passed
in the aggregate but could not clear one or two subjects on
account of medical reasons.
14.

The sickness of the petitioner has not been

disputed. Having regard to the facts and circumstances of

W.P.(C) 6587/2005

page 8 of 9

the case and the attempt made by the petitioner despite her
sickness, in my view the petitioner ought to be granted the
relief prayed for. It is made clear that this order is being
made only in the facts and circumstances of the present
case and would not be cited as a precedent in any other
case.
15.

Vide orders dated 21st April, 2005, the petitioner

was able to take the re-test in Physics and Chemistry for
the class 11th. The writ petition is allowed. The respondents
are directed to declare the result of the petitioner. In case
she has passed the re-test, she shall be entitled to be
promoted to the next class as per the policy of the
respondents.
There shall be no order as to costs.

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
May 27th, 2005
kr

W.P.(C) 6587/2005

page 9 of 9

