IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 5857/1998
Judgmen t reserved on : April 4, 2006
Da te of decision: 28 April, 2006
MGT. M/S STATE FARMS CORPN.OF INDIA LTD.
... Petitioner
through: Mr. C.N. Sreekumar, Advocate
VERSUS
P.O., INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-II & ANR. ....
Respondent
through: Mr. Sanjay Ghose, Adv. and
Ms. Pragya, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment? Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported in
the Digest? Yes
GITA MITTAL, J
1.

The petitioner has assailed an industrial award dated

18th July, 1998 whereby it has been held that services of the
respondent no. 2 were terminated in violation of Section 25 (F) of
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and his reinstatement into
service and back wages has been directed. The petitioner has
assailed this award primarily on the following grounds:WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 1 of 39

(i) that the workman was appointed as apprentice under the
provisions of Apprentices Act, 1961 and for this reason, the
respondent no. 2 is outside the purview of Industrial Disputes Act,
1947 (referred to as 'the Act' for brevity hereafter) as there is no
relationship of employer and employee.
(ii) The appointment of the petitioner mandated the respondent
no. 2 to take a final test upon completion of his course as an
apprentice for which he was given two chances and upon failure to
clear the same, the contract was liable to be treated as cancelled.
The workman failed in the final test once and did not take the
same at any point thereafter and thereby is not entitled to any
employment with the petitioner.
(iii) The engagement of the respondent no. 2 after completion of
the period of his apprenticeship training was upon his specific
request for extension on the ground of his financial straits on
demise of his father which engagement was of short durations for
specific periods while the result of his test was awaited. The
termination of the services of the respondent no. 2 on expiry of the
period for which he had been appointed did not amount to
retrenchment within the meaning of the expression in 2 (oo) of the
Act and that the instant case was clearly within the exception
provided in Section 2 (oo) (bb).
For this reason, the
petitioner was not required to comply with the provisions of
Section 25 (F) of the Act prior to the termination of services of the
respondent.
(iv) The main function of the petitioner is agriculture in nature
and that it is engaged in the activity of only production of quality
seeds for being supplied to the State Governments. Only if there
are any left-overs, they are supplied to local farmers. The
petitioner, therefore, contends that the petitioner has no
systematic activity producing goods or rendering services and it,
therefore, is not an industry as per the definition of the expression
in Section 2 (j) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. For this
reason, the adjudication before the industrial adjudicator was
wholly incompetent.
(v)
The issue at serial no. (iv) is a legal issue which is
jurisdictional in nature and no pleadings in respect thereof are
WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 2 of 39

required. There is a judicial pronouncement of the High Court of
Judicature at Madras reported at (1) 1997 LLN (Labour Law
Notes) 361 entitled State Farms Corporation of India Ltd.
Vs. The Second Additional Courts, Madras & Ors. as well
as of a learned single Judge of this court dated 26th September,
2005 rendered in Writ Petition (C) No. 2037/1996 entitled State
Farms Corporation of India Ltd., Beej Bhawan, Nehru
Place Vs. Government of India & Anr. wherein it was held
that the petitioner is not covered within the definition of industry
under Section 2 (j) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. Such
authoritative pronouncements are binding on this court and,
therefore, on this count also, the petitioner must succeed.
2.

Before addressing the afore noticed contentions, it is

necessary to notice certain proceedings in the present matter.
This writ petition came up for hearing initially on the
16th of November, 1998 when notice was issued to the respondent
to show cause and interim stay of the award was granted. Despite
repeated opportunities, the respondent failed to file the counter
affidavit.

Consequently, rule was issued in the matter on 18th

August, 2000.
3.

On an application of the respondent no. 2 under Section

17-B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, an order was passed on
4th of February, 2004 directing the petitioner to make payment of
wages at Rs. 1500/- per month, the wages which he was drawing at
the time of termination of his services. This order was modified on
an application of the respondent on 27th July, 2004 whereby it was

WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 3 of 39

directed that the respondent/workman would be paid wages under
Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 at the higher of
the rates between last drawn and the the minimum wages notified
by the statutory authorities from time to time subject to security
being furnished by the workman. This order was assailed by the
petitioner before the apex court wherein the court modified the
interim order directing the petitioner to deposit the difference
between the last drawn pay and the minimum wages with this
court for the purposes of being invested in a nationalised bank in a
short term fixed deposit pending disposal of the writ petition. The
appellant was directed to go on paying the last drawn pay pending
disposal of the writ petition and this court was directed to dispose
of the writ proceedings as soon as conveniently possible preferably
within a period of three months from the date of the order. The
order was passed by the apex court on the 2nd of January, 2006.
However, the petitioner failed to place this order before
the court. The same was brought to the attention of this court by
an application being CM No. 2183/2006 filed by the respondent
no. 2 which came up for hearing on 21st of February, 2006. The
matter was posted for immediate hearing on 28th of February,
2006. It is noteworthy that no counter affidavit has been filed by
WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 4 of 39

the respondent no. 2 in the matter. However, it was contended
that the record of the industrial adjudicator which has been placed
before this court along with the writ petition is relied upon by the
respondent no. 2 and is sufficient for final hearing. Accordingly,
the matter was heard on several dates at the request of both
parties and is being disposed of at the earliest thereafter.
4.

Inasmuch as there is no real dispute to the basic facts, to

the extent necessary for adjudication, the same are noticed
hereafter. For the purposes of adjudication of the first three issues
noticed above, it has to be assumed that the petitioner is an
industry within the meaning of Section 2 (j) of the Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947.
Admittedly, the respondent no. 2 was appointed as an
apprentice by a contract dated 19th July, 1983 for training as an
apprentice in the trade of clerk (General). The period of training
was prescribed as one year commencing from 19th July, 1983.
Clause 2 of the terms and conditions of the appointment of the
respondent/workman

provided that the respondent

would

complete the apprenticeship course within this period and to take
a final test thereafter. Extension of the period of the training
would be allowed by the petitioner in case of the apprentice,
WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 5 of 39

having completed the course, failed in the final test. In case the
apprentice failed in the second test, he would not be allowed any
extension of the period of training and the contract would be
treated as cancelled. During his apprenticeship, the respondent
was entitled to a stipend of Rs. 230/- per month. Schedule II to
this contract provided the obligations of the apprentice. However,
clause 5 of this Schedule which is important, reads as follows:-

5.
the

“5. The apprentice shall appear for periodical
tests that may be conducted by the Corporation
or other authorities concerned and also appear
for the final test to be conducted by the National
Council for Training in Vocational Trades for
award of a certificate of proficiency in the trade.”
This contract was duly registered under the provisions of
Apprenticeship Act, 1961 on the 2nd of December, 1983.

Apprenticeship was required to be extended as the respondent did
not pick up the clerical work which was requested by a letter dated
15th of June, 1984 from the petitioner to the Regional Director,
Regional Directorate of Apprenticeship Training, Kanpur, U.P.
This period was further extended by an office order dated 18th July,
1984 with effect from 19th July, 1984 to 18th January, 1985 or till
the next All India Trade Test was held, whichever was earlier on
the same terms and conditions as the original contract.
Respondent No. 2, Shri Baljit Singh accepted and consented to the
WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 6 of 39

extension of his apprenticeship on the stated terms and to appear
in the All India Trade test by a letter dated 18th January, 1985.
Apprenticeship was extended upto final period of 18th July, 1985
by the concerned authorities.
6.
April,

The respondent submitted a representation dated 4th
1985

for

sympathetic

consideration

and

regular

appointment on account of the death of his father. Therefore, after
expiry of the period of apprenticeship training of the respondent,
he was given an appointment on temporary basis on daily wages
for different fixed periods from 23rd of July, 1985 to 22nd of March,
1986.
7.

The petitioner had given an explanation as to the reason

why the respondent was given these temporary appointment on
sympathetic considerations. In accordance with the terms of the
Apprentice Contract noticed above, the respondent had taken the
42nd All India Trade Test conducted by the Regional Directorate of
Apprenticeship Training. It was while the result of the test was
being awaited, the respondent was given the temporary
appointment pursuant to his request for sympathetic appointment
on daily wage basis. The result of the 42nd All India Trade Test was
conveyed by the Regional Directorate vide a letter dated 28th of
WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 7 of 39

February, 1986 whereby it was informed that the respondent had
failed to qualify the afore stated trade test. Result of this test was
conveyed to the respondent by a letter dated 10th of March, 1986
whereby he was informed that he had been unable to qualify in the
trade test. The respondent was directed to re-appear as a private
candidate by applying in the prescribed proforma and the Regional
Directorate was directed to send a copy of the proforma to the
respondent.
8.

It is an admitted position that the respondent after

having failed the trade test once, never re-appeared in the same
and has not passed the trade test. Therefore, so far as the initial
engagement of the respondent is concerned, the same was purely
as an apprentice in terms of the contract dated 25th of July, 1983
which is governed by the Apprentices Act, 1961. The respondent
having failed in the trade test cannot seek any benefit or
entitlement to engagement as the termination of his services was
strictly in terms of the contract. There can be no manner of doubt
that so long as the respondent was engaged as an apprentice, in
any case, he would be outside the purview of the definition of the
workman under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
9.

As far as the reliance placed by the workman on his

WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 8 of 39

temporary engagement with effect from 23rd of July, 1985 is
concerned, the petitioner had proved before the industrial
adjudicator its office orders dated 23rd July, 1985; 19/23rd
September, 1985; 22nd November, 1985; 21st January, 1986 and 21st
February, 1986. These office orders were issued in identical terms
and were in the nature of orders of appointment for the
respondent which stipulated that the respondent was hereby
appointed as a 'Lower Division Clerk' on daily wage basis for
specified duration and on temporary basis.

The orders also

stipulated that the services of the respondent could be terminated
at any time without any notice and without assigning any reason.
10.

So far as the order dated 21st February, 1986 is

concerned, the same reads as under:“Shri Baljit Singh is hereby appointed as a Lower
Division Clerk on daily wage basis with effect
from 21st February, 1986 to 22nd March, 1986 on a
purely temporary basis.
Shri Baljit Singh shall be entitled to the wage of
Rs. 18.40 (Rupees Eighteen and Paise Forty only)
per day (inclusive of weekly off day).
The services of Shri Baljit Singh can be
terminated at any time without any notice and
without assigning any reason.
Shri Baljit Singh is posted to work in
Establishment section.”
11.

Undoubtedly, therefore, each time the office order was

WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 9 of 39

issued, the respondent was put to notice of the last date of his
engagement that his appointment was on temporary basis as a
daily wager and that his services could be terminated at any time
without any notice and without assigning any reason.
12.

The workman assailed the termination of his services

with effect from 22nd of March, 1986 primarily on the ground that
he has worked more than 240 days and that termination of his
services was in violation of Section 25 F, G and H of the Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947. This claim of the workman was referred for
adjudication to the industrial adjudicator and was strongly
contested on the afore-noticed submissions on behalf of the
petitioner. The industrial adjudication culminated in the award
dated 18th July, 1998 which was passed in favour of the workman
holding that he had worked for more than 240 days and
consequently his termination in non-compliance of the provisions
of Section 25 F of the Act was illegal and invalid thereby directing
his reinstatement into service with back wages.
13.

In the statement of claim filed by the workman, it has

been admitted that he was appointed as an apprentice though the
workman contended that “the management adopted the dubious
method of employment showing the appointment as a trainee and
WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 10 of 39

apprenticeship which was extended from time to time till 19th of
July, 1985. Otherwise, the workman was doing the job of LDC
throughout. Thereafter the workman was shown to have been
taken into employment as LDC on daily wages with effect from
23rd July, 1985 and was paid his wages as fixed.”
14.
fixed

The appointment of the respondent was undoubtedly for
tenures

pursuant

to

written

orders.

The

respondent/workman was fully aware of the same. The petitioner
has established the same by evidence in this behalf.
15.

It is therefore necessary to consider the relevant

statutory provision of Section 2 (oo) of the Act which is concerned
with termination of service of the workman and the exception
provided in Section 2 (oo) (bb) and has been cited before this
court. For purposes of convenience, the same is reproduced in
extenso hereunder:“2 (oo) - 'retrenchment' means the termination
by the employer of the service of a workman for
any reason whatsoever, otherwise than as a
punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary action
but does not include(a) voluntary retirement of the workman; or
(b) retirement of the workman on reaching the
age of superannuation if the contract of
employment between the employer and the
workman concerned contains a stipulation in that
behalf; or
WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 11 of 39

16.

(bb) termination of the service of the workman as
a result of the non-renewal of the contract of
employment between the employer and the
workman concerned on its expiry or of such
contract being terminated under a stipulation in
that behalf contained therein.”
In this behalf, reference can usefully be made to the

pronouncement of the apex court reported at (2001) 5 SCC 540
entitled

Harmohinder

Singh

Vs.

Kharga

Canteen,

Ambala Cantt. In this case it was held that contracts of service
which are for a fixed term, are excluded from the definition of
retrenchment in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. It was held that
where termination takes place on the expiry of the contract period
or in terms of the contract, the principles of natural justice are not
attracted.

In this behalf, reliance was placed on the earlier

pronouncement of the Supreme Court in (1998) 6 SCC 538
entitled Uptron India Ltd. Vs. Shammi Bhan.
17.

In a pronouncement of the Supreme Court reported at

(1997) 11 SCC 521 entitled

Escorts Ltd. Vs. Presiding

Officer and Anr., an argument was laid that even though a
workman had been appointed on temporary basis for period of two
months, it was urged that because the workman had worked for
240 days, the termination of his services amounted to
retrenchment under Section 2 (oo) of the Industrial Disputes Act,
WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 12 of 39

1947 and the same being in violation of Section 25 F of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 was illegal. The Apex Court held
that it was unnecessary to go into the question whether a workman
had worked for 240 days in a year inasmuch termination of
services of the workman did not constitute retrenchment in view of
clause (bb) in Section 2 (oo) of the Act. The termination of the
services of the workman was in accordance with the stipulation
contained in his contract which is to be found in his letter of
appointment. Therefore, even though termination of the services
of the workman was before the expiry of the period of probation,
however, since the termination of the service was in accordance
with the terms of the contract, it fell within the ambit of Section 2
(oo) (bb) of the statute and did not constitute retrenchment. In
this regard, the Supreme Court cited with approval its earlier
decision reported at (1994) 2 SCC 323 entitled M.Venugopal
Vs. Divisional Manager, LIC.
Therefore, there can be no manner of doubt that this
court is bound by the authoritative judicial pronouncement of law
to the effect that so long as the termination of service of the
workman is in accordance with the terms of the contract on or
expiry of the contract, the same does not amount to retrenchment
WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 13 of 39

within the meaning of the expression as it is excepted under
Section 2 (oo) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. In the instant
case the respondent was fully aware of the terms and tenure of his
engagement. In these circumstances, upon termination of services
of the respondent the employer could not be required to comply
with the provisions of Section 25 F of the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947.
18.

The services of the respondent no. 2 in the instant case

were terminated as the period for which he had been appointed
pursuant to the office order dated 21st February, 1986 came to an
end.

Furthermore, even in terms of his original contract of

apprenticeship dated 25th July, 1983, the respondent/workman
had failed to clear the trade test and consequently, his
appointment could not be so continued.

Therefore, such

termination was clearly outside the purview of retrenchment as
contemplated under Section 2 (oo) of the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947 and fell within the stipulation prescribed under Section 2 (oo)
(bb) of the statute. Hence, in the light of the principles laid down
by the Apex Court, there was no requirement of compliance with
the Section 25 F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
19.

At this stage, I may notice another submission which

WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 14 of 39

was vehemently made on behalf of the petitioner to the effect that
even in the event of termination of service falling within the
definition of the expression 'retrenchment' as given under the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, merely for non-compliance of
Section 25 F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, the direction for
reinstatement into service could not have been made.

In this

behalf, reliance is placed on the pronouncement of the apex court
reported at (2006) 2 SCC 716 entitled M.P. State Agro
Industries Development Corpn. Ltd. & Anr. Vs. S.C.
Pandey.
It had been urged before the Apex Court that in the
event of non-compliance of Section 25 F of the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947, the respondent/workman had been reinstated into
service on account of an erroneous order by the court. Therefore,
in order to do complete justice between the parties, instead of
direction to reinstate the workman into service, the employer was
directed to pay an amount of Rs. 10,000/- as compensation.
20.

In the present case, it has been held that there was no

requirement to comply with the provisions of Section 25 F of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and inasmuch as the termination of
the service of the workman was outside the definition of
WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 15 of 39

retrenchment as has been provided under Section 2 (oo) in view of
clause (bb) of the Act.
21.

On behalf of the respondent, Mr. Sanjay Ghose,

Advocate has stated that the period of apprenticeship of the
workman came to an end on expiry of one year from 25th of July,
1983.

Thereafter, the respondent was appointed as a Lower

Division Clerk on daily wage basis and on this basis, he worked for
a period of 240 days from 23rd of July, 1985 till his services were
terminated. It has been contended on behalf of the respondent
that there was not a whisper in any of the orders that the
appointment was conditional upon a trade test.
22.

In this behalf, there is no dispute that the workman was

appointed as an apprentice under the Apprenticeship Contract
which was duly registered with the competent authority under the
Apprentices Act, 1961. The respondent had taken the written test
in April, 1985, the result of which was not pronounced till
February, 1986. It was during this period only that the respondent
was given short term appointment on daily wage basis, which
engagement was almost co-terminus with the declaration of his
result. The services of the respondent/workman came to an end as
the period for which he had been appointed by the office order
WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 16 of 39

dated 21st of February, 1986 also came to a close.
23.

In view of the foregoing discussion, the respondent

would clearly be disentitled to any relief on these two counts which
also answers the ground (i) to (iii) raised by the petitioner, as
noticed above.
24.

Coming now to the main submission which was made on

behalf of the petitioner to the effect that the petitioner is engaged
principally in agriculture activity and is consequently outside the
purview of definition of industry given under Section 2 (j) of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.

In this behalf, the industrial

adjudicator has noticed that an objection in this behalf was taken
for the first time by the petitioner in the course of argument on
behalf of the management when reliance was placed upon the
judgment of the Madras High Court in the case involving the State
Farms Corporation of India Ltd.
The industrial adjudicator has noticed that the petitioner
has submitted a plea that the petitioner was not an industry was a
legal plea and therefore, could be urged even without pleadings to
that effect. However, the industrial adjudicator has refused to
entertain this plea on the sole ground that the same had not been
taken by the management in its written statement and had placed
WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 17 of 39

reliance on the observation of the Apex Court in (1963) 1 LLJ
692 entitled Harinagar Cane Farm & Anr. Vs. State of
Bihar & Ors. to the effect that it was desirable that industrial
adjudication should deal with problems as and when they arise
and confine its decision to points which strictly arise on the
pleadings between the parties. In this view of the matter, without
anything further, the Industrial Tribunal refused to entertain the
management's objection in this behalf.
25.

So far as industrial adjudication is concerned, it is well

settled that strict rules of procedure are not applicable. However,
the purpose of requiring a party to be bound by its pleadings is
that the other party is put to notice of the case of the other side
which it is required to meet. However, even in civil litigation to
which Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 strictly applies, it is well
settled that issues of law can be struck at any stage. No pleadings
are necessary so far as issues of law are concerned. In this behalf,
regard may be had to the pronouncement of the Division Bench of
this court reported at 1996 (39) DRJ 774 entitled Chet Ram
Gupta

Vs.

Motian

Devi

Lamba

&

Ors.

Industrial

adjudication is not confined by the formalities of strict procedure.
Deriving force from these well settled principles applicable to civil
WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 18 of 39

litigation, so far as industrial adjudication is concerned, it has to
be held that no pleading is necessary so far as an issue of law is
concerned.
26.

It cannot be at all doubted that a challenge to the

maintainability of the proceedings on the ground that the
management was not covered under the definition of industry
under Section 2 (j) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 goes to the
very root of the jurisdiction of the industrial adjudicator and the
maintainability

of reference

against

such a management.

Undoubtedly, the objection may have been raised at a late stage.
But the question is as to whether the industrial adjudicator could
have refused to permit examination of such a plea as the same may
have delayed adjudication on the ground that if the other side
contested the submission and required an opportunity to lead
evidence in respect of its objection, the matter would have
required further consideration.
27.

In the instant case, the petitioner had placed reliance on

a pronouncement of the Division Bench of the Madras High Court
relating to an establishment of the petitioner itself. The industrial
adjudicator did not arrive at a conclusion that the question raised
was a mixed question of fact and law and could not be gone into
WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 19 of 39

without pleading or evidence, but refused to even consider this
judicial pronouncement, which in my view, it ought not to have
done so. It is well settled that the rules of procedure are not
strictly applicable to industrial adjudication. It was open to it to
adopt such fair procedure as was necessary to do justice. Such a
plea as taken in the instant case was based on a judicial
pronouncement. The plea was jurisdictional
went to the root of the matter.

and undoubtedly

It certainly deserved a

consideration. To test its maintainability, such a plea would be
akin and can be compared to a prayer for belated amendment of a
pleading. It is well settled that delay alone would not defeat even a
belated request for amendment when such delay can be
compensated by payment of adequate costs. The powers of the
industrial adjudicator are undoubtedly very wide. Therefore, it
was open to the industrial adjudicator to consider the plea if it
involved adjudication based on law or, if requested and deemed
necessary, permit amendment of pleading, frame an issue
appropriately and to require parties to lead evidence thereon. Such
fair procedure as the adjudicator decided to follow would, needless
to say, depend on the stand which the workman took.
In the instant case, the stand of the workman on this
WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 20 of 39

plea before the adjudicator is not available in the award. However,
certainly the industrial adjudicator was required to consider the
objection of the petitioner as well as the judicial pronouncement
which was cited before it especially as it related to an
establishment of the very management which was before it.
28.

Before going any further, inasmuch as the learned

counsel

for

the

respondent

has

placed

reliance

on the

pronouncement of the apex court reported at AIR 1964 SC 903
entitled Harinagar Cane Farms & Anr. Vs. State of Bihar
& Ors., it becomes necessary to examine this authoritative and
binding pronouncement.

In this judgment, it was argued on

behalf of the appellant that legislative history has shown a sharp
distinction between industry on the one hand and agriculture
operations, on the other. Therefore, agricultural operations are as
a whole, outside the purview of definition of industry given under
Section 2 (j) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. The argument on
behalf of the Harinagar Cane Farms was a broad and general
submission that all agriculture operations would be outside the
purview of definition of industry under the statute. It was in this
context, that the apex court was of the view that industrial
adjudication should refrain from enunciating any general
WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 21 of 39

principles or adopting any doctrinaire consideration with regard
to the issue involved and the court ought to restrict itself to the fact
and circumstances which were before it in the adjudication. In
this behalf, the court observed thus:“8. In dealing with the present appeals, we do not
propose to decide the large question as to
whether all agriculture and operations connected
with it are included within the definition of
Section 2 (j). As we have repeatedly emphasised,
in dealing with industrial matters, industrial
adjudication should refrain from enunciating any
general principles or adopting any doctrinaire
considerations. It is desirable that industrial
adjudication should deal with the problems as
and when they arise and confine its decisions to
the points which strictly arise on the pleadings
between the parties.
If in reaching any
conclusion while dealing with the narrow aspect
raised by the parties before it, industrial
adjudication has to evolve some principle, it
should and must, no doubt, attempt to do so, but
in evolving the principle, care should be taken not
to lay an unduly general or broad proposition
which may affect facts and circumstances which
are not before industrial adjudication in the
particular case with which it is concerned.”
After so observing, so far as Harinagar Cane Farm was
concerned, the court held thus:“Bearing in mind the importance of adopting this
approach in dealing with industrial matters, we
propose to deal with the narrow question as to
whether agricultural operations carried on by the
two appellants constitute an industry under
Section 2 (j) or not. There is no doubt that for
WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 22 of 39

carrying on the agricultural operations, the
appellants have invested a large amount of capital
and it is not disputed that the appellants have
invested capital for carrying on their agricultural
operations for the purpose of making profits. It is
also common ground that the workmen employed
by the appellants in their respective operations
contribute to the production of agricultural
commodities which bring in profit to the
appellants.
Therefore, even the narrow
traditional requirements of the concept of trade or
business are, in that sense, satisfied by the
agricultural operations of the appellants.”
29.

It is noteworthy that so far as Harinagar Cane Farm is

concerned, the court noticed other prior judicial pronouncements.
30.
1970

In earlier pronouncements of the apex court reported at
(2)

LLJ

249

entitled

Thiru

Arooran

Sugars

Ltd.,Vadapathimangalam Vs. The Industrial Tribunal,
Madras and at 1951 (2) LLJ 37 entitled Vellankara and
Thattil Rubber Estate Union Vs. Vellankara and Thattil
Rubber Estates

and AIR 1960 SC 675 entitled The

Corporation of Nagpur City Vs. Its Employees, the
Supreme Court laid down the principle that if agricultural and
industrial operations are carried out in an integrated fashion, then
the entire operations would have to be treated as industrial
activity. Thus, when sugarcane is grown in farms by a company
which is captively consumed for manufacturing sugar, then the
WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 23 of 39

establishment is engaged in the sugar industry.
31.

Similarly, a rubber farm wherein the rubber which is

tapped on the farm is utilised by it in an industrial operation in
manufacturing of other rubber products, then the agricultural
activity is completely integrated with the industrial operation and
in such a circumstance it has to be held to be an industrial
establishment if the agricultural operation and industry is owned
by the same ownership and management.
32.

So far as the pronouncement of the apex court reported

in AIR 1960 SC 675 entitled The Corporation of City of
Nagpur Vs. Its Employees relied upon by the petitioner is
concerned, it was held by the Supreme Court that the Corporation
is a juristic person capable of holding and disposing of property
and conferred with vide powers and functions. The apex court
observed that the corporation was analogous to a big public
company carrying out most of the duties which such a company
can undertake to do with a difference that certain statutory powers
had been conferred on the corporation for carrying out its
functions satisfactorily. The court sought to draw a distinction
between certain functions of the municipality which, if undertaken
by an individual, would be an industry and others which a private
WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 24 of 39

person could not perform. It was on such a distinction that the
court pointed out that certain departments would be covered
under the definition of industry under the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947 to which this statute would apply while others would not. On
this test, the engineering department, sewage department, health
department, market department, public earns department, public
works department, assessment department, estate department,
education department, printing press department and others were
held to be covered under the definition of industry.
According to the apex court, the question which was
required to be answered is not whether the discharge of certain
functions by the Corporation has statutory backing but whether
those functions can equally be performed by private individuals.
The present petition does not raise any such issue.
33.

So far as the petitioner is concerned, it is necessary to

examine the pronouncement of the High Court of Judicature at
Madras reported in 1997 (1) LLN 361 entitled State Farms
Corporation of India Ltd. Vs. The Second Additional
Courts, Madras. In this pronouncement, it has been noticed
that the petitioner was a farm which was a unit of the State Farm
Corporation of India Ltd., a Central Government undertaking
WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 25 of 39

which runs a model farm. All that it does is to maintain the farm
by carrying out agricultural operations and incidental functions.
The main function of the petitioner is agricultural in nature. It
produces quality seeds for being supplied to the State Government
and only if there are left overs, they are supplied to the local
farmers.

The submission was that the petitioner had no

systematic activity producing goods or rendering service and
therefore, was not an 'industry' as per Section 2 (j) of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
34.

The workman in this case had placed reliance on the

pronouncement of the apex court in 1978 (1) LLN 376 and 657
Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board Vs.
Rajappa, to contend that the three tests laid down in the
judgment were squarely applicable to the activity carried on on the
farm. However, the Madras High Court held that tests are applied
to find out whether an activity carried on in a particular
establishment is an 'industry' within the meaning of Section 2 (j)
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and that the test cannot be
applied to an agricultural activity. Even in an agricultural farm,
production is there, cooperation of the employer and employee is
also there, commercial activity is also there but the distinction has
WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 26 of 39

to be made between commercial activity and the industrial activity.
When the predominant activity is agricultural activity, then the
tests cannot be applied. It was noticed in the judgment of the
Madras High Court that the Supreme Court had noticed that
professions, clubs, educational institutions, cooperatives, research
institutes, charitable projects and other kindred adventure, if they
fulfil the triple tests listed by the court, cannot be exempted from
the scope of Section 2 (j) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. It
was observed by the Madras High Court that the exclusion of
agricultural activity from the listed categories in the entire
judgment indicated that the judgment did not relate to agricultural
activity at all.
35.

After considering the nature of activity of the petitioner

that is the Central State Farms, it was held that the petitioner farm
could not be termed as an 'industry'.
36.

It has been contended on behalf of the respondent that

the issue as to whether an establishment is an 'industry' within the
meaning of expression given in Section 2 (j) of the Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947 or not, is a mixed question of law and fact and
that if such an objection had been taken before the industrial
adjudicator, the respondent would have had an opportunity to
WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 27 of 39

challenge the same and by leading appropriate evidence in this
behalf.

It has been contended that the respondent cannot be

denied this opportunity and no such finding can be returned so far
as the establishment of the petitioner is concerned in the instant
case.
37.

The workmen can succeed in demonstrating that the

firm is “an industry”by application of the predominant nature
activity test in which they have to establish that the establishment
indulges in a number of activities, some of which fall within the
category of “industry” and do not qualify for the exemption.
Further, the workman will have to establish that the activities
which are not exempted, dominate over the activities which are
exempted from the purview of section 2(j) of the Act.
38.

This issue also arose for consideration before the

Supreme Court in the case of State of Bombay & Ors Vs. The
Hospital Mazdoor Sabha & Ors AIR 1960 SC 610 wherein
the court was called upon to answer an objection that the
respondent was a hospital and concerned with medical education
and hence, was outside the purview of Section 2 (j) of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. The court held thus:“16. In considering the question as to whether
WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 28 of 39

the group of Hospitals run by the appellant
undoubtedly for the purpose of giving medical
relief to the citizens and for helping to impart
medical education are an undertaking or not, it
would be pertinent to enquire an activity of a like
nature would be an undertaking if it is carried on
by a private citizen or a group of private citizens.
There is no doubt that if a hospital is run by
private citizens for profit it would be an
undertaking very much like the trade or business
in their conventional sense. We have already
stated that the presence of profit motive is not
essential for bringing an undertaking within S. 2
(j). If that be so, if a private citizen runs a
hospital without charging any fees from the
patients treated in it, it would nevertheless be an
undertaking under S.2(j). Thus the character of
the activity involved in running a hospital brings
the institution of the hospital within S. 2(j). Does
it make any difference that the hospital is run by
the Government in the interpretation of the word
“undertaking” in S. 2(j)? In our opinion, the
answer to this question must be in the negative.
It is the character of the activity which decides
the question as to whether the activity in question
attracts the provision of S. 2 (j); who conducts the
activity and whether it is conducted for profit or
not do not make a material difference.
17. We have yet to decide which are the attributes
the presence of which makes an activity an
undertaking within S. 2(j), on the ground that it
is analogous to trade or business. It is difficult to
state these possible attributes definitely or
exhaustively; as a working principle it may be
stated that an activity systematically or habitually
undertaken for the production or distribution of
goods or for the rendering of material services to
the community at large or a part of such
community with the help of employees is an
undertaking. Such an activity generally involves
WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 29 of 39

the cooperation of the employer and the
employees; and its object is the satisfaction of
material human needs. It must be organised or
arranged in a manner in which trade or business
is generally organised or arranged. It must not
be casual nor must it be for oneself nor for
pleasure. Thus the manner in which the activity
in question is organised or arranged, the
condition of the cooperation between employer
and the employee necessary for its success and its
object to render material service to the
community can be regarded as some of the
features which are distinctive of activities to
which S. 2 (j) applies. Judged by this test there
would be no difficulty in holding that the State is
carrying on an undertaking when it runs the
group of Hospitals in question.”
When an issue is raised as to whether an establishment
is an industry or not, the Court is required to advert itself to this
question and to apply the 'predominant nature of activity' test after
ascertaining the basic facts upon which such a doctrine can
operate.
39.

So far as the issue as to whether an establishment is

covered under the definition of “industry” as set up under section
2(j) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, is concerned, the matter
has been concluded by the decision of the Supreme Court in the
case of Bangalore Water Supply & Sewerage Board Vs.
Rajappa & Ors. (1978) 2 SCC 213 wherein the entire case law
on the point has been reviewed and it has been laid down that
WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 30 of 39

absence of a profit motive or gainful objective is irrelevant, be the
venture in the public, joint, private or other sector. The true focus
is functional and the decisive test is the nature of the activity with
special emphasis on the employer-employee relations.
40.

In this behalf, it would be useful to advert to the

discussion on this aspect of the matter in the case of Ramesh
Chander Singh Vs. Union of India 1981 Labour IC 781,
wherein the Court held as under :“13. Where a complex of activities, some of which
qualify for exemption, others not, involve
employees on the total undertaking some of whom
are not “workmen” or some departments are not
productive of goods and services if isolated, even
then the predominant nature of the services and
integrated nature of the departments will be true
test. The whole undertaking will be “Industry”
although those who are not “workmen” by
definition may not benefit by the status.
Applying this criteria to the facts of the
instant case we find that the National Sugar
Institute is predominantly a research institute and
its objective is to devise ways and means of
economising in sugar production and also to
design machines and machine parts so as to make
the working of the sugar mills more efficient. It
also helps the industry in solving their specific
problems and to advise the industry in various
other ways to make the whole industry more
effective and viable. The defendant has admitted
in its written statement that the Institute charges
for advice to the Industries and also undertakes
other jobs of research on payment by the
Industries.
It is indeed an organised and
WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 31 of 39

systematic enterprise but to my mind it does not
qualify to the various requirements which can
make an enterprise an industry. It is purely a
technical institute which provides the industry
with its know-how and skill and gives advantage of
its research to the industry, of course, on payment
but not on profit. Under these circumstances, I
find myself unable to agree with the submissions
made by the appellant that the research institute
was an industry.”
41.

In the case of P.Jose Vs. The Director, Central

Institute of Fisheries & Anr. 1986 Labour I.C. 1564, the
Bench ruled as under:“7. Except to contend that the petitioner is a
casual worker, the learned counsel for the
petitioner has not placed anything before this
Court to sustain his plea that the 1st respondent is
an 'industry' within the meaning of 'the Act'. In
this connection it is relevant to recall the
pleadings in the counter-affidavit sworn on behalf
of the respondents. In the counter-affidavit it has
been stated thus:
“The Central Institute of Fisheries, Nautical and
Engineering Training, is not engaged in research
in deep sea fishing. The Institute is meant for
training personnel in deep sea fishing and allied
operations and not for research.”
Such institutions as the respondent-institute will
not be an 'industry' because it belongs to the
restricted category of institutions mentioned in
the decision of the Supreme Court in Bangalore
Water Supply & Sewerage Board V.
Rajappa, (1978) 2 SCC 213 : (1978) Lab IC
467 at p. 514, para 161).
xxxx
WP (C) No. 5857/1998

xxxx

xxxx

xxxx
Page 32 of 39

9. For the reasons stated above, I have no
hesitation to hold that the petitioner is not entitled
to the benefits of the provisions contained in
Chapter V A of the Industrial Disputes Act.
In this view of the matter, the Original Petition is
liable to be dismissed. The Original Petition is
accordingly dismissed. No order as to costs.”
42.

An issue similar to the question raised before this Court

arise for consideration before the Punjab & Haryana High Court.
It was urged that the Agriculture Department of the Punjab State
comes within the ambit of `industry' as defined in Section 2(j) of
the Industrial Disputes Act.
Punjab

Thr.

The

The Court in the case of State of

Director

Of

Agriculture

Punjab,

Chandigarh and Anr. Vs. Shri Daljit Singh & Anr. 1986 (1)
SLR 420 held as under :“4. There is no dispute that the Agriculture
Department of the Punjab Government deals with
the governmental activity. It has been held by a
Full Bench of this Court is State of Punjab v.
Sh.Kuldip Singh and Another 1983 Lab.I.C. 83 that
the State or governmental activity is of the
following four classifications :(1)the sovereign or the legal functions of the State
which are the primary and inalienable rights of a
constitutional Government.
(2) Economic adventures clearly partaking of the
nature of trade and business undertaken by it as
part of its welfare activities.
WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 33 of 39

(3) Organised activity not stamped with the total
indicia of business yet bearing a resemblance to or
being analogous to trade and business.
(4)
The residuary organized governmental
activity which may not come within the ambit of
the aforesaid three categories.”
Dealing with these four categories it was held that
although the second and third categories would be
clearly within the spirit and letter of the definition
of “industry” as given in section 2(j) of the Act but
the first and the fourth categories are to be
judicially excluded from the ambit of the definition
of “industry”.
Thus to be within the ambit of
“industry” a governmental activity must atleast be
analogous to trade and business and there must be
an element of an economic venture in
governmental activity before it can be brought
within the four corner of an industry.
5. It is not controverted that the function of the
Agriculture Department of the Punjab Government
is to render help to the agriculturists in the pursuit
of farming. The nature of work of this department
is largely advisory.
It is not even remotely
suggested that this department delves in economic
ventures of any kind. It seems to follow that the
character of activity of this department is neither
that of trade or business nor any economic venture.
Hence, the Agriculture Department of the Punjab
Government cannot possibly come within the
ambit of an “industry” as defined in the Act. The
question posed in this case at the very outset must,
therefore, be answered in the negative.”
43.

I find that it is not even the contention of the respondent

that the petitioner is engaged in any systematic activity producing

WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 34 of 39

goods or rendering any service. The seeds produced at the farms
are supplied to the State Governments and even the head office
would be part of the same functions being performed by the
petitioner. The main and predominant purpose of the State Farms
Corporation is production of high breed or quality seeds for the
farmers, which is clearly agricultural activity. In view of the above,
it has to be held that the predominant activity of the petitioner is
agricultural in nature.
44.

The State Farm Corporation of India at Beej Bhawan,

Nehru Place, New Delhi was a petitioner in Writ Petition (C)
No. 2037/1996 entitled State Farms Corporation of India
Ltd., Beej Bhawan, Nehru Place Vs. Government of
India & Anr. The State Farms Corporation of India had
challenged an order dated 31st January, 1992 passed by the
Regional Labour Commissioner certifying the standing orders of
the petitioner.

Even though the petitioner had applied for

certification initially, however, subsequently a plea was raised
before the Regional Labour Commissioner to the effect that this
application was made on the mistaken belief and as the petitioner
was not an 'establishment' under the Industrial Employment
(Standing Orders) Act, 1946, therefore, no such exercise was
WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 35 of 39

required.

This contention was rejected by the Chief Labour

Commissioner in an order passed on 23rd January, 1996. The
petitioner's appeal against this order was rejected by the Central
Government by an order dated 23rd January, 1996. These orders
were assailed before this court by way of writ petition which was
registered as Writ Petition (C) No. 2037/1996. It appears that the
respondent had opted not to appear in the matter. By a judgment
passed on 26th September, 2005, Writ Petition (C) No.
2037/1996 was allowed in favour of the State Farms of India
holding thus:“Learned counsel for the petitioner states that the
issue that petitioner is not an industrial
establishment has since been determined by
Madras High Court in the case of State Farms
Corporation of India Ltd. Vs. Second Addl. Court,
Madras, 1997 (1) LLN 361. Perusal of that
judgment would show that it has been held by
Madras High Court that the petitioner is not
an 'industry' within the meaning of
Section 2 (j) of the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act'). While
coming to Section, the Madras High Court took
into consideration the judgment of the Supreme
Court in the case of Bangalore Water Supply and
Sewerage Board Vs. Rajappa, 1978 (1) LLN 376
and observed that since the predominant activity
of the petitioner is agriculture and does not
amount to industrial activity, it would not fall
within the definition of 'industry' as contained in
Section 2 (j) of the Act. Relying upon the ratio of
this judgment it could safely be concluded that
WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 36 of 39

the petitioner is not an industrial establishment
within the meaning of the Industrial Employment
(Standing Orders) Act, 1946. The impugned
orders 31st January, 1992 and 23rd January, 1996
are hereby quashed. Prayer made in the writ
petition is allowed. Rule is made absolute.”
45.

The stand taken by the respondent may deserve to be

sustained in a case where such issue had not fallen for judicial
scrutiny and consideration and there was no judicial finding and
precedent on the matter. In the present matter, this court in its
judgment dated 26th September, 2005 has categorically held that
the petitioner is not an industrial establishment.

There is no

dispute that the present petitioner was a petitioner in Writ Petition
(C) No. 2037/1996.
46.

I also find that the petitioner did make averments in this

behalf in the writ petition and has assailed the refusal of the
industrial adjudicator to examine this matter when an objection
was raised, even though belatedly. The respondent has not filed
any counter affidavit to the writ petition. The Madras High Court
has noticed that it is the contention of the petitioner that the farm
which was agricultural in nature, produces quality seeds for being
supplied to the State Government and only the left overs are
supplied to the local farmers.

WP (C) No. 5857/1998

It has been orally submitted on

Page 37 of 39

behalf of the respondent that the petitioner is the head office of the
various farms.
47.

The present petitioner was also the petitioner in the writ

petition which was decided by the judgment dated 26th September,
2005. It has already been held that since the predominant activity
of the petitioner is agriculture and does not amount to industrial
activity.

It has been categorically held that the petitioner's

establishment would not fall within the definition of 'industry' as
contained in Section 2 (j) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. It
has also been observed that the petitioner is not an industrial
establishment within the meaning of

Industrial Employment

(Standing Orders) Act, 1946.
48.

This judgment is undoubtedly binding on this court.

Therefore, on grounds of judicial discipline and legal proprietory
also, it has to be held that the petitioner in the instant case is not
covered within the definition of 'industry' under Section 2 (j) of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
In this view of the matter, this writ petition has to be
allowed. The award dated 18th July, 1998 is consequently set aside
and quashed.
There shall be no order as to costs.
WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 38 of 39

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
April 28, 2006
(SD)

WP (C) No. 5857/1998

Page 39 of 39

