IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
CONT.CAS(C) 284 OF 2004
Da te of decision: 28th JANUARY, 2005
SHRI L.C. GUPTA

... Petitioner
through Petitioner in person
VERSUS

SHRI RAJENDER KUMAR
... Respondents
through Ms.Latika Chaudhary,
Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

The present petition has been filed alleging deliberate

and wilful disobedience of the directions made in the judgment
dated 24th May, 2001 passed in Writ Petition (Civil) no. 4978/94,
4384/95 and 4342/99. The judgment passed by the learned Single
Bench was affirmed by the Division Bench in LPA 297/2001 vide
judgment delivered on 1st February, 2002.
2.

The petitioner contends that the eligibility of the

petitioner was confirmed by the respondent in a counter affidavit
1

Cont.Cas(C)284/2004

filed in SLP(C) 7555/03. However the respondent adopted one
device after another to avoid compliance with the directions made
by in his favour in the aforestated judgments. It is submitted by
him that on the plea that the school stood taken over by the
authorities, the respondents filed an application bearing CM
No.1056/02 stating that the seniority of the present petitioner has
to be considered in accordance with the seniority list of the state
cadre. This application was thereafter withdrawn on 3rd February,
2003. Despite withdrawal of the application before the Division
Bench,

the

respondent

made

an

application

seeking

amendment/review of the judgment dated 24th May, 2001 being
CM No.13672/03. This application was dismissed after hearing by
an order dated 29th January, 2004.
3.

The petitioner has submitted that he has made repeated

requests and representations to the respondents to comply with
the directions given by this Hon'ble Court which are inter alia
dated 18th September, 2003, 30th September, 2003, 13th October,
2003 and 24th March, 2003. Despite the requests made in the
aforestated representations, the respondents are in contumacious
default of the judgments dated 24th May, 2001 and 1st February,
2002. On these averments it is submitted that the respondent has
2

Cont.Cas(C)284/2004

rendered himself liable for punishment for his contumacious
conduct under the Contempt of Court Act.
4.

The present petition was filed in April, 2004. This Court

upon considering the grievance of the petitioner passed an order
dated 12th April, 2004 wherein it was specifically directed that in
case the order dated 9th December, 2003 is not implemented
within a period of one month and there was no stay of the
operation of the order, the respondent shall remain personally
present in Court.
5.

It is only thereafter that the respondents took any action

in the matter which was placed before this Court in their reply filed
on 1st July, 2004. The respondent has sought to explain the delay
in compliance of the judgment largely on the ground that the
directions made by the Court in the judgment dated 24th May,
2001 related to a private aided school. During the interregnum,
the school had been taken over and was functioning as school of
the Government of NCT of Delhi. In these circumstances there
was no local managing committee of the school. Consequently it
was felt that clarification was necessary from the court as the same
resulted in difference in the constitution of the Departmental
Promotion Committee (hereinafter referred to as the 'DPC'). It is
3

Cont.Cas(C)284/2004

submitted that it is these circumstances that the application
seeking clarification was filed, first, before the Appellate Court and
later the review application being CM 13672/02 in the writ
petition.
According to the respondent, the clarification was also
deemed necessary inasmuch as, so far as schools under the
Government of NCT of Delhi were concerned, there was a set cadre
of teachers and a seniority list was being maintained at the State
level. As such, since the directions made in the judgment dated
24th May, 2001 required consideration of the senior most teacher,
it was necessary to seek a clarification whether the senior most
teacher would be as per the seniority list of the State cadre
maintained by the Government or would be in terms of the
seniority list of the school. This application of the Government
was dismissed only on 29th January, 2004. Opinion was given on
the file with regard to agitating the matter in an appeal. However
counsel had given a second opinion advising the Government that
no Appeal could be filed against the order dated 29th January,
2004 and required the Department to immediately constitute the
DPC to consider all eligible officers in the school. The respondents
have contended that the DPC was then constituted under the
4

Cont.Cas(C)284/2004

Chairmanship of Ms. M. Thakur, Deputy Director of Education
(Administration) in lieu of the Chairman/Manager.
6.

As per Rule 47 of the Delhi School Education Act,

teachers of the aided school which was taken over by the
Government would stand absorbed in the Government schools and
will come at the bottom of the seniority list of the State cadre. The
respondents submit that as the DPC met on 18th May, 2004 and
29th October , 2004 and also considered the case of the petitioner
for promotion, there was compliance with the judgments passed
on 24th May, 2001 and affirmed in appeal on 1st February, 2002.
7.

The respondents have also sought to explain the

affidavit filed on behalf of the Government in SLP(C) 7555/03 and
submitted that the affidavit dated 21st July, 2003 was filed by the
Zonal Officer in collusion with Mr.L.C.Gupta, the petitioner
herein. It is submitted that the affidavit was fraudulent and did
not deserve credence as there was concealment and suppression of
material facts therein. The concerned officer was interested in
giving undue favour to the petitioner and disciplinary proceedings
were initiated against the officials involved in the filing of the
affidavit. The respondent has submitted that upon the aforestated
facts coming to its notice, an amended affidavit was filed by the
5

Cont.Cas(C)284/2004

respondent. 8.

The petitioner in rejoinder has contended that

the proceedings of the DPC were a mere an eye wash and the same
was constituted and held its meeting only on account of the
pendency of the present proceedings and the orders dated 12th
April, 2004 made by this Court.
9.

I have heard the learned counsel for the parties who

have taken me through the record. The only issue relevant for
adjudication of the present case is as to whether there is wilful
disobedience of directions made by this Court.
10.

In the judgment dated 24th May, 2001 passed in writ

petition

(Civil)

no.

4978/94,

4384/95

and

4342/99

the

respondents were directed as hereunder:“15. In that view of the matter, I have no other
option but to set aside and quash the said order of
promotion of Shri Ram Avtar Sharma to the post
of Vice-Principal of the School, which I hereby do.
Consequently, a direction is also issued to the
Director of Education to constitute a Selection
Committee immediately, as in the meantime the
School has become a Government School and the
matter relating to promotion tot he vacant post of
Vice-Principal of the concerned School shall be
placed before the said Selection Committee
immediately. While re-considering the matter,
the Selection Committee would take the relative
position, merit and eligibility criteria of all the
eligible candidate as on 8th November, 1994 and
upon such re-consideration, a decision shall be
taken with regard to appointment to the post of
6

Cont.Cas(C)284/2004

Vice-Principal which falls vacant in terms of the
present order. The file shall be processed by the
Director of Education immediately and steps shall
be taken for filling up the post of Vice-Principal,
as expeditiously as possible, preferably with a
period of three months. In the meantime, the
senior most teacher in the School shall be allowed
to hold the charge of the Vice-Principal of the
School till a regular Vice-Principal is appointed in
terms of this order.
16. On considering the facts and circumstances of
the case, I am also of the considered opinion that
since suppression and manipulation in the official
records were done, the same is required to be
investigated upon by the Director of Education
and an enquiry shall be conducted by the Director
of Education in respect of the same and upon
receipt of the report thereof, shall proceed against
the person who is responsible for the aforesaid
act, in accordance with law, as expeditiously as
possible.”
11.

This matter was agitated in Appeal before the Division

Bench. By a detailed judgment on 1st February, 2002 the Division
Bench dismissed the appeal directing the respondents as
hereunder:“For the above reasons, we dismiss the appeal and
affirm the direction of the learned Single Judge to
the effect that a fresh selection process be carried
out for promotion to the post of Vice-Principal in
Jan Kalyan Senior Secondary School after
considering all the eligible persons as on the date
the Selection Committee met, that is, 27th
October, 1994.
In the event the successful
candidate has superannuated in the meanwhile,
the next person in the select list should be
7

Cont.Cas(C)284/2004

appointed as the Vice-Principal of the School.
The selection process should be completed within
three months and till then, the senior-most
teacher in the school shall hold the charge of Vice
Principal.

12.

We also agree that the Director of Education
should conduct an inquiry into the suppression
and manipulation of the official records and take
action against the persons responsible for the
misdemeanour.”
Despite the aforestated no action appears to have been

taken to appoint a DPC or to undertake a fresh selection process
for promotion to the post of the Vice-Principal in the Jan Kalyan
Senior Secondary School. The directions made by the Courts were
unambiguous and explicit.

The respondents were bound to

consider all eligible persons as on the date of passing of the
judgment. The Selection Committee had met on 27th October,
2004. The Division Bench had even set out the manner in which
the consideration was to be effected in the event of superannuation
of the senior most person. The process was to be completed within
three months and till then senior most teacher in the school was
required to hold the charge of the Vice-Principal. The respondents
were directed to conduct an inquiry into the suppression and
manipulation of the records and to take action against the persons
responsible for the misdemeanour.

8

Cont.Cas(C)284/2004

13.

It appears that Ram Avtar Sharma, whose appointment

has been set aside by this Court, took the matter to the Supreme
Court in SLP(C) 7555/03. In these circumstances, the respondents
had filed a counter affidavit dated 21st July, 2003 wherein the
following averments were made:“IV(1) The parawise list of dates is as hereunder
:XXXXX
The name of Sh.L.C.Gupta M.A, B.T, having an
exp of 23 yrs as H.M. in the same School, working
since 15.7.1971 as H.M., and who was at sl.no.1 in
the seniority list, was not recommended for his
promotion as V.P by the DPC on the erroneous
plea that two disciplinary proceedings were
pending against Sh.L.C.Gupta since the
orders/directions, passed by this Hon'ble Court
dated 16.7.1987 in SLP no.2822/87 were still as
good on 27.10.94 even, the DPC ignored these
directions/orders.”
XXXXX
“As far as the question of the pendency of
disciplinary proceedings, pending against Sh.
L.C.Gupta H.M is concerned, these do not come
on the way of his promotion to the post of Vice
Principal because when the directions/orders dt.
16.7.87 in SLP 2822/87 are followed and
implemented,
the
alleged
disciplinary
proceedings pending, now decided vide order
dated 6.4.2000, exonerating Sh.L.C.Gupta, H.M
of all the charges, levelled against him, would not
come in the way of Mr.Gupta's promotion as Vice
Principal.”
“2. XXXXX
However, it is admitted the Sh. L.C.Gupta the
respondent no.5 was eligible because of his
working as H.M since 15.7.1971 contd. in the same
9

Cont.Cas(C)284/2004

14.

school.”
So far as the eligibility of the petitioner Mr.L.C.Gupta is

concerned, the respondents have stated even in the present
proceedings that the DPC constituted by them which has
conducted its proceedings on 18th May, 2004 and 29th October,
2004, had considered the case of the petitioner but the petitioner
was not found fit for promotion and was not recommended for the
same as the DPC did not find the petitioner's Annual Confidential
Reports for the last five years deserving of promotion to the post of
Vice-Principal. Therefore, so far as eligibility is concerned, the
candidature of the petitioner was not rejected on account of failure
to satisfy the eligibility conditions but the petitioner was not found
fit for promotion on the ground that he did not meet the requisite
grading of 'good' in his Annual Confidential Reports for the last
five years.
15.

I find that the respondents have also submitted that the

DPC considered the Post Graduate Teachers of the school as per
their merit and found that there was no Post graduate Teacher fit
for promotion to the post of Vice-Principal inasmuch as the
teachers were not possessed of the requisite experience laid down
for the said post.

10

Cont.Cas(C)284/2004

In view of the aforestated, so far as the directions
requiring the respondents to conduct a fresh selection process for
appointment to the post of Vice-Principal in the Jan Kalyan Senior
Secondary School is concerned, the same stands complied with.
The respondents constituted the DPC which has conducted its
proceedings on 18th May, 2004 and 29th October, 2004.
16.

Further direction contained in the judgments dated 24th

May, 2001 and 1st February, 2002 to the effect that the Selection
Committee would take the relative merit position and eligiblity
criterion as on 8th October, 2004 and only then take a decision
with regard to the appointment to the post of Vice-Principal is
concerned, the respondents also appear to have complied with this
directive inasmuch as the DPC is stated to have considered the
existing Post Graduate Teachers who were eligible in the school. It
is upon such consideration that the DPC did not find any Post
Graduate Teacher fit for promotion as they were short of the
prescribed experience as laid down for appointment to the post of
Vice-Principal. The petitioner was not found fit for promotion by
the DPC inasmuch as he did not meet the benchmark for
promotion to the post of Vice-Principal in his Annual Confidential
Reports. The prescribed criterion is 'good' and it is submitted that
11

Cont.Cas(C)284/2004

the petitioner did not fulfil that criteria.
17.

Therefore, it is apparent that, irrespective of the

submissions made on behalf of the respondent with regard to the
affidavit dated 21st July, 2003 filed in SLP(C) 7555/2003, the
respondent has treated the petitioner as an eligible candidate and
placed his record before the DPC for consideration for
appointment to the post of Vice-Principal.
18.

Even assuming in favour of the petitioner that the

respondents were bound by the affidavit dated 21st July, 2003 it is
to be noticed that the only submission made in the counter
affidavit before the Supreme Court was to the effect that the
petitioner was eligible for consideration for appointment to the
post of Vice-Principal.

It is only such like eligible candidates

whose names were placed before the DPC. The petitioner was
treated as eligible when his case was considered. Eligibility is not
synonymous with recommendation to appoint.

Eligibility of a

person merely renders the petitioner entitled to consideration for
appointment.
The DPC having considered the case of the petitioner
and having found the petitioner not fit for promotion on the
ground that the petitioner was not meeting the prescribed Annual
12

Cont.Cas(C)284/2004

Confidential Report criterion of 'good', in my view the respondents
have also carried out the direction made by this Court for
consideration of the petitioner who was stated to be most senior
candidate.
19.

In view of above, I am not recording any finding on the

submission on behalf of the respondent to the effect that the
affidavit dated 21st July, 2003 was fraudulent and, therefore, not
binding on the respondent. The petitioner has contended that the
correct affidavit stated to have been filed by the respondent was
filed without taking leave of the Court and was not taken on
record. In view of the finding arrived at by me here-in-above no
finding needs to be recorded on this aspect of the matter.
20.

I am unable to agree with the petitioner that the

proceedings of the DPC were a mere eyewash and only in cosmetic
compliance of the judgments dated 24th May, 2001 and 1st
February, 2002.

According to the learned counsel for the

petitioner this is supported by the fact that no action was taken by
the respondent despite repeated representations to it.
Howsoever dilatory the actions of the respondents may
have turned out to be, but it cannot be urged that the doubt
expressed in view of the take over of the school by the Government
13

Cont.Cas(C)284/2004

for constitution ;of seniority and the seniority of candidates was
frivolous or that it could be brushed aside or ignored.

The

respondent was discharging statutory duties and was bound to
exercise care and caution in implementing orders of this Court.
LPA 297/01 was not filed by the respondent herein but by the
private employee whose appointment had been set aside by the
judgment dated 24th May, 2001. Even the Special Leave Petition
before the Apex Court was filed by the same person. Upon take
over of the school, on account of statutory intervention, there was
a change in the status of the teachers in the school and the
respondent had expressed the apprehensions and doubts with
regard to the effect of the same.
21.

Having carefully gone through the counter affidavit and

the course of litigations with regard to the matters in issue and the
explanation given by the respondent, I am satisfied that the failure
to implement the directions made in the judgment dated 24th May,
2001 and 1st February, 2002 immediately on pronouncement was
only on account of the changed circumstances which were not
brought to the notice of the Court at the time of passing of the
judgment dated 24th May, 2001. Even the petitioner did not bring
the aspect of take over of the school and the resultant changes
14

Cont.Cas(C)284/2004

before the Court at that time. It has been stated that after the
dismissal of the application for modification, even though decision
was taken to file an appeal, the opinion of the counsel that the
matter was not a fit case for filing the appeal and that the
Department should hold the DPC was implemented.

Opinion

given by the counsel was accepted and the DPC which was duly
constituted held its proceedings on 18th May, 2004. Therefore, the
present case can at best be stated to be a case of delayed
compliance with the directions made which in the aforestated
facts, would not invite the penal consequences under the
Contempt of Court Act against the respondent.
22.

So far as the decision of the DPC finding the petitioner

not fit for promotion is concerned, the same cannot be the subject
matter of adjudication in the present proceedings. The petitioner
cannot be permitted to contend that the proceedings of the DPC
were an eye wash and the actions of the respondent contumacious
merely because he was not found fit. It is, therefore, directed that
the petitioner may take such action in respect of the same in
accordance with law. The petitioner may impugn the proceedings
and the orders of the DPC in appropriate proceedings.
23.

Perusal of the record shows that the petitioner made
15

Cont.Cas(C)284/2004

repeated representations which did not even deserve an answer
from the respondent. The judgments passed by the Court were not
implemented for a considerable period and the respondents took
their own good time so as to constitute the DPC. It is a fact that
only the orders dated 12th April, 2004 shook the respondent out of
their inertia and caused them to constitute the DPC.

The

petitioner was compelled to file the present petition to vent his
grievance. In these circumstances the present case is a fit case
where the petitioner should be compensated with costs of the
present proceedings. Accordingly the petition is dismissed.
However the petitioner shall be entitled to costs of the present
proceedings which are quantified at Rs.15,000/-. Costs shall be
paid within four weeks from today.
The petition is dismissed in the above terms.

28th JANUARY, 2005
JK

GITA MITTAL, J.

16

Cont.Cas(C)284/2004

