IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Writ Petition(Civil) No. 7023/2003
Da te of decision: April 30, 2007
Shri Muralidharan K.
.... Petitioner
through: Mr.M.L. Khattar, Advocate
VERSUS
The Management of M/s circle Freight Intl.(India) P.Ltd.
....Respondent
through: Mr. Mr. Suhail Dutt,
Mr. M.K. S. Menon and Mr. L. Anand Singh,
Advocates
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J
1.

This writ petition has been filed by the petitioner assailing an

industrial award dated 3rd January, 2003 of the industrial
adjudicator answering the reference made to it against the
petitioner-workman.
2.

There is no dispute to the material facts essential for

adjudicating upon the subject matter of the present case and the
same are briefly noticed hereafter.

W.P.(C) No. 7023/2003

page 1 of 25

3.

The petitioner was appointed as an Operations Supervisor

with effect from 1st July, 1986 by the respondent no. 1 pursuant to
a letter dated 1st July, 1986 on probation for a period of six
months from the date of his joining. The duties of the petitioner in
this letter of appointment clearly stipulated that the petitioner
was responsible for the following duties;

4.

"7. You will be responsible for:(a) issuing delivery orders and sending out
arrival notices.
(b) maintaining registers on day to day basis.
(c) handling of consolidations (sorting out cargo
and transshipping the same promptly)
(d) maintaining good relationship between the
customer and CFI.
(e) answering telephone calls politely.
(f) you will complete all documents on charges
collect, MAWB and HAWB and hand them over
to the Finance Manager for remittances to be
sent back to origin station.
(g) you will be in charge of the billing on regular
basis.
(h) you will sport a tie during working hours.
(i) no overtime will be paid."
The appointment was at an initial remuneration of Rs.

2150/-

Confirmation

of

his

services

was

effected

by

a

communication of 1st January, 1987. The respondent no. 1 has
placed reliance on the clause in this letter wherein the petitioner
was notified that his services could be terminated by one month's
notice from either side or if the company so elects, termination

W.P.(C) No. 7023/2003

page 2 of 25

could be effected at any time giving one month's salary in lieu of
such notice. There is also no dispute that the last drawn salary of
the petitioner was Rs. 3630/- per month and that during the
course of his employment, the petitioner was sent to the United
States of America and Philippines for training in the international
operational procedure in the freight forwarding industry in
August, 1987, March, 1988 and June, 1989. Sometime in the year
1989 there was controversy with regard to accounting of the cash
which had been withdrawn from the company in its Delhi office.
According to the respondent no.1, advances taken from the
company in lieu of expenses to be incurred for the work of custom
clearance were not settled or accounted for.

On the allegation

that in February, 1988, the petitioner had taken Rs.20,000/- from
the company in lieu of expenses for works done but vouchers in
regard thereto were falsified, a memo/notice dated 27th June,
1989 (Exhibit W3) was given to the petitioner to which he replied
by a letter of 6th July, 1981(Exhibit W4).

According to the

respondent no. 1, an investigation was made and an explanation
was called from the petitioner in the presence of senior officers of
the company.

As no explanation was given, his services were

terminated by a letter dated 23rd September, 1989.
W.P.(C) No. 7023/2003

page 3 of 25

5.

The petitioner has disputed any such enquiry by the

respondent no. 1. Aggrieved by such termination, the petitioner
invoked the jurisdiction of the appropriate government under the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. By an order bearing reference no.
F24(2226)/90-Lab dated 6th July, 1990 the following dispute was
referred for adjudication to the industrial tribunal:

6.

"Whether the termination of service of Shri
Muralidharan K. is legal and/or justified and if
not to what relief is he entitled and what
directions are necessary in this respect?"
The petitioner assailed the termination on grounds of malice

and also urged that the termination of the services without service
of a charge sheet or notice or enquiry, was wholly illegal and that
he had been penalised for earning the wrath of his officer. The
petitioner claimed entitlement to reinstatement with full back
wages and continuity of service. He also urged that his demands
vide letter dated 3rd October, 1989 was wrongfully rejected by the
respondent.
7.

The respondent no. 1 objected to the maintainability of the

reference on the ground that the petitioner was appointed as an
operational supervisor but the respondent no. 1 treated him as an
employee of the managerial cadre and for this purpose alone the
workman has been sent to the foreign countries to educate him on
W.P.(C) No. 7023/2003

page 4 of 25

international operational procedures. The petitioner was drawing
as a salary in excess of Rs.4200/- per month, more than the
statutorily prescribed limit, and that he was functioning in
managerial capacity as an operations manager. On these pleas, it
was urged that the petitioner was outside the purview of

the

definition of workman as stipulated under Section 2(s) of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. On merits the action of termination
of service was defended on the plea that the petitioner had
defrauded the company by falsifying expense vouchers and that
his services were terminated after a prior enquiry, without there
being any personal bias.
8.

In view of the specific challenge made by the petitioner on

the ground that the industrial adjudicator has failed to decide the
issues which were framed by it, it becomes necessary to notice the
issues which were framed in the adjudication.
9.

On 8th February, 1991, the industrial adjudicator framed the

following issues:
"1. Is Shri K. Muralidharan not workman as
alleged in Section 2(s) of I.D. Act?
2. Did the management hold a legal and valid
enquiry against Shri K. Muralidharan according
to principles of natural justice?
3. As per terms of reference."

W.P.(C) No. 7023/2003

page 5 of 25

10.

Thereafter, in accordance with law, the industrial adjudicator

proceeded to examine issue no. 2 as a preliminary issue.
Inasmuch as the validity of the claimed enquiry was required to be
proved, the onus of proof thereon, was placed on the respondent
no. 1.

The respondent no. 1 failed to lead any evidence on this

issue despite several opportunities and consequently its evidence
on the issue was closed.

Finally by an order passed on 26th

August, 1996, the industrial adjudicator returned a finding against
the respondent no. 1 on the issue of the legality and validity of the
enquiry.
11.

The respondent no. 1 thereafter sought leave to adduce

evidence with regard to the alleged misconduct of the petitioner.
This request was granted by the industrial tribunal by an order
passed on 12th December, 1997 when the following additional
issue was framed :
"Whether the workman committed the alleged misconduct?
OPM"
12.

The petitioner examined himself in support of his case while

the respondent led the evidence of Mr. Mahesh Kumar Malik in
support of its case. On a consideration of the evidence led before
him, the industrial adjudicator by the award dated 3rd January,
W.P.(C) No. 7023/2003

page 6 of 25

2003 held against the petitioner on both issues and as such
answered the reference against the workman.
13.

The present writ petition has been filed primarily on the

ground that the award of the industrial adjudicator is based on no
evidence.

It is secondly urged, that having held against the

respondent no. 1 on issue no. 2 by the order dated 26th August,
1996, it was not open to the learned industrial adjudicator to
reconsider the same and answer the same in favour of the
respondent no. 1 in the award. It has further been urged that the
industrial adjudicator failed to answer the fourth additional issue
which had been framed on 12th December, 1997 and for this
reason as well the award was not sustainable.
14.

The petitioner has contended that so far as the finding of the

industrial adjudicator to the effect that the petitioner was not a
workman was concerned, the same was based on no evidence and
was legally incorrect inasmuch as the nomenclature of a post
would not determine as to whether the petitioner was covered
under the definition of workman or not but it was the nature of
duties which was being performed by the petitioner which has to
be considered.
15.

Mr. Suhail Dutt, learned counsel for the respondent no. 1 has

W.P.(C) No. 7023/2003

page 7 of 25

however contended that the award is liable to be sustained and
that it is not open to this court to examine the findings of fact
which have been returned by the industrial adjudicator. It has
been submitted that the award is based on the cross examination
of the workman himself, and that the respondent no. 1 had
adequately established the misconduct of the workman and for
this reason the award was liable to be sustained.
16.

I have heard learned counsel for the parties at length and

have also carefully perused the record. I find that the industrial
adjudicator had decided the issue no. 2 relating to the legality and
validity of the enquiry claimed to have been conducted by the
respondent no. 1.

Issue no. 2 specifically required the

management to prove that it had held a legal and valid enquiry
against the petitioner according to principles of natural justice.
This issue had been clearly held against the respondent no. 1 by
the order dated 26th August, 1997 which finding had not been
assailed by the respondent no. 1 in any proceedings. The findings
thus returned on this issue had attained finality and were binding
in the adjudication procedings and the parties.
17.

So far as the additional issue framed on 12th December, 1997

is concerned, I find that this issue does not even find a mention in
W.P.(C) No. 7023/2003

page 8 of 25

the industrial award made on 3rd January, 2003.

By this

additional issue framed on 12th December, 1997, the onus to prove
that the workman had committed the alleged misconduct was
clearly and unequivocally cast on the management.

The

respondent no. 1 filed the affidavit of Mr. Mahesh Malik, its Area
Manager by way of evidence. Shri Mahesh Kumar Malik was cross
examined by the petitioner when he stated that he was employed
with the management only since 1st June, 1998 and that he had
never dealt with the workman. He based his knowledge of the case
mainly on the basis of the record.
18.

Inasmuch as the grievance before this court is that the

Award is based on no evidence, it is necessary to examine this
aspect of the case. Mr. Khattar, learned counsel for the petitioner
has painstakingly taken me through the record to point out that
the allegations against the petitioner were not crystallized by the
respondents in the various communications addressed to him and
that the respondent no. 1 was not even sure as to the exact charges
against the petitioner.

In the cross examination, Mr. Mahesh

Kumar Malik, management's witness

no. 1 has stated that a

charge sheet was issued to the petitioner and one Shri A.P. Shukla
for defalcation of Rs.34000/-. He denied the suggestion that no
W.P.(C) No. 7023/2003

page 9 of 25

enquiry was conducted against the workman while admitting that
the workman had filed a reply to the charge sheet. In his affidavit
he has deposed on oath that defalcation of Rs.34000/- was found
to have been done by Shri Muralidharan, the petitioner for which
enquiries had been done and that Shri Muralidharan was
supported by Shri A.P. Shukla in this regard.

He has further

stated that the petitioner had given false and fictitious vouchers to
the tune of approximately Rs.24000/- in February, 1988 and that
when an explanation was demanded from the petitioner no
explanation was rendered.
19.

Perusal of the record however would show that these

allegations are certainly not supported by the correspondence
which has been placed on record. Exhibit W3 is the circular dated
27th June, 1989 addressed to five officers of the respondent no. 1
including Shri A.P. Shukla, Shri K. Muralidharan, Shri K.K.
Mukherjee, Shri T.S. Rammurthy and Shri Ashok Sharma that a
shortage of "approximately Rs.21000/-" in the cash box of the
respondent no.1 has been revealed while the exact quantum has
not been ascertained. It was further stated that no conclusive
liability has been fixed and opinion of these persons was solicited
as to how the cash shortage has arisen. Another memorandum
W.P.(C) No. 7023/2003

page 10 of 25

dated 10th July, 1989 was addressed by the respondent no. 1 to
four officers submitting that from a report of Hoshan Netarwala's
report, it appeared that Rs.21000/- was missing. It was urged
herein that "the company cannot employ employees who have
control in the office of both financial and administrative
management and have funds missing. If this happens again, I am
afraid the company will have no choice but to take personal action
against you individually."
The respondent no. 1 has itself placed vouchers purportedly
signed by the petitioner before the court and it has been pointed
out by Mr. Khattar, learned counsel for the petitioner that they
were all duly settled amounts in the accounts of the respondent no.
1.
20.

The respondents have proved the reply dated 6th July, 1989

by the petitioner as Exhibit M6 on record. This reply deserves to
be considered in extenso and reads thus :" I refer to you IOM dated 27/6/89 copy
received by me on the 1st July, 1989 reg
defalcation of cash
In this connection I would like to enlighten the
following:
1. As and when I took IOU for making official
payments such as custom duty, demurrage or
any other expenses relates to operation, customs
clearance etc. it was totally against records
W.P.(C) No. 7023/2003

page 11 of 25

(token of receipts i.e. IOU). After completion of
the respective jobs, expenses were submitted to
accounts and taken back IOUs.
In no
circumstances money was taken without IOU for
cashier's accounting.
2. Account of IOUs maintained by accounts
(KKM) was finally passed on to Mr. Anoop
Sharma (as instructed) by Dan for my IOUs
settlement) and my final IOU settlement was
accepted and confirmed by Mr. Sharma as per
xerox attached.
3. Any shortage in cash-box if noticed, you may
take necessary steps to prove it in black and
white; you can expect my full cooperation as I
mentioned to you during your last visit.
Further it may also be added that whatsoever
may be the person entrusted with the company
cash transaction must be held responsible for
any shortage in his possession as is prevalent
everywhere."
21.

It is noteworthy that both the circulars dated 27th June,

1989 were in the nature of a general circular to all employees and
did not level any specific charges against any person nor was it in
the nature of a charge sheet served upon the petitioner.

The

memo dated 10th July, 1989 were addressed to other officers
including Mr. Anoop Sharma and the petitioner.

These

communications were thereafter followed only with a letter dated
23rd September, 1989 wherein it was alleged that the year 1987 a
sum of Rs.34376.61 was defalcated and that investigation reveal
that advances given by the company were not settled in entirety for
W.P.(C) No. 7023/2003

page 12 of 25

an extended period of time. In addition it was stated that an
amount of Rs.25355.85 was advanced in the petitioner's name
which has not been settled; and further, that the petitioner has
falsified vouchers totalling Rs.20788.90 in the month of February,
1988. On this basis it was urged that the petitioner's actions were
not compatible with the corporate policy and that in view of the
gross abuse of the corporate funds, the management had lost
confidence in the petitioner's ability and had no option but to
terminate the petitioner's services and to call upon the petitioner
to make good these losses.
22.

I have noticed above that the industrial adjudicator had

arrived at a finding that the respondents had not held a legally
valid enquiry in compliance with the principles of natural justice
against the petitioner.
Before this court also, nothing could be pointed out wherein
the allegations made in the letter of termination dated 23rd
September, 1989 were ever communicated to the petitioner prior
thereto. There is certainly variation of the amounts in the various
communications.
23.

In any case, in view of the order dated 12th December, 1997

passed by the industrial adjudicator, the respondent no. 1 was
W.P.(C) No. 7023/2003

page 13 of 25

required to prove as a matter of fact that the petitioner had
committed the alleged misconduct.

Bald allegations unsupported

by details of accounting or documentation would not further the
case of the respondent no. 1 or establish misconduct on the part of
the petitioner. The industrial adjudicator has held that the
petitioner has failed to give explanation to the allegations against
him without any credible evidence on this aspect. No material has
been placed before the industrial adjudicator in its evidence by the
respondent no. 1 which could have established that the petitioner
had committed the misconduct. In the light of the foregoing, it has
to be held that this finding is not supported by the evidence which
has been led before the industrial adjudicator.
24.

Furthermore, in the findings returned in the award dated

3rd January, 2003, the industrial adjudicator has observed that
the management has claimed that a fair and proper enquiry was
conducted in the case and notice was issued to the workman; the
workman did not reply and this led to a presumption of
misconduct submitted by him. On these facts, the issue no. 2 was
decided against the workman and in favour of the management.
Certainly these observations and findings are not supported by the
record. The industrial adjudicator has also not considered the
W.P.(C) No. 7023/2003

page 14 of 25

order dated 26th August, 1996 which was to the contrary. In any
case, the order dated 26th August, 1996 having become final, it
was certainly not open to the industrial adjudicator to re-decide an
issue which stood decided.

At the same time the industrial

adjudicator has failed to return any finding on the additional issue
which was made on 12th December, 1997. For this reason alone
the award would not be sustainable.
25.

The petitioner has also assailed the findings returned by the

industrial adjudicator on issue no. 1. The industrial adjudicator
has held that the workman was sent abroad thrice during the
course of his employment; that he was assisted by another person
for the work of custom clearance and freight forwarding and that
he had also once issued a letter signing as manager. The industrial
adjudicator has relied on the statement of the workman that he
had joined the respondent no. 1 because he had better prospects
than the post of imports in-charge held by him with Jina &
Company, his earlier employer.

It was also noticed that the

petitioner was confirmed as "Operation Supervisor" and that his
remuneration was Rs.3630/- which exceeded Rs.1600/-. On these
facts, it was held that the workman was not a workman for the
reason that he was a supervisor and issue no.1 framed in this
W.P.(C) No. 7023/2003

page 15 of 25

behalf was decided against the workman.
26.

On a consideration of the record and the applicable law, in

my view this finding is also not legally sustainable. The mere fact
that the post on which the petitioner was appointed was
designated as Operation Supervisor does not mean that the
petitioner was appointed to a post which was supervisory in
nature. The fact that the petitioner was sent abroad for training
would also not by itself in any manner indicate that the petitioner
was employed in managerial capacity.

Mr. Khattar, learned

counsel for the petitioner has urged that the petitioner was
handling the cargo operations and therefore it was the airlines
which sent him abroad for training and that the respondent no. 1
did not incur any cost or liability on this. I find force in the
submissions of learned counsel for the petitioner that from a bare
perusal of the duties of the petitioner as set out in the letter of
appointment noticed in para 3 above, there is no element of
management or supervision therein.

There is nothing in the

evidence of the respondent no. 1 or in the cross examination of the
petitioner to indicate that he was supervising or managing any
staff of the respondent no. 1.
27.

It is well settled that neither the appellation to the post to

W.P.(C) No. 7023/2003

page 16 of 25

which an employee is stated to be employed nor the salary which
he is being paid would decide the issue as to whether a person is
covered within the definition of "workman" as given in Section 2s
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.

It has been repeatedly

emphasised by the Apex Court and the high courts that the
expression "industry, workman and industrial disputes" etc are
not to be interpreted so as to whittle down the object of the
enactment. Disputes between employees and the management are
not to be excluded from the operation of the enactment Act by
giving narrow and restricted meaning to the expressions contained
in the Act. Taking a pragmatic approach, the Apex Court has
repeatedly held that the courts have to look beyond glorified
designations and names assigned to posts by managements and
examine the nature of duties to discover what precisely what
duties the employee is performing.
28.

In 1983 Lab.IC 1483 S.K. Verma v. Mahesh Chandra

& Anr., the court considered the appointment letter of the
employee and noticed that though appointed as a "Development
officer" the employee had no authority to bind the corporation in
any way and that his principal duty appeared to be to organise and
develop the business of the corporation in the area allotted to him
W.P.(C) No. 7023/2003

page 17 of 25

and for that purpose to recruit active and reliable agents and to
train them to canvass new business and to render post sales
services to policy holders. He was expected to assist and inspire
the agent and had no authority to appoint agents or take
disciplinary action or supervise the work of agents, though he was
required to train them and assist them. There was no sub ordinate
staff working under the Development Officer and consequently it
was held that the employee was not engaged in administrative or
managerial work. In this behalf reference can also usefully be
made to the Division Bench pronouncement of this court reported
at 1981 Lab. I.C. 893 Management of Bharat Kala
Kendra Pvt. Ltd. vs. R.K. Baweja & Anr.
29.

My attention has also been drawn to the pronouncement in

the dispute between Anand Bazar Patrika (P.Ltd.) & Its
Workmen reported at 1969 2 LLJ 670. In this case, the Apex
Court had laid down the principles which would be followed in
deciding a question as to whether a person is employed in a
supervisory capacity or is doing clerical work. It was held that if a
person is mainly doing supervisory work but incidentally, or, for a
fraction of time also does some clerical work, it would have to be
held that he is employed in supervisory capacity and conversely if
W.P.(C) No. 7023/2003

page 18 of 25

the main work done is of clerical nature, the mere fact that some
supervisory duties are also carried out incidentally or as a small
fraction of the work done by him will not convert his employment
as a clerk, into one in supervisory capacity.

From the

consideration of the duties being rendered by the petitioner in the
case, the court was of the view that because the employee was the
senior most clerk doing the work of maintaining and writing cash
books and preparing various returns, he was given a small amount
of control over the other clerks working in his section which were
minor duties of the supervisory nature, would not convert his
office of senior clerk into that of a supervisor.
30.

So far as the consideration of the nature of functions is

concerned, managerial, supervisory or administrative function
would require that a person who is so employed, controls the
working of others. Merely because the person who does some
work and gets assistance for doing that work would not be
sufficient by itself to describe or hold that the person was working
in a managerial or administrative capacity. A person who has to
thus only supervise those who are helping him in doing the work
he has to perform, is also not working as a supervisor.

A

supervisor is a person who is watching the work being done by
W.P.(C) No. 7023/2003

page 19 of 25

others to see that it is being done properly. (Ref :- 1977 II LLJ
255 The disputes between Mathur Aviation

and

Lieutenant Governor Delhi & Ors.)
31.

In the instant case, the respondent no.1's principal ground of

challenge to the petitioner not being covered under the definition
of workman is the quantum of wages being drawn by him. It has
been contended that the statutory limit so far as ascertaining the
criterion of employment of the petitioner is concerned at the
relevant time was Rs.1600/- and that the petitioner was drawing
wages more than Rs.1600/- for which reason by virtue of Section
2s(4) of the Industrial Disputes Act, he was not entitled to invoke
the jurisdiction of the industrial adjudicator under the Industrial
Disputes Act. This issue has been considered in several binding
precedents.

In the judgment reported at (1966) 2 LLJ 827

regarding Shree Madhav Mills Limited it was held that
though the claimant was drawing wages exceeding the statutory
limit but was not employed in a supervisory capacity, he would fall
within the definition of workmen under Section 2s of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
32.

Mr. Suhail Dutt, learned counsel for the respondent no.1 has

asserted that the petitioner has admitted that he signed a letter as
W.P.(C) No. 7023/2003

page 20 of 25

manager and this admission by itself justifies the finding returned
in the award. This admission cannot be read in isolation ignoring
the complete evidence of the petitioner. I find that the petitioner
has clarified

that he so signed because Mr. A.P. Shukla, the

manager was not available. This statement cannot be ignored and
would explain why the petitioner so signed. It was certainly not
because the petitioner was working as a manager. The respondent
also does not contend that the petitioner was a manager. For this
reason there is no admission that the petitioner was working in a
managerial capacity with the respondent no. 1.
33.

In the light of these well settled binding principles laid down

in various judicial pronouncements noticed hereinabove, it has to
be held that the petitioner was employed as a workman and was
not engaged in any supervisory or managerial functions or
capacity. The finding of the industrial adjudicator is contrary to
the settled principles of law noticed hereinabove . It would appear
that the industrial adjudicator has been persuaded to hold against
the petitioner because of the appellation of the post in which he
was engaged and the sole fact that he had thrice been abroad to
take training.

Such finding has been rendered without

consideration of the capacity in which the petitioner was engaged
W.P.(C) No. 7023/2003

page 21 of 25

or sent abroad or the usual nature of his duties and is contrary to
law.
34.

Before this court, the respondents have urged that the

respondent no. 1 had lost confidence in the petitioner and
consequently looked at from any angle the petitioner cannot be
granted relief in his favour.

Reliance has been placed by Mr.

Suhail Dutt learned counsel for the respondent on the
pronouncement of the Apex Court in (1977) 1 SCC 146 Kamal
Kishore Laxman v. Management of Mr. Pan American
World Inc.

; 1970 (1) LLJ 63 between Rai General

Company Limited & Chopras (PP) and 1971 (II) LLJ 615
between M/s Eran Kalian & Co. Pvt. Ltd. And Their
Workman & Anr. to urge that in view of the loss of confidence
between the petitioner and the respondent no. 1, the petitioner
could not be reinstated into the services of the respondent no. 1.
35.

This submission is opposed by the petitioner on the plea that

this was never the case of the respondent no. 1 before the
industrial adjudicator. I find that there is nothing on record to
support these submissions made by the respondents before this
court.
36.

There is no dispute that the industrial adjudicator has failed

W.P.(C) No. 7023/2003

page 22 of 25

to decide the additional issue framed on 12th December, 1987. It
was submitted by Mr. Dutt, learned counsel for the respondent no.
1 that the services of the petitioner stood validly terminated and
that the petitioner is carrying on a business in partnership, though
under the cover, shield and name of his wife as partner, and that in
view of the pronouncement of the Apex Court reported in (2005)
5 SCC 124 Allahabad Jal Sansthan v. Daya Shankar Rai
& Anr.; (2002) 6 SC 41 Hindustan Motors v. Tapan
Kumar Bhatta and (2003) 6 SCC 141 M.P. State
Electricity Board v. Jarina Bee, the petitioner would in any
case be not entitled to back wages even if his services were to be
restored.
37.

I find that these submissions have never been made before

the learned industrial adjudicator and no finding in this behalf has
been returned on any of these aspects. There is nothing before
this court to indicate that these issues were even considered by the
industrial adjudicator.
38.

The services of the petitioner were terminated as back as on

23rd September, 1989 and the matter remained pending before
the industrial adjudicator for almost 13 years till 3rd January,
2003 when the award was made.
W.P.(C) No. 7023/2003

Normally, for reasons of

page 23 of 25

expediency, this court may have considered these issues. However
I find that these questions require that the evidence placed by the
parties on record to be considered and findings returned on purely
factual issues.

I do not deem it in the interest of justice or

appropriate to decide on these submissions which would be best
left for consideration and adjudication to the statutory authority
on whom such jurisdiction has been bestowed.
39.

In view of the foregoing discussion, I hereby set aside and

quash the findings of the industrial adjudicator on issue no. 1 and
issue no. 2 as returned in the industrial award dated 3rd January,
2003. So far as the findings on issue no. 2 are concerned, it is held
that the order dated 26th August, 1996 has finally adjudicated
thereon and would bind the parties. Inasmuch as the industrial
adjudicator has failed to decide the issue framed on 12th
December, 1997, I hereby remand the matter for fresh
consideration on this issue and the relief, if any, to be found
admissible to the petitioner in accordance with law based on the
material already placed on record by the parties. In view of the
period which has elapsed since the termination of the services of
the petitioner, it is expected that the industrial adjudicator will
dispose of this matter within six months of the receipt of this
W.P.(C) No. 7023/2003

page 24 of 25

judgment and the record from this court.
40.

It is made clear that nothing herein contained is an

expression of opinion on the contentions of the respondent no. 1
based on the plea that there was loss of confidence of the
respondent no. 1 in the petitioner and consequently termination
based thereon was valid and proper or the alternative argument
raised that the petitioner would not be entitled to back wages
This petition is allowed in the above terms.

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
April 30, 2007.
kr

W.P.(C) No. 7023/2003

page 25 of 25

