IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.3820/2004
Reserved on: 6th October, 2005
Date of decision: 30th November, 2005
MUNICIPAL CORPORATION
OF DELHI
... Petitioner
through: Ms. Amita Gupta,
Advocate
VERSUS
SMT. MOHAR KAUR
... Respondent
through: Mr. Sanjoy Ghose,
Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

By way of this writ petition, the Municipal Corporation of

Delhi has impugned an Award dated 1st May, 2003 passed by the
Industrial Tribunal holding that the services of the respondent had been

WP (C) No.3820/2004

Page 1 of 9

terminated illegally and unjustifiably and directing her reinstatement in
service with continuity of service and full back wages.
2.

Smt. Mohar Kaur joined the employment of the Municipal

Corporation of Delhi w.e.f. 3rd May, 1979 as a School Attendant. Her
services were regularised w.e.f. 10th August, 1987. At the time of taking
employment, the petitioner had submitted an application form and an
affidavit to the effect that she was born on 2nd March, 1951.

The

petitioner/MCD have contended that the workman used to slip away from
the School during her duty hours for two-three days in an unauthorised
manner for which memos dated 26th February, 1994, 19th November,
1994 and 4th February, 1995 were also issued to her. The head master is
said to have reported the matter to the Education Office vide reports
dated 28th March, 1995 & 5th April, 1995.
3.

It is alleged that a legal notice dated 24th March, 1995 was

received alleging that the respondent/workman had obtained service by
furnishing false documents regarding her date of birth. It was stated that
the date of birth of the respondent in the service record was reflected as
2nd March, 1951 while her daughter and son from school record were
alleged to have been born on 1st June, 1957 and 10th October, 1959.
In view of these facts, it was submitted that the date of birth

WP (C) No.3820/2004

Page 2 of 9

claimed by the petitioner was apparently false.
4.

According to the M.C.D, a medical examination was

conducted by the petitioner on 1st June, 1987. The medical authorities
endorsed the following remarks in the report on such examination:
“Her age according to her own statement, 37 years and
by appearance about 40 years.”
5.

In these circumstances, the Head Master appears to have

served a memo on 3rd April, 1995 upon the workman which she refused
to receive and also refused to supply her ration card.
6.

The MCD claims to have conducted a departmental inquiry

against the petitioner based on charges with regard to the false affidavit
and her failure to perform duties as noticed above. The respondent
submitted a reply dated 18th May, 2001 denying the charges.

The

petitioner proceeded to hold that the inquiry against the respondent and
finding the charges proved, her services were terminated vide an order
dated 8th June, 2001.
7.

Aggrieved thereby, the petitioner raised an industrial dispute

which was referred for adjudication to the Industrial Tribunal vide a
reference order dated 27th February, 2002 which was in the following
terms:“Whether the services of Smt. Mohar Kaur, w/of Shri
WP (C) No.3820/2004

Page 3 of 9

Lakshmi Chand have been terminated illegally and/or
unjustifiably by the management and if so, to what sum
of money as monetary relief alongwith consequential
benefits in terms of existing laws/Govt. Notifications
and to what other relief is she entitled and what
directions are necessary in this respect?”
8.

The petitioner challenged the inquiry proceedings as well as

the order of termination.

It was also stated that no copies of the

document were supplied to the workman and that the inquiry officer on
16th March, 2002 of his own recorded that the petitioner did not want to
cross-examine the remaining witnesses.

The respondent/workman

claimed that the inquiry was a mere eyewash with a predetermined mind.
9.

The MCD failed to file the written statement and none

appeared before the Industrial Tribunal on 15th July, 2002 and despite
taking several adjournments, failed to file written statement. In these
circumstances, the Corporation was proceeded ex-parte.

The order

directing ex parte proceedings was accepted by the Municipal
Corporation of Delhi in as much as it availed the opportunity to crossexamine the workman who had appeared as a witness in support of his
own case.
10.

In her deposition, the respondent/workman supported the case

set up by her in her claim. She also submitted that she was illiterate and
did not call any assistance in the inquiry. No opportunity was given in
WP (C) No.3820/2004

Page 4 of 9

this behalf to her. I find that no suggestion has been given by the
Municipal Corporation of Delhi that her deposition was false or her
documents were false or fabricated. There was no evidence in rebuttal
on behalf of the management.
11.

Learned counsel for the respondent has drawn my attention to

the explanation given by the workman in respect of the allegations of the
date of birth.

It has been pointed out by the workman that she is

completely illiterate and that her affidavit was submitted on the basis of
assumption and approximation of her given age. No inquiry in respect
thereof was made at the time of her appointment nor was any proper
medical examination done to ascertain her age. The workman has also
stated that her daughter was illiterate and was never admitted by her
husband Lakshmi Chand or herself in a school. The workman disputed
the signatures on the admission form and affidavit produced by the
M.C.D. It was also pointed out that these documents did not contain any
date of birth.
12.

Therefore, based on these materials, it has been stated by the

respondent/workman that the charges against her were totally false and
unsubstantiated.
13.

I have had occasion to examine another matter wherein an

WP (C) No.3820/2004

Page 5 of 9

issue relating to the age of a similarly placed workman had arisen. The
management in that case had also placed reliance on an assumption of
age given based on an ocular assessment of age of a person, without
examining the matter any further. In as much as such an assumption was
based on no assertion report or forensic examination of the workman.
Vide a judgment dated passed in WP (C) No.6395/2001 entitled MCD Vs.
Satyawan Singh & Ors. estimation of age based on such estimation was

rejected.
14.

I find that in the instant case also, the assumption of age had

been rendered on a conjecture based on purely physical appearance
without anything further.

There has been no examination of the

petitioner by any forensic expert nor any test or medical examination
undertaken to arrive at a fair assessment and reasonable assessment of
the age of the respondent/workman. For this reason, an assertion in the
alleged medical report relied upon by the petitioner is not worth of any
judicial credence.
15.

The evidence of the workman remains unrebutted.

Her

statement to the effect that she was not furnished document and that she
could not afford a defence assistance have also gone completely
unchallenged.

WP (C) No.3820/2004

Page 6 of 9

16.

Learned counsel for the respondent has submitted that the

petitioner had even failed to establish the charges led against the
respondent even on the evidence led before the inquiry.
17.

I find that there is no reason to disbelieve the deposition of

the respondent. There is no evidence or material before this court to
disturb the findings of fact arrived at by the Industrial Adjudicator even
if such course was legally permissible which it is not. The Award dated
1st May, 2003 has been rendered based on such evidence.
18.

The parameters and scope of judicial review on issues of fact

in industrial awards have been circumscribed within narrow limits by
judicial pronouncement. Noteworthy in this behalf are the observations
of the Apex Court in AIR 2000 SC 1508 entitled Indian Overseas Bank
Vs. I.O.B. Staff Canteen Workers' Union & Another in which it was
held thus:“The learned single Judge seems to have undertaken
an exercise, impermissible for him in exercising writ
jurisdiction, by liberally reappreciating the evidence
and drawing conclusions of his own on pure questions
of fact, unmindful, though aware fully, that he is not
exercising any appellate jurisdiction over the awards
passed by a Tribunal, presided over by a Judicial
Officer. The findings of fact recorded by a factfinding authority duly constituted for the purpose and
which ordinarily should be considered to have become
final, cannot be disturbed for the mere reason of
having been based on materials or evidence not
WP (C) No.3820/2004

Page 7 of 9

sufficient or credible in the opinion of the writ Court
to warrant those findings at any rate, as long as they
are based upon some material which are relevant for
the purpose or even on the ground that there is yet
another view which can b reasonably and possibly one
taken. The Division Bench was not only justified but
well merited in its criticism of the order of the learned
single Judge and in ordering restoration of the Award
of the Tribunal. On being taken through the findings
of the Industrial Tribunal as well as the order of the
learned single Judge and the judgment of the Division
Bench, we are of the view that the Industrial Tribunal
had overwhelming materials which constituted ample
and sufficient basis for recording its findings, as it did,
and the manner of consideration undertaken, the
objectivity of approach adopted and reasonableness of
findings recorded seem to be unexceptionable. The
only course, therefore, open to the writ Judge was the
relevant criteria laid down by this Court, before
sustaining the claim of the canteen workmen, on the
facts found and recorded by the fact-finding authority
and not embark upon an exercise of re-assessing the
evidence and arriving at findings of ones own,
altogether giving a complete go-bye even to the facts
specifically found by the Tribunal below.”
The learned Adjudicator had followed the pronouncement of

19.

the Apex Court reported in (1990) 1 SCC 361 entitled Bhagwati Prasadi
Vs. Delhi State Mineral Development Corporation wherein it was held
that:“The main controversy centres round the question
whether some petitioners are possessed of the
requisite qualifications to hold the posts so as to
entitle them to be confirmed in the respective posts
held by them. The indisputable facts are that the
petitioners were appointed between the period 1983
and 1986 ever since, they have been working and
WP (C) No.3820/2004

Page 8 of 9

have gained sufficient experience in the actual
discharge of duties attached to the posts held by them.
Practical experience would always aid the person to
effectively discharge the duties and is a sure guide to
assess the suitability.
The initial minimum
educational qualification prescribed for the different
posts is undoubtedly a factor to be reckoned with, but
it is so at the time of the initial entry into the service.
Once the appointments were made as daily rated
workers and they were allowed to work for a
considerable length of time, it would be hard and
harsh to deny them the confirmation in the respective
posts on the ground that they lack the prescribed
educational qualifications. In Our view, three years'
experience, ignoring artificial break in service for
short period/periods created by the respondent, in the
circumstances, would be sufficient for conformation.”
20.

For all the foregoing reasons, the Award dated 1st May, 2003

cannot be impugned on any legally tenable ground.
21.

Accordingly, this writ petition is dismissed with costs which

are quantified at Rs.10,000/-. Out of this amount, the petitioner shall pay
Rs.5,000/- to the respondent as costs. The balance amount of Rs.5,000/be apportioned equally between the Delhi High Court Bar Association
Library Fund and the Delhi High Court Legal Services Authority and
paid within a period of four weeks from today.
(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
November 30th , 2005
aa

WP (C) No.3820/2004

Page 9 of 9

