IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI

IA No.13910/2006 in CS (OS) No.1644/2002
Reserved on 16th April, 2007
Date of decision: 30th April, 2006
TARIKH EXPORT HOUSE
through: Mr. Kirti Uppal,
Advocate

... Plaintiff

VERSUS
MR. LOKESH UPADHYAY & ANR. ... Defendants
through: Ms. Charu Verma, Advocate for
Defendant No.1.
M r. Vijay K. Singh, Advocate for
Defendant No.2.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.

1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

This application has been filed on behalf of the defendant nos. 1 & 2

IA 13910/2006 in CS (OS) No.1644/2002

Page No.1

under Order 7 Rule 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure seeking an order of
return of plaint for want of territorial jurisdiction of this Hon’ble Court.
2.

It is noteworthy that the defendant no.2 had earlier filed an

application being IA No.175/2004 under Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code of
Civil Procedure, making a prayer for rejection of the plaint on the same
ground. This application was contested by the plaintiff. However, on 8th
September, 2004, the defendant no.2 was permitted to withdraw this
application unconditionally.
3.

The application has been thereafter filed by the defendants on the plea

that the defendant no.1 was appointed by the plaintiff as a Vice-Chairman at
Delhi in terms of appointment letter dated 16th October, 1997.

In

November, 1999 when the plaintiff undertook the expansion of business, a
branch office was set up at Bangalore to carry out business in that part of
the country. The defendant no.1 was constrained to shift to Bangalore with
his family for this purpose, and is permanently settled there. The defendant
has urged that a joint account number 1282 was opened with the Vijaya
Bank, at its Indira Nagar Branch in Bangalore jointly in the name of the
plaintiff and the defendant no.1 to enable easy access of the defendant no.1
to the money to pay the manufacturers making the supplies to the plaintiff
IA 13910/2006 in CS (OS) No.1644/2002

Page No.2

and discharge other liabilities.
4.

Disputes arose in April, 2002 between the parties inasmuch as the

defendant no.1 had then started pressing for a statement of his outstanding
dues by the plaintiff and payment. Reliance is placed in this behalf on faxes
dated 2nd April, 2002 and 8th April, 2002 addressed by the defendant no.1 to
Mr. Suresh Chopra. The defendant submits that he was authorized by Mr.
Suresh Chopra to withdraw amounts from the afore-noticed bank account to
meet the minimum needs pending settlement of accounts. According to the
defendant no.1, he had even caused a legal notice dated 20th April, 2002 to
be served upon the plaintiff in respect of his claim.
5.

Ms. Charu Verma, learned counsel appearing for the defendant no.1,

has pointed out that as per para 16 of the plaint, cause of action for filing the
present suit arose for the first time on the 20 th April, 2002 when the plaintiff
claims to have learnt from the Vijaya Bank that defendant no.1 had
withdrawn an amount of Rs.11,76,000/- between 17th & 19th April, 2002.
Based on this submission, it is contended that neither of the defendants are
residing at Delhi.

All dealings by the plaintiffs have taken place at

Bangalore. The defendants are permanent residents of Bangalore. The
transactions in question relates to the plaintiff’s branch office and the bank
IA 13910/2006 in CS (OS) No.1644/2002

Page No.3

both of which are located at Bangalore and that no part of the cause of
action has arisen at Delhi. For this reason, placing reliance on AIR 1992
S.C. 1514 Patel Roadways Limited, Bombay Vs. M/s Prasad Trading
Company and AIR 1955 Allahabad 669 Sunder Lal & Another Vs. Jai
Narain & Ors., it is urged that this court does not have the pecuniary
jurisdiction to entertain and adjudicate upon the subject matter of the suit
and that the plaint has to be returned to the plaintiff for filing in a court of
competent jurisdiction.
6.

The defendant no.2 has taken two fold objections in support of the

prayer for return of the plaint. Firstly, pointing out that the plaintiff has not
prayed for a joint and several decree against the defendant nos. 1 & 2
respectively, while a decree of Rs.25,71,350/- has been prayed against the
defendant no.1, so far as the defendant no.2 is concerned, the plaintiff has
prayed for only a decree for Rs.13,90,750/-. For this reason, it is objected
that so far as the defendant no.2 is concerned, this court does not have the
pecuniary jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the subject matter. The second
objection of the defendant no.2 also relates to territorial jurisdiction. It is
pointed out that cause of action for filing the suit against the defendant no.2
is to be severed from the cause of action for filing and maintaining the suit
IA 13910/2006 in CS (OS) No.1644/2002

Page No.4

against the defendant no.1. It is also submitted that the defendant no.2 is a
company registered in accordance with the provisions of the Companies
Act, 1956 at Bangalore. All transactions in relation to the defendant no.2
and payments which have been complained of by the plaintiff, have been
made at Bangalore. In order to ascertain territorial jurisdiction of the court
which is to determine a cause in respect of just payments, it is submitted that
the place where the amounts have been paid to the defendant no.2 would
vest jurisdiction.
7.

The application has been strongly contested by Mr. Kirti Uppal,

learned counsel appearing for the plaintiff on the ground that the plaintiff
has pleaded collusion between the defendant nos. 1 & 2 in misappropriating
the amounts of the plaintiff.

It has also been submitted that it is the

plaintiff’s case that amounts were being sent from Delhi to the defendant
no.1 at Bangalore and that the defendant no.1 was maintaining accounts of
the expenditure which was being incurred by him in Bangalore and sending
the same to the plaintiff at Delhi. The plaintiff has also contended that after
the filing of the present suit, the defendant no.1 has filed Suit No.1937/2002
entitled Lokesh Upadhyay Vs. Tarikh Exports House which is a suit for
recovery filed against the plaintiff for an amount of Rs.37,34,541/-. This is
IA 13910/2006 in CS (OS) No.1644/2002

Page No.5

stated to be the total of the amounts claimed to be due to him for the work
which he has undertaken for the present plaintiff.

This suit is being

contested by the present plaintiff and is being listed along with the present
suit.
8.

Having heard learned counsel for the parties, it is noteworthy that in

the suit no.1937/2002 filed by the defendant no.1 against the plaintiff, he
has stated that the Bangalore branch office expenses were to be borne by the
Delhi office only. It is further stated that branch office expenses and bank
account statements were sent to Delhi office on a monthly basis with all the
relevant bills in original and by post.
9.

So far as the territorial jurisdiction was concerned, the present

defendant no.1 in para 28 of his plaint (In Suit No.1937/2002), has stated as
follows:“That the appointment letter was issued at
New Delhi within the jurisdiction of this
Hon’ble Court inasmuch as the plaintiff on
16th October, 1997 jointed the defendant
concern at its New Delhi office at N-104,
Greater Kailash II, New Delhi – 110 048. In
para 29, the defendant no.1 has stated that the
“cause of action for the present suit has also
arisen in parts within the jurisdiction of this
Hon’ble Court”.

IA 13910/2006 in CS (OS) No.1644/2002

Page No.6

10.

So far as the present case is concerned, I find that the plaintiff in para

17 of the present plaint has stated that the defendant no.1 was appointed as
Vice-President of the plaintiff firm in Delhi and all specifications and rates
for supply of the stone were being finalised from Delhi to the defendant
no.2 in Bangalore.
11.

In order to appreciate the controversy and the objections of the

defendants, it would be useful to consider the pleadings of the parties before
this court. The defendant no.1 had originally filed a written statement dated
1st February, 2003 which was subsequently amended.

The material

assertions in the pleadings in the plaint and the written statement of the
defendant no.1 to the same deserve to be considered in extenso and read
thus:Plaint

Written Statement of Defendant No.1

6. It is further submitted that in course of
time and shortly after when Defendant
No.1 joined the business of the Plaintiff, he
brought a representative of Defendant No.2
to Delhi and introduced the said person to
the Plaintiff. Defendant No.2 promised to
commence the business of supplying
materials to the Plaintiff as per their
specifications and orders placed from
Delhi. As per practice, the Plaintiff would
invite specification from Defendant No.2
with their prices. Orders were then placed
and payments were either sent through draft
to Bangalore or via transferred from

5. The contents of para 6 are wrong,
incorrect and therefore denied. It is stated
that Defendant No.2 was not even known
to Defendant No.1 before he was engaged
as supplier of the Plaintiff concern and in
turn Defendant No.1 was informed by the
Plaintiff
concern
that
thenceforth
Defendant No.2 was to be treated as
supplier of plaintiff concern and Defendant
No.1 has to deal with Defendant No.2 as
such on behalf of the Plaintiff concern as
and when necessary and direct. Rest of the
paragraph does not pertain to Defendant
No.1 and therefore needs no reply. It is

IA 13910/2006 in CS (OS) No.1644/2002

Page No.7

Plaint

Written Statement of Defendant No.1

Plaintiffs Account in New Delhi to
Defendant No.2's account in Bangalore.
The Plaintiff was transferring money from
Delhi to the Bank in Bangalore as and
when Defendant No.2 was sending the
details of payment due to him on account
of advance against delivery.

denied that the materials were being
inspected primarily by Defendant No.1. It
is submitted and appreciated that plaintiff
had no reason to believe that the delay in
payment was anything out of the ordinary
course of business. It is stated that in this
business there is always an outstanding in
the market. Reliance is placed on the
preliminary objections in this regard.

12. Therefore, it has now come to the
knowledge of the Plaintiff that Defendant
No.1 had apparently all along been
compromising on the quality of the
material supplied to foreign buyers for his
personal gain and on number of occasions
sub-standard Commercial Quality material
instead of first class material has been
purchased from other manufacturers i.e.

20. It is stated that the contents of
paragraph 12 are wrong, incorrect and
therefore denied. It is further pointed out
that defendant no.1 not at all responsible
for the selection of goods to be supplied to
the foreign buyer and therefore defendant
no.1 can not be held responsible for sub
standard quality of the material supplied. It
is denied that defendant no.1 has apparently
all along been allegedly

Plaint

Written Statement of Defendant No.1

other than Metrogranite - Defendant
No.2,for which the Plaintiff had to suffer.
Any payments which may not be received
by the Plaintiff or in which deductions may
be made by these foreign parties for alleged
bad and inferior quality material is
therefore the joint and several liability of
Defendants No.1 & 2. It is also significant
to mention that many times when Plaintiff
found that the material was not being
supplied by Metro Granite in time or was
not as per specifications and efforts were
made to procure material from a different
supplier - the Defendant No.1 always
insisted that the Plaintiff should persist
with Defendant No.2 only. It is obvious
that Defendant No.1 has misused his
position and committed breach of the trust
reposed in him by the Plaintiff and that

comprising on the quality of material
supplies to the foreign suppliers. It is
denied that defendant no.1 can be liable for
the payments not received by the plaintiff
or the payment received after education by
the parties for allegedly bad and inferior
quality of material. It is denied that
defendant no.1 can be liable for the
payments not received by the plaintiff or
the payment received after education by the
parties for allegedly bad and inferior
quality of material. It is denied that
defendant no.1 always insisted that plainitff
should persist with defendants no.2. It is
denied that the defendant no.1 has misused
his position and committed breach of trust
reposed in by the plaintitff. It is also
denied that the Defendant No.1 had any
relationship with Defendant No.2 other

IA 13910/2006 in CS (OS) No.1644/2002

Page No.8

Plaint

Written Statement of Defendant No.1

both Defendants No.1 & 2 had conspired
and colluded with each other to defraud the
Plaintiff of substantial amounts right from
February, 1998. It is not apparent that
Defendant No.1 was inducing the buyers to
whom material had been exported by the
Plaintiff to withhold the payments for long
periods or pay reduced amounts and at the
same time Defendant No.1 was developing
his own goodwill and was in fact
promoting the interests of Defendant No.2.
So much so that the interests of the Firm
which had been developed in the foreign
countries
through
association
with
Defendant No.2 over the last nearly

than in a capacity of Vice President of the
Plaintiff. Therefore, it is incorrect to say
that there was any collusion or conspiracy
between Defendant No.1 was inducing the
buyers to withhold payments for long
periods or pay reduced amounts or
Defendant No.1 was developing his own
goodwill. It is incorrect to sasy that
Defendant No.1 was promoting the interest
of Defendant No.2. It is denied that
Defendant No.1 could be held liable to pay
excess amount spent for the containers as
stated in the paragraph under reply. The
rest of the paragraph does not relate to
Defendant No.1 and therefore needs no
reply.

Plaint

Written Statement of Defendant No.1

four years are going to suffer seriously as
Defendant No.2 has gone back on its
commitment to supply balance 5-1/2
containers of material. The Plaintiff has
been forced to arrange alternate material
from other sources at a much higher costs
in order to meet its contractual
commitments with the foreign buyers. The
Plaintiff is therefore liable to recover
excess amount spent for these containers
from Defendants No.1 & 2. The details of
these claims are given in schedule C hereto.
17.
The Defendant No.1 was appointed
as a Vice President of the Plaintiff Firm in
Delhi and all the specifications and rates 26. Para 17 is a statutory para and
for supply of the stone were being finalised therefore needs no reply.
from here in Delhi, payments were also
being made from here in Delhi to the
Defendant No.2 in Bangalore and as such a
part of cause of action for filing the present
suit has arisen in Delhi and hence this
Hon'ble Court has the necessary territorial
jurisdiction to entertain and try the present
IA 13910/2006 in CS (OS) No.1644/2002

Page No.9

Plaint

Written Statement of Defendant No.1

suit.
1 (xvii)
Moreover, as earlier, all the
transactions on behalf of the plaintiff
concern were done after taking due
permission and consent from the sole
proprietor of the plaintiff concern and as
per the practice of business most of the
time keeping in mind paucity of time in
Plaint

Written Statement of Defendant No.1
decision making the same consultation was
done on telephone. The proposal to set up
a new branch office also came along with
another proposal that as defendant No.1
had to shift from Delhi to Bangalore he
would have to shell out certain personal out
of pocket expenses which was further
consented by the plaintiff concern to be
paid in addition what was to be paid as
remuneration as per appointment letter
No.TEC/MC/97 dated 16th October, 1997.
However, the branch office expenditure
and bank account settlements were as a
practice sent to Delhi office on monthly
basis with all relevant bills in original and
details by post.
1.(xxxii) The defendant No.1 is from a
good educated family background and is a
peace loving and law abiding citizen. After
all this, still defendant No.1 felt that there
was nothing like an amicable settlement.So
defendant No.1 himself approached the
counsel of the plaintiff concern on
telephone to fix up a meeting to settle the
matter amicably. In the meanwhile, a reply
to the said notice dated 14th July, 2002 was
also served upon the counsel of sole
proprietor of the plaintiff concern denying
all the illegal, fabricated and frivolous

IA 13910/2006 in CS (OS) No.1644/2002

Page No.10

Plaint

Written Statement of Defendant No.1
allegations.
In order to delay the
proceedings without having any intention
to settle the matter, the plaintiff concern
and his lawyer organised several futile

Plaint

Written Statement of Defendant No.1
meetings, the last of such meeting was
organized in the month of September, 2002
at 19, Surya Niketan, Vikas Marg, Delhi 110 092 at the residence of G.S. Sandhu,
C.E., LL. B., Advocate for the sole
proprietor of the plaintiff concern. It was
realized in the last meeting that in fact all
the meetings were organised for the
purpose of only delaying the procedure and
not with any serious intention to settle the
matter.

4. The contents of para 5 are admitted. It
5.To promote the interest of the Firm, in
is most respectfully submitted that
the month of November, 1999 a joint
Defendant No.1 has never violated the
account No.1282 was opened with Vijaya
terms as stated in para 5.
Bank at Indira Nagar Branch, Bangalore, in
the name of the Plaintiff i.e. M/s Tarikh
Export House. This account was to be
operated by Sh. Sarvesh Chopra, Proprietor
of the Plaintiff and Defendant No.1 on
"either or survivor" basis. Defendant No.1
was also authorised to incur office
expenses, withdrawal of money subject to
permission/consent of the Plaintiff in a
prescribed manner subject to availability of
funds as and when required for bona fide
transactions.

IA 13910/2006 in CS (OS) No.1644/2002

Page No.11

Plaint

Written Statement of Defendant No.1

Plaint

Written Statement of Defendant No.1

Needless to say that Defendant No.1 was
bound to immediately account for all his
operations in the said account also.
9.
The Plaintiff then started making
enquiries from the Defendant No.1 about
the various complaints regarding material
etc. All of a sudden, the Plaintiff came to
know that between the period 17.4.2002
and 19.4.2002, the Defendant No.1
withdrew huge sums of money from the
account of the Plaintiff to the tune of
Rs.11,76,000/- without the consent and
permission of the proprietor. Since this is
for the first time that Defendant No.1
withdrew money totally to his own account,
i.e. not for the purpose of making payments
to the suppliers, the Plaintiff got worried
and checked with the Bank for details of
the amounts withdrawn. It was only when
the Plaintiff received a statement of
account from his Bankers or about 5.5.2002
that the Plaintiff realized the extent to
which the Defendant No.1 had defrauded
the Plaintiff. Not only this, the Defendant
No.1 in furtherance of his malafide and
dishonest intentions, immediately after
withdrawing the aforesaid huge amounts
between the period 17.4.2002 to 19.4.2002
caused a legal notice dated 20.4.2002 to be
issued to the Plaintiff wherein he made all
kinds of unjustified claims including the
claim for 25% of the profits out of the total
sale proceeds of the firm in terms of the
letter of appointment. Under the said
notice,
Plaint

7.
The contents of para 9 are wrong,
incorrect and therefore denied.
It is
incorrect to say that all of a sudden
defendant No.1 withdrew huge sum of
money from the account of the plaintiff to
the tune of Rs.11,76,000/- without the
consent and permission of the proprietor.
The details of the said amount had already
been furnished to the plaintiff and the
details of the same is also being annexed as
Schedule-A. Reliance is being placed on
the preliminary objections in this regard.
It is admitted that there was an exchange of
legal notice and its response. Defendant
No.1 craves leave to place reliance on
relevant documents at a pertinent moment.

Written Statement of Defendant No.1

it was alleged that the Defendant No.1 had
been able to procure orders for huge
IA 13910/2006 in CS (OS) No.1644/2002

Page No.12

Plaint

Written Statement of Defendant No.1

amounts and that he was entitled to claim
his share from the said amounts. Even at
that stage the Plaintiff was not aware of the
details of the misdeeds which the
Defendant No.1 had indulged in all this
while and how he had sought to defraud the
Plaintiff. It is submitted that the Plaintiff
immediately sent a letter dated 6.5.2002 in
response to the said notice which had been
sent by Defendant No.1 and it was clarified
in the said letter that in fact it was
Defendant No.1 who had played a fraud
with the Plaintiff and had withdrawn
substantial amount of money from the
Bank account to the tune of Rs.11,76,000/unauthorisedly and without furnishing any
justification or details to the Plaintiff.
11. j The Director of Defendant No.2 Sh.
Manoj Singh sometime in February, 2002
asked the Plaintiff to send an additional
amount of Rs.10 lacs so that they would
ensure that the balance material which
could not be supplied in February could be
sent to USA while Defendant No.1 was
there. The Plaintiff accordingly sent the
amount of Rs.10 lacs to the Bank with
instructions to Defendant No.1 to make the
payment to Defendant No.2 before leaving
for USA on 14.2.2002. However,
Defendant No.1 left signed cheques with
Defendant No.2. In March, 2002 when
Plaint

19. The contents of sub-para j of para 11
are wrong incorrect and therefore denied.
It is stated that the said money was in fact
sent back to Delhi office of the plaintiff
concern. The contents of the rest of the
paragraph do not relate to the defendant
under reply and therefore needs no reply.

Written Statement of Defendant No.1

the Plaintiff enquired from Defendant No.2
why the material had not been sent and
whether the payment had been received, he
informed that neither the payment of Rs.10
lacs was received nor the material was
ready for dispatch.
Accordingly, the
Plaintiff asked Defendant No.2 to send
back the payment which they were
IA 13910/2006 in CS (OS) No.1644/2002

Page No.13

Plaint

Written Statement of Defendant No.1

supposed to have withdrawn from the Bank
on the basis of cheque left by Defendant
No.1. The Defendant No.2 at that state
sent a bank draft for Rs.8.13 lacs against
those signed cheques in March. However,
the material was not made ready for
inspection nor supplied. It may be pointed
out that earlier they used to allow the
proprietor of Plaintiff to inspect the
material when requested. Later however
they would give some excuse for not
offering the material for inspection. When
Mr. Lokesh Upadhyay would come back
from his visits, they would immediately
give the material for inspection to him.
17. The defendant no.1 was appointed as a
Vice President of the Plaintiff Firm in Para 17 is a statutory para and therefore
Delhi and all the specifications and rates needs no reply.
for supply of the stone were being finalised
from herein in Delhi, payments were also
being made here in Delhi to the Defendant
No.2 in Bangalore and as such a part of
cause of action for filing the present suit
has arisen in Delhi and hence this Hon'ble
Court has the necessary territorial
jurisdiction to entertain and try the present
suit.

12.

From the above, it is writ large on the face of the record that the

defendant has not objected to the contentions of the plaintiff that part of
cause of action for filing the present suit against him has arisen at Delhi.
13.

Ms. Charu Verma, learned counsel appearing for the defendants, has

placed strong reliance on the correspondence which has been filed by the
IA 13910/2006 in CS (OS) No.1644/2002

Page No.14

defendants. It is noteworthy that while adjudicating upon an objection to
the maintainability of a suit, so far as the Order 7 Rule 10 of the Code of
Civil Procedure is concerned, it has been held in (2002) 40 All LR 654
(656) as follows:"21. According to the procedure prescribed under C.P.C. at the
stage of O.7, R.10, the defence of the defendant is not to be
examined. If after examination of the plaint and document filed
by the plaintiff the Court comes to the conclusion that it has no
territorial jurisdiction it must return plaint under O.7, R.10."
Even under Order 7 Rule 11, the same proceeds on demurrer and the
assertions made by the plaintiff in the plaint for the purpose of deciding the
objections are taken as admitted.
14.

In the instant case, however, I find that the view that this court would

take would not vary even if the documents relied upon by the defendants
and placed before this court along with this application, are considered. I
find that in the letter dated 8th April, 2002 relied upon by the defendant no.1,
he has stated that he had taken details of the accounts when he came to
Delhi from the office and that he had made his computations based on these
accounts. There is no dispute that the appointment letter of the plaintiff was
issued from Delhi. The plaintiff has taken a categorical stand in the plaint
as noticed hereinabove, that the payments were being sent for all expenses
IA 13910/2006 in CS (OS) No.1644/2002

Page No.15

etc. to the Bangalore from Delhi and that all the specifications and rates for
supply of the stone were being finalised from Delhi.
15.

From the above and on the own showing of the defendant, it would

appear that the office of the plaintiff at Delhi was having a material say over
the functioning in the Bangalore office and the amounts were being sent
from Delhi. Even the accounts as per the communication of the defendant
no.1 appeared to be maintained at Delhi.
It is not open to the defendants to contend that these payments and the
accounting would not be a relevant issue in the present case. It cannot,
therefore, be contended that no part of the cause of action has arisen at
Delhi within the jurisdiction of this court.
16.

The principles laid down by the Apex Court in AIR 1992 S.C. 1514

Patel Roadways Limited, Bombay Vs. M/s Prasad Trading Company ,
would not apply in the present case inasmuch as before the Apex Court, the
defendant in the civil suit was the appellant before the court and had
objected to the filing of the suit against him at the court exercising
jurisdiction over its branch office. There is no dispute to the legal principles
laid down in this judgment to the effect where the defendant has a principal
office and a subordinate office at another place, it is not the court within
IA 13910/2006 in CS (OS) No.1644/2002

Page No.16

whose jurisdiction the principal office of the defendant is situated but the
court within whose jurisdiction it has a subordinate office which alone shall
have jurisdiction "in respect of any cause of action arising at any place
where it has also a subordinate office".
17.

In the facts of the instant case, I have found that a part of the cause of

action has arisen at Delhi and consequently, this pronouncement of the
Apex Court would not bar adjudication in the present case.
For the same reason, the pronouncement in AIR 1955 Allahabad 669
Sunder Lal & Another Vs. Jai Narain & Ors, would have no application to
the present case.
18.

So far as the objections taken by the defendant no.2 is concerned, I

find that the plaintiff has set up a case that the defendant no.2 was
introduced to it by the defendant no.1 and they have collusively taken away
the amounts of the plaintiff. Thus the questions of law and fact which
would arise against both the defendants would be the same.
19.

It is well settled that an objection as to the local jurisdiction of the

court can be waived and that the same does not stand on the same footing as
an objection of the competence of the court to try a case which goes to the
root of the jurisdiction. In this behalf, a reference can be made to (1962) 2
IA 13910/2006 in CS (OS) No.1644/2002

Page No.17

SCR 747 Hira Lal Patni Vs. Kali Nath wherein it was held thus:“4............It is well settled that the objection as to local
jurisdiction of a court does not stand on the same footing
as an objection to the competence of a court to try a case
goes to the very root of the jurisdiction, and where it is
lacking, it is a case of inherent lack of jurisdiction.”
20.

So far as the submissions made on behalf of the defendant no.2 are

concerned, undoubtedly, there can be no doubt that the defendant no.2 had
earlier filed IA No.175/2004 under Order 7 Rule 11 which was on the same
grounds which was unconditionally withdrawn on 8th September, 2004. The
plaintiff has alleged collusion between the defendant nos. 1 & 2 on which it
has based its respective averments against the defendants.

As noticed

above, the defendant no.1 has sued the plaintiff at Delhi basing its cause of
action on the letter of appointment issued by the plaintiff amongst other
facts. This court has held that the suit against defendant no.1 is competent
in this court for the reasons recorded heretofore.
21.

I find that the legislature permits a plaintiff to join all persons as

defendants in one suit, if separate suits were brought against such persons,
any common question of law or fact would arise in the two suits. In this
behalf, Order 1 Rule 3 Sub-rule (a) of the Code of Civil Procedure is
noteworthy. As per Sub-Rule (a) of Rule 3 of Order 1 Code of Civil
IA 13910/2006 in CS (OS) No.1644/2002

Page No.18

Procedure, all persons may be joined in one suit as defendants where any
right to relief in respect of, or arising out of, the same act or transaction or
series of acts or transactions is alleged to exist against such persons,
whether jointly, severally or in the alternative.
22.

In view of the averments in the plaint averring collusion between the

defendants resulting in the amounts becoming due from the defendants,
albeit, severally, in case separate suits were brought by the plaintiff,
common issues would arise therein. The plaintiff would therefore be legally
permitted by the Code of Civil Procedure to join such defendant nos. 1 & 2
in one suit in respect of its claims against them.
23.

As noticed above, the defendant no.1 has also filed Suit

No.1937/2002 against the plaintiff at Delhi which is pending and has been
listed along with the present suit. I have noticed hereinabove the averments
and the claims of the defendant no.1 therein are based on the very
transactions which are being complained of by the present plaintiff in the
present suit seeking recovery of money. The claim of the plaintiff in the
present case would be its defence in the suit filed by the defendant no.1 and
vice versa. It, therefore, cannot be urged that the matters in issue in the two
suits would not be overlapping, if not the same.
IA 13910/2006 in CS (OS) No.1644/2002

Page No.19

In Suit No.1937/2002 filed by the defendant no.1, he has himself
urged that issuance of appointment letter was at Delhi which was a material
part of the cause of action.
24.

On these facts, it is evident that a joint trial of the two suits would

prevent a conflict of judgment as also would save valuable judicial time on
common questions of law and fact. The evidence relating to the accounts of
the parties would also be largely available at Delhi and the defendant no.1
has himself chosen Delhi as the forum for adjudication and redressal of his
grievances when he filed suit being CS (OS) No.1937/2002.
25.

In 67 (1997) DLT 189 S.C. Jain Vs. Smt. Bindeshwari Devi wherein

the court succinctly laid the principles which would bind the court and the
procedure to be followed while considering two suits raising similar
questions were authoritatively laid down by the court. The court noticed
that sufficient unity or similarity in the matter in issue in the suits or the fact
that determination of the suits rests mainly on common questions which
would make it convenient to have them tried as analogous cases would
require exercise of the power to consolidate the suits. However, it was
noticed that the court could pass three kinds of directions, firstly, a direction
for analogous or simultaneous hearing of the suits; secondly, consolidation
IA 13910/2006 in CS (OS) No.1644/2002

Page No.20

of the suits in their entirety; and thirdly, consolidation of the suits for the
purposes of trial.
In the light of the foregoing discussion, interests of justice, therefore,
merit that the present suit be adjudicated upon at Delhi and be listed along
with CS (OS) No.1937/2002.
26.

Even otherwise, assuming that this court was to direct separate trials

against the defendant nos.1 & 2, in case similar or identical questions of law
and fact were to arise if the suits were to proceed separately, it has been
repeatedly held that in order to avoid a conflict of judgments, as also for the
reasons of expediency, it would be appropriate to consolidate such suits for
trial. In such eventuality, this court being the court of higher pecuniary
jurisdiction, would undoubtedly, be empowered to deal with the suit of
lesser value and to call for the record of such suit which may be separately
filed against the defendant no.2 and cause the same to be consolidated with
the suit against the defendant no.1

for the purposes of trial and

adjudication.
27.

Therefore, looked at from any angle, the objections taken by the

defendant no.2 do not deserve to be sustained in the larger interest of
substantial justice.
IA 13910/2006 in CS (OS) No.1644/2002

Page No.21

28.

For all these reasons, I find no merit in this application which is

hereby dismissed.
(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
April 30, 2007 (aa)

IA 13910/2006 in CS (OS) No.1644/2002

Page No.22

