*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) no.3227/1987
Judgment reserved on : 22nd May, 2006
Date of Decision : July 31, 2006.
P.K. DUGGAL

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. R.K. Saini, Advocate

versus

CENTRAL GOVT. INDUS.
TRIBUNAL ETC.
..... Respondents
Through Mr. Suhail Dutt, Mr. M.K.S.
Menon, Mr. Raj Nathan, Mr, K. Anand
Singh, Mr. V.P. Singh, Advocates for
Respondent no. 2
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL

1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
GITA MITTAL, J.

No
No
No

%

1.

This writ petition is a classical example of delay in adjudication

resulting in denial of justice. Shri P. K. Duggal, the original writ

1

WP(C)3227/87

petitioner was an employee of the Narang Bank Ltd. (respondent no.3
herein) as a Special Assistant. On account of allegations of misconduct
against him, he was suspended from service pending disciplinary
proceedings. On 26th July, 1976 this workman was served with a charge
sheet.

As the workman's explanation was found unsatisfactory one Shri

Ibne Hassan, Director of the Bank was appointed as his Inquiry Officer.
2.

It appears that during the pendency of the disciplinary enquiry, the

Narang Bank of India Ltd. was taken over by the United Bank of India
(respondent no.2 herein) pursuant to an agreement dated 25th July, 1976.
So far as the employees of the Narang Bank are concerned, as per the
agreement dated 25th July, 1976 the relevant clauses in respect thereof
read as under :-

“2)a) The transferee shall be under an obligation to take
over and absorb and retain with effect from 1st August,
1976 in its employment such staff, employees and assistants
(hereinafter called “the said employees”) of the Transferor
or employed by the Transferor in relation to or in connection
with the said banking business intended to be taken over or
acquired by the Transferee as aforesaid who were permanent
employees of the transferee on the same terms and
conditions including the remuneration and wages and/or
other lawful claims as were or are applicable or payable to
them on the said date subject to the terms and conditions as
contained in the Third Schedule hereto PROVIDED
ALWAYS that such taking over or absorption of the staff
and employees of the Transferor by the Transferee on the
same terms and conditions as hereinbefore mentioned in the
2

WP(C)3227/87

Third Schedule hereto shall not however be so construed as
to include or extend to their or each of their rank and status.
b)
The Transferee shall not, however, be bound to take
over or absorb in their employment – (i) all such staff,
assistants and employees against whom any show cause
notice or any action (penal or otherwise or any enquiry or
any actions and/or proceedings whatsoever are pending on
the said date by the Management or by any or Tribunal
Court or otherwise and/or who are on the said date involved
or figuring in any such enquiries, actions and/or proceedings
and against whom any adverse or suspense order finding or
decision has been passed or is likely to be passed prior to
subsequent to the said date. (ii) Any such staff employees
and assistants of the Transferor whose service have been
terminated by the Transferor on or before the said date
and/or against whom any adverse or suspension order
finding or decision has been passed by any person holding
any enquiry or decision has been passed by any person
holding any and/or Management of the transferor and/or by
the Court, Tribunal or otherwise subsequent to the said date
but prior to the formal taking over of the said business or
assets or properties of the Transferor by the transferee on the
basis of this Agreement.
PROVIDED NEVERTHELESS the Transferee shall
take over suspended employees, if any, of the Transferor
relating to the said business with effect from the said date
and/or condition as hereinafter mentioned in Clause 20(a)
/or above in so far as the same shall be applicable if and
only if such employee/employees is or are finally and
ultimately absolutely/exonerated or acquitted from or of all
the charges levelled against him/them.
( c) The Transferee shall not be bound to pay any
compensation and/or any other dues of any staff assistants or
employees of the Transferor or for those, who, when offered
the aforesaid terms and conditions would be unwilling to
serve the Transferee and compensate and other dues, if any,
payable to them shall be taken over by the Transferor and
3

WP(C)3227/87

nothing herein contained shall be deemed to have effected
the right of the Transferor or the transferee to resist lawfully
and such claim for compensation or otherwise in respect of
any such employees staff or assistants who are guilty of any
act of insubordination of duties or otherwise.”
3.

It is the admitted case of the parties, which was proved in the

evidence laid before the industrial adjudication, that all the employees of
the Narang Bank of India on its rolls on the date of its taking over by the
United Bank of India in terms of the aforenoticed agreement were taken
over with all its assets and liabilities.

The Inquiry Officer Mr.Ibne

Hassan informed the United Bank of India of the pendency of the
disciplinary proceedings requiring it to participate in the enquiry
proceedings which were assigned to him. The United Bank of India
chose not to participate in the same.

Thereafter by a report dated 24th

October, 1977, the Inquiry Officer came to the conclusion that the
charges against the petitioner were unsubstantiated and consequentially
exonerated him from all the charges. The report recommended that he
should be reinstated with immediate effect on the post of Special
Assistant and he should be paid his full salary from the date of his
suspension.

Such report of the Inquiry Officer was submitted to the

Narang Bank of India Ltd. which forwarded the same to the United Bank
of India on 25th March, 1977.

4

WP(C)3227/87

4.

As no action was taken to reinstate the petitioner, he complained

of the same with the labour authorities.

By an order dated 28th

December, 1979, the Central Government passed an order referring the
following dispute for adjudication to the industrial adjudicator :“Whether the action of the management of United bank
of India in not reinstating Shri P.K.Duggal, Special
Assistant w.e.f. 1.8.76 with back wages inspite of its
having been exonerated of all the charges by an enquiry
conducted by Narang Bank of India Ltd. is legal and
justified. If not, to what relief is the workman entitled.”

5.

On this order of reference, which was passed against both the

United Bank of India as well as the Narang Bank of India, notice was
issued to them. The Narang Bank of India disowned any liability with
regard to the services of the claimant in view of the agreement dated 25th
July, 1976 and had supported the petitioner-claimant that having been
exonerated of all the charges by the Inquiry Officer, the United Bank of
India was under a legal obligation to reinstate the claimant with
consequential relief as per the agreement dated 25th July, 1976.
6.

On the other hand, United Bank of India-respondent no.2 before

this Court had challenged the claim of the petitioner on the same grounds
as has been urged in opposition to this petition.

While denying any

breach of the contract and relationship of employee and employer, it had

5

WP(C)3227/87

been contended that in terms of the proviso to Clause 2(b) of the
agreement, the workman has not been taken over on its rolls by
respondent no.2 as, according to it, he had not been absolved of charges
and that the enquiry by the Inquiry Officer was no enquiry in the eyes of
the law.
7.

Before this Court, it has been vehemently urged on behalf of

respondent no.2 that the respondent no.3 had not accepted the inquiry
report and that the respondent no.2 was not bound to take any action
thereon. It has also been urged that the enquiry was not conducted in
accordance with law and stood vitiated.

Based on the pleadings of the

parties and the evidence before it, the industrial adjudicator passed an
award dated 28th November, 1986 holding that the enquiry was vitiated
as it contained no specific reasons for the charges not being proved. It
also returned a finding that the authority could exonerate or acquit the
delinquent official from the charges vested with the transferee Bank and
consequently held that respondent no.3 had no moral authority to prove
the report of the Inquiry Officer and had also not specifically approved
the same.
In these circumstances, it was held that the action of the
management of respondent no.2 in not reinstating the petitioner in

6

WP(C)3227/87

service was legal and justified and the reference is answered against the
workman. Aggrieved by this, the workman has filed the present writ
petition.
8.

I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the

available record. I find that the relevant clause in the agreement dated
25th July, 1976 did contain a covenant that the transferee-respondent
no.2 was not bound to take an employee against whom disciplinary
proceedings were pending. However, the proviso thereof provided that
the respondent no.2 shall take over such suspended employee if such
employee is finally and ultimately exonerated or acquitted from the
charges levelled against him.

The liability of the transferee i.e.

respondent no.2 to pay compensation and/or any other dues of the
employees of the transferor of the Narang Bank of India who was
unwilling to serve the transferee was, however, restricted. Undoubtedly,
disciplinary action was pending against the petitioner on 25th July, 1996
when the aforenoticed agreement was entered into and also on 1st
August, 1975 which was the date on which the assets and liabilities of
respondent no.3 were taken over by respondent no.2.

However, Shri

S.C.Deb, Regional Manager of the Bank whose cross-examination has
been placed on record, reflects that the Union Bank of India had been

7

WP(C)3227/87

called by the Inquiry Officer to participate in the enquiry but it
deliberately opted not to do so. The communication of respondent no.3
to respondent no.2 enclosing the Inquiry Report also did not result in any
action by respondent no.2. No objection to the inquiry or the report was
taken by either of the respondents who failed to take any action,
affirmative or negative thereon. Respondent no.3 has taken a categorical
stand before the industrial adjudicator to the effect that in the light of the
proviso to clause 2(b) of the agreement dated 25th July, 1976, the
respondent no.2 was bound to reinstate the petitioner with all
consequential reliefs.

This stand of respondent no.3 is fortified by the

contents of the proviso to which there is no dispute on behalf of
respondent no.2.
9.

I find that the industrial adjudicator has noticed that the proviso in

the agreement did not make it clear as to which of the transferor or the
transferee – bank was the competent authority finally and ultimately to
absolve the delinquent official from all or any of the charges.

The

findings in the award are based on interpretation of the clause of the
agreement which interpretation has been stated to be based on principles
of natural justice and balance of convenience.

This is clearly not

permissible in law. The stipulations in the agreement dated 25th July,

8

WP(C)3227/87

1996 are explicit. It clearly provides that the transferee shall not be
bound to take over or absorb in its employment such employees against
whom any show cause notice or any action is pending or against whom
any adverse or suspension order/finding or decision has been passed or is
likely to be passed prior or subsequent to the said date. The proviso to
the clause clearly provided that the transferee shall take over such
suspended employee if and only if such employee is finally and
ultimately exonerated from the charges levelled against him. There is no
dispute on behalf of the respondents that the Narang Bank of India is
continuing even on date.

The construction placed by the industrial

adjudicator on the terms of the agreement dated 25th July, 1996 is clearly
not sustainable.
10.

In any case the respondent no.2 accepted the validity of the

enquiry proceedings and took no steps nor filed any objection to the
maintainability or pendency of the proceedings before the Inquiry
Officer. The respondent no.2 was admittedly informed about the
pendency thereof.

No objection whatsoever was taken to the inquiry

report when it was sent to respondent no.2 on 25th March, 1977 by the
Narang Bank of India.

At no point of time has the respondent no.2

stated that it did not accept the report or that it proposed to conduct any

9

WP(C)3227/87

fresh enquiry against the petitioner.

By such conduct, respondent no.2

would, in any case, be clearly precluded from making any such objection
and the observations and findings of the industrial adjudicator to this
effect are wholly without jurisdiction. The terms on which the order of
reference was passed by the appropriate Government dated 28th
December, 1979 did not postulate any adjudication into the legality or
validity of the enquiry proceedings. No issue thereon was framed by the
industrial adjudicator and the petitioner was never called upon to prove
or establish the legality or validity thereof.
In these circumstances, the findings of the industrial adjudicator to
the effect that the action on the part of the transferor bank was a
transgression of the powers of the transferee bank or that Shri Ibne
Hassan was not a properly appointed Inquiry Officer, are clearly based
on no legal evidence or material and are not sustainable in law. There is
nothing on record nor is it discernible from the record as to the manner in
which the enquiry proceedings were placed before the industrial
adjudicator.
There is no discussion by the adjudicator of any of the evidence
which was placed before it.

It is certainly not open to any Court or

Tribunal to substitute a specific term of agreement on any predilection of

10

WP(C)3227/87

the adjudicator or assumption of moral authority or balance of
convenience.

The findings returned by the industrial adjudicator with

regard to the report of the Inquiry Officer or its approval by the
respondent no.3 are clearly based only on surmises and conjectures and
are contrary to the record.

Respondent no.3 has even filed a written

statement in support of the enquiry report.

Respondent no.2 has not

issued even a letter of protest to respondent no.3 with regard to the
inquiry report or any denial to the claim of reinstatement of the
petitioner.
11.

In view of the foregoing discussion, I find that the award dated

28th November, 1986 is based on no evidence and is beyond the terms of
reference.

The same is, therefore, not sustainable in law and is

accordingly hereby set aside and quashed.

As a consequence, the

petitioner is entitled to reinstatement in service in view of the proviso to
clause 2(b) of the agreement dated 25th July, 1976 between the
respondents no.2 & 3.
12.

It has been brought on record that the petitioner was suspended

w.e.f. 28th January, 1976. As a consequence he would be entitled to
reinstatement in service with full back wages and continuity from that
date.

It is further noticed that unfortunately, the petitioner expired on

11

WP(C)3227/87

22nd September, 1989 during the pendency of this writ petition and his
widow Smt.Kamlesh Duggal was substituted as a legal representative in
his place. Since reinstatement cannot be effected, the petitioner's widow
would be entitled to receive the amount payable to him. So far as the
back wages are concerned, it is directed that respondent no.3 shall be
liable to make payment of the back wages till 1st August, 1976.
For the period thereafter till the date of the petitioner's death or
superannuation, whichever is earlier, it shall be the responsibility of
respondent no.2. Needless to say that respondents no.2 & 3 shall be
entitled to adjust such amounts as may have been already paid including
amounts as subsistence allowance to the petitioner and the maintenance
allowance to his widow, in terms of the orders dated 19th May, 1992
(which was confirmed by the order dated 28th September, 1992 passed in
LPA 16/1990) till adjudication in this petition.
It is directed that the wages in terms of the directions passed above
would be payable to the legal heirs of the petitioner till the date of his
superannuation.
The respondents shall also effect computation of any other benefits
to which the petitioner may be entitled.
Respondents no.2 & 3 shall effect computation in terms of the

12

WP(C)3227/87

directions passed today within six weeks from today which may be
communicated to his widow and the payment of the amount in terms of
the computation shall be paid within a period of four weeks thereafter.
In case the widow of the petitioner is entitled to pension, the same
shall be paid as per rules.
This writ petition is allowed in the above terms with costs which
are quantified at Rs.10,000/-

GITA MITTAL, J
July 31, 2006
rds

13

WP(C)3227/87

