IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
RFA NO.441/2000
Date of decision : May 31st, 2005
M/s The National Radio & Electronic Co. Ltd.
... Appellant
through Mr. S.C. Dhanda & Mr.M.A.Khan,
Advocates
VERSUS
Motion Pictures Association

.... Respondent
through Ms. Mala Goel, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE JUSTICE DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to

see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
Yes
GITAL MITTAL, J.
1.
The present appeal has been filed by the appellant aggrieved by
the judgment and decree dated 26th May, 2000 passed by the learned
Additional District Judge in Suit No.876/1198 entitled Motion Pictures
Association Vs. Nelko Radio & Electronics Company Limited. There is no

1

RFA 441/2000

dispute to the factual matrix between the parties. The appellant (defendant
in the suit) was inducted as a tenant in the suit property bearing No.27,
Netaji Subhash Marg, New Delhi. The tenanted premises measured about
2800 sq. ft.
increased

The tenancy commenced in the year 1961 and rent was

from

time

to

time

as

per

the

demand

of

the

respondent/plaintiff/landlord. The last agreed rent between the parties was
Rs.3,513.84 paise per month. The respondent terminated the tenancy of the
appellant vide notice dated 25th September, 1998. The appellant tenant sent
a reply to the same dated 30th October, 1998 disputing the contents of the
notice.

In these circumstances, the respondents brought a suit for

possession of the ground floor portion of the said premises bearing no.27,
Netaji Subhash Marg, New Delhi and for recovery of future damages and
mesne profit at the rate of Rs.1,96,000/- per month.
2.

The appellant-defendant filed a written statement in answer to

the suit disputing the averments made in the plaint setting up a plea of
renewal of the tenancy for a period of three years on enhanced rent.

By a

letter dated 17th November, 1997 issued by the respondent-landlord, it was
stated that the tenancy has been agreed to be renewed upto November, 2000
at the rent of Rs.3513.84. However, it is not disputed that this was not
2

RFA 441/2000

pursuant to any lease deed executed or registered in accordance with law.
The respondent-plaintiff brought an application under Order 12
Rule 6 of the Code of Civil Procedure praying for a decree for possession
on the basis of admissions made on the part of the appellant tenant in its
written statement. This application was considered by the learned Trial
Judge on 18th August, 1999 who arrived at a finding that there was no
dispute to the relationship of landlord and tenant between the parties to the
lis; that the agreed rent of Rs.3513.84 per month and that a notice for
termination of the tenancy had admittedly been served on the tenant which
not only terminated the tenancy but also gave a statutory period of 15 days
for vacating the premises. The learned Trial Judge also held that the alleged
agreement of the renewal of the tenancy was contrary to the express
provisions of the Registration Act and the Transfer of Property Act in as
much as the same was not by registered lease deed and as a consequence,
the tenancy at best stood renewed month to month which was determinable
by service of notice under Section 116 of the Transfer of Properties Act.
The trial court noticed that there was no dispute to the legality and validity
of the notice. Under these circumstances, the suit of the plaintiff to the
extent of the relief of possession was decreed under the provisions of Order
3

RFA 441/2000

12 Rule 6 of the Code of Civil Procedure vide the judgment and decree
dated 18th August, 1999.
3.

On the same date, the court framed the following issue in respect

of the claim of future damages and mesne profit which was to the following
effect:-:
1. At what rate the plaintiff is entitled to claim mesne

4.

profit/damages from the defendants who are in occupation of
the premises from 1st November, 1998 onwards?
The case was directed to be listed for plaintiff evidence on this

issue on 4th November, 1999. Perusal of the record of the Trial Court shows
that on 4th November, 1999, the plaintiff failed to produce any evidence.
The court gave the plaintiff a last opportunity to produce its entire evidence
on 2nd February, 2000.
Again on 2nd February, 2000, an adjournment was requested on
behalf of the plaintiff on the plea that the only witness to be examined on
behalf of the plaintiff was Mr.G.S. Mayawala, its Manager and Joint
Secretary. However, as this person was stated to be unwell, and information
to this effect was received by counsel for the plaintiff only in the morning,
an adjournment was requested. The learned Trial Judge observed that the
only issue to be examined related to mesne profit and damages for 1998-

4

RFA 441/2000

1999 in respect of the premises. It was noticed that in this behalf, relevant
evidence would be of witnesses who had taken the premises in the area on
rent during this period and that inquiry into mesne profit and damages could
not be done on the oral testimony of the Secretary of the plaintiff only.
The court also noticed the fact that no person from the adjoining
buildings or from the Sub-Registrar's office for proving any lease deed of
the relevant period had been summoned. The court had been informed that
the Secretary of the respondent/plaintiff would prove the value of the
property only.
Under these circumstances, it was held that there is no
justification for grant of adjournment on behalf of the plaintiff and its
evidence was closed. Counsel for the defendant stated that he did not want
to give any evidence and consequently, the matter was placed for argument
on 22nd March, 2000.
5.

The learned Trial Judge considered the entire matter laid before

it. It was noticed that the premises in question was located in Darya Ganj
which was one of the prime business area in Delhi and that while deciding
the issue of mesne profits, the court could take judicial notice of the
prevalent market rent of different areas in Delhi as the court was routinely
5

RFA 441/2000

deciding similar suits of mesne profit and damages in respect of different
areas in Delhi. Noting that rental values in Delhi had suddenly shot up and
that the rent in Nehru Place went upto Rs.60/- to Rs.70/- per sq. ft. per
month while in Connaught Place and Darya Ganj, rent went to between
Rs.200/- and Rs.250/- per sq. ft. per month. It was further observed that
there was a fall in the monthly rental in Nehru Place which came down from
Rs.20/- to Rs.30/- per sq. ft. per month while in Connaught Place, rent
became Rs.60/- to Rs.70/- per sq. ft. per month.
6.

So far as the suit property was concerned, the court observed that

rent of Rs.3,513.84 paise was being paid for an area of 2800 sq.ft. for the
reason that the appellant/defendant was a tenant since 1961 and rent had
gradually increased at the rate of 10% in every new year while market rent
in the area from new tenancy had shot up.
Finding that the respondent/plaintiff had lawfully terminated the
tenancy, the court held that the respondent-plaintiff was entitled to market
rent of the premises after determination of the tenancy from 1st November,
1998. It was held that the market rent could be considered at Rs.30/- per
sq. ft. per month in Darya Ganj which was almost half of the rent prevalent
in Connaught Place and accordingly, the claim of the plaintiff-respondent
6

RFA 441/2000

was decreed at the rate of Rs.30 sq. ft. per month w.e.f. 1st November, 1998
till the possession of the premises was recovered by the plaintiff.
Accordingly, the suit of the plaintiff was decreed on this basis vide the
judgment and decree dated 26th May, 2000.
7.

Aggrieved by the judgment dated 26th of May, 2000, the

appellant-defendant has preferred the present appeal principally on the
ground that despite the plea having been taken and issue having been
framed, the respondent-plaintiff had failed to prove the market rate of rent
in Darya Ganj which could be considered for the purposes of determination
of the liability of the appellant/defendant.
8.

Reliance has been placed on behalf of the respondent landlord on

several pronouncements of this Court where after taking judicial notice of
the factum of increase in rent in Delhi, the court awarded mesne profits at
such market rates of rent based on this presumption.
The pronouncements relied upon by the respondent in this behalf
are the judgments of the Apex Court in AIR 1992 SC 184 entitled
D.C.Oswal vs. V.K.Subbiah and others; 1999 RLR 114 entitled S. Kumar
Vs. G.R.Kathpalia; 1995(2) AD (DB) Delhi 304 entitled Vinod Khanna Vs.
Bakshi Sachdev; 1994(1) AD Delhi 937entitled Mrs.(Dr.) P.S.Bedi vs. The
7

RFA 441/2000

Project & Equipment Corporation of India and 1993 RLR 563 entitled
Bakshi Sachdev(deceased) by LRs vs. Concord India.
9.

We have heard the parties at length and have carefully perused

the available record. Learned counsels have also taken us through the
pleadings of the parties and the material placed before the learned trial
court.
10.

We find that the respondent landlord had issued a legal notice to

the appellant tenant dated 25.9.1998 wherein it was notified as follows:“4. That since my clients do not wish you to continue
any more as a tenant in the said premises as the
portion of the premises occupied by you is now
required by my clients urgently for expanding their
activities. Accordingly, my clients wish to terminate
your said tenancy which is hereby terminated w.e.f.
The midnight of 31.10.1998, by means of this notice
which you may please not carefully at your end and
this notice may also be treated as notice of
termination of your month to month tenancy under
Section 106 of Transfer of Property Act.
5. It may be further noted carefully at your end that in
the event of your failure to vacate and hand over the
vacant physical possession of the Ground Floor
portion of the premises on the midnight of
31.10.1998 or in the morning of 1.11.1998, then in
that eventuality, you shall be liable to pay damages
for unauthorised occupation w.e.f. 1.11.1998 at the
rate of Rs.1,96,000/- per month @ Rs.70/- per sq. ft.
which is the prevalent market rate in the locality for
8

RFA 441/2000

such type of premises.

11.

6. For the reasons stated hereinabove, I have been
instructed to call upon you to deliver the vacant
physical possession of the ground floor portion of the
premises bearing no.27, Darya Ganj, New Delhi on
the midnight of 31.10.1998 o in the morning of
1.11.1998 failing which I have the specific
instructions to file a suit for recovery of possession
against you in respect of the said premises and also to
claim damages @ Rs.1,96,000/- per month in respect
of the ground floor portion of the premises w.e.f.
1.11.1998 till the actual delivery of the possession at
your own risk and costs.”
In its reply dated 30.10.1998 the appellant respondent stated as

follows:-

12.

5. The contents of para 5 are wrong and denied.
The alleged claim on account of alleged
unauthorised occupation of demised premises by my
client is not maintainable. My client continues to be
a tenant till November 2000 and claim for damages
for use and occupation is not maintainable. My
client is a lawful tenant and not an unauthorised
occupant. My client is only liable to pay the rent as
agreed between the parties and not beyond it. The
claim of damages is not maintainable in view of the
fact that tenancy of my client subsists and my client
is a lawful tenant.”
On account of failure of the appellant tenant to comply with the

notice of demand the plaintiff filed the suit on 8.12.1998 seeking the decree
for possession of the tenanted premises and recovery of future damages and
mesne profits @ Rs.1,96,000/- based on the following averments in the
9

RFA 441/2000

plaint:“6. It is submitted that the tenancy has already been
terminated vide notice dated 25.9.1998 and the
defendants were bound to deliver the vacant
possession of the ground floor portion of the suit
premises, to the plaintiff on the midnight of
31.10.1998 but they did not do so. The defendants
have failed to deliver the vacant physical possession
to the plaintiff and, as such, from the midnight of
31.10.1998, the defendants are in unauthorised
occupation.
7. That vide notice dated 25.9.98 sent by the plaintiff
the defendants were called upon to deliver the vacant
possession of the ground floor portion of the premises
and it was also informed that if the said portion of the
premises was not vacated on the mid-night of
31.10.1998, then in that case and till such time the
premises are vacated, the defendants are liable to pay
damages at the rate of Rs.1,96,000/- per month i.e. at
the rate of Rs.70/- per sq. ft. per month, which is
prevailing market rate in the locality for such type of
commercial premises.”
“Prayer:xxxxxxxxxx
“(ii) pass a decree for recovery of damages/mesne
profits at the rate of Rs.1,96,000/- from 1.11.1998 till
the delivery of the actual physical possession of the
ground floor portion of the premises. The plaintiff
hereby agree and undertake to pay the actual court
fees on the amounts which may be ultimately found
due from the defendants at the time of passing the
decree.”
13.

The defendant in its written statement disputed the claim of the
10

RFA 441/2000

plaintiff in the following terms:-

14.

“7. ...................... The claim of the damages @
Rs.1,96,000/- per month i.e. at the rate of Rs.70/- per
sq. ft. per month is not maintainable in view of the
fact that tenancy of the defendant subsists and the
defendant is a lawful tenant. Without prejudice to
above even otherwise the market rate of rent is highly
excessive and exaggerated and not Rs.1,96,000/- as
alleged. The plaintiff be put to strict proof of the
same. The amount of damages claimed is not the
prevailing rate of rent in the locality as alleged. The
contents of para under reply are absolutely false to
the knowledge of the plaintiff and are liable to be
rejected.”
We find that the learned trial judge framed an issue in respect of

the respondents' claim of mesne profits as noticed here-in-above on
18.8.1999 and put the plaintiff to evidence. Despite opportunities being
given on 4.11.99 and 2.12.2000, the respondent-plaintiff failed to lead any
evidence in respect of the damages and mesne profits.
15.

It is settled law that the burden of proof or the onus of proving a

claim or a plea rests on a party which has put forth the same. So far as the
trial court was concerned there was no dispute to the factum of the original
tenancy agreement and its rate of rent which was prevalent then. The
respondent-plaintiff had put forth the claim of entitlement to damages @
Rs.70/- per sq. ft. with effect from 1.11.1998 after the notice period in terms

11

RFA 441/2000

of the notice dated 25.9.1998 came to an end. This brought the monthly
claim of damages for 2800 sq. ft of area to Rs. 1,96,000/- per month. The
respondent-plaintiff was required to establish the same on record in
accordance with law.
16.

In view of the pleas set up by the parties and the observations

and findings of the learned trial judge in its judgment and decree dated
26.5.2000, it becomes necessary to examine the legal position.
17.

The

charges

payable

for

occupation

of

a

premises

unauthorisedly and wrongfully have been termed as mesne profits. They are
defined thus in the Black's Law Dictionary:-

18.

“Mesne profits. Intermediate profits; i.e profits which
have been accruing between two given periods.
Dumas v. Ropp, 98 Idaho 61, 558 P.2d 632, 633.
Value of use or occupation of land during time it was
held by one in wrongful possession and is commonly
measured in terms of rents and profits.”
Therefore, it is to be noted that the payment of rent arises in the

right and is based on a lawful tenancy agreement between the parties.
However after termination of a tenancy, occupation becomes unauthorised
and wrongful and hence the occupation is treated as without authority
entitling the landlord of the premises to award of damages.
19.

The further question which arises upon the occupancy of a
12

RFA 441/2000

person being held as unauthorised, is the actual rate at which such person
would be liable to pay occupancy charges and mesne profits. It has been
held that mesne profits and damages for unauthorised occupancy after
expiry of a tenancy can be granted at a rate higher than the agreed rate of
rent after the expiry of the tenancy. It was so held in several judgments of
this Court including the judgment reported at 1993 RLR 563 entitled
Bakshi Sachdev(deceased) by LRs vs. Concord India.
20.
Union

We find that in a judgment reported at 1987(1) SCC 551 entitled
of

India

and

another

vs.

Wing

Commander

RR

Hingorani(Retd.), the Apex Court held that a person doing something with
full knowledge of its adverse consequences must face the consequences and
cannot claim an equitable relief.
21.

Applying such principle to cases of continuation of occupancy

despite termination of tenancy, it has to be held that such person is liable for
paying mesne profits and damages at a rate which may be higher than the
agreed rent and may be equivalent to the then prevalent market rate of rent.
22.

In the Division Bench pronouncement of the High Court of

Jammu & Kashmir reported at AIR 1961 J&K page 39(DB) entitled
L.Bhagwan Dass Mengi vs. UOI the Court placing reliance on the earlier
13

RFA 441/2000

pronouncements reported at AIR 1933 Lahore 61 Vol.20 entitled Sundar
Singh vs. Ram Saran Das; AIR 1929 Patna 717 Vol.16 entitled Kuman Das
vs. Radhika Singh and AIR 1940

Nagpur 140 Vol.27 entitled Parekh

Nandal vs. Anant Govind and 2 J and K LR 42 entitled Jogeshwar Kumar
vs. Mst. Suwarn Kour held that where the tenant after the expiry of the
lease remains in occupation of the premises in spite of the fact that the
landlord served a notice on him to vacate and warned him that if he remains
in occupation he will have to pay a specified sum as damages for wrongful
use and occupation of the building, the defendant tenant will be liable to pay
that amount provided it is not penal and unconscionable.
23.

The question which has arisen before this Court is as to what is

the rate at which an award of mesne profits has to be made when no
evidence in this behalf has been led by a plaintiff/landlord. We find that
such a question had arisen for consideration before the Bombay High Court
which had answered the same in a judgment reported at AIR 1988 Bombay
82 entitled Sau Shantibai vs. Manakchand Ratanchand Raka.
relevant portion of the same reads as under:“although the plaintiff has claimed the damages to the
extent of Rs.10,000/- he had led no evidence for
proving the said damages. No doubt, the Court can
14

RFA 441/2000

The

24.

take judicial notice of the fact that the prices of the
land have arisen considerably, manifold, from the date
of the agreement till this date, but the Court cannot
take judicial notice of the exact rate of the increase.
The measure of damages would be the excess price that
would be required to be paid by the plaintiff to
purchase similar lands on the date of the suit, on
account of the breach of the agreement on the part of
the defendant. But plaintiff has led no evidence in that
behalf. The plaintiff would not, therefore, be entitled
to a decree for damages of Rs.10,000/- as claimed by
him in the suit.”
In support of its plea that the Court cannot draw any inference

with regard to the factum of the market rate of rent which was prevailing at
the relevant time without any evidence in this behalf, the appellant has
placed reliance on the pronouncement of the Apex Court in 2001(9)SCC
765 entitled Commissioner of Customs, Vishakhapatnam and others vs.
Jaya Satya Marine Exports(P) Ltd. and others. It was held by the Apex
Court that there was no evidence whatsoever before the High Court on the
basis of which it could come to a conclusion that prawns and shrimps were
not “fish” in common parlance. The Court held that judicial notice could
not be taken of a fact that a common man treats fish and prawns as two
different articles.
This fact required evidence as proof of the statement of fact.
25.

It is also settled law that evidence recorded in one case or the
15

RFA 441/2000

findings recorded based on evidence led before it with regard to the rate at
which damages/mesne profits would be payable and its quantum cannot
form basis for awarding damages for mesne profits in another case. This is
more so in the absence of any evidence with regard to the prevailing rate or
comparison of the two properties which are the subject matter of the two
cases. This was also held by a Division Bench of this Court in the judgment
reported at 2000(53) DRJ 409 entitled All India Handloom Fabric
Marketing Cooperative Society Ltd. vs. Phelps & Co. Pvt. Ltd.
26.

We find that in several cases, this Court has rejected claims of

mesne profits where no evidence had been led on the issue framed in this
behalf. Noteworthy are the pronouncements reported at 2002(VI) AD Delhi
725 entitled Hari Singh(deceased) through LRs vs. SS Jogi etc.; 1997 VI
AD Delhi 153 entitled Kanti Singh and others vs. Project and
Equipment Corporation of India Limited.
27.

We also find that in cases where the court had based the award of

mesne profits after taking judicial notice of the factum of increase there was
some evidence led by the owner/landlord as to the prevailing market rates of
rent or there was no serious challenge to the findings of the learned judge in
this behalf even in appeals preferred.
16

RFA 441/2000

28.

We may appropriately advert to the statutory provisions which

enable a Court to take judicial notice of certain facts.
These are to be found in Section 56 & 57 of the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872, which read as under:“56. Fact judicially noticeable need not be provedNo fact of which the Court will take judicial notice
need to be proved.
57. Facts of which Court must take judicial notice--The court shall take judicial notice of the following
facts:[(1) All laws in force in the territory of India;]
(2) All public Acts passed or hereafter to be passed by
Parliament[of the United Kingdom], and all local and
personal Acts directed by Parliament [of the United
Kingdom] to be judicially noticed;
(3) Articles of War for [the Indian] Army, [Navy or Air
Force];
[(4)The course of proceeding of Parliament of the
United Kingdom, of the Constituent Assembly of India,
of Parliament and of the legislatures established under
any law for the time being in force in a Province or in
the State.
(5) The accession and the sign manual of the Sovereign
for the time being of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Ireland;
(6) All seals of which English Courts take judicial
notice: the seals of all the [Courts in [India]], and all
17

RFA 441/2000

Court out of [India] established by the authority of [the
Central Government or the Crown Representative]: the
seals of Courts of Admiralty and Maritime Jurisdiction
and of Notaries Public, and all seals which any person
is authorised to use by [the Constitution or an Act of
Parliament of the United Kingdom or an] Act or
Regulation having the force of law in [India].
(7) The accession to office, name, titles, functions, and
signatures of the persons filing for the time being any
public office in any State, if the fact of their
appointment to such office is notified in [any Official
Gazette];
(8) The existence, title and national flag of every State
or Sovereign recognized by [the Government of India];
(9) The divisions of time, the geographical divisions of
the world, and public festivals, fasts and holidays
notified in the Official Gazette;
(10) The territories under the dominion of [the
Government of India];
(11) The commencement, continuance and termination
of hostilities between [the Government of India] and
any other State of body of persons;
(12) The names of the members and officers of the
Court and of their deputies and subordinate officers
and assistants and also of all officers acting in
execution of its process, and of or all advocates,
attorneys, proctors, vakils, pleaders and other persons
authorised by law to appear or act before it;
(13) The rule of the road, [on land or at sea].

18

RFA 441/2000

In all these cases, and also on all matters of public
history, literature, science or art, the Court may resort
for its aid to appropriate books or documents of
reference.

29.

If the Court is called upon by any person to take
judicial notice of any fact, it may refuse to do so,
unless and until such person produces any such book or
document as it may consider necessary to enable it to
do so.”
The matters of which a court can take judicial notice have fallen

for consideration before the Apex Court in several pronouncements.
Noteworthy amongst these are the pronouncements of the Apex Court in (i)
AIR 1959 SC 1041 entitled Ujagar Singh Vs. Mst. Jeo. In this case the
Court was concerned with proof of prevalency of a custom. The Court held
that when a custom has been so recognised by the courts, it passes into the
law of the land and in such circumstances proof of it then becomes
unnecessary under Section 57(1) of the Evidence Act;
In AIR 1977 SC 1108 entitled Onkar Nath Vs. Delhi
Administration, the Apex Court held as under:“The list of facts mentioned in Section 57 of which
the Court can take judicial notice is not exhaustive
and indeed the purpose of the section is to provide
that the Court shall take judicial notice of certain
facts rather than exhaust the category of facts of
which the Court may in appropriate cases take
judicial notice. Recognition of facts without formal
19

RFA 441/2000

30.

proof is a matter of expediency and no one has ever
questioned the need and wisdom of accepting the
existence of matters which are unquestionably within
public knowledge. (see Taylor 11th edn. pp.3-12;
Wigmore sec 2571 footnote; Stephen's Digest, notes
to Article 58; Whitley Stokes' Anglo-Indian Codes
Vol.II p.887). Shutting the judicial eye to the
existence of such facts and matters is in a sense an
insult to commonsense and would tend to reduce the
judicial process to a meaningless and wasteful ritual.
No Court therefore insists on formal proof, by
evidence.”
In such position in law so far as facts of

which

courts may take judicial notice is concerned, we may now examine the
specific contention raised before us with regard to the parameters within
which courts would take judicial notice of matters relating to increase of
rent and prevailing market rents.
In the pronouncement of the Apex Court reported at AIR 1992
SC 184 entitled D.C.Oswal vs. V.K.Subbaih and others, the Apex Court
held as under:“7. We allow the appeal and reverse the judgment of
the High Court and dismiss the petition for eviction.
We would, however, like to add that judicial notice can
be taken of the fact that rental has escalated
everywhere and appropriate rent in the present case
should be raised to Rs.400 per month from 1.1.1992.
The tenant should have a direction to pay the rent in
advance from month to month as stated by him in the
Courts below and it should be by the end of every
20

RFA 441/2000

31.

month. There will be no order as to costs.”
We find that this court has in several cases taken judicial notice

of the factum of increase of rent and made awards of mesne profits and
damages. Noteworthy in this behalf is a judicial pronouncement of the
Division Bench reported at 1995(2) AD Delhi 304 entitled Vinod Khanna
Vs. Bakshi Sachdev. This judgment was delivered by a Division Bench of
which one of us (Dr.M.K.Sharma, J.) had delivered the judgment. It was
held as under:“21. The learned counsel for the appellants also urged
before us that the learned trial court was not justified in
taking a judicial notice of the fact of increase of rents
like the suit property and also in providing Rs.10,000/per month as fair amount towards damages/mesne
profits in favour of the plaintiffs. It is true that no
substantial evidence has been led by the plaintiffs in
respect of the increase of rent in the properties like that
of the suit property. However, it is a well known fact
that the amount of rent for various properties in and
around Delhi has been rising staggeringly and we
cannot see why such judicial notice could not be taken
of the fact about such increase of rents in the premises
in and around Delhi which is a city of growing
importance being the capital of the country which is a
matter of public history. At this stage we may
appropriately refer to the court taking judicial notice of
the increase of price of land rapidly in the urban areas
in connection with the land acquisition matters. Even
the Apex Court has taken judicial notice of the fact of
universal escalation of rent and even raised rent of
disputed premises by taking such judicial in case of
21

RFA 441/2000

D.C.Oswal vs. V.K.Subbiah reported in AIUR 1992 SC
184.

32.

22. In that view of the matter we have no hesitation in
our mind in holding that the trial court did not commit
any illegality in taking judicial notice of the fact of
increase of rents and determining the compensation in
respect of the suit premises at Rs.10,000/- per month
w.e.f. 19.1.1989, in view of the fact that the rent fixed
for the said premises was at Rs.6,000/- per month as far
back as in the year 1974. We may, however, note here
that the learned counsel for the appellants did no
seriously challenge the findings of the learned judge
that Rs.10,000/- per month would be the fair market
rent of the suit premises. Accordingly, in view of the
aforesaid findings arrived at by us the submissions of
the learned counsel for the appellants in our view have
no substance at all.”
In another Division Bench pronouncement reported at 1999 RLR

114 entitled S. Kumar Vs. G.R.Kathpalia the issue raised was as follows:“4. Lastly, the learned counsel for the appellant
vehemently argued that the judgment of the learned
Addl. District Judge cannot be sustained in so far as it
has fixed damages @ 50,000/- p.m. It is submitted that
in the plaint the plaintiff has claimed damages @
10,000/- p.m. And, therefore, the Trial Court could not
go beyond the said figure while fixing the amount of
damages/mesne profits. It is true that in the plaint the
plaintiff claimed damages @ Rs.10,000/- p.m. Upto the
date of filing of the suit However, it is to be noted that
the plaintiff has further prayed that till such time that the
possession of the suit premises is delivered to the
plaintiff, the Court may hold an inquiry under Order 20
Rule 12 CPC and determine the mesne profits/damages
and decree in respect thereof may also be passed. The
22

RFA 441/2000

33.

plaintiff has also undertaken to pay the requisite Court
fee on such a decree. The Trial Court has considered the
evidence in this behalf and reached a conclusion that the
damages/mesne profits for the premises at the relevant
time ought to have been @ 50,000/- p.m. It is a premises
built on a 500 sq. yds. Plot in East of Kailash, New Delhi
and the period under consideration is the year 1994. The
learned counsel for the respondent submitted on this
aspect of the matter that the amount of mesne
profits/damages may be fixed by this Court as it may be
deemed proper and the decree of the Trial Court in this
behalf could be modified. We have heard learned
counsel for the parties on this aspect and considered the
evidence adduced. Respondent/landlord has not let any
documentary evidence of the prevalent market rate of
other premises in the vicinity. However,keeping in mind
the prime location of suit premises, its proximity to
Community Centre and commercial activity, we are of
the view that a sum of Rs.25,000/- p.m. would be a just
and fair amount by way of damages/mesne profits from
the date of institution of the suit till the delivery of the
possession of the premises. The decree of the Trial
Court will stand modified to this extent. The respondent
will pay the decree and the requisite Court fee stamps
will be deposited in the Trial within four weeks from
today.”
The respondents have also drawn our attention to the

pronouncement of learned Single Judge of this Court in 1994(I) AD Delhi
937 entitled Mrs. Dr. P.S.Bedi Vs. The Project and Equipment
Corporation of India Limited. Adverting to the several pronouncements,
noticed by us here-in-above the Court answered the issue relating to
damages/mesne profits as follows:23

RFA 441/2000

“29. Next question that arises for consideration would
be at what rate the damages/mesne profits should be
awarded in favour of the plaintiff and against the
defendant. In this case the defendant has not vacated
the premises in piste of legal notice and also
particularly when the period of lease was not renewed
by the plaintiff. The defendant has occupied the
premises without any authority of law,therefore, the
plaintiff is entitled to damages/mesne profits at the
market rate provided the same is not penal and
uncoscionable.
30. The plaintiff has produced evidence about the
market rate of rent prevailing in that area at the relevant
time i.e in 1989 whereas the defendant has not
produced any evidence at all. The plaintiff appearing as
PW 1 in her statement has specifically stated in crossexamination that the market rate of rent of similar
premises in the year 1989 was about Rs.32/- sq. ft. She
has also in this context proved a document dated
19.6.1985, Ex.PW ¼. Shri PC Bedi, PW2 has also
deposed about the market rent of the premises. He has
brought certain lease deeds dated 22.8.1989(Mark A)
showing the rent for the relevant period. Document
mark A dated 22.8.1989 produced during cross
examination of PW 2 is in respect of 8th floor of
Hansalaya building for a flat of Rs.1333 sq. ft. and the
rate of rent has been shown at Rs.27 per sq. ft. from
22.8.1989 to 21.8.1992. This document however
cannot be taken into consideration as it has not been
exhibited. However, having regard to the oral evidence
of Pws 1 & 2, the document Ex. PW ¼ and the
phenomenal rise in rents in Delhi and particularly in the
area where the property in suit is located, in my opinion
it would be just and equitable to fix the market rate of
rent for the demised premises at the rate of Rs.25/- per
sq. ft which such premises might have fetched on
24

RFA 441/2000

34.

30.4.1989.”
Judicial notice is taken of only such facts of which there can be

only one view. In the light of the aforestated position in law, there can be
no manner of doubt that so far as the increase of rent is concerned, judicial
notice can be taken of a fact that over a certain period rents generally have
arisen. However, so far as quantification of the rate at which the increase
has actually taken place, a finding can be arrived at only on the basis of
legal evidence and material establishing the actual rates at which properties
have been let over the period and comparison of such properties with the
property which is the subject matter of the lis. Rents may vary based on
location of properties, nature of construction, period of construction,
purpose/user for which the premises are let, variation between demand for
tenanted premises and availability of premises and even factors relating to
the position of the economy. Therefore, while a learned trial judge may be
justified in taking judicial notice of the fact that rents have risen over a
certain period of time in the area in question, it would be incumbent upon a
person laying a claim of entitlement to mesne profits to prove the same by
cogent and reliable evidence in accordance with law.
As has been noticed in the judicial pronouncements noticed here-

25

RFA 441/2000

in-above, the evidence may include documentary evidence relating to
tenancies of properties in the area which can be summoned from the office
of the sub-Registrar or by examination of property dealers, oral testimony of
the parties to the litigation and persons in the trade of real estate, other
property owners.
35.

The defendant/tenant is entitled to know not only the landlord's

claim but also the extent to which the same stands established.

The

defendant has a legal right to an opportunity to prove the contrary.
36.

In the instant case we find that other than the admission of the

tenancy, extent of the tenanted premises and receipt of the notice, there was
no admission on the part of the tenant. The tenant in its reply sent on
30.10.1998 had rebutted the claim of the landlord made in the legal notice
dated 25.9.1998.

The claim made in the plaint was also vehemently

disputed in the written statement as noticed here-in-above.
Faced with such a denial and challenge, the learned trial judge
had framed a specific issue in this behalf on 18.8.1998.
In spite of this position the plaintiff failed to lead any evidence in
this behalf either on 4.11.199 or 2.2.2000. No list of witnesses even was
filed and the only witness who was sought to be produced as a witness, was
26

RFA 441/2000

being examined to prove the valuation of the property. The respondent
-plaintiff miserably failed to discharge the onus and burden of proof cast on
it in accordance with law.
37.

It has been brought on record that after the judgment and decree

and grant of the relief of possession on 18.8.1999, the appellant handed over
possession of the suit property to the respondent-plaintiff on 2.11.1999.
The suit had been filed only on 8.12.1998.
38.

In this background of the factual position and the law, despite

taking judicial notice of the fact that rentals have generally increased in
Delhi there was no material at all on which the claim of the plaintiff could
have been granted by the learned trial judge.
We find that the learned trial judge has observed that it could
take judicial notice of the prevalent market rates of rent of different areas in
Delhi as the “court has routinely been deciding” similar suits of mesne
profits and damages in respect of different areas.
39.

We have no manner of doubt that these observations are totally

contrary to the settled position in law. The extent to which the rents are
actually rising in specific areas has to be proved as a statement of fact in
every case. A party would need to lead evidence in respect of the period
27

RFA 441/2000

over which the rental has increased and also the percentage for which it has
increased in order to enable a court to arrive at a finding of the actual
prevalent market rate of rent at the given point of time with regard to a
particular property. A finding of fact in a litigation binds only the parties to
the lis.
40.

It is also necessary that a defendant/tenant is put to notice with

regard to the basis and claim on which a relief is being ascertained. The
defendant must know the rate which a plaintiff will be able to prove in its
evidence so that it can lead its evidence in defence to the claim.
41.

In the instant case the plaintiff did not lead any evidence and the

defendant was thereby deprived of an opportunity to prove that the
prevalent market rate of rent was not Rs.30/- per sq. ft per month which is
the rate arrived at by the learned trial judge in its conclusions. We hold that
this finding of the learned trial judge is based on no material whatsoever, is
speculative and presumptuous and has no basis in fact.
42.

In this view of the matter we set aside and quash the findings of

the learned trial judge on the issue raised before it in the judgment and
decree dated 26.5.2000.
43.

At this stage we may mention that in order to find an amicable
28

RFA 441/2000

resolution of the dispute, having regard to the fact that rentals have
increased over the years, that the appellant was paying such low rate of rent
only because the tenancy was an old one and that the premises were
commercial premises in a prime area, learned counsel for the appellant at
one stage of the argument agreed that the rent/mesne profit which is being
paid is on the lower side. He had to admit that although the market rate of
rent in the area could not be Rs.30/- per sq. ft. yet it would be some where
near Rs.15/- to Rs.20/- per sq. ft. and that the appellant may not be averse to
pay such rental. We take on record the aforesaid statement and accept
Rs.15/- per sq. ft. as appropriate and just rental for the aforesaid premises
with effect from 1st November, 1998 till vacation.
44.

We, therefore, modify the judgment and decree and hold that the

respondent shall be entitled to mesne profits @ Rs.15/- per sq. ft. per month with
effect from 1st November, 1998 till the date of vacation on 2nd November, 1999.
The respondent shall be entitled to costs of the suit and appeal.
The decree sheet be prepared accordingly.
GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
DR.MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA
JUDGE
May 31st, 2005 JK
29

RFA 441/2000

