IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Writ Petition (C) No. 5760/2007
Judgment reserved on: 21st August, 2007
Da te of decision: 31st August, 2007
Jai Kishan
.... Petitioner
through: Mr. Neeraj Kishan Kaul, Sr. Adv. with Mr.
B.L. Wali, Advocate
VERSUS
Municipal Corporation of Delhi
.... Respondent
through: Mr. J.M. Sabharwal, Sr. Adv. with Ms. Smita
Shankar, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest? Yes
GITA MITTAL, J
1.

This petition lays a challenge to the policy of the Municipal

Corporation of Delhi ('MCD' for brevity) for allotment of parking sites
for the purposes of their operation on licence basis in areas falling
under the jurisdiction of the MCD.
2.

The writ petition has been filed by the petitioner who has

submitted that he is a registered parking site contractor with the
W.P. (C) No. 5760/2007

1

MCD.

As per the scheme of registration, notified by the MCD,

parking sites have been classified into three categories, the first being
category 'A' which consists of parking sites with monthly licence fee
of Rs. 5 lakhs and above; the second being category 'B' which consists
of parking sites with monthly licence fee between Rs. 2 lakhs and
below Rs. 5 lakhs; and the third being category 'C' which consists of
parking sites with monthly licence fee upto Rs. 2 lakhs.

The

respondents have prescribed an annual turnover of contractor which
would render them eligible and have also prescribed non-refundable
registration fee towards these categories which ranged from Rs.
25,000/- for category 'C' sites to Rs. 1 lakh in respect for category 'A'
sites.

Non-refundable yearly renewal fees for the registration

ranging from Rs. 25,000/- for category 'C' sites to Rs. 10,000/- for
category 'A' sites was also stipulated.
3.

Mr. Neeraj Kishan Kaul, learned senior counsel for the

petitioner has placed strong reliance on the fact that in addition to
above, the contractors applying for registration were required to
submit attested copies of income tax returns, statement of accounts,
proof of residence/business premises in Delhi as also attested copies

W.P. (C) No. 5760/2007

2

of lease deed/ownership papers of property with valuation reports
from Government approved valuer as per prescribed requirement
ranging from Rs. 10 lakh for the category 'C' registrants to Rs. 25
lakhs for the category 'A' registrants.
The terms of registration itself prescribed the amounts which
the contractor was required to deposit in the event of an award of
contract to him.
According to the writ petitioner, this policy was based on sound
and reasonable considerations which were stated in a counter
affidavit filed by MCD in Writ Petition (C)No. 6251/2003 Shri Rattan
Singh Vs. MCD.
4.

Based on these submissions, Mr. Neeraj Kishan Kaul, learned

senior counsel has urged that the decision of the MCD to give a go bye
to the policy of restricting applications for parking site allotments to
registered contractors is based on no relevant material and is
opposed to public interest. It is urged that the MCD having taken a
considered decision which was approved by this court in the
judgment dated 15th September, 2006 in W.P.(C) No. 625/2003, it
was not open to the MCD to reverse the same arbitrarily. For these

W.P. (C) No. 5760/2007

3

reasons, the submission is that the advertisement dated 28 th July,
2007 published by the MCD in the Times of India and Navbharat
Times invited applications from the public who satisfied the eligibility
conditions was illegal, arbitrary and malafide.
5.

The challenge in the instant case is based on public notice

published by the MCD on the 28th July, 2007 whereby the MCD has
invited tenders for parking sites on monthly licence fee from any
'adult

individual

citizen

of

India/firm/company/registered

society/registered cooperative society who has/have no outstanding
dues of the MCD' and was eligible as per the laid down guidelines.
6.

The terms and conditions for allotment which have been

notified show that the respondents have given away the prohibition
that the person participating must be registered for parking sites
allotment with the MCD. The petitioner has contended that the stand
taken by the MCD in 2003 in support of its policy by restricting
tendering process to registered contractors was based on grounds of
public interest for the reason that the same ensured recovery of
licence fee and that registration by itself was a source of additional
revenue to the MCD and that there was no reason at all for the

W.P. (C) No. 5760/2007

4

change of policy.
7.

It is pointed out that in view of the decision taken vide

Resolution No. 431 dated 25th August, 2003 and also being
interested to operate the parking sites, the petitioner was compelled
to get himself registered with the respondent by depositing the
registration fee of Rs. 1 lakh on the 10th July, 2006 and thereby was
registered against the registration no. 67 in category 'A'.

The

petitioner has also deposited the sum required to be deposited by the
MCD towards renewal of this registration.

Consequently, it is

contended that the action of the respondents in inviting applications
from persons or firms who are not registered to operate parking sites
is arbitrary, mala fide, illegal and based on no material.
The petitioner's grievance is that the respondents having so
vehemently supported its decision and action in restricting the award
of tenders to registered persons alone, there was no warrant for this
change of policy in 2007 which is based on no material whatsoever.
8.

On the other hand, the Municipal Corporation of Delhi has

staunchly defended its action and opposed the writ petition. It has
also been objected that the change of policy in the circumstances

W.P. (C) No. 5760/2007

5

explained is justified and in public interest and would be beyond the
pale of judicial review in writ jurisdiction.
9.

I have heard learned senior counsels on both sides at length.

The original record of the MCD has also been placed before this
court. I find that the policy of the MCD in awarding the parking sites
contracts only to registered contractors was a subject matter of
challenge in W.P.(C) No. 6251/2003 entitled Shri Rattan Singh Vs.
MCD. In this writ petition Mr. Rajesh Kumar, Additional Deputy
Commissioner, RP Cell of MCD had filed a counter affidavit dated
21st November, 2003 herein.
10.

It would be useful to consider the explanation given by the MCD

to justify its decision then to restrict the applicant to registered
contractors in its counter affidavit and had stated thus : "3.
That the MCD is engaged in various
commercial activities which are permitted under
the provisions of DMC Act. The MCD is also
engaged in managing a big number of car/scooter
parking sites located in different parts of Delhi
through private contractors. The allotment of
parking sites is done by way of open tenders. This
has been a big source of revenue of the MCD, but in
recent years the revenue generation declined, as
most of the contractors have not been making
payment of the licence fees on one pretext or the
other.
When the MCD proceeds against the
W.P. (C) No. 5760/2007

6

defaulting contractors for recovering its dues it is
found that the defaulting contractor was having no
money/property in his name. Many times even the
whereabouts of the contractors could not be traced.
Due to all these facts, the MCD suffered huge
losses.
4. In order to have a check on the participation of
fake/bogus contractor in the process of tendering,
the MCD introduces registration scheme for the
parking contractor. Accordingly, vide Resolution
No. 431 dated 25th August, 2003, the MCD has
resolved that all the interested parties will have to
be registered themselves as parking contractors
with the MCD (R.P. Cell Department) to become
eligible for further bid and tendering purposes.
The copy of the Resolution No. 431 dated 25th
August, 2003 is being annexed hereto and marked
as Annexure 'A'.
5.
That with a view to the rulings of the Hon'ble
Court the MCD has announced/started the scheme
of getting the parties registered for parking
purposes. Notwithstanding, the MCD has a very
effective tool in its hands for recovering the dues
from the defaulting persons/contractors under
Section 455 of the DMC Act. The recovery of dues
is possible only when the defaulting contractor has
sound financial credentials and his identity is well
known."
11.

It has been pointed out that the writ petition was dismissed by

the court by a judgment passed on 15th September, 2006 on the
ground that no individual could insist that he ought to be granted
licence on his own terms or in terms other than what have been
evolved by the State.
W.P. (C) No. 5760/2007

7

It was further held that the court in judicial review, while
considering the validity or otherwise of such policy, cannot substitute
its opinion or examine the wisdom of the public authority. The court
also found that the turnover criteria and the registered fee which had
been challenged was designed so that the latter has some nexus or
proximity to the nature and content of the contract.
12.

In the answer to the notice to show cause, the respondents have

explained the basis of their decision making in the counter affidavit.
There can be no dispute to the proposition that any statutory
authority or the State has an absolute power to re-examine its policy
and to take appropriate action, if the circumstances so warranted, to
effectuate a change therein. So long as the decision taken and the
policy is based on material and discloses application of mind, such
decision cannot be the subject matter of challenge in writ proceedings
merely because the same would decrease prospects of an award of
contract to the petitioner.
13.

Mr. J.M. Sabharwal, learned senior counsel for the respondent

has submitted that the only amendment which has been effected in
the terms and conditions for allotment of the parking sites has been

W.P. (C) No. 5760/2007

8

undertaken so as to encourage and increase public participation in
the same and render the same even more transparent and fair. It has
further been submitted that the same was in the interest of public and
for better administration of parking sites which decision was free
from any mala fide or arbitrariness.
14.

As per the MCD, the reason necessitating change in policy was

the experience of the MCD based on its earlier policy. It is disclosed
that the same was being grossly misused. The scheme which had
been initiated in order to secure larger revenue for the Corporation,
became a tool of misuse and control in the hands of a few registered
contractors. The counter affidavit discloses that while 80 persons are
registered for allotment of parking sites, it has been found that only
27 are controlling and operating all the MCD parking sites. Even out
of these, effectively only 11 registered parking contractors are having
a monopoly over 80% of the parking sites.
15.

I also find that the respondents have stated on an affidavit that

a large percentage of these registered contractors were defaulters in
the payment of the monthly licence fee towards the parking sites and
were owing huge amounts to the MCD.

W.P. (C) No. 5760/2007

9

In the event that MCD

proceeds against them in accordance with the prescribed procedure,
they are required to be black listed after following due process and
upon such eventuality, the MCD is required to take the parking sites
back from these contractors. As a result, while fresh tenders etc. are
floated and the process initiated and completed for allotment to
another contractor, the parking site is left 'free' without any element
of management and control. This would not only lead to revenue loss
but to impairment of public interest. The MCD has experienced that
instead of preventing the formation of cartels, the restriction of the
tendering process to only registered contractors was resulting in few
contractors acquiring monopolistic control over the allotments and
the parking sites.
16.

It is indisputable that healthy competition would certainly

enable the MCD to procure the best persons and the best tenders.
The respondents have admitted that in order to lending efficiency to
the procedure, they have initiated the 'safe' tendering process open to
all. In addition thereto, it is pointed out that in order to ensure
regular payments of the monthly licence fee, the MCD is requiring
deposit of four installments of monthly licence fee at the time of

W.P. (C) No. 5760/2007

10

allotment of the contract. The MCD has also reduced the duration of
the contract to two years as against the earlier policy of awarding the
contract for five years which would enable the MCD to take expedited
action in case of defaulting contractors. The amended terms of
allotment also prescribed that in case of default of three consecutive
months in payment of the monthly licence fee, the contractor would
be black listed and the amount deposited by him would be adjusted
against such dues. In order to assess the financial standing of the
respective contractor, the MCD has required submission of a solvency
certificate from the applicants banker including proof of residence
and the income tax PAN registration number. The respondents have
also prescribed earnest money to be paid.
17.

Mr. Neeraj Kishan Kaul, learned senior counsel for the

petitioner has placed reliance on the pronouncement of the Apex
Court reported at (2003) 5 SCC 437 Union of India & Anr. Vs.
International Trading Co. & Anr. in support of the contention
that the change in policy of the MCD is not reasonable or fair and
would be hit by Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
On the other hand, Mr. J.M. Sabharwal, learned senior counsel

W.P. (C) No. 5760/2007

11

for the respondent submits that the pronouncement of the Apex
Court in Union of India & Anr. Vs. International Trading Co. & Anr.
in fact supports the respondents.
It has been noticed in this case that courts ought to be kept out
of the lush field of administrative policy except where the policy is
inconsistent with the express or implied provisions of the statute
which creates the power to which the policy relates or where the
decision made in purported exercise of power is such that a
repository of the power acting reasonably and in good faith could not
have made it. Even in such eventuality, the Apex Court has laid down
the principle that there still has to be something overwhelming before
the court would intervene.
In this case, the court had reiterated the well settled principle
that Article 14 of the Constitution of India applies to matters of
governmental policy and if the policy or any action of the
Government even in contractual matters, fails to satisfy the test of
reasonableness, it would be unconstitutional.
It has also been reiterated that while the discretion to change
the policy in exercise of executive power when not trammelled by any

W.P. (C) No. 5760/2007

12

statute or rule is wide enough, what is imperative and implicit in
terms of Article 14 is that a change in policy must be made fairly and
should not give the impression that it was so done arbitrarily or by
any ulterior criteria.

The sweep of Article 14 encompasses the

requirement of every State action qualifying for its validity on this
touchstone irrespective of the field of activity of the State.
18.

It is trite that exercise of power is tested before the courts on

whether relevant considerations have gone into and irrelevant
consideration kept out of the determination. It is equally well settled
that reasonableness for purposes of judging whether there was an
'excess of power' or an 'arbitrary' exercise of it, is really the
demonstration of a reasonable nexus between the matters which are
taken into account in exercising a power and the purposes of exercise
of that power. (Ref : (1974) 2 SCC 630 Saraswati Industries
Syndicate Ltd. Vs. Union Of India).
19.

In Union

of

India

Vs.

Hindustan

Development

Corporation, (1993) 3 S499, the Supreme Court has held that a
government policy in the matter of fixation of price and in allotment
of largesse from the point of view of prohibiting monopolistic

W.P. (C) No. 5760/2007

13

tendencies and encouraging healthy competition among the units was
reasonable and not arbitrary.
20.

A decision rendered in a case raising a challenge similar to the

present

case

is

reported

MANU/DE/0189/1998

at

73

entitled

(1198)

DLT

D.J.

664

:

Singh

(Retd.)(Commodore) Vs. New Delhi Municipal Council. In
this case the petitioners had challenged a change in the original policy
of the NDMC whereby it was allotting parking lots only to exservicemen.

A decision was taken by the NDMC on complaints

received from the public to allot parking lots on open tender out of
that 50% would be reserved for ex-servicemen. It was held by the
court that the decision for inviting open tenders for allotment of
parking lots was not arbitrary or irrational and the challenge was
negated.
21.

The main ground for the challenge of the policy before this

court is based on the explanation given by the MCD in support of its
earlier policy in the counter affidavit which was filed on 21st
November, 2003 as noticed above.
22.

It is well settled that every action, policy or even change of

W.P. (C) No. 5760/2007

14

policy which is in the realm of state activity has to be informed, fair
and non-discriminatory. So far as change of policy is concerned, in
the Union of India Vs. International Trading Company, the court has
held thus :“While the discussion to change the policy in exercise of
the executive power when not trampled by any statute
or rule, is wide enough, what is imperative and implicit
in terms of Article 14 is that a change in policy must be
made fairly and should not give the impression that it
was done arbitrarily or by any ulterior criteria. The
wide sweep of Article 14 and the requirement of every
State action qualifying for its validity on this touchstone
irrespective of the fields of activity of the State is a
expected tenet. The basic requirement of Article 14 is
fairness in action of the State and non-arbitrariness in
essence and substance is the heartbeat of fair play.”
In the instant case, it would appear that the MCD was
persuaded to effectuate the earlier policy based on what it

then

perceived to be sound economics in public interest.
On implementation of that policy, its experience showed
otherwise. It cannot be certainly contended or held that having taken
a decision which had disastrous consequences and proved totally
counter productive, the authority could not change the same or revert
to the earlier situation on changed terms and conditions. Certainly,
such a change in the policy could not be faulted on grounds of being
W.P. (C) No. 5760/2007

15

unfair, unreasonable or being based on irrelevant considerations.
23.

In Tata Cellular Vs. Union of India (1994) 6 SCC 651,

the Supreme Court has laid down the scope of judicial review relating
to public contracts and policies impacting commercial matters. In
this case the court had clearly laid down that the government must
have framed a contract and that a fair play in the joints is a necessary
concomitant

for

an

administrative

body

functioning

in

an

administrative sphere or quasi-administrative sphere. However, the
decision must not only be tested by the application of Wednesbury
principle of reasonableness but must be free from arbitrariness not
affected by bias or actuated by mala fides.
The scope of judicial review requires a court to investigate the
action of the local authority with a view to seeing whether or not they
have taken into account matters which they ought not to have taken
into account, or, conversely, have refused to take into account or
neglected to take into account matter which they ought to take into
account. (Ref : 1988 (1) All.E.R. 961 R Vs. Tower Hamlets
London Borough Council, ex P Chetnik Developments Ltd.)
24.

In (1997) 7 SCC 592 M.P. Oil Extraction Vs State of

W.P. (C) No. 5760/2007

16

M.P. & Ors., it was held that that the court cannot and should not
outstep its limits and tinker with the policy decision of the executive
functionary of the state unless the same is held to be arbitrary and
founded on mere ipse dixit of the executive functionaries thereby
offending Article 14 of the Constitution or such policy offends other
constitutional provisions or comes into conflict with any statutory
provision. The Apex Court in no uncertain terms held that the court
should not embark on the uncharted ocean of public policy and
should not question its efficacy unless it was held to be wholly
without jurisdiction.
25.

Further in Netai Bagh & Ors. Vs. State of West Bengal &

Ors. reported at 2000 (8) SCC 262, the court has held that
constitutional courts cannot be expected to presume the alleged
irregularities, illegalities or unconstitutionality nor can the courts
substitute their opinion for the bonafide opinion of the state
executive. The courts are not concerned with the ultimate opinion
but only with the fairness of the decision making process.
26.

The MCD is performing statutory functions under the

provisions of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act and discharging

W.P. (C) No. 5760/2007

17

public law obligations. It is bound to take every decision as may be
required to further public interest and ensure that its revenue is
secured.
Efficiency in operation of parking sites is undoubtedly a
pressing need of the public at large. At the same time, the MCD
would be justified in ensuring that its revenue from such commercial
enterprise is maximized.
27.

The MCD has also clearly explained the circumstances which

have persuaded it to consider the change of policy and in my view,
apart from the same being in the realm of decision making which is
wholly within the wisdom of the public authority, in the instant case,
it cannot be held that the proposed decision is based on or guided by
any extraneous or irrelevant considerations.
28.

I find that the decision is purely in the commercial sphere and

there is no arbitrariness or unreasonableness in the action of the
MCD.
The action of the respondents has only increased the
competition which ought to lend to better efficiency in the operation
of the parking sites.

W.P. (C) No. 5760/2007

18

In this view of the matter, the challenge made by the petitioner
to the proposed change in policy of the MCD is legally untenable.
29.

Having said so, there is however one aspect to the matter which

requires to be dealt with. The respondents have pointed out in the
counter affidavit that the decision on the earlier action was approved
by the full house of the Corporation. Consequently, even though the
instant decision falls squarely within the jurisdiction of the
Commissioner of the MCD under the provisions of the Delhi
Municipal Corporation Act, 1957, however, any variation in the terms
and conditions of allotment would require the approval of the house
of the Corporation.
Having regard to the urgency of the matter, the respondents
have obtained anticipatory approval of the Chairman of the Standing
Committee and the Mayor on the 4th of July, 2007. A preamble to
this effect has been drafted and has been placed on record.
30.

Mr. J.M. Sabharwal, learned senior counsel for the respondents

on instructions has stated that the same will, as per the prescribed
procedure, be placed before the Standing Committee and in case of
its approval would be placed before the full house of the Corporation.

W.P. (C) No. 5760/2007

19

31.

However, it would therefore appear that a final decision in the

matter is still required to be taken by the full house of the MCD
before the same can be implemented.

Consequently, while

dismissing this writ petition, it is made clear that the respondents
may proceed with the consideration of the applications which they
have invited, however, the formal award of the parking sites and the
contracts in this behalf would require to be taken in accordance with
law after approval of the Municipal Corporation.
The respondent shall be entitled to costs which are quantified at
Rs.10,000/-

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
August 31, 2007
SD

W.P. (C) No. 5760/2007

20

