IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1729/2005
Judgm ent reserved on : May 26, 2005
Da te of decision: May 31, 2005
SAGAR TOMAR
... Petitioner
through Mr. Rahul Kadyan, Advocate
VERSUS
C.B.S.E.

.... Respondent
through Ms. Manisha, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

This petition has been filed by the petitioner seeking

appropriate writ to issue directing the respondent to accept
his examination form and permitting him to appear in the senior
secondary examination in the subject of Biology(having the code
044) as an additional subject as a private candidate in the
academic session 2004-2005. According to the writ petitioner, he
has passed the senior secondary school examination from the

W.P.(C) 1729/2005

page 1 of 9

Central Board of Secondary Education in the academic year 20032004 having Physics, Chemistry, Maths, English and Physical
Education as his subjects.

After passing the said exam, the

petitioner found himself inclined towards making a career in
medicine. He was informed that in order to join medicine, he was
required to have offered Biology in his class 12th course to render
him eligible for admission to medical courses. In order to fulfill
such aspirations, the petitioner approached the Kendriya
Vidyalaya, Sikh Line, Meerut in July for guidance when he was
advised to take biology as an additional subject and appear in the
board examination for biology as a private candidate.
2.

It is submitted that the Principal of the said school

exercised discretion and permitted the petitioner to join theory
and practical classes in biology for 10+2 in the school with effect
from 1st July, 2004. The petitioner relies upon a certificate dated
17th July, 2004 issued by the Principal of the school to this effect.
According to the petitioner, the examination bye laws and the
senior school curriculum issued by the respondent permit a
candidate to offer an additional subject. The petitioner submits
that he is eligible having regard to the senior school curriculum
and the examination bye laws to take biology as an additional
W.P.(C) 1729/2005

page 2 of 9

subject. Reliance is placed on clause 2.8 of the Senior School
Curriculum and the scheme of studies of the Examination Bye
Laws of the Central Board of Secondary Education.
3.

The petitioner states that he filled the examination form

for taking the examination as a additional subject on the 31st
August, 2004 alongwith the requisite examination fee of Rs.250/vide a demand draft dated 31st August, 2004. The petitioner also
separately

filled

the

form

for

pre-medical/pre-dental

examinations-2005.
It is contended that the form of the petitioner was
illegally rejected by the regional office of the Central Board of
Secondary Examination at Allahabad vide memorandum dated 7th
October, 2004 on the ground that subject of biology involves
practicals and that the same cannot be taken as a private candidate
as per the examination bye laws of the respondent. The petitioner
submits that he made a representation in this behalf to the
respondent board which rejected the same vide a letter dated 28th
December, 2004. This communication has been impugned before
me on the ground that it is in violation of the examination rules of
the CBSE.
4.

The respondent have contested the matter, inter alia, on

W.P.(C) 1729/2005

page 3 of 9

the ground that in Rule 19(v) of the Examination Bye- Laws,
private candidates are not allowed to offer such subjects for the
examination which involve practical work except in the case of
candidates who had failed earlier and had put in a regular course
of study in such subject in an institution affiliated to the board in
the previous academic year. The only exception provided is to
female candidates who are permitted to offer home science with
practical.

The respondent also contends that in terms of the

Examination Bye Law 16, private candidates are defined as
persons who are not regular candidates but are permitted to
undertake and/or appear in the examinations under the provisions
of bye laws. It is submitted that such candidates have been more
specifically defined in Rule 18 and Rule 43.
5.

According to Ms. Manisha appearing for the respondent,

the petitioner is seeking to take biology as an additional subject.
The petitioner has passed the class 12th examination and therefore
cannot be admitted to class 12th.

It is stated that the spirit,

intendment and purpose of the rules is to the effect that a
candidate is permitted to take an additional subject and appear as
a private candidate only in such subjects which entail no practical.
If this was not so, the same would result in an inbuilt contradiction
W.P.(C) 1729/2005

page 4 of 9

inasmuch as science subjects necessarily entail practical work and
there has to be training and assessment thereof.
6.

I have perused the record of the case and have been

taken through the Examination Bye Laws of the respondent as well
a s the Senior School Curriculum.

As per the lay out of the

Examination Bye Laws, Rules 16 to 21 govern private candidates.
Provisions of the bye laws relevant to the present case are set out
hereinabove :“16.

Private Candidates
Definition

For the purposes of the byelaws
contained in this chapter and in chapter 5,
unless there is something repugnant in the
subject or context, a 'Private Candidate”
means a person who is not a Regular
Candidate but, under the provisions of these
byelaws, is allowed to undesrtaken and/or
appear in the All India/Delhi Senior School
Certificate Examination or All India/Delhi
Secondary School Examination of the
Board.
19.
Procedures for Submission
of Applications of Private Candidates
at All India/Delhi Senior School
Certificate Examination (Class XII)
(v)
Private candidates shall
not be allowed to offer such subjects for the
examination which involve practical work
except in the case of candidates who had
failed earlier and who had put in a regular
course of study at an institution affiliated to
W.P.(C) 1729/2005

page 5 of 9

the Board in the previous academic year.
However notwithstanding this condition,
female candidates may offer Home Science
with practical.
21.
Persons eligible to appear as
a Private Candidate for All India
Secondary School Examination
(i)
A candidate who had
failed at the All India Secondary School
Examination of the Board, will be eligible to
reappear at the subsequent examination as
a private candidate in the Syllabus and text
books as prescribed for the examination of
the year in which he will reappear.
(ii)
Teachers serving in
institutions affiliated to the Board.
43.
Additional Subject(s)
A candidate who has passed the
Secondary/Senior
School
Certificate
Examination of the Board may offer an
additional subject as a private candidate
provided the additional subject is provided
in the Scheme of Studies and is offered
within FIVE YEARS of passing the
examination of the Board. Exemption from
time limit may be granted by the Chairman
in deserving cases. Facility to appear in
additional subject will be available at the
annual examination only.”
7.

Private candidate is defined only in Rule 16. As per the

definition of a private candidate, it means any student who is not a
regular candidate but is permitted to take the examination of the
board.

Rule 19 provides the procedure for submission of

applications of private candidates at the class 12th examination.
8.

It is not disputed that the petitioner is proposing to take

W.P.(C) 1729/2005

page 6 of 9

the examination in biology as an additional subject as a private
candidate. He admittedly has no admission to any regular school
for this purpose.
9.

Perusal of the scheme of the said bye laws shows that

Rule 19(v) stipulates that private candidates shall not be allowed to
offer such subjects for the examination which involve practical
work except in the case of candidates who had failed earlier and
who had put in a regular course of study at an institution affiliated
to the respondent board in the previous academic year. Rule 19(v)
is not restricted in its application only to candidates who have
failed at the all India secondary school examination of the Board.
Provision for such candidates has been made under Rule 21 of the
Examination Bye Laws.
10.

I find no force in the submissions on behalf of the

petitioner to the effect that Rule 43 has to be read in isolation and
that the provisions of Rule 19(v) would not guide or control the
same. The scheme of the entire examination bye laws has to be
examined and applied in order to arrive at a meaningful result.
11.

I find that the petitioner has submitted that he has taken

casual admission in the Kendriya Vidyalaya at Meerut to pursue
biology as an additional subject.
W.P.(C) 1729/2005

Learned counsel for the
page 7 of 9

respondent submits that there is nothing called a 'casual
admission' and that the petitioner cannot place any reliance on a
certificate which is in total violation of the applicable rules.
However, it is apparent that the petitioner was conscious of the
requirement of pursuing a regular course in case the additional
subject entails practicals.

It is for this reason alone that the

petitioner would have pursued biology as claimed at the said
school.
12.

In the prayer clause, the petitioner has also sought

permission to take the examination as a private student. There is a
prohibition contained in Rule 19(v) for a candidate to take a
subject which involves practicals. In my view, Rule 19(v) is the
only rule which provides the procedure for submission of
application of private candidates.

The only three kinds of

situations contemplated where a student is permitted to appear as
a private candidate are provided in Rule 18, 42 and 43. Private
students who are compelled to take compartment examination on
account of having failed in one or other subject (as provided in
Rule 42); or students who have failed in the class 12th examination
at the all India senior school certificate examination (provided
under Rule 18) and a candidate who has passed the senior school
W.P.(C) 1729/2005

page 8 of 9

certificate examination of the board but is offering an additional
subject as a private candidate (provided under Rule 43) have to
comply with the requirements of Rule 19 which provides the
procedure.
In this view of the matter, the petitioner is not entitled to
the relief sought in the present writ petition. The petitioner could
not have taken biology as an additional subject as a private
candidate.
I find no merit in the writ petition which is hereby
dismissed.

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
May 31, 2005 kr

W.P.(C) 1729/2005

page 9 of 9

