IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
IA No.6439/2004 in CS (OS) No.365/2004
Reserved on 25th July, 2006
Date of decision: 31st July, 2006
O.P. KHANNA & OTHERS
... Plaintiffs
through: Mr. H.M. Singh, Advocate
VERSUS
RAM NIWAS @ RAMU
... Defendant
through: Mr. P.R. Agarwal, Advocate &
Ms. Neeru Sharma, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
No
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
No
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
No
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

This application for impleadment under Order 1 Rule 10 of the Code

of Civil Procedure (referred to as the CPC hereafter) has been filed by one
Shri Amricke Singh, son of Shri Shive Charan who is claiming to be a
resident of Village Mangol Pur Kalan on the allegation that his ancestors
were owners of large tracks of land including agricultural and residential
land in the revenue state of Village Mangol Pur Kalan. By passage of time,
IA No.6439/2004 in CS (OS) No.365/2004

Page No.1

other properties including the suit properties which stated to be in the
possession of the defendant allegedly came to the share of Shri Shive
Charan, father of the applicant. The applicant contends that by a partition
amongst the brothers of Shri Shive Charan, the suit property came to the
share of Shri Shive Charan in the year 1995 after the death of their father.
The plaintiff contends that after the death of Shri Shive Charan, his
properties were partitioned amongst his sons including the applicant. The
suit property came to fall to the share of the applicant. The applicant has
claimed that he is the lawful owner thereof and in possession of the same. It
is asserted that the property is an old construction and was constructed by
father of the applicant even prior to the partition between Shive Charan and
his brother.
2.

The applicant has further claimed that he inducted Shri Ram Niwas,

the defendant in the present suit, as a tenant in the property about 11 years
ago at a monthly rent of Rs.500/- and the rent has been enhanced to
Rs.2,500/-. The applicant claims that he is receiving rent from Shri Ram
Niwas.
3.

Alleging a dispute in the village in the month of February, 2004,

between the plaintiff and the defendant, the applicant contends that he
gained knowledge of ongoing litigation and about the pendency of this case.
IA No.6439/2004 in CS (OS) No.365/2004

Page No.2

It is submitted that it is upon enquiries from the neighbours that the
applicant has learnt that the plaintiffs and the defendant are respectively
claiming ownership of the property. The present application is stated to
have been filed on 21st September, 2004 after obtaining copy of the plaint
with difficulty. The applicant contends that the plaintiffs are not the owners
of the suit property.
4.

The application has been vehemently resisted on behalf of the

plaintiffs who have submitted that the applicants have no right, title or
interest in the suit property which belongs to them and in which they are in
possession accept the open portion in respect of which permissive use was
given to the defendant Shri Ram Niwas. The application is alleged to be
collusive with the defendant.

The plaintiffs have also alleged that the

applicant had threatened the daughter of the plaintiff no.1 on the telephone
in case the property was not sold to him.
5.

Along with the rejoinder, the applicant has placed reliance on some

photocopies of bills purportedly issued by the electricity company, Delhi Jal
Board and some house tax receipts.
6.

Having heard learned counsel for the parties and carefully perused the

record, I find that the applicant has not given any particulars or details of
the property in respect of which he has claimed ownership. No documents
IA No.6439/2004 in CS (OS) No.365/2004

Page No.3

whatsoever have been pleaded nor any details thereof given in the
application which is bereft of all material particulars which would enable
the court to hold even prima facie in support of the applicant. The applicant
has failed to disclose the names and particulars of the ancestors from whom
he is deriving title. A vague assertion that the property was partitioned by
the bothers of Shri Shive Charan after the death of his father has been
mentioned. No date whatsoever of the date of demise of the father of Shri
Shive Charan or the date of partition between Shri Shive Charan and his
brother, has been mentioned.
7.

The applicant does not even disclose the date of the death of Shri

Shive Charan or any particular date on which the partition was effected
between the applicant Shri Amricke Singh and his brother.
8.

More important is the complete silence with regard to the details of

the property over which the applicant is seeking ownership. The same
cannot be identified from the application in terms of the numerical
particulars nor the area thereof. The application does not disclose the nature
or the location of the land which was owned by ancestors of Shri Shive
Charan, as claimed. The location thereof or the nature of construction
thereof, if any, is also not disclosed. The application does not disclose the
date or details of construction effected by Shri Shive Charan as claimed.
IA No.6439/2004 in CS (OS) No.365/2004

Page No.4

9.

The application is bereft of all material particulars. No documents

have been filed which could even point to as an inference of title and
ownership of the applicant or his predecessor-in-interest. After the plaintiffs
filed a reply taking objections to the application and challenging the claims
made in this application, the applicant has filed a rejoinder placing reliance
on some electricity and water bills and some receipts with regard to deposit
of property tax.
In view of the strong reliance placed on behalf of the applicant on
these documents, it becomes necessary to deal with them in some detail. The
applicant has placed strongest reliance on a document which purports to be
a receipt issued by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi which has been
issued by the Delhi Electricity Supply Undertaking which is purportedly
dated 5th February, 1992. No original of this document has been placed on
record though, the applicant has filed originals of some other water and
electricity bills.

This receipt though issued in the name of Shri Shive

Charan, does not disclose or contain the property number in respect of
which it has been issued. By this document, the applicant has sought to
support the grant of an electricity connection at the suit premises. However,
perusal of the documents shows that it does not so evidence.
10.

The electricity bills which have been placed on record refer to the

IA No.6439/2004 in CS (OS) No.365/2004

Page No.5

period 2002 and 2004. They have been issued in the name of Shri Shive
Charan in respect of shop no.2, Village Mangol Pur Kalan.
11.

The applicant has placed before this court some bills relating to a

water connection. This water connection is purportedly in the name of Shri
Amricke Singh, son of Shri Shive Charan. So far as the address of the
premises where this connection is stated to have been installed is “Mangol
Pur Kalan, Delhi”. The purpose of the connection is domestic. These bills,
therefore, do not relate to the same property to which the electricity
connection relates. Even these bills are isolated bills for different periods
and dates between in 2001 and 2004.
12.

Two receipts have been placed on record by the applicant purporting

to have been issued by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi towards deposit
of property tax. These receipts relate to the property bearing no.RZ 2/123A,
Mangol Pur Kalan, Delhi. There is no connection with the suit property
which has been described as property bearing no.70/1/1(out of Khasra
No.70/1/1) Mangol Pur Kalan Village, Delhi. The documents placed before
this court, in any case, cannot be related to the suit property and in any case
do not establish any right, title or interest in the suit property of the
applicant.
13.

The claim of the applicant requires to be examined from yet another

IA No.6439/2004 in CS (OS) No.365/2004

Page No.6

angle. The applicant has claimed that the defendant Shri Ram Niwas was
his tenant for several years. Neither semblance of tenancy agreement nor
any rent receipt has been placed before this court. The defendant, on the
other hand, has claimed that he is the owner of the suit property and does
not make any reference to the applicant. The court vide orders dated 15 th
April, 2004 had appointed a local commissioner to visit the suit premise and
prepare a report with regard to the possession as well as the existing
construction. The local commissioner visited the spot on two dates, i.e., 15 th
April, 2004 and 16th April, 2004. The report of the local commissioner does
not show the presence of the applicant even remotely.
14.

For all the foregoing reasons, I find no merit in this application. The

applicant is not a necessary or proper party in the present adjudication.
The applicant has delayed the adjudication in the suit by filing this
application and, therefore, must be required to compensate the same by
imposition of costs. Accordingly, this application is dismissed with costs of
Rs.15,000/-. The costs shall be apportioned equally between the Delhi High
Court Legal Services Committee and the National Legal Aid Fund
(NALSA). The costs shall be deposited within a period of fifteen days. The
proof of deposit of costs shall be filed before this court.
Copy of the direction requiring payment of costs shall be sent to the
IA No.6439/2004 in CS (OS) No.365/2004

Page No.7

authorities with whom the same has to be deposited.

(GITA MITTAL)
JUDGE
July 31, 2006 (aa)

IA No.6439/2004 in CS (OS) No.365/2004

Page No.8

