IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 4719-23/2005
Judgment reserved on : May 4,
2005
Da te of decision: May 31, 2005
SUBHASH CHAND GUPTA & ORS.
... Petitioner
through : Mr. R.K. Saini and
Mr.Abhey Chauhan, Advocates
VERSUS
COMMISSIONER OF POLICE & ORS.... Respondents
through : Mr. Amiet Andley, Adv. for
respondents no. 1 and 2
Shri Sunil Goyal, Adv. for
respondent nos. 4 and 5 Mr. N.K. Gupta,
respondent no. 5 in person
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.

By way of the present writ petitions, the petitioners seek

the following prayers :“(i)
a writ of certiorari quashing the
order dated 22.2.2005 passed by Ms.
Samita Garg, Civil Judge, Delhi in suit no.
315/2002, Annexure-E, t the extent she has
W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 1 of 43

2.

ordered that Local Police to seal the whole
of the property bearing no. 1220,Gali
Kashmirian, Kucha Pati Ram, Bazar Sita
Ram, including the residential portion in
occupation of the petitioners and their
family
members
and
shown
and
demarcated in Yellow in the site plan
annexure-F.
(ii)
a direction to the local police and
the SHO Police Station Hauz Qazi, to
immediately remove the seal and the locks
from the residential premises in occupation
of the petitioners and their family members
and shown and demarcated Yellow in the
site plan annexure-F
(iii)
issue a further direction to the
local police not to obstruct the petitioners
and their family members from entering
and occupying their respective residential
portion as mentioned above;
(iv)
and pass any other order or
direction as may be deeded fit and proper
in the interest of justice.”
Briefly stated the facts giving rise to the present petition

are to the effect that the respondent no. 4 Ms. Gita filed a suit for
permanent injunction against the petitioner no. 5 Sanjay Gupta
seeking permanent injunction alongwith an application under
Order 39 Rule 1 and 2 CPC being civil suit no. 315/2002. The suit
was filed on 18th June, 2002 seeking the following prayers against
petitioner no. 5 :“i)_
pass a decree of injunction thereby
restraining the defendant, his agents,
employees,
servants,
attorneys,
relatives/family members, including his
W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 2 of 43

3.

father and brothers, representatives, or any
one else claiming for him and on his behalf
from visiting/coming the Shop No. 3080,
Bazar site Ram, Delhi-110006, as well as
Workshop of the said Suprex Drycleaners
situated at 1220,Gali Kashmirian, Delhi-6
and further from taking money from the said
business under threats as also from
interfering in the smooth conduct of the
aforesaid business by the plaintiff and her
agents;
ii)
award the costs of this suit to the
plaintiff and against the defendant;
iii)
pass such other and further orders
as are deemed fit and proper in the facts and
circumstances of the case.”
The prayers made in the interim application under

Order 39 Rule 2 were to the following effect :“I)
Pass an ex-parte ad-interim order
in favour of plaintiff and against the
defendant thereby restraining the defendant,
his agents, employees, servants, attorneys,
relatives/family members, or any one else
claiming for him and on his behalf from
visiting/coming the Shop No. 3080, Bazar
Sita Ram,Delhi-110006, as well as Workshop
of the said Suprex Drycleaners situated at
1220, Gali Kashmierian, Delhi-6 and further
from extorting money from the said business
under threats as also from interfering in the
smooth conduct of the aforesaid business by
the plaintiff and her agents;
II)
pass such other and further orders
as are deemed fit and proper in the facts and
circumstances of the case and to meet the
ends of justice.”
4.

This application of the respondent no. 4 was dismissed

W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 3 of 43

vide an order dated 4th June, 2003 passed by the Learned Civil
Judge. The respondent no. 4 carried this order in an appeal which
was allowed by the Senior Civil Judge on 8th April, 2004 making
the following directions :-

5.

“8.
Accordingly,
application
of
respondent/plaintiff Late Sh.Shyam Lal
Gupta in suit no. 316/02/99 is dismissed and
application of appellant Smt. Gita Gupta is
allowed. It is directed under the peculiar
circumstances of the cases that unless all
legal heirs decides to run shop in question,
the suit property that is shop and workshop
be locked and the keys be deposited in the
Ld. Trial Court as there is perennial, multi
farious even criminal litigation between the
parties increasing day by day. With this
order appeal of appellant stands disposed.”
It appears that the petitioner no. 5 Sh. Sanjay Gupta filed

a civil (Miscellaneous) no. 395/2004 in this court which was
dismissed vide an order dated 1st December, 2004.
6.

The matter was thereafter listed before the Learned Trial

Judges on the 9th December, 2004 when the following order
directing the SHO to implement the order of the Appellate Court
was made :“09.12.04
Present : Sh. N.K. Gupta,Advt. For pltff.
Sh. Shad Anwar,Adv. For deft.
SI Somvir Singh & SI Sanjeev
Kumar, P.S. Hauz Kazi, Delhi.
W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 4 of 43

Report submitted by Shri Somvir
Singh, SI, PS Hauz Kazi, Delhi. It is reported
that the defendant himself locked the
workshop and shop which is the subject
matter of the present suit and handed over
the keys to him. The keys of the suit
property have been brought in the Court.
An application is also filed on
behalf of Smt. Kum Kum Gupta and Smt.
Seema Gupta stating that their jewellery,
cash and other items are lying in the suit
property and necessary directions be issued
to the police or plaintiff to enable them to
repossess the said belongings.
Heard.
SHO, PS Hauz Kazi is directed to
allow Smt. Kum Kum Gupta, Smt.Seema
Gupta and any other person, whose
belongings, jewellery, cash and any other
items are kept in the suit property and,
thereafter, the keys of the suit property be
deposited.
Keys of the suit property have been
given to SI Somvir to compliance of the
order.
The application is disposed of
accordingly.
Copy of the order be given dasti.
To
come
up
for
further
proceedings on 10.12.04.”
7.

It is pertinent to mention that the police official

thereafter proceeded to seal the workshop situated at property no.
1220 Gali Kashmirian, Kucha Pati Ram, Bazar Sita Ram, Delhi and
deposited the keys with the court. In the proceedings held on 10 th
December, 2004, the respondent no. 4 Gita Gupta informed the

W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 5 of 43

court that only one room had been locked by the police and that
the entire premises were lying open.
appointment of a local commissioner.

A prayer was made for
The order dated 10th

December, 2004 records as follows :“10.12.04
Present : Sh. N.K. Gupta, Cl. For pltff.
Sh. Somvir, SI, PS Hauz Qazi,
Delhi
is also present
Action taken report filed.
Report perused.
It is reported that workshop
situated at property no. 1220, Gali
Kashmirian, Kucha Pati Ram, Bazar Sita
Ram, Delhi has been locked and keys thereof
are being deposited with the court.
Counsel for the plaintiff submitted
that only one room has been locked by the
police and the entire premises is lying open
and he submitted that Local Commissioner
be appointed for ascertaining factual
position. However, keeping in view the fact
that the file has been transferred by the
orders of Hon'ble District Judge for the
purpose of disposal of application under
Order 39 Rule 1 & 2 CPC, therefore, counsel
for the plaintiff is at liberty to make the said
request before the concerned court.
SI Somvir Singh has deposited
six(6) keys of the shop and workshop which
is the subject matter of the suit. Be taken on
record.
File be sent to the concerned Court
immediately.”
8.

Learned counsel for the petitioners has stated that the

W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 6 of 43

suit related to such portion of the premises no. 1220, Gali
Kashmirian, Kucha Pati Ram, Bazar Sita Ram which was being
utilised earlier for drycleaning business and its workshop. The
plaint nowhere disclosed the exact portion which was being so
used and vague averemnts to this effect were made in this plaint.
It is also submitted that the plaintiff/respondent no. 4 herein had
not filed any site plan alongwith the plaint.
9.

On 3rd January, 2005 the following order was recorded

by the trial Judge :“03.01.05
Present : Counsel for the parties.
It is submitted by the counsel for
the plaintiff that despite the orders of the
Court dated 08.03.04, the premises bearing
no.
1220,
Gali
Kashmerian,
Delhi110006(except one room) is lying open and
accordingly, a local commissioner be
appointed for ascertaining the factual
position.
A perusal of the record shows that
the police had submitted its compliance
report dated 1012.2004 wherein it has been
stated that the entire premises has been
sealed and the keys of the same were also
deposited in the Court alongwith report.
On Shri Subhash Gupta has
appeared on behalf of the defendant, who has
submitted that the premises bearing no.
1220, Gali Kashmerian, Delhi-110006 has
some residential portion as well in which the
defendant is residing till date. Counsel for
the plaintiff has stated that the defedants is
W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 7 of 43

10.

residing therein but the perusal of the record
shows that he has neither mentioned in the
plaint nor has filed any site plan showing that
the suit premises has some residential
portion as well.
Counsel for the plaintiff is directed
to file comprehensive site plan of the suit
property on or before next date of hearing.
Put up for further proceedings on 24.01.05.”
The present petitioner no. 1 had appeared before the

court on behalf of the defendant and had informed the court that
the premises no. 1220 also included a residential portion and that
the petitioner no. 5, defendant in the suit w as also residing
therein. The court also observed that there is no such mention in
the plaint nor any site plan had been filed. Accordingly, the court
directed the plaintiff to file a comprehensive site plan of the suit
property before the next date of hearing. It appears that thereafter
the plaintiff filed a plan shows several rooms, kitchen etc. One tin
shed is shown as a workshop while other rooms have been shown
against which the names as Sandeep, Manish etc have been
mentioned. This plan bears a date of 24th January, 2005.
11.

The case was listed before the learned trial Judge on the

3rd February, 2005 when the court recorded the statement of the SI
Somvir Singh who had sealed the workshop and had visited the
premises in dispute. The order made on 3rd February, 2005 is as

W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 8 of 43

follows :“3.2.05
Present : None for pltff.
Sh. B.B. Gupta, Cl. For def.
Called against
Present : Counsel for the
plaintiff.
SI Somvir Singh in person
Shri B.B. Gupta, counsel for the
defendant
It is stated by the SI Somvir Singh
that in compliance of the order dated
10.12.2004, the tin room shed of Shri
Subhash Gupta has been sealed by him. He
has also placed on record the site plan. He
further states that the remaining portions are
residential and hence, the same was not
sealed. The counsel for the defendant has
submitted that the site plan filed by the
counsel for the plaintiff on record is not the
correct site plan and seeks time to file his own
site plan showing the correct factual position.
A perusal of the order dated
08.03.2004, shows that the Appellant Court
had directed for the sealing of the workshop
only and at that time the question whether
the workshop includes the residential area or
not was not raised before Appellant Court.
Keeping in view the controversy
which has arisen, I deem it appropriate that
the present matter be taken alongwith the
contempt application on 22.02.2004. In the
meantime, the counsel for the defendant is
directed to file his site plan and the counsel
for the plaintiff is directed to furnish the
affidavit stating therein that the property
bearing no. 1220, Gali Kashmirian is only a
commercial premises and no residential
portion is situated therein.
W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 9 of 43

12.

At this stage, the counsel for the
plaintiff has supplied the copy of the site plan
filed by him to the counsel for the defendant.
Put up on the date fixed that is
22.02.2005.”
SI Somvir also filed a report before the court dated 10th

December, 2004 stating that Sh. Sanjay Gupta and his father Sh.
Subhash Chand Gupta had locked the premises and handed over
six keys to SI Somvir Singh who had takent he same into
possession pursuant to a seizure memo and deposited them in the
police station malkhana.
13.

Sh. Sanjay Gupta, petitioner no. 5 herein who was

defendant in the suit filed objections dated 22nd February, 2005
wherein it was, inter alia, stated as follows :“9.
That the plaintiff has however filed
a site plan for the first time before this
Hon'ble Court in respect of property no. 1220,
Gali Kashmerian, Bazar Sita Ram, Delhi
showing the woskshp of M/s Suprex
Drycleaners and on perusal of the said site
plan it is evident that the dimension of the
workshop has not beens shown therein and in
fact the said site plan is absolutely wrong and
incorrect besides the same is also not in
accordance with the existing situation of the
property.
10.
That in property no. 1220, Gali
Kashimirian, Bazar Sita Ram, Delhi the
workshop which ws being run by Shri Shyam
Lal Goel is shown in the site plan annexed
with this application in dark red colour
although t he police officials have wrongly
W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 10 of 43

sealed one room which is also shown in red
colour which room has been the residential
room. IT is equally important to mention
that in property no. 1220,Gali Kashmerian,
Bazar Sita Ram, Delhi a portion shown in
blue colour is in possession of Shri Gopal
Krishan who is using the same for workshop
purposes and there has not been any dispute
with regard to said workshop in the present
suit. Similarly the portion shown in green
colour in the site plan is the residential
portion in possession of Smt. Subhdara Devi
and her sons namely Ashok Kumar, Mukesh
etc. which is also the residential premises and
the yellow portions also residential which is
in possession of Shri Subhash Gupta and his
son Sandeep Gupta etc. It is once again
submitted that the plaintiff has not created
any dispute in the present case with regard to
any residential premises therefore, the
plaintiff cannot take any relief in respect of
portion shown in blue, green, yellow as well
as light red colour portions shown in the site
plan.
11.
That in fact the plaintiff herself is
not aware about the factual position of the
said premise as she was neither in possession
of the same nor was ever running any shop or
workshop there and for the said reasons the
site plan filed by her is totally wrong and
incorrect and intention of the plaintiff is to
get the residential portion or property no.
1220, Gali Kashmirian, Bazar Site Ram, Delhi
sealed on the basis of the orders passed by
the Hon'ble Senior Civil Judge, Delhi by
wrongly claiming the said portion to be the
workshop.”
14.

These objections were placed before the court on the

22nd February, 2005. An application dated 22nd February, 2005 for
W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 11 of 43

impleadment under the provisions of order 1 Rule 10 CPC was also
filed by Sh. Gopal Krishan Kotwalwala on the pleas that the
plaintiff/respondent no. 4 herein had wrongfully filed a plan
showing portion of the property no. 1220, Gali Kashmirian which
is owned and is in possession of the applicant. It was stated that
the applicant was carrying on the business in the property and
that his property was
not connected with M/s Superex Dry Cleaning and its workshop. A
prayer was made for impleadment in the suit inasmuch as the
applicant's rights were being affected without notice and hearing.
15.

Several documents in support of occupation and

residence of other persons in the nature of bills of authorities,
election identity cards etc are forthcoming on the trial court
record.
16.

The learned trial judge issued notice on this application

for impleadment. On the 22nd February, 2005 without examining
the pleas raised on behalf of the petitioner no. 5 or the applicant
Sh. Gopal Krishan Kotwalwala who was not even impleaded as a
party to the proceedings, the court observed that only one room
had been sealed by SI Somvir Singh and that a controversy has
been raised to the effect that in addition to the workshop, there
W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 12 of 43

were residential portions occupied by different persons in the
property no. 1220. It was observed that such controversy was not
raised by any of these parties before the Appellate Court or before
this court and therefore keeping in view the orders passed in those
proceedings, it would lead to multiplicity of litigations if the
property no. 1220, Gali Kashmirian is not sealed. Accordingly, the
SHO was directed to seal the entire property and to give his
compliance report before the next date of hearing.
17.

Pursuant to the directions made on the 22nd February,

2005, it has been stated that the entire premises including the
portions occupied by different persons as residences was sealed by
the Additional SHO of police station Hauzqazi namely Inspector
Darban Singh alongwith SI Somvir on Wednesday the 9th March,
2005.
18.

The petitioners are all stated to be residents of the house

no. 1220, Gali Kashmirian, Kucha Pati Ram, Bazar Sita Ram,
Delhi-110006. The residents included several ladies and minor
children who have been residing in the premises. The petitioners
and their family members were not permitted to take out anything
from their houses and were turned out on to the road.

The

premises were sealed without the children being permitted to take
W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 13 of 43

any woollen clothes or books even which are all lying inside the
premises.

Since such time, the petitioners and their family

members are on the road without any shelter and protection.
19.

This order passed by the learned Civil Judge on the 22nd

February, 2005 has been impugned before this court inter alia on
the ground that the same is perverse, without jurisdiction and
arbitrary and passed in violation of the procedural requirements
and rules of natural justice. The order was passed against the
petitioner nos. 1 to 5 who are stated to be in occupation of the
different portions of the property for long periods if even 25 years.
20.

The respondent nos. 4 and 5 have appeared before this

court and has vehemently objected to the maintainability of the
writ petition. Replies were filed and also written submissions and
synopsis were filed. The respondents have placed reliance on the
judgment of the Apex Court reported at 2005 (4), SCALE 116
entitled Swami Atmananda vs Swami Bodhananda & Ors. to
contend that no writ petition would lie impugning a decree of a
civil court. These respondents have also placed reliance on the
judgment of the Apex Court reported at AIR 1973 SC page 76
entitled Managing Director(MIG) Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd. vs
Ajit Prasad Tarway and AIR 1989 SC 997 entitled State of U.P. Vs
W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 14 of 43

Maharaja Dharmender Prasad Singh in support of his submissions
that this court has no jurisdiction to interfere with the order of the
first Appellate Court and the learned Trial Judge. Several other
submissions have been made to contend that the petitioners have
never resided at the suit property. The respondent no. 4 has a
grievance principally against the petitioner no. 5.

However,

perusal of the written submissions before the court shows that the
respondent nos. 4 and 5 have admitted and accept that the ration
cards of petitioner nos. 1, 2 and 5 continues to be at the premises
no. 1220, Gali Kashmirian, Delhi.
21.

In order to deal with the principal objections of the

petitioner with regard to the maintainability of the present writ
petition, the issue stands answered by a judgment of the Apex
Court reported at 2003 6 SCC 675 entitled Surya Dev Rai vs Ram
Chand Rai, wherein it was held as under :“25.
Upon a review of decided cases
and a survey of the occasions, wherein the
High Courts have exercised jurisdiction to
command a writ of certiorari or to exercise
supervisory jurisdiction under Article 227 in
the given facts and circumstances in a variety
of cases, it seems that the distinction between
the two jurisdictions stands almost
obliterated in practice. Probably, this is the
reason why it has become customary with the
lawyers labelling their petitions as one
W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 15 of 43

common under Articles 226 and 227 of the
Constitution, though such practice has been
deprecated in some judicial pronouncement.
Without
entering
into
niceties
and
technicality of the subject, we venture to state
the broad general difference between the two
jurisdictions. Firstly, the writ of certiorari is
an exercise of its original jurisdiction by the
High Court; exercise of supervisory
jurisdiction is not an original jurisdiction and
in this sense it is akin to appellate, revisional
or corrective jurisdiction. Secondly, in a writ
of certiorari, the record of the proceedings
having been certified and sent up by the
inferior court or tribunal to the High Court,
the High Court if inclined to exercise its
jurisdiction, may simply annul or quash the
proceedings and then do no more.
In
exercise of supervisory jurisdiction, the High
Court may not only quash or set aside the
impugned proceedings, judgment or order
but it may also make such directions as the
facts and circumstances of the case may
warrant, maybe, by way of guiding the
inferior court or tribunal as to the manner in
which it would now proceed further or afresh
as commended to or guided by the High
Court. In appropriate cases the High Court,
while exercising supervisory jurisdiction, may
substitute such a decision of its own in place
of the impugned decision, as the inferior
court or tribunal should have made. Lastly,
the jurisdiction under Article 226 of the
Constitution is capable of being exercised on
a prayer made by or on behalf of the party
aggrieved; the supervisory jurisdiction is
capable of being exercised suo moto as well.
xxxxx
37.
The
abovequoted
sentence from Ganga Saran case cannot be
read torn out of the context. All that the Full
W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 16 of 43

Bench has said is that while exercising
certiorari jurisdiction over a decision of the
court below refusing to issue an order of
injunction, the High Court would not, while
issuing a writ of certiorari, also issue a
mandamus against a private party. Article
227 of the Constitution has not been referred
to by the Full Bench. Earlier in this judgment
we have already pointed out the distinction
between Article 226 and Article 227 of the
Constitution and we need not reiterate the
same. In this context, we may quote the
Constitution Bench decision in T.C. Basappa
v. T. Nagappa and Province of Bombay v.
Khushaldas S. Advani as also a three-Judge
Bench decision in Dwarka Nath vs ITO which
have held in no uncertain terms, as the law
has always been, that a writ of certiorari is
issued against the acts or proceedings of a
judicial body conferred with power to
determine questions affecting the rights of
subjects and obliged to act judicially. We are
therefore of the opinion that the writ of
certiorari is directed against the act, order
or proceedings
of the subordinate
court, it can
issue even if the lis is between two private
parties.
38.
Such
like
matters
frequently arise before the High Courts. We
sum up our conclusions in a nutshell, even at
the risk of repetition and state the same as
hereunder :
(1)
Amendment by Act 46 of
1999 with effect from 1-7-2002 in Section 115
of the Code of Civil Procedure cannot and
does not affect in any manner the jurisdiction
of the High Court under Articles 226 and 227
of the Constitution.
(2)
Interlocutory
orders,
W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 17 of 43

passed by the courts subordinate to the High
Court, against which remedy of revision has
been excluded by CPC Amendment Act 46 of
1999 are nevertheless open to challenge in,
and continue to be subject to, certiorari and
supervisory jurisdiction of the High Court.
(3)
Certiorari, under Article
226 of the Constitution, is issued for
correcting gross errors of jurisdiction i.e.
when a subordinate court is found to have
acted (i) without jurisdiction - by assuming
jurisdiction where there exists none, or (ii) in
excess of its jurisdiction – by overstepping or
coursing the limits of jurisdiction, or (iii)
acting in flagrant disregard of law or the rules
of procedure or acting in violation of
principles of natural justice where there is no
procedure specified, and thereby occasioning
failure of justice.
(4)
Supervisory jurisdiction
under Article 227 of the Constitution is
exercised for keeping the subordinate courts
within the bounds of their jurisdiction. When
a subordinate court has assumed a
jurisdiction which it does not have or has
failed to exercise by the court in a manner not
permitted by law and failure of justice or
grave injustices has occasioned thereby, the
High Court may step in to exercise its
supervisory jurisdiction.
(5)
Be it a writ of certiorari
or the exercise of supervisory jurisdiction,
none is available to correct mere errors of fact
or of law unless the following requirements
are satisfied :(i) the error is manifest and
apparent on the face of the proceedings such
as when it is based on clear ignorance or utter
disregard of the provisions of law, and (ii) a
grave injustice or gross failure of justice has
occasioned thereby.
(6)
A patent error is an error
W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 18 of 43

which is self-evident i.e. which can be
perceived or demonstrated without involving
into any lengthy or complicated argument or
a long-drawn process of reasoning. Where
two inferences are reasonably possible and
the subordinate court has chosen to take one
view, the error cannot be called gross or
patent.
(7)
The power to issue a writ
of certiorari and the supervisory jurisdiction
are to be exercised sparingly and only in
appropriate cases where the judicial
conscience of the High Court dictates it to act
lest a gross failure of justices or grave
injustice should occasion. Care, caution and
circumspection need to be exercised, when
any of the abovesaid two jurisdictions is
sought to be invoked during the pendency of
any suit or proceedings in a subordinate court
and the error though calling for correcting is
yet capable of being corrected at the
conclusion of the proceedings in an appeal or
revision preferred there against and
entertaining a petition invoking certiorari or
supervisory jurisdiction of the High Court
would obstruct the smooth flow and/or early
disposal of the suit or proceedings. The High
Court may feel inclined to intervene where
the error is such, as, if not corrected at that
very moment, may become incapable of
correction at a later stage and refusal to
intervene would result in travesty of justice or
where such refusal itself would result in
prolonging of the lis
(8)
The High Court in
exercise of certiorari or supervisory
jurisdiction will not convert itself into a court
of appeal nd indulge in re appreciation or
evaluation of evidence or correct errors in
drawing inferences or correct errors of mere
formal or technical character.
W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 19 of 43

(9)
In
practice,
the
parameters for exercising jurisdiction to issue
a writ of certiorari and those calling for
exercise of supervisory jurisdiction are almost
similar and the width of jurisdiction exercised
by the High Courts in India unlike English
courts has almost obliterated the distinction
between the two jurisdictions.
While
exercising jurisdiction to issue a writ of
certiorari, the High Court may annul or set
aside the act, order or proceedings of the
subordinate courts but cannot substitute its
own decision in place thereof. In exercise of
supervisory jurisdiction the High Court may
not only gives suitable directions so as to
guide the subordinate court as to the manner
in which it would act or proceeds thereafter
or afresh, the High Court may in appropriate
cases itself make an order in supersession or
substitution of the order of the subordinate
court as the court should have made in the
facts and circumstances of the case.”
22.

This court in a judgment rendered on the 26th May,

2004 in Civil Writ Petition no. 3677/2003 entitled S.N. Aggarwal
vs State NCT of Delhi & Ors. delivered by my learned brother
Mukul Mudgal, J also considered this issue. The petitioner in that
writ petition had challenged the directions made by the learned
Additional District & Sessions Judge dated 23rd October, 1999 in a
suit for recovery of money. The court deleniated the scope of a
writ of certiorari which could be by a superior court to an inferior
court commanding the latter to send the record of a particular

W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 20 of 43

case. I may appropriately set out the references recorded by my
learned brother in this judgment :“3.
Mr. Subramanium, the learned
amicus curiae has delineated the scope of
certiorari to be a writ issued by a Superior
Court to an inferior court or Tribunal
commanding the latter to send up the record
of a particular case. He further referred to
the definition of certiorari by H.W.R. Wade'
and C.F. Foresyth as follows :“Certiorati is used to
bring upto into the High Court the
decision of some inferior tribunal or
authority in order that it may be
investigated. If the decision does
not pass the test, it is quashed that
is to say, it is declared completely
invalid, so that one need respect it.
The underlying policy is
that all inferior courts and
authorities have only limited
jurisdiction or powers and must be
kept within their legal bounds. This
is the concern of the Crown, for the
sake of orderly administration of
justice, but it is a private complaint
which
sets
the
crown
in
motion.”(Administrative Law, 8th
Edn.,page 591)
4.
He has also referred to
De Smith, Woolf and Jowell who defined the
certiorari and its scope in the following words
:“For a century or more it
was
generally
assumed
that
certiorari and prohibition would
issue only in respect f “judicial acts”
or administrative acts in the
performance
of
which
the
W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 21 of 43

competent authority was under an
express or implied duty to “a ct
judicially” (or fairly).
Because
certiorari and prohibition were the
main
judicial
remedies
in
administrates law it used to be very
important to be able to identify
“judicial acts” and situations where
the courts could be expected to hold
that here was a duty to act
judicially.
However, a judicial
recognition, that the rules of natural
justice do not import an inflexible
procedural
code
of
uniform
applicability and the increasing
frequency with which judges fall
back upon the vaguer duty to act
fairly have shifted the focus of the
argument from whether there are
any implied procedural obligations
to be complied with before a power
may lawfully be exercised in
determining their content in the
particular context. It is now beyond
doubt
that
certiorari
and
prohibition are not confined to
reviewing decisions of a judicial
nature.
(Judicial
Review
of
th
Administrative Act, 5 Edn, page
702).”
23.

In T.C. Basappa vs T. Nagarappa reported at AIR 1954

SC 440 (relied upon in S.N. Aggarwal's case), it was laid down that
a writ of certiorari is granted when the court has acted without
jurisdiction or in excess of its jurisdiction. It was also held that a
writ of certiorari may also be issued if the court or tribunal acted in

W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 22 of 43

flagrant disregard of the rules or procedure or in violation of
principles of natural justice where no particular procedure is
prescribed. It has also been held that an error in the decision or
determination may also be amenable to a writ of certiorari subject
to the fact that the error is manifest and apparent on the face of the
proceedings i.e when its based on clear ignorance or disregard of
the provisions of law but a mere wrong decision is not amenable to
a writ of certiorari.
24.

I find that in the aforestated judgment, the court had

noticed the principles laid down in AIR 1961 SC 1087 entitled
Custodian of Evacuee Property vs Khan Saheb Abdul Shukoor
which were to the following effect.
“(1)
Certiorari will be issued for
correcting errors of jurisdiction.
(2)
Certiorari will also be issued when
the court or tribunal acts illegally in the
exercise of its undoubted jurisdiction as
when it decides without giving an
opportunity to the parties to be heard, or
violates the principles of natural justice.
(3)
The court issuing a writ of
certiorari acts in exercise of a supervisory
and not appellate jurisdiction.
One
consequence of this is that the court will not
review findings of the fact reached by the
inferior court or tribunal, even if they be
erroneous.
(4)
An error in the decision or
determination itself may also be amenable to
W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 23 of 43

a writ of certiorari if it is a manifest error
apparent on the face of the proceedings, e.g.,
when it is based on clear ignorance or
disregard o the provisions of law. In other
words, it is patent error, which can be
corrected by certiorari but not a mere wrong
decisions.”
25.

After

referring

to

several

other

authoritative

pronouncements of the Apex Court, this court in W.P.(C)
3677/2003 interalia laid down the following guidelines :“7.
In
Syed
Yakoob
vs.
K.S.
Radhakrishnan, AIR 1964 SC 477 it was held
that when a question is decided without
giving opportunity of hearing to a party
affected, a writ of certiorari can be granted.
Similarly in Harbans Lal vs Jagmohan Saran,
(1985) 4 SCC 333 it was held that certiorari
shall issue if there is any breach of principles
of natural justice.
12.(a).
The Corpus Juris Secundum has
laid down that a writ of certiorari is a writ
from a superior court to an inferior court
seeking a record of a particular case and as
per Wade and Forsyth(supra) a writ of
certiorari is meant to question the decision of
the inferior Tribunal or Authority to test its
validity and the limits of jurisdiction within
which the power has been exercised. The
ADJ is a court inferior in hierarchy to this
Court and the writ of certiorari can issue,
questioning the validity of its decision.
(b)
Similarly De Smith, Woolf and
Jowell has also noted that a certiorari will
issue where there is a duty to act judicially in
functioning while performing a judicial act. It
is not in dispute that learned ADJ was
performing a judicial act when he passed the
W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 24 of 43

impugned judgment. In fact De Smith, Woolf
and Jowell have gone further and held that
certiorari is not confined to reviewing orders
of judicial nature.
(c)
The position of law laid down by
Hon'ble Supreme Court in T.C. Basappa
(supra) clearly is to the effect that a writ of
certiorari can issue if the Tribunal or court
has acted in violation of principles of natural
justices. Similarly in Syed Yakoob (supra) the
Supreme Court held that writ of certiorari can
issue when a party affected by the order has
not been given opportunity to be heard.
(d)
In Ram & Shyam Co.(supra) it has
been held that existence of an alternate
remedy even if its is assumed that seeking of
leave to appeal is an effective adequate
remedy, is not a bar to the exercise of writ
jurisdictions.”
Concluding thus, the court issued a writ of certiorari
quashing and setting aside certain directions made in a judgment
arising out of a suit by an Additional District Judge.
In view of such legal position, the objection of the
respondent nos. 4 and 5 as to the maintainability of a writ petition
against orders of a trial judge is without legal basis.
26.

Learned counsel appearing for the respondent nos. 4

and 5 has vehemently contended that the petitioner no. 5 is not a
resident of the property and has placed reliance on averments
made by this petitioner in other proceedings. Having regard to the
parties as arrayed by the respondent no. 4 before the trial court, I
W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 25 of 43

find that the plaintiff/respondent no. 4 has itself admitted that the
suit property was the address and resident of the petitioner no. 5.
27.

It has further been contended that the petitioners did

not make any such objections either before the trial court or before
the Appellate Court. I find that the plaintiff-respondent no. 4 never
took a stand that the entire property was housing the business and
workshop in its pleadings no such stand as has been taken in the
present proceedings was taken before this court in the earlier
proceedings.
28.

In this behalf, I find force in the submissions made on

behalf of the petitioner to the effect that the order which had been
passed by the Appellate Court which was sustained by this court
was to the effect of sealing only the drycleaning business and the
workshop. The residential portion was not part of the suit claim
nor any order had been passed for sealing in respect thereof.
29.

The respondent nos. 4 and 5 have vehemently objected

to the maintainability of the present writ petition also on the
ground that other than the petitioner no. 5, the other petitioners
were not a party to the suit.
It is settled law that any person aggrieved by an order
passed by any court or authority would be a person aggrieved and
W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 26 of 43

would have the right to invoke judicial remedy seeking setting
aside of such order.
30.

Perusal of the record of the trial court also shows that

the plaintiff-respondent no. 4 failed to file the affidavit as directed
vide the order dated 3.2.05 to the effect that the property in
dispute no. 1220 was only a commercial premises and that no
residential portion is situated therein.
31.

In the instant case, the trial court also stood informed

about the rights of the petitioners.

An application for

impleadment had also been filed by one person. However, no
consideration was given to any of these factors nor was their any
adjudication upon the application for impleadment permitted to
passing of the impugned order.
32.

As a result, valuable rights of the petitioners have been

jeopardised. The petitioners have been put out of residence and
are stated to be on the road without their clothes or any other
belongings including books of children. In these circumstances,
the petitioners are persons aggrieved by the order and have every
right to maintain the present writ petition.
33.

So far as the judgments cited by the respondents are

concerned, I find that the pronouncement of the Apex Court in
W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 27 of 43

2005 (5) SCALE 116 related to a challenge to a final decree for
which an appeal is statutorily provided. In the instant case, the
petitioners have no remedy inasmuch as the order passed has not
been passed on any specific application based on a specific
statutory provision. The same is not appealable under the Code of
Civil Procedure and as such the petitioners have no other option or
remedy other than by way of the present writ petition.
34.

In AIR 1989 SC 997 entitled State of U.P. & Ors. Vs

Maharaja Dharmender Prasad Singh etc. the Apex Court had held
that judicial review under Article 226 cannot be converted into an
appeal and that the same is directed not against the decision but is
confined to the examination of the decision making process. It was
further held that scope of judicial review would be confined to
examination of whether a decision is vitiated by taking into
account irrelevant, or neglecting to take into account of relevant
factors or is so manifestly unreasonable that no reasonable
authority, entrusted with the power in question could reasonably
have made such a decision. The scope of judicial review of the
decision making process includes examination, as a matter of law,
of the relevance of the factors considered.
35.

In the instant case, I have held that the learned trial

W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 28 of 43

Judge has failed to take into account all relevant factors and has
proceeded to pass an order which was wholly beyond the scope of
the suit before it. In taking such a decision, the learned trial judge
has erred in failing to hear the effected parties and has violated the
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure. The issues raised before
me are fully within the parameters of the scope of judicial review
as laid by the Apex Court in the aforestated judgment.
36.

In AIR 1973 SC 76 entitled The Managing Director(MIG)

Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd. Balanagar vs Ajit Prasad Tarway,
Manager(Purchase and Stores) Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd.
Balanagar, Hyderabad, the court was concerned with examination
of the exercise of powers by the High Court in revisional
jurisdiction. The ratio laid down int his court has no application to
the case before me
37.

In order to effectively adjudicated upon the subject

matter of this writ petition, I deemed it necessary to call for the
record of the lower court which has been made available to me.
Both parties have relied on different portions of the record in
support of their contentions. On the 4th April, 2005, keeping in
view the controversy raised in the present matter, I had recorded
the following order :W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 29 of 43

“1.
Learned counsel for the parties
have been heard for some time. The main
controversy in this matter arises out of the
impugned order dated 22.2.2005 whereby
the Trial Court directed sealing of the entire
premises bearing No.1220, Gali Kashmirian,
Kucha Patiram, Bazar Sitaram, Delhi by the
concerned SHO and directed submission of
the compliance report on or before the next
date of hearing. Learned counsel appearing
for the petitioner has pointed out that only a
small portion of the first floor of the said
premises bearing No.1220, Gali Kashmirian,
Kucha Patiram, Bazar Sitaram, Delhi was
housing the workshop of M/s.Superex Dry
Cleaners and that the remaining portion was
residential. It is also submitted that the
plaint dated 18.6.2002 filed by the present
respondent No.4 nowhere disclosed the
location and extent of the premises which
was being actually used for the purpose of dry
cleaning and the workshop. The plaint filed
by the respondent No.4 has also arrayed the
petitioner No.5 as residing at the premises
No.1220, Gali Kashmirian, Kucha Patiram,
Bazar Sitaram, Delhi. It has also been pointed
out that there were other tenants/occupants
in the ground and first floor of the premises.
One of the tenants Sh. Gopal Krishan
Kotwala had filed an application before the
Court for impleadment in the suit which
application was placed before the learned
Trial Judge on the 22.2.2005. In complete
disregard of the aforestated position the
order dated 22.2.2005 was passed varying
the earlier order made on 4.6.2003 and
directions for sealing the entire premises
beyond the workshop were made by the Trial
Judge without going through any pleadings
or the documents before it and without
hearing parties effected.
W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 30 of 43

2.
On a query being put by the
learned counsel for respondent No.4, he is
unable to submit the plan which was placed
before the Trial Judge on the basis of which
the order dated 22.2.2005 was passed. There
is no explanation forthcoming for arraying
petitioner No.5 as a resident of the premises
No. 1220, Gali Kashmirian, Kucha Patiram,
Bazar Sitaram, Delhi if he was not actually
residing there. It is not disputed that the
extent and portion wherefrom the business
and workshop were being carried out in the
premises No. 1220, Gali Kashmirian, Kucha
Patiram, Bazar Sitaram, Delhi was not
mentioned in the plaint or the application
under Order 39 Rule 1 & 2 CPC by the
plaintiff. It is an admitted position that no
site plan was filed before the Trial Judge on
4.6.2003 when the order on the injunction
application was made.
The date of filing of the plan relied
upon in the order dated 22nd February, 2005
is also not available.
3.
The admitted position today is that
the premises have been sealed and the keys
are lying with the Trial Judge. It is also
vehemently contended that several families
constituting of more than 11 members who
were occupying different portions of the
premises of the property bearing No.1220,
Gali Kashmirian, Kucha Patiram, Bazar
Sitaram, Delhi are out of residence and on
the streets in view of the sealing effected by
the concerned SHO pursuant to the order
dated 22.2.2005. Learned counsel for the
petitioner has requested that in view of the
aforestated position, the petitioners are being
handicapped in as much as the belongings etc
of the petitioners are stated to be lying in
different portions of the premises No.1220,
Gali Kashmirian, Kucha Patiram, Bazar
W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 31 of 43

Sitaram, Delhi. An oral request has been
made for appointment of the local
commissioner for verifying the extent of the
premises which was put to use for the
workshop and for the residence of the
petitioners and the tenants.
4.
Learned
counsel
for
the
respondents has raised strong objections to
the grant of such a prayer and has contended
that the writ petition itself is not
maintainable and ought not to be
entertained.
The respondent No.4 is not in a
position to place the correct position of the
facts placed before the Trial Court.
The
petitioner has contended that there was no
application before the court for variation of
the order dated 4.6.2004 that the learned
Trial Judge has acted completely without
jurisdiction and in flagrant disregard of the
rules and procedure and also in violation of
principles of natural justice. I am, therefore,
of the prima facie view that this petition is
maintainable. In this behalf, my views are
fortified by the judgment of this Court dated
24.5.2004 rendered in W.P(C) No.3677/2003
entitled S.N.Aggarwal Vs. State (NCT of
Delhi) ORS.
5.
Having regard to the rival
contentions, I am also of the view that the
present case is a fit case for appointment of
local commissioner to inspect the ground and
first floor of the premises No.1220, Gali
Kashmirian, Kucha Patiram, Bazar Sitaram,
Delhi and to submit a report with regard to
the users of the different portions. The
petitioner and the respondent shall furnish
the plans respectively filed by them on the
court records to the learned local
commissioner. I appoint, Mr.Rajiv Kumar,
Advocate who is present in court as the local
W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 32 of 43

commissioner to conduct the inspection in
terms of the above and place a report before
this court within three days. He shall prepare
a sketch and may take photographs.
The Local Commissioner shall be
entitled to a fee of Rs.15,000/- and expenses
to be paid by the petitioners and shall be at
liberty to engage a draftsman and
photographer.
6.
It is submitted that the keys are
deposited with the learned trial judge. The
learned Trial Judge shall release the keys to
the local commissioner for undertaking the
inspection. The keys shall be deposited by
the local commissioner before the Trial Judge
immediately after completion of the
inspection.
It is also directed that the
concerned SHO shall depute the concerned
police official to assist the local commissioner
in securing release of the keys and
undertaking the inspection. Parties shall
cooperate in the inspection to be conducted
by the local commissioner. The learned local
commissioner shall notify the parties through
their counsel of the date and time of the
inspection.
The matter shall be taken up for
hearing on 14.4.2005.
The record of the Trial Court shall
also be summoned through a special
messenger for the next date of hearing.
Copy of this order be given dasti
under the signature of the court master of
this court.”
38.

Subsequently, time for execution of the commission was

extended vide an order recorded on 11th April, 2005.
39.

The learned local commissioner has placed before this

W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 33 of 43

court a detailed report dated 15th April, 2005 which interalia makes
the following observations :“
xxxxx The main gate of the property
was sealed with SS Seal as informed by Sub
Inspector,Mr.Sanjiv Kumar. Thereafter the
seal was opened and the undersigned
alongwith SI Sanjiv Kumar, Mr. S.C. Pandey,
MR.Manish Gupta, Mr. S.C. Gupta, Mrs.
Manju Gupta, Mr. Siri Chand, Mr. Ajay
Saxena (Draftsman) and Mr. Aryan
(Photographer), entered the suit premises.
After entering the property the undersigned
alongwith aforesaid persons visited different
portions of the property and took
photographs and Mr.Ajay Saxena(Draftsman)
with the help of the site plan provided by the
counsel for the petitioners Sh. R.K. Saini
identified the different portions of the
property and also made necessary changes as
exited at the suit property in the site plan.
The different portions inspected by
undersigned have been shown clearly in the
site
plan
prepared
by
Mr.
Ajay
Saxena(Draftsman) and wherein the portions
in possession of the petitioners have been
shown in yellow colour and areas in
possession of other persons are residential in
character. The areas marked blue in the plan
is in possession of Mr. Gopal Kishan and the
same
are
used
as
workshop
for
manufacturing electric switches, therefore the
user is commercial in nature. The site plan
also shows the possession of the different
persons of the different portions of the suit
property. The portion marked red in the site
plan is a sealed work shop for drycleaning
purposes which as informed was sealed
pursuant to the orders of Hon'ble Supreme
Court. The site plan furnished by the counsel
W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 34 of 43

for petitioners containing necessary changes
and the site plan prepared by draftsman are
annexed hereto and marked as annexureP3(colly).
12.
That from the inspection
carried out and the articles lying in various
portions of the property it is very much
apparent that the user of the property is
residential except the tin shed in possession
of Mr. Gopal Krishan which is being used for
manufacturing electric switches. Apart from
this Mr. Mukesh Dubey who is in possession
of part of the first floor, also carries out
screen printing work at a small scale from his
portion but from inspecting the property it
can be concluded that the dominant user is
residential only.
Therefore based upon the visit to
the suit property it can be concluded that the
major portion of the suit property is being
used for residential purposes except the tin
shed and the store in possession of Mr. Gopal
Kishan, which are being used for
manufacturing electric switches and storage
purposes.”
Thus, the local commissioner has physically verified the
existence of residential portions, availability of the residential
goods of the petitioners and also the exact portions which were in
their possession prior to its sealing.

The report of the local

commissioner also supports the existence of these residential
portions even on date.
40.

I find that the plaint and application of the respondent

no. 4 gave no details.
W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

No plea accompanied the plaint.
page 35 of 43

The

appellate order also was concerned with the business only. There
was never any issue raised nor prayer for sealing the residential
portion. The plan filed by the respondent no. 4 itself showed the
workshop in only one portion. Names of several other persons
were mentioned on the plaint of the petitioner which appears at
page 481 of the trial court record. The respondent nos. 4 and 5
failed to file the affidavit directed to be filed vide order dated
3.2.05.

Despite of this material being before the learned trial

Judge, the same was not considered and the impugned order was
made on the 22nd February, 2005.
41.

In the instant case, the petitioner Sh. Gopal Krishan had

also filed an application for impleadment of the

under order 1

Rule 10 of the CPC. The applicant before the trial Judge and the
persons effected had a legal right to be heard in the matter.
The learned trial Judge therefore gravely erred in not
following the settled principles of law to the effect that no order
ought to be made against a person who is not a party before the
suit or in respect of property which is not the subject matter of the
litigation. In any case, no order effecting rights of parties can be
made without hearing them. It has been contended and I find that
the same has resulted in apparent travesty of justice inasmuch as
W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 36 of 43

the petitioners have been dispossessed from their residential
property.
42.

It has been authoritatively held that an appropriate writ

issue even against an order of the civil court in the aforestated
circumstances. Failure to follow the legal provisions, violation of
principles of natural justice and failure of justice resulting to
parties have been held as sufficient cause for issuance of a writ.
The order impugned before me suffers from such infirmities. I
therefore hold that in the facts of instant case, the present writ
petition is maintainable.
43.

So far as the merits of the petition are concerned,

perusal of the plaint shows that the prayer was based on the
following assertions :“Mrs. Geeta Gupta
wife of Shri N.K. Gupta
r/o 3148, LalDarwaza,
Bazar Sita Ram,
Delhi-110006

......Plaintiff

Mr.Sanjay Gupta
S/o Mr.Subhash Chand Gupta
Resident of 1220,
Gali Kashmerian,
Delhi-110006
.....Defendant
xxxxxx
1.
That the plaintiff is the sole
beneficiary of entire the estate left behind by
W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 37 of 43

the
deceased
Shri
Shyam
Lal
Goel(hereinafter referred to as the said
deceased) by virtue of Will dated 25th day of
April, 1995, which, interalia, included the
property and premise bearing no. 3080,
Bazar Sita Ram, Delhi, and the business
conducted therein under the name and style
of M/s Suprex Dry Cleaners. A Succession
case is also pending adjudication with
regard to the said Will of late Shri Shyam
Lal.
xxxx
17.
That the cause of action
first accrued to the plaintiff, on various
dates
when
defendant
and
his
accomplices/henchmen have started acting
illegally, criminally and against the interest
of the plaintiff who is the sole beneficiary of
the deceased and the plaintiff has filed
various police reports and complaints. The
cause of action further arose on 18.4.2002
when the plaintiff has terminated the
services of the defendant and he was called
upn to stop coming to the aforesaid business
shop premises and desist from extorting
money from the said business under threats
as also stop interfering in the smooth
conduct of the aforesaid business. It further
arose when the defendant and his
accomplices, despite having received the
said letter has started coming to the shop
and extorting the money from the Cash box
lying in the said shop premises. Therefore
the cause of action is a continuing one.
xxxx
“i)_
pass a decree of injunction thereby
restraining the defendant, his agents,
employees,
servants,
attorneys,
relatives/family members, including his
father and brothers, representatives, or any
one else claiming for him and on his behalf
W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 38 of 43

from visiting/coming the Shop No. 3080,
Bazar site Ram, Delhi-110006, as well as
Workshop of the said Suprex Drycleaners
situated at 1220,Gali Kashmirian, Delhi-6
and further from taking money from the said
business under threats as also from
interfering in the smooth conduct of the
aforesaid business by the plaintiff and her
agents;
ii)
award the costs of this suit to the
plaintiff and against the defendant;
iii)
pass such other and further orders
as are deemed fit and proper in the facts and
circumstances of the case.”
Perusal of the averments on behalf in the plaint shows
that there was no description of the property in terms of the
number of rooms, floors etc. The respondent no. 4/plaintiff did
not show where the business of drycleaning was located or which
portion housed the workshop. Even in terms

of area and

measurement, nothing was stated and no site plan was filed with
the suit. Same was the position in the application under Order 39
Rule 1 & 2 CPC.
44.

The plaintiff had arrayed the petitioner no. 5 as a

defendant and shown the property no. 1220 as the defendant's
residence and address.
45.

The senior Civil Judge in his judgment dated 8th March,

2004 had held that the suit property i.e. the shop and workshop be

W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 39 of 43

locked and the keys be deposited before the trial court. There was
no direction whatsoever to lock any portion other than the shop
and the workshop. The residential portion were not the subject
matter of the plaint and therefore no interim order could have
been passed in respect thereof. The sub-inspector Somvir Singh
who went to the suit property had made a statement on 3rd
February, 2005 to the effect that he had sealed the workshop and
the remaining portion of the property was residential. Objections
to the plaintiff's contentions were filed before the learned trial
court and defendant had also so stated in the order recorded on 3rd
January, 2005.

An application for impleadment was pending

before the learned trial court by one of the residents on the 22nd
February, 2005.
46.

Perusal of the order sheet shows that on an oral

objection of the plaintiff to the effect that only one room had been
sealed, the court passed the order of 22nd February, 2005 after
refusing to examine the objections of the defendant and the
applicant under Order 1 Rule 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
Despite having it been brought to its specific notice that the plaint
had been filed only in respect of the business and workshop and
there was no lis whatsoever with regard to the residential portions
W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 40 of 43

or with regard to the entire property 1220, the learned trial Judge
directed the entire property to be sealed. This was wholly beyond
the plaint.
47.

It is to be noticed that even the plaintiff/respondent no.

4 had made a request that a local commissioner be appointed on
the 3rd January, 2005. If this prayer had been granted, the correct
position would have been brought before the court.
48.

In any case in view of the bald averments in the plaint,

the present case, no local commissioner was necessary. The suit
related only to the drycleaning business and workshop. The plan
filed by the plaintiff pursuant to the order dated 24th January,
2005 showed only one tin shed as a workshop. No other portions
of the property could have been sealed.
49.

It is settled law that no order can be passed which would

effect rights of third parties or of persons who are not a party to the
suit. Such persons having approached the court, no order could
have been passed without hearing them and adjudicating upon
their claim. There was no direction by the Appellate Court on 8th
March, 2004 to effect sealing of residential portions or the entire
property no. 1220. There was no averment by the plaintiff nor any
material on record to the effect that the entire property was a
W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 41 of 43

workshop. Despite specific orders no affidavit was filed by the
plaintiff. In these circumstances, the order dated 26th February,
2005 is without jurisdiction and contrary to settled principles of
law.

In directing its implementation, the learned trial Judge has

caused displacement of several families who are admittedly
residents in the property.
50.

On the other hand, the local commissioner appointed by

this court has conclusively established that the property sealed
under the impugned orders includes large areas which are
residential. The learned local commissioner has also set out the
names of the persons who were occupying and residing therein.
51.

For all the foregoing reasons, the order dated 22nd

February, 2005 cannot be permitted to stand.

Accordingly, I

hereby issue a writ of certiorari quashing and setting aside the
order dated 22nd February, 2005 whereby the learned trial Judge
directed the sealing of the entire property no. 1220, Gali
Kashmirian, Sita Ram Bazar, Delhi.
52.

It is made clear that the seal of the portion marked in red

colour in the plan filed by the local commissioner with his report
dated 15th April, 2005 being the sealed workshop for drycleaning
purposes in the site plan shall be so maintained. The remaining
W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 42 of 43

residential portions shall be desealed and possession thereof
handed over forthwith to the occupants who have been noticed in
the same report.
53.

The concerned SHO shall depute the police officials to

seek release of the keys from the trial court in order to forthwith
comply with the directions made today. The keys of the sealed
portion shall be deposited by the police with the learned trial
Judge after compliance of the order has been made.
This writ petition is allowed in the above terms.

GITA MITTAL
JUDGE
May 31, 2005
kr

W.P.(C) 4719-23/2005

page 43 of 43

