IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

AA No. 503 & AA No.505/2006
Reserved on
Date of decision

: 18.02.2008
: 05.03.2008

IN THE MATTER OF :
#M/s Automation Technologies (I) P.Ltd.
!

...... Petitioner

Through
Mr.S.
Singhvi
Khurana, Advocates

and

Ms.Sonia

Versus
$Unitech Ltd & Ors.
^

.........

Respondent.

Through Mr.U.K.Chaudhary, Sr.Advocate
With Mr.Sandeep Arya, Ms.Deepti Gupta &
Mr.Parvinder Tanwar, Advocates for R-1
Mr.Ravi Varma, Advocate for R-2.
Mr.Mrityunjay K.Singh and Ms.D.Banerjee
Advocates for R-3 to 8.

CORAM

* HON'BLE MS.JUSTICE HIMA KOHLI
1.Whether Reporters of Local papers may be allowed to see
the Judgment? Yes

AA No. 503 & 505/2006

Page 1 of 31

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest? Yes

HIMA KOHLI, J.

:

With the consent of the parties, both the matters are

disposed of together as the counsels for the parties state that
the dispute is common and the parties to the present petition as
also to AA No.503/2006 are common.

For the sake of

convenience, facts of AA No.505/2006 are taken note of.
2.

The present petition is filed by the petitioner under

Section 11 (6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (for
short `the Act’) praying inter alia for appointment of sole
Arbitrator in terms of clause 16 of Memorandum of Understanding
dated 28th January, 1998.

AA No. 503 & 505/2006

Page 2 of 31

3.

The facts of the case lie in a narrow compass and

require to be dealt with before coming to the arguments of the
parties.
4.

M/s

Sarvamanglam

Builders

&

Developers

Ltd,

respondent No.8 company is the absolute owner of land
measuring 4.386 acres and also the owner of an additional parcel
of land measuring 1.344 acres owned by M/s Continental
Properties

Ltd.,

a

100%

subsidiary

of

respondent

No.8,

aggregating 5.730 acres of land situated in the revenue estate of
village

Sikandrapur

Ghoshi,

District

Gurgaon,

Haryana.

Respondents No.3 to 7 were shareholders in respondent No.8
company collectively having

22040 shares of the face value of

Rs.100/- each in it. It was agreed by respondents No.3 to 7, to
raise the authorized share capital of respondent No.8 company to
Rs.1 crore.
5.

Counsel for the petitioner submitted that respondents

No.3 to 7 approached the petitioner to become a shareholder in
respondent No.8 company to the extent of 5% shareholding in
AA No. 503 & 505/2006

Page 3 of 31

the post acquisition paid up capital of respondent No.8 company.
The initial purpose of the collaboration of respondents No.3 to 7
with the petitioner was to develop a multi storeyed residential
complex on the aforesaid plot of land in the name and style of
Speciality Builders Pvt.Ltd., which was subsequently changed and
it was decided by the parties to develop a commercial complex
and service apartments on the said land.
6.

Respondent No.1, M/s Unitech Ltd., a known developer

of commercial complex agreed to participate in the development
of the aforesaid plot of land along with respondent No.2 and thus
it was agreed between the parties that they would make
investments for the purpose of development of the said land as a
commercial project and share the profits therefrom. Approval,
clearance etc. were agreed to be procured in the name
respondent No.8 company.
Memorandum

of

of

Accordingly, the parties executed a

Understanding

entitled

`Shareholding

Agreement’ (hereinafter referred to as `the Agreement`) on 28th
January, 1998 wherein respondents No.3 to 8 and the petitioner
AA No. 503 & 505/2006

Page 4 of 31

were collectively referred to as `the RG Group’ and party on the
first part’, respondent no.1 as `UT Group’ and party on the
second part and respondent No.3 as `PB Group’ and party on the
third part.
7.

It is recorded in the recitals of the Agreement that the

party on the first part had invited the parties on the second part
and third part to acquire shareholding in respondent No.8
company and to enhance the shareholding and participate in the
development and execution of the project land after obtaining
necessary

sanctions

and

approvals

from

the

regulatory

authorities. The ratio of the share capital of the first, second and
third parties in respondent No.8 company, in the post acquisition
paid up capital was fixed as 5% for the petitioner, 35% for the
remaining respondents No.3 to 7, thus collectively as 40% for the
first party, 40% for the second party and 20% for the third party
with the understanding that the parties will have the right to
nominate Directors on the Board of Directors of respondent No.8
company in proportion to their respective shareholding, i.e. two
AA No. 503 & 505/2006

Page 5 of 31

Directors would be nominated by the first party, two by the
second party and one by the third party.
8.

The relevant clauses necessary for deciding the subject

matter of the present petition are reproduced hereinbelow:
11. Expenditure & Accounts
11.2 However, the planning, interaction with
outside consultants, Architects and sale of
available areas after development, will be
done by the Second Party and in lieu of these
services, the Second Party shall be entitled to
fees @ 5% (Five per cent) of the gross sales
of the developed areas.

14. TERM OF THIS AGREEMENT:
14.1 THIS AGREEMENT shall continue and be
binding upon each of the Parties as long as
such Parties shall remain a shareholder in
SARVMANGLAM/CONTINENTAL.

14.2 Upon completion of the Project and
disposal of all saleable areas, the Board of
Directors of the company shall consider the
continuance
or
otherwise
of
THIS
AGREEMENT. In the event, it is decided to
terminate THIS AGREEMENT, the Second &
the
Third
Parties
will
opt
out
of
AA No. 503 & 505/2006

Page 6 of 31

SARVMANGLAM/CONTINENTAL. For this, the
valuation of shares shall be carried out by a
reputed Firm of Chartered Accountants. In the
event, R.G.Group (First Party) declines to buy
the shares at the aforesaid value, the Second
Party and the Third Party respectively in that
order shall have the option of buying out the
shares of the other two remaining Parties.

16. ARBITRATION
Any dispute or difference arising out of or in
connection
with
this
Agreement
or
interpretation thereof shall be referred and be
finally resolved by Arbitration in accordance
with the Indian Arbitration Laws as applicable
from time to time. “

9.

Counsel for the petitioner contended that

more than

eight years have expired since the execution of the Agreement
and though the petitioner approached the respondents time and
again, it has been kept in the dark about the progress made in
connection with the project on the land, no notice for Annual
General Meeting was sent to the petitioner, nor a statement of
account was forwarded to it.

As a result, the petitioner issued

letters dated 11th October, 2005, 5th December, 2005 and 5th
AA No. 503 & 505/2006

Page 7 of 31

April, 2006, and called upon the Managing Director of respondent
No.1 to distribute share of profits of the petitioner in the said
project which, as per the petitioner would amount to Rs.6.705
crores, in addition to the returns on the investments and the
interest on profit which had accrued on a year to year basis since
commencement of the project along with share of profit in the
maintenance of the buildings in the project.
10.

It was submitted on behalf of the petitioner that in view

of the failure on the part of the respondents to reply to the earlier
letters issued by the petitioner, the petitioner issued a legal
notice dated 29th June, 2006 to respondents No.1 and 2 calling
upon them to pay a sum of Rs.4.125 crores to the petitioner on
account of the petitioner's share in the project and Rs.1.08 crores
as a share of the petitioner in the increase of FAR in tower D of
the project developed by respondent No.8 along with interest @
18% p.a. The petitioner also claimed entitlement to proportionate
share of profit in the project amounting to Rs.1.50 crores along
with interest @ 18% p.a. The respondents were informed that in
AA No. 503 & 505/2006

Page 8 of 31

case of default on their part, the petitioner shall invoke the
arbitration clause contained in the Agreement and take further
necessary steps pursuant thereto. Counsel for the petitioner
submitted that as the respondents No.1 & 2 failed to reply to the
aforesaid notice, it was compelled to file the present petition on
4th December, 2006 invoking the arbitration clause 16 governing
the parties, for appointment of a sole Arbitrator.
11.

Notice was issued on the aforesaid petition on 6th

December, 2006 whereafter the respondents entered appearance.
Respondents No.1 & 2 have filed their respective replies
contesting the petition. Though respondents No.3 to 8 did not file
a reply on the record, it was stated by their counsel that their
stand was the same as that of respondents No.1 & 2. In other
words, respondents No.3 to 8 are also contesting the present
petition filed by the petitioner for appointment of a sole
Arbitrator.
12.

While the existence of an arbitration clause was not

disputed by any of the respondents, the present petition was
AA No. 503 & 505/2006

Page 9 of 31

opposed by them on various counts.

It was submitted by the

counsels for the respondents that the present petition is beyond
the scope of arbitration and the Agreement.

Counsel for the

respondent no.1 contended that the petitioner being only 5%
shareholder in the respondent No.8 company and no dispute
having been raised by any of the remaining

shareholders who

collectively form a part of the RG Group, party on the first part,
the present petition is not maintainable and at best, the disputes
raised

by

the

petitioner

emanate

from

interse

differences

amongst the constituents of the RG Group, party on the first part
and not against respondents No.1 & 2 and thus no dispute or
differences can be permitted to be raised by the petitioner within
the scope of the arbitration clause as the grievance of the
petitioner with respect to non-distribution of profits cannot be a
subject matter of a dispute raised for adjudication by invoking
clause 16 of the Agreement. In support of his submissions,
counsel for the respondent no.1 relied on clause 11.2 and clause
16 of the Agreement.

AA No. 503 & 505/2006

Page 10 of 31

13.

In rebuttal, counsel for the petitioner denied that the

petition is beyond the scope of arbitration as contained in the
Agreement by relying upon the provision of Section 2 of the Act.
It was stated that the petitioner was not under any obligation to
seek prior consent from the other constituents of the RG Group,
party on the first part, for invoking the arbitration clause as there
was no such stipulation contained in the Agreement. It was
denied that the disputes raised by the petitioner were beyond the
scope of the arbitration clause or they were claims personal in
nature against the remaining constituents of the RG Group who,
as per respondents No.1 & 2 on their part had not raised any
dispute under the Agreement.

Reference was made by the

counsels for both sides to the following judgments rendered by
the Supreme Court in the context of Section 11(6) of the Act:
(i)SBP & Co. Vs. Patel Engineering Ltd. and
another (2005) 8 SCC 618

(ii) Shree Ram Mills Ltd. Vs. Utility Premises
(P) Ltd. (2007) 4 SCC 599
AA No. 503 & 505/2006

Page 11 of 31

14.

Taking the first objection raised by the respondents as

to the maintainability of the present petition on the ground that
the petitioner being only one constituent from amongst seven
constituents who collectively form a part of the “party of the first
part” as described in the Agreement dated 28th January, 1998 is
disentitled from invoking the arbitration clause, it is necessary to
examine the Agreement.

It is pertinent to note that the

Agreement starts by describing all the three parties by referring
to them individually.

Thus the RG Group which has been

collectively described as the `party of the first part’ comprises of
seven persons from item No.1 (a) to 1(g),
petitioner finding place at item No.1(f).

the name of the

However, although all

the aforesaid constituents are collectively described as the `RG
Group’

and

as

Directors/Shareholders

in

respondent

No.8

company and M/s Continental Properties (P) Ltd., it is not as if
the constituents of the party of the first part decided to form an
association of persons and designated one from amongst them as
AA No. 503 & 505/2006

Page 12 of 31

authorized to deal for and on behalf of all the constituents, with
the remaining parties to the Agreement, namely, party of the
second and the third part respectively. This is not only borne out
by a perusal of the Agreement, but also by glancing at the last
page of the Agreement where signatures of the parties are
affixed. In the column of the “party of the first part”, all the
seven constituents of the RG Group are independent signatories.
It is also pertinent to note that respondent No.8 company of
which all the rest of the six constituents are stated to be the
Directors/Shareholders etc., is represented in its own right,
through its Director, Mr.Ramnik Agarwal, duly authorized by the
Board of Directors to sign and execute the Agreement on its
behalf.
15.

The

arbitration

clause

No.

16

contained

in

the

aforesaid Agreement also does not expressly state as to which of
the parties could invoke the said clause, i.e., whether the
arbitration clause could be invoked only by any one of three
parties, i.e. by the RG Group or the UT Group or the PB Group or
AA No. 503 & 505/2006

Page 13 of 31

by any one of the signatories to the Agreement.

Rather, a

perusal of the arbitration clause No.16 in the Agreement shows
that there is no reference to any party at all. Instead, reference
is made therein only to “any dispute or difference arising out of or
in connection with the Agreement or interpretation thereof”.
16.

Taking into consideration the definition of `party’ under

Section 2(1)(h) of the Act which has been defined as “party to an
arbitration agreement”, in the absence of any covenant to the
contrary in the Agreement, the term cannot be given a restrictive
meaning. It therefore cannot be stated that the petitioner herein
is not a `party’ to the Agreement merely because it is one of the
seven constituents of the “party of the first part” for the reason
that the petitioner is a signatory to the Agreement in question in
its own right and the said right has not been made dependent on
the remaining constituents of the “party of the first part” being ad
idem with the petitioner, for the purposes of invoking the
arbitration clause. Merely because the remaining six constituents,
namely, respondents No.3 to 8 have not invoked the arbitration
clause or have not raised a dispute, cannot be a ground to
AA No. 503 & 505/2006

Page 14 of 31

foreclose the right of the petitioner to invoke the arbitration
clause and file the present petition for appointment of an
arbitrator.
17.

Thus, the objection taken on behalf of the respondents

that the present petition instituted by the petitioner herein is not
maintainable and that the petitioner does not have locus standi to
file the petition for appointment of an Arbitrator, or that the
consent of the remaining six constituents of the “party of the first
part” was mandatorily required for the petitioner to invoke the
arbitration clause, is untenable and liable to be turned down. The
petitioner being a party to the Agreement which contains the
arbitration clause and a signatory to the aforesaid Agreement in
its own right, is well entitled to invoke the arbitration clause by
filing the present petition, without requiring any prior consent
from the remaining six constituents, namely, respondents No. 3
to 8.
18.

Neither the Agreement, nor the Statute has placed any

such embargo on the petitioner barring it from invoking the
AA No. 503 & 505/2006

Page 15 of 31

arbitration clause, without the prior consent from respondents
No.3 to 8. Such a narrow interpretation to the term “party”, has
not been given in the Agreement and if permitted to be given,
shall fly in the face of the definition “party” as provided for under
the Act. Provision of Section 2 (1) (h) of the Act does not place
any such fetters on a party as sought to be imposed by the
respondents herein.

Rather, a reading of the arbitration clause

shows that the intention of the parties was to word the clause
very loosely, by not referring to any party who may be entitled to
invoke arbitration, thus making it very wide and all encompassing
in nature. It is therefore held that the petitioner was entitled to
invoke the arbitration clause in the Agreement.
19.

The second objection taken by the respondents is that

the disputes raised in the petition are beyond the scope of
arbitration and that as the petitioner is a shareholder of
respondent No.8 company, it is only entitled to dividends when
declared by the company. Thus it was contended that there is no
“dispute” or “difference” that can be raised by the petitioner
AA No. 503 & 505/2006

Page 16 of 31

within the scope of the arbitration clause.

Counsel for the

respondent No.1 urged that while exercising its powers under
Section 11 (6) of the Act, it is for this Court to decide whether
conditions for exercise of the said powers under the aforesaid
provision exist or not. He also contended that the disputes raised
by the petitioner related internally to the “party of the first part”
or, the “RG Group” and not all the parties, and that resolution
thereof could be sought by the petitioner under the Companies
Act.
20.

In the aforesaid context, it is relevant to advert to the

observations of the Supreme Court in the case of

Patel

Engineering Ltd.(supra) wherein while discussing the functioning
and duties of a Chief Justice or the person or institution
designated by him under Section 11(6) of the Act, the Court
observed as below:

“ 9 …While exercising the power or performing
the duty under Section 11(6) of the Act, the
AA No. 503 & 505/2006

Page 17 of 31

Chief Justice has to consider whether the
conditions laid down by the section for the
exercise of that power or the performance of
that duty exist. Therefore, unaided by
authorities
and
going
by
general
principles, it appears to us that while
functioning under Section 11(6) of the Act,
a Chief Justice or the person or institution
designated by him, is bound to decide
whether he has jurisdiction, whether there
is an arbitration agreement, whether the
applicant before him is a party, whether
the conditions for exercise of the power
have been fulfilled, and if an arbitrator is
to be appointed, who is the fit person, in
terms of the provision. Section 11(7)
makes his decision on the matters
entrusted to him, final.
Xxx

11.
The appointment of an arbitrator
against the opposition of one of the parties
on the ground that the Chief Justice had no
jurisdiction or on the ground that there
was no arbitration agreement, or on the
ground that there was no dispute
subsisting which was capable of being
arbitrated upon or that the conditions for
exercise of power under Section 11(6) of
the Act do not exist or that the
qualification
contemplated
for
the
arbitrator by the parties cannot be ignored
and has to be borne in mind, are all
adjudications which affect the rights of
AA No. 503 & 505/2006

Page 18 of 31

parties. It cannot be said that when the Chief
Justice decides that he has jurisdiction to
proceed with the matter, that there is an
arbitration agreement and that one of the
parties to it has failed to act according to the
procedure agreed upon, he is not adjudicating
on the rights of the party who is raising these
objections.
The
duty
to
decide
the
preliminary facts enabling the exercise of
jurisdiction or power, gets all the more
emphasized,
when
sub-Section
(7)
designates the order under sub-sections
(4), (5) or (6) a “decision” and makes the
decision of the Chief Justice final on the
matters referred to in that sub-Section.
Thus, going by the general principles of law and
the scheme of Section 11, it is difficult to call
the order of the Chief Justice merely an
administrative order and to say that the
opposite side need not even be heard before
the Chief Justice exercises his power of
appointing an arbitrator. Even otherwise, when
a statute confers a power or imposes a duty on
the highest judicial authority in the State or in
the country, that authority, unless shown
otherwise, has to act judicially and has
necessarily to consider whether his power has
been rightly invoked or the conditions for the
performance of his duty are shown to exist.

Xxx

AA No. 503 & 505/2006

Page 19 of 31

17…Where a Chief Justice designates not a
Judge, but another person or an institution
to nominate an Arbitral Tribunal, that can
be done only after questions as to
jurisdiction, existence of the agreement
and the like, are decided first by him or his
nominee Judge and what is to be left to be
done is only to nominate the members for
constituting the Arbitral Tribunal. Looking
at the scheme of the Act as a whole and the
object with which it was enacted, replacing the
Arbitration Act of 1940, it seems to be proper to
view the conferment of power on the Chief
Justice as the conferment of a judicial power to
decide on the existence of the conditions
justifying the constitution of an Arbitral
Tribunal…

18. ... Therefore, the power was conferred on
the highest judicial authority in the country and
in the State in their capacities as Chief Justices.
They have been conferred the power or the
right to pass an order contemplated by Section
11 of the Act. We have already seen that it is
not possible to envisage that the power is
conferred on the Chief Justice as persona
designata. Therefore, the fact that the power is
conferred on the Chief Justice, and not on the
court presided over by him is not sufficient to
hold that the power thus conferred is merely an
administrative power and is not a judicial
power.
Xxx
AA No. 503 & 505/2006

Page 20 of 31

25…While constituting an Arbitral Tribunal,
on the scheme of the Act, the Chief Justice
has to consider whether he as the Chief
Justice has jurisdiction in relation to the
contract, whether there was an arbitration
agreement in terms of Section 7 of the Act
and whether the person before him with
the request, is a party to the arbitration
agreement. On coming to a conclusion on
these aspects, he has to enquire whether the
conditions for exercise of his power under
Section 11(6) of the Act exist in the case and
only on being satisfied in that behalf, he could
appoint an arbitrator or an arbitral tribunal on
the basis of the request.
…Similarly, when the party raises an objection
that the conditions for exercise of the power
under Section 11(6) of the Act are not fulfilled
and the Chief Justice comes to the conclusion
that they have been fulfilled, it is difficult to say
that he was not adjudicating on a dispute
between the parties and was merely passing an
administrative order. It is also not correct to
say that by the mere constitution of an arbitral
tribunal the rights of parties are not affected.
Dragging a party to an arbitration when there
existed no arbitration agreement or when there
existed no arbitrable dispute, can certainly
affect the right of that party and even on
monetary terms, impose on him a serious
liability for meeting the expenses of the
arbitration, even if it be preliminary expenses
and his objection is upheld by the arbitral
tribunal. Therefore, it is not possible to
AA No. 503 & 505/2006

Page 21 of 31

accept the position that no adjudication is
involved in the constitution of an Arbitral
Tribunal.

Xxx
38… Therefore, a decision on jurisdiction
and on the existence of the arbitration
agreement and of the person making the
request being a party to that agreement
and the subsistence of an arbitrable
dispute require to be decided and the
decision on these aspects is a prelude to
the Chief Justice considering whether the
requirements of sub-Section (4), subSection (5) or sub-Section (6) of Section
11 are satisfied when approached with the
request for appointment of an arbitrator. It
is difficult to understand the finality to referred
to in Section 11(7) as excluding the decision on
his competence and the locus standi of the
party who seeks to invoke his jurisdiction to
appoint an arbitrator. Viewed from that angle,
the decision on all these aspects rendered by
the Chief Justice would attain finality and it is
obvious that the decision on these aspects could
be taken only after notice to the parties and
after hearing them.
39. It is necessary to define what exactly
the Chief Justice, approached with an
application under Section 11 of the Act, is
to decide at that stage. Obviously, he has
to decide his own jurisdiction in the sense,
whether the party making the motion has
AA No. 503 & 505/2006

Page 22 of 31

approached the right High Court. He has to
decide whether there is an arbitration
agreement, as defined in the Act and
whether the person who has made the
request before him, is a party to such an
agreement. It is necessary to indicate that
he can also decide the question whether
the claim was a dead one; or a long barred
claim that was sought to be resurrected
and whether the parties have concluded
the transaction by recording satisfaction of
their mutual rights and obligations or by
receiving the final payment without
objection. It may not be possible at that
stage, to decide whether a live claim
made, is one which comes within the
purview of the arbitration clause. It will be
appropriate to leave that question to be decided
by the arbitral tribunal on taking evidence,
along with the merits of the claims involved in
the arbitration…

Xxx
47 ….(iv) The Chief Justice or the
designated judge will have the right to
decide the preliminary aspects as indicated
in the earlier part of this judgment. These
will be, his own jurisdiction, to entertain
the request, the existence of a valid
arbitration agreement, the existence or
otherwise of a live claim, the existence of
the condition for the exercise of his power
and on the qualifications of the arbitrator
or arbitrators. The Chief Justice or the judge
AA No. 503 & 505/2006

Page 23 of 31

designated would be entitled to seek the
opinion of an institution in the matter of
nominating an arbitrator qualified in terms of
Section 11(8) of the Act if the need arises but
the order appointing the arbitrator could only be
that of the Chief Justice or the judge
designate.” (emphasis added)

21.

In a subsequent judgment rendered by the Supreme

Court in the case of Shree Ram Mills Ltd.(supra), while discussing
the aforesaid case of Patel Engineering (supra), particularly para
39 thereof, the Supreme Court observed as below:
“.. Even at the cost of repetition we must state
that it is only for the purpose of finding out
whether the arbitral procedure has to be
started that the Chief Justice has to record
satisfaction that there remains a live issue in
between the parties. The same thing is about
the limitation which is always a mixed
questions of law and facts. The Chief Justice
only has to record his satisfaction that
prima facie the issue has not become dead
by the lapse of time permitted by law to
agitate those issues covered by the
agreement. It is for this reason that it
was pointed out in the above para that it
would be appropriate sometimes to leave
the question regarding the live claim to be
decided by the Arbitral Tribunal. All that
AA No. 503 & 505/2006

Page 24 of 31

he has to do is to record his satisfaction
that the parties have not closed their
rights and the matter has not been barred
by limitation. Thus, where the Chief Justice
comes to a finding that there exists a live
issue, then naturally this finding would include
a finding that the respective claims of the
parties have not become barred by limitation.”
(emphasis added)

22.

Applying the aforesaid principles laid down by the

Supreme Court to the present case, the argument of the
respondents that the claim of the petitioner is only against
respondent No.8 company and that no dispute or difference
arises which requires to be adjudicated by invocation of the
arbitration

clause

governing

the

parties,

requires

to

be

examined.
23.

The petitioner has made a claim in the present petition

for entitlement to a sum of Rs.6.705 crores with interest @ 18%
p.a. from the date of completion of the project.
distribution of the share of the profit

It has sought

of the petitioner in the

project as also return on the investment and the interest on the
AA No. 503 & 505/2006

Page 25 of 31

profit which has accrued from year to year since the start of the
project along with share of profit in the maintenance of the
building in the project.
24.

The plea of the respondents that the disputes, if any,

raised by the petitioner are directed against respondent No.8
company alone and not against any of the other respondents,
particularly not against respondents No.1 & 2, is not sustainable
for the reason that the parties of the second part and the third
part have shareholdings in respondent No.8 company to the
extent of 40% & 20% respectively, while the seven constituents
of the RG Group who form a part of the party of the first part
have a collective shareholding in the respondent No.8 company to
the extent of 40%. Clause 6.2 of the Agreement stipulates that
none of the parties shall part with their respective shareholding
without the unanimous consent of the other parties.

It is also

recorded that the shareholding of the seven constituents of the
first party in the respondents No.4 and 5 companies and that of
the petitioner company shall not be altered or changed without
AA No. 503 & 505/2006

Page 26 of 31

the mutual consent of all the parties to the Agreement. Similarly
clause 14.1 of the Agreement stipulates that the said Agreement
shall continue and be binding upon each of the parties as long as
such parties shall remain a shareholder in respondent No.8
company or M/s Continental Pvt.Ltd.

Thus, it cannot be said that

the arbitration clause cannot be invoked by the petitioner as the
disputes raised by it are against respondent No.8 company and
none else. The arbitration clause in the Agreement clearly states
that any dispute or difference arising out of or in connection with
the Agreement or interpretation thereof, shall be referred to and
resolved by arbitration. In these circumstances, it will be for the
arbitral Tribunal to decide on merits as to whether the disputes
raised by the petitioner against the respondents No.1 and 2 are
maintainable or not.
25.

Now with regard to the objection of the respondents

that there is no live issue between the parties for being referred
to arbitration, it has been clearly laid down in the case of Shree
Ram Mills Ltd. (supra) that the Court has only to record its
AA No. 503 & 505/2006

Page 27 of 31

satisfaction that prima facie the issue has not become dead by
lapse of time or that the

party has not slept over its rights

beyond the time permitted by law to agitate the issues covered
by the agreement or whether the matter has not become barred
by limitation.
26.

There is no grievance raised by the respondents that

the issues raised by the petitioner have become barred by
limitation.

It is also not the case of the respondents that the

parties have recorded their accord and satisfaction regarding
financial claims and there is no question of there remaining any
lingering issue between the parties. The plea of the respondents
that the claims made by the petitioner against respondents No.1
and 2 are not sustainable for the reason that the petitioner is not
entitled to claim or has been unable to indicate a right to
distribution of profits in the respondent No.8 company and as the
petitioner has not raised any grievance with regard to nonpayment of dividend, underselling of units by respondent No.1 or
fraud on the part of respondent No.1 qua the petitioner, thus the
AA No. 503 & 505/2006

Page 28 of 31

petitioner has failed to raise any `dispute’ or `difference’ within
the scope of the arbitration clause, is not acceptable and liable to
be turned down. By raising such objections, the respondents are
confusing the term “maintainability” of the claims of the
petitioner

with

“sustainability”

thereof.

This

Court

while

exercising its powers under Section 11(6) of the Act is only
required to satisfy itself that prima facie there exist live claims
between the parties to be decided by the arbitral Tribunal and
that the parties are at issues on certain matters. It is, however,
not for this Court to decide the sustainability of the claims raised
by the petitioner in the present proceedings.
27.

Having considered the disputes raised by the petitioner,

this Court is prima facie of the opinion that they are not time
barred.

Nor is

there any accord and satisfaction between the

parties regarding their mutual rights and obligations, subject
matter of the Agreement. Thus certain live issues can be stated
to exist for adjudication by the arbitral Tribunal. Having arrived
at the aforesaid conclusion, and the respondents having failed to
appoint an Arbitrator within 30 days from the date a notice was
AA No. 503 & 505/2006

Page 29 of 31

received by them from the petitioner invoking the arbitration
clause governing the parties or even subsequently, but prior to
institution of the present petition, in view of the judgments of the
Supreme Court in the cases of Datar Switchgears Ltd. Versus Tata
Finance Ltd. & Anr., reported in IV (2000) CLT 191 (SC)=VII

(2000) SLT 543=JT 2000 (Suppl.2) SC 226 and

in Punj

Lloyed Ltd. Versus Petronet MHB Ltd., reported in (2006) 2SCC
682 and the judgment of a Division Bench of this Court in the
case of Delkon (India) Pvt. Ltd. Versus G.M. Bharat Heavy
Electricals Ltd., reported in 120 (2005) DLT 542 (DB), it is left
to this Court to do the needful.
28.

Taking into consideration the facts and circumstances

of the case, both the petitions are allowed.
Sabharwal (Retd. CJI)

Mr.Justice Y.K.

is appointed as the sole Arbitrator to

adjudicate all the disputes arising between the parties. The
parties shall equally share the fee of the Arbitrator. The parties
shall appear before the Arbitrator on 18.3.2008, at 4.30p.m. The
Registry is directed to forward a copy of the judgment to the
AA No. 503 & 505/2006

Page 30 of 31

learned Arbitrator forthwith. The parties are also directed to
intimate the learned Arbitrator about the order.

29.

The petitions are disposed of.

March _______, 2008
mk

AA No. 503 & 505/2006

(HIMA KOHLI)
JUDGE

Page 31 of 31

