IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+

Execution Petition No.4 of 2006
Reserved on
: 14.02.2008
Date of decision : 25.02.2008

IN THE MATTER OF :
#VIJAY GUPTA
!

.... Decree Holder
Through Mr.Chandan Kumar,
Advocate
Versus

$RENU MALHOTRA
^

*

..... Judgment Debtor
Through Mr.Deepender Hooda,
Proxy Counsel, Advocate

CORAM
HON'BLE MS.JUSTICE HIMA KOHLI
1. Whether Reporters of Local papers may
be allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes
Yes

HIMA KOHLI, J
:
1.
By this order, the objection raised by the
counsel for the judgment debtor with regard to the
maintainability of the present execution petition in this

Ex.P. No.4/2006

Page 1 of 16

Court on the ground of

lack of pecuniary jurisdiction is

being decided.
2.

The genesis of the dispute subjection matter of

the present petition, arose in the year 1998, when the
decree holder filed a petition under Section 11 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (for short `the Act')
before this Court in December, 1998, seeking appointment
of an Arbitrator.

For the purpose of jurisdiction and

valuation, the decree holder valued the petition at more
than Rs.5 lakhs. It is relevant to note that at that point in
time, this Court had the pecuniary jurisdiction to entertain
suits the value of which exceeded Rs. 5 lakhs.

Consequent

to the filing of the aforesaid petition, vide order dated
27.2.2002, an Arbitrator was appointed to adjudicate the
disputes inter-se the parties.
3.

During

the

pendency

of

the

arbitration

proceedings, the judgment debtor approached this Court on
two occasions for seeking certain orders.

On the first

occasion, the judgment debtor filed a petition under Section

Ex.P. No.4/2006

Page 2 of 16

27 of the Act for summoning four additional witnesses,
being OMP No.297/2003. The said petition was allowed by
order dated 13.1.2005.

Thereafter, the judgment debtor

filed another petition under Section 37 (2) (b) of the Act
assailing an order dated 28.9.2004, passed by the Arbitral
Tribunal, being OMP No.382/2004.

The aforesaid petition

was disposed of vide order dated 27.3.2006, directing the
judgment debtor to place the undertaking given to the
Court on an affidavit, to the effect that the judgment debtor
shall not transfer or create any third party interest in the
assets of Manoranjan Cabel Network during the pendency of
the present Execution Petition.
4.

During the pendency of OMP No.382/2004, the

Arbitrator passed an award dated 31.8.2005 execution of
which is sought by the decree holder who filed the present
petition on 2.1.2006.

In the meantime, the judgment

debtor assailed the aforesaid award by filing a petition
under Section 34 of the Act

in this Court on 28.11.2005.

However, the aforesaid petition was taken back by the

Ex.P. No.4/2006

Page 3 of 16

judgment debtor from the Registry under objections and
was thereafter filed in the Court of the District Judge, Delhi
and numbered as OMP No.164/2005. Before the learned
Additional District Judge, the judgment debtor made a
request for withdrawing the petition on the ground that as
the matter had earlier been proceeded with by the High
Court under Section 11 of the Act, the District Court did not
have the jurisdiction to try the petition.

The petition was

returned to the Judgment debtor by the Additional District
Judge to be filed before the appropriate Court. A perusal of
the following order passed by the learned Additional District
Judge on 18.4.2006, is relevant:“ Counsel for the petitioner submits that
he accedes to the plea of the respondent
that this court does not have the
jurisdiction to try this petition; in as much
as the matter had been earlier proceeded
by the Hon'ble High Court u/s 11 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act and hence,
this petition should be filed before the
Hon'ble High Court.
In the circumstances, he prays to
withdraw the petition to file the same
before the Hon'ble High Court.
His
Ex.P. No.4/2006

Page 4 of 16

statement
separately.

to

this

effect

recorded

Counsel for the respondent objects to
the said permission stating that this court
does not have jurisdiction to pass any
order in this case as this court does not
have the jurisdiction in the matter at all.
Heard. In my opinion, the returning of
the plaint would not amount to any order
on the subject matter of the said petition,
but, only with respect to the fact that this
court does not have the jurisdiction and
the petition be filed before the appropriate
court having the jurisdiction to try this
petition.
The petition is accordingly,
returned to the petitioner to be filed before
the
appropriate
court.
Arbitration
proceedings be returned to the Arbitrator.
File be consigned to the record room.”
5.

A review of the aforesaid order dated 18.4.2006

passed by the learned Additional District Judge, was sought
by the Judgment Debtor who filed a review application
which was rejected vide order dated 22.3.2007. Counsel
for the judgment debtor stated that, aggrieved by the
aforesaid order of rejection of the review application, an
appeal was preferred by him and is pending in this Court,

Ex.P. No.4/2006

Page 5 of 16

being FAO No.155/2007.
6.

Counsel for the Decree Holder drew the attention

of this Court to the provisions of Sections 27, 37 and 42
read with Section 2 (e) of the Act to state that the aforesaid
provisions which are contained in Part I of the Act, when
read collectively, indicate that the word `Court' as defined
in Section 2 (e) of the Act, for the purposes of the present
petition, is none other than the High Court and hence this
Court has the pecuniary jurisdiction to entertain the
Execution Petition.

He also stated that the aforesaid

conclusion is backed by the conduct of the judgment debtor
herself who not only filed petitions under Sections 27 and
37 (2) (b) of the Act in this Court during the pendency of
the arbitral proceedings, but after passing of the award,
initially filed the Section 34 petition in this Court, then
withdrew it and filed it in the District Court and again
withdrew it from there to enable her to file it back in the
High Court.

Ex.P. No.4/2006

Reliance was placed on Section 42 of the Act

Page 6 of 16

which reads as below:
“Section 42- Jurisdiction- Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this
Part or in any other law for the time being
in force, where with respect to an
arbitration agreement any application
under this Part has been made in a Court,
that Court alone shall have jurisdiction
over the arbitral proceedings and all
subsequent applications arising out of
that
agreement
and
the
arbitral
proceedings shall be made in that Court
and in no other Court.”
7.

Counsel for the judgment debtor on the other

hand submitted that merely because an Arbitrator was
appointed by this Court

on a petition preferred by the

decree holder under Section 11 of the Act, and/or merely
because the judgment debtor filed applications before this
Court during the pendency of the arbitral proceedings and
withdrew her petition under Section 34 of the Act from the
District Court for being filed before the appropriate forum,
the provisions contained in Section 42 of the Act will not be
applicable and

this Court will not be vested with the

jurisdiction to entertain a petition under Section 34 of the

Ex.P. No.4/2006

Page 7 of 16

Act, or for that matter, the present execution petition. In
support of his contention, he placed reliance on the order
dated 3.1.2006, passed in OMP No.55/2005, entitled NDMC
Versus D.K. Construction Company, as also the judgment
reported at 2002 (3) ALR 8 (Delhi) entitled National
Thermal Power Corporation Versus R.S. Avtar Singh and
Anr. Counsel for the judgment debtor also placed reliance
on the judgment reported at 87 (2000) DLT 405 entitled
Kinetic Capital Finance Ld. Versus Anil Kumar Misra

and

125 (2005) DLT 511 entitled Apparel Export Promotion
Council

Versus

Prabhati

Furnishers and Anr.

Patni,

Proprietor

Comfort

to state that arbitral award of which

the decree holder seeks execution can only be enforced by
the Civil Judge and not this Court.
8.

I have heard the rival contentions of the parties

and have perused the documents placed on record. As
stated above, the question that arises for consideration
herein is confined to whether this Court has the pecuniary
jurisdiction to entertain the present execution petition, or

Ex.P. No.4/2006

Page 8 of 16

not.
9.

There is no dispute on the fact that the value of

the claims involved were less than Rs.20 lakhs and the
amount awarded by the Arbitrator is also below Rs.20
lakhs.

It is therefore necessary to see as to which Court

would be “the Court” within the meaning of Section 2(e) of
the Act for the purposes of executing

the award, i.e,

whether it is this Court as the decree holder contended, or
is it the District Court, as contended by the judgment
debtor.
10.

Section 2 (e) of the Act reads as below:“court” means the principal Civil
Court of original jurisdiction in a
district, and includes the High Court
in exercise of its ordinary original
civil jurisdiction, having jurisdiction
to decide the questions forming the
subject-matter of the arbitration if
the same had been the subject
matter of a suit, but does not
include any Civil Court of a grade
inferior to such principal Civil Court,
or any Court of Small Causes;

11.

A bare reading of Section 2(e) of the Act shows

Ex.P. No.4/2006

Page 9 of 16

that a Court having jurisdiction would mean the Court
having jurisdiction to decide the questions forming subject
matter of the arbitration, if the same had been the subject
matter of a suit, being the “principal Civil Court of original
jurisdiction”.
12.

Counsel for the decree holder relied on Section

42 of the Act and

sought to derive strength from the

conduct of the judgment debtor in submitting that as an
application under Section 11 of the Act for appointment of
an Arbitrator was filed by him before this Court and not
opposed by the judgment debtor, and also since the
judgment

debtor

had

herself

filed

applications

under

Section 27 and Section 37(2)(b) of the Act in this Court
during the pendency of the arbitral proceedings, therefore,
as per the provisions of Section 42 of the Act, this Court
has the jurisdiction over all the arbitral proceedings and all
the subsequent applications arising out of the arbitral
proceedings including the present execution petition. Much
emphasis was laid on the fact that the judgment debtor had

Ex.P. No.4/2006

Page 10 of 16

also filed a petition under Section 34 of the Act in this
Court, which was taken back by her from the Registry and
thereafter filed in the District Court, but was withdrawn
from there subsequently with liberty to file the same before
the appropriate Court, thus conceding that the District
Court was not the appropriate forum having jurisdiction to
entertain the same.
13.
Thermal

In view of the judgment in the case of National
Power

Corporation

(supra),

which

has

been

consistently followed in various judgments of this Court, it
is well settled that the expression “Chief Justice” as
contained in Section 11 of the Act, is not synonymous with
the term the “Court” as defined in Section 2(e) of the Act,
and therefore merely because an Arbitrator has been
appointed by the High Court, the same in itself would not
be sufficient to vest jurisdiction with the High Court to
entertain any other/ subsequent applications relating to the
said arbitral proceedings in which the Arbitrator was
appointed, irrespective of the pecuniary limits on its

Ex.P. No.4/2006

Page 11 of 16

jurisdiction.
14.

Moving on to the argument of the counsel for

the decree holder that the judgment debtor having herself
filed applications under Section 27 and Section 37(2)(b) of
the Act in this Court, which were duly entertained and
having withdrawn her objections under Section 34 of the
Act from the District Court, to file it before the appropriate
Court, is sufficient to negate the objection raised on her
behalf with respect to lack of pecuniary jurisdiction of this
Court, a reference to the judgment rendered in the case of
Apparel Export Promotion Council (supra) is relevant. In the
said case, the Court when confronted with the issue as to
whether the mere filing of objections under Section 34 of
the Act in this Court would clothe the Court with the
jurisdiction to entertain the disputes interse the parties, in
view of the provisions of Section 42 of the Act, observed as
under:
“21….. A reading of Section 42 makes it
clear that it is a non-obstante provision
and that it indicates that if any application
Ex.P. No.4/2006

Page 12 of 16

is submitted under Part I (which includes
an application under Section 34) in a
court, then that court alone would have
jurisdiction over the arbitral proceedings
and all subsequent applications arising out
of the arbitral agreement and the arbitral
proceedings shall be made in that court
and in no other court. Mr Rawal has
construed this provision to mean that
since the petitioner had filed his objections
under Section 34 first in this court and the
respondent had thereafter filed its
objections in the court at Jaipur, this court
and this court alone would have
jurisdiction and the court at Jaipur,
notwithstanding
anything
contained
elsewhere or in any other law for the time
being in force, would not have jurisdiction.
I am unable to agree with this submission
of Mr Rawal. The primary reason being
that Section 42 also uses the word
'court' which has to be construed in
terms of the definition in Section
2(e). This court (i.e., Delhi High
Court), clearly, is not the 'court', in
the facts of the present case, which is
referred to in Section 2(e) of the said
Act. Therefore, the mere filing of the
petition under Section 34 in this court
would not clothe this court with
jurisdiction in respect of the disputes
between the parties for all times to
come. Mere filing of the objections
under Section 34 in a wrong court
would not clothe that court with
jurisdiction.
This
court
does
not
otherwise have jurisdiction as indicated
above and, therefore, the mere fact that
Ex.P. No.4/2006

Page 13 of 16

the petition under Section 34 has been
filed here would not confer jurisdiction on
this court.” (emphasis added)

15.

It can thus be deduced that simply because

applications under Section 27 and 37(2)(b) of the Act were
filed by the judgment debtor in this Court during the
pendency of the arbitral proceedings, would not confer
pecuniary jurisdiction on this Court, as this Court otherwise
does not have the jurisdiction in respect of matters having
value below Rs.5 lakhs.

Merely because this Court

exercised jurisdiction in deciding the aforesaid applications,
during the pendency of the arbitral proceedings ipso facto is
not sufficient to arrive at a conclusion that this Court must
exercise jurisdiction in the present petition as well. Also, as
rightly pointed out by the learned counsel for the judgment
debtor, it was for the decree holder to have raised
objections against the exercise of jurisdiction by this Court
in the aforesaid applications at that stage, if available to
him in law, and only because the aforesaid applications
were entertained by this Court, does not mean that this
Ex.P. No.4/2006

Page 14 of 16

Court is vested with the jurisdiction to entertain the present
petition as well.
16.

Thus, the conduct of the judgment holder, by

itself, would not vest jurisdiction in this Court, which it lacks
inherently in view of the pecuniary limits placed on it by
virtue of the Notification dated 25.5.2003, amending the
Delhi High Court Act, 1966 and enhancing the ordinary
original civil jurisdiction of this Court from Rs.5 lakhs to
Rs.20 lakhs.

It is settled law that consent, waiver or

acquiescence on the part of parties cannot vest jurisdiction
in a Court that inherently lacks it. Thus, the conduct of the
judgment debtor, as described above in filing the aforesaid
two applications in this Court or in withdrawing the petition
filed under Section 34 of the Act from the District Court
with liberty to file it in an appropriate Court would not
clothe this Court with jurisdiction in the present matter, as
it is not the “principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction” as
defined under Section 2(e) of the Act for the purpose of
entertaining and deciding the present petition.

Ex.P. No.4/2006

Page 15 of 16

17.

In light of the aforesaid discussion and the

position of law as discussed above, the inevitable conclusion
is that this Court does not have the pecuniary jurisdiction to
entertain the present execution petition. Consequently, the
Registry is directed

to return the petition to the decree

holder for being filed before the appropriate Court.

February 25, 2008.
`ns'

Ex.P. No.4/2006

(HIMA KOHLI)
JUDGE

Page 16 of 16

