IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CS(OS) No. 1739/1998
Reserved on
Date of decision

:
:

7.02.2008
28 .02.2008

IN THE MATTER OF :
# Juliana Loiseau
!

....... Plaintiff.
Through Mr.B. Bhattacharya, Sr.Adv.with
Mr.Joy Basu and Mr.Madhurendra Kumar,
Advocates
Versus

$ The British High Commission & Ors..........
^

Defendants

Through Mr.P.Nagesh, Advocate.

CORAM
* HON'BLE MS.JUSTICE HIMA KOHLI
1.Whether Reporters of Local papers may be allowed to see
the Judgment? Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes

CS(OS) No. 1739/1998

Page 1 of 22

HIMA KOHLI, J.
:1.

The present suit is instituted by the plaintiff praying

inter alia for a decree of damages/compensation for an amount of
Rs.71,00,000/- together with pre-suit, pendente lite and future
interest in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendants on
account of the loss of salary, provident fund, gratuity benefits,
future job prospects, pension benefits etc., claimed by

the

plaintiff.
2.

The undisputed facts leading to the institution of the

present suit are that vide letter of appointment dated 8.10.1982
(Ex.P-1), the plaintiff was appointed as a Staff Nurse Grade-III
with the defendant no.1, The British High Commission, New Delhi,
w.e.f. 1.11.1982. Enclosed with the said letter of appointment,
was a Booklet containing the conditions of service for Locally
Engaged Staff (Ex.P-2).

The said appointment was subject to

probation for a period of twelve months, which period was
completed by the plaintiff on 1.11.1983.

Thereafter, vide letter

dated 2.11.1983 (Ex.P-4), the plaintiff was confirmed in the
CS(OS) No. 1739/1998

Page 2 of 22

service of the defendant no.1 as Nurse Grade III. The plaintiff
became a member of the defendant’s Staff Provident Fund, vide
letter dated 2.11.1983, (Ex.P-5). After the plaintiff

continued

working with the defendant no.1 for a period of about 12 years, a
letter dated 07.08.1995 (Ex.P-11) was issued to her whereby the
plaintiff was intimated on behalf of the defendant no.1 that her
service was being terminated by invoking the terms of para 3 of
the letter of appointment dated 08.10.1982, issued to her.
Aggrieved by the said termination of her services, the plaintiff has
instituted the present suit against the defendant, after obtaining
necessary

sanctions

from

the Ministry

of

External

Affairs,

Government of India, which was accorded by the Ministry vide its
letter dated 18.3.1998 (Ex.PW-3/1).
3.

Vide order dated 7.8.2002, the following issues were

framed :“(i) Whether the suit is bad for mis-joinder of
parties? OPD
(ii) Whether termination of service of plaintiff by
the defendant is in violation of terms and
CS(OS) No. 1739/1998

Page 3 of 22

conditions of appointment letter dated 8.10.1982
and principles of natural justice? OPP
(iii) If issue No.2 is decided in favour of the
plaintiff, then to what amount of damages and
compensation is the plaintiff entitled to? OPP”

4.

In support of her case, the plaintiff stepped in the

witness box as PW-1. Her husband, Mr.R.Loiseau deposed in her
favour as PW-2.

PW-3, Sh.S.D. Moorthy, Protocol Officer,

Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India was summoned
by the plaintiff to prove the letter dated 18.3.1998, issued by the
Ministry giving its consent to the plaintiff under Section 86 (2) of
the CPC for instituting the present suit against the British High
Commission. The said letter dated 18.3.1998, was exhibited as
Ex.PW-3/1.

On their part, the defendants produced Sh.Ian

Douglas Kydd,

Counselor (Management) of defendant no.1 as

DW-1. Both the parties cross examined the witnesses produced
by the other side.

CS(OS) No. 1739/1998

Page 4 of 22

5.

It may be stated at the outset that issue No.1, onus of

which was on the defendants was not pressed by the counsel for
the defendants and no arguments were addressed on the said
issue, thus leaving issues No.2 & 3 for adjudication.

As issues

No.2 and 3 are interlinked, issue No.3 flowing from issue No.2,
they are being decided collectively.
6.

Learned counsel for the plaintiff argued that the act of

the defendants in terminating the services of the plaintiff was in
disregard of paras 3 and 16 of the letter of appointment dated
8.10.1982 (Ex.P-1) and in gross violation of the Rules contained
in the Conditions of Service Rule Book (Ex.P-2) (hereinafter
referred to as “the Rules”), particularly Rule 19 thereof, which
was an integral part of the letter of appointment.

It was

submitted that though para 3 of the said letter of appointment
provided that the appointment may be terminated before
completion of probationary period without notice or cause
assigned, but termination of services without giving any reasons,
or any notice to show cause, after a period of 12 years of
CS(OS) No. 1739/1998

Page 5 of 22

rendering regular service amounted to illegality and arbitrariness.
It was further submitted that it was incumbent upon the
defendants to disclose reasons for terminating the services of the
plaintiff and to afford her an opportunity to defend herself by
granting a hearing, in absence of which, the basic principles of
natural justice stood violated. It was contended by the counsel for
the plaintiff that on confirmation, para 3 of the letter of
appointment dated 8.10.1982 became inapplicable to the plaintiff
and any termination thereafter could only be done by invoking
the provisions of Rule 19 of the Rules.
7.

Much emphasis was laid on Rule 19 of the Rules to

state that the plaintiff was neither warned asking her to explain
her conduct/performance, nor was she given a notice to show
cause before a final decision was taken by the defendants for
terminating the services of the plaintiff. It was urged that
termination simpliciter was in violation of the said Rule 19, which
was an integral part of the appointment letter, and any
termination done de hors the said rule, was bad in law. Reliance
CS(OS) No. 1739/1998

Page 6 of 22

in this regard was placed by the counsel for the plaintiff on the
following judgments:
(i) Assam Oil Company, Ltd. v. Its Workmen, 1960 1 LLJ
587
(ii)Chartered Bank, Bombay v. Chartered Bank Employees’
Union and Anr, 1960 1 LLJ 222
(iii)T.P. Daver v. Lodge Victoria No. 363, S.C. Belgaum
and Ors., AIR 1963 SC 1144
(iv)Gujrat Steel Tubes Ltd. v. Gujrat Steel Tubes Mazdoor
Sabha, (1980) 1 LLJ 137

8.

Learned counsel for the plaintiff also contended that

there appears to be an agenda behind the act of the defendants
in terminating the services of the plaintiff and this was sought to
be substantiated by relying on various letters addressed by the
defendants to the plaintiffs (Ex.P-7 to Ex.P-10), to contend that
the conduct of the plaintiff was exemplary throughout the period
of her service.

CS(OS) No. 1739/1998

Page 7 of 22

9.

Per contra, counsel for the defendants stated that the

act of the defendants in terminating the services of the plaintiff
was neither contrary to law, nor to the terms & conditions of the
appointment letter issued to the plaintiff. It was submitted that
the termination of the plaintiff was not in violation of paras 3 and
16 of the said letter of appointment dated 8.10.1982 (Ex.P-1)
and that the letter of confirmation dated 2.11.1983 (Ex. P-4) only
reiterated that the plaintiff’s employment was on the terms and
conditions as laid down in her initial letter of appointment.
Attention of the Court was drawn to para 3 of the said letter of
appointment to state that it clearly stipulated that even after
completion of the probationary period, the services of the plaintiff
could be terminated by either side by giving one month’s notice
in writing.

10.

With regard to the plaintiff’s contention that her

termination was not in accordance with Rule 19 of the Rules,
learned counsel for the defendants submitted that the plaintiff’s
case was not covered under the said Rule 19, but was rather
CS(OS) No. 1739/1998

Page 8 of 22

governed by Rule 5 which provides that even after the initial
probation

period

is

over,

the

appointment

could

still

be

terminated by either party by giving one month’s notice. It was
contended that there was no hiatus between the end of the
probation period of the plaintiff and the commencement of the
period of her permanent appointment as sought to be urged on
behalf of the plaintiff.

11.

It was further stated on behalf of the defendants that

there was no need to serve a notice to show cause on the
plaintiff, or to afford her an opportunity of hearing, since the
termination of her service was a termination simpliciter, done
strictly in accordance in with the terms of the contract, and was
not stigmatic in nature. It was also stated that the plaintiff was
entitled only to payment of gratuity under the conditions of
service applicable to her, which amount has already been paid to
her, and that no pension as claimed by her was payable under
the said conditions of service.

CS(OS) No. 1739/1998

Page 9 of 22

12.

Learned

counsel

for

the

defendants

sought

to

distinguish the judgments relied on by the counsel for the plaintiff
by stating that in all of those judgments, the remedy being
pursued

was

under

the

Industrial

Disputes

Act,

and

the

proceedings were under Article 226 of the Constitution of India,
unlike the present case, which is to be decided strictly in
accordance with terms of the contract governing the parties.
13.

In rejoinder, counsel for the plaintiff emphasized on the

fact that principles of natural justice are applicable even to
contractual matters. Reliance was also placed on the Terminal
Gratuity Form to contend that there was a requirement for giving
reasons for termination of service even under the said form,
which was not complied with by the defendants.
14.

I have heard the counsels for both the parties and have

carefully perused the documents placed on record along with the
evidence adduced by the parties.
15.

As a decision on the entire issue hinges on the letter of

appointment dated 8.10.1982 (Ex.P1), and the interpretation of
CS(OS) No. 1739/1998

Page 10 of 22

Rules 5 and 19 of the Rules (Ex.P-2), it is necessary to refer to
the relevant clauses. Paras 3 and 16 of the letter of appointment
dated 8.10.1982 read as below:
“3. The appointment is temporary and is subject
to 12 months' probation. It carries no right to
permanent appointment or promotion nor to
pension or gratuity on its termination. The
appointment may be terminated on or before the
completion of the probationary period without
notice or cause assigned. Thereafter it may be
terminated by one month's notice in writing on
either side.”
XXX
16 The terms of this offer are personal to
yourself and are not necessarily the same as
those under which other staff in the High
Commission are employed. Enclosed is a booklet
which sets out the main conditions of service of
locally engaged staff.”

16.

Rules 5.1 and 19 of the Conditions of Service for Locally

Engaged Staff as contained in the Rules are as under:
5. Probation-Termination of Appointment
5.1 All locally-engaged staff appointments are
subject to the satisfactory completion of a
probationary period of one year. The
CS(OS) No. 1739/1998

Page 11 of 22

appointment may be terminated on or before
the completion of the probationary period
without notice or cause assigned. If, at the
end of the initial probation period, the officer's
performance, though promising, is still not
entirely satisfactory, the probation period may
be extended up to 3 months. After such
extension the appointment of any officer who
still cannot be considered entirely suitable
must
be
terminated.
Thereafter,
the
appointment will be terminable on one
month's notice in writing by either party.
Neither party is required to give any reason
for the termination of the appointment.
However, an employee who is guilty of wilful
misconduct, disobedience or neglect of duty
may be dismissed immediately and without
notice. Any leave due must be taken during
the period of notice unless prior approval to
the contrary has been obtained. Staff may not
receive payment in lieu of earned leave due to
them on termination.

19: Service and Discipline
Officers are expected to perform their duties
diligently and conscientiously to the best of
their ability and to obey instructions relating to
their duties and conduct given them by their
superiors. If an officer is not giving
satisfactory service, he will be warned by his
superior officer. Continued unsatisfactory
service could lead to the withholding of an
increment which is due or to termination of
appointment. Likewise, breaches of discipline
CS(OS) No. 1739/1998

Page 12 of 22

may lead to the withholding of an increment or
transfer to another department, and in serious
cases may be recorded in writing on the
officer's personal file or lead to dismissal.
Officers are given every opportunity to provide
an explanation of unacceptable conduct before
a final decision is reached.”

17.

A perusal of the letter of appointment dated 8.10.1982

shows that the plaintiff was governed not only by the terms and
conditions contained in the said letter but also by the conditions
of service contained in the Rules. A perusal of the letter dated
8.10.1982 also shows that the appointment of the plaintiff was
initially temporary and subject to probation for a period of 12
months and that her appointment was liable to be terminated on
or before the completion of the period of probation without any
notice or cause assigned. However, it was clarified that after the
period of probation was over, the services of the plaintiff could be
terminated by issuance of one month's notice in writing on either
side. The interpretation sought to be given by the counsel for the
plaintiff to the aforesaid Rule 3 that on the confirmation of the
CS(OS) No. 1739/1998

Page 13 of 22

plaintiff, the said Rule 3 became inapplicable to the plaintiff and
could not be invoked by the defendants and that the services of
the plaintiff could only be terminated in the manner as laid down
in Rule 19 of the Rules, is not borne out from a collective reading
of the aforesaid documents. The said conclusion is fortified by a
reading of Rule 1 of the Rules which states as below:
“Conditions of Service for Locally Engaged
Staff in India
“1. General
“This booklet contains the main conditions of
service of locally engaged staff employed at
British Diplomatic Service Posts in India: the
High Commission in Delhi, Deputy High
Commissions in Bombay, Calcutta and Madras.
These conditions follow generally the practice
of good local employers.

...A letter of appointment is issued to all staff
on engagement; this sets out conditions of
service which will apply to the employee
personally.”

CS(OS) No. 1739/1998

Page 14 of 22

18.

The aforesaid Rule 1 read with para 16 of the letter of

appointment of the plaintiff makes it clear that while the Rules
contained the main conditions of service as applicable to the
plaintiff, the conditions of service set out in the letter of
appointment were specifically applicable to the plaintiff alone.
Thus for the plaintiff to contend that as the period of probation of
the plaintiff was one year with effect from 1.11.1982 and she was
confirmed by the defendant No.1 vide letter dated 2.11.1983, the
word “thereafter” used in the last line of para 3 of the letter of
appointment (Ex.P-1) ought to be interpreted to mean the period
between the end of the probation period of the plaintiff and the
commencement of the period of her permanent appointment, is
unacceptable for the reason that the plaintiff was appointed on
probation basis with effect from 1.11.1982 and vide letter dated
2.11.1983 (Ex.P-4) she was confirmed in service on completion of
the period of probation on 1.11.1983. Thus it cannot be said that
there was a hiatus between the end of the period of probation
and the commencement of the period of permanent appointment
of the plaintiff.
CS(OS) No. 1739/1998

Page 15 of 22

19.

In so far as Rule 5.1 of the Rules is concerned, the

same also reiterates the position as contained in para 3 of the
letter of appointment of the plaintiff by stating clearly that the
period of probation of locally engaged staff shall be one year
which may be extended upto three months and thereafter, the
appointment will be terminable on one month's notice in writing
by either party. The said Rule further clarifies that neither party is
required to give any reasons for the termination of the
appointment. Thus for the plaintiff to contend that her letter of
termination dated 7.8.1995 (Ex.P-11) did not furnish any reasons
or that the plaintiff was entitled to be afforded an opportunity of
hearing before a final decision was taken by the defendants to
terminate her services cannot be sustained, as the terms of the
contract governing the plaintiff and the defendants itself made it
abundantly clear that no reasons were required to be given for a
decision to terminate the services of the plaintiff and only one
month's notice was required to be given in writing by either party
to terminate the appointment.

CS(OS) No. 1739/1998

Page 16 of 22

20.

Rule 19 of the Rules which are service and disciplinary

rules cannot be held to be applicable to the plaintiff inasmuch as
it is not a case where the plaintiff had not rendered satisfactory
service or had committed breach of discipline, for a warning or
punishment of withholding of increment to be issued to her.
Hence the plea of the plaintiff that an enquiry ought to have been
held and an opportunity of hearing afforded to her to provide an
explanation for her conduct as provided for in Rule 19, is not
sustainable.
21.

The judgment in the case of Gujarat Steel Tube (supra)

on which the counsel for the plaintiff placed reliance, relates to a
case where the petitioner management terminated the services of
853 workmen with one stroke of pen resulting in reference of the
disputes to arbitration under Section 10A of the Industrial
Disputes

Act.

The

Arbitrator

upheld

the

action

of

the

management resulting in the respondent union filing a writ
petition in the High Court for reversal of the Arbitrator's award.
The said writ petition filed by the respondent union was allowed
CS(OS) No. 1739/1998

Page 17 of 22

and aggrieved by the said decision, the petitioner management
approached the Supreme Court. It was in the aforesaid context
that the Supreme Court made an observation to the effect that if
the Standing Orders or terms of contract permit the employer to
terminate the services or his employee by discharge simplicitor,
without assigning reasons, it would be open to him to take
recourse to the said term or condition and terminate the services
of his employee but when the validity of such termination is
challenged

in industrial adjudication, it would be open for the

Industrial Tribunal to enquire whether the impugned discharge
was effected in bona fide exercise of the power conferred by the
terms of employment. In other words, the Industrial Tribunal
would be entitled to go behind the words and form and decide
whether it was a discharge simplicitor or not. It was in the
aforesaid factual background that the observations were made by
the Supreme Court. However, the facts of the case in hand are
entirely different and thus the said judgment has no application.

CS(OS) No. 1739/1998

Page 18 of 22

22.

In the case of Lodge Victoria (supra), the Supreme

Court was dealing with the internal disputes of members of a
masonic lodge and in that context it considered the source of
power of associations like clubs and lodges to expel their
members. While referring to the principles governing members of
the lodge in question, the Supreme Court gave certain findings in
the peculiar facts and circumstances of the said case and also
observed that the court has to see broadly the circumstances of
each case to decide as to whether the principles of natural justice
were applied or not. Similarly, the judgments cited by the counsel
for the plaintiff in the cases of Chartered Bank (supra) and Assam
Oil Company (supra) were rendered in the context of the
Industrial Disputes Act and the issue therein related to the power
of the Industrial Tribunal to go behind the words and form to
decide whether the discharge of an employee was a discharge
simplicitor or not, as also to enquire into the bona fides as well as
justifiability of the action taken by the management.

CS(OS) No. 1739/1998

Page 19 of 22

23.

In the present case, the relationship between the

plaintiff and the defendant No.1 is strictly within the realm of a
contract between two private parties which is governed by the
terms and conditions of employment as contained in the letter of
appointment as also in the conditions of service as laid down in
the Rules. Thus the plaintiff has neither invoked the provisions of
Article 311 of the Constitution of India or those contained in the
Industrial Disputes Act or any Statute. The dispute between the
plaintiff and the defendant No.1 would therefore squarely fall
within the four corners of a contract which has to be construed by
the Court strictly as per the terms and conditions contained in the
contract.
24.

Having arrived at a finding that the terms and

conditions of the contract governing the appointment of the
plaintiff permitted the defendant No.1 to terminate the services
of the plaintiff by giving one month's notice and without stating
any reasons for the termination, then issue No.2 has to be
decided against the plaintiff.
CS(OS) No. 1739/1998

It is held that the termination of
Page 20 of 22

service of the plaintiff by the defendant is not in violation of the
terms and conditions of the appointment letter dated 8.10.1982,
nor have the principles of natural justice been violated by the
defendants.
25.

Pertaining to issue No.3, in so far as the claims of the

plaintiff towards payment of arrears of provident fund and
gratuity are concerned, the counsel for the plaintiff stated that
she has received the entire arrears due and payable to her till the
date of the termination of her service. It is also not denied that
pension was not payable to the plaintiff under the conditions of
service. Once it has been held that the termination of the service
of the plaintiff is not contrary to the contract of service and the
same is valid and legal, and once issue No.2 has been decided
against the plaintiff, there arises no question of granting
consequential relief as sought by the plaintiff for a decree of
damages/compensation against the defendants to the tune of
Rs.71,00,000/- on account of loss of salary, loss of PF benefits,
loss of future job prospects, loss of pension or mental torture for
CS(OS) No. 1739/1998

Page 21 of 22

the period after the date of termination of her services, i.e. after
7.8.1995. Thus issue No.3 is also decided against the plaintiff.
26.

As a result of the aforesaid discussion, the suit is

dismissed. Parties are left to bear their own costs.

February

28 , 2008

mk

CS(OS) No. 1739/1998

(HIMA KOHLI)
JUDGE

Page 22 of 22

