*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

%
+

Date of Reserve : 21.1.2008
Date of Decision : 08.02.2008
WP(C) No.17349/2006
Ex. Sepoy Anand Pal

....

Petitioner

...

Respondents

Versus
1.
2.
3.

Union of India
Chief of Army Staff
GOC Delhi Area,

Advocates who appeared in this case :
For the petitioner

: Major K. Ramesh, Advocate.

For the respondents : Ms. Maneesha Dhir with Mr. Sumit Attri
and Major S.S. Pandey, Advocate
CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K. SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE J.M. MALIK
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

J.M. MALIK, J.
*
1.
The indisputable facts of this case are these.
WP(C) No.17349/2006

Ex. Sepoy

Page 1 of 13

Anand Pal, the petitioner who is posted as Havildar / Clerk was
indicted for accepting an illegal gratification of Rs.20,000/-. He
was tried by a Summary Court Martial.

The petitioner pleaded

'guilty' and he was sentenced, “To be reduced to ranks”.

The

petitioner does not pick up a dispute with these facts.
2.

The GOC Delhi area while exercising administrative power

awarded another punishment of “dismissal from service” under
Section 20(3) of the Army Act, 1950 (hereinafter to be referred as
Army Act) read with Rule 17 of Army Rules for the same charge.
Aggrieved by that order the present petition was filed with the
prayer that punishment awarded by the GOC Delhi, dated
06.06.2006 be quashed and the petitioner be granted pensionary
benefits and other fiscal retrial benefits with immediate effect.
3.

We have heard the counsel for the parties and considered

the written synopsis filed by the counsel for the petitioner. The
only question raised by the petitioner is whether the second
punishment by way of dismissal from service after a full fledged
operative and executed sentence by a Summary Court Martial
would amount to a double jeopardy in terms of Article 20(2) of
Indian Constitution. In this regard the counsel for the petitioner
has made four submissions which are reproduced below :WP(C) No.17349/2006

Page 2 of 13

“A. The same GOC was well within his
plenary powers to convene even a General
Court Martial for the purpose but when once
ordered for a Summary Court Martial by way
of promissory estoppel he cannot take a
volte face stand just because he is 'unhappy'
with the punishment.
B.
The Summary Court Martial has the
powers to award a sentence of Dismissal
from service with even 1 year RI but having
considered his past record of exemplary
service of 20 years without any red ink
entry(page 14) he was awarded 'To be
reduced to ranks' which is legally correct
and cannot be tinkered with. Moreover any
finding/sentence of a Summary Court Martial
does not require confirmation. Here it has
been even promulgated by tearing off his
stripes in front of the unit as per the
Promulgation Parade. So the individual has
already suffered the trauma.
C.
Inter alia as a Havildar he had 6 more
years of service upto 26 years of service but
with the reduction to ranks as a Sepoy he
can serve only upto 20 years of service. The
petitioner was enrolled on 22nd August 1986
and therefore his service has to end by 31st
August 2006, based on the consequence of
the punishment. Appreciating this fact the
Records rightly directed the petitioner for
discharge on 31st August 2006 but then this
impugned order of the GOC dated 6th June
2006 has come in the way and today he is
not getting his pension which is the only
surviving grievance of the petitioner.
D.
The two judgments quoted by counsel
for respondents are though correct but are
out of context. While referring the judgment
WP(C) No.17349/2006

Page 3 of 13

in Re UOI vs. HS Sandhu (2001) 5 SCC 593
the kind attention is drawn in “page 601”
which is important and reproduced in
Ground A (ii) in page 4 of CWP. Thus the
ibid ratio decidendi is squarely applicable
here. Prayed for in utmost humility.”
4.

Ground A (ii) in page 4 of CWP is reproduced as follows :
“A(ii) The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Re
Union of India Vs. Harjeet Singh Sandhu in
(2001) 5 SCC 593 by a Larger Bench has
held in Para G in Page 601 that, 'Once
finding and sentence are confirmed exercise
of power under Section 19 read with Army
Rule 14 is impermissible.' The Apex Court
in its elaboration of the judgment had held
that 'To permit such a course would be
violative of the principle of Double Jeopardy
and would be subversive of the efficacy of
the Court Martial proceedings, finding and
sentence.'
It is well known that for officers Section 19
read with Army Rule 14 is applicable and for
jawans Army Act Section 20 read with Army
Rule 17 is applicable.”

5.

For the following reasons, we are unable to clap any

significance to these arguments. It must be borne in mind that
“page 601” pertains to the head note of the judgment, extracted
from Para 27 at page 617.

Para 27 of Re UOI Vs. H.S.

Sandhu(supra) for rare clarity is reproduced as follows :
“27. Section 127 was to be found in the
Army Act as originally enacted which
provided that a person convicted or
WP(C) No.17349/2006

Page 4 of 13

acquitted by a Court Martial could be tried
again by a criminal court for the same
offence or on the same facts subject to
previous
sanction
of
the
Central
Government. The provision was deleted by
Act 37 of 1992. This deletion is suggestive
of the legislative intent to confer finality to
the finding and sentence of Court Martial
subject to their being confirmed and not
annulled. Power to confirm finding and
sentence of Court Martial and the power to
annul the proceedings on the ground of
being illegal or unjust, both provisions read
together indicate that the finding and
sentence of Court Martial if legal and just
have to be ordinarily confirmed but they
may be annulled on the ground of illegality
or unjustness. An obligation is cast on the
confirming authority to examine the legality
and justness of the proceedings before
confirming them. Questions of correctness,
legality and propriety of the order passed
by any Court Martial and the regularity of
any proceedings to which the order of Court
Martial relates can be raised by way of
petition under Section 164.
Once the
finding and the sentence, if any, have been
confirmed, the Court Martial being a Special
Tribunal dispensing military justice, it would
not be permissible to exercise additionally
the power conferred by Section 19 read
with Rule 14 and to inflict a penalty
thereunder if the Court Martial has not
chosen to inflict the same by way of
punishment under Section 71. To permit
such a course would be violative of the
principle of double jeopardy and would also
be subversive of the efficacy of the courtmartial proceedings, finding and sentence.
So long as a final verdict of guilty or not
guilty, pronounced by a Court Martial and
WP(C) No.17349/2006

Page 5 of 13

confirmed by the competent authority so as
to be effective is not available, the power to
proceed under Section 19 read with Rule
14(2) exists and remains available to be
exercised.”
6.

It must be borne in mind that Section 20 and Rule 17 or

Section 19 and Rule 14 of Army Act were not struck down by the
Apex Court.

The Apex Court came to the conclusion that the

question of double jeopardy will come into play only on certain
situation clarified in above quoted para. The position was further
made clear in the subsequent paras. Para 42 reads :“42. Exercise of power under Section 19
read will Rule 14 is open to judicial review
on
well-settled
para
meters
of
administrative law governing judicial review
of administrative action such as when the
exercise of power is shown to have been
vitiated by mala fides or is found to be
based wholly on extraneous and / or
irrelevant grounds or is found to be a clear
case of colourable exercise of / or abuse of
power or what is sometimes called fraud on
power i.e. where the power is exercised for
achieving an oblique end. The truth or
correctness or the adequacy of the material
available before the authority exercising
the power cannot be revalued or weighed
by the court while exercising power of
judicial review.
Even if some of the
material, on which the action is taken is
found to be irrelevant, the court would still
not interfere so long as there is some
relevant material available on which the
action can be sustained. The court would
WP(C) No.17349/2006

Page 6 of 13

presume the validity of the exercise of
power but shall not hesitate to
interfere
if
the
invalidity
or
unconstitutionality
is
clearly
demonstrated.
If two views are
possible, the court shall not interfere
by substituting its own satisfaction or
opinion for the satisfaction or opinion
of the authority exercising the power.”
7.

Now let us turn to the relevant provisions of Army Act.
Section 20(3) of the Army Act runs as follows :
“(1) The Chief of the Army Staff may
dismiss or remove from the service any
person subject to this Act, other than an
officer.
(2)

X

X

X

X

(3) An officer having power not less than a
brigade or equivalent commander or any
prescribed officer may dismiss or remove
from the service any person serving under
his command other than an officer or a
junior commissioned officer.
(4), (5), (6) & (7)

X

X

X

X

Rule 17 of the Army Act runs as follows :
“17. Dismissal or removal by Chief of the
Army Staff and by other officers – Save in
the case where a person is dismissed or
removed from service on the ground of
conduct which has led to his conviction by a
criminal court or a court-martial, no person

WP(C) No.17349/2006

Page 7 of 13

shall be dismissed or removed under subsection (1) or sub-section (3) of section 20;
unless he has been informed of the
particulars of the cause of action against
him and allowed reasonable time to state in
writing any reasons he may have to urge
against his dismissal or removal from the
service:
Provided that if in the opinion of the
officer competent to order the dismissal or
removal, it is not expedient or reasonably
practicable to comply with the provisions of
this rule, he may after certifying to that
effect, order the dismissal or removal
without complying with the procedure set
out in this rule. All cases of dismissal or
removal under this rule where the
prescribed procedure has not been complied
with shall be reported to the Central
Government.”
It must be borne in mind that in the instant case no petition
under Section 164 of the Army Act was moved.

It will not be

advisable at this late stage to direct the petitioner to move the
petition under Section 164 of the Army Act. We have, therefore,
taken on ourselves to decide the case on merits.
8.

A Division Bench of this court in case Lt. Col. V.N. Singh Vs.

Union of India and others, 2002(64) DRJ 379 (consisting of S.B.
Sinha, Chief Justice, as he then was and one of us viz. A.K. Sikri, J)
upheld the validity of Sections 153, 154 and 160 of the Army Act.

WP(C) No.17349/2006

Page 8 of 13

The last section deals with revision of finding or sentence, relied
upon three cases one pertaining to the Apex Court reported in
Captain Harish Uppal Vs. Union of India and others, 1973 (2) S.C.R
1025 and two pertaining to this court reported in Gian Chand Vs.
Union of India and others, 1983 Crl. L.J 1059 D.B and Havaldar
D.K. Srivastava Vs. Union of India, CWP No. 6999 of 2001 decided
on 06.02.2002 and made the following observations :
“7. Principle of double jeopardy, as
enumerated under Clause (2) of Article 20
of the Constitution, in our considered view,
is not attracted in the instant case. The
power of the revisional authority to revise
an order of punishment is in continuation of
the same proceedings. Only because the
delinquent officer has in the meantime
undergone punishment, the same, in our
opinion, does not bring about a situation in
terms whereof enhancement of punishment
in an appeal or revision would be
impermissible. What is provided in Clause
(2) of Article 20, is prosecution and
punishment for the same offence more than
once.
The same does not prohibit
enhancement of punishment in the same
proceedings.
Even under the Criminal
Procedure Code, the High Court, either in
exercise of its appellate or revisional
jurisdiction may enhance the punishment,
subject of course to compliance of the
principles of natural justice. The revisional
power of the High Court includes initiation
of suo moto proceedings.”

WP(C) No.17349/2006

Page 9 of 13

9.

In Union of India and others Vs. K. Murugesan, (Kant) D.B,

2004 (6) KarLJ 120, the Karnataka High Court speaking through
T.S. Thakur, J. held :
“11-A.
A plain reading of the above
would show that the same does not
envisage the conduct of any enquiry into
the facts constituting the cause of action
against him before an order of dismissal or
removal from service can be made. All that
is required is that the official concerned is
informed of the particulars of the cause of
action and allowed reasonable time to state
in writing the reasons he may have to urge
against his dismissal or removal. Proviso to
Section 17 in fact makes it clear that even
the requirement of informing the official
concerned of the particulars of the cause of
action against him may be dispensed with
provided the officer competent to order the
dismissal records a certificate to the effect
that it is not expedient or reasonably
practicable to comply with the same. The
argument that Rule 17 envisaged the
conduct of an enquiry before an order of
dismissal could be passed must therefore
be rejected. The provision satisfies bare
minimal requirements of natural justice
before an order of dismissal is passed
against the officials concerned.
The
decisions of the Supreme Court in Lekh Raj
Khurana v. Union of India, AIR 1971 SC
2111 and Union of India and Anr. v. K.S.
Subramanian, AIR 1976 SC 2433 have
authoritatively held that in the absence of
protection conferred under Article 311 of
the Constitution, the principles of natural
justice cannot be invoked to widen the
scope of enquiry or the opportunity
WP(C) No.17349/2006

Page 10 of 13

10.

available to an affected person over and
above that prescribed by the relevant rules.
To the same effect is the decision of High
Court of Andhra Pradesh in V.Y. Thomas v.
Commandant, A.D.C. Centre, Secunderabad
and Anr., 1982 Lab.I.C 632 A.P. It follows
that an order of dismissal passed under
Section 20 of the Army Act read with Rule
17 of the Rules framed thereunder may be
validly
passed
upon
satisfying
the
requirements of a notice to the person
affected and informing him about the cause
of action on the basis whereof the proposed
order of dismissal is sought to be made and
after allowing him time to state in writing
reasons that he may have to urge against
his dismissal or removal from service. That
requirement having been satisfied in the
instant case, there was no illegality in the
order to justify interference with the order
of dismissal impugned in the writ petition.
In as much as the learned Single Judge read
into Rule 17, the requirement of an enquiry,
he in our opinion, committed an error that
needs to be corrected in appeal.”
This High Court in a case reported in Karan Singh Vs. UOI

and others, 2000 IV A.D (Delhi) 831 decided by one of us (Hon'ble
Justice A.K. Sikri) upheld the dismissal order from service under
Section 20(3) of the Army Act read with Rule 17 of Army Rules.
The petitioner in that case was sentenced to undergo five years
imprisonment and fine for offence under Sections 376/323 Indian
Penal Code by the Additional Sessions Judge.
11.

It must be noticed that framers of the Army Act were well

WP(C) No.17349/2006

Page 11 of 13

aware of the concept of double jeopardy. That is why Section 121
of the Army Act specifically ingrained this concept, which is
reproduced as follows :

12.

“121. Prohibition of second trial – When
any person subject to this Act has been
acquitted or convicted of an offence by a
court-martial or by a criminal court, or has
been dealt with under any of the sections
80, 83, 84 and 85, he shall not be liable to
be tried again for the same offence by a
court-martial or dealt with under the said
sections.”
In V.N. Singh Vs. Union of India (supra) it was further held:

13.

“As by reason of the provisions of the Army
Act which is a complete code by itself a
detailed procedure as regards holding of
different categories of proceedings have
been laid down in terms whereof principles
of natural justice are complied with and
trials can be held in a fair manner, the
requirements of Article 21 of the
Constitution cannot be said to be violated.
It is, thus, idle to contend that the aforementioned provisions of the Act are ultra
vires. Furthermore, by reason of Section
164 of the Act, an additional protection has
been afforded to a delinquent officer and
thus, it cannot be said that thereby
executive would have a say over the
authorities
discharging
the
judicial
function.”
It thus boils down to the conclusion that above said

proceedings are without any flaw.
serious offence.

The corruption is a very

The authorities have to take punitive steps in

WP(C) No.17349/2006

Page 12 of 13

order to curb this type of crime. Corrupt influence is itself the
perennial spring of all prodigality, and of all disorder, it loads us
more than millions of debt, takes away vigor from our arms,
wisdom from our councils, and every shadow of authority and
credit from the most venerable parts of our Constitution. Again,
the accomplice to the crime of corruption is frequently our own
indifference. The writ is meritless and therefore dismissed.

J.M. MALIK, J.

A.K. SIKRI, J.
February 08, 2008
dk

WP(C) No.17349/2006

Page 13 of 13

