*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

%
+

Date of Reserve : 16.1.2008
Date of Decision : 08.02.2008
WP(C) No.3196/2006
BIJENDER SINGH

....

Petitioner

Versus
1.

UNION OF INDIA

2.

CHIEF OF ARMY STAFF

3.

SENIOR RECORDS OFFICER

...

Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case :
For the petitioner

: Mr.Gyanender Singh, Advocate

For the respondents : Ms.Barkha Babbar, Advocate
CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K. SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE J.M. MALIK
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

J.M. MALIK, J.
*
1.
Sanjay Kumar was enrolled as Sepoy in Indian Army on 20th
[WP(C) No.3196/2006

Page 1 of 7]

April, 1994. He sacrificed his life in an encounter with terrorists.
He was married to Smt. Hemlata Devi only five months and nine
days earlier to his death.

After his death his wife left the

matrimonial house and all the terminal benefits were given to her.
However, Sanjay Kumar, deceased, had made his mother Smt.
Rajbiri Devi, wife of Shri Bijender Singh, the petitioner in this case,
as the nominee and had declared the petitioner as dependant on
his wife. After the death of the sepoy, a dispute arose between
Smt. Hemlata, the wife of the deceased and smt. Rajbiri Devi, the
mother of the deceased for pensionary and other benefits, which
was referred to Branch Recruiting Office, Meerut Cantt, which
recommended for division of family pension between the ladies.
Ultimately, PCDA(P), Allahabad, had adjudicated the Liberalised
Family Pension(in short LFP) and sanctioned LFP at the rate of
60% to Smt. Hemlata and 40% to Smt. Rajbiri Devi with effect
from 8th August, 2001 vide order dated 22nd July, 2002.

The

payment of AFPP Fund Balance and DLI amount were paid to both
the ladies in the same ratio. The other financial assistance and
death benefits were paid to Smt. Hemlata vide letter dated 19th
March, 2002.

[WP(C) No.3196/2006

Page 2 of 7]

2.

Smt. Rajbiri Devi expired on 25th May, 2003. The petitioner

made a representation to the respondents to release his portion
of LFP on 05th February, 2005,

but this did not produce the

desired result.

Another representation was made on 17th

February, 2005.

Consequently his case was referred to Branch

Recruiting Office, Meerut Cantt to investigate the matter and
forward his recommendation for division of LFP. The petitioner as
well as Smt. Hemlata were called by the Branch Recruiting Office
and were interviewed on 26th October, 2005. Prior to that Smt.
Hemlata intimated the authorities that the petitioner had driven
her out of the matrimonial roof. The investigation was made vide
letter dated 31st October, 2004. It transpired that Smt. Hemlata
and her two and a half years old daughter had been disowned by
the petitioner and she was living alone with no source of income.
It also came to light that a sizeable part of the lump sum amount
accruing from the death benefits was taken away by the
petitioner on the pretext of making a memorial for his deceased
son but only a fraction of the amount was actually spent on it and
the remaining was retained by him.

The investigation done by

the department also reveals that the petitioner was living with his

[WP(C) No.3196/2006

Page 3 of 7]

son and earns adequately from agricultural land and cattle to
sustain himself and his son. The relations between Smt. Hemlata
and the petitioner did not remain cordial. Vide Order dated 31st
March, 2005 PCDA(P), Allahabad restored the full LFP at the rate
of Rs.3,560/- per month w.e.f. 26th May, 2003 till widowhood in
favour of Smt. Hemlata.
3.

Aggrieved by that order the petitioner has filed the present

writ petition in the nature of mandamus with the prayer that the
divided portion of LFP be released in his favour and he be granted
interest at the rate of 18% per annum. It is also surprising to note
that he has not made any attempt to array her daughter-in-law as
one of the respondents in this case.
4.

We have heard the learned counsel for the parties. Learned

counsel for the petitioner vehemently argued that in view of LFP
the petitioner is entitled to succeed to the LFP which was granted
to his wife that is upto the extent of 40% of the pension of his son.
The relevant portion of LFP scheme is reproduced as follows:“(b)

PBOR
(i)

If Special Family Pension is sanctioned to the Widow
same provisions as applicable to officers.

(ii)

Where first life award is sanctioned to parents:

[WP(C) No.3196/2006

Page 4 of 7]

(aa) If widow continues to support child(ren)
after re-marriage or has no issues

50% of SFP to parents
50% of SFP to widow

(ab) If widow does not support children after remarriage but the children are supported by
the parents
(ac) If children are not supported either by the
re-married widow or the parents

Full SFP to parents
Ordinary Family Pension
to widow
50% SFP to parents
50% SFP to eligible
children
Ordinary Family Pension
to widow

(ad) On death or disqualification of parents Full SFP to widow
and the widow supports the children
or has no issues
(ae) On death or disqualification of parents and
the widow does not support the children

6.

Full SFP to eligible children
Ordinary Family Pension
to widow

Liberalised Family Pension (LFP)

6.1 In case of death of an Armed Forces Personnel under the
circumstances mentioned in category “D” & “E” of para 4.1 above, the
eligible member of the family shall be entitled to Liberalised Family
Pension equal to reckonable emoluments last drawn as defined in para
3.1 above, both for officers and PBOR. Liberalised Family Pension at
this rate shall be admissible to the widow in the case of officers and to
the nominated heir in the case of PBOR until death or disqualification.”

5.

It is clear that the present case is squarely covered by the

provision (ad) quoted above.

It is clear that the nominated

person, that is, the mother of the deceased has unfortunately
expired. The plea raised by the petitioner that he was dependant
upon his wife does not stand proved. The investigation made by
the Branch Recruiting Officer, Meerut clearly goes to reveal that
after the death of his son the petitioner did not allow his

[WP(C) No.3196/2006

Page 5 of 7]

daughter-in-law and grand daughter

to stay with them.

It is,

therefore, clear that Smt.Hemlata is brining up her two and a half
years daughter, who was allegedly disowned by the petitioner.
The investigation dug out by the Branch Recruiting Office further
goes to show that the money taken by the petitioner for raising a
memorial was not fully spent by the petitioner for that purpose.
The petitioner has got another son and both of them are earning
enough to sustain their livelihood. Such like serious matters have
to be considered with full awareness of the rude realities on the
ground not with our heads in the clouds. The court is bound to
take a down to earth view. It is usually seen that at the time of
marriage few in-laws promise a pie in the sky but whenever they
are confronted with such like tragedy like the instant one they fail
to provide even the essential facilities of life to the daughter-inlaw.
6.

Moreover, the petitioner comes within the category of

disqualification of parents as per term cited in para (ad) above.
The word 'disqualification' means unfitness that bars you from
participation.

The bizarre conduct of the petitioner debars him

from claiming any share from the pension of his deceased son.

[WP(C) No.3196/2006

Page 6 of 7]

The above said legal and factual position clearly evinces the
hollowness of petitioner's case. He has no bone to pick with his
daughter-in-law and grand daughter.

Consequently, the writ

petition is dismissed with no order as to costs.

J.M. MALIK, J.

February 08, 2008
dc/dk

[WP(C) No.3196/2006

A.K. SIKRI, J.

Page 7 of 7]

