*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

%
+

Date of Reserve : 31.1.2008
Date of Decision : 08.02.2008
WP(C) No.7132/2001
EX-NK/SHT K. KAMRAJ

....

Petitioner

...

Respondents

Versus
1.
2.
3.

THE UNION OF INDIA
THE CHIEF OF THE ARMY STAFF
COL. HKEM PANIKKER

Advocates who appeared in this case :
For the petitioner

: Mr. P.D.P. Deo, Advocate.

For the respondents : Ms. Maneesha Dhir with Ms. Preeti Dalal,
Advocates
CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K. SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE J.M. MALIK
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

J.M. MALIK, J.
*
1.
The petitioner Ex-NK/SHT K. Kamraj was serving with 514
WP(C) No.7132/2001

Page 1 of 10

ASC Battalion in Indian Army. In August 1999, the said unit went
to Bhatinda, Punjab as the unit of petitioner used to go on yearly
training to civilian areas away from the permanent location of the
unit. On 16th August, 1999, the petitioner along with Sepoy, S.
Borah, Sepoy (MT) Driver V. Mani, and Hav. Rajkumar were
commanded by their Officer Commanding Sub. A. Das to load four
barrels of diesel into a vehicle called 'Four Tonner' of the
composite platoon.

While the above said personnel were

unloading the barrels in a civil tractor, they were apprehended by
personnel of military police and charged for selling diesel.
Consequently, a court of inquiry was conducted for the alleged
charge.
2.

On 18th October, 1999 court of inquiry finalised with

direction of competent authority for taking disciplinary action
against all except Sepoy S. Borah and Sepoy V. Mani.

On 11th

January, 2000 separate tentative charge sheet was framed
against the petitioner though in a joint trial case. The said charge
sheet is reproduced as follows :
“TENTATIVE CHARGE SHEET
The accused No.6383361Y Nk./SHT K. Kamraj is charged
with :

WP(C) No.7132/2001

Page 2 of 10

AA Sec 63

AN ACT PREJUDICIAL TO GOOD ORDERS AND
MILITARY DISCIPLINE
in that he,
at Bhatinda on 16 Aug 99 at 2000h, while
performing duties with 11 Compo PL., complied
with illegal order by JC-213826W Sub/SKT A.Das,
officiating OC 11 Compo Pl., to unload four
barrels of diesel into civil tractor, knowing that
the same was being misappropriated.

Station : c/o 56 APO
Dated : 11 Jan 2000

(HKEM PANIKER)
Colonel
Commanding Officer”

Two separate tentative charge sheets were framed against
the remaining accused.
3.

Summary of Evidence was recorded against petitioner and

other co-accused between March 2000 to November 2000.
Petitioner as well as the remaining two co-accused were
committed to trial by General Court Martial on revised charge
vide charge sheet dated 16/17 April 2001. The said charge sheet
runs as follows :
“CHARGE SHEET
The accused JC-213826W Sub/SKT A.Dass, (Accused no.-1),
No. 6376812L Hav/SHT Rajkumar (Accused no.-2) and No.6383361Y Nk./SHT K. Kamraj, (Accused no.-3), all of 514 ASC Bn.
are charged with:

WP(C) No.7132/2001

Page 3 of 10

Army Act
Section 52(a)

COMMITTING THEFT OF PROPERTY
TO THE GOVERNMENT

(read with IPC Section 34)

in that they together,
at Bhatinda, on 16 Aug 99,
committed theft in respect of four
barrels of diesel containing 816
(eight hundred and sixteen liters of
diesel, the property of the
government).

Place : Dehradun
Dated : 16 Apr 2001

(Sunil Khosla)
Colonel
Commanding Officer
514 ASC Bn.

to be tried by the general court martial
Place : Dehradun
Dated : 17 Apr 2001

4.

(KK Khanna)
Maj. Gen.
(General Officer Commanding)
14 Infantry Division”

On 19.06.2001 the petitioner was declared guilty along with

other two alleged accused and he was awarded the following
punishment :
“(a) to be reduced to the ranks;
(b)

to suffer rigorous imprisonment for 6 months; and

(c) to be dismissed from the service.”
Almost similar punishments were awarded to the other two
accused also.
5.

Under these circumstances the present writ petition, with

WP(C) No.7132/2001

Page 4 of 10

the following prayers, was filed in this court:
“(a) quash the proceedings of the General Court
Martial as being illegal;
(b) quash the sentence passed by the General Court
Martial;
(c) issue appropriate writ or direction to respondent
no. 1 and 2 to reinstate the petitioner in service with
all the consequential benefits; and
(d) pass such and other / further orders as this
Hon'ble Court may deem fit and proper in the facts
and circumstances of this case.”
6.

The respondents have contested the present petition. We

have heard the counsel for the parties.
7.

The argument urged by the learned counsel for the

petitioner has the following three prongs.

The key argument

urged by the learned counsel for the petitioner was that the Army
authorities were not empowered to change the charge. The first
charge dated 11th January, 2000 was in regard to compliance of
illegal order given by A. Dass to unload four barrels of diesel into
Civil Tractor knowing that the same was misappropriated.

The

second charge pertains to dishonest misappropriation of 816 litre
of diesel owned by the Government.

Learned counsel for the

petitioner vehemently argued that there was no conspiracy and
the respondents have failed to produce even an iota of evidence
WP(C) No.7132/2001

Page 5 of 10

in this regard. He also pointed out that Army Rule 22 has been
violated.

In support of his case, he has cited an authority

reported in Lance Dafedar Laxman Vs. UOI and Ors. [DRJ
1992 (24)].

He, however, failed to explain as to how the

provisions of Rule 22 of Army Rules have been violated.
Secondly, there is no evidence, worth the name, to show that the
petitioner had the knowledge that the above said diesel was
being misappropriated.

The petitioner was just obeying the

orders of his senior. He lastly pleaded that the punishment
awarded to the petitioner is disproportionate.
8.

We are unable to locate any substance in these arguments.

Rule 22 of the Army Rules is reproduced as follows:
[22. Hearing of Charge.-(1) Every charge
against a person subject to the Act shall be heard
by the Commanding Officer in the presence of the
accused. The accused shall have full liberty to
cross-examine any witness against him, and to
call such witness and make such statement as
may be necessary for his defence:
Provided that where the charge against the
accused arises as a result of investigation by a
Court of inquiry, wherein the provisions of rule
180 have been complied with in respect of that
accused, the commanding officer may dispense
with the procedure in sub-rule (1).
(2) The commanding officer shall dismiss a
charge brought before him if, in his opinion the
evidence does not show that an offence under the
Act has been committed, and may do so if, he is
WP(C) No.7132/2001

Page 6 of 10

9.

satisfied that the charge ought not to be
proceeded with:
Provided that the commanding officer shall
not dismiss a charge which he is debarred to try
under sub-section (2) of Sec. 120 without
reference to superior authority as specified
therein.
(3) After compliance of sub-rule (1), if the
commanding officer is of opinion that the charge
ought to be proceeded with, he shall within a
reasonable time(a) dispose of the case under section 80 in
accordance with the manner and form in
Appendix III; or
(b) refer the case to the proper superior military
authority; or
(c) adjourn the case for the purpose of having the
evidence reduced to writing; or
(d) if the accused is below the rank of warrant
officer, order his trial by a summary court-martial:
Provided that the commanding officer shall
not order trial by a summary court-martial
without a reference to the officer empowered to
convene a district court-martial or on active
service a summary general court-martial for the
trial of the alleged offender unless(a) the offence is one which he can try by a
summary court-martial without any reference to
that officer; or
(b) he considers that there is grave reason for
immediate action and such reference cannot be
made without detriment to discipline.
(4) Where
the
evidence
taken
in
accordance with sub-rule (3) of this rule
discloses an offence other than the offence
which was the subject of the investigation,
the commanding officer may frame suitable
charge(s) on the basis of the evidence so
taken as well as the investigation of the
Col. HKEM Pannikar, Station Headquarters was examined as

WP(C) No.7132/2001

Page 7 of 10

defence witness at the request of the petitioner and his two coaccused. He testified that Army Rule 22 was complied in each
case in letter and spirit.

He was cross-examined at length but

nothing of importance was elicited during his cross examination.
Learned counsel could not point out any flaw therein.
10.

The facts of the above-cited authority are altogether

different. No such illegalities were pointed out in the instant case.
The above cited authority has no application to the facts of this
case. It stands established that the charge was legally amended
within the parameters of law. It appears that this objection was
raised merely for the sake of cavil.
11.

Now we turn to the knowledge of the petitioner about the

commission of the above said crime. The motivation behind the
commission of the crime is transparent. The Army case is clear.
There is no hinge nor loop to hang a doubt on.

This is an

admitted fact that Sub A. Das accused no. 1 had given orders to
driver S. Borah to go to four guards location along with four tone
vehicle containing the four barrels of diesel. All the three accused
including this petitioner were sitting in the vehicle. The vehicle
did not go to four guards location. It was diverted and was taken
towards Bibiwala village and subsequently the unloading was
WP(C) No.7132/2001

Page 8 of 10

done in the trolly of the civilian tractor. The petitioner also kept
on participating in the above said deal without even a whisper or
protest, objection or resistance. The evidence also reveals that
the driver of the vehicle had stated that he did not know the
location of four guards. The petitioner directed him to take the
vehicle to four guards location.

The evidence further goes to

show that he had subsequently directed him not to take the
vehicle to four guards but to the above said predesignated place
to deliver the consignment to a civilian. The evidence produced
by the prosecution consists of Sepoy MT V. Mani, PW1, he has
stated in clear and unequivocal terms that the petitioner and
other three were also sitting in the vehicle. Naib Subedar (M.P)
B.R. Sharma second witness for prosecution also supported the
prosecution case.
12.

All these facts and circumstances clearly establish mens rea

and common intention on the part of the petitioner.

The

petitioner's argument that he was doing it at the behest of the
Commanding Officer is of no consequence. He should have raised
the objection as to why the vehicle had come at an unknown
place and why the unloading was being done in the trolly of the
civilian tractor. All these facts adequately attribute knowledge on
WP(C) No.7132/2001

Page 9 of 10

the part of the petitioner.

The facts of this case speak for

themselves. The petitioner has no defence to make.
13.

Now we advert to the quantum of punishment. Those who

indulge in outlawry, should know how to stand the gaff. Suck like
criminals neither love the country nor they have any respect for
the law. The punishment awarded by the authorities should have
deterrent effect on the potential wrong doers and it should
commensurate with the seriousness of the offence.
said punishment fits the above said crime.

The above

In the result, the

petitioner's tilt at windmills fails.
14.

The instant writ petition is therefore dismissed but there will

be no orders as to costs.

J.M. MALIK, J.

A.K. SIKRI, J.
February 08, 2008
dk

WP(C) No.7132/2001

Page 10 of 10

