*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

%
+

Date of Reserve : 9.1.2008
Date of Decision : 1.2.2008
WP(C) No.7290/2004
Ex.Rect./GD Krishan Kumar,
S/o Sh. Shyam Singh,
R/o Village, Dadanpur,
Distt. Jhajjar (Haryana)

....

Petitioner

Versus
1.

Union of India
Thru The Secretary,
Ministry of Home Affairs,
North Block,
Govt. of India, New Delhi

2.

The Director General,
CRPF, CGO Complex,
Lodhi Road, New Delhi

3.

The Addl. Deputy Inspector Genl. of Police
CRPF Group Centre, Guragaon,
Haryana
...
Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case :
For the petitioner
For the respondents

: Mr.Rohit Sharma, Advocate
: Mr.S.B.Sharma with Mr.Manoj Ohri,
Adocates

CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K. SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE J.M. MALIK

WP(C) No.7290/2004

Page 1 of 10

1. Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

J.M. MALIK, J.
*
1.
Krishan Kumar, petitioner, was enrolled in CRPF on 18th
March, 2002. No disease came to light during his medical
examination, at the time of his appointment. He was allotted his
service number as 025110243. The petitioner had an attack of
epileptic seizure during training at Kadarpur, Gurgaon on 22nd
April, 2002. Firstly, he was referred to the Base Hospital, CRPF,
New Delhi by the Chief Medical Officer (Incharge) GC, Gurgaon
vide letter dated 24th June, 2002

He was also referred to the

Neuro Physician, Safdarjung Hospital for investigation and was
diagnosed as a case of epileptic treatment. He remained under
treatment till 17th August 2002. The Additional DIGP, CRPF,
Gurgaon vide office order dated 18th January, 2003 terminated the
service of the petitioner under Rule 5 of the CCS (Temporary
Service) Rules, 1965, without assigning any reason and show
cause notice. The petitioner was orally informed that his services

WP(C) No.7290/2004

Page 2 of 10

were terminated due to his sickness.

The petitioner made a

detailed representation but it did not produce the desired result.
Under these circumstances, the instant writ petition was filed with
the prayer that the order dated 18th January, 2003 be quashed or
in the alternative the petitioner be granted disability pension as
per CCS (EDP) Rule with all the consequential benefits.
2.

According to the respondents after the attack of epileptic

seizure, he was advised three months treatment initially and was
kept under observation. During the said period also the petitioner
had two epileptic attacks.

After three months he was again

referred to the Physician, Base Hospital-I, CRPF for review of the
patient.

The petitioner was examined and viewed by the

Physician, Base Hospital-I, CRPF, who gave the following opinion:“A known case of epilepsy with H/o several
episodes of seizure treated at Base Hospital-I
One CRPF as well as at Safdarjung Hospital, New
Delhi.
Since he is a recruit and has been detected
to have a seizure disorder he will not be fit for
CRPF, where he has to work for 33 years.
Action may be taken as per existing orders
i.e. recruitment rules S/o 10 of 2000 and SO 7/99.
He should be discharged from force as
unbecoming effective soldier (combant) in force.
Action to be taken accordingly by the unit.”
Thereafter, the case of the petitioner was referred to the
WP(C) No.7290/2004

Page 3 of 10

Board of Medical Officers, which gave the following opinion:-

3.

“Having gone through the medical documents of
the patient and the remark given by the medical
specialist of Base Hospital-I CRPF, Jharoda Kalan
New Delhi and after careful examination of the
patient and all other related documents the
board opines that the No. 025110243 Rt/CD
Krishan Kumar is case of epilepsy and unfit for
the force/CRPF duties and therefore be invalided
out of service.”
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties. It may

be mentioned, at the very outset, that the learned counsel for the
petitioner

did

not

press

the

prayer

seeking

quashing

of

termination order dated 18th January, 2003 and confined his
arguments to the issue of grant of pension only.

The learned

counsel for the petitioner vehemently argued that the petitioner is
entitled to grant of special pension. In support of his case, he has
drawn the attention of this Court towards the Appendix III,
Schedule 1-A under Rule 3(4) of the CCS (Extraordinary Pension)
Rules. This schedule mentions about the list and classification of
diseases which can be attributed by service.

Its Clause 1(d)

mentions about the diseases affected by training, marching, etc.
The attention of the Court was drawn towards its Clause (v), which
is reproduced as under:-

WP(C) No.7290/2004

Page 4 of 10

1. LIST AND CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
WHICH CAN BE CONTRACTED BY SERVICE
A to D.

xxx xxx xxx

D.
Diseases affected by training, marching,
etc.
(i) to (iv)

xxx xxx xxx

(v) Post-traumatic epilepsy and other
mental changes resulting from skull injury.
(vi) to (viii) xxx xxx xxx
4.

The counsel for the petitioner has also drawn our attention

towards the manifold meanings of epilepsy as defined in Macdold
Critchley, IInd Edition, 1986.
5.

Counsel for the petitioner further argued that the abovesaid

disease cropped up during the service and therefore, the same is
attributable to the service. He also submitted that at the time of
his routine medical test, this disease could not be traced out,
meaning thereby that at the time of joining the service he was not
suffering from the above-said disease.
6.

After mulling over the evidence on record, we find that

instead of touching the heart of the problem, the learned counsel
for the petitioner just skirted it. The abovesaid provision of law

WP(C) No.7290/2004

Page 5 of 10

has no application to the facts of the case. The abovesaid disease
did not result from skull injury.
Macdold

Critchley

hardly

The above referred book by

extends

any

assistance

to

this

controversy. The detection of epileptic syndrome is not possible
during the routine medical test.

There is not even an iota of

evidence which may go to show that Computed Tomography (CT
Scan) or Electroencephalogram (EEG) were conducted at the time
of routine medical test.

The above-said quoted medical report

clearly goes to show that the petitioner had a known case of
epilepsy. The term, “known case of epilepsy” is very significant.
This clearly means that he was an old patient of epileptic disease.
The said report given by the Base Hospital-I, CRPF remains
unrebutted on record. There is no evidence that the said disease
had arisen in service or the conditions of disease were due to the
circumstances of the duty in service. Again it cannot be said that
the sustenance of disease per se is on account of military service.
7.

In a recent authority reported in Union of India and Ors. Vs.

Keshar Singh, 2007 (6) SCALE 17, the following authorities were
referred :
“7. In Union of India and Anr. v. Baljit Singh
(1996) 11 SCC 315 this Court had taken note of
WP(C) No.7290/2004

Page 6 of 10

Rule 173 of the Pension Regulations. It was
observed that where the Medical Board found
that there was absence of proof of the
injury/illness having been sustained due to
military service or being attributable thereto, the
High Court's direction to the Government to pay
disability pension was not correct. It was inter
alia observed as follows :
“6. ....It is seen that various criteria have been
prescribed in the guidelines under the Rules as to
when the disease or injury is attributable to the
military service. It is seen that under Rule 173
disability pension would be computed only when
disability has occurred due to wound, injury or
disease which is attributable to military service
or existed before or arose during military service
and has been and remains aggravated during the
military service. If these conditions are satisfied,
necessarily the incumbent is entitled to the
disability pension. This is made ample clear from
clause (a) to (d) of para 7 which contemplates
that in respect of a disease the Rules
enumerated thereunder required to be observed.
Clause (c) provides that if a disease is accepted
as having arisen in service, it must also be
established that the conditions of military service
determined or contributed to the onset of the
disease and that the conditions were due to the
circumstances of duty in military service. Unless
these conditions satisfied, it cannot be said that
the sustenance of injury per se is on account of
military service. In view of the report of the
Medical Board of Doctors, it is not due to military
service. The conclusion may not have been
satisfactorily reached that the injury though
sustained while in service, it was not on account
of military service.
In each case, when a
disability pension is sought for made a claim, it
must be affirmatively established, as a fact, as to
WP(C) No.7290/2004

Page 7 of 10

whether the injury sustained was due to military
service or was aggravated which contributed to
invalidation for the military service”.
8.
The position was again reiterated in Union
of India and Ors. V. Dhir Singh China, Colonel
(Retd.) (2003) 2 SCC 382. In para 7 it was
observed as follows :
7.
That leaves for consideration Regulation 53.
The said Regulation provides that on an officer
being compulsorily retired on account of age or
on completion of tenure, if suffering on
retirement from a disability attributable to or
aggravated by military service and recorded by
service medical authority, he may be granted, in
addition to retiring pension, a disability element
as if he had been retired on account of disability.
It is not in dispute that the respondent was
compulsorily retired on attaining the age of
superannuation. The question, therefore, which
arises for consideration is whether he was
suffering, on retirement, from a disability
attributable to or aggravated by military service
and recorded by service medical authority. We
have already referred to the opinion of the
Medical Board which found that the two
disabilities from which the respondent was
suffering were not attributable to or aggravated
by military service. Clearly therefore, the opinion
of the Medical Board ruled out the applicability of
Regulation 53 to the case of the respondent. The
diseases from which he was suffering were not
found to be attributable to or aggravated by
military service, and were in the nature of
constitutional diseases. Such being the opinion
of the Medical Board, in our view the respondent
can derive no benefit from Regulation 53. The
opinion of the Medical Board has not been
assailed in this proceeding and, therefore, must
WP(C) No.7290/2004

Page 8 of 10

be accepted.
9.
The above position was highlighted in
Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension) and
Ors. v. S. Balachandran Nair (2005) 13SCC 128.
8.

It must be borne in mind that there lies no rub in granting

pension in favour of a trainee. Again “a known case of epilepsy”
cannot be attributable to or aggravated by military service within
short span of a month or two of joining service. In the above said
authorities the Apex Court had authoritatively laid down that
precedence has to be given to the findings recorded by the
Medical Board.

In the instant case the findings of the Medical

Board are inconformity with the rules and regulations and
guidelines meant for medical officers as no objection was ever
raised by the petitioner.

The original file goes to reveal that

petitioner was examined by as many as three doctors.

The

petitioner did not pick up a conflict with the above said Medical
Report. We cannot sit as a court of appeal or substitute our own
views over the decision of the Medical Board. The findings and
opinion recorded by the Medical Board would be binding.

It

appears that the appellant was suffering from the said disease
and he did not develop it suddenly out of blue.

WP(C) No.7290/2004

Page 9 of 10

9.

For the reasons mentioned above, we find no reason to

interfere in the present writ petition.

The same is therefore

dismissed but there shall be no order as to cost.

J.M. MALIK, J.

A.K. SIKRI, J.

February 01, 2008
dc

WP(C) No.7290/2004

Page 10 of 10

