*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

%
+

Date of Decision : 17.1.2008
LPA No. 254/2001
The Chief of Army Staff and Ors.

....

Appellants

Versus
Ex. 14257873 K Sigmm
Trilochan Behera

... Respondent

Advocates who appeared in this case :
For the appellants

: Ms.Jyoti Singh, Advocate

For the respondent

: Mr. N.L.Bareja, Advocate

CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K. SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE J.M. MALIK
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?
J.M. MALIK, J. (Oral)
*
1.
The facts of the above-said letter patents appeal are these.
The

respondent,

LPA No. 254/2001

Trilochan

Behera,

was

enrolled

as

Page 1 of 15

Sepoy/tailor(Unit) in the Army Corps of Signal in June, 1984. On
being tipped off, the search of the belongings of the respondent
was conducted by Lt. Kuldip Singh adjutant of the same unit in
the presence of other two witnesses on 26th February, 1994, but in
the absence of the respondent and the following incriminating
materials were recovered :
“(a) Rubber Stamp Adjt 4 Corps Engineering Signal Regmt.
(b)
(c)

Bottle containing ink remover.

(d)
2.

Rubber Stamp Authorised to travel by AC Sleeper

Old concession vouchers and
railway warrants.”

The summary court martial held that the charge against the

respondent stood proved and dismissed the respondent from
service.

Aggrieved by that order the respondent filed a writ

petition before this Court and this Court vide order dated 6 th
February, 2001 accepted his writ petition and declared that the
proceedings of the summary court martial were void because it
had failed to follow the Army Rules 22 and 115(2).

The learned

Single Judge also came to the conclusion that there is nothing on
the record to show that the preliminary enquiry under Rule 22

LPA No. 254/2001

Page 2 of 15

was held. It was also observed that the document produced along
with the counter affidavit in Annexure B, which is stated to be the
record of proceedings itself, shows that it was recorded on 28th
March, 1994.

However, the case of the appellants is that the

hearing of charges commenced on 28th February, 1994 at 12:45
hours and was closed at 13.30 hours.
respondent

were

not

obtained

proceedings running into 13 pages.

The signatures of the

anywhere

on

the

entire

The appellants themselves

claim that summary evidence was recorded on 05.03.1994 and
07.03.1994 and additional summary evidence was recorded on
19th March, 1994. The learned Single Judge observed, “A perusal
of the record would show that the relevant rules prescribing the
procedure had not been followed.

The whole thing is clearly

made-up.” It was further held that the appellants while holding
the summary court martial, had proceeded on the basis that the
respondent had admitted the guilt and the provisions under Army
Rule 115 were not complied with.
3.

Aggrieved by this order, the appellants have approached

this Court. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
Counsel for the appellants vehemently argued that all the
mandatory rules were complied with. She submitted that there is
LPA No. 254/2001

Page 3 of 15

no requirement of law that the accused must sign the plea of
guilt. She argued that the respondent had made the confession
out of his own volition and now he wants to wriggle out of it by
turning around and finding faults with the proceedings.

She

argued that the wrong mention of date appears to be a human
error and hence a typographical mistake crept in.

Inspite of

writing it as 28th February, 1994 it was wrongly typed as 28th
March, 1994. She explained that there is no allegation of bias.
The respondent himself made a statement, “I repent for the
mistake I have done. I want to continue serving as my family is
dependent on my income only.” Counsel for the appellants also
drew our attention towards the statement of Kuldeep Singh, who
stated that he identified the accused who was present before the
Court. Then, there is a certificate issued by Major P.K.Agarwal,
the officer who recorded the summary of evidence, wherein he
certified, “I certify that I had cautioned the accused No.
14257873K UINK (Tailor 'U') Trilochan Behera in terms of Army
Rule 23(3). The individual declines to make any statement in the
presence of independent witness JC-367262F Nb Sub MH Biswas.”
Lastly, she pointed out that all the proceedings were held in the
presence of witnesses and the question of manipulation of any
LPA No. 254/2001

Page 4 of 15

document does not arise.
4.

We find force in the order of Single Judge in a measure,

however, our reasoning is wee bit different.

The appellant has

produced before us the true copies of the record.

This record

goes to show that no ordersheet was ever prepared. The
respondent has also placed on record the copies furnished to him.
All these copies go to show that the proceedings were initiated on
28th March, 1994. It is pertinent to note that 28th March, 1994 was
written on a paper with a heading, “trial by summary court
martial under the Army Act”. Annexure P-1 reveals that the date
is mentioned as “28th March, 1993”. The next connected paper
mentions the date as 28th March, 1994. The certificate of Col. K.C.
Mehta, Commanding Officer, also mentions the date as 28th
March, 1994. Succinctly stated ExPI mentions the date as “28th
March 1993”, three other papers out of abovesaid 13 pages
mention the date as 28th March, 1994, the charge sheet mentions
the date as 22nd March, 1994. There can be human error at one
place. If the same type of human error occurs at so many places,
an integument of suspicion envelopes the entire proceedings of
the above-said Court Martial. It is difficult to fathom as to how
this type of mistake occurred time and again. Although, there is
LPA No. 254/2001

Page 5 of 15

no allegation of bias, yet the possibilities of its being manipulated
cannot be ruled out particularly when the record is being
produced for the scrutiny of this Court.
5.

Secondly, the signatures of the respondent were not

obtained on any of these proceeding. The plea of the respondent
was recorded on a printed format.

The column of arraignment

reads as under :
“By the Court-How say you No. 14257873K ULNK
Trilochan Behera are you guilty or not guilty of
the ................... charge preferred against you?”
The answer is recorded as “Guilty”.

It does not mention

what was the charge though a separate chargesheet has been
placed on record which is dated 22nd March, 1994, which is not
signed by the respondent. The complete plea of guilt of the
respondent was not recorded.
6.

In Sashidhara Kurup Vs. Union of India and Ors., 1994

Cri.L.J., 375 (Gauhati), his Lordship Dr.H.K.Sema, the then judge of
the High Court, was pleased to hold:
“7......... Recording of the plea of the accused as
nearly as possible in the words which is used by
the accused has an important significance
because unless the plea of the accused is
recorded as nearly as possible in the words which
is used by the accused the appellate court is
deprived of the privilege to examine as to
LPA No. 254/2001

Page 6 of 15

whether the plea made by the accused amounts
to admission of guilt or not.”
However, in the next page, the following question was put to
the respondent:
“Do you wish to make any statement in reference
to the charge or in mitigation of punishment?
This question was put to the respondent after he had
pleaded guilty, to which the respondent replied,
“I repent for the mistake I have done. I want to
continue serving as my family is dependent on
my income only.”
It is also noteworthy that no date is mentioned on this paper.
Not even under the signatures of the Judge, Col. K.C.Mehta.
7.

Counsel for the respondent has drawn our attention

towards guide to Summary Court Martial issued in the year 1984,
Heading (b) Arraignment at pages 7 & 8, it is mentioned :
“(iii)
If the accused pleads guilty to the
charge, the
implications of the plea
should be explained to the accused(s) by
the officer holding the trial vide AR 115(2).
He should also make the following record
on page 'B' of the proceedings in the
presence of the accused and obtain his
signature thereon :“Before recording the plea of guilty offered
by the accused, the Court explains to the
accused the meaning of the charge(s) to
which he had pleaded guilty and ascertains
that the accused understands the nature of
LPA No. 254/2001

Page 7 of 15

the charge(s) – to which he has pleaded
guilty. The Court also informs the accused
the general effect of that plea and the
difference in procedure which will be
followed consequent to the said plea. The
Court having satisfied itself that the
accused understands the charge(s) and the
effect of his plea of guilty accepts and
records the same. The provisions of Army
Rule 115(2) are complied with.”
(Signature)
(Signature)
Accused
The Court
(iv)
Failure
to
comply
with
the
procedure explained in sub-para 16(b) (iii)
above will amount to violation of the
procedural safe guard provided in AR
115(2) and violation of Article 14 of the
Constitution of India and the punishment
awarded will have to be set aside.
(Auth : HQ Western Command letter No
0337/1/A3 dated 30 Oct 84 attached as
Appx F and Judgment of J & K High Court,
see Pritpal Singh v. Union of India (J & K)
1984 (3) SLR 680.)”
8

In Prithpal Singh Vs. Union of India and others(supra) that

is, 1984(3) SLR 675 (J & K), it was held :
“9.
Coming to the present case, I have
stated the requirement of Rs. 115 and 129
of the army Rules. The procedure laid
down in the said Rules cannot be observed
in breach by Summary Court Martial. It is
revealed from the record that at no stage
the petitioner had accepted Mr. Arun Dhar
as a friend under R. 129 yet he was
imposed on him against his wish. This
would amount denial of right to the person
LPA No. 254/2001

Page 8 of 15

in having a friend to assist him as required
by R.129 of the Army Rules.
So the
proceedings conducted cannot be termed
to be fair because an important right of the
petitioner was arbitrarily taken away in
violation of Art. 14 of the Constitution. He
was to be given equal protection of laws
that protection has been denied to him.
Therefore, the decision taken by the
Summary Court Martial in awarding
punishment to the petitioner is tainted with
arbitrariness and unfairness.
10.
The most important aspect of the
case is as to whether the petitioner had
pleaded guilty to the charges as is
suggested by Mr. Hussain or not Plea of
guilt recorded by Lt. Col. Mehta is dehors
R.115 of the Army Rules. In the first place
the alleged plea of guilt is unsigned by the
authorities. Surprisingly the petitioner also
has not signed the alleged plea of guilt. At
what stage word “guilty” was recorded
against each charge is not known. If it was
recorded in presence of the accusedpetitioner obviously his signatures would
have been obtained on it.
Then the
minutes of the enquiry should have
contained an advice to the petitioner not to
plead guilty as enjoined by R. 115 of the
Army Rules. This important mandate of the
Rule
has
been
flagrantly
violated.
Therefore the proceedings conducted by
the Summary Court Martial which have
affected the petitioner's fundamental rights
as he is deprived of his job are vitiated.
The protection afforded by the procedure
should not have been denied to the
petitioner if it was intended to proceed
against him under the Army Rules. As to
whether charges were correct or not as
LPA No. 254/2001

Page 9 of 15

already observed this court cannot go into
that aspect of the matter. But certainly
this court will set aside the punishment
which is awarded to the petitioner on the
ground that the decision to punish the
petitioner was taken by contravening the
mandate of Rules. Such a decision would
be arbitrary and shall be violative of the
guarantees contained in Art. 14 of the
Constitution. The argument of the learned
counsel for the respondent that the
petitioner was not prejudiced in any
manner during the Summary Court Martial
proceedings is devoid of force.
The
petitioner has suffered punishment of
dismissal from service and the punishment
is awarded by conducting proceedings in
such a manner which were neither fair not
judicial. Could the Summary Court Martial
observe the Rules governing the conduct of
Summary Court Martial in breach. Answer
to this question will be emphatic no in view
of the glory of the Constitution and rights
guaranteed by it.”
9.

Now, we turn to the procedure laid down in Rule 115 of the

Army Rules.

The certificate which bears the date 28th March,

1994 is reproduced as follows:“Before recording of plea of guilty offered by the
accused the Court explained to the accused the
meaning of the charge to which he had pleaded
guilty and ascertained that the accused had
understood the nature of the charges to which he
had pleaded guilty. The Court also informed the
accused the general effect of the plea and the
difference in procedure which will be followed
consequent to the said plea. The Court having
satisfied itself that the accused understands the
LPA No. 254/2001

Page 10 of 15

charges and the effect of his plea of guilty
accepts and records the same. The provision of
Army Rule 115 (2) are thus complied with”.
There are no other proceedings in this context.
10.

It clearly goes to show that this certificate was prepared

after the respondent had pleaded guilty. This is apparent that the
provisions of Rule 115(2) were not complied with. The said rule
runs as under:
“115. General plea of “Guilty” or “Not Guilty”.
(1) XXXX
(2) If an accused person pleads “Guilty”, that
plea shall be recorded as the finding of the court;
but before it is recorded, the court shall ascertain
that the accused understands the nature of the
charge to which he has pleaded guilty and shall
inform him of the general effect of that plea, and
in particular of the meaning of the charge to
which he has pleaded guilty and of the difference
in procedure which will be made by the plea of
guilty, and shall advise him to withdraw that plea
if it appears from the summary of evidence (if
any) or otherwise that the accused ought to
plead not guilty.
11.

(3) XXXX”
This formality should have been done before the plea of guilt

of the respondent was recorded.

There is no indication in the

charge dated 22nd March, 1994 that the Commanding Officer had
already undergone this formality. That is why in the absence of
ordersheets and other proceedings, the position does not begin to
LPA No. 254/2001

Page 11 of 15

jell. The preparation of ordersheets would have gone a long way
to illustrate the position more vividly on this hazy record. It is also
not understandable as to why did the Commanding Officer fail to
correct the date of 28th March, 1994. Again, the certificate given
by him under Rule 115(2) of the Army Rules is on a separate
paper. The possibility of its being manipulated cannot be ruled
out.

Such like certificates can be prepared at any time.

This

justifies the need for obtaining the signatures of the accused viz.
to lend authenticity to such a record.
12.

In a recent authority reported in Sukanta Mitra Vs. Union of

India and Ors., 2007 (2) 197 (J & K), it was held:
“9. This apart the fact remains that the appellant
has been convicted and sentenced on the basis of
his plea of guilt. The plea of guilt recorded by the
Court does not bear the signatures of the
appellant. The question arising for consideration,
therefore, is whether obtaining of signatures was
necessary. In a case Union of India and Ors. v. ExHavildar Clerk Prithpal Singh and Ors. KLJ 1991
page 513, a Division Bench of this Court has
observed:
The other point which has been made
basis for quashing the sentence awarded
to respondent-accused relates to clause
(2) of rule 115. Under this mandatory
provision the court is required to
ascertain, before it records plea of guilt of
the accused, as to whether the accused
undertakes the nature of the charge to
which he has pleaded guilty and shall
LPA No. 254/2001

Page 12 of 15

inform him of the general effect of that
plea and in particular of the meaning of
charge to which he has pleaded guilty.
The Court is further required under this
provision of law to advise the accused to
withdraw that plea if it a appears from
summary of evidence or otherwise that
the accused ought to plead not guilty.
How to follow this procedure is the main
crux of the question involved in this case.
Rule 125 provides that the court shall
date and sign the sentence and such
signatures shall authenticate of the
same. We may take it that the signature
of the accused are not required even
after recording plea of guilt but as a
matter of caution same should have been
taken.
13.

In Lachhman (Ex. Rect.) Vs. Union of India & Others, 2003

II AD (Delhi) 103, it was held :

14.

“13. The record of the proceedings shows that
the plea of guilty has not been entered into by
the accused nor has it been recorded as per Rule
115 inasmuch neither it has been recorded as
finding of court nor was the accused informed
about the general effect of plea of guilt nor about
the difference in procedure which is involved in
plea of guilt nor did he advise the petitioner to
withdraw the plea if it appeared from the
summary of evidence that the accused ought to
plead not guilty nor is the factum of compliance
of sub-rule (2) has been recorded by the
Commanding Officer in the manner prescribed in
sub rule 2(A). Thus the stand of the respondents
that the petitioner had entered into the plea of
guilt stands on highly feeble foundation.”
The learned counsel for the respondent also cited a case

LPA No. 254/2001

Page 13 of 15

reported in Uma Shanker Pathak Vs. Union of India and others,
1989 (3) SLR 405 by Allahabad High Court, wherein it was held :
“10.
The
provision
embodies
a
wholesome provision which is clearly
designed to ensure that an accused person
should be fully forewarned about the
implications of the charge and the effect of
pleading guilty. The procedure prescribed
for the trial of cases where the accused
pleads guilty is radically different from that
prescribed for trial of cases where the
accused pleads 'not guilty'. The procedure
in cases where the plea is of 'not guilty' is
far more elaborate than in cases where the
accused pleads 'guilty'. This is apparent
from a comparison of the procedure laid
down for these two classes of cases. It is in
order to save a simple, unsuspecting and
ignorant accused person from the effect of
pleading guilty to the charge without being
fully conscious of the nature thereof and the
implications and general effect of that plea,
that the framers of the rule have insisted
that the court must ascertain that the
accused fully understands the nature of the
charge and the implications of pleadings
guilty to the same.
13.
It is thus apparent that the questions
and answers have to be reproduced by the
Court in their entirety, which, in the context
of Army Rule 115 (2), means all the
questions and answers must be reproduced
verbatim. In the present case however, the
Court has not done this. Instead the Court
merely content itself with the certificate
that “the provisions of Army Rule 115 (2)
are here complied with”.

LPA No. 254/2001

Page 14 of 15

15.

It is also noteworthy that one of the copies given to the

respondent,

that

is,

Appendix

III,

wherein

arraignment

proceedings are undertaken, is blank. The blanks in the printed
format were not filled in.

The copies produced before the Court

and given to the respondent are at variance. It only intensifies
the doubt.
16.

In the light of the above discussion, we find that the above-

said proceedings bristle with a number of question marks. The
same stand vitiated. If dismissal from employment is based on a
defined

procedure,

even

though

generous

beyond

the

requirements that bind such agency, that procedure must be
scrupulously observed. The L.P.A is thus dismissed. There shall
be no orders as to costs.
J.M. MALIK, J.

January 17, 2008
dc

A.K. SIKRI, J.

LPA No. 254/2001

Page 15 of 15

