*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

%
+

Date of Reserve : 14.02.2008
Date of Decision : 14.03.2008
WP(C) No.5319/2004

Smt. Lajwanti Devi
w/o Sh. Vijay Pal Singh

.... Petitioner
Versus

1.

Union of India
Through The Secretary

2.

The Director General
Boarder Security Force

3.

The Commandant

.... Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case :
For the petitioner

: Mr. A.K. Trivedi, Advocate

For the respondents : Ms. Monika Garg, Advocate

CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K. SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE J.M. MALIK
1.

Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2.

To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

WP(C) No.5319/2004

Page 1 of 13

J.M. MALIK, J.
*
1.

Vijay Pal Singh, husband of the petitioner got enrolled in the

Border Security Force (In short BSF) on 27th March, 1990 as
Constable. He was not suffering from any disease at the time of
his entry into service. After completion of his training for about 9
months in Jodhpur (Rajasthan), he was transferred along with his
Unit to Sri Nagar and was deployed in Rajouri Sector. He became
sick while serving at Rajouri Sector on board at high attitude area
due to disease i.e. „Grandmal Epilepsy‟. While performing duties
he fell down and suffered a fracture of “lateral Gondyle humorous
“of left hand.

These diseases were attributable to the BSF

service and he was brought before the Medical Board on 31 st July,
1992 at Rajouri and placed in low medical category „EEE‟
permanent and was recommended for retention in service.
However, he received a notice dated 31.8.1992, which was
issued to him stating that he would be boarded out from service.
Thereafter, he was invalidated out from service vide order dated
15.9.1992. He made a representation for grant of his disability
pension and other benefits on 4.11.1992.

He remained under

treatment during the period between 1992 to 1996. Thereafter,
WP(C) No.5319/2004

Page 2 of 13

he lost the control of brain and left his home on 26 th June 1996 at
8.00 pm. The father of the husband of the petitioner lodged a
complaint with Bhiwani Police Station regarding the missing of his
son. However, he could not be traced. Since more than 7 years
have lapsed, therefore, it is to be assumed that the husband of
the petitioner has since died in view of Section 108 of Evidence
Act.
2.

The

petitioner

made

a

representation

to

the

Army

department for grant of appointment on compassionate ground
for herself but the same was rejected by the respondents vide
order dated 12.6.1996.

It is submitted that husband of the

petitioner was invalided out of service with 100% disability and
therefore he was entitled for grant of disability pension. A legal
notice requiring the respondents to pay pension to her was sent
to the respondents on 1.7.2002 which is yet to be replied by the
respondents.

On these grounds the present writ petition with

the prayers for grant of the extra-ordinary family pension to the
petitioner w.e.f. 27th June, 1996 from the date of missing of the
husband of the petitioner along with the arrears of back period
pension with interest and the grant of a Life Time Arrears (in

WP(C) No.5319/2004

Page 3 of 13

short LTA) of the disability pension of the husband of the
petitioner from the date of invalidation from service till 26.6.1996
with interest was filed in this court on 21.03.2004.
3.

The respondents have contested the present writ petition.

4.

We have heard the counsel for the parties.

The learned

counsel for the petitioner vehemently argued that the above said
disease was contracted during the service and it is clearly
attributable to the service in BSF.

It was pointed out that the

husband of the petitioner was invalidated out from service on
medical ground due to the disease of Epilepsy in medical
category „EEE‟ and as per the Medical Board proceedings in
Annexure R-4 the disease of the husband of the petitioner was
aggravated by service due to stress and strain of military service
and the percentage of disability was assessed at 40%.

It was

submitted that the husband of the petitioner was entitled for
disability pension under “The Central Civil Services (Extra
ordinary Pension) Rules” as the disease due to which he had
been invalidated out of service was aggravated by service
conditions. The relevant portion of Annexure R4 is produced as
follows :

WP(C) No.5319/2004

Page 4 of 13

“OPINION OF THE BOARD”
Findings of the Board :- The board having examined
No.90644679 Ct. Vijay Pal Singh of 102BN BSF are of the opinion
that he is suffering from 1. GRAND MALEPILEPSY 2. FRACTURE
LATERAL CONDYLE HUMERUS (Lt) 3. MYOSITIS OSSIFICANS –
ELBOW (Lt) 4. TARDY ULNAR NERVE PALSY (Lt) OPID and is
considered unfit for further service in BSF.
1.

Was the disability contracted
in service?

3.

Was in contracted in
circumstances
over
which
he
has
no
control?
No

5.

If so, by what specified
conditions.

Yes
4.

Is it directly attributable to
conditions of service?
No

6.

Nil

If not directly attributable to 7.
service, was it aggravated
thereby and if so, by what
specify conditions.

Medical
category
recommended
EEE

Yes, due to stress and strain
of service conditions.
8.

Percentage of disability
The

learned

counsel

40%
for

the

petitioner

argued

with

vehemence that the abovesaid case is fully covered with
Appendix-3” Central Civil Services (Extraordinary Pension) Rules,
rule 3-A (1) (a) II.
WP(C) No.5319/2004

Page 5 of 13

5.

We are unable to cotton with his arguments. As a matter of

fact every “fact” militates against his argument. First of all the
abovesaid Rule 3A-I-A-(II) deserves a look as it appears in
Swamy‟s Pension Compilation incorporating CCS Pension Rules
(incorporating

corrections

received

upto

February

2002)

Sixteenth edition 2002 at pages 325 and 326. Again it must be
borne in mind that the provisions of the rule is not to be read in
bits and pieces to the detriment of one and to the benefit of
other. This provision is reproduced as follows:3-A (1)
(a)

(b)

Disablement shall be accepted as due to
Government service, provided that it is certified
that it is due to wound, injury or disease which(i)
Is attributable to Government Service, or
(ii) Existed before or arose during Government
service and has been and remains
aggravated thereby.
Death shall be accepted as due to Government
service provided it is certified that it was due to
or hastened by (i)
a wound, injury or disease which was
attributable to Government service, or
(ii)

(2)

the aggravation by Government service of a
wound, injury or disease which existed
before or arose during Government service.

There shall be a casual connection between –
(a)

disablement and Government Service; and

WP(C) No.5319/2004

Page 6 of 13

(b)

death and Government service,
for attributability or aggravation to be conceded.
Guidelines in this regard are given in the
Appendix which shall be treated as part and
parcel of these Rules.”

Again there is a clarification appended thereto which reads“Clarification – It will be seen from the new
(revised) Forms `C‟ , `D‟ and `E‟ that these
forms of medical certificates have been so
designed that they would indicate whether
the entitlement criteria laid down in new
Rule 3-A have been satisfied or not, and
therefore, normally, no other separate
certificates in that behalf may be necessary.
It is essential for the Administrative Officer
as well as the Audit Office (PAO) concerned
to
satisfy
themselves
that
the
death/disability is, in fact, attributable to or
aggravated by the Government service
which alone makes an EOP Award admissible
and for that purpose, it is essential for both
of these authorities to satisfy themselves in
that behalf and certify the nexus and casual
connection
between
disablement
and
Government service or between death and
Government service (as the case may be), in
any particular case, as laid down in the new
Rule 3-A on the basis of the medical and
other documents regarding the case. If a
Government servant had died in such
circumstances and that a medical report
could not be secured, even then, the nexus
and the casual connection between death
and Government service has to be
established before conceding acceptance of
death due to Government service.”

WP(C) No.5319/2004

Page 7 of 13

It appears that all these provisions appearing in various Acts
are para materia to each other. The above quoted rule, even if it
is assumed to be applicable to the BSF, does not extend any help
to the petitioner.
6.

The perusal of the record clearly goes to show that the

petitioner was suffering from the above said disease prior to his
joining the service in BSF. Medical Board proceedings Annexure
R-1 is a document of utmost importance. It clears the position to
a large extent. The history of the above said illness was recorded
therein. The relevant portion coming out from horse‟s mouth is
reproduced below :
“Since the age of 14 he was apparently well. At his
age of 15 he suddenly developed convulsions. The
convulsion was generalized, history of tongue bite,
dribbling of saliva present he has had convulsions off
and on from that time. As per his statement he was
taking Ayurvedic treatment upto the age of 20 years.
The details of treatment and medicines he was taking
not known, and no medical documents is available
with him. Later during he joined BSF and underwent
basic training at STC Jodhpur. During training also he
was taking Ayurvedic medicines and here is no history
convulsions during the period. After completion of his
training he joined 102 Bn BSF at Srinagar on Feb‟ 90.
After that since April ‟91 he did not have any
convulsions and he was performing all duties. During
the month of May ‟91 he again developed convulsions.
Later he was referred to BSF Hospital New Delhi.

WP(C) No.5319/2004

Page 8 of 13

From there he was referred to Safdarjung
Hospital New Delhi. Necessary investigations were
done and diagnosed as a case of Grandmal Epilepsy.
There he was prescribed T. Gardenal 60mg daily and
T. Mazetal 100 mg tds. Since then was taking the
medicines regularly and there was the complaint.
Later since April ‟92 he stopped the medicines on his
own and as per his statement there is no complaint.
2.
He sustained injury to left elbow on 6.2.92 when
he fell down, while he was on annual leave he took
treatment from a local practitioner and was advised
exercises of elbow. He then developed pain in left
elbow and difficulty in bending the elbow. Later he
noticed the wasting of musdes of left hand associated
with numbness along the ulnar aspect of left forearm
and hand, which is progressively increasing.
On
19.5.92 he was referred to 150 GH. Necessary X-rays
were taken and there he was diagnosed as a “Old case
of Fracture medial Expicondyle with Tardy ulnar nerve
palsy-LT” From there he was referred to northen
command Hospital Udhampur. There he underwent
Anterior Transposition of the Ulnar nerve on 8.6.92.
After surgery restriction of elbow joint movements and
neurological deficit is the same.”
7.

Under these circumstances, it cannot be said that the above

said disease is attributable to his service in the BSF. The learned
counsel for the petitioner did not pick up a dispute with the fact
that the husband of the petitioner developed convulsions at the
age of 15 years.

He did not challenge the Medical Board

proceedings Annexure RI or Annexure R4. We find considerable
force in the argument urged by the learned counsel for the
WP(C) No.5319/2004

Page 9 of 13

respondents to the effect that the husband of the petitioner
appears to have suppressed this fact at the time of his
enrollment in BSF.

A known case of epilepsy cannot be

attributable to or aggravated by military service within short span
of six or twelve months.

At the time of enrollment the

respondents are not supposed to conduct Computed Tomography
(CT Scan) or Electroencephalogram (EEG) during the routine
check up.
8.

In a recent authority reported in Union of India and Ors. Vs.

Keshar Singh, 2007 (6) SCALE 17, the following authorities were
referred :
“7. In Union of India and Anr. v. Baljit Singh (1996) 11

SCC 315 this Court had taken note of Rule 173 of the
Pension Regulations. It was observed that where the
Medical Board found that there was absence of proof
of the injury/illness having been sustained due to
military service or being attributable thereto, the High
Court's direction to the Government to pay disability
pension was not correct. It was inter alia observed as
follows :
“6. ....It is seen that various criteria have been

prescribed in the guidelines under the Rules as
to when the disease or injury is attributable to
the military service. It is seen that under Rule
173 disability pension would be computed only
when disability has occurred due to wound,
injury or disease which is attributable to military
service or existed before or arose during military
WP(C) No.5319/2004

Page 10 of 13

service and has been and remains aggravated
during the military service. If these conditions
are satisfied, necessarily the incumbent is
entitled to the disability pension. This is made
ample clear from clause (a) to (d) of para 7 which
contemplates that in respect of a disease the
Rules enumerated thereunder required to be
observed. Clause (c) provides that if a disease is
accepted as having arisen in service, it must also
be established that the conditions of military
service determined or contributed to the onset of
the disease and that the conditions were due to
the circumstances of duty in military service.
Unless these conditions satisfied, it cannot be
said that the sustenance of injury per se is on
account of military service. In view of the report
of the Medical Board of Doctors, it is not due to
military service. The conclusion may not have
been satisfactorily reached that the injury though
sustained while in service, it was not on account
of military service. In each case, when a
disability pension is sought for made a claim, it
must be affirmatively established, as a fact, as to
whether the injury sustained was due to military
service or was aggravated which contributed to
invalidation for the military service”.
8. The position was again reiterated in Union of India
and Ors. V. Dhir Singh China, Colonel (Retd.) (2003) 2
SCC 382. In para 7 it was observed as follows :
7. That leaves for consideration Regulation 53.
The said Regulation provides that on an officer
being compulsorily retired on account of age or
on completion of tenure, if suffering on
retirement from a disability attributable to or
aggravated by military service and recorded by
service medical authority, he may be granted, in
addition to retiring pension, a disability element
as if he had been retired on account of disability.
WP(C) No.5319/2004

Page 11 of 13

It is not in dispute that the respondent was
compulsorily retired on attaining the age of
superannuation. The question, therefore, which
arises for consideration is whether he was
suffering, on retirement, from a disability
attributable to or aggravated by military service
and recorded by service medical authority. We
have already referred to the opinion of the
Medical Board which found that the two
disabilities from which the respondent was
suffering were not attributable to or aggravated
by military service. Clearly therefore, the opinion
of the Medical Board ruled out the applicability of
Regulation 53 to the case of the respondent. The
diseases from which he was suffering were not
found to be attributable to or aggravated by
military service, and were in the nature of
constitutional diseases. Such being the opinion of
the Medical Board, in our view the respondent
can derive no benefit from Regulation 53. The
opinion of the Medical Board has not been
assailed in this proceeding and, therefore, must
be accepted.
9. The above position was highlighted in Controller of
Defence Accounts (Pension) and Ors. v. S.
Balachandran Nair (2005) 13SCC 128.”
9.

Similar view was taken in another case in Union of India &

anr. Vs. Bashirbhai R. Khiliji, 2007 (8) Scale 63.
10.

In the above said authorities the Apex Court authoritatively

laid down that prudence has to be given to the findings recorded
by the Medical Board which remains unrebutted on the record till

WP(C) No.5319/2004

Page 12 of 13

date. For all these reasons, we find no force in these arguments
and the writ petition is hereby dismissed.

J.M. MALIK, J.

A.K. SIKRI, J.
March 14, 2008
dk

WP(C) No.5319/2004

Page 13 of 13

