*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Decision : 15th February, 2008

%
+

WP(C) No.1153/2008
Lt. Col. Sanjay Sitanshu
S/o Shri L.P.Yadav,
509 Army Base Wksp, Agra Cantt.

....

Petitioner

Versus
1.

Union of India
through Secretary, Ministry of Defence,
New Delhi

2.

Chief of Army Staff
Army Headquaters
DHQ P.O.
New Delhi

3.

General Officer Commanding
Convening Authority GCM
12 RAPID
C/O 56 APO

4.

Colonel D.S.Dahiya
Presiding Officer, GCM,
65 Armoured Regiment,
C/o 56 APO

...

Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case :
For the petitioner

: Petitioner in person

For the respondents : Ms.Jyoti Singh, Advocate
WP(C) No.1153/2008

Page 1 of 8

CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K. SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE J.M. MALIK
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

A.K. SIKRI, J (ORAL)
*
1.

The petitioner was appointed as Defending Officer for one

Lt. Col. Harbans Singh of 614 EME Battalion.

The said Lt. Col.

Harbans Singh is facing General Court Martial (for short “GCM”)
proceedings and the petitioner is defending him in those
proceedings.

The GCM proceedings are still underway.

In this

petition filed by the petitioner, the petitioner has alleged that the
GCM proceedings are not held in accordance with the provisions
of Army Act and Army Rules as are applicable to such GCMs. In
this behalf, inter alia, he alleged that his submissions before the
open court are not being recorded, which is contrary to Army
Rule 92. He further alleged that he had also made submissions
as per Army Rules 39, 44, 49, 51 and 53 which were also not

WP(C) No.1153/2008

Page 2 of 8

considered. The petitioner, therefore, has approached this Court
to quash the GCM proceedings being illegal and for direction to
conduct the GCM in a legal and lawful manner in accordance with
the provisions of Army Act and Army Rules.
2.

The learned counsel for the respondents, at the outset, has

taken two preliminary submissions to the maintainability of the
writ petition. The first submission is with regard to the territorial
jurisdiction of this Court. The locus standi of the petitioner to file
such a petition is also challenged on the ground that it is the Lt.
Col. Harbans Singh who would be competent to file any such
petition as the GCM is convened against him.

Insofar as the

submission with respect to territorial jurisdiction is concerned, it
is pointed out that no cause of action or even a part of cause of
action has arisen within the territorial jurisdiction of this Court. It
is pointed out that Lt. Col. Harbans Singh belongs to 614 EME
Battalion which is located at Dehradun. It is further stated that
the GCM is convened at Jodhpur.
3.

We find merit in these submissions of the learned counsel

for the respondents. Only because the Head Quarter of the Army
is situated in Delhi would not confer jurisdiction on this Court.

WP(C) No.1153/2008

Page 3 of 8

This aspect is dealt with in detail by a Division Bench judgment of
this Court in the case of Ex.Rect./GD Vinod Kumar Vs. Union of
India and Ors. [135(2006) DLT 414].

After taking stock of the

plethora of judgments of the Apex court as well as of this Court
the Division Bench has culled out various principles governing the
issue of territorial jurisdiction. Specific reference is made to the
judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Kusum Ingots and
Alloys Ltd. Vs. Union of India and Another [2004 (6) SCC 254],
wherein it is held that unless a cause of action or a part of cause
of action arises within the territorial jurisdiction of the High Court,
the high Court will not have jurisdiction to entertain the petition.
The Supreme Court in the said judgment has gone to the extent
of holding that even if the small part of cause of action arises
within the territorial jurisdiction of the High Court, the same by
itself cannot be considered to be the determinative factor
compelling the High Court to decide the matter on merits. The
Supreme Court also rejected the contention based on the location
of the Central Government in Delhi as sufficient factor to confer
the jurisdiction on this Court.

WP(C) No.1153/2008

Page 4 of 8

4.

The

petitioner submitted that he had approached the

confirming authority, namely, the Chief of Army Staff under the
provisions of Section 164 of the Army Act by making a
representation dated 20th January, 2008 but no action is taken
thereon till date. He submits that since the Chief of Army Staff is
the

competent authority to deal with any such representation

under Section 164 of the Army Act, this Court will have the
jurisdiction to

issue directions to him.

We would have been

persuaded with such a submission but for the fact that in the
present case, the representation under Section 164 of the Army
Act lies to the Army Commander, South Western Command. It is
only a petition

under Section 164(2) of the Army Act, which

would be a post confirmation petition after the conclusion of the
GCM and in case any conviction/sentence is passed upon the
accused, that would be maintainable before the Chief of Army
Staff. Since in the present case, the proceedings are still not over
and any order passed at this stage can be challenged under
Section 164(1) of the Army Act alone, the Chief of Army Staff
does not come into picture at

this stage.

This may not be

the ground to confer the jurisdiction on this Court.

WP(C) No.1153/2008

Even if

Page 5 of 8

the mandamus is to be issued directing the competent authority
to

pass

appropriate

orders

on

the

representation

of

the

petitioner, that competent authority is not the Chief of Army
Staff.
5.

The petitioner at this stage has raised another important

issue which may need some consideration. His submission is that
the Army officials who are posted to such battalions do not
remain static inasmuch such battalions keep on shifting from one
place to another and the officers attached to those battalions
have also to move. In such a situation, he further submits that
soldiers defend the frontiers of the country and take part in peace
operations even when there is no war. There should not be any
limitation of boundaries for such officers to seek their redressal.
Insofar as filing of petition before a particular High Court is
concerned. He submits that there may be a possibility that the
Court Martial Proceedings take place where a particular officer is
posted e.g. Jammu and Kashmir and thereafter, he may be
transferred to a faraway place, such an officer cannot be forced
to go to Jammu and Kashmir to file the petition.

As pointed out

above, there may be some force in this submission.

WP(C) No.1153/2008

We

Page 6 of 8

appreciate the difficulty faced by such officials. If an aggrieved
official is forced to go to a distant place to seek his remedy, it
may be an impossible task for him as it would involve not only
travelling to a distant place repeatedly, but huge expenditure
which he may not be able to afford. It may amount to negation of
access to justice, which is the right of every citizen of this
country. This is more so when with the laudable object of `justice
at doorstep’ in mind various measures of other kinds are being
taken. There is thus a need to make appropriate amendment in
the Rules or Act to confer necessary territorial jurisdiction. We
may point out that there already exists a provision to this effect
in the Rules framed under the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985.
Rule 6 of the Central Administrative Tribunal (Procedure) Rules,
1987 provides as under:
“6.Place of filing applications – (1) An application
shall ordinarily be filed by an applicant with the
Registrar of the Bench within whose jurisdiction –
(i)
The applicant is posted for the time being, or
(ii) The cause of action, wholly or in part, has arisen:
Provided that with the leave of the Chairman the
application may be filed with the Registrar of the
Principal Bench and subject to the orders under
section 25, such application shall be heard and
disposed of by the Bench which has jurisdiction over
the matter.
WP(C) No.1153/2008

Page 7 of 8

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1)
persons who have ceased to be in service by reason of
retirement, dismissal or termination of service may at
his option file an application with the Registrar of the
Bench within whose jurisdiction such person is
ordinarily residing at the time of filing of the
application.”
It would be, therefore, for the legislature to take care of this
hardship faced by such officials and make appropriate provisions
in this regard.

The Parliament has already enacted the Armed

Force Tribunal Act, 2007. The feasibility of framing similar rule
under

that

Act

may

be

examined

by

the

Central

Government/Legislature.
7.

The position in law as it stands today would compel us to

hold that we do not have territorial jurisdiction to entertain the
present petition.

We, therefore, dismiss this petition on this

ground leaving the petitioner to approach the appropriate High
Court for redressal of his grievance.
8.

A copy of this order be given dasti to the petitioner.

A.K. SIKRI, J.

February 15, 2008
dc
WP(C) No.1153/2008

J.M. MALIK, J.
Page 8 of 8

