*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

%

Date of Reserve : 29.02.2008
Date of Decision : 14.03.2008

+1. WP(C) No.9109/2005
Sqn. Ldr. Himanshu Goswami F (P)
S.NO. – 22728 (L)
88 Pocket B, Phase II,
Ashok Vihar, Delhi – 52

....

Petitioner

Versus
1.

UOI, Secretary,
Ministry of Defence
South Delhi Block,
New Delhi

2.

Chief of Air Staff,
Vayu Bhawan,
New Delhi

...

Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case :
For the petitioner

: Mr.Rajiv Shakdher, Sr.Advocate with
Mr.Rakesh Gosain, Advocate

For the respondents : Ms.Jyoti Singh, Advocate
2.

WP(C) No.20269/2005

Sqn. Ldr. V. Shukla

...... Petitioner
Versus

1.

Union of India
Secretary, Ministry of Defence,

WP(C) No.9109/2005

Page 1 of 38

South Delhi Block,
New Delhi
2.

Chief of Air Staff,
Vayu Bhawan,
New Delhi

.....

Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case :
For the petitioner

: Mr.Rajshekhar Rao and Mr.Akashdeep
Singh.

For the respondents : Ms.Jyoti Singh
3.

WP(C) No.11359/2005

Sqn. Ldr. P. Bakshi

...... Petitioner
Versus

1.

Union of India
Secretary, Ministry of Defence
South Delhi Block,
New Delhi

2.

Chief of Air Staff,
Vayu Bhawan
New Delhi

.....

Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case :
For the petitioner

: Mr.Manmohan, Sr.Advocate with
Mr.Rakesh Gosain,

For the respondents : Ms.Jyoti Singh,
CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K. SIKRI
WP(C) No.9109/2005

Page 2 of 38

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE J.M. MALIK
(1)

Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

(2)

To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

(3)

Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

J.M. MALIK, J.
*
1.

The core issue in all the abovesaid three petitions is

whether all the petitioners who are working as pilots/Sqn. Leaders
are entitled to discharge from service/pre-retirement from Indian
Air Force.

The facts and questions of law are almost identical

hence this judgment would dispose of all the three petitions.
2.

Case

of

Sqn.

Leader

Himanshu

Goswami

(F)

WP

(C)No.9109/2005.
The petitioner in response to a public notification in the year
1990-1993 applied and was selected for the flying branch of
Indian Air Force. After successful training he was commissioned
as pilot and rose to the rank of Sqn. Leader having specific duty
of flying Transporter Aircraft and other secondary duties as per
the directions and orders of the respondents as NDA candidate.
WP(C) No.9109/2005

Page 3 of 38

Thereafter, the petitioner carried out his duties with full zeal and
zest for a period of nine years. The mother of the petitioner, who
was employed with a Bank, suffered with arthritis, migraine
attacks with hyper tension and cholesterol problem. She had to
resign her job in 2001. The doctors had certified her to be a case
of total disability. She is bed-ridden and needs constant care and
attention.

The petitioner is her only child.

The father of the

petitioner is aged about 65 years, suffers from a host of old age
related diseases and is unable to do the needful. He is jobless
since 1996 and is totally dependent upon the petitioner. It is also
pointed out that nowadays the life of the old couples and senior
citizens in the cosmopolitan city is not safe due to law and order
position prevalent here.

Keeping

in

view

the

above-said

circumstances, the petitioner filed an application for premature
discharge/release from service on compassionate grounds with
effect from 20th January, 2005.

The said application of the

petitioner was duly recommended and verified by the medical
officer of the department and Air Officer Commanding of the
respondents.

However, contrary to their policy dated 7th March,

2003 the respondent rejected the prayer of the petitioner vide
WP(C) No.9109/2005

Page 4 of 38

letter dated 18th March, 2005.
3.

Case of Sqn. Ldr V.Shukla WP (C) No.20269/2005. The

petitioner in response to a public notification in the year 19921996 applied and was selected for the flying branch of Indian Air
Force. After successful training he was commissioned as Pilot in
the Indian Air Force and rose to the rank of Sqn. Leader having
specific duty of flying Transport Aircraft and other secondary
duties as per the directions and orders of the respondents.
Thereafter, he carried out his duties with full zeal and zest. The
petitioner applied for premature discharge on the following
compassionate grounds. Firstly, in the year 2002, his mother was
diagnosed for suffering with acute depression, sugar and
hypertensive.

She was operated upon thrice.

Secondly, the

petitioner is a resident of a village situated within the areas of
Allahabad and Dehradun. His brother has been non-cooperative.
The above-said property is unsafe. Lastly, the younger sister of
the petitioner is not getting married and now she is over age.
During the pendency of his above-said application his mother
suffered an eye haemorrhage and lost her vision. The father of
the petitioner is also stated to be old who suffers with multiple
WP(C) No.9109/2005

Page 5 of 38

diseases and is unable to render any help to his mother. On 24 th
August, 2005, the petitioner was interviewed by Mr. K.D. Singh,
ACS PO AVM at Air Head Quarter and his application was referred
for sympathetic consideration.

But Mr.Singh displayed his

inability to help the petitioner in this context. His application for
premature release was ultimately rejected on 26th August, 2005
without assigning any reason.
4.

Case of Sqn. Ldr. P.Bakshi WP(C) No.11359/2005. The

petitioner was commissioned as Pilot in the Indian Air Force and
rose to the rank of Sqn. Leader having specific duty of flying
Helicopter during the years 1989-1993.

Thereafter, within the

span of nine years he carried out his duties with full zeal and
zest. He was transferred four times. His father suffered a Heart
attack and was operated for triple vessel bypass surgery at
Escorts Heart Institute, New Delhi on 14th February, 2002. The
petitioner's father did not recover fully and further suffered other
multiple health problems. In February, 2004, his gall bladder had
to be removed. His health deteriorated and he was re-admitted
in ICU where he was diagnosed with an acute form of
pancreatitis. In April, 2003 the father of the petitioner suffered
WP(C) No.9109/2005

Page 6 of 38

from repeated loss of consciousness and fainted for no apparent
reason on four occasions.

He was medically treated and had

been on regular medication for “syncope” to prevent seizure.
The father of the petitioner, who is aged 63 years, is not able to
look after himself. Petitioner's mother suffered from arthritis and
B.P.

She is also not able to render much of assistance.

The

health of the father of the petitioner further deteriorated as he is
now also ailing from hyper tension and cervical spondalitus. He
needs constant care and attention with medical aid. For security
reasons they cannot be left alone because the life of old couples
and senior citizens nowadays are in danger due to law and order
position prevalent in the city.
Common Facts
5.

It was averred in all the petitions that the similarly situated

officers were given the premature retirement.

The petitioners

have furnished the list of seventeen to twenty such like officers
who were given the pre-retirement. It was pointed out that this
Court, too, vide its order dated 17th February, 2002 had
discharged one Sqn. Leader Gautam Banerjee, in Writ Petition No.
7825/2001.

On these grounds, the present writ petitions were

WP(C) No.9109/2005

Page 7 of 38

filed with the prayer that the respondents be directed to
discharge the petitioners from service on the aforesaid grounds.
6.

The respondents have listed the following defences in their

counter affidavits.

Pursuant to the selection of the petitioners,

they underwent three years training at the cost of the State. This
was followed by the flying training, the cost of which is in crores
of rupees, which was fully borne by the State. Lakhs and crores
of rupees are spent over a pilot to train him for the said purpose.
The petitioners‟
substantially.

training

has

cost

the

public

ex

chequer

To train another officer and to meet his service

requirements would be an additional liability both financially as
well as operationally. The request made by the petitioners were
considered on merits and though their request was rejected, yet
they were advised that they could seek a posting near their
hometowns for resolving their problems. The applications of the
petitioners were considered in accordance with the guidelines of
the

existing

policies

by

the

competent

authority.

The

respondents have placed on record a copy of the human resource
policy dated 7th March, 2003 as Annexure R-1, which according to
the respondent provides broad guidelines in respect to premature
WP(C) No.9109/2005

Page 8 of 38

retirement/release of officers and has been sincerely adhered to
in the case of the petitioners.

It is explained that the actual

purpose for seeking premature retirement is not infirmity of
parents but to seek employment for better prospects. Had the
intention of the petitioners been to look after their parents, they
were offered with an opportunity to seek a posting near their
hometown while continuing in service but the same was not
availed.

It is contended that the facts of the above-said

seventeen/twenty officers are different from the facts of the
instant case. It is explained that as a matter of fact petitioner
P.Bakshi has brother and sister. Despite this fact the petitioner
was advised to apply for a posting so as to enable him to
continue in service and to look after his father. As per the terms
and conditions of service of the Indian Air Force, all personnel are
to serve in any part of India or abroad. It is alleged that in the
shield of father's illness the petitioner wants to be discharged so
that he can join the private service and earn monetary benefits
without appreciating the factum of expenses borne by the
Government to give him such an extensive training of a pilot. It
is

admitted

that

WP(C) No.9109/2005

though

the

petitioner's

application

was

Page 9 of 38

recommended by the Commanding Officer, yet it was not
approved by the competent officer, Air Head Quarter due to lack
of merit. The petitioner was advised vide letter dated 4 th May,
2005 that he could seek a posting of his choice so as to enable
him to resolve his difficulties.
7.

We have heard the counsel for the parties and gone through

the written notes filed by them. The counsel for the petitioner
Sqn. Ldr Himanshu Goswami argued with vehemence that the
position of the mother of the petitioner is precarious.

It was

submitted that she took VRS in the year 2001. The father of the
petitioner, who is aged about 69 years, is also sick.

It is

explained that while deciding the case of the petitioner the
concerned authority did not apply its mind and did not give any
reason for rejecting the application. It was also submitted that
the

other

similarly

release/discharge order.

situated

persons

were

given

the

The petitioner furnished a number of

such cases and the respondents have failed to give any
satisfactory reply. Again, the petitioner has already completed
fourteen and a half years of service and this fact should have
been taken into consideration.
WP(C) No.9109/2005

It was argued that the posting
Page 10 of 38

tenure in Delhi is only two years and posting in Delhi would not
serve any purpose.

It was also pointed out that the petitioner

does not have any vested right and he is ready to give
undertaking to the Court that he will not join any other private
job.

The petitioner has made a query under the RTI Act.

The

following opinion was supplied to him:

“(a) Per Capita cost of Training of PC Pilot (1992-93) (Rs. In lakhs)
Streams
Fighter
Transport
Helicopter

NDA Cost
221.54
193.29
110.43

Non-NDA Cost
221.86
193.61
110.75

(b)
SSC Helicopter Pilot for 1992-93 The cost of training of PC & SSC
is same as the syllabus of PC and SSC pilot is same. Hence, the cost as
mentioned above for helicopter stream can be applicable both for PC
and SSC.
(c)
SSC (Women) Helicopter Pilot for 2005-06 As the syllabus for PC
and SSC pilot is same, the cost of training for both is also same. Per
capita cost (Rs in lakhs) of Helicopter pilot of NDA and Non NDA stream
is Rs. 239.88 and Rs. 240.90 respectively”

It was brought to the notice of the Court that a lot of pilots
(example of five were cited) of varying seniority were arbitrarily
released by Air Force over the period running upto five years
during and after the process of petitioner‟s application on almost
the same grounds and a few on frivolous ones such as Sqn.
WP(C) No.9109/2005

Page 11 of 38

Leader J.S. Ahuja on the ground, “Evincing lack of interest in
service” and four others whose cases were not covered in the
abovesaid policy.

Father of Mukesh Sehgal was suffering from

arthritis and he was released. However, in case of petitioner it
was stated that the petitioner‟s case was not meritorious enough.
The respondents have failed to cite a single case of “only child”
whose application was turned down. The petitioner was treated
discriminately and partially.
8.

The learned counsel for Sqn. Leader V. Shukla made the

following submissions.

The petitioner was interviewed on his

application for premature release on 24th August, 2005 where he
was dissuaded from leaving the services. It was submitted that
no alternative posting was ever suggested to him during the said
interview as alleged in the counter affidavit. The application of
the petitioner was rejected vide impugned order dated 26 th
August, 2005. The relevant portion of the impugned order runs
as follows:
“Request for premature retirement for service on
compassionate grounds in respect of the above
mentioned officer has been considered at an
WP(C) No.9109/2005

Page 12 of 38

appropriate level at this HQ and has not been
agreed to.”

It is argued that this is completely a non-speaking order
containing no reasons in support thereof. The petitioner has filed
CM No. 7012/2007 seeking a direction to the respondents to
consider the recent medical records pertaining to his parents
which clearly establish that the petitioner„s request for preretirement is genuine one and he is covered by the above-said
policy. It was further explained that the above-said request was
not responded.

It was also submitted that the petitioner was

offered a posting to either Allahabad or Dehradun. But when the
petitioner moved a formal application dated 14th November, 2006
for his posting close to his home town in order to be nearer to his
parents, he was instead posted further away to Hyderabad
despite the existence of vacancy against which he could be
adjusted in Hindon, Ghaziabad. It was also argued on behalf of
the petitioner that he has recently gone through a divorce. Again
he has been placed in low medical category and therefore
rendered unfit for flying itself since 19th March, 2006 which has
WP(C) No.9109/2005

Page 13 of 38

added further mental and emotional trauma suffered by him. In
his written submissions the petitioner has named six persons,
who according to him, are similarly situated. According to him,
they do not satisfy the requirement of a pre-retirement policy but
have been granted premature retirement.

It is alleged that

arbitrary discrimination has been meted out to the petitioner.
The application of the petitioner is not considered in accordance
with the aforesaid policy.
9.

Counsel for the P.Bakshi submitted that the petitioner has

got one married brother who is settled in Romania and a married
sister who is settled in Dubai. The father of the petitioner is an
old man of 64 years. He was retired from BHEL, a public sector
company. He draws no pension and has no source of income. It
was argued that the petitioner's appeal for reconsideration of his
discharge was also turned down.

The petitioner had filed an

application under the Right to Information Act. He came to know
that the respondent had obtained information regarding his
father's ailment of heart by pass and syncope from Doctor
(Aviation Mission). Though the father of the petitioner was not
examined, yet an opinion was given that a heart patient of sixty
WP(C) No.9109/2005

Page 14 of 38

four years with syncope seizure and cervical spondalitis requires
no medical attention. However, the same doctor opined that the
medical conditions and surgeries stated by the petitioner are
genuine.

It was also stressed that a number of officers are

applying for release on vague reasons such as :


Failing business of father.



Looking after property of grandfather.



Feeling of discontentment.



Better prospects in civil.



Grounds of in-laws.

- Cases of release to officers who were in relation/proximity
of Senior Air Ranks.
Again, some officers were trained on particular

type of

aircraft, given time to clear their civil license and then given
premature release. It was further submitted that the cost
incurred on the training of a pilot of Indian Air Force is recovered
in ten years.

The Short Service Commissioned Officers have a

fixed tenure of ten years and/or free to leave after the expiry of
that term. If

the petitioner is

discharged he will loose

the

benefit of pension which would in excess of Rs. 30 lakhs. Again,
no Airlines would take a helicopter pilot to fly its passenger
WP(C) No.9109/2005

Page 15 of 38

airliner.

The petitioner himself has been out of flying for two

years. The learned counsel for the petitioner lastly pleaded that
the petitioner is ready to give an undertaking to the effect that in
case he is discharged form service, he will not join any such like
service in any private airline.
10.

In order to embolden their respective cases the learned

counsel for the petitioners have cited few authorities. In Major
S.K. Jain Vs. Union of India and Ors. [2000 (54) DRJ 188], the
judgment given by one of us (HMJ A.K.Sikri), it was held,
“The competent authority, on the basis of para 4,
observed that as grounds advanced by the
officer were not covered under the laid down
criteria, his application may be rejected. The
aforesaid record shows that the authorities were
influenced mainly by the consideration that the
examples in para B of the guidelines dated
20.1.1979 did not specifically stipulate the
grounds mentioned by the petitioner. Thus the
approach adopted by the Central Government
was clearly erroneous. As already pointed out,
the examples in para B are only illustrative. The
application of the petitioner was rejected only on
the basis that the reasons given by the petitioner
are not covered by specific instances mentioned
therein and the authorities did not look into this
aspect as to whether the grounds mentioned by
the petitioner could be considered as 'extreme
compassionate grounds'. The Army Hqrs. had
recommended the case of the petitioner which
clearly implies that reasons given by the
WP(C) No.9109/2005

Page 16 of 38

petitioner were treated as falling under 'extreme
compassionate grounds' by Army authorities.
Therefore it was necessary for the competent
authority
to
examine
whether
the
recommendation of the COAS treating the
reasons given by the petitioner as 'extreme
compassionate grounds' was proper or not,
instead of confining the consideration to the
specific instances mentioned in para B and
coming to the conclusion that the case of the
petitioner did not fall in those specific instances.
Competent authority thus committed an error in
treating these specific instances as exhaustive
rather than illustrative.”
11.

In Union of India Vs. Mohan Lal Capoor and Ors. [1974 1 SCR

797], it was held,
“A place on the approved select list certainly
confers a right to be appointed, according to
Rules 8 and 9, to cadre posts. Although, the
process of assessment by the Selection
Committee, and, thereafter, approval by the
Union Public Service Commission does not
involve observance of the "audi alteram patrem"
rule in all its rigour and with all its implications,
yet, it seems unfair to deprive a person suddenly
of either an expectation to be placed, and, even
more, of a place on a finalised select list, which
confers certain valuable rights on him, without
informing him of even the reasons for his
proposed supersession before its approval. At
any rate, Article 16 of our Constitution gives
rights to Govt. servants to be treated fairly and
squarely, reasonably and impartially in matters
relating to service.”

WP(C) No.9109/2005

Page 17 of 38

It was further held,
“We next turn to the provisions of Regulation
5(5) imposing a mandatory duty upon the
Selection Committee to record "its reasons for
the
proposed
supersession".
We
find
considerable force in the submission made on
behalf of the respondents that the "rubberstamp" reason given mechanically for the
supersession of each officer does not amount to
"reasons for the proposed supersession". The
most that could be said for the stock reason is
that it is a general description of the process
adopted in arriving at a conclusion. This apology
for reasons to be recorded does not go beyond
indicating a conclusion in each case that the
record of the officer concerned is not such as to
justify his appointment "at this stage in
preference to those selected”.
In the context of the effect upon the rights
of aggrieved persons, as members of a public
service who are entitled to just and reasonable
treatment, by reason of protections conferred
upon them by Articles 14 and 16 of the
Constitution, which are available to them
throughout their service, it was incumbent on the
Selection Committee to have stated reasons in a
manner which would disclose how the record of
each officer superseded stood in relation to
records of others who were to be preferred,
particularly as this is practically the only
remaining visible safeguard against possible
injustice and arbitrariness in making selections if
that had been done, facts on service records of
officers considered by the Selection Committee
would have been correlated to the conclusions
reached. Reasons are the links between the
materials on which certain conclusions are based
WP(C) No.9109/2005

Page 18 of 38

and the actual conclusions. They disclose how
the mind is applied to the subject matter for a
decision whether it is purely administrative or
quasi-judicial. They should reveal a rational
nexus between the facts considered and the
conclusions reached. Only in this way can
opinions or decisions recorded be shown to be
manifestly just and reasonable. We think that it
is not enough to say that preference should be
given because a certain kind of process was
gone through by the Selection Committee. This is
all that the supposed statement of reasons
amounts to. We, therefore, think that the
mandatory provisions of Regulation 5(5) were
not complied with. We think that reliance was
rightly placed by respondents on two decisions of
this Court relating to the effect of noncompliance with such mandatory provisions.
These were : Associated Electrical Industries
(India) Pvt. Ltd. Calcutta v. Its Workmen [AIR
1967 SC 284] and the Collector of Monghyr and
Ors. v. Keshav Prasad Goenka and Ors. [ 1963 (I)
SCR 98].”
12.

In Badrinath Vs. Government of Tamil Nadu [2000 (8) SCC

395], the Apex court was pleased to hold,
“88. We may, however, point out that it is not as
if there are no exceptions to this general
principle. The occasions where the Court issued a
writ of certiorari and quashed an order and had
also issued a mandamus at the same time to the
State or public authority could be very rare but
we might emphasise that the power of this Court
to mould the relief in the interests of justice in
extraordinary cases cannot be doubted. In
Comptroller & Auditor General of India v. K.S.
Jagannathan, (1986) 2 SCC 679, such a power on
WP(C) No.9109/2005

Page 19 of 38

the part of this Court was accepted by a three
Judge Bench, Madan, J. referred to the
observations of Subba Rao, J. (as he then was) in
Dwarkanath v. ITO, AIR 1966 SC 81, wherein the
learned Judge explained that our Constitution
designedly used wide language in Article 226 to
enable the Courts to 'reach justice wherever
found necessary' and 'to mould the reliefs to
meet peculiar and complicated requirements of
this country'. Justice Madon also referred to
Rochester Corpn. v. R, 1858 EB & E 1024, R. v.
Revising Barrister for the Borough of Hanley
1912 (3) KB 518, Padfield v. Minister of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, 1968 AC 997 and
to a passage from Halsbury's Laws of England,
4th Edn. Vol. 1, p. 59. Finally Madon, J. observed:
“20. There is thus no doubt that the High
Courts in India exercising their jurisdiction under
Article 226 have the power to issue a writ of
mandamus or a writ in the nature of mandamus
or to pass orders and give necessary directions
where the government or a public authority has
failed to exercise or has wrongly exercised the
discretion conferred upon it by a statute or a rule
or a policy decision of the government or has
exercised such discretion mala fide or on
irrelevant considerations or by ignoring the
relevant considerations and materials or in such
a manner as to frustrate the object of conferring
such discretion or the policy for implementing
which such discretion has been conferred. In all
such cases and in any other fit and proper case a
High Court can, in the exercise of its jurisdiction
under Article 226, issue a writ of mandamus or a
writ in the nature of mandamus or pass orders
and give directions to compel the performance in
a proper and lawful manner of the discretion
conferred upon the government or a public
authority, and in a proper case, in order to
WP(C) No.9109/2005

Page 20 of 38

prevent injustice resulting to the concerned
parties, the court may itself pass an order or give
directions which the government or the public
authority should have passed or given had it
properly and lawfully exercised its discretion.”
(emphasis supplied)
We emphasise the words underlined in the
above passage to the effect that the Court may
in some rare situations itself pass an order or
give directions which the government or the
public authority should have passed or given had
it properly and lawfully exercised its discretion.
The same view was expressed by another three
Judge Bench in B.C. Chaturvedi v. Union of India,
(1995) 6 SCC 749, even regarding disciplinary
cases. Verma, J. (as he then was) observed (at
SCC p. 762, para 18) as follows:
“The High Court/Tribunal, while exercising
the power of judicial review, cannot normally
substitute its own conclusion on penalty and
impose some other penalty. If the punishment
imposed by the disciplinary authority or the
appellate authority shocks the conscience of the
High Court/Tribunal, it would appropriately mould
the relief, either directing the disciplinary
authority/ appellate authority to reconsider the
penalty imposed, or to shorten the litigation, it
may itself, in exceptional and rare cases, impose
appropriate punishment with cogent reasons in
support thereof.”
(emphasis supplied)
The underlined words reiterate the powers of this
Court in rare and exceptional cases.”
13.

In Major Rahul Shukla Vs. Union of India and Ors.[59 (1995)

Delhi Law Times 573 (DB)], it was held,
WP(C) No.9109/2005

Page 21 of 38

“11. An application for resignation may be
rejected if it is not based on adequate and
justifiable reasons. The over-riding consideration
is whether the officer's continuance in service for
a specific period is necessary to meet exigencies
in a service and alternative arrangements cannot
be made. Even in such a case the application for
resignation cannot be rejected. It can only be
held in abeyance. In the case at band it is not the
case of the respondent that the facts stated by
the petitioner in his application for resignation
were false or were not adequate or not
justifiable. That finding could not have been
arrived at in as much as the Colonel
Commanding Officer having personally reviewed
the application, was satisfied of the validity
thereof. Any higher authority to form an opinion
different from the one expressed by the Colonel
Commanding Officer must have been possessed
of material concrete enough to form a different
opinion which it is not so.“
14.

In Bidi Supply Company Vs. Union of India [AIR 1956 SC

479], Justice Vivian Bose while agreeing with the then Hon‟ble
Chief Justice has observed,
“14. It is elementary that no two things are
exactly alike and it is equally obvious many
things have features that are common. Once the
lines of demarcation are fixed, the resultant
grouping is capable of objective determination
but the fixing of the lines is necessarily arbitrary
and to say that governments and legislatures
may classify is to invest them with a naked and
arbitrary power to discriminate as they please.
Faced with the inexorable logic of this position,
the learned Judges who apply this test are forced
WP(C) No.9109/2005

Page 22 of 38

to hedge it round with conditions which, to my
mind, add nothing to the clarity of the law. I will
pass over the limitations with which the
classification test is now judicially surrounded,
namely that it must be "reasonable", it must not
be "discriminatory" or "arbitrary", it must not be
"hostile"; there must be no "substantial
discrimination" and so forth, and will proceed at
once to a rule that is supposed to set the matter
at rest. The rule is taken from the American
decisions and was stated thus in The State of
West Bengal v. Anwar Ali Sarkar [[1952] S. C. R.
284, 334.] :
"In order to pass the test, two conditions
must be fulfilled, namely (1) that the
classification must be founded on an intelligible
differentia which distinguishes those that are
grouped together from others and (2) that that
differentia must have a rational relation to the
object sought to be achieved by the Act".
Mukherjea, J. (as he then was) said at page 321
ibid that
"the classification should never be arbitrary,
artificial or evasive. It must rest always upon real
and substantial distinction bearing a reasonable
and just relation to the thing in respect to which
the classification is made; and classification
made without any reasonable basis should be
regarded as invalid".
In another case, Ram Prasad Narayan Sahi v.
State of Bihar [[1953] S. C. R. 1129.], the same
learned Judge said at page 1139 "but such selection or differentiation must
not be arbitrary and should rest upon a rational
basis, having regard to the object which the
legislature has in view".
WP(C) No.9109/2005
Page 23 of 38

Ivor Jennings puts it another way :
"Among equals the law shall be equal and
shall be equally administered and that like shall
be treated alike".
xxx xxx xxx
23. After all, for whose benefit was the
Constitution enacted? What was the point of
making all this pother about fundamental rights?
I am clear that the Constitution is not for the
exclusive benefit of governments and States; it is
not only for lawyers and politicians and officials
and those highly placed. It also exists for the
common man, for the poor and the humble, for
those who have business at stake, for the
"butcher, the baker and the candlestick maker".
It lays down for this land "a rule of law" as
understood in the free democracies of the world.
It constitutes India into a Sovereign Democratic
Republic and guarantees in every page rights
and freedom to the individual side by side and
consistent with the overriding power of the State
to act for the common good of all.”
15.

In Indian Railway Construction Co. Ltd. Vs. Ajay Kumar

[(2003) 4 SCC 579], it was held,
13. One of the points that falls for determination is
the scope for judicial interference in matters of
administrative decisions. Administrative action is
stated to be referable to broad area of
Governmental activities in which the repositories of
power may exercise every class of statutory function
of executive, quasi-legislative and quasi-judicial
nature. It is trite law that exercise of power, whether
legislative or administrative, will be set aside if there
WP(C) No.9109/2005
Page 24 of 38

is manifest error in the exercise of such power or the
exercise of the power is manifestly arbitrary (See
State of U.P. and Ors. v. Renusagae Power Co. and
Ors. (AIR 1988 SC 173(SIC)). At one time, the
traditional view in England was that the executive
was not answerable where its action was
attributable to the exercise of prerogative power
Professor De Smith in his classical work "Judicial
Review of Administrative Action" 4th Edition at
pages 285-287 states the legal position in his own
terse language that the relevant principles
formulated by the Courts may be broadly
summarised as follows. The authority in which a
discretion is vested can be compelled to exercise
that discretion, but not to exercise it in any
particular manner. IN general a discretion must be
exercised only by the authority to which it is
committed. That authority must genuinely address
itself to the matter before it; it must not act under
the dictates of another body or disable itself from
exercising a discretion in each individual case. In the
purported exercise of its discretion, it must not do
what it has been forbidden to do, nor must it do
what it has not been authorized to do. It must act in
good faith, must have regard to all relevant
considerations and must not be influenced by
irrelevant considerations, must not seek to promote
purposes alien to the letter or to the spirit of the
legislation that gives it power to act, and must not
act arbitrarily on capriciously. These several
principles can conveniently be grouped in two main
categories: (i) failure to exercise a discretion, and (ii)
excess or abuse of discretionary power. The two
classes are not, however, mutually exclusive. Thus,
discretion may be improperly fettered because
irrelevant considerations have been taken into
account, and where an authority hands over its
discretion to another body it acts ultra vires.
xxx xxx xxx
WP(C) No.9109/2005

Page 25 of 38

18. Therefore, to arrive at a decision on
"reasonableness" the Court has to find out if the
administrator has left out relevant factors or taken
into account irrelevant factors. The decision of the
administrator must have been within the four
corners of the law, and not one which no sensible
person could have reasonably arrived at, having
regard to the above principles, and must have been
a bona fide one. The decision could be one of many
choices open to the authority but it was for that
authority to decide upon the choice and not for the
Court to substitute its view.
19. The principles of judicial review of administrative
action were further summarized in 1985 by Lord
Diplock in CCSU case as illegality, procedural
impropriety and irrationality. He said more grounds
could in future become available, including the
doctrine of proportionality which was a principle
followed by certain other members of the European
Economic Community. Lord Diplock observed in that
case as follows:
".....Judicial review has I think, developed to a stage
(SIC) when, without reiterating (SIC) analysis of the
steps by which the development has come about,
one can conveniently classify under three heads the
grounds on which administrative action is subject to
control by judicial review. The first ground I would
call 'illegality', the second 'irrationality' and the third
'procedural impropriety'. That is not to say that
further development on a case-by-case basis may
not in course of time add further grounds. I have in
mind particularly the possible adoption in the future
of the principle of 'proportionality' which is
recognized in the administrative law of several of
our fellow members of the European Economic
Community."

Lord Diplock explained "irrationality" as follows:
WP(C) No.9109/2005

Page 26 of 38

"By 'irrationality' I mean what can by now be
succinctly
referred
to
as
Wednesbury
unreasonableness'. It applies to a decision which is
to outrageous in its defiance of logic or of accepted
moral standards that no sensible person who had
applied his mind to the question to be decided could
have arrived at it."
16.

He has also cited an authority reported in Tandon Brothers

Vs. State of W.B. and Others [(2001) 5 SCC 664] which is also to
the same effect.
17.

All these arguments carry no conviction. It must be borne in

mind that it cannot be laid down as a rule of thumb that every
army man or pilot has to be given pre-retirement/discharge.
Every case has to be decided on its own merits. Reality should
dominate the court‟s mind. The Court is bound to approach the
problem

more

gingerly

and

realistically.

The

service

jurisprudence applicable to the Civil Services cannot be ipso facto
extended and applied to the Defence Forces which are a class by
themselves and therein considerations of secrecy and of safety,
security and sovereignty of the country have vital role to play
enabling personal interest to be scrutinized for or giving way to
the larger interests of the nation. The right of army personnel to
resign from his commission or Army cannot be wide and absolute
WP(C) No.9109/2005

Page 27 of 38

as it may be in Civil Services. An application filed by an army
man for resignation may be rejected if it is not based on
adequate and justifiable grounds. The overriding consideration is
whether the officer‟s continuance in service for a specific period
is necessary to meet exigencies in a service and alternative
arrangements cannot be made. This is an indisputable fact that
during the previous years the respondents were liberal in
granting the discharge or premature retirement but that position
has undergone a tremendous change.

The number of pilots is

reducing day by day, there is exodus of pilots, and therefore, the
respondents are not that liberal in granting their applications.
18.

The paramount consideration is the national interest and

whether the application made by the applicant is genuine. The
petitioners were informed time and again that they could be
transferred near their hometowns. The explanation given by the
petitioners that they are not willing to come near their home
towns as the maximum stay at the transferred place cannot be
more than two years, is by no means satisfactory. The petitioners
could have taken the chance to serve their parents and should
have got themselves transferred to their hometowns. After the
WP(C) No.9109/2005

Page 28 of 38

lapse of two years, they could have made another request in this
respect. To my mind, their lies no rub and in such circumstances
the stay of a pilot in Delhi or other hometown can be extended
for more than two years. It is clear that the petitioners do not
want to make avail of the said opportunity which was offered to
them time and again. The counsel for the petitioners themselves
admitted that the petitioners cannot attend to their mother or
father for twenty four hours. It is not humanly possible to sit with
the patient for the whole of your life. They will have to do some
work to earn their livelihood. It is, therefore, easy to cull out the
malafide intention of the petitioners.

The counsel for the

respondents argued that even if they make applications for their
transfer to their hometown in future those will be considered. In
addition, we further direct that in case such an application is
made the same shall be considered favourably.
19.

However, the case of Sqn. Ldr Vs. Shukla is somewhat

different. The counsel for the respondents assured the court that
his request for transfer near his hometown will be considered.
We hereby give one more opportunity to the petitioner to move a
fresh

application

in

WP(C) No.9109/2005

this

context

which

must

be

decided

Page 29 of 38

favourably. At the same time it will not be necessary to give him
a station of his choice like Ghaziabad. Allahabad or Dehradun will
be a better place and enable the petitioner to serve his parents.
20.

It must also be noticed that the problems faced by the

petitioners are similar to most people of their seniority in their
Department.
21.

Moreover, the above-said comparisons with other officers, if

any, would be odious.

The exact facts of the above-said

seventeen/twenty officers are not before us.

They were not

arrayed as respondents. The Court cannot make any comparison
with those officers. The parents‟ infirmity of every officer differs
from the other. Nothing was brought on record which may go to
show that the cases of the petitioners are similar to the case of
other seventeen/twenty officers.
22.

Again, in the instant case reasons were specified. The

learned counsel for the petitioner himself argued that the
petitioner was told that his case was not meritorious enough for
grant of premature release (see the written synopsis on behalf of
the Sqn. Leader Himanshu Goswami). It is also an admitted fact
that certain candidates were heard and interviewed. Again it can
WP(C) No.9109/2005

Page 30 of 38

be well assumed that there cases did not fall within the said
policy.

There is no evidence of apparent hostility or enmity or

malice or bias.

The respondents appear to have no guile.

A

Division Bench of this court in WP(C) No. 15557/2004 decided on
24th August, 2007 titled as S.K.Aggarwal, Ex. Brig. Vs. Union of
India and Ors. was pleased to hold,
“19…….While the show cause notice does not
specify the reasons why trial of the petitioner by
a general court martial was inexpedient or
impracticable, the official record produced by the
respondents before us contains those reasons
which we have already extracted in the earlier
part of this judgment. It is not, therefore, a case
of no reasons having been recorded. It is fairly
well settled that so long as the contemporaneous
official record bears the reasons on the basis of
which the authority passing the order has arrived
at this conclusion, it does not matter whether the
same were enumerated in the formal expression
of that order……”
23.

A Division Bench of this Court in WP(C) No.10630/2006 titled

as Major Gen B.D. Wadhwa, AVSM Vs. Union of India and Ors.
decided on 17th October, 2006 was pleased to observe,
“For a decision not to be hit by Rule of
Wednesbury, it is essential that there should be
patently no infirmity in the decision-making
process and it ought not to have been arbitrary.
The relevant materials must not have been
ignored by the authorities nor should they have
taken into consideration the irrelevant materials
WP(C) No.9109/2005

Page 31 of 38

to create an edge in favour of one and against
the other. Over-emphasizing a particular aspect
of the criteria, would certainly not be in
consonance with the doctrine of fairness. The
absence of detailed reasoning may be tolerable
but there has to be at least some iota of
reasoning on record to support the decisionmaking process and the ultimate decision. A
decision which has been taken in bad faith on
extraneous consideration or under extraneous
circumstances or there has been a disregard of
public policy, would be liable to be assailed
before the Court.”
24.

In Union of India and Ors. Vs. E.G. Nambudiri [(1991) 3 SCC

38], it was held that where a statute requires an authority though
acting administratively to record reasons, it is mandatory for the
authority to pass speaking orders and in the absence of reasons
the order would be rendered illegal.

Where a vested right is

adversely affected by an administrative order, or where civil
consequence ensue, principles of natural justice apply even if the
statutory provisions do not make any express provision for the
same, and the person concerned must be afforded opportunity of
hearing before the order is passed.

But principles of natural

justice do not require the administrative authority to record
reasons for the decision as there is no general rule that reasons
must be given for administrative decision.

Order of an

WP(C) No.9109/2005

Page 32 of 38

administrative authority which has no statutory or implied duty to
state reasons or the grounds of its decision is not rendered illegal
merely on account of absence of reasons. It has never been a
principle of natural justice,

that reasons should be given for

decisions. However, there is necessity for giving reasons in view
of the expanding law of judicial review to enable the citizens to
discover the reasoning behind the decision. Right to reasons is
an indispensable part of a sound system of judicial review. Under
our Constitution an administrative decision is subject to judicial
review if it affects the right of the citizen. It is therefore desirable
that reasons should be stated. If any challenge is made to the
validity of an order on the ground of its being arbitrary or mala
fide, it is always open to the authority concerned to place reasons
before the Court which may have persuaded it to pass the orders.
Such reasons must already exist on records as it is not
permissible to the authority to support the order by reasons not
contained in the records.
25.

Now we turn to the shortage of pilots faced by this country

where unemployment is the biggest problem. The facts of WP(C)
No. 10279/2006 titled as Sunil Kumar Vs. Union of India [DB]
WP(C) No.9109/2005

Page 33 of 38

decided on 31st August, 2006 by a Division Bench of this Court
are almost similar. In this case, it was held,
“The fact which cannot be disputed and in fact
has not been disputed is that the petitioner was
deputed in Army quota seat in the IIT for
completing M.Tech in „Laser and Electro Optics‟
at the Government cost. The admission to that
college was given to the petitioner from the
seats reserved for army officers and the
petitioner could have hardly got a seat on his
own in that college to do such a specialized
course.
Having taken the benefit of being
allotted seat in a college of great repute to do his
post graduation at Government expense and
after filling up a bond in favour of the
respondents, would by itself be a sufficient
ground for the respondents not to accept the
request of petitioner for resigning from
permanent commission. It is specifically pleaded
in the case of the respondents that there is
shortage of graduate/post graduate engineers in
the Core of EME and the request of the petitioner
cannot be accepted in view of exigencies of
service and in public interest.”
26.

Again, it must be borne in mind the above mentioned

amount spent on training etc. is incurred from the coffers of govt.
Ex Chequer. The court is not supposed to encourage those pilots
who want to leave Indian Air Force for their own material
benefits. In Sqn. Ldr. Shkul Tyagi Vs. UOI and Ors. [2006(86) DRJ
1 (DB)], it was held,

WP(C) No.9109/2005

Page 34 of 38

“9………True, the petitioner averred in his
petition that cases of officers of identical
problems were considered by the authorities and
they were given premature retirement but as we
have noticed in the policy dated 7th March,
2003, that cases of premature retirement on
compassionate grounds shall be determined on
the circumstances of the each case.
10. The petitioner, on whom the Government of
India had spent huge amount by imparting flying
training to him and had undergone three years
extensive flying training while in National
Defence Academy and other academies now
wants to quit abruptly because of the stated
family problem. We would not hesitate in stating
that at the time of joining the elite force the
petitioner was aware of the exigencies of serving
as an Air Force Officer and cannot now be
permitted to cite reasons of conjugal bliss. We
may further state that at the time when cadets
pass out they take oath to make a supreme
sacrifice if the occasion arise and even otherwise
having joined Indian Air Force, and having
received expensive training at the cost of the
State exchequer, he should not have thought of
quitting Air Force particularly abruptly when he
has a long and enthusiastic career ahead.
Domestic problems do come in the way of armed
personnel. These forces are trained to overcome
these difficulties and not to succumb to these
problems which we would call tiny problems in
comparison to the interest of the nation.
11. Even otherwise we are not satisfied if the
petitioner is quiting because of family problems.
The possibility that the petitioner desires to go
for better prospects in terms of money as there
is a growing need of commercial pilots because
of induction of numerous private airlines cannot
WP(C) No.9109/2005

Page 35 of 38

be ruled out. We do not say so on surmises but
the petitioner has himself stated in clause D of
grounds of writ petition that the right to
employment for better prospects is available to
the petitioner and same cannot be denied by the
authority having no power to do so. This gives an
indication that the possibility that the petitioner
may join some other airlines or some other
employment for better prospects cannot be ruled
out. We cannot lose sight of the fact that the
petitioner was trained at considerable public
expense to serve his motherland.
13. The respondents had offered to place the
petitioner at a station closest to his wife's place
of working. Notwithstanding the dismissal of this
petition if the petitioner makes a request for
such a posting within six weeks from today, the
respondents shall grant such a request as per
the offer made in court for a transfer to a station
proximate to his wife.”
.

Aggrieved by order of this court the petitioner in the

abovesaid case namely Shkul Tyagi had approached the Apex
Court which vide its order dated September 19, 2006 in Civil
Appellate Jurisdiction Civil Appeal No. 4197/2006 was pleased to
hold,
“This apart, while ordering notice in the Special
Leave Petition, this court has ordered limited
notice on the question as to why the petitioner
should not be permitted to take premature
release on full reimbursement of the money
spent by the Union of India on his training. The
learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of
the appellant herein submitted that the appellant
WP(C) No.9109/2005

Page 36 of 38

is not willing to take premature release on full
reimbursement of the money spent by the Union
of India on his training. This Court by ordering
limited notice has rejected the request of the
appellant of premature release from service. We
see no ground to interfere with the order passed
by the High Court. The appeal is accordingly
dismissed. There shall be no order as to costs.”
30.

Again, in a recent case decided by a Division Bench of this

Court in WP(C)No. 2751/2007 titled as Wg. Cdr. R V R Prasad Vs.
Union of India and Ors. decided on 20th December, 2007, it was
held,
“9. The decision of the Respondents not to
accede to the Petitioner‟s request for premature
retirement or for that matter for resignation
cannot be seen as perverse.
Wherever the
Armed Forces are concerned the Writ Court must
be constantly mindful of the fact that discipline is
the foremost consideration.
An eloquent
argument was put forward that the Petitioner is
quite willing to forgo all his pensionary and other
benefits. This argument, however, assumes that
these rights have already come into force in his
favour, which is a fallacious assumption. The
Petitioner must serve for twenty years before
any such entitlement enure to his benefit.
10. This is not a case where it would be
appropriate to exercise the extraordinary powers
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
Petition is without merit and is dismissed.”
31.

After having subjected the abovesaid aspects to a closet

WP(C) No.9109/2005

Page 37 of 38

scrutiny, we find that the claims made by the petitioners in their
respective petitions are lame of strength.

The petitions are

therefore dismissed but there shall be no orders as to costs.
However, it is mentioned here that the above said petitions
were filed in the year 2005.

Enough time has since elapased.

There may be change of circumstances consequently nothing will
debar the petitioners to move fresh applications for discharge, if
necessary, for re-consideration by the respondent.
The

respondent

will

be

at

liberty

to

decide

their

applications, if moved, as per above said policy, law and rules.

J.M. MALIK, J.

March 14, 2008
dc

WP(C) No.9109/2005

A.K. SIKRI, J.

Page 38 of 38

