*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

%
+

Date of Decision : 17.01.2008
WP(C) No.1770/2001
Mukesh Chand Bhatt
S/o Sh. Anand Mani Bhatt,
R/o A-2/A-180, Janakpuri,
New Delhi – 110 058

.... Petitioner

Versus
1.

Director General of Police,
Indo Tibetan Border Police Force,
CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi

2.

Dy. Inspector General,
Jammu and Kashmir,
Indo Tibetan Boarder Police Force,
Pantha Chowk, Srinagar,
Jammu and Kashmir

3.

Commandant,
22nd Battalion, Indo Tibetan
Border Police Force,
Through the DIG,
Indo Tibetan Border Police Force,
Pantha Chowk, Srinagar,
Jammu and Kashmir

4.

The Secretary,
Ministry of Home Affairs,
Govt. of India,
North Block,
New Delhi

WP(C) No.1770/2001

.... Respondents

Page 1 of 18

Advocates who appeared in this case :
For the petitioner

: Mr.Shiva Kumar Sinha with Mr.Arun
Dhiman, Advocate

For the respondents : Ms.Maneesha Dhir, Advocate
CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K. SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE J.M. MALIK
1.

Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

A.K.SIKRI, J (ORAL)
*
1.

CM No. 820/2008 in WP(C) No.1770/2001
By this application petitioner wants to bring on record the

additional documents which are also filed along with the
application. Learned counsel for the respondent has no objection.
This application is accordingly allowed. CM stands disposed of.
2.

WP(C) No.1770/2001
The petitioner herein who was serving in the Indo Tibetan

Border Police Force as HC/CM was served with the charge memo
dated 21.07.2000, levelling following charges :
WP(C) No.1770/2001

Page 2 of 18

“CHARGE NO. 1

ABSENCE FROM CAMP WITHOUT LEAVE ITBPF ACT
SEC-21(a)
That he absented himself on 09.06.2000 from Tac
HQRS 22nd Bn., ITB Police Quazigund, without prior
permission of competent authority.
CHARGE NO. 2
TO CONSUME OF LIQUOR ON DUTY
ITBPF ACT SEC.-29
That he consumed liquor on 09.06.2000 when he was
on duty and found intoxication.
CHARGE NO. 3
VIOLATION OF GOOD ORDER AND DISCIPLINE
ITBPF ACT SEC.-43
That he absented himself from Tac. Hqrs, 22nd Bn., ITB
Police Camp, without any prior permission, reached
Y.K. Pura and consumed liquor.”

3.

Enquiry was held on 26.07.2000 on the basis of which

charges were held to be proved and petitioner was dismissed
from service vide order dated 26.07.2000. It was also directed
that all medals and decorations held by him stood withdrawn.
Petitioner’s statutory appeal was also dismissed by the appellate
authority vide memo dated 30.10.2000. The petitioner preferred
WP(C) No.1770/2001

Page 3 of 18

revision petition which met the same fate as it also came to be
dismissed by the concerned authority vide memorandum dated
11.12.2000.

In

these

circumstances,

after

exhausting

the

departmental remedies petitioner has filed the present petition
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India challenging the
aforesaid orders. As is clear from the charge memo reproduced
above the main charge against the petitioner was that he had
absented himself on 09.06.2000 from his unit and it was found
that he had consumed liquor on that day while he was on duty
and had reached another camp in the said state of affairs without
any prior permission. Being absent from duty is an offence under
the ITBPF Act, 1992 and is so stipulated under Section 21 (a) of
the

Act,

punishable

with

imprisonment

upto

three

years.

Intoxication is also treated as offence under Section 29 of the
said Act and maximum sentence of six years is provided for the
same. Likewise violation of good order and discipline is made
offence under Section 43 of the Act punishable with maximum
punishment upto seven years. In the first blush, when a person is
charged with such an offence of consuming liquor on duty and
thereafter absenting himself and also entering into some other

WP(C) No.1770/2001

Page 4 of 18

camp without permission, it appears to be a serious offence.
However, in order to appreciate the culpability of the petitioner
one will have to dealt into the past medical history of the
petitioner as set out in detail in the writ petition and about which
there is no controversy. The petitioner was detected as case of
“Chronic Alcohol Dependence Syndrome' some time in December
1997. He was given treatment from time to time. In the counter
affidavit filed by the respondent itself it is mentioned that he was
initially admitted to unit hospital TPT Battalion w.e.f. 20.12.1997
and remained in the said hospital till 20.01.1998. On this basis he
was categorized as medical category CEE (T) for six months.
Thereafter he was again admitted to hospital w.e.f. 09.07.1998
and remained indoor patient till 31.07.1998 when he got
treatment for the aforesaid disease. He was again brought before
the medical board which was convened on 01.09.1998 and was
placed under low medical category CEE (T) for six months w.e.f.
31.07.1998. On 17.02.1999 the petitioner was again admitted in
the hospital and was there till 28.02.1999. On 24.03.1999 the
petitioner was issued memo pointing out that the Psychiatrist had
again declared him as a case of 'Chronic Alcohol Dependence

WP(C) No.1770/2001

Page 5 of 18

Syndrome' and had recommended his categorization as medical
category – 'EEE' and had found him unsuitable for duty with the
following recommendation that “he should be presented before
invalidation medical board under an escort”. In this memo it was
accordingly stated that an invalidation medical board had been
constituted and was further stipulated that “until its proceedings
are not complete you have to be kept under escort on the
recommendation of the Psychiatrist”. It is further made aware to
the petitioner that “till the aforesaid proceeding is completed you
will not be placed in the valley”.
4.

It is clear from the above that even as on March 1999, as

per the respondents, the petitioner was suffering from the
aforesaid illness and he was to be produced before the
invalidation medical board for easing out of service. Such medical
board was convened on 30.03.1999. The medical board after
examining

the

petitioner

and

going

through

the

relevant

documents found that “deaddiction was not given to him”. The
opinion of the invalidation medical board was that large number
of chronic alcoholics became normal after “proper deaddiction”.

WP(C) No.1770/2001

Page 6 of 18

The invalidation medical board therefore did not recommend the
boarding out of the petitioner and instead opined as under :“Therefore

the board opines that the
individual to be given a chance for proper
deaddiction in a good and reputed
deaddiction centre and he should be
observed for six months after admission at
deaddiction centre until further evaluation
keeping in view of the above findings and
management be is placed in CEE(P) for 2
years w.e.f. 30.03.1999 with six monthly
review.”
5.

This invalidation board consisted of three senior doctors and

only doctors could understand such a problem of alcoholic nature
of the petitioner and whether it was curable or not. Two things
which are discernible from the opinion are, firstly, that the
petitioner was not, upto now, given deaddiction which was
required; and secondly, if proper deaddiction would have been
given there were good chances of the petitioner getting cured as
what generally happens in such cases. In these circumstances
the medical board had recommended that the petitioner be given
a chance for proper deaddiction in a good and reputed
deaddiction centre and should be observed for six months after
admission in the said centre. The allegation of the petitioner in
the present writ petition is that he was not sent to any
WP(C) No.1770/2001

Page 7 of 18

deaddiction centre. Even in the counter affidavit there is no such
averment. Though in para six of the counter affidavit, it is
admitted that the petitioner was examined by the medical board
on 30.03.1999 and was placed in low medical category for two
years and six months. And it further states that the treatment
was given to the petitioner in the unit, under the direct and close
supervision of qualified physician of the unit where he was
posted. Even with a limited knowledge we can say, without any
fear

of

contradiction,

that

such

a

treatment

would

not

commensurate with the opinion of the medical board whereby
the petitioner was advised to be sent to a proper deaddiction
centre which clearly means that he was to be treated by the
experts in the deaddiction programmes.
6.

The petitioner has also produced on record the prescription

given by medical doctor viz. Dr. A. Tripathi, CMO posted at 22nd
Battalion ITBP which was given on 05.07.2000 as per which the
petitioner

was

undergoing

detoxification

and

deaddiction

treatment. His condition as on that date is described in the said
prescription, which is termed as “refer sheet”, in the following
words :
WP(C) No.1770/2001

Page 8 of 18

“Presented with severe pain epigastrium with radiation

to back 'illegible' following alcoholic 'illegible' on
05.07.2000. Releaved by H2 Antagonists with PPI. In
view of old history of alcohol dependence actue
pancreatitis 'illegible' with acture exacerbation.”
7.

In view of the aforesaid condition the doctor had further

advised that the petitioner needed detailed work at PGI for the
same. He referred the petitioner to Medical Specialist, Base
Hospital, Ram Garh for treatment / opinion. What follows from the
above is that even in July 2000 the petitioner was undergoing
treatment for detoxification and deaddiction at the unit where he
was posted and was not sent to any Specialist Deaddiction
Centre. One can thus infer that the petitioner had not been cured
till July 2000.
8.

In this back drop we have to test the validity of charge

sheet dated 21.07.2000 as per which the aforesaid act is imputed
upon him which allegedly happens on 09.06.2000. Obviously
even on 09.06.2000 the petitioner was suffering from the said
syndrome.
9.

Learned counsel for the petitioner referred to Medical

Jurisprudence which explains the nature of symptom of such

WP(C) No.1770/2001

Page 9 of 18

disease, its effect and also the treatment which is required, It
would be relevant to extract therefrom the portion which
discusses the aforesaid aspect of the disease with which the
petitioner was suffering at the relevant time. It signifies that a
patient who suffers from such a syndrome develops dipsomania,
an irresistible desire to take large amounts of alcohol until they
become almost unconscious from its effect which means that the
patient would keep on drinking till he becomes unconscious. It
further states that there is some psychological basis of some
distressing event in the patient's past life that is generally
responsible for this condition. It is not even, in the treatment,
possible to withdraw the patient from consuming alcohol as
sudden withdrawal can result into withdrawal symptoms which
are marked by anxiety, reaction, confusion and hallucinations and
even delirium and convulsions. It is further stated that there are
tremors, profound sweating, hyperthermia, tachycardia with
labile blood pressure.
10.

It is for this reason, we pointed out above that a particular

expertise is required to treat such patients if such a patient is to
be deaddicted. The doctor treating such patients would go into
WP(C) No.1770/2001

Page 10 of 18

the past history and would try to find out the psychological basis
which led into this disease and the treatment would be more
psychological

than

medicinal,

though

medicines

are

also

required.
11.

Alcohol Dependence Syndrome is one of the most common

psychiatric illnesses found in Armed Forces. And since many of
them have relapses, the Authority concerned sometimes become
pessimistic about the prognosis and tend to think that there is no
point in treating Alcohol Dependence Syndrome. Keeping the
above paradigm in mind, the study was conducted by Lt Col P
Sarkar, Brig S Sudarsanan, Maj S Nath to see the outcome of the
standard treatment given in military set up, in India ( Lt Col P
Sarkar, Brig S Sudarsanan, Maj S Nath, “Outcome of Treatment of
Alcohol Dependence Syndrome Patients in Military Psychiatry Set
Up” (2004) 60 Medical Journal Armed Forces India 247).The result
was contrary to a prevailing belief that these patients do not
respond much to treatment. It showed that two third of the
patients improved, out of which one third were abstinent at the
time of review. This study is likely to encourage the doctors,
patients and administrative authorities to seek treatment of
WP(C) No.1770/2001

Page 11 of 18

patients

suffering

from

Alcohol

Dependence

Syndrome

as

treatment definitely helps many of them. The discussion as well
as the conclusion of the study be taken note of, and reads as
under:
“Some of us harbour a pessimistic view about the
outcome of treatment of Alcohol Dependence patients.
Some times we tend to think it is useless to treat this
group of patients. This is because quite a number of
times we find patients coming back in relapses. These
relapses are apparently more in number than those of
illnesses like Schizophrenia and Mood Disorders. Also,
there are some Alcohol Dependent patients who
repeatedly have relapses compared to other Alcohol
Dependent patients and we tend to remember this
group only, as they become regular visitors and some
times this creates a false impression about the
prognosis of the illness. We also tend to think that it is
a self created illness and it is not unusual that we
develop negative counter-transference towards this
group of patients. The results show that 2/3rd of the
patients improved, out of which 1/3rd were found
abstinent and 1/3rd improved partially in that there
was no longer any impairment of socio-occupational
performance though they continued to drink, but in
moderation only. 1/3rd of the patients had relapses at
any point of time. The result has shown that the
chances of relapse decreased with subsequent reviews.
This is an important finding. It shows that with
repeated exposure to treatment during reviews, there
is chance of further improvement. Though in the 4th
review the figure came to 32.9%, we must remember
that this group consists of patients reviewed after two
years and above and had more number of chronic
cases who had repeated relapses as most of the
patients who remained relapse free in initial reviews
WP(C) No.1770/2001

Page 12 of 18

were already declared fit by the psychiatrists and did
not reach up to the 4th review. Even with more of
chronic patients in the 4th review, the percentage of
relapse was still much less than the first review. In
addition, the result has shown that the percentage of
people remaining abstinent increased with subsequent
reviews. This again shows that with repeated exposure
to treatment during the reviews, chances of remaining
abstinent improve. We have to keep in mind that many
patients had improved completely during this period
and made fit and were not followed up till two years.
With remaining patients, who were more towards
chronic side, percentage of patients abstaining is
encouraging.
xxxxxx
The study helps us to understand the treatment
response of Alcohol Dependence Syndrome patients.
We feel that if two third patients responded to
treatment, it is a great achievement.
xxxxxx
To conclude, we think that all authorities should be
encouraged to detect such patients and to send them
for psychiatric help, because it definitely helps.”
12.

Several studies have shown the efficacy of motivation

(Zhang AY, Harmon JA, Werkner J, et al., “Impact of motivation for
change on severity of alcohol use by patients with severe &
persistent mental illness” (2004) 65 Journal of Studies on Alcohol
392), family therapy (Landau J, Stanton MD, Brinkman-Sull D, et
al., “Outcomes with ARISE approach to engaging reluctant drug

WP(C) No.1770/2001

Page 13 of 18

and alcohol dependent individuals in treatment” (2004) 30
American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse 711; Gruber KJ,
Fleetwood TW, “In-home continuing care services for substance
use affected families” (2004) 39 Substance Use & Misuse
(Journal) 1379), group therapy (Mcnally AM, Palfai TP, “Brief
group alcohol interventions with college students: examining
motivational components” (2003) 33 Journal of Drug Education
159) and alcohol anonymous (Pagano ME, Friend KB, Tonigan JS,
et al., “Helping other alcoholics in alcoholics anonymous &
drinking outcome: findings from project MATCH” (2004) 65
Journal of Studies on Alcohol 766; McCrady BS, Epstein EE, Kahler
CW,

“Alcoholics

maintenance

anonymous

strategies

after

and

relapse

conjoint

prevention

behavioural

as

alcohol

treatment for men: 18-month outcomes” (2004) 72 Journal of
Consulting & Clinical Psychology 870) in the treatment of
alcoholism, but the long term prognosis of alcohol dependence in
the armed forces at best is guarded as shown in the study
discussed above.
13.

When we understand the condition of the petitioner in the

aforesaid perspective, who was a patient of alcoholic syndrome

WP(C) No.1770/2001

Page 14 of 18

and for whom taking alcohol was an irresistible desire. Thus,
charging such a person for the alleged offence of consuming
alcohol is adding insult to the disease with which the petitioner
was suffering therefrom. Instead of adopting humane approach
and trying to treat petitioner properly by sending him to PGI or
any other well known and established hospital, it is adding insult
to the injury by charging him for this offence.
14.

Therefore, even if it is presumed that petitioner has

consumed liquor on 09.06.2000 and stayed into some other camp
which is also treated as being absented from duty, it should not
have been treated as misconduct. We, therefore, are of the
opinion that very basis of serving such a charge sheet upon the
petitioner is uncalled for. At this stage, we may also point out
that learned counsel for the petitioner has made attempt to
challenge the validity of the enquiry held against him on number
of grounds. In the first instance it is mentioned that no defence
assistance was provided to him as none was available in the said
camp. It is also mentioned that the petitioner was provided with a
friend, however, due to last minute change there was another
friend provided to him on the evening of 25.07.2000 and the
WP(C) No.1770/2001

Page 15 of 18

petitioner did not even had sufficient time to explain to him his
disease and the past history as narrated above. And thus,
resulting in the infraction of principles of natural justice as the
friend of the petitioner was not able to defend the petitioner
properly. It is also contended that even record of enquiry was not
given to the petitioner and was tried to serve upon him on the
evening of 26.07.2000. The learned counsel for the petitioner
also argued that in such a case even the punishment imposed is
shockingly disproportionate as the petitioner is dismissed from
service on the basis of charge which was an act which can be
treated as consequence of his disease and therefore such a
punishment should not be awarded to him depriving him of his
livelihood. It is also submitted that when the petitioner pointed
out the aforesaid facts and pleaded against the quantum of
punishment, the appellate authority rejected his contention
pointing out the past conduct of the petitioner though no such
past conduct was stated in the charge sheet and thus, the order
of the appellate authority suffers from this lacuna. He further
submitted that on the plea of petitioner's past medical history,
the appellate authority has remarked that the petitioner was

WP(C) No.1770/2001

Page 16 of 18

dismissed from service on the basis of indiscipline and not on
medical reports and in this way a very casual approach is given
by the revisionary authority to the petitioner's medical reports. In
view of our opinion that the act attributed to the petitioner in the
circumstances in which petitioner was placed and suffering from
aforesaid disease could not have been treated as misconduct or
violation of Sections 21(a), 29 and 43 of ITBPF Act, it is not
necessary to go into these arguments though we may note that
learned counsel for the respondents had refuted these arguments
and submitted that the enquiry was conducted in accordance
with rules and there was no infraction of principles of natural
justice. Before we part with we may take note of the statement
made by learned counsel for the petitioner that after his dismissal
petitioner took treatment at AIIMS and is now fully cured. He has
family with two children and therefore he is competent to
discharge the duties.
15.

In the consequence of aforesaid discussion, we allow this

writ petition. Consequently we make rule absolute and set aside
orders dated 26.07.2000, 30.10.2000, 11.12.2000 passed by the
disciplinary

authority,

WP(C) No.1770/2001

appellate

authority

and

revisionary
Page 17 of 18

authority, respectively. The petitioner shall accordingly be
reinstated in service with 25% of the backwages.

A.K. SIKRI, J.

January 17, 2008
dk

WP(C) No.1770/2001

J.M. MALIK, J.

Page 18 of 18

