*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

%
+

Date of Reserve : 07.2.2008
Date of Decision : 22.02.2008
WP(C) No.667/1994
Ex. SHGO Rakesh Kumar Sharma

....

Petitioner

...

Respondents

Versus
1.
2.
3.
4.

Union of India
Chief of Army Staff
General Officer Commanding,
Commandant

Advocates who appeared in this case :
For the petitioner

: Mr. P.D.P. Deo, Advocate.

For the respondents : Ms. Sonia Mathur, Advocate with Major S.S.
Pandey.
CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K. SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE J.M. MALIK
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

J.M. MALIK, J.
*
WP(C) No.667/1994

Page 1 of 13

1.

In this writ petition, the petitioner has called into question

the discharge order from his service under Army Rules 13(3) item
III(v). The petitioner was served with a show cause notice dated
31.3.92 from Brigadier Commandant, Delhi Cantt., on 4.4.92
which reads :
“32330/Est/ME/RKS

31 March 92
MILITARY ESTABLISHMENT
SHOW CAUSE NOTICE

1.

It is revealed from your service docus that you have earned

3 red ink entries by committing the following offence since the
time you were enrolled in Army Ordnance Corps on 9 May, 85.
Your conduct indicates that you are not amenable to good order
and military discipline. The details of the punishments awarded
to you are as under :No.

Date of
Offence

Army Act Section
and offence

Punishment
Awarded

a)

27 Feb.89

AA SEC 59(a)
“Absenting himself
without Leave”

28 days
imprisonment

b)

26 Jan.92

AA SEC 41 (2)
“DISOBEYING A LAWFUL
COMMAND GIVEN BY
HIS SUPERIOR OFFICER”

02 days
imprisonment

c)

13 Mar 92

AA SEC 63

07 days

WP(C) No.667/1994

Page 2 of 13

“AN ACT PREJUDICIAL
TO GOOD ORDER AND
MILITARY DISCIPLINE”

imprisonment

2.
You are hereby called upon to show cause as to why you
should not be discharged from service under AR 13(3) Item III(v).
3.
Your written reply is required to be submitted to the
undersigned within 07 days from the receipt of this show cause
notice. In case no reply is received by due date, it will be
assumed that you have nothing to say in your defence and further
action to discharge you locally from service will be taken.

No.6922535 P Sep SH GD
R.K. Sharma”
2.

(T.J.S. GILL)
Brig
Commandant

Reply was sent in response to the notice on 6.4.92.

The

petitioner explained that the first punishment was given only for
seven days and not for 28 days. He further explained that this
punishment was never awarded in reality.

He admitted that

punishment 1(b) detailed in show cause notice was due to fault of
applicant.

The petitioner had only expressed his desire to

proceed on leave. He returned to the unit as per and obeyed the
order of the commanding 2TB.

On 23.5.92 the petitioner was

discharged from Army Ordnance Corps under Army Rule 13(3)
item III(v) and was struck of strength from the Army on 25.5.92.
Aggrieved by the said order the petitioner has filed the present

WP(C) No.667/1994

Page 3 of 13

writ petition, on 4.1.94, under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India, wherein it is prayed that order of discharge dated 23.5.92
be quashed, the petitioner be restored to the service, he be
treated as having not removed from service for all future
promotions and be paid the service pay, allowances and
pensionary benefits.
3.

In order to embolden his case the petitioner has set up the

following grounds. The petitioner was given only seven days to
reply the above said show cause notice. He was not given the
copies of the offences detailed in the above said show cause
notice. He has also challenged the above said punishments. It is
explained that the above said punishments were given illegally
and due to the error of the officiating officers. Subsequently, the
punishments were amended but the record was not corrected.
However, the alleged offences were not grave. The respondents
did not send any response to the reply sent by the petitioner.
4.

The respondents have contested the present petition. It is

explained that during the short span of seven years of service the
petitioner was awarded four and not three punishments.

The

above said three punishments hardly require reiteration.

The

fourth punishment runs as follows :
WP(C) No.667/1994

Page 4 of 13

“Date of offence
(4)

Army Act Section
offence

Punishment
awarded

31.3.92
63
28 days RI”
It was explained that on 31.3.1992 itself before sending

response to the show cause notice, the petitioner committed
another offence under Section 63 of the Army Act. For this fourth
offence the petitioner was awarded 28 days RI on 2.4.1992. It is
explained that since the petitioner had already been served with
a show cause notice, no further show cause notice was given to
the petitioner in respect of this fourth red ink entry. Adverting to
punishment no. 1, it is explained that petitioner was awarded 28
days RI on 27.2.1989 i.e. absenting without leave under Section
39(a) Army Act. However, after the petitioner had undergone 7
days RI the remaining period of 21 days imprisonment was
remitted by the officiating commandant on 11.8.1989, in view of
the fact that this was the first offence committed by the
petitioner.

It is pointed out that rest of the punishments were

correctly awarded.
5.

The learned counsel for the respondent made the following

submissions. Firstly, it was not necessary for the respondents to
give further notice after the commission of the fourth offence.
WP(C) No.667/1994

Page 5 of 13

Again the mention of the fourth offence also does not find any
mention either in the show cause notice or in the discharge order.
Both these important documents are conspicuously silent about
the fourth punishment and as such the same should not be taken
into account.

She stressed that the petitioner deserves the

discharge order due to the three punishments detailed in the
show cause notice.

she explained that the procedure was

complied with and the preliminary enquiry was held. It was also
brought to the notice of the court that the petitioner never asked
for the offence reports.

She opined that the petitioner cannot

pick up a conflict with the disputed questions of fact and if the
petitioner had any grouse against the above said punishment he
should have initiated action against the same instantaneously.
She submitted that whether those punishments were rightly given
or not cannot be considered in this petition. The reply filed by the
petitioner clearly goes to show that some of the punishments
were admitted by him to be correct. There is no inkling in his
reply that the time granted in his favour was too short or he
wanted to adduce evidence in support of his case. In order to
bring her point home, she has cited the following cases.
6.

In Ex. Sepoy Rishumuni Rai Vs. Directorate General of Sup.

WP(C) No.667/1994

Page 6 of 13

TP(ST-20) and Anr., 2007 (5) SLR 81, it was held :
“5. In the present case since the petitioner had
incurred 4 red ink entries, his case was referred to 536
ASC Bn vide ASC Records (Supply) letter No.
6376715/T8/536/Doc-IV dated 11 May 1989, and
accordingly a show cause notice dated 6.6.1989 was
served on the petitioner. In reply to the aforesaid
show cause notice the petitioner in terms of his
petition dated 17.6.1989 requested that he be given
an opportunity and be retained in service.
A
sympathetic view was taken and the petitioner was
retained in service. That thereafter on 30.8.1989 the
petitioner was again awarded a punishment under
Section 39(B) of the Army Act and thereby he incurred
another red ink entry making a total of 5 red ink
entries. The petitioner was once again served with a
show cause notice dated 10.9.1989 and in reply
thereto he assured that he would improve himself and
thus another opportunity be given to him.
The
petitioner showed absolutely no sign of improvement,
and another offence was committed by him on
21.3.1990 as a result thereof he was punished under
Section 63 of the Army Act. The respondents were
forced to issue another show cause notice dated
28.3.1990, and thereafter orders for discharge were
passed against the petitioner. Despite the show cause
notices the petitioner made no effort to improve
himself. By no stretch of imagination it can be stated
that the respondents have not followed the due
process of law or have not complied with the
provisions of natural justice.”
7.

In Gunner Mamraj Vs. Chief of the Army Staff & Ors, 91

(2001) DLT 652 (DB) it was held :
“10. A conjoint reading of these provisions with
relevant Army Instructions/Letters leaves no scope for
doubt that appellant was liable to be discharged for
being undesirable for retention in service and that it
WP(C) No.667/1994

Page 7 of 13

was for the competent Authority to adjudge his such
desirability on the basis of his service record. It is not
in dispute that appellant had suffered for “red ink”
entries which clouded his retention in service and
could be discharged in the process. His discharge
could not be said to be lacking in basis or material.
But his order of discharge was still required to be
passed by the competent Authority.
11. Army Rule 13(3)(v) only empowers Brigade/SubArea Commander to pass the order of discharge but for
this requires him to give show cause notice to the
person concerned proposed to be discharged wherever
circumstances permit.
12

x

x

x

x

13. Appellant's other grievance that charges against
him were not supported by facts and the Court Martial
proceedings were vitiated for some reason, is his mere
ipse dixie. It is too late in the day for him to raise such
ancillary issue when he had admittedly failed to
challenge all this at the relevant time. This appeal
accordingly fails and is dismissed.”
8.

She has also cited the judgment of Ex. L/Nk Gambhir Singh

Vs. The Chief of Army Staff and Ors, WP(C) No.6014/1999 decided
on 19.10.2006, wherein, it was observed:
“9. The policy dated 28.12.1998 brings out various
possibilities available before dealing with an individual,
who is undesirable and inefficient including that in
case discharge/dismissal is not warranted and that
transfer will meet the case, the said individual may be
transferred in his substantive rank, not recommended
for further promotion and/or increments of pay until he
proves his fitness for promotion or an increment of pay
in his new unit. In fact it has also been recommended
in the said policy that discharge from service
WP(C) No.667/1994

Page 8 of 13

consequent to 4 red ink entries is not a mandatory or
legal requirement. The Commanding Officer was to
consider the nature of offences for which red ink
entries were awarded and not be harsh with the
individual especially when they are about to complete
the pensionable service and due consideration should
be given to the length of service. The petitioner has
put in 14 years 1 month and 18 days of service and
there is a shortfall of about 10/12 months only.”
9.

All these arguments have left no impression upon us. The

duty cast upon on the court is to winnow truth from falsehood. It
must be noticed that the show cause notice served upon the
petitioner is itself defective.
picture.

It does not portray the correct

The first punishment goes to show that he was

sentenced to 28 days.

The counter affidavit filed by the

respondent clearly reveals that the show cause notice is not
correct. As per record the petitioner was punished to undergo 7
days imprisonment only. It appears that 28 days were written in
respect of 7 days in order to show that the petitioner had suffered
higher sentence.

It is well settled that extreme step of

termination of the Army man is warranted only upon evaluating
all the pros and cons of a particular case.
smacks of a fig leaf job.

The instant case

The concerned authority handled the

situation in a very maladroit way. It is difficult to say in which
way the wind would have blown in case the correct position was
WP(C) No.667/1994

Page 9 of 13

placed before the competent authority. Again second show cause
notice should have been given after the commission of fourth
offence. It cannot be said for sure that the competent authority
did not consider the fourth punishment.

The non speaking

discharge order in this context is also bad in law.
10.

The following case law emboldens the case of the petitioner.

In Surinder Singh Sihag Vs. Union of India & Ors, 100 (2002) DLT
705, the Division Bench of this court was pleased to hold:
“10. In the aforementioned situation, the respondents
were bound to follow the procedures laid down in the
circular letter dated 28.12.1988, the relevant
provisions whereof are as under:
“5. Subject to the foregoing, the procedure to
be followed for dismissal or discharge of a person
under AR 13 or AR 17, as the case may be, is set out
below :
(a) Preliminary enquiry : Before recommending,
discharge or dismissal of an individual the authority
concerned will ensure:
(i)
That an impartial enquiry(not necessarily a
Court of Inquiry) has been made into the allegations
against him and that he has had adequate opportunity
of putting up his defence or explanation and / or
adducing evidence in his defence.
(ii) That the allegations have been substantial
and that the extreme step of termination of the
individual's service is warranted on the merits of the
case.”
..........................................................................
WP(C) No.667/1994

Page 10 of 13

(d) Action by Competent Authority – The
authority competent to authorize the dismissal or
discharge of the individual will consider the case in the
light of what is stated in (a) above. If he is satisfied
that the termination of the individual's serges is
warranted, he should direct that a show cause notice
be issued to the individual in accordance with AR 13 or
AR 17 as the case may be. No lower authority will
direct the issue of a show cause notice. The show
cause notice should cover the full particulars of the
cause of action against the individuals. The allegations
must be specific and supported by sufficient details to
enable the individual to clear understand and reply to
them. A copy of the proceedings of the enquiry held in
the case of .... also be afforded reasonable time to
state in writing any reasons he may have to urge
against the proposed dismissal or discharge.
..........................................................................
Note :
1.
As far as possible, JCO, UO and Dr. awaiting
dismissal orders will not be allowed to mix with
personnel.
2.
Discharge from service consequent to four red ink
entries is not a mandatory or legal requirements. In
such case Commanding Officer must consider the
nature of offences for which case red ink entry has
been awarded and not to harsh with the individuals,
especially when they are about to complete the
pensionable service.
Due consideration should be
given to the long service, hard stations and difficult
living conditions that the OR has been exposed to
during his service, and the discharge should be ordered
only when it is absolutely necessary in the interest of
service. Such discharge should be approved by the
next higher commander.”
(Emphasis supplied)”

WP(C) No.667/1994

Page 11 of 13

11.

In Rajesh Kumar Vs. Union of India and others, Mil LJ (2005)

Del 48, it was held that the preliminary enquiry is required to be
held where the delinquent employee must be given an adequate
opportunity of putting up his defence or explanation or adducing
evidence in support of his case. In this case show cause notice
was issued only in respect of three red ink entries whereas the
respondents admittedly considered a fourth red ink entry in the
final order which was not a part of the show cause notice issued
to the petitioner.

It was held that principles of natural justice

stood violated and the discharge order was set aside.

It was

further held,
“10. Counsel appearing for the respondents has also
drawn our attention to paragraph 2 of the note below
the circular where it shows that discharge from service
consequent to four red ink entries is not mandatory or
legal requirement. This para instead of helping the
respondents, goes against the respondents as even in
a case where a person has earned four red ink entries,
he may not be discharged from service as all cases
have to be considered by the Commanding Officer
giving due weightage to the nature of offences for
which the red ink entries have been awarded. It
further provides that the Commanding Officer should
not be too harsh with the individuals. It therefore,
explicitly clear that inspite of the fact that a person has
incurred four red ink entries, which is a requirement,
the person may not be discharged from service in a
given case where the Commanding Officer is of the
opinion that the nature of the offences is not of the
nature for which harsh consequences like discharge
WP(C) No.667/1994

Page 12 of 13

from service is called for and warranted.
The
petitioner
shall now be reinstated in service in
accordance with law with all benefits.”
12.

We therefore make the rule absolute and allow this writ

petition

by

quashing

discharge

order

dated

23.5.1992.

Consequently the petitioner shall now be reinstated in service in
accordance with law with all benefits. No costs.

J.M. MALIK, J.

A.K. SIKRI, J.
February 22, 2008
dk

WP(C) No.667/1994

Page 13 of 13

