*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

%
+

Date of Reserve : 14.01.2008
Date of Decision : 24.01.2008
WP(C) No.1796/1992
Sucha Singh

....

Petitioner

Versus
1.

Union of India

2.

Chief of Army Staff

...

Respondents

Advocates who appeared in this case :
For the petitioner

: Mr. Hameed S. Shaikh, Adv.

For the respondents : Mr. Sanjay Katyal, Adv.
CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K. SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE J.M. MALIK
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

J.M. MALIK, J.
*
1.
The petitioner joined the Indian Army as Rifleman in JAK RIF
WP(C) No.1796/1992

Page 1 of 11

Infantary on 24.07.1989. On 25.04.1990 charge sheet was issued
to the petitioner alleging that on 11.03.1990, he committed an
unnatural offence of Sodomy punishable under Section 46(a) of
the Army Act, 1950 (hereinafter referred to as “the Army Act”) on
the person of Sh. Inder Singh, private servant of Captain A.S. Kler
of Indian Military Academy, Dehradun.

He was awarded

punishment

days

of

three

months

and

five

of

rigorous

imprisonment in civil prison and dismissal from service.

The

Reviewing Authority confirmed the above said punishment. The
Chief of Army Staff rejected his petition on 20.11.1990.

His

petition filed under Section 179 of the Army Act was also rejected.
2.

The petitioner in this writ petition has called into question

the above said proceedings on the following grounds.

The

proceedings against him are without jurisdiction. The offence was
to be tried by a civilian court and the Army Act is not applicable.
The

court martial

proceedings

were not

conducted by

a

competent officer and are contrary to Section 116 of the Army
Act. The Army Authorities have got no right to withhold pension
and pensionary benefits available to the petitioner under the law.
3.

The respondents have contested this petition.

4.

We have heard the counsel for the parties.

WP(C) No.1796/1992

Although a
Page 2 of 11

number of objections were raised in the writ petition but before us
only the following three submissions were raised. It is not out of
place to mention here that, although, the first submission finds
place in the writ petition, yet, the remaining two submissions
were raised for the first time during arguments and no specific
averment was made.
5.

The principal argument urged by the learned counsel for the

petitioner was that the alleged offence was committed by the
petitioner against a civilian and as such the provisions of the
Army Act do not stand attracted.

It was submitted that if the

petitioner was to be proceeded against, he could have been
proceeded against only under the Indian Penal Code by a criminal
court. Again this fact has prejudiced the petitioner no end. Had it
been a trial before the criminal court the petitioner could have
engaged an advocate and would have been given full, fair and
complete opportunity to prove his innocence.

On the contrary

before the court martial proceedings, the petitioner was not
allowed to engage any advocate and had only a friend to
represent him under Section 129 of the Army Act.
6.

This submission carries no conviction. Sections 69 and 70 of

the Army Act when read together disclosed that court martial are
WP(C) No.1796/1992

Page 3 of 11

prohibited from trying cases of murder or culpable homicide of a
person not subject to Military, Naval, Air Force law or cases of
rape in relation to such a person, unless the offence is committed
on active service or at a specified frontier post or at any place
outside India.

It therefore clearly means that the court martial

was authorised to try this case of unnatural offence under Section
69 of the Army Act. Again Section 46(a) provides :
“Any person subject to this Act who
commits any of the following offences, that
is to say, (a) is guilty of any disgraceful conduct of
a cruel, indecent or unnatural kind; or
(b)

X

X

X

(c)

X

X

X

shall, on conviction by court-martial, be
liable to suffer imprisonment for a term
which may extend to seven years or such
less punishment as is in this Act
mentioned.”
The Manual of Military Law Vol. II by Govt. of India, Ministry
of Defence defines Section 46(a) of the Army Act and note
appended thereto mentions :
“4. Disgraceful conduct of an unnatural
kind ordinarily implies the commission or
at least the attempted commission of an
offence under IPC.S. 377. Therefore, in
WP(C) No.1796/1992

Page 4 of 11

framing charges under this clause, the
charge should invariably be laid for
disgraceful conduct of an indecent kind
unless the evidence permits of the
averment in the particulars that an
unnatural offence as ordinarily understood
was committed or at least attempted.”
Again, Section 125 of the Army Act gives discretion to the
officer

commanding

the

army,

army

corps,

division

or

independent brigade in which the accused person is serving or
such other officer as may be prescribed to decide before which
court the proceedings shall be instituted, and, if that officer
decides that they should be instituted before a court-martial, he
would direct that the accused person shall be detained in military
custody.
Section 112 of the Army Act makes it clear that on active
service, the officer commanding the forces in the field, or any
officer empowered by him in this behalf shall have the power to
convene a summary general court martial.

In view of this

discussion the arguments urged by the learned counsel for the
petitioner must be eschewed out of consideration.
7.

The second submission made by the learned counsel for the

petitioner was that victim Inder Singh was never medically
examined. The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that
WP(C) No.1796/1992

Page 5 of 11

in absence of the medical report the entire proceedings stand
vitiated.

In order to buttress his argument he has cited an

authority reported in Rahim Beg & Another Vs. State of U.P., 1972
SCC (Crl.) 827, wherein it was held that :
“26. According to Dr. Katiyar, Medical
Officer of District Jail, Rae Bareli, if a girl of
10 or 12 years who is virgin and whose
hymen is intact is subjected to rape by a
fully developed man, there are likely to be
injuries on the male organ of the man. No
injury was, however, detected by the
doctor on the male organ of any of the two
accused. The absence of such injuries on
the male organs of the accused would thus
point to their innocence. The examination
of the two accused by Dr. Katiyar, was on
August 5, 1969.
The two accused,
however, had been arrested, according to
the prosecution, on the morning of August
4, 1969. No cogent explanation has been
furnished as to why they were not soon
thereafter got medically examined by the
police.”
8.

The facts of this case are peculiar and unique. The evidence

on the record reveals that the victim was made to drink before
the above said offence was committed.

The victim tried to

commit

act.

suicide

after

the

above

said

The

victim

unsuccessfully tried to hit the petitioner. The victim tried to put
his hands in between the blades of the fan. Due to which the fan
stopped. The victim also tried to electrocute himself by touching
WP(C) No.1796/1992

Page 6 of 11

the bulb and catching naked electric wires but did not have any
bad effect. He thereafter tried to break open the window panes
by striking his head but his head struck against the wooden panel.
In the meantime, the jawans entered and saved him.
9.

Captain Alok Kler was examined as PW4.

The witness

when came to the spot he found victim in a pitiable condition. His
clothes were awry and he was hysterical.

He was sobbing

uncontrollably. Upon being asked the victim said that he would
become a saint and go to the hills. He further explained that he
was physically abused and could not live with a shame of it. He
narrated the details to the witness and ended up by saying that
he had tried everything within his means to end his own life. The
above said witness explained that thought of having the boy
examined medically did cross his mind but seeing the condition of
the boy he thought it prudent, not to expose him to any other act
which he would consider shameful.

The witness feared for his

mental balance. The witness stated that on the aspect of medical
examination the witness did make enquiries regarding RFN Sucha
Singh's presence, but he was informed that he was absconding.
Thereafter, he took victim to his residence. On seeing his serious
condition he did not wish to aggravate the matter primarily by
WP(C) No.1796/1992

Page 7 of 11

leaving the boy alone. He kept the boy close to him and even
made him sleep under the same roof to ensure that he does
nothing stupid.
10.

We find considerable force in the argument of the

learned counsel for the respondent that under these exceptional
circumstances the petitioner could not be medically examined. In
State of Kerala Vs. Kurissum Moottil Antony, JT 2006 (10) SC 370
it was held :
“7. To insist on corroboration except in the
rarest of rare cases is to equate one who is
a victim of the lust of another with an
accomplice to a crime and thereby insult
womanhood. It would be adding insult to
injury to tell a woman that her claim of
rape will not be believed unless it is
corroborated in material particulars as in
“the case of an accomplice to a crime”.
(See State of Maharashtra v. Chandra
Prakash Kewalchand Jain AIR 1990 SC 658.
Why should be the evidence of the girl or
the woman who complains of rape or
sexual molestation be viewed with the aid
of spectacles fitted with lenses tinged with
doubt, disbelief or suspicion? The plea
about lack of corroboration has no
substance. It is unfortunate that respect
for womanhood in our country is on the
decline and cases of molestation and rape
are steadily growing.
Decency and
morality in public and social life cart be
protected only if Courts deal strictly with
those who violate the social norms.

WP(C) No.1796/1992

Page 8 of 11

The above position was highlighted
by this Court in Bhupinder Sharma v.
State of H.P., AIR 2003 SC 4684. The
rule regarding non-requirement of
corroboration is equally applicable to
a case of this nature, relating to
Section 377 IPC”
11.

In a recent authority reported in State of MP Vs. Dayal

Sahu, AIR 2005 SC 3570 it was held that once the statement of
prosecutrix inspires confidence and accepted by the Courts as
such, conviction can be passed only on the solitary evidence of
the prosecutrix and no corroboration would be required unless
there are compelling reasons which necessitate the Courts for
corroboration of her statement. Corroboration of testimony of the
prosecutrix as a condition for judicial reliance is not a requirement
of law but a guidance of prudence under the given facts and
circumstances. Non-examination of doctor and non-production of
doctor's report would not be fatal to the prosecution case, if the
statement of the prosecutrix and other prosecution witnesses
inspire confidence.
12.

We are of the view that this ground too does not enure in

favour of the petitioner. Though the power of judicial review of
this court is limited. It appears that there was enough evidence
to convict the accused which also included the confession made
WP(C) No.1796/1992

Page 9 of 11

by the petitioner on 1st June, 1990, evidence of the eye witnesses
and other circumstantial evidence.
13.

The learned counsel for the petitioner pointed out that

Section 130 of Army Act is mandatory and there is not even an
iota of evidence which may go to show that same was complied
with by the Summary Court Martial.
14.

We see no force in this argument. This court in a case

reported in Ram Nath Vs. Union of India and Ors.,1989 (16) DRJ
101 DB was pleased to hold,
“6. Mr.Jugal Wadhwa, learned counsel for
the petitioner submits that the Supreme
Court in Vidhya Prakash v. Union of India,
AIR 1988 SC 705 has by implication upheld
the principle that it is open to the accused
to raise such an objection regarding his
being tried by his Commanding Officer.
The plea is that in the present case the
petitioner having raised such an objection,
the Commanding Officer was expected not
to have tried the accused. In our view the
submission is entirely mis-conceived. As
has been noticed in Vidhya Prakash's case
(supra), proceedings of a Summary Court
Martial are to be governed under Section
116 of the Army Act. After the review of
Ranjit Thakur's case, it is no longer open to
read the rule laid in Section 130 of the Act
to Summary Court Martial.
Thus the
Commanding Officer holding the Summary
Court Martial is not to ask the accused
whether he has any objection for being
tried by him (the Commanding Officer).”
WP(C) No.1796/1992

Page 10 of 11

Consequently, the argument urged by the learned
counsel for the petitioner must be left out of consideration.
15.

The writ petition has no merit and the same is therefore

dismissed. No costs.

J.M. MALIK, J.

January 24, 2008
dk

A.K. SIKRI, J.

WP(C) No.1796/1992

Page 11 of 11

