*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

%
+

Date of Reserve : 10.1.2008
Date of Decision : 28.1.2008
WP(C) No.8065/2002
Ex. Nk. Yashpal Singh

....

Petitioner

...

Respondents

Versus
Union of India and Others.
Advocates who appeared in this case :
For the petitioner

: Mr.S.M.Dalal, Advocate

For the respondents : Ms.Rachitta Priyanka with Major
S.S.Pandey, Advocate
CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K. SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE J.M. MALIK
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

J.M. MALIK, J.
*
1.
The petitioner joined the Indian Army as Sepoy/Gunner. In
the year 2000, he was posted at Artillery Centre, Hyderabad and
was holding the rank of Naik. Some Army personnel came to the

[WP(C) No.8065/2002

Page 1 of 11]

house of the petitioner on 19th October, 2000, when the petitioner
was on annual leave and searched his house in his absence.
Subsequently, the petitioner was charged under three heads for
offences under Sections 63 and 64(e) of the Army Act, 1950. The
first charge pertained to attempt for gratification for himself as a
motive for procuring the enrollment of persons in service.

The

indictment against the petitioner was that on 5th October, 2000,
he agreed to accept a sum of Rs. 40,000/- per individual from
three persons, namely, Kuldeep, Subhash and Sunil Grewal.
Secondly, he had taken away the educational certificates of the
said three persons reporting for recruitment at Artillery Centre,
Hyderabad on 9th October, 2000 and after obtaining false stamps
and signatures of the Recruiting Officer, returned the said
certificates to the above-named individuals wrongly indicating
that they had qualified in the preliminary screening, which they
had not cleared since they did not take part in the one mile run.
Lastly, that between 28th September, 2000 and 15th October,
2000 he improperly hired eight rooms in a lodge in Langar
House, Hyderabad at a rent of Rs. 20,000/- for one month to
accommodate 50 to 60 boys belonging to Haryana, who had
come for recruitment at Artillery Centre, Hyderabad with effect
[WP(C) No.8065/2002

Page 2 of 11]

from 9th October, 2000 and paid Rs. 10,000/- as advance, that is,
Rs. 2000/- to Shri K.V.Reddy, owner of the lodge, and Rs.8000/- to
Shri A.Shekhar Reddy, the Manager of the lodge.
2.

The Summary Court Martial was held against the petitioner

from 30th October, 2000 to 6th November, 2000 and the petitioner
was sentenced to be reduced to ranks and to suffer rigorous
imprisonment for one year in civil prison and to be dismissed from
service. The statutory appeal filed by the petitioner under Section
164(2) read with Section 179 of the Army Act was rejected by the
Chief of the Army Staff on 5th July, 2001. Aggrieved by that order,
the instant writ petition was filed on 1st December, 2002 for
quashing the impugned appellate order dated 5th July, 2001, the
conviction and sentence of the Summary Court Martial dated 6th
November, 2000 and for reinstatement of the petitioner in service
with all service benefits such as continuity in service, payment of
back wages and promotion from the date when his juniors had
been granted.
3.

The respondents have contested the instant writ petition.

4.

We have heard the counsel for the parties and marshalled

the record and the brief synopsis submitted on behalf of the
petitioner.
[WP(C) No.8065/2002

Page 3 of 11]

5.

The principal argument urged by the learned counsel for the

petitioner is that the trial is without jurisdiction.

It was argued

that Col. R.N.Kakar, Deputy Commandant of Artillery Centre, who
constituted the Court and held the trial of the petitioner was not
the Commanding Officer of the petitioner in terms of the Army
Act.

Our

attention

was

drawn

towards

Section 116 read with Section 3 (VI) and Army Rule 187 (3)(e). It
was argued that since the petitioner was posted to Artillery
Centre, Hyderabad, the Commandant of the said Centre, who is a
Brigadier is the proper Commanding Officer of the petitioner.
Again, the statutory powers vested in Commandant by way of
Section 3(VI) and Rule 187(3)(e) cannot be delegated by
publishing an Army Order.

It was urged that under these

circumstances the entire Summary Court Martial stands vitiated.
6.

We find no force in this argument. This is an indisputable

fact that Lt. Col. J.H.Mayne was exercising the powers of a Special
Unit Cadre and not the Commanding Officer of the accused. He
was

Deputy

Commandant

in

whom

the

powers

of

the

Commanding Officer were vested in view of the provisions of AO
251/72. The said order runs as follows :
“

AO

[WP(C) No.8065/2002

251/72 Discipline-Command

over

Page 4 of 11]

personnel
1.
By
virtue
of
his
appointment,
the
commander of a formation is also the
Commanding Officer of all personnel of, and
attached to, the formation headquarters. It is
only when he does not wish to exercise personally
his powers as Commanding Officer that the
question of appointing a Staff Officer as
Commanding Officer arises. Such appointments
should invariably be made in writing by the
formation commander and promulgated in Part I
Orders.
2.
In small formation headquarters, only one
officer need be appointed as Commanding Officer
of all formation headquarters personnel, including
officers.
In larger formation headquarters,
however, it is obviously necessary to appoint two
officers as Commanding Officers, one for officers
and another for JCOs and OR.
3.
In the absence of any of the officers
appointed as per para 2 above, the officers who
will officiate as Commanding Officers will require
to be detailed in orders in writing.
4.
Where a Staff Officer of the rank of Brigadier
is the Commanding Officer for officers of a large
formation headquarters, he cannot try such
officers summarily under Army Act Sec 83. For
this purpose, the officer in question must be tried
by the local Sub Area or Brigade Commander,
unless the commander of the formation
concerned himself chooses to do so.
5.
As
regards
establishments
and
organisations, other than formation headquarters,
the Commandants or Commanders of which have
been authorised by the Central Government
under Army Act Sec 8 to exercise the powers
which under that Act may be exercised by an
officer commanding a division or a brigade, the
next senior most officer on the strength of the
[WP(C) No.8065/2002

Page 5 of 11]

establishment or organisation may be appointed
as Commanding Officer in the manner laid down
in paras 1 to 3 above.
6.

AO 779/64 is HEREBY CANCELLED.”

In view of this order, we are of the view that the Deputy
Commandant was authorised to deal with this case.
7.

The second submission made by learned counsel for the

petitioner was that the charges framed against the accused are
not clear and they do not reveal the culpability.

In the

chargesheet it was explained that the petitioner had attempted to
obtain for himself a gratification, whereas in the particulars of the
charge, it is averred that he agreed to accept a sum of
Rs.40,000/-. He argued that the heading and the particulars
mentioned in the charge are at variance. It was stressed that the
attempt to obtain or agreeing to obtain are two different offences.
Again, the second charge is innocently worded. This is an offence
of forgery under the Indian Penal Code.

It is, therefore, a civil

offence chargeable under Section 69 of Army Act.

The offence

under Section 69 is not ordinarily triable by Summary Court
Martial in view of the restriction imposed under Section 120(2),
unless a reference had been made to an officer empowered to
convene a District Court Martial. It is a prohibitory provision and if

[WP(C) No.8065/2002

Page 6 of 11]

violated renders the trial without jurisdiction.

Turning to the

instant case the learned counsel for the respondent vehemently
argued that no sanction had been obtained from the authority
aforesaid and thus, the trial stands vitiated. Lastly, adverting to
third charge, he argued with vehemence that the hiring of 8
rooms in a lodge in Hyderabad does not reveal any culpability.
8.

All these arguments are without merit.

The entire record

had to be read as a composite document and not in piecemeals to
the benefit of one and to the detriment of the other. The heading
of the charge just gives the gist/title of the offence with which the
offender is charged. The requirement of law is that the charge
must give the full particulars.

Charge No.1 gives the full

particulars of the offence with which the petitioner was charged.
Consequently, the argument in this context must be left out of
consideration.

Moreover, in view of Rule 32 of Army Act, the

petitioner has failed to show that prejudice was caused to him due
to the framing of the above-said charge. Rule 32 of Army Rule
lays down,
“Validity of charge-sheet.-(1) A charge-sheet
shall not be invalid merely by reason of the fact
that it contains any mistake in the name or
description of the person charged, provided that
he does not object to the charge-sheet during the
[WP(C) No.8065/2002

Page 7 of 11]

trial, and that no substantial injustice has been
done to the person charged.
(2) In the construction of a charge-sheet or
charge, there shall be presumed in favour of
supporting the same every proposition which may
reasonably be presumed to be impliedly included
though not expressed therein.”
9.

Section 63 of the Army Act, 1950 in the manual of Military

Law, Volume II, issued by the Ministry of Defence, Government of
India, runs as follows:“63. Violation of good order and discipline.Any person subject to this Act who is guilty of any
act or omission which, though not specified in
this Act, is prejudicial to good order and military
discipline shall, on conviction by court-martial, be
liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which
may extend to seven years or such less
punishment as in this Act mentioned.
NOTES
1, 2 and 3 (a)

xxx xxx xxx

3(b) Negligently.-Negligence has been defined
by judicial pronouncements as “the omission to
do something which a reasonable man guided
upon those considerations which ordinarily
regulate the conduct of human affairs, would do,
or doing something which a prudent and
reasonable man would not do and as “doing
some act which a person of ordinary care and
skill would not do under the circumstances.
4.
The following are a few instances of
offences not uncommonly charged under this
section:xxx xxx xxx
[WP(C) No.8065/2002

Page 8 of 11]

Stating a falsehood to a superior officer.
xxx xxx xxx”
10.

The last argument in this context is also devoid of force.

The learned counsel for the petitioner did not pick up a conflict
with the contention raised by the counsel for the respondent that
the petitioner had rented the rooms in the civilian area contrary to
the existing orders of obtaining permission from authority to do
so. Consequently, the petitioner had violated military orders and
discipline.

The use of word improperly in the charge gives an

inkling that the petitioner had committed an act which was
contrary to military orders. In the result the argument urged by
the learned counsel for the petitioner must be left out of
consideration.
11.

The next submission made by the learned counsel for

the petitioner was that it is a case wherein the punishment was
awarded without any evidence. He strenuously argued that the
respondents have failed to produce cogent, convincing and
plausible evidence against the petitioner to prove its case beyond
reasonable doubt.
13.

It must be borne in mind that the scope of judicial

review is limited.
[WP(C) No.8065/2002

This court is not required to reassess the
Page 9 of 11]

evidence produced before the trial court.

However, there is

nothing on record which may go to reveal that the accused /
petitioner was prejudiced by any action of the Summary Court
Martial.
14.

The last submission made by the learned counsel for

the petitioner was that the petitioner was greatly prejudiced
because he was not given the opportunity to engage a qualified
lawyer. The so-called friend of petitioner viz. Major Ravi Kumar
was not legally qualified person and being from the unit of
Commanding Officer had to toe his line and did not help the
petitioner in defending his case.

The learned counsel for the

petitioner has referred to a judgment of this court in CWP No.
2937/1995 titled as Ranjit Singh, Ex. Sepoy Vs. Union of India and
Ors., decided on 18th May, 2002.
15.

All these arguments carry no conviction. The facts of

the above said case are altogether different.

In that case, the

petitioner did not know the language of the court. He was unable
to communicate with his counsel, who also did not know his
language.

Consequently, the above said authority provides no

assistance to the petitioner. Again Rule 129 runs as follows :
“129.
[WP(C) No.8065/2002

Friend

of

accused

–

In

any
Page 10 of 11]

summary court-martial, an accused person
may have a person to assist him during
the trial, whether a legal adviser or any
other person. A person so assisting him
may advise him on all points and suggest
the questions to be put to witnesses, but
shall not examine or cross-examine
witnesses or address the court.”
16.

There is nothing on the record which may go to show

that the petitioner had prayed that he should be assisted by a
legal adviser or such request made by him was declined by the
court concerned.

We have perused the record and the cross-

examination of the witnesses.

It appears that the person, who

was engaged in cross-examination of the witnesses had the legal
knowledge.

For all these reasons, we are unable to locate

substance in this argument as well.
17.

Again, the petition is lame of strength and the same is

therefore dismissed but there shall be no order as to costs.

J.M. MALIK, J.

A.K. SIKRI, J.
January 28, 2008
dc

[WP(C) No.8065/2002

Page 11 of 11]

