IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC. APP. NO. 704-05/2006
Judgment delivered on: November 1, 2007
Shri Deep Chand and Anr.
..... Appellant
Through: Mr. Yogendra Gautam, Adv.
versus
Shri Parmod Kumar Tyagi & Ors.
..... Respondent
Through: Mr. S. Sirish Kumar, Advs.
for respondents No. 2 and 3.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR,
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
By way of this appeal, the appellant seeks to challenge the
impugned Award mainly on the ground that the Tribunal has not
considered the future prospects of the deceased, who was brilliant
student and in the near future would have progressed in his life.
The appellant also averred that the Tribunal has awarded a

MAC.APP. No. 704-05/06

pages 1 of 7

nominal amount for funeral expenses and loss of love and
affection i.e. Rs. 10,000/- each besides that the Tribunal has also
awarded an interest at a quite lower rate i.e. 5.5% per annum
from the date of the filing of the petition.
The brief facts of the case relevant for present appeal are
that on 23.10.1995 at about 8.45 p.m. the deceased aged about
13 years was playing with the crackers in front of his house at
Sawan Park Road, Ashok Vihar, Delhi, when respondent No. 1
driving the truck in most negligent and rash manner came from
Sunder Lal Jain Hospitals direction and rammed the front tyre of
the truck into the deceased and crushed the deceased. When the
deceased was rushed to the hopsital, he ws declared 'brought
dead' by the hospital authorities. A claim petition was filed by the
present appellants on 1.2.1996 and award was passed on
16.5.2006. Aggrieved with the said award present appeal is
preferred by the appellants/claimants.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties. Mr. Yogendra
Guatam, counsel appearing for the appellant contends that the
progress report of 4th ,6th and 7th standard of the deceased was
placed on record and even the certificate certifying the grant of
meritorious scholarship in 6th standard was duly proved on record
MAC.APP. No. 704-05/06

pages 2 of 7

as Ex. PW1/9, but still the Tribunal has not taken into account the
aspect of future growth and progress of the deceased. The
counsel also contends that a bare and minimum Award towards
loss of love and affection in a sum of Rs. 10,000/- has been
granted by the Tribunal and similarly a lessor amount of Rs.
10,000/- has been awarded for funeral expenses. Counsel also
contends that grant of interest @ 5.5% is on the lower side and
the same has also not been awarded as per the recent judgments
of this Court as well as of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India.
Mr.S. Sirish Kumar, counsel appearing for the respondent on
the other hand states that there is no infirmity or illegality in the
impugned order passed by the Tribunal. As per the counsel for the
respondent the Award is already excessive in favour of the
appellants. The counsel contends that the child is of 13 years of
age, but still the notional income as per the Minimum Wages Act
@ Rs. 2000/- per month was taken into consideration. Counsel
also justified the finding of the Tribunal as far as the expanses
awarded towards the funeral and loss of love and affection are
concerned. Counsel also justified the said low rate of interest on
the ground that the Tribunal has already granted higher amount
towards loss of income.
MAC.APP. No. 704-05/06

pages 3 of 7

No amount of compensation can mitigate the sufferings of
the parents and the family members. However, while awarding
compensation the Tribunal has to see whether the same is just,
fair and equitable. The compensation should neither be a bonanza
nor look like granting peanuts only.

In this regard, in the

judgment entitled Divisional Controller, KSRTC v. Mahadeva
Shetty,(2003) 7 SCC 197

of the Apex Court, following

observations have been made by the Hon'ble Apex Court:“15. It has to be kept in view that the Tribunal
constituted under the Act as provided in Section
168 is required to make an award determining
the amount of compensation which to it appears
to be “just”. It has to be borne in mind that
compensation for loss of limbs or life can hardly
be weighed in golden scales. Bodily injury is
nothing but a deprivation which entitles the
claimant to damages. The quantum of damages
fixed should be in accordance with the injury. An
injury may bring about many consequences like
loss of earning capacity, loss of mental pleasure
and many such consequential losses. A person
becomes entitled to damages for mental and
physical loss, his or her life may have been
shortened or that he or she cannot enjoy life,
which has been curtailed because of physical
handicap.
The normal expectation of life is
impaired. But at the same time it has to be borne
in mind that the compensation is not expected to
be a windfall for the victim. Statutory provisions
clearly indicate that the compensation must be
“just” and it cannot be a bonanza; not a source
of profit but the same should not be a pittance.
The courts and tribunals have a duty to weigh
the various factors and quantify the amount of
MAC.APP. No. 704-05/06

pages 4 of 7

compensation, which should be just. What would
be “just” compensation is a vexed question.
There can be no golden rule applicable to all
cases for measuring the value of human life or a
limb. Measure of damages cannot be arrived at
by precise mathematical calculations. It would
depend
upon
the
particular
facts
and
circumstances, and attending peculiar or special
features, if any. Every method or mode adopted
for assessing compensation has to be considered
in the background of “just” compensation which
is the pivotal consideration. Though by use of the
expression “which appears to it to be just”, a
wide discretion is vested in the Tribunal, the
determination has to be rational, to be done by a
judicious approach and not the outcome of
whims, wild guesses and arbitrariness. The
expression “just” denotes equitability, fairness
and reasonableness, and non-arbitrariness. If it
is not so, it cannot be just. (See Helen C. Rebello
v. Maharashtra SRTC 8 .)”

Child of 13 years of age cannot be considered to be in
employment, but still the Tribunal has taken into account the
annual income of the deceased on notional basis at Rs.2,000/-.
The Tribunal has also applied multiplier of 15 as per the II
Schedule and after applying the criteria laid down in Sarla Dixit's
case the Tribunal has arrived at the figure of Rs. 2,40,000/towards the loss. I do not find any illegality or infirmity in the said
finding of the Tribunal. I am also not inclined to interfere as far as
as the funeral expenses are concerned. I feel that the Award of
MAC.APP. No. 704-05/06

pages 5 of 7

Rs.10,000/- towards the love and affection is quite on the lower
side, the same is enhanced from Rs.10,000/- to Rs. 25,000/-. The
interest awarded by the Tribunal is also quite on the lower side.
Although no fixed rate of interest has been laid down either in the
Motor Vehicles Act or in any of the judgments of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court or of this Court and the same is awarded keeping
in view the facts and circumstances of each case. The banking
rate can be considered to be the general guide for the Tribunals
but that again vary from time to time as per RBI directions. In any
case, I consider the rate of interest of 5.5% is quite on the lower
side. The same is raised from 5.5% to 7.5% and the same shall be
paid by the respondents from the date of the filing of the petition
till the realization of principal amount.
With these directions, the impugned order is modified and
the Award amount is enhanced accordingly. Counsel for the
appellant at this stage also contends that the appellants have not
been able to get any benefit of the said amount as major portion
of the Award amount falling in the share of the respective
appellants at Rs.

80,000/- each has been lying in the fixed

deposit. Perusal of the Award shows that the Tribunal has given
liberty to the appellants to approach the Tribunal for the
MAC.APP. No. 704-05/06

pages 6 of 7

withdrawal of the amount in case of any emergent necessity.
Accordingly, if there is any emergent requirement of the
appellants they can approach the Tribunal explaining and
justifying the circumstances for claiming the withdrawal of the
said amount.
The parties are directed to appear before the Tribunal on
22nd November, 2007 to carry out the said modifications and
further directions, if any.

November 01, 2007
rkr

MAC.APP. No. 704-05/06

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.

pages 7 of 7

