IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC APP. No. 618/2007
Judgment delivered on: November 01, 2007
Shri Kishan Lal Arora
S/o Sh.Ram Lal Arora
R/o A-35, Mira Bagh
New Delhi

..... Appellant.
Through:
versus

Sh.Mukesh Nigam
S/o Sh. RamChandra Nigam,
R/O EC-268, Maya Enclave,
New Delhi
Through:
CORAM:

Mr. Rakesh Khanna, Advocate

..... Respondent
Nemo

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR,
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:

MAC APP No.618/2007

page 1 of 8

By way of this appeal, the appellant who

is the

owner of the offending vehicle seeks to challenge the impugned
award whereby the Tribunal has given an award of Rs.
2,60,000/- with interest @ 6% per annum in favour of the
respondent/claimant and against the appellant.
In brief the facts of the present appeal are that on
19/12/1994 at about 10 p.m., Shri Mukesh Nigam was riding his
scooter, bearing registration No. DIU 5778, while coming from
his office at Defence Colony on his way to his house at Maya
Enclave. Shri Mukesh Nigam halted his scooter at the red light
at Lajwanti Garden Chowk for taking a right turn towards the
Maya Puri Road & on the light turning green, he took a right
turn & was hit by a Maruti Car bearing registration No.DL-2CF
1592 which was coming from jail road, Tilak Ngar side a t a very
high speed and had jumped the red light. The scooter and Shri
Mukesh Nigam were dragged for about 30 yards before the car
stopped. The claimant respondent was taken on Deen Dayal
Upadhyay and after receiving treatment from there he went to
MAC APP No.618/2007

page 2 of 8

Ganga Ram Hospital and from there he was shifted to Kolmet
Hospital. The present respondent filed claim petition before
MACT on 27.5.1995 and award was made on 7.7.2007.
Aggrieved with the said award the appellant has assailed the
said award.
The main grievance raised by the appellant in the
present appeal is that the Tribunal has granted excessive
amount of compensation of Rs.1 lac towards the permanent
disability while at the same time categorically holding that the
respondent claimant had not proved any medical report to
show that on account of injury, the respondent was not in
position to sit for a long hours. In support of his argument,
counsel for the appellant has invited my attention to para 15 of
the impugned award which shows that

the Tribunal has

observed that the disability suffered by the respondent injured
was not such that he was unable to do the work of Chartered
Accountant.

The counsel further stated that

disability

certificate filed by the respondent/injured is of 11th October,
MAC APP No.618/2007

page 3 of 8

1996, although the respondent had suffered the injuries on
account of the accident occurred on 19.12.94.

Counsel also

suggested that none of the witnesses who had signed

the

disability certificate appeared in the witness box to prove the
permanent disability of the respondent at 20%. Counsel for the
appellant invited my attention to the statement of PW-7, Dr.
S.K.Sogani, Consultant Neurosurgeon, Indraprastha Apolo
Hospital, New Delhi, where he has stated that vide Ex.PW 3/58,
in the requisite column

of diagnosis the respondent

was

diagnosed having suffered only head injury and not the spinal
injury for which the treatment of respondent continued and
disability of the claimant/respondent was taken to the extent
of 20%. Counsel further contended that the respondent injured
was initially admitted in Deen Dayal Hospital, Delhi, where he
was not also diagnosed as a case of spinal injury. Counsel for
the appellant has invited my attention to pages 23 & 24 of the
paper book, in which no such diagnose

of spinal injury was

made by the attending doctor. Even in Ganga Ram Hospital, the
MAC APP No.618/2007

page 4 of 8

final diagnoses found by the Doctor was of head injury as
would be evident from the admission/discharge record which
was duly exhibited as Ex. PW4/1.
Another contention raised by the counsel for the
appellant in the present appeal is that the Tribunal has erred in
reaching the conclusion to hold the appellant negligent. The
contention of the counsel for the appellant is that no such
negligence was proved by the respondent and therefore, finding
of the Tribunal is without any basis and proof. In support of his
contention, counsel for the appellant has placed reliance on the
judgment of the Division Bench of

Gujarat High Court in

Pankajbhai Chandubhai Patel Vs. Bharat Transport
Corporation & Anr.,

reported in 1998 (1) T.A.C.883

(Guj.)
I

have

heard

counsel

for

the

appellant

at

considerable length and have perused the record.
The respondent injured was initially admitted in Deen
Dayal Upadhyay Hospital, Delhi and from there he was taken to
MAC APP No.618/2007

page 5 of 8

Ganga Ram Hospital, Delhi. The respondent injured was not
satisfied

with the treatment

in Ganga Ram Hospital and

thereafter he got himself admitted in Kolmet Hospital, where he
was advised C.T. Scan as the said hospital suspected spinal
injury. He remained at Kolmet Hospital for about one and half
month. Report of the C.T. Scan revealed that he has suffered
fracture in his spinal cord in D7 and D8 vertibra.

It is an

admitted case that the respondent injured was not subjected to
C.T. Scan or MRI either in Deen Dayal Hospital or in Ganga
Ram Hospital and it is only in Kolmet Hospital, the respondent
injured was found to be suffering with spinal cord injury. The
respondent injured has duly proved the medical records not
only by his own deposition but by producing the evidence of
Dr. S.K. Sogani, Consultant Neurosurgeon of Apollo Hospital
and Dr.Prem Chandra, Consultant Neurosurgeon of Tirath Ram
Shah Hospital. The respondent injured has also proved the
disability certificate duly certified

by

five Doctors who

constituted the Medical Board. Going by the said medical
MAC APP No.618/2007

page 6 of 8

records and the evidence led in support thereof it cannot be said
that the respondent injured has failed to prove the disability of
the nature of injuries suffered by him. I am not inclined to
interfere in the findings arrived at by the Tribunal.
As regards the second contention of the counsel for
the appellant that the negligence
respondent injured, I feel

was not proved

by the

that the said submission of the

counsel is also equally devoid of any merit. The Tribunal has
found that the Maruti Car being driven by the appellant was
coming at very high speed and the appellant had jumped the red
light also. The impact was so grave that the scooter of the
respondent was dragged for about 30 yards before the car was
stopped by the appellant. The Tribunal has also made reference
to the criminal records to hold the negligence of the appellant
owner of the offending vehicle. The Tribunal has also referred
to the judgment of the Metropolitan Magistrate

dated

10.5.2000, whereby the appellant was convicted for committing
an offence under Section 279/337 IPC.
MAC APP No.618/2007

page 7 of 8

I do not think in the present case the appellant had
established or proved that there was no negligence on the part
of the appellant owner of the offending vehicle.
In catena of judgments the Supreme Court has held
that reliance can be placed on the criminal records to ascertain
the negligence on the part of the driver of the offending vehicle.
In the present case not only the case was registered against the
appellant driver of the offending vehicle but even the trial stood
concluded with the conviction of the appellant for committing
offence by the appellant. The judgment referred above is not
applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case.
I do not find any infirmity in the impugned order.
Dismissed.

November 01,2007
mg

MAC APP No.618/2007

KAILASH GAMBHIR
(JUDGE)

page 8 of 8

