IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC APP. No. 653/2007
Judgment delivered on: November 02,2007
The Commissioner of Police &Ors.
Police Headquarters
I.P.Estate,
New Delhi
..... Appellants
Through: Mr. Amitabh Marwah, Advocate
versus
Smt. Krishna Devi & Ors.
Through:

..... Respondent
Nemo

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR,
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:

MAC APP No. 653/2007

page 1 of 9

By way of this appeal, the appellants seek to challenge
the impugned award merely on the ground that there was no
negligence on the part of the driver of the appellant no.1. The
award is also assailed on yet another ground that the claim
petition filed by the respondents/claimants was debarred under
Section 140 of The Delhi Police Act.
Mr. Amitabh Marwah, counsel for the appellants
contends that findings of the tribunal on the aspect of negligence
are incorrect and perverse. The contention of the counsel for the
appellants is that the driver of the offending vehicle was coming
from the narrow lane to the main road so as to cross the same
and took the right turn and at that point of time the deceased
who was driving his two wheeler scooter in a rash and negligent
manner collided with the vehicle of the appellant no.1 and
therefore, the sole negligence was of the deceased and not of the
driver of the appellant no.1. The counsel also contends that the
deceased was not wearing helmet and besides that he was
carrying cattle feed on

MAC APP No. 653/2007

the back of his scooter due to which

page 2 of 9

the vehicle being driven by the deceased tilted and

hit the

vehicle of appellant no.1.
I have heard counsel for the appellant at considerable
length.
I do not find force in the argument of counsel for the
appellant.

Perusal

of the impugned award shows that the

Tribunal has discussed this aspect of negligence not only in detail
but quite satisfactorily.

The Tribunal has observed that when

the vehicle was coming from a narrow road and is approaching
towards the wide road it is the duty of the driver coming from
the narrow road to stop the vehicle and see the clarity on the
main road before making an attempt to cross the road.
Tribunal has placed reliance on the

The

site plan which also

suggested that the scooter being driven by the deceased was
coming from its correct left side when the same was hit by the
driver of the offending vehicle. The Tribunal has also taken note
of the fact that the said driver is facing criminal prosecution
against whom charge sheet has already been filed under Section

MAC APP No. 653/2007

page 3 of 9

173 of the Cr.P.C. After having gone through the evidence led by
the parties and the documents placed on record, the Tribunal
found that the negligence

on the part of the driver of the

offending vehicle was duly established.

The Tribunal further

held that in the facts and circumstances of the case, Rule of Res
Ipsa Loquitur was fully applicable. The Tribunal further held
that it is a settled principal of law that in motor accidents claim
cases, the negligence of the driver of the offending vehicle has
not to be establish beyond all reasonable and probable doubts as
required to be done in the criminal proceedings.
The principle of

Res Ipsa Loquitur has been

explained in the judgment of Hon'ble Apex Court in Pushpabai
Purshottam Udeshi v. Ranjit Ginning & Pressing Co.
(P) Ltd., reported in (1977) 2 SCC 745. The relevant paragraph
is reproduced below:
6. The normal rule is that it is for the plaintiff to
prove negligence but as in some cases considerable
hardship is caused to the plaintiff as the true cause
of the accident is not known to him but is solely
within the knowledge of the defendant who caused
MAC APP No. 653/2007

page 4 of 9

it, the plaintiff can prove the accident but cannot
prove how it happened to establish negligence on
the part of the defendant. This hardship is sought to
be avoided by applying the principle of res ipsa
loquitur. The general purport of the words res ipsa
loquitur is that the accident “speaks for itself’ or
tells its own story. There are cases in which the
accident speaks for itself so that it is sufficient for
the plaintiff to prove the accident and nothing more.
It will then be for the defendant to establish that the
accident happened due to some other cause than
his own negligence. Salmond on the Law of Torts
(15th Edn.) at p. 306 states: “The maxim res ipsa
loquitur applies whenever it is so improbable that
such an accident would have happened without the
negligence of the defendant that a reasonable jury
could find without further evidence that it was so
caused”. In Halsbury’s Laws of England , 3rd Edn.,
Vol. 28, at p. 77, the position is stated thus: “An
exception to the general rule that the burden of
proof of the alleged negligence is in the first
instance on the plaintiff occurs wherever the facts
already established are such that the proper and
natural inference arising from them is that the injury
complained of was caused by the defendant’s
negligence, or where the event charged a;
negligence ‘tells it own story’ of negligence on the
part of the defendant, the story so told being clear
and unambiguous”. Where the maxim is applied the
burden is on the defendant to show either that in
fact he was not negligent or that the accident might
more probably have happened in a manner which
did not connote negligence on his part. For the
application of the principle it must be shown that
the car was under the management of the
defendant and that the accident is such as in
ordinary course of things does not happen if those
who had the management used proper care.

MAC APP No. 653/2007

page 5 of 9

Based on the said discussion, I do not find there is any
infirmity in the order passed by the Tribunal holding the driver
of the appellant vehicle negligent for the accident in question
which resulted into the death of Shri Pawan Saini.
The second contention of the appellant that the application
filed by the respondents/claimants was barred under Section 140
of the Delhi Police Act, I do not find any force in the submission
of counsel for the appellant. It is a settled legal proposition that
claim application filed under the Motor Vehicles Act are not akin
to civil suits and therefore, the plea of invoking Section 140 of
The Delhi Police Act is not available to the appellants so far as the
compensation cases under Motor Vehicles Act are concerned.
Section 140 of The Delhi Police Act is itself a bar on entertaining
any suit or prosecution if the same is not instituted within a
period of three months after the date of the act complained of.
Proviso to Section 140 (1), restricts the maximum period for
filing the suit or prosecution within a period of one year from the
date of the alleged offence, provided the same is instituted with

MAC APP No. 653/2007

page 6 of 9

the previous sanction of the Administrator.
A similar situation came before the Bombay High
Court in Parbat Gopal Walekar Vs. Dinkar S. Shinde
reported in 1961 (63) Bom LR 189, under the provisions of
Bombay Police Act (analogous to Section 140 of the Delhi Police
Act, 1978), wherein a police constable driver, when driving a
police jeep, which was carrying a S.I. of police who was
proceeding for an inquiry, knocked down a person and injured
him and a suit for damages was filed against the driver, where
also defence of non-maintainability was taken on the basis of the
plea that it was filed beyond the period prescribed under Section
161 of the Bombay Police Act, 1951, on the question of entitlement
to the benefit of the period of limitation prescribed under Section
161 of the Act; the Court observed as follows:
“the act of the petitioner in driving rashly and
negligently, being in total disregard of the manner
in which he was expected to do his duty under the
Bombay Police Manual, 1950, could not be regarded
as an act done under the colour or in excess of duty
imposed upon him as a police constable driver and,
therefore, he was not entitled to the benefit of the
period of limitation prescribed under Section 161 of
MAC APP No. 653/2007

page 7 of 9

the Act.”
In the instant case as well, the act of driving of the
vehicle in a rash and negligent manner by the appellant driver
undoubtedly cannot be regarded as an act done under the colour
of duty or authority or in excess of any such duty, or authority, as
a prerequisite for the operation of Section 140 of the Delhi Police
Act.
In the instant case, the act of the appellant driver is
also in disregard of the duty that he owed as the driver of the
motor vehicle to the public to drive the vehicle with due care and
attention. In my view, therefore, the benefit of the shorter period
of limitation under Section 140 of the Delhi Police Act would not
be available to the appellant.
There can be no doubt that there is no such bar of
limitation as far as

filing of compensation case is concerned

under the Motor Vehicles Act. Even otherwise the appellants
have not taken any such defence in their written statement and
it is for the first time in the appeal this objection has been taken.

MAC APP No. 653/2007

page 8 of 9

In the light of the above discussion, I do not find any
merit in the present appeal.
Dismissed.

November 02, 2007
mg

MAC APP No. 653/2007

KAILASH GAMBHIR
(JUDGE)

page 9 of 9

