IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC APP. No.101/2006
Judgment delivered on: December 03 ,2007
Smt.Roopa Talwar & Ors.
..... Appellants
Through: Mr.Manohar Lal, Advocate
versus
Sh.Paramjit Singh & Ors.
Through:

..... Respondents
Mr.Mohan Babu, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR,
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
*
By way of this appeal, the appellants seek to challenge
the impugned award mainly on three grounds. Firstly, the tribunal
has not correctly assessed the income of the deceased, secondly,
the tribunal has not considered the grant of future prospects and
thirdly, the tribunal has awarded future interest at the rate of 4%

MAC APP. No.101/2006

Page 1 of 7

from the date of the award till realization.
Before adverting to deal with the contentions of the
parties, it would be appropriate to give brief facts of the case as
under:On 11.5.2002, the deceased Sh.Harish Talwar was
going to Kapoorthala to bring his family in Maruti van bearing
registration No. DL 6C E 2251.

When he reached near Friends

Cattle Feed Factory, a truck bearing registration No. PB 09 4143
came from opposite direction, rashly and negligently and collided
with the said Maruti van resulting in causing damages to the van
and also injuries to Sh.Harish Talwar who later succumbed to his
injuries at Kapurthala Civil Hospital.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have
perused the records.
Counsel for the appellants contends that the deceased
was doing the business of manufacturing electrical goods and was
earning about Rs.5,000/- to Rs.10,000/- per month. Counsel for
the appellants contends that PW-1 had duly proved the income of
the deceased.

Counsel further contends that the tribunal has

wrongly assessed the income of the deceased at Rs.6,000/- per
month although income tax return for the relevant year clearly
MAC APP. No.101/2006

Page 2 of 7

showed the gross income of the deceased at Rs.98,650/- p.a.
On future prospects, the contention of counsel for the
appellants is that it was proved on record that the deceased was
in the business of manufacturing electrical goods and the tribunal
ought to have taken into consideration the growth of the business
of the deceased and on the said basis, future prospects should
have been taken into consideration.
As regards, the lower rate of future interest, the
contention of counsel for the appellants is that the tribunal has
not given any reasons as to why the tribunal has awarded lower
rate of simple interest at the rate of 4% per annum from the date
of filing of the award till realization.
Per contra, counsel appearing for the respondents,
contends that there is no infirmity in the award passed by the
tribunal. He contests that the appellants have failed to prove the
income of the deceased as even no certified copy of income tax
return was filed on record.

Counsel further contends that

although the photocopy of income tax return is not admissible in
evidence but still the tribunal has taken the said return into
consideration for determining the income of the deceased.
Counsel further contends that the appellants themselves have
MAC APP. No.101/2006

Page 3 of 7

stated the income of the deceased between Rs.6,000/- to
Rs.10,000/- p.m., therefore, there is no infirmity in the impugned
award assessing the income of the deceased at Rs.6,000/- p.m.
On the aspect of future prospects, counsel for the
respondents has placed reliance on the judgments of the Apex
Court reported in (2006) 3 SCC 242, Bijoy Kumar Dugar Vs.
Bidya Dhar Dutta and raised the contention that once the
appellants have failed to prove on record as to how and in what
manner the appellant would have earned future prospects, the
tribunal

cannot

assess

the

future

prospects

merely

on

assumptions.
On the aspect of interest, the contention of counsel for
the respondents is that 4% interest granted by the tribunal was
over and above the rate of interest of 7.5% which was granted
from the date of filing of the petition till its realization.

Counsel

for the respondents otherwise also contends that the impugned
award already stands satisfied immediately after passing of the
award, therefore, the plea raised by the appellants in this regard
is not available.
Perusal of the impugned award shows that the
appellants had failed to prove the exact income of the deceased
MAC APP. No.101/2006

Page 4 of 7

the appellants had merely filed photocopy of the return of the
income tax in which the gross income of the deceased was shown
at Rs.98,650/- for the assessment year 2000-2001. The deceased
in the present case had died on 11.5.2002, therefore, the income
of the deceased for the said assessment year 2000-2001 could
have been taken into consideration. The income of the deceased
in the said assessment year as per own case set

up by the

appellants is Rs.98,650/- and there is nothing wrong if the net
income of the deceased has been taken at Rs.72,000/- p.a. by the
tribunal. Even otherwise, the appellants had claimed the income
of the deceased between Rs.5,000 - 10,000/- p.m. and based on
the same, the income of the deceased taken to be at Rs.6,000/ -p.
m. cannot be considered to be incorrect.

The argument of

counsel for the appellants on this account is rejected.
As regards, future prospects, the legal position is no
more res integra. For claiming future prospects, the appellants
have to plead, prove and establish on record as on what basis the
future prospects are being awarded. In this regard the judgment
of Apex Court in Bijoy Kumar Dugar's case has held as under:“ The mere assertion of the claimants that the
deceased would have earned more than Rs 8000
to Rs 10,000 per month in the span of his lifetime
MAC APP. No.101/2006

Page 5 of 7

cannot be accepted as legitimate income unless all
the relevant facts are proved by leading cogent
and reliable evidence before MACT. The claimants
have to prove that the deceased was in a trade
where he would have earned more from time to
time or that he had special merits or qualifications
or opportunities which would have led to an
improvement in his income. There is no evidence
produced on record by the claimants regarding
future prospects of increase of income in the
course of employment or business or profession,
as the case may be.”

Admittedly, no evidence to this effect was led by the
appellants, therefore, the plea of claiming compensation towards
future prospects cannot be entertained.
On the third contention of counsel for the appellants
with regard to grant of lower rate of interest at the rate of 4% p.a.
from the date of award till realization, I find that the said plea is
not available to the appellants at this stage as the respondents
have already satisfied the award. Moreover, as per the contention
of counsel for the respondents, the said 4% interest was over and
above the rate of interest which has been allowed by the Tribunal
in favour of the appellants at the rate of 7.5% p.a. from the date
of filing of the petition till the date of award and, therefore, it
would come to 11.5% rate of interest from the date of award till
the date of realization. In case the award passed by the tribunal

MAC APP. No.101/2006

Page 6 of 7

has not been complied with within a period of 30 days from the
date of the award then the appellants shall be entitled to the said
increase rate of interest at the rate of 11.5% for the remaining
period after giving an allowance of 30 days period.
With these directions the appeal is disposed of.

December 03, 2007
ga

MAC APP. No.101/2006

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.

Page 7 of 7

