IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
FAO No.218/2003
Judgment delivered on: October 03, 2007
Deepak Kumar

Through:

..... Appellant
Mr.J.S. Kanwar, Advocate

versus
Sunil & Ors.

..... Respondent
Through: Ms.A. Sangeeta, Advocate for
respondent No.3.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Not necessary

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Not necessary

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Not necessary

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
*
By way of the present appeal, the appellant is seeking
enhancement in the compensation.

Mr.J.S. Kanwar, counsel

appearing for the appellant states that meagre amount of
Rs.5,000/- has been awarded in favour of the appellant who had
received some serious injuries i.e. fracture on his left leg and 8

FAO No.218/2003

Page No.1 of 4

ribs but the Tribunal ignoring the said nature of injuries has
awarded a very small compensation in favour of the appellant.
Counsel for the appellant further contends that one academic year
of the appellant was lost due to injuries as he could not continue
his studies in 9th standard.

Counsel further contends that even

the medical expenses were not taken into consideration by the
Tribunal. Only a small amount of Rs.1,000/- has been awarded
towards treatment, medicine and conveyance etc.
Per contra, counsel for the respondent contends that
the nature of injuries as being alleged by the appellant are not
supported by the medical records were placed by the appellant.
The MLC proved that the nature of injuries were simple in nature
and not one as have been alleged by the appellant. Counsel has
invited my attention to Para 17 of the impugned award where the
Tribunal has discussed this aspect of the alleged injuries not
supported by the MLC on record.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties at length
and have perused the records. In Para 17 of the judgment, the
Tribunal has observed that the perusal of MLC, Ex.P11 indicates
that the nature of injuries described by the doctors concerned has
been certified as simple. The Court has also observed that EX.P11
FAO No.218/2003

Page No.2 of 4

being the first medical examination of the petitioner after the
accident, more reliance should be placed on the said document
and not on the oral plea of the claimant dealing with a different
kind of injury. The Tribunal has also referred to the x-ray report
which was exhibited as Ex.P15 and came to the conclusion that
the x-ray report does not re-concile with the nature of the injuries
certified on the MLC. In the absence of any evidence proving the
said injuries of fracture of left leg and 8 ribs, the Tribunal also did
not rely upon the bills produced by the appellant in support of his
injuries, although a sum of Rs.1,000/- has been awarded by the
Tribunal towards treatment, medicine and conveyance etc. Since
admittedly in the present case, the present appellant has suffered
only a simple injury, therefore, the Tribunal did not feel convinced
to award any higher amount of compensation as claimed by the
appellant in the claim petition.

It is no doubt true that the

appellant in his deposition has stated that he lost one academic
year due to the injuries sustained by him and this aspect has been
totally ignored by the Tribunal.
compensation which

has to

be

As per the settled law, the
passed

in

the

facts

and

circumstances of the case has to be just and fair.
The judgment of Supreme Court in Nagappa v.
FAO No.218/2003

Page No.3 of 4

Gurudayal Singh, (2003) 2 SCC 274 is relevant in this regard.
The relevant para of the same is reproduced below:“7. Firstly, under the provisions of the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988, (hereinafter referred to as
“the MV Act”) there is no restriction that
compensation could be awarded only up to the
amount claimed by the claimant. In an
appropriate case, where from the evidence
brought on record if the Tribunal/court
considers that the claimant is entitled to get
more compensation than claimed, the Tribunal
may pass such award. The only embargo is —
it should be “just” compensation, that is to say,
it should be neither arbitrary, fanciful nor
unjustifiable from the evidence.”

Since the Tribunal has not considered that aspect of
loss of one academic year, therefore taking the said aspect into
consideration, I enhance the award from Rs.5,000/- to Rs.9,000/with interest from the date of filing of the appeal.
With the above discussion, the appeal is disposed of.

October 03, 2007
ga

FAO No.218/2003

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.

Page No.4 of 4

