IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
WP(C) No. 5795/2001
Judgment delivered on: August 03, 2007
Delhi Transport Corporation
Through
Regional Manager
Delhi

..... Petitioner

Through: Mr. Vinay Sabharwal, Advocate
versus
1.

The Presiding Officers
Industrial Tribunal II
Karkardooma Court,
Delhi

2.

Shri Mukhtiar Singh
S/o Sh. Ram Hans
Driver, B.NO. 11090,
R/o Village Mazu & P.O.Gudhana
Distt. Rohtak (Haryana)

..... Respondent

Through: Ms. Rasmeet K. Charya for respondent no2.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR,
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
W.P.(C).No.5795/2001

page 1 of 6

in the Digest?
KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
By way of this petition, the petitioner has challenged the
impugned order dated 24.3.2001 passed by the Industrial Tribunal II,
thereby rejecting the application moved by the petitioner management
under Section 33(2) (b) of the I.D.Act.
Mr.
management

Vinay

Sabharwal

counsel

for

the

petitioner

has contended that in view of the judgment of the

Supreme Court in Delhi Transport Corporation Vs. Sardar
Singh, JT 2004 (6) SC 342, the application filed by the petitioner
under Section 33 (2) (b) of the I.D. Act should be allowed. Counsel for
the petitioner has contended that the petitioner had duly proved the
misconduct of the respondent. Counsel for the petitioner has further
contended that the respondent has failed to rebut the evidence adduced
by the petitioner and even did not lead any evidence before the
Tribunal. Counsel for the petitioner also contended that the petitioner
management had proved the attendance report which was exhibited as
Ex.AW 2/1. Counsel for the petitioner submitted that attendance report
clearly states that the respondent workman remained absent from his
duties without permission.
W.P.(C).No.5795/2001

The said report further states that
page 2 of 6

respondent remained

unauthorisedly absent from his duties for a

period of 62 days without any application in this regard and for 69 days
he remained

absent

although his

leave application was rejected.

Counsel for the petitioner contended that in view of the settled legal
position the application moved by the petitioner under Section 33 (2)
(b) merited approval and not rejection.
Ms. Rasmeet K. Charya, counsel for the respondent, on the
other hand

has contended

that this matter

consideration by the Tribunal and therefore,

requires further

the matter needs to be

remanded back. Counsel for the respondent contended that availing
leave without pay does not amount to any misconduct. Counsel for the
respondent contended that

no details

have been given by

the

petitioner in his evidence as to for which period he was on leave without
permission and for which period the application of the respondent
workman was rejected. Counsel for the respondent has placed reliance
on the judgment of this Court in W.P.(C). No. 710/2002 titled as
Delhi Transport Corporation Vs. Shri Suraj Bhan Chander ExConductor, B.No. 11559 & Anr.

and contended

that in similar

circumstances this Court has remitted the case back for fresh trial to
examine the aspect of misconduct of the delinquent official on account
W.P.(C).No.5795/2001

page 3 of 6

of his unauthorised absentism.
I have heard the arguments advanced by both the counsel
for the parties.
The management has proved the report EX.A2/1. The said
report clearly states that respondent workman remained absent from
duty without permission. It further states that workman remained
absent for a period of 62 days without any application and for the
period of 69 days his leave applications were rejected.
In view of the said evidence adduced by the petitioner
management, I do not find any merit in the argument of the respondent
to remand the matter back for a fresh trial.

On the issue of

unauthorised absentism of the respondent workman, the witness of the
management has clearly stated that leave was taken by the respondent
without any permission. Even for the period of 69 days the respondent
workman did not seek any prior permission for obtaining the leave.
This evidence of the petitioner could have been rebutted by the
respondent only by leading the evidence but since no such evidence was
led by the respondent, therefore, there is no option left with the Court
but

to accept the correctness of the deposition

adduced by

the

petitioner management. In Sardar Singh's case (Supra) and in
W.P.(C).No.5795/2001

page 4 of 6

catena of other judgments it has been clearly held that unauthorised
absentism is a serious misconduct. The relevant para from Sardar
Singh's case is reproduced below:
“In all these cases almost the whole
period of absence was without sanctioned leave. Mere
making of an application after or even before absence
from work does not in any way assist the concerned
employee. The requirement is obtaining leave in
advance. In all these cases the absence was without
obtaining leave in advance. The relevant paras of the
Standing Order read as follows:
“4.

Absence without permission:-

(i) An employee shall not absent himself
from his duties without having first obtained the
permission from the Authority or the competent officer
except in the case of sudden illness. In the case of
sudden illness he shall send intimation to the office
immediately. If the illness lasts or is expected to last for
more than 3 days at a time, applications for leave should
be duly accompanied by a medical certificate, from a
registered medical practitioner or the Medical Officer of
the D.T.S. In no case shall an employee leave station
without prior permission.
(ii) Habitual absence without permission
or sanction of leave and any continuous absence
without such leave for more than 10 days shall render
the employee liable to be treated as an absconder
resulting in the termination of his service with the
Organisation..............”
The Supreme Court has clearly held that mere making of
W.P.(C).No.5795/2001

page 5 of 6

an application by the employee after or even before absence from work
does not assist the employee unless the leave is sanctioned pursuant to
such application. As per the evidence adduced by the petitioner in the
present case no leave application was moved by the respondent as far as
period of 62 days

is concerned. However, for a period of 69 days

applications were moved but the same

were not accepted by the

petitioner management. The judgment relied upon by the counsel for
the respondent in Virender Singh's case (Supra) is not applicable
to the facts of the present case.
In view of the settled legal position, the order passed by the
Tribunal needs to be set aside and the same is accordingly set aside.
The necessary consequence of the application moved by the petitioner
management under Section 33 (2) (b) is allowed.

The order dated

24.3.2001 passed by the Tribunal is thus set aside and hereby quashed.
The writ petition is allowed.

August 03, 2007
mg

W.P.(C).No.5795/2001

KAILASH GAMBHIR J.

page 6 of 6

