IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC. APP. NO.183/2007
Judgment delivered on: December 4, 2007
United India Insurance Co. Ltd.
..... Appellant.
Through: Mr.Pankaj Seth, Adv.
versus
Smt. Sona Devi & Ors.
Through:

..... Respondents
Mr.Zainul Abedin, Adv. for
respondent Nos.1 to 4.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
*
The present appeal preferred under Section 173 of The
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, arises out of the award dated 11th

MAC. APP. NO.183/2007

Page 1 of 11

December, 2006 of the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, whereby
the Tribunal awarded a sum of Rs. 6,29,000/- along with interest
@ 7% per annum to the claimants from the date of filing of the
petition till its realisation.
The brief facts relevant for deciding the instant case
are that on 20/5/1999, the deceased Sh. Shambu Rai was
travelling on a scooter along with his friend Sh. Jitender Rai. At
about 12 noon when they were plying on National Highway No. 8,
Opposite Hotel Royal Palace, their scooter was hit by a truck
bearing registration no. HR 38 8037, driven in a rash and
negligent manner by its driver. As a result, Sh. Shambu Rai
received fatal injuries and was removed to the Safdarjung
Hospital from the accident site, where he was declared as
“brought dead”. A claim petition was filed by widow and children
of the deceased before the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal and
award was made on 11/12/2006. Aggrieved with the said award
present appeal is preferred by the appellant insurance company.
Present appeal is limited to the question of multiplier
in as much as the deceased was aged 29 years and the learned
tribunal adopted a multiplier of 18.

MAC. APP. NO.183/2007

Page 2 of 11

Sh. Pankaj Seth, counsel for the appellant insurance
company contends that the tribunal has erred in applying the
multiplier of 18.
Per contra, Sh. Zainul Abedin, counsel for respondents
no. 1 to 4 has vehemently denied the said contention of the
counsel for the appellant. The counsel urged that the award made
by the tribunal is just and fair and even otherwise the present
appeal is not maintainable as the defence under section 170 of
MV Act was not been taken over by the appellant before the
tribunal.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have
perused the record.
On the preliminary objection raised by the respondents
to the very maintainability of the appeal, I am of the view that the
contention of the respondent is correct in this regard. Counsel for
the respondent contends that the appellant had not taken over
the defence of the owner and driver as envisaged under Section
170 of the Motor Vehicles Act and, therefore, is debarred from
challenging the impugned award so as to assail the findings of the
Tribunal on the quantum of compensation.

MAC. APP. NO.183/2007

Page 3 of 11

The contention of counsel for the respondent is that
right to file an appeal is a statutory right and the insurer can
assail the findings of the Tribunal only under Section 149(2) of the
Motor Vehicles Act. Counsel further contends that it is only in a
case where there is collusion between the claimants and the
insured, the insurer can assail the findings of the Tribunal on the
grounds of quantum as well as negligence subject however to the
condition that the insurer had taken permission of the Court to
take over the defence of the owner or driver as the case may be
as envisaged under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act. No
such permission was sought by the appellant under Section 170 of
the Motor Vehicles Act by the Tribunal and, therefore, in the
absence of the same, the appellant being the insurer of the
offending vehicle cannot maintain the present appeal on grounds
other than those available to it under Section 149(2) of the Motor
Vehicles Act.
Per contra, counsel for the appellant vehemently
disputes this position and contends that the insurer cannot be
rendered remedlyless especially in a case where the Tribunal has
awarded an excessive amount of compensation in favour of the

MAC. APP. NO.183/2007

Page 4 of 11

claimants ignoring all basic principles of law for the award of
compensation. Counsel for the appellant has also placed reliance
on the judgment of the Supreme Court reported in 2007 (9) Scale
216, New India Assurance Company Ltd. Vs. Smt. Shanti
Pathak & Ors. to contend that the Apex Court had interfered to
lower down the compensation amount even in a case where the
insurer had not taken any permission from the Court under
Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act. Counsel for the appellant
also contends that the Hon'ble Supreme Court has already
referred the said issue of lack of competence of the insurer to
assail the findings of the Tribunal on the ground of quantum of
compensation and negligence to a larger Bench and, therefore,
this Court may follow the decision of the Supreme Court in this
regard.
After having given my thoughtful and conscious
consideration to the issue involved in the present case, I am of
the view that the issue is no more res integra as in the judgments
cited by the respondent, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has
authoritatively held that in the absence of permission sought from
the Court as envisaged under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles

MAC. APP. NO.183/2007

Page 5 of 11

Act, the insurer has no right to file an appeal to challenge the
quantum of compensation or finding of the Tribunal as regards
the negligence or contributory negligence of offending vehicles is
concerned. It would be appropriate to refer Section 170 of the
Motor Vehicles Act as under:“170. Impleading insurer in certain cases- Where
in the course of any inquiry the Claims Tribunal is
satisfied that (a) there is collusion between the person
making the claim and the person against whom
the claim is made, or
(b) the person against whom the claim is made
has failed to contest the claim,

It may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, direct
that the insurer who may be liable in respect of such
claim, shall be impleaded as a party to the proceeding
and the insurer so impleaded shall thereupon have,
without prejudice to the provisions contained in subsection (2) of section 149, the right to contest the
claim on all or any of the grounds that are available to
the person against whom the claim has been made.“

It is an admitted case between the parties that no such
permission under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act was
sought by the appellant which clearly means that the procedure
laid down under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act was not

MAC. APP. NO.183/2007

Page 6 of 11

followed. In the judgment of the Supreme Court reported in
(1998) 3 SCC 140, Shankarayya Vs. United India Insurance
Co. Ltd., the Supreme Court has held that the insurance
company when impleaded as a party by the Court can be
permitted to contest the proceedings on merits only if the
conditions

mentioned in Section 170 are found to be satisfied

and for that purpose the insurance company has to obtain an
order in writing from the Tribunal and such an order should be a
reasoned order of the Tribunal. In such circumstances unless the
said procedure is followed, the appellant insurer cannot have a
wider defence on merits than what is available to it by way of a
statutory defence. RElevant part of Para 4 of the said judgment in
this regard is referred as under:“4. It clearly shows that the Insurance
Company when impleaded as a party by the
Court can be permitted to contest the
proceedings on merits only if the conditions
precedent mentioned in the section are found
to be satisfied and for that purpose the
Insurance Company has to obtain order in
writing from the Tribunal and which should be a
reasoned order by the Tribunal. Unless that
procedure is followed, the Insurance Company
cannot have a wider defence on merits than
what is available to it by way of statutory
defence. “

MAC. APP. NO.183/2007

Page 7 of 11

In another judgment of the Apex Court entitled
National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Nicolletta Rohtagi, (2002) 7
SCC 456, it was observed as under:“25. We have earlier noticed that motor
vehicle accident claim is a tortious claim
directed against tortfeasors who are the
insured and the driver of the vehicle and the
insurer comes to the scene as a result of
statutory liability created under the Motor
Vehicles Act. The legislature has ensured by
enacting Section 149 of the Act that the
victims of motor vehicle are fully compensated
and protected. It is for that reason the insurer
cannot escape from its liability to pay
compensation on any exclusionary clause in
the insurance policy except those specified in
Section 149(2) of the Act or where the
condition precedent specified in Section 170 is
satisfied.
26. For the aforesaid reasons, an insurer if
aggrieved against an award, may file an appeal
only on those grounds and no other. However,
by virtue of Section 170 of the 1988 Act,
where in course of an enquiry the Claims
Tribunal is satisfied that ( a ) there is a
collusion between the person making a claim
and the person against whom the claim has
been made, or ( b ) the person against whom
the claim has been made has failed to contest
the claim, the Tribunal may, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, implead the insurer and in
that case it is permissible for the insurer to
contest the claim also on the grounds which
are available to the insured or to the person
against whom the claim has been made. Thus,
unless an order is passed by the Tribunal

MAC. APP. NO.183/2007

Page 8 of 11

permitting the insurer to avail the grounds
available to an insured or any other person
against whom a claim has been made on being
satisfied of the two conditions specified in
Section 170 of the Act, it is not permissible to
the insurer to contest the claim on the grounds
which are available to the insured or to a
person against whom a claim has been made.
Thus where conditions precedent embodied in
Section 170 are satisfied and award is adverse
to the interest of the insurer, the insurer has a
right to file an appeal challenging the quantum
of compensation or negligence or contributory
negligence of the offending vehicle even if the
insured has not filed any appeal against the
quantum of compensation. Sections 149, 170
and 173 are part of one scheme and if we give
any different interpretation to Section 173 of
the 1988 Act, the same would go contrary to
the scheme and object of the Act.”

In view of the said legal position, I cannot appreciate
the argument of counsel for the appellant that even without
seeking permission of the Court as required under Section 170,
the Appellant can proceed with the appeal. Once the application
under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act was preferred by the
appellant before the Tribunal for taking over the defence of an
owner or driver, the Tribunal is required to pass specific order and
that too a reasoned order as per the observations of the Supreme
Court referred above and, therefore, in the instant matter the
argument of counsel for the appellant cannot be appreciated that

MAC. APP. NO.183/2007

Page 9 of 11

non-filing of an application under Section 170 of the Motor
Vehicles Act by the appellant in this regard is no bar in preferring
present appeal.
In the light of the above discussion, I do not find any
merit in the submission of counsel for the appellant. The
judgment cited by the counsel in Shanti Pathak's case (supra)
has not dealt with the said legal proposition and, therefore, the
same is not applicable in the facts and circumstances of the
present case. Therefore, in view of the settled position of law the
present appeal is not maintainable.
Even otherwise, the issue pertaining to the adoption of
multiplier is no more res integra. In plethora of cases the Hon’ble
Apex Court has held that the II Schedule can be taken as a guide
in computing compensation and any deviation therefrom, should
take place only on the peculiar facts and circumstances of the
case. In this regard in Abati Bezbaruah v. Dy. Director
General, Geological Survey of India,(2003) 3 SCC 148 the
Hon’ble Apex Court has observed as under:
“11. It is now a well-settled principle of law that
the payment of compensation on the basis of
structured formula as provided for under the

MAC. APP. NO.183/2007

Page 10 of 11

Second Schedule should not ordinarily be deviated
from. Section 168 of the Motor Vehicles Act lays
down the guidelines for determination of the
amount of compensation in terms of Section 166
thereof. Deviation from the structured formula,
however, as has been held by this Court, may be
resorted to in exceptional cases. Furthermore, the
amount of compensation should be just and fair in
the facts and circumstances of each case.”
The deceased at the time of the accident was 29 yrs of
age and is survived by his widow and minor children, therefore,
the multiplier of 18 adopted by the tribunal is as per the II
Schedule to the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. I do not find any force
in the contention of the counsel for the appellant that the tribunal
has not correctly applied the multiplier of 18 for the deceased
aged 29 years.
In view of the above discussion, the appeal is
dismissed.

December , 2007

MAC. APP. NO.183/2007

KAILASH GAMBHIR J.

Page 11 of 11

