IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC APP No. 56/2005

Judgment delivered on: October 04, 2007
Smt. Sugna @Sugni @Sona Devi@Sona
w/o Late Shri Kanhiya Lal
R/O D-369,
JJ colony,
Shakurpur, Delhi
..... Appellant.
Through:

Mr.

Narender

Kalra,

Advocate
versus
Shri Ashok Kumar & Ors.

..... Respondents

Through: Mr. A.K.De, Advocate.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR,
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

No

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
MAC APP. NO. 56/2005

page 1 of 7

in the Digest?

No

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
By way of this present appeal the appellant has
challenged the impugned award dated 30.10.2004, whereby
the claim petition filed by the appellant was dismissed.
The brief facts

of the case which are not in

dispute are that the petitioner was employed on the post of
sweeper/helper with M/s. Shakun Consumer Products Pvt. Ltd.
at B-36, Lawrence Road Industrial Area, Delhi on 26.9.2001.
When she was performing the sweeping duties, suddenly a
truck bearing registration no. HR 37A-1695 in a most rash
and negligent manner hit the iron

table which was

being

cleaned by the appellant as a result of which 4 fingers of right
hand of the appellant got crushed very badly.

The

management of the appellant got her admitted in Kuber
Hospital at Chander Lok Enclave, Pitampura, where all the
four fingers of the appellant got amputated. The appellant
remained admitted in the said hospital for a period of three
MAC APP. NO. 56/2005

page 2 of 7

days.

After

treatment

her discharge

the appellant continued her

for a period of four months.

The written

statement was filed by the driver and owner of the offending
vehicle

wherien

they

disputed

the

factum

of

the

involvement of the said truck in the alleged accident and
after filing of the written statement the driver and owner of
the offending vehicle preferred to remain absent and were
proceeded ex-parte.

The claim petition was only contested

by respondent no.3/insurer of the offending vehicle.
The Tribunal has

framed

the issues and the

parties were directed to lead evidence. The appellant had
filed an affidavit in support of her claim petition, whereas, no
evidence was led by the Insurance Company as well as by
the respondents. After taking into consideration the evidence
adduced by the appellant, the documents filed by the
appellant comprising of copy of FIR and another investigation
document, the court came to the conclusion that the
appellant had failed to prove the involvement of the said
truck bearing registration no.HR 37A-1695. The Tribunal held
MAC APP. NO. 56/2005

page 3 of 7

that apart from the fact that there was immense delay on the
part of the appellant in lodging the FIR, the appellant herself
could not reveal

the registration number of the offending

vehicle to the police even after two months of the date of the
said accident.

The Tribunal also pointed out that no test

identification parade had taken place
Tribunal has also observed that
came to be filed against

at any time.

The

as to how charge sheet

the driver and owner of the said

truck bearing no. HR-37A-1695.

The Tribunal further

observed that the appellant withheld the best evidence i.e.,
of Mr. Kailash Sharma, who was manager in the said
company and who as per the appellant was only aware of the
involvement of the said truck.
Based on the said observations, the Tribunal
dismissed the claim petition filed by the appellant.
Mr. Narender Kalra, counsel for the appellant
contends that the Tribunal has attached undue importance
to the pendency of the criminal case as if the Tribunal was
acting as a criminal court and not trying the compensation
MAC APP. NO. 56/2005

page 4 of 7

case.

Counsel for the appellant contends that

once the

appellant had proved the injury sustained by her and
involvement of the offending vehicle, that was sufficient
enough to consider the case of the appellant for the grant of
compensation. Counsel for the appellant contends that copy
of the FIR

and other criminal documents filed by the

appellant clearly disclosed

that said truck was involved in

the accident which led to causing injury to the appellant.
Counsel for the appellant also contends that appellant could
not

force the manager of the company to give evidence

apprehending her removal from the company.
Mr. De, counsel for the respondent on the other
hand contends that

once the appellant has failed to even

prove the involvement of the said truck bearing No. HR-37A1695, no compensation could have been awarded in favour of
the appellant. Counsel for the respondent further contends
that once involvement of the offending vehicle as well as
negligence

has not

been

besides the best evidence
MAC APP. NO. 56/2005

proved by the appellant and
has also been withheld by the
page 5 of 7

appellant, no illegality or perversity could be found in the
decision of the Tribunal in dismissing the claim petition.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties at
considerable length and I have perused the records. Although
the delayed registration of FIR would not come in the way of
the Tribunal in considering the compensation case, yet the
moot question would be as to on what basis and at whose
instance

involvement

of

alleged

offending

truck

was

disclosed. It is admitted position that the appellant herein
was not aware of the involvement of the truck in question as
she merely stated that there was some truck carrying flour
cane had hit one iron table while taking a reverse and due to
which the appellant had received the injuries in question. On
the query raised by the Court as to who had exactly witness
the accident in question the counsel for the appellant
submitted that one Shri Kailash Sharma, who was the
company Manager came to know about the involvement of
the truck bearing registration No. 37A-1695 although Mr.
Kailash Sharma himself was not an eye witness to the alleged
MAC APP. NO. 56/2005

page 6 of 7

accident. These peculiar facts led the Court to observe that
there is not even a single piece of document or any other
testimony to connect the truck No. HR-37A-1695 to the
accident in question resulting in causing injuries to the
appellant. Be that as it may, it is manifest that this aspect of
the matter as to whether the truck bearing No. HR-37A-1695
was involved in the accident in question needs to be
considered by the Tribunal afresh and if deemed necessary
by granting one more opportunity to each of the contesting
parties to lead further evidence.
In the light of the aforesaid observations, the matter is
remanded back to the MACT Tribunal for deciding the issue
No. 1 afresh after granting due opportunity to the parties.
The parties are directed to appear before the concerned
MACT Tribunal on 2nd November, 2007.

October 04, 2007
mg

MAC APP. NO. 56/2005

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.

page 7 of 7

