IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC APP. NO.495/2004
Judgment delivered on: November 05,2007
Shri Rahul Gupta & Ors.
Through:

..... Appellant.
Mr.S.P.Gupta, Advocate

versus
The Oriental Insurance Co.Ltd. & Ors.
Through: Mr.
Advocate.

..... Respondent
Madhurendra
Kumar,

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR,
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
By way of this appeal, the appellant seeks to challenge

MAC APP. No. 495/2004

page 1 of 7

the impugned award dated. 7.4.2004 on the ground that the
Tribunal has not granted adequate compensation towards the
loss of the income due to the demise of the parents of the
appellants.
Brief facts of the present appeal are that Smt.Veena
Gupta aged 53 years along with her husband Shri Dharampal
Gupta aged about 60 years, their son, Shri Rahul Gupta, aged
about 29 years and daughter-in-law, Smt. Raj Shree Gupta at
about 10.00 a.m. on 22.6.1997 met with an accident on G.T. Road,
Muzaffar Nagar, Roorkee Road, near Falauda, P.S. Purkaji, Distt.
Muzazzaffar Nagar, U.P. while travelling in a Maruti car bearing
registration No. HR-51 B-1199, and were proceeding from Delhi to
Pondha (Dehradun). A Tata Sumo Car bearing registration No.
UP 15F 3787 came from opposite side being driven at a very fast
speed, rashly and negligently by its driver and truck being driven
by its driver in a rash and negligent manner came from the
opposite side on extreme right side of the road and collided with
the car bearing registration No. HR51 B1199. Due to forceful
MAC APP. No. 495/2004

page 2 of 7

impact the occupants of the car along with the car were thrown
out of the road and Smt. Veena Gupta and her husband Shri.
Dharam Pal Gupta succumbed to their injuries and died on the
spot. A claim petition was filed on 27.3.1998 before the MACT and
Award was made on 7.4.2004. Aggrieved with the said Award the
present appellant/claimant has preferred this appeal.
Mr.S.P. Gupta, counsel for the appellants contends
that the Tribunal while computing the compensation has not
taken into consideration the financial loss to the family and to
the estate and has merely granted compensation of Rs.2 lacs on
account of loss of love and affection, motherly guidance, support
and encouragement. In support of his argument counsel for the
appellants has placed reliance on the judgment of the Supreme
Court reported in Lata Wadhwa & Ors. Vs. State of Bihar
& Ors. reported in 2001 ACJ 1735.
Mr.Madhurendra Kumar, counsel for the respondent on
the other hand contends that since the deceased was a housewife
and the appellant was not financially dependent upon her
MAC APP. No. 495/2004

page 3 of 7

therefore, there was no loss to the estate and consequently no loss
to the appellants and, therefore, due to this reason the Tribunal
has declined to grant any amount for the loss of estate, after the
demise of Smt. Veena Gupta.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties at
considerable length and have perused the record. The Tribunal
has taken into consideration the observations of the Supreme
Court made in Lata Wadhwa's case (Supra) and based on
the same has estimated the value of the services rendered @
3,000/- per month. After placing reliance on the said judgment
the Tribunal came to the conclusion that the estimated value of
the services rendered by a housewife could be safely applied to
the facts of the present case. Surprisingly, the Tribunal ultimately
did not grant any compensation for the loss of estate to the
appellants on the ground that the appellants were not financially
dependent on the deceased. The Tribunal, however, granted a
total compensation of Rs.2 lacs to the appellants for the loss of
love and affection, motherly guidance and support, besides
MAC APP. No. 495/2004

page 4 of 7

considering other factors, to the appellants due to the demise of
their mother.
Although, I do not feel inclined to interfere with the
impugned award so far as the grant of compensation of Rs.2 lac is
awarded in favour of the appellants under differnet heads, yet, I
feel the approach of the Tribunal is totally erroneous and illegal
so far as the same is concerned in relation to denial of amount of
compensation towards the loss of estate on the ground that the
appellants were not monetarily or financially dependent upon
the deceased. The income of the deceased as a housewife, after
placing reliance on the judgment of Lata Wadhwa's case
(Supra), was to be estimated

in monetary terms and

once

reaching to that conclusion, the Tribunal ought not to have
debarred the appellants from the loss of the estate due to the
demise of the mother. The Tribunal has held the income of the
deceased @3,000/- per month.

In the present case there is an

estimation of the value of the services being rendered by the
housewife and therefore, I do not consider it proper to deduct
MAC APP. No. 495/2004

page 5 of 7

1/3rd expenses from the said estimated value of services. The age
of the deceased was 53 years at the time of her death and the
appropriate multiplier applicable to 52 to 55 years

is 11 and

applying the multiplier of 11 as envisaged in Second Schedule of
the Motor Vehicles Act, the loss to the estate of the deceased
would come to Rs.3,96,000/- (3,000x12x11). The respondent
insurance company is thus directed to pay a sum of Rs.3,96,000/@6% per annum from the

date of filing of the petition till

realisation.
With the above directions, the award passed by the
Tribunal so far as the same relates to the death of Smt. Veena
Gupta is modified to that extent.
The matter is remitted

back to the Tribunal for

carrying out the said modification and giving necessary directions
for the release of the amount in favour of the appellants. Since
the recovery rights have already been granted to the respondent
insurance company, therefore, for the enhanced amount also, the
respondent shall have recovery rights to recover the said amount
MAC APP. No. 495/2004

page 6 of 7

from the owner of the said offending vehicle.
With these directions the present appeal stands
disposed of.
The parties are directed to appear before the Tribunal
on 17.1.2008.

November 05, 2007
mg

MAC APP. No. 495/2004

KAILASH GAMBHIR J.

page 7 of 7

