IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
FAO NO. 69/1993
Judgment delivered on: December 05,2007
Delhi Transport Corporation

..... Appellant.

Through: Mr.Jyotindra Kumar, Advocate.
versus
Shri B.P.Singhal & Ors.

..... Respondents

Through: Mr.R.P.Bansal, Sr.Advocate
with Mr.H.P.Sharma,for respondent.
Mr.P.K. Seth, Advocate for
respondent No.6.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR,
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:

FAO No.69/1993

page 1 of 16

By way of this appeal, the appellant seeks to challenge
the impugned award dated 27.1.1993 on two grounds.

Firstly,

that there was a contributory negligence on the part of the driver
of the three wheeler scooter in which the deceased was travelling.
The second contention raised by the appellant is that without
there being any evidence on record, the Tribunal has wrongly
assessed the income of the appellant at Rs.3,500/- p.m.

For

better appreciation of the contentions raised by the parties, it
would be appropriate to give brief scenario of the facts as under:On 4.10.1981 at about 1.10 p.m., the deceased was
travelling in a three wheeler

scooter bearing registration No.

DHR-5301 and was going towards India Gate on Dr.Zakir Hussain
Marg.

When the said scooter was at the crossing of the Zakir

Hussain Road and Cornwallis Road, suddenly the offending DTC
bus bearing registration No. DHP-2996, being driven in a very rash
and negligent manner by its driver came from Cornwallis Road for
going towards Zoo's direction,. The bus driver skipped the red
light traffic signal at the aforesaid crossing.

Suddenly the bus

driver lost the control over the vehicle. When the three wheeler
scooter saw the bus reaching towards him, he tried to save
FAO No.69/1993

page 2 of 16

himself from the collision but the bus hit the three wheeler scooter
and smashed into and as a result of this, the deceased Master
Ashesh Singhal died.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have
perused the records.
Counsel for the appellant has contended that as per
own admission of the driver of the scooter in his crossexamination the scooter had hit against the right middle portion
of the bus.

The contention of counsel for the appellant is that

once the scooter driver himself has categorically admitted the
said fact of the scooter being hit at the middle portion of the bus,
this circumstance in itself is sufficient enough to prove that the
scooter driver himself was negligent in driving the vehicle.
Counsel for the appellant has invited my attention to the crossexamination of Mr.Sushil Kumar in support of his argument.
Counsel for the appellant contends that DTC alone could not have
been held responsible for causing the accident and at best it was
a clear cut case of contributory negligence.

Counsel for the

appellant has also contended that the police had challaned three
wheeler scooter for committing offence under Sections 278 and
304-A of the IPC.
FAO No.69/1993

page 3 of 16

On the second contention, counsel for the appellant
submitted that the Tribunal has assessed the income of the
deceased at Rs.3,500/- in a most whimsical manner as there was
no evidence in support of the same placed on record by the
respondent to prove the said income. Counsel further contends
that it is an admitted case of the parties that deceased being a
student, it cannot be said that he was earning any income also.
Counsel for the appellant thus contends that tribunal has returned
a wrong finding as regards the determination of the income of the
deceased is concerned. Counsel for the appellant has also placed
reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court reported in III
(2003) ACC 57(SC), The Divisional Controller,KSRTC Vs.
Mahadeva Shetty & Anr., to contend that the compensation to
be awarded by the tribunals has to satisfy the criteria of the same
being just and fair as envisaged under Section 168 of the Motor
Vehicles Act. Just compensation does not mean, it should be by
way of a bonanza for the victim of the dependant family
members. Counsel further contends that the just compensation
has to be assessed on the basis of the material placed by the
claimants on record and such a compensation cannot be
determined without there being any basis.
FAO No.69/1993

Counsel for the
page 4 of 16

appellant has referred to Para 14 of the said judgment which is
reproduced as under:“14. The main principles of law on compensation
for injuries were worked out in the 19th century,
where railway accidents were becoming common
and all actions were tried by the jury. Though the
cases have an antiquated air it is still useful to
refer to them. The necessity that damages should
be “full” and “adequate” was stressed by the
Court by the Queen’s Bench in Fair v. London and
North-Western Rly. Co. The word “compensation”
is derived from the Latin word “compensare”
meaning “weigh together” or “balance”. In
Rushton v. National Coal Board it was observed:
“[E]very member of this Court is
anxious to do all he can to ensure that the
damages are adequate for the injury
suffered, so far as there can be
compensation for an injury, and to help the
parties and others to arrive at a fair and
just figure....”

Per contra, counsel for the respondent seriously refutes
the contention raised by counsel for the appellant. He contends
that the negligence on the part of the driver of the offending
vehicle of the appellant was writ large. Counsel further contends
that the present case is a case of gross negligence as not only
that the bus had hit the three wheeler scooter while the bus was
being driven by the driver at a very high speed but he continued
driving the bus
FAO No.69/1993

even after hitting the same.

Counsel for the
page 5 of 16

respondent has placed reliance on the deposition of PW-5 who
was an eye witness being passenger in the offending vehicle. In
his deposition, PW-5 has clearly narrated the exact facts which led
to the occurrence of the said accident.

In his testimony, the

witness has stated that the driver of the offending bus was driving
the vehicle at a very high speed without even bothering about the
red light and while jumping the red light, he had hit the three
wheeler scooter in which the deceased was travelling which was
coming from the other side of Oberoi Hotel. The said witness also
stated that there was a green signal as far as three wheeler
scooter was concerned and the accident had occurred because
the bus driver had jumped the red light and was trying to cross
the main crossing at a very high speed and at which point of time
the said accident occurred in which three wheeler scooter not only
turned turtle but was dragged at about a distance of 100 yards.
Counsel further contends that the evidence of the said eye
witness cannot be doubted and nothing contrary to his deposition
could be elicited by the appellant in his cross-examination.
Counsel for the respondent has also invited my attention to the
relevant paras of the award in which the tribunal has considered
the contentions raised by the appellant. Para 9 to 12 of the same
FAO No.69/1993

page 6 of 16

are reproduced as under:“9. Issue No.1 & 3- Both the issues being
inter-connected are proposed to be discussed
together. On the part of the claimants one
witness appearing as PW5 has deposed
regarding the manner in which the accident
took place, he was travelling in the offending
bus driven by the respondent No.1. He has
further deposed that after the accident the
deceased and Insured driver of the three
wheeler scooter were taken in the same bus to
the hospital. According to him the driver of
the bus did not stop the bus even after the
scooter was hit and was overtured, it was only
on the insistence of the passengers travelling
in the bus that he was forced to stop the
vehicle and bring it back to the place of
accident.
This witness is definite in his
statement regarding the speed of the bus that
it was being driven in a very high speed and
irrespective of the red traffic light, the driver of
the bus respondent No.1 jumped the red light
and hit the three wheeler scooter which was
coming from the side of the Oberoi Hotel. In
the W.S. filed by the respondents it has been
pleaded that the traffic light was clear for the
traffic when the bus reached there and
according to it the driver of the DTC bus as RW
stated that on his side the signal was clear and
to quote from his statement “when I was
crossing the traffic lights it Zakir Hussain
crossing were out of order they had been out
of order for the last three days. Thus there is
contradiction in the plea“9. Issue No.1 & 3Both the issues being inter-connected are
proposed to be discussed together. On the
part of the claimants one witness appearing as
PW5 has deposed regarding the manner in
which the accident took place, he was
travelling in the offending bus driven by the
FAO No.69/1993

page 7 of 16

respondent No.1. He has further deposed that
after the accident the deceased and Insured
driver of the three wheeler scooter were taken
in the same bus to the hospital. According to
him the driver of the bus did not stop the bus
even after the scooter was hit and was
overtured, it was only on the insistence of the
passengers travelling in the bus that he was
forced to stop the vehicle and bring it back to
the place of accident. This witness is definite
in his statement regarding the speed of the
bus that it was being driven in a very high
speed and irrespective of the red traffic light,
the driver of the bus respondent No.1 jumped
the red light and hit the three wheeler scooter
which was coming from the side of the Oberoi
Hotel. In the W.S. filed by the respondents it
has been pleaded that the traffic light was
clear for the traffic when the buding and
evidence produced by the respondents.
Beside this evidence I find that the three
wheeler scooter driver who is respondent also
appeared as PW6 and he has deposed that on
his side it was a green signal therefore he
entered the crossing and after being hit
became unconscious. The argument advanced
by the learned counsel for the Delhi Transport
Corporation is that the criminal case was
registered at the instance of the Delhi
Transport Corporation bus driver and it was
registered against the three wheeler scooter
therefore it should be presumed that it was the
fault of the respondent three wheeler scooter
driver for causing this accident.
He also
referred to the statement of the PW6 in the
cross examination where he admits that he
has licence since 1980 an the TSR belonging to
his brother. There from it was argued that
respondent three wheeler scooter driver was
novice in driving the vehicle and caused this
accident. But this argument does not carry
FAO No.69/1993

page 8 of 16

any weight in my opinion it was held in the
case of Suleman Vs. State of Maharashtra a
criminal appeal No.50 of 1965 dieced on
1.12.67 by the Honourable Supreme Court that
a person having learner licence driving a jeep
without a regular licence holder by his side
knocking down a pedestrian cannot be said to
be novice in driving the vehicle simply because
he has a learner licence. A person may be
proficient in driving yet for sheer indifference
he might not have taken the licence. In view
of this ruling where conviction was set aside
for the conviction 304 of the IPC it is clear that
this is no ground for holding the argument of
the learned counsel for the respondents that
the scooter driver was a novice therefore this
accident has taken place. Registration of case
by itself against the scooter driver for the
offence under the Indian Penal Code is also no
reason to hold his fault in causing the accident
because:1. There is no finding of criminal court as yet.
2. Even if there is such finding, a finding given
by the criminal court is not binding in this
case.
3. The tribunal has to arrive at independent
conclusion regarding driving of the vehicle
rashly and negligence in causing the accident
and by which of the parties.
4. The FIR was registered by the bus driver for
the reasons stated by the PW 8 respondent
scooter driver that he became unconscious at
the spot and was taken to the hospital and he
remains there for one day and was discharged
on 5.10.81.
5. Further the driver of the bus himself was the
complainant in the FIR in the ordinary course it
FAO No.69/1993

page 9 of 16

is expected that he would blame the other
vehicle driver involved in the accident to save
his own skin.
10. For these reasons merely registration of
the case against the scooter driver in the
Police Station under Section278 and 304 A of
Indian Penal Code will not absolve the bus
driver from his liability for rash and negligent
driving of the bus.
11. Another aspect of the matter is that the
conductor of the bus has not been examined
as witness by the respondent No.1 There is
solitary statement of the respondent as RW in
support of his plea regarding fault of the
scooter driver in causing this accident. There
were admittedly some passengers in the bus.
The driver could have examined any of the
passengers in his support, if no passenger was
was available, atleast the address and name
and particulars of the conductor were
definitely available with the driver, he could
have produced him, to tell the court whose
fault it was in causing the accident. It was
held in the case of 1990 (2) 7AC 59 that
where the conductor of the bus was not
examined he being the best witness of the
accident and adverse inference can reasonably
be raised on this account.
12. Further even in the normal course if the
facts brought on record are appreciated, it can
be concluded that it was the fault of the
respondent No.1 exclusively due to which this
unfortunate accident took place. Being the
heavier vehicles in comparison of the three
wheeler scooter. It would deliberately strike
against
the
running
Delhi
Transport
FAO No.69/1993

page 10 of 16

Corporation bus coming from the other side,
when according to the respondents case and
pleas as a RW the bus had already crossed the
traffic light and it was that the three wheeler
scooter struck against. It this story is believed
it implies that the three wheeler scooter driver
deliberately and intentionally struck against
the bus. This is not the normal behavior of the
driver of any vehicle. There is no such plea on
the part of the respondents that the three
wheeler scooter Driver was drunk and he lost
balance of the vehicle and due to it the
accident took place. In the absence of such
plea the only conclusion to accept the plea of
the respondent is that the three wheeler
scooter driver himself struck against running
DTC bus which I find myself unable to believe.
And more over in this regard there is no
suggestion to the PW 6 who is the driver of the
three wheeler scooter that it was he who
struck scooter against the bus.
What is
suggested is that he tried to cross ahead of the
bus and said accident took place. It has come
in the evidence of the eye-witness as well that
if the PW 6 that there was green light for the
traffic coming from which side the three
wheeler scooter was coming it was the fault of
the DTC bus driver who jumped the red light.
Therefore looked at from any angle it is fault of
the bus driver that the accident took place.
Hence I hold this issue No.1 in favour of the
claimants and Issue No.3 against the
respondent 1 and 2.”
Perusal of the aforesaid paragraphs would clearly
reveal that the contentions raised by the appellant in the present
appeal have been discussed threadbare by the Tribunal. It is no

FAO No.69/1993

page 11 of 16

doubt true that in normal circumstances, the complaint should
have been lodged against the driver of the bus but in the given
facts and circumstances of a particular case non-registration of
complaint or FIR cannot have any adverse effect if the claimants
are otherwise able to establish the negligence on the part of the
driver of the offending vehicle.

Once the respondent has

successfully established the negligence on the part of the driver of
the bus that too before the MACT Tribunal, no adverse inference
can be drawn against the respondent for non-registration of any
complaint or FIR against the driver of the offending bus.

Even

otherwise, it is an admitted case that the driver of TSR became
unconscious due to the injuries sustained by him and the boy in
question had died at the spot itself.
In

relation

to

'negligence'

negligence', the Hon'ble Apex Court in

and

'contributory

Municipal Corpn. of

Greater Bombay v. Laxman Iyer, (2003) 8 SCC 731 has
observed as under:“To determine whether an act would be or
would not be negligent, it is relevant to
determine if any reasonable man would
foresee that the act would cause damage or
not. The omission to do what the law obligates
or even the failure to do anything in a
FAO No.69/1993

page 12 of 16

manner, mode or method envisaged by law
would equally and per se constitute negligence
on the part of such person. If the answer is in
the affirmative, it is a negligent act. Where an
accident is due to negligence of both parties,
substantially there would be contributory
negligence and both would be blamed. In a
case of contributory negligence, the crucial
question on which liability depends would be
whether either party could, by exercise of
reasonable
care,
have
avoided
the
consequence of the other’s negligence.
Whichever party could have avoided the
consequence of the other’s negligence would
be liable for the accident. If a person’s
negligent act or omission was the proximate
and immediate cause of death, the fact that
the person suffering injury was himself
negligent and also contributed to the accident
or other circumstances by which the injury
was caused would not afford a defence to the
other. Contributory negligence is applicable
solely to the conduct of a plaintiff. It means
that there has been an act or omission on the
part of the plaintiff which has materially
contributed to the damage, the act or om
ission being of such a nature that it may
properly be described as negligence, although
negligence is not given its usual meaning.
(See Charlesworth on Negligence , 3rd Edn.,
para 328.) It is now well settled that in the
case of contributory negligence, courts have
the power to apportion the loss between the
parties as seems just and equitable.
Apportionment in that context means that
damage is reduced to such an extent as the
court thinks just and equitable having regard
to the claim shared in the responsibility for the
damage. But in a case where there has been
FAO No.69/1993

page 13 of 16

no contributory negligence on the part of the
victim, the question of apportionment does
not arise.”
On the basis of the above discussion, I am of the view
that the contention raised by the appellant on this aspect is
meritless.
As regards, the other contention of the appellant that
the Tribunal has wrongly assessed the income of the deceased at
Rs.3,500/- p.m., the same is also devoid of any force. Admittedly,
the deceased was a student of M.Sc.(Physics) of a young age of
21 years at the time of accident. In this regard the Tribunal has
placed reliance on the judgments reported in 1989 (1) TAC 334,
Kumari Vs. Shanti Trivedi, 1991 (1) TAC 364, Uman Singh
Gurung Vs. Shri Seva Rama Dutta, 1992 (1) TAC 96, Ayavvur
Vs. Gopi Nathan Nair and 1990 ACJ 687, Rukmani Devi Vs.
Om Prakash.

Even under Section 163A of the Motor Vehicles

Act, the criteria of notional income of a boy of such an age has
been laid down and it cannot be said that simply the boy was a
student, so the notional income of such a student should not be
taken into consideration. Even otherwise as per the case set up
by the respondent,

the said student was a partner in M/s.B.P.

Singhal & Company and carrying the business of pesticides.
FAO No.69/1993

page 14 of 16

Counsel for the respondent has also invited my attention to the
deposition of PW-12, who proved the existence of partnership firm
M/s.B.P. Singhal in which the said boy Master Ashesh Singhal was
one of the partners. PW-3, father of the deceased also entered
the witness box and had deposed about the said fact of his son
being a partner in the said partnership firm. He also proved that
his son was likely to go abroad for higher education for which his
passport was also ready. Even under the Minimum Wages Act,
the income for a person possessing a graduate degree has been
duly laid down and I, therefore, do not find that there is any
illegality in the impugned award assessing the income of the
deceased

at

Rs.3,500/-

p.m.

that

too

after

taking

into

consideration, the academic record of the said student and his
family status besides his being a partner in the said partnership
firm.

After assessing the said income of Rs.3,500/- p.m., the

tribunal has taken into consideration the loss of dependancy of
the parents only at Rs.2,000/- p.m.
I, therefore, do not find any infirmity or illegality in the
award as regards determination of the income of the deceased is
concerned. There is no merit in the appeal.

FAO No.69/1993

page 15 of 16

Dismissed.

December 05, 2007
ga

FAO No.69/1993

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.

page 16 of 16

