IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC. APP. No. 620/2005

Judgment delivered on: November 5,2007
National Insurance Company
Through:

..... Appellant
Mr. Rajnesh Kumar, Adv.

versus
Smt. Sukha Devi & Ors.
Through:

..... Respondents
Mr. Rajpal Singh, Adv. for
respondent Nos. 1,2,3,6,7 & 8.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR,
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
The present appeal is preferred against the Award dated
7.5.2005 of the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal.
MAC APP. 620/05

pages 1 of 4

The facts of the matter in a nutshell are;On 23.2.2004 at about 6.00 p.m. Shri Tulsi Ram was on his
foot near Ch. Ram Rikh, MCD Primary School along with his son
Agarsain @ Gulshan, when an Eicher Canter bearing registration
No. UP12G 5382 being driver in a rash and negligent manner and
at a very high speed came from the opposite direction and hit Shri
Tulsi Ram, who when taken to the hospital was declared as
'brought dead'. A claim petition was filed before the MACT and
award was made on 7.5.2005. Aggrieved with the said Award
present appeal is preferred by the appellant insurance company.
The grievance raised in the present appeal is that the
Tribunal has not given adjustment of Rs. 50,000/-, which was paid
by the appellant in compliance of the interim order.
The other contention raised by the counsel for the appellant
is that the appropriate multiplier as laid down in the second
schedule of the Motor Vehicles Act has not been applied.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties. Perusal of the
operative para of the judgment shows that the directions for
adjustment of Rs. 50,000/- has been given by the Tribunal as it is
held that the Award in the sum of Rs. 2,70,500/- shall be inclusive
of the interim award. In view of this position, there is no force in
MAC APP. 620/05

pages 2 of 4

the argument of the counsel for the appellant that the adjustment
of Rs. 50,000/- is not given while passing the final Award. As
regards the second contention of the counsel for the appellant, it
has been stated that once the future prospects have been
considered by the Tribunal then the multiplier could not have been
increased by the Tribunal from the one as laid down in the second
Schedule of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (as amended). The
deceased in the present case was of 61 years of age and he is
survived by his widow, who was 59 years of age at the relevant
time, his son of the age of 19 years, respondent No. 2 herein and
a minor daughter of the age of 14 years, respondent No. 3 herein,
at the relevant time. It is no doubt true that the appropriate
multiplier as laid down in the second Schedule, keeping in view
the age of the deceased as 61 years, should be 5 and not 7 as
granted by the Tribunal. In any case, the Hon'ble Supreme Court
in plethora of judgments has said that the said second Schedule is
not to be applied like a ready reckoner as there are inherent
defects in the second Schedule and that deviation from second
Schedule while computing compensation can be made in peculiar
facts and circumstances of each case.
In this regard the Hon'ble Apex Court has observed in the
MAC APP. 620/05

pages 3 of 4

judgment of United India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Patricia Jean
Mahajan, reported in (2002) 6 SCC 281 as reproduced below:-

“It thus makes it clear that it is for the
Tribunal to arrive at an amount of
compensation, which it may consider to be
just in the facts and circumstances of the
case. This Court however has been of the
view that structured formula as provided
under the Second Schedule would be a safe
guide to calculate the amount of just
compensation. Deviation though permissible,
may only be resorted to for some special
reasons to do so.”
Looking into the facts of the present case where the
deceased is survived by his widow as well as two young children, I
do not find any infirmity in the finding of the Tribunal to apply the
multiplier of 7.
There is no merit in the appeal and the same is hereby
dismissed. Parties are left to bear their own costs.

November 05, 2007
rkr

MAC APP. 620/05

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.

pages 4 of 4

