IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC APP. No.305/2007
Judgment delivered on: December 06 ,2007
United India Insurance Co. Ltd.
..... Appellant.
Through: Mr.P.K. Seth & Mr.Pankaj Seth,
Advocates.
versus
Smt. Meenakshi & Ors.
Through:

..... Respondents
Mr.Ashok Popli, Advocate for
respondent Nos.1 to 5.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR,
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
*
Counsel for the appellant states that as per the
instructions received by him, application under Section 170 of the
Motor Vehicles Act was preferred by the appellant before the
Tribunal. But he has not received any instructions as regards any
MAC APP. No.305/2007

Page 1 of 5

order passed on the said application.
Mr.Ashok Popli, counsel appearing for the respondents,
on the other hand, states that no such order on the alleged
application of the appellant was passed by the Tribunal.

He

further states that it is more so because of the fact that the claim
petition was duly contested by the driver and owner of the
offending vehicle. Counsel also contends that written statement
was also filed by the driver and owner of the offending vehicle, as
would be apparent from Para B of the judgment. Counsel further
states that even Mr.Rohit Kumar, driver of the offending vehicle
appeared in the witness box. The contention of counsel for the
respondent is that these facts would clearly show that there was
no occasion for the Tribunal to give any directions on the alleged
application of the appellant un Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles
Act, as the claim petition was being contested by the owner and
driver of the offending vehicle.
At this stage, it is found that Lower Court records have
been received in the present case.

Perusal of the Lower Court

record clearly shows that no such application was even filed by
the appellant as has been represented by the counsel today.
Certified copy of the application on which reliance has been
MAC APP. No.305/2007

Page 2 of 5

placed by counsel for the appellant shows that the same pertains
to some other case. Counsel for the appellant should have acted
with some responsibility while making such a statement. Since no
defence under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act was taken
over by the appellant insurance company, therefore, in view of
the settled legal position, the present appeal filed by the
insurance company is not maintainable. Reference in this regard
is made to the judgment of

the Apex Court in National

Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Nicolletta Rohtagi, (2002) 7 SCC 456.
Relevant paras of the said judgment is reproduced as under:“25. We have earlier noticed that motor
vehicle accident claim is a tortious claim
directed against tortfeasors who are the
insured and the driver of the vehicle and the
insurer comes to the scene as a result of
statutory liability created under the Motor
Vehicles Act. The legislature has ensured by
enacting Section 149 of the Act that the
victims
of
motor
vehicle
are
fully
compensated and protected. It is for that
reason the insurer cannot escape from its
liability to pay compensation on any
exclusionary clause in the insurance policy
except those specified in Section 149(2) of
the Act or where the condition precedent
specified in Section 170 is satisfied.
26. For the aforesaid reasons, an insurer if
aggrieved against an award, may file an
MAC APP. No.305/2007

Page 3 of 5

appeal only on those grounds and no other.
However, by virtue of Section 170 of the 1988
Act, where in course of an enquiry the Claims
Tribunal is satisfied that ( a ) there is a
collusion between the person making a claim
and the person against whom the claim has
been made, or ( b ) the person against whom
the claim has been made has failed to contest
the claim, the Tribunal may, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, implead the insurer and in
that case it is permissible for the insurer to
contest the claim also on the grounds which
are available to the insured or to the person
against whom the claim has been made.
Thus, unless an order is passed by the
Tribunal permitting the insurer to avail the
grounds available to an insured or any other
person against whom a claim has been made
on being satisfied of the two conditions
specified in Section 170 of the Act, it is not
permissible to the insurer to contest the claim
on the grounds which are available to the
insured or to a person against whom a claim
has been made. Thus where conditions
precedent embodied in Section 170 are
satisfied and award is adverse to the interest
of the insurer, the insurer has a right to file
an appeal challenging the quantum of
compensation or negligence or contributory
negligence of the offending vehicle even if the
insured has not filed any appeal against the
quantum of compensation. Sections 149, 170
and 173 are part of one scheme and if we
give any different interpretation to Section
173 of the 1988 Act, the same would go
contrary to the scheme and object of the Act.”

MAC APP. No.305/2007

Page 4 of 5

In the light of above discussion the present appeal filed
by the insurance company challenging the impugned award in
question is not maintainable.
Dismissed.

December 06, 2007
ga

MAC APP. No.305/2007

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.

Page 5 of 5

