IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC. APP. No. 691/2007

Judgment delivered on: December 07, 2007

National Insurance Co. Ltd.

..... Appellant
Through: Mr.Pradeep Gaur, Adv.

versus
Dhan Kumari Chhetri & Ors.

..... Respondents
Through: Nemo

CORAM:

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR,

1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:

MAC APP No. 691/2007

page 1 of 8

*

The appellant, National Insurance Company Ltd.,

insurer of the offending vehicle has preferred an appeal
challenging the impugned order dated 3.09.2007 passed by the
learned MACT. The impugned award has arisen out of the claim
petition filed by respondent No.1 against the appellant as well as
against respondent Nos.2 & 3 claiming compensation for the
death of Shri Bal Ram.
The brief facts which are necessary for deciding the
present appeal inter alia are that respondent No.1 is the legal heir
of deceased Shri Bal Ram who died on 3.11.2005 at the accident
spot itself. On 3.11.2005 the deceased boarded a bus bearing
registration no. DL 1PB 3959, driven rashly and negligently by Sh.
Jasbir Singh, driver of the said bus. While overtaking another bus,
the aforesaid bus hit a stationary bus, which was parked in front
of Tirupati Stone Centre. Shri Bal Ram, who had just stepped in to
the bus, received fatal injuries due to the collision of the buses
and as a result died on the spot.
The Tribunal after taking into consideration the facts of the
case as well as evidence led by the parties had passed an award
MAC APP No. 691/2007

page 2 of 8

vide order dated 3/09/2007 in the sum of Rs. 4,02,000/- along
with interest at the rate of 7.5% per annum payable from the date
of the institution of the petition till the date of realisation. The said
order passed by the Tribunal is now under challenge in the
present appeal.
I

have

heard

learned

counsel

for

the

appellant

at

considerable length.
Counsel for the appellant contends that the application
under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act was moved before
the Tribunal, but specific order was not passed by the Tribunal.
The contention of counsel for the appellant is that there is no fault
on the part of the appellant if no speaking order was passed by
the Tribunal, therefore, the appellant cannot be deprived of the
remedy of appeal to challenge the award even on the grounds of
quantum and negligence. Counsel further contends that there is a
deemed permission in favour of the appellant as the appellant did
move an application before the Tribunal under Section 170 of the
Motor Vehicles Act but the Court did not pass any order thereto,
therefore, it cannot be assumed that permission under Section
MAC APP No. 691/2007

page 3 of 8

170 of the Motor Vehicles Act was not granted by the Tribunal.
Counsel for the appellant has placed reliance on the judgment of
the Supreme Court reported in 2007 (9) Scale 216, New India
Assurance Company Ltd. Vs. Smt. Shanti Pathak & Ors. to
contend that the Apex Court had interfered to lower down the
compensation amount even in a case where the insurer had not
taken any permission from the Court under Section 170 of the
Motor Vehicles Act. The counsel for the appellant also contends
that the Hon'ble Supreme Court has already referred the said
issue of lack of competence of the insurer to assail the findings of
the Tribunal on the ground of quantum of compensation and
negligence to a larger Bench and, therefore, this Court may await
the decision of the Supreme Court in this regard.
After

having

given

my

thoughtful

and

conscious

consideration to the issue involved in the present case, I am of the
view that the issue is no more res integra as in a catena of
judgments the Hon'ble Supreme Court has authoritatively held
that right to file an appeal is a statutory right and the insurer can
assail the findings of the Tribunal on the grounds of quantum as

MAC APP No. 691/2007

page 4 of 8

well as negligence, subject however, to the condition that the
insurer had taken permission of the Court to take over the
defence of the owner or driver as the case may be as envisaged
under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act. No such permission
was granted to the appellant under Section 170 of the Motor
Vehicles Act by the Tribunal, therefore, in the absence of the
same, the appellant being the insurer of the offending vehicle
cannot maintain the present appeal on grounds other than those
available to it under Section 149(2) of the Motor Vehicles Act.
It would be appropriate to refer Section 170 of the Motor
Vehicles Act as under:“170. Impleading insurer in certain cases- Where
in the course of any inquiry the Claims Tribunal is
satisfied that (a) there is collusion between the person making the
claim and the person against whom the claim is
made, or
(b) the person against whom the claim is made has
failed to contest the claim,
It may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, direct
that the insurer who may be liable in respect of such
claim, shall be impleaded as a party to the proceeding
and the insurer so impleaded shall thereupon have,
MAC APP No. 691/2007

page 5 of 8

without prejudice to the provisions contained in subsection (2) of section 149, the right to contest the
claim on all or any of the grounds that are available to
the person against whom the claim has been made.“

Admittedly, no such permission under Section 170 of
the Motor Vehicles Act was obtained by the appellant, which
clearly meant that the circumstances as envisaged under Section
170 of the Motor Vehicles Act were not in existence for the Court
to grant such permission. In the judgment of the Supreme Court
reported in (1998) 3 SCC 140, Shankarayya Vs. United India
Insurance Co. Ltd., the Supreme Court has held that the
insurance company when impleaded as a party by the Court can
be permitted to contest the proceedings on merits only if the
conditions preceding mentioned in Section 170 are found to be
satisfied and for that purpose the insurance company has to
obtain an order in writing from the Tribunal and such an order
should be a reasoned order of the Tribunal. In such circumstances
unless the said procedure is followed, the appellant insurer cannot
have a wider defence on merits than what is available to it by way

MAC APP No. 691/2007

page 6 of 8

of a statutory defence. Ralevant part of Para 4 of the said
judgment in this regard is referred as under:“4. It clearly shows that the Insurance
Company when impleaded as a party by the
Court can be permitted to contest the
proceedings on merits only if the conditions
precedent mentioned in the section are found
to be satisfied and for that purpose the
Insurance Company has to obtain order in
writing from the Tribunal and which should be a
reasoned order by the Tribunal. Unless that
procedure is followed, the Insurance Company
cannot have a wider defence on merits than
what is available to it by way of statutory
defence. “

In view of the said legal position, I cannot appreciate
the argument of counsel for the appellant that there is a deemed
permission in favour of the appellant. Once the application under
Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act was preferred by the
appellant before the Tribunal for taking over the defence of an
owner or driver, the Tribunal is required to pass specific order and
that too a reasoned order as per the observations of the Supreme
Court referred above and, therefore, the argument of counsel for
the appellant cannot be appreciated that filing of an application
under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act by the appellant in
MAC APP No. 691/2007

page 7 of 8

this regard was a sufficient compliance of a said statutory
requirement.
In the light of the above discussion, I do not find any
merit in the submission of counsel for the appellant. In the
judgment cited by the counsel in Shanti Pathak's case (supra)
the Hon'ble Apex Court has not dealt with the said legal
proposition and, therefore, the same is not applicable in the facts
and circumstances of the present case.
There is no merit in the appeal and the same is
dismissed.
At the oral request of counsel for the appellant, a sum
of Rs.25,000/- as deposited by the appellant insurance company
with the Registrar General of this Court towards statutory deposit
be released in favour of the appellant.

December 07, 2007

MAC APP No. 691/2007

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.

page 8 of 8

