IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC APP. No.109/2005
Judgment delivered on: December 07 ,2007
Smt Rekha

Through:

..... Appellant
Mr.D.K.Sharma, Advocate.

versus
The State &Ors.

Through:

..... Respondents
Mr.Rahul Malhotra, Advocate for
respondent No.4.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
*
By way of this appeal, the appellants seek to challenge
the impugned award dated 18.5.2004 primarily on the ground
that the Tribunal has not correctly assessed the income of the
deceased respondent.

The award is also challenged on the

ground that the Tribunal has not considered grant of future
MAC APP. No.109/2005

Page 1 of 7

prospects and also on account of the fact that a meagre amount
of compensation of Rs.10,000/- has been granted by the Tribunal
towards loss of consortium and no compensation has been
granted towards loss of love and affection.
Before adverting to deal with the contentions of the
parties, it would be appropriate to give brief facts of the case as
under:On 25.1.2002, the deceased Mr.Dinesh along with
Mr.Phool Chand was returning back in a bus bearing registration
No. DL-1PA-3289 from New Delhi Railway Station. At about 10.00
pm., when the aforesaid bus crossed Desh Bandhu Gupta Road
bus stand, which was driven at a very high speed and in a rash
and negligent manner and to avoid accident of the bus, the driver
of the bus applied sudden breaks due to which the deceased fell
down from the bus and received serious injuries. The deceased
was taken to Hindu Rao Hospital where he was declared as
'brought dead'.
Counsel for the appellant contends that the deceased
was earning Rs.4,800/- p.m. as he was working in a printing press.
The contention of counsel for the appellant is that the Tribunal has
not taken into consideration the testimony of PW-1 and PW-2 who
MAC APP. No.109/2005

Page 2 of 7

in their deposition had categorically stated the said income of the
deceased.

The contention of counsel for the appellant is that

there was no effective cross-examination

by the respondent

insurance company to rebut the said deposition of the witnesses
on the aspect of monthly income of the deceased. Counsel also
contends that the Tribunal has not taken into account the future
prospects of the deceased.

The contention of counsel for the

appellant is that the deceased would have grown in his business,
therefore, the Tribunal ought to have applied the criteria laid
down in Sarla Dixit & Anr. Vs. Balwant Yadav & Ors., 1996
ACJ 581 (SC). Counsel for the appellant contends that the meagre
amount of Rs.10,000/- has been granted for loss of consortium
and besides that no amount has been granted in favour of the
appellants towards loss of love and affection.
Counsel appearing for the respondent, on the other
hand, states that there is no infirmity or illegality in the impugned
award.

Counsel contends that in the absence of any cogent

evidence led by the appellant, the Tribunal had rightly assessed
the income of the deceased, based on the Minimum Wages Act.
Counsel further contends that even the Tribunal has taken into
consideration the increase in the wages from the date of accident
MAC APP. No.109/2005

Page 3 of 7

and its enhancement as on the date of passing of the award.
Counsel also contends that just and fair compensation has been
granted by the Tribunal towards loss of consortium.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have
perused the record.
Perusal of the record shows that the appellants had
failed to prove the income of the deceased by producing any
documentary evidence.

It is a settled legal position that for

proving the income of the deceased, the claimants have to place
on record sufficient material and it is only with the help of such a
material, the Tribunal can arrive at a finding to correctly assess
the income of the deceased.

A bald statement by any of the

witnesses cannot help in assessing the income of the deceased.
In this regard in Oriental Insurance Co.Ltd. Vs. Meena
Variyal, (2007) 5 SCC 428, the Hon'ble Apex Court has given
following observations:“It was necessary for the claimants to
establish what was the monthly income and what
was the dependency on the basis of which the
compensation could be adjudged as payable.
Should not any Tribunal trained in law ask the
claimants to produce evidence in support of the
monthly salary or income earned by the deceased
from his employer company? Is there anything in
the Motor Vehicles Act which stands in the way of
MAC APP. No.109/2005

Page 4 of 7

the Tribunal asking for the best evidence,
acceptable evidence? We think not. Here again, the
position that the Motor Vehicles Act vis--vis claim
for compensation arising out of an accident is a
beneficent piece of legislation, cannot lead a
Tribunal trained in law to forget all basic principles
of establishing liability and establishing the
quantum of compensation payable. The Tribunal, in
this case, has chosen to merely go by the oral
evidence of the widow when without any difficulty
the claimants could have got the employer
Company to produce the relevant documents to
show the income that was being derived by the
deceased from his employment.”

The Tribunal has clearly observed that the appellants
have not placed any documentary evidence regarding income of
the deceased, therefore, I do not find any infirmity in the said
finding of the Tribunal. The Tribunal has taken recourse to the
Minimum Wages Act for assessing the income of the deceased as
prevailing on the date of accident. The Tribunal has merely given
an increase of Rs.2,000/- in the salary by taking the date of
accident and the date of award into consideration. Since in the
present case, the multiplier of 16 has been applied and this Court
has already taken a view that the income under the Minimum
Wages Act for this category of non-matriculate workers gets more
than double within a period of 10 years, so safely the said
increase in the wages can also be taken into consideration for
MAC APP. No.109/2005

Page 5 of 7

assessing the correct income of the deceased. As on the date of
accident, the deceased can be taken to have been earning a sum
of Rs.2,860 being non-matriculate and doubling the same and
taking an average of the same, it would come to Rs.4,290/-.
Deducting 1/3rd of the said amount towards personal expenses of
the deceased, the annual income of the deceased would come to
Rs.34,320/-, multiplying the said income with the multiplier of 16,
the loss of dependancy would come to Rs.5,49,120/-.

The

compensation for loss of dependancy is thus enhanced from
Rs.3,84,000/- to Rs.5,49,120/-.
I also find that the Tribunal has granted a meagre
amount of Rs.10,000/- towards loss of consortium and no amount
has been granted towards loss of love and affection. The amount
of loss of consortium is enhanced from Rs.10,000/- to Rs.50,000/as the deceased died at a very young age and is survived by his
young widow. Further for loss of love and affection the
compensation for a sum of Rs.15,000/- is granted in favour of the
appellants.
Respondent No.4 shall pay the differential amount of
compensation along with upto date interest at the rate of 7% from
the date of filing of the petition till its realization.
MAC APP. No.109/2005

Page 6 of 7

With these directions, the present appeal is disposed
of.

December 07, 2007
ga

MAC APP. No.109/2005

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.

Page 7 of 7

