IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CRP. No. 158/2007
Judgment delivered on: September 10 ,2007
1. Sh. Ramesh Singh @ Ramesh Chand
2. Sh. Sunder Lal
Both sons of late Shri Ram Kishan
R/o 36, Sarai Kale Khan,
Nizamudin,
New Delhi.
..... Petitioner
Through: Mr. G.K. Srivastava for the petitioner.
versus
1. Sh. Satish Chand Singhal
S/o Late Sh. Malook Chand Agarwal,
R/O A-108, Sector-40
NOIDA
2. Sh. Hem Chand Saini
S/o Sh. Gyashi Ram Saini
R/o 8423, Arya Nagar,
Pahar Ganj,
Delhi.
Through:

..... Respondents
Nemo

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
CRP NO. 158/2007

page 1 of 7

be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.
Aggrieved with the order dated 12.5.2007 of the
Additional District Judge dismissing the application of the
petitioners under Order 1 Rule 10 CPC, the challenge has been
made assailing the said order in the present petition. The brief
facts which are necessary for disposing the present petition inter
alia are that vide Memorandum of Understanding dated 11.3.2004
and Agreement to Sell dated 20.10.2004 Mr.Ram Kishan, father
of the present petitioners had agreed to sell land measuring 6810
sq. yards of Khasra No.489/1 situated at Village Kilokari, Tehsil
Defence Colony, Distt. South Delhi for a total consideration of Rs.2
crores.

Against the said consideration amount, the deceased

father of the petitioners had received a sum of Rs.16,01,000/- in
the manner as stated in the said Agreement to Sell.

The

respondent/plaintiff had filed a suit for recovery of Rs.19,99,180/-

CRP NO. 158/2007

page 2 of 7

after it was found by him that the said land was acquired and the
same could not have been sold by the petitioners in favour of the
respondent No.1. The petitioners contested the said suit filed by
respondent No.1.

The petitioners also preferred an application

under Order 1 Rule 10 CPC seeking impleadment of the co-owners
of the suit land. The said application of the petitioners has been
dismissed by the learned ADJ on the ground that the co-owners
sought to be impleaded by the petitioners were not privy to the
Memorandum of Understanding dated 11.3.2004 as well as the
Agreement to Sell dated 20.10.2004.
I have heard learned counsel for the petitioners. The
contention of counsel for the petitioners is that although the coowners are not privy to both the said agreements but respondent
No.1 was fully aware of the fact that the land under sale belonged
to and were owned by them.

Counsel, thus, contends that the

said co-owners are not only proper but are also necessary parties
and in their absence the suit in question cannot be effectually
tried. Learned counsel for the petitioners has invited my attention
to some of the terms of the Memorandum of Understanding as
well as Agreement to Sell where reference has been made to the
CRP NO. 158/2007

page 3 of 7

ownership of these co-owners over the land in question. Counsel
for the petitioners also contends that if these co-owners are not
impleaded in the suit then the petitioners would not be able to
recover the amount already paid by the petitioners to these coowners in respect of the said land in question.
There is no force in the arguments advanced by
counsel for the petitioners. The object of Order 1 Rule 10 is to
discourage contests on technical pleas, and to save honest and
bona fide claimants from being non-suited. The power to strike
out or add parties can be exercised by the court at any stage of
the proceedings. Under this rule, a person may be added as a
party to a suit in the following two cases:
(1) when he ought to have been joined as plaintiff or defendant,
or
(2) when, without his presence, the questions in the suit cannot be
completely decided.
The co-owners are neither privy to Memorandum of
Understanding dated 11.3.2004 nor to the Agreement to Sell
dated 20.10.2004.

The money towards part sale consideration

amount of Rs.16,01,000/- was received by the father of the
CRP NO. 158/2007

page 4 of 7

present petitioners and not by the said co-owners. The terms of
the Memorandum of Understanding as well as Agreement to Sell
clearly shows that it was the deceased father of the petitioners
who were to execute the documents of title in favour of
respondent No.1 after receiving entire sale consideration amount
and possession of the land was also to be delivered by the
deceased father of the petitioners and not the co-owners.

The

present petitioners have further declared themselves to be
Bhoomidars of the land in question and whatever title documents
were in possession of the deceased father of the petitioners, the
same were handed over by him to respondent No.1. By seeking
impleadment of the co-owners, the petitioners are trying to
complicate the issue. Any right of the petitioners against the coowners of the land is a separate and independent right and the
rights inter-se between them cannot form subject matter of the
suit in question. Based on said documents, there cannot be any
two opinions that the Court can direct impleadment of only those
parties whose presence before it may be necessary to adjudicate
upon and to resolve the question involved in the suit effectually
and completely. It is abundantly clear that necessary parties are
CRP NO. 158/2007

page 5 of 7

those persons in whose absence no decree can be passed by the
court or whose presence before the court would be necessary in
order to enable the court to effectually and completely adjudicate
upon and settle all the questions involved in the suit. Keeping in
view the aforesaid principles in mind, these co-owners are
admittedly not privy to both the agreements.

The co-owners

sought to be impleaded by these petitioners do not appear to be
either necessary or proper parties and it cannot be said that their
presence is essential for deciding the suit effectually and
completely.

No consideration amount has been paid to these co-

owners. No obligation has been laid on these co-owners under the
terms and conditions of both the said agreements for effectuating
and completing the transaction in question and in the plaint also
no relief has been claimed by respondent No.1 against these coowners.
In the light of the aforesaid discussion, I do not find any
infirmity in the impugned order passed by the Trial Court.
There is no merit in this petition. Dismissed.

CRP NO. 158/2007

page 6 of 7

September 10, 2007
ga

CRP NO. 158/2007

KAILASH GAMBHIR
JUDGE

page 7 of 7

