IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC APP. No.908/2005

Judgment delivered on: December 10 ,2007
National Insurance Co. Ltd.
..... Appellant.
Through: Ms.Manjusha Wadhwa, Adv.
versus
Sh.Shashi Kwatra & Ors.
..... Respondents
Through: Mr.Ashok Mahipal, Adv. for
respondent No.1 to 3.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

No

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

No

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
*
By way of this appeal, the appellant seeks to challenge
the impugned award dated 20.10.2005 mainly on the ground that
the respondents have committed a fraud in not disclosing the

MAC APP. No.908/2005

Page 1 of 6

correct age of the deceased.
The contention of counsel for the appellant is that
deceased was more than 55 years of age at the relevant time of
accident. Counsel for the appellant has drawn my attention to the
monthly pay slip of the deceased issued from his Office i.e. Air
Force Central Accounts Office in which against the relevant
column of date of birth mentioned in the abbreviated form i.e.
BRDT, the date of birth mentioned is 10.10.1947. In the
photocopy of the said pay slip, the said date is not clearly legible.
Counsel for the appellant has placed on record another photocopy
of the said pay slip. The same is taken on record. Perusal of the
said monthly pay slip clearly reveals that against the said column
of BRDT, the date of birth has been shown as 10.10.1947. Even
the copies of ration card and election card placed on record
supports the said contention of counsel for the appellant.
Based on the said documents, counsel for the appellant
contends that it is a clear cut case of fraud on the part of the
respondents in not placing on record the correct date of birth of
the deceased. Counsel thus sought to urge that the Tribunal has
wrongly applied the multiplier of 15 taking the age of deceased
at 45 years. Confining her arguments to this aspect of the case,
MAC APP. No.908/2005

Page 2 of 6

counsel contends that the finding of the Tribunal to that extent be
set aside.
Mr.Ashok

Mahipal,

counsel

appearing

for

the

respondent very fairly concedes that the said recording of date of
birth was on account of sheer mistake on the part of the
claimants. Counsel contends that no fraud has been committed
by the respondent.
Perusal of the award shows that the Tribunal has taken
the age of the deceased at 45 years after placing reliance on the
statement of PW-2 and PW-3 and accordingly has applied the
multiplier of 15. There is an apparent fallacy in the said finding of
the Tribunal.

As per the documents placed on record the

deceased was admittedly more than 55 years of age. Counsel for
the respondent states that he has no objection if the finding of the
Tribunal to that extent be set aside and award is passed
considering the age of the deceased on the relevant date of
accident as based on his date of birth as 10.10.1947.
In the light of the above submissions, the multiplier of
15 is reduced to 8 as laid down in the IInd Schedule of the Motor
Vehicles Act. The Tribunal has applied the criteria laid down in
Sarla Dixit's case and thus has given the benefit of future
MAC APP. No.908/2005

Page 3 of 6

prospects for considering the loss of dependancy. The aspect of
future prospects apparently has been taken into consideration
after taking the age of deceased as 45 years. The deceased at
the relevant time of accident was Principal Private Secretary in
Ministry of Defence and would have remained in service till the
age of 60 years. The Tribunal has taken a mean of the average
income of the deceased after doubling the income of the
deceased. Since now the multiplier has been reduced from 15 to
8 years, therefore, the deceased at the most would have
remained in service for a period of not more than 5 years. The
income of the deceased cannot be assumed to have doubled in
the short period of 5 years. Considering these facts, the income
of the deceased can be taken to have arisen not exactly double
but at least by 50% of the same and applying the same yardstick
as laid down in Sarla Dixit's case, the yearly income of the
deceased would come to Rs.2,85,620/- and after deducting 1/3rd
of the income towards personal expenses, the loss of dependancy
to the respondents would come to Rs.190413/- and after applying
multiplier of 8, the loss of dependancy will come out as
Rs.15,23,307/-.

The total compensation thus would come to

Rs.1551442/-. Since the above mistake on the part of the
MAC APP. No.908/2005

Page 4 of 6

respondents compelled the appellant to challenge the award,
therefore, no interest shall be payable to respondents from the
date of filing the appeal till the passing of the present order.
The appellant has already deposited 50% of the award
amount. Let the appellant deposit the remaining award amount, if
any, with the Tribunal and thereafter the amount shall be
disbursed in favour of the claimants in the same manner as
directed by the Tribunal.

In case the entire award amount has

been received by the respondents then the remaining amount in
excess of the above shall be paid by the respondents to the
appellant. Since the appellant is yet to bring on record the legal
heirs of the deceased respondent No.4 or in the alternative to
satisfy this Court about the eligibility of the legal heirs left by the
deceased victim to claim the compensation amount, therefore, till
the decision on this aspect is taken by the Court, the amount of
compensation shall be disbursed in favour of the claimants other
than

the

legal

heirs

which

were

claiming

rights

through

respondent No.4.
With the above directions, the present appeal is
disposed of.

MAC APP. No.908/2005

Page 5 of 6

December 10, 2007
ga

MAC APP. No.908/2005

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.

Page 6 of 6

