IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC. APP. No.265/2007
Judgment delivered on: October 10, 2007
National Insurance Co. Ltd.
..... Appellant
Through: Mr.S.L. Gupta, Adv.
versus
Sulo Devi & Ors.

Through:

..... Respondents
Mr.N.K. Jha, Adv.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR,
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
*
The appellant, National
insurer

Insurance

Company

Ltd.,

of the offending vehicle has preferred an appeal

challenging the impugned order dated 15.03.2007 passed by the
learned MACT. The impugned award has arisen out of the claim
petition filed by respondent Nos.1 to 7 against the appellant as
well as against respondent Nos.8 & 9 claiming compensation for
MAC. APP. No.265/2007

Page No.1 of 8

the death of Shri Vishnu Dev Mandal. The brief facts which are
necessary for deciding the present appeal inter alia are that
respondent Nos.1 to 7 are the legal heirs of deceased Shri Vishnu
Dev Mandal who

died on 19.09.2004 in the hospital. On

10.09.2004 while waiting for the TSR in which all of them were
travelling while moving towards New Delhi Railway Station the
deceased was hit by the offending bus bearing registration no. DL
1PA 4351 driven by respondent No.3 rashly and negligently. As a
result of the said accident, the deceased Sh. Vishnu Dev Mandal
received serious injuries and was admitted to the hospital where
ultimately he succumbed to his injuries. The Tribunal after taking
into consideration the facts of the case as well as evidence led by
the parties had passed an award in the sum of Rs. 6,28,000/-along
with interest at the rate of 8% per annum payable from the date
of the institution of the petition till the date of realisation. The
said order passed by the Tribunal is now under challenge in the
present appeal.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties at
considerable length.

Counsel appearing for the respondent has

taken a preliminary objection to the very maintainability of the
present appeal on the ground that the appellant cannot assail the
MAC. APP. No.265/2007

Page No.2 of 8

findings of the Tribunal on the quantum of compensation as
determined by the Tribunal. Counsel contends that the appellant
had not taken over the defence of the owner and driver as
envisaged under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act and,
therefore, is debarred from challenging the impugned award so as
to assail the findings of the Tribunal on the quantum of
compensation. Counsel for the respondent has placed reliance on
the following judgments of the Apex Court:1. (2002) 7 SCC 456, National Insurance Co. Vs. Nicollata Rohtagi
2. 1998 ACJ 513, Shankarayya & Anr. vs. United India Insurance
Co. Ltd.
The contention of counsel for the respondent is that
right to file an appeal is a statutory right and the insurer can
assail the findings of the Tribunal only under Section 149(2) of the
Motor Vehicles Act. Counsel further contends that it is only in a
case where there is collusion between the claimants and the
insured, the insurer can assail the findings of the Tribunal on the
grounds of quantum as well as negligence subject however to the
condition that the insurer had taken permission of the Court to
take over the defence of the owner or driver as the case may be
as envisaged under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act.
MAC. APP. No.265/2007

Page No.3 of 8

No

such permission was sought by the appellant under Section 170 of
the Motor Vehicles Act by the Tribunal and, therefore, in the
absence of the same, the appellant being the insurer of the
offending vehicle cannot maintain the present appeal on grounds
other than those available to it under Section 149(2) of the Motor
Vehicles Act.
On the other hand, counsel for the appellant sincerely
disputes this position and contends that the insurer cannot be
rendered remedlyless especially in a case where the Tribunal has
awarded an excessive amount of compensation in favour of the
claimants ignoring all basic principles of law for the award of
compensation. Counsel for the appellant has also placed reliance
on the judgment of the Supreme Court reported in 2007 (9) Scale
216, New India Assurance Company Ltd. Vs. Smt. Shanti
Pathak & Ors. to contend that the Apex Court had interfered to
lower down the compensation amount even in a case where the
insurer had not taken any permission from the Court under
Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act. Counsel for the appellant
also contends that the Hon'ble Supreme Court has already
referred the said issue of lack of competence of the insurer to
assail the findings of the Tribunal on the ground of quantum of
MAC. APP. No.265/2007

Page No.4 of 8

compensation and negligence to a larger Bench and, therefore,
this Court may follow the decision of the Supreme Court in this
regard.
After having given my thoughtful and conscious
consideration to the issue involved in the present case, I am of the
view that the issue is no more res integra as in the judgments
cited by the respondent, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has
authoritatively held that in the absence of permission sought from
the Court as envisaged under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles
Act, the insurer has no right to file an appeal to challenge the
quantum of compensation or finding of the Tribunal as regards the
negligence or contributory negligence of offending vehicles is
concerned.

It would be appropriate to refer Section 170 of the

Motor Vehicles Act as under:“170. Impleading insurer in certain cases- Where
in the course of any inquiry the Claims Tribunal is
satisfied that (a) there is collusion between the person
making the claim and the person against whom
the claim is made, or
(b) the person against whom the claim is made
has failed to contest the claim,
It may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, direct
that the insurer who may be liable in respect of such
MAC. APP. No.265/2007

Page No.5 of 8

claim, shall be impleaded as a party to the proceeding
and the insurer so impleaded shall thereupon have,
without prejudice to the provisions contained in subsection (2) of section 149, the right to contest the
claim on all or any of the grounds that are available to
the person against whom the claim has been made.“

It is an admitted case between the parties that no such
permission under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act was
sought by the appellant which clearly means that the procedure
laid down under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act was not
followed. In the judgment of the Supreme Court reported in
(1998) 3 SCC 140, Shankarayya Vs. United India Insurance
Co. Ltd., the Supreme Court has held that the insurance
company when impleaded as a party by the Court can be
permitted to contest the proceedings on merits only if the
conditions precedent mentioned in Section 170 are found to be
satisfied and for that purpose the insurance company has to
obtain an order in writing from the Tribunal and such an order
should be a reasoned order of the Tribunal. In such circumstances
unless the said procedure is followed, the appellant insurer cannot
have a wider defence on merits than what is available to it by way
of a statutory defence.

Ralevant part of Para 4 of the said

judgment in this regard is referred as under:MAC. APP. No.265/2007

Page No.6 of 8

“4. It clearly shows that the Insurance
Company when impleaded as a party by the
Court can be permitted to contest the
proceedings on merits only if the conditions
precedent mentioned in the section are found
to be satisfied and for that purpose the
Insurance Company has to obtain order in
writing from the Tribunal and which should be a
reasoned order by the Tribunal. Unless that
procedure is followed, the Insurance Company
cannot have a wider defence on merits than
what is available to it by way of statutory
defence. “

In view of the said legal position, I cannot appreciate
the argument of counsel for the appellant that even without
seeking permission of the Court as required under Section 170,
the Appellant can proceed with the appeal. Once the application
under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act was preferred by the
appellant before the Tribunal for taking over the defence of an
owner or driver, the Tribunal is required to pass specific order and
that too a reasoned order as per the observations of the Supreme
Court referred above and, therefore, in the instant matter the
argument of counsel for the appellant cannot be appreciated that
non-filing of an application under Section 170 of the Motor
Vehicles Act by the appellant in this regard is no bar in preferring
present appeal.
In the light of the above discussion, I do not find any
MAC. APP. No.265/2007

Page No.7 of 8

merit in the submission of counsel for the appellant.

The

judgment cited by the counsel in Shanti Pathak's case (supra)
has not dealt with the said legal proposition and, therefore, the
same is not applicable in the facts and circumstances of the
present case.
There is no merit in the appeal and the same is
dismissed.

October 10, 2007

MAC. APP. No.265/2007

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.

Page No.8 of 8

