IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC APP NO. 697/2007
Judgment delivered on: December 10 ,2007
Shri Jawahar Singh

..... Appellant.
Through: Mr. V.P.Katiyar, Advocate
versus

Smt.Bala Jain & Ors.
.....
Respondents
Through: Mr. Pradeep Gaur, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR,
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
By way of this appeal, the appellant has
assailed the impugned award dated 12.9.2007 whereby
MAC APP No. 697/2007

page 1 of 6

the Tribunal has awarded compensation to the tune of
Rs. 8,35,067/- along with interest @ 7% p.a.
The brief facts relevant for deciding

the

present appeal are that on 18.7.2004 at 1.20 P.M. the
deceased Shri Mukesh Jain was driving his two wheeler
scooter No. DAI-1835 on which his son namely Shashank
Jain was a pillion rider. When they reached near SDM
Office, Geeta Colony, Delhi, a motorcycle bearing
registration no.DL-7S-G-3282 being driven in a very rash
and negligent manner, tried to overtake the scooter of
the deceased and in that process struck against the
scooter of the deceased with a great force due to which
the deceased and his son were forcibly thrown on the
road, as a result, the deceased sustained fatal injuries.
Counsel

for the appellant contends that the

Tribunal has not dealt the issue of the maintainability
of the claim petition as well as on the aspect of
contributory negligence on the part of the deceased Mr.
MAC APP No. 697/2007

page 2 of 6

Mukesh Jain himself who was

driving

two wheeler

scooter bearing registration no.DAI-1835. The contention
of the counsel for the appellant is that the accident had
occurred due to the sole negligence of deceased Mukesh
Jain who was driving two wheeler scooter bearing
registration no. DAI-1835, but wrongly the appellant has
been held to be negligent for causing

the accident in

question.
Counsel for the appellant also contends that
the Tribunal has given unnecessary weightage to the
deposition of PW-8, Head Constable Devender Singh.
Assailing the testimony of the said witness, counsel for
the appellant

contends that even the name of the

nursing home was not correctly stated

by PW-8.

Counsel also contends that the testimony of R1W1 and
R1W2 were not believed by the Tribunal because they
were minors. Similarly testimony of the appellant who
entered

the witness box as R1W4 was wrongly

MAC APP No. 697/2007

page 3 of 6

discarded by the Tribunal.

Counsel for the appellant

also contends that the Tribunal did not take any step to
appoint guardian of the respondent no.5 who was held
out to be a minor, therefore, on account of that also the
award became bad in the eyes of law.
I have heard counsel for the appellant and
have perused the record also.
It is an admitted case that the appellant was
a minor as on the date of the accident, therefore, he was
driving the vehicle in utter violation of the provisions of
the Motor Vehicles Act and Rules framed thereunder.
The negligence of the appellant has also been duly
proved by

PW8

who in his

examination-in-chief has

clearly deposed that the accident took place due to rash
and negligent driving on the part of the appellant. No
suggestion was given to the said witness by the
appellant, suggesting that he was not present at the
accident site, therefore, the evidence on record was
MAC APP No. 697/2007

page 4 of 6

sufficient to establish the negligence on the part of the
appellant and thus, the argument of the counsel for the
appellant claiming contributory negligence on the part of
the respondent no.1 is repelled.
As regards the other contention of the counsel for
the appellant that the respondent no.5 being

a minor

was not sued through guardian or next friend. I do not
find any force in such submission. It is a settled law that
strict procedures as laid down under the CPC as well as
under the Evidence Act are not applicable to the
summary proceedings under the Motor Vehicles Act.
Once it has not been denied that the said minor was
driving the

offending vehicle in a most rash

and

negligent manner which resulted into causing such
serious accident,

the impugned award cannot be set

aside simply on account of not bringing on record the
guardian or next friend of respondent on record. Even
otherwise no such plea was taken by the appellant in
MAC APP No. 697/2007

page 5 of 6

the written statement filed before the Tribunal.
I do not find any force in the contentions
raised by the counsel for the appellant.
There is no merit.
Dismissed.

December 10, 2007

KAILASH GAMBHIR J.

mg

MAC APP No. 697/2007

page 6 of 6

