IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CM (M) No. 1232/2007

Judgment delivered on: September 10 ,2007
Shri Moinuddin
S/o Shri Nizamuddin,
R/o 1173 to 1184
Gali Samosan, Farash Khana
Delhi
Through:

..... Petitioner
Mr. S.D. Ansari for the petitioner.

versus
Shri Parvez
S/o Shri Mansoor Ahmed
R/o 217-18, Gali Kandle Kashan
Fatehpuri,
Delhi
Through:

..... Respondent
Nemo

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

CM(M)No. 1232/2007

page 1 of 5

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.
Counsel for the petitioner contends that vide order dated
17.5.2007, the learned Trial Court in the presence of counsel for
the defendant had passed the restraint order thereby restraining
the respondent/defendant not to dispossess the plaintiff without
due process of law from the suit property. Thereafter, the present
petitioner had moved an application under Section 151 CPC
seeking directions to the SHO, PS Lahori Gate for ensuring the
implementation of the Court order dated 17.05.2007.

The said

application of the petitioner had been dismissed by the impugned
order dated 13.8.2007.

Aggrieved with the said order, the

present petition has been preferred.

Counsel for the petitioner

contends that once the plaintiff/petitioner was given protection by
the said order then the said order was required to be enforced by
the Court. The contention of counsel for the petitioner is that the
enforcement of the said order could not have been denied by the
Court by simply saying that it was merely a preliminary order and
no order on merits on the application under Order 39 Rule 1 and 2
CM(M)No. 1232/2007

page 2 of 5

CPC have yet been passed by the Court.

Counsel for the

petitioner has placed reliance on the judgment reported in AIR
1971 Andhra Pradesh 53, Rayapati Audemma Vs. Pothineni
Narasimham to contend that Order 39 Rule 2(A) CPC only
provides for punishment and as far as enforcement of the order is
concerned, the Court is well within its powers to give necessary
directions on the application moved under Section 151 CPC
invoking inherent powers of the Court. The proposition of law as
settled in the said judgment cannot be disputed that the
enforcement of the order passed by the Court can be sought by
any of the parties by moving an application under Section 151
CPC invoking the inherent powers of the Court. However, a bare
perusal of the application filed by the petitioner under Section
151 CPC seeking the said enforcement of the order evidently
shows that there are no specific averments made by the
petitioner seeking such enforcement of the order with the help of
the local police. Para 3 and 4 of the application are reproduced as
under:“3. That the defendant is strong head persons
and are not caring for the said orders and are
CM(M)No. 1232/2007

page 3 of 5

making attempts to dispossess the plaintiff in
violation of the court orders aforesaid. They
threaten to even assault the plaintiff.
4.
That unless and unless police is not
directed to get the said orders implemented
and are not ensured to be complied with by
the defendant, the defendant is not likely to
desist from heir illegal activities and they will
put his threats into action. The plaintiff gone
to the concerned police and apprised about
the order, but they said that till there are no
specific direction, they will not do anything.”
The aforesaid averments would clearly show that they
are quite general in nature and no specific instances have been
disclosed in the said averments warranting such an order in
favour of the petitioner. The parties seeking police assistance for
enforcement of an order passed by the Civil Court must disclose
strong reasons and exceptional circumstances for the Court to
pass such an order.

In the absence of grave and imminent

circumstances grant of any such order has the propensity and
vulnerability of being misused, therefore, Court has to be very
cautious giving any such directions of granting police assistance
to enforce such orders when passed by a Civil Court.
In the light of the aforesaid discussion, the matter is
sent back to the learned trial court for re-consideration of the said
CM(M)No. 1232/2007

page 4 of 5

application at the time of disposal of application of the petitioner
under Order 39 Rule 1 and 2 CPC. The Trial Court is also directed
to endeavour to hear the application of the petitioner under Order
39 Rule 1 and 2 CPC and application of the petitioner under
Section 151 CPC, as expeditiously as possible.
In view of the above discussion, the impugned order is
set aside.
With these directions, the petition is disposed of.
DASTI.

September 10, 2007
ga

CM(M)No. 1232/2007

KAILASH GAMBHIR
JUDGE

page 5 of 5

