*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+
%

WP (C) No. 23295/2005
Judgment delivered on: February 11, 2009

Delhi Transport Corporation
...... Petitioner
Through: Mr. Vinay Sabharwal, Adv.
versus
Sh. Ranbir Singh & Anr.

..... Respondents
Through: Mr. Rudra Kahlon, Adv.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR
1.

Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes
Yes
Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. (Oral)
*
1.

By way of this writ petition filed under Article 226 of the

Constitution of India the petitioner seeks to challenge the
impugned Award dated 4th July, 2000 passed by the Industrial
Tribunal II declining the approval to the petitioner as was sought
by the petitioner by moving an application under Section 33(2)(b)
of the Industrial Disputes Act. At the outset counsel appearing for

WP (C) No. 23295/05

Page 1 of 7

the respondent has taken preliminary objection to the very
maintainability of the present petition on the ground of delay and
laches. Counsel appearing for respondent No. 1 has submitted that
respondent No. 1, has taken a preliminary objection in his counter
affidavit stating that the present petition is liable to be dismissed
on the ground of delay and laches as the order declining the
approval was passed by the Tribunal as long back as on 4th July,
2000 and the present petition was preferred by the petitioner in
December, 2005 without making any endeavour to explain the
delay on the part of the petitioner for such a long period of five
years. In support of his arguments counsel for the respondent No.
1 has placed reliance on the judgment of the Division Bench
passed in LPA No. 2671/2005 dated 13.12.2005.
2.

Mr. Vinay Sabharwal, counsel for the petitioner while

refuting the said submission of the counsel for the respondent
submits that such an objection of maintainability of the petition on
the ground of delay and laches can only be taken at the initial
stage and not at the stage of final hearing of the matter. Counsel
for the petitioner further submits that in any case the petition filed
by the petitioner cannot be treated as a belated petition as the

WP (C) No. 23295/05

Page 2 of 7

petitioner had never abandoned its right on account of the
pendency of the industrial dispute raised by the respondent
pursuant to the reference made under Section 10 of the Industrial
Disputes Act. Counsel for the petitioner further states that in any
case, the law of limitation does not apply to the industrial
adjudication

and therefore, the petitioner is not required to

explain each days delay as required for seeking condonation under
the Limitation Act. Counsel thus states that the present petition
filed by the petitioner cannot be thrown out merely on the ground
of delay on the part of the petitioner.
3.

I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the

record.
4.

Indisputably, the law of Limitation does not attract the

industrial adjudication, but the same would not mean that the
parties can take their remedies as and when they so wish. The
impugned order by the Tribunal was passed as long back as on 4 th
July, 2000 declining the approval sought by the petitioner under
Section 33(2)(b) of the Industrial Dispute Act. The present petition
was preferred by the petitioner on 2nd December, 2005 apparently
when already the Tribunal had passed an Award in favour of the

WP (C) No. 23295/05

Page 3 of 7

respondent in the other case i.e. ID No. 149/2001 holding the
action on the part of the petitioner terminating the respondent as
not legal and justified. In para 10 of the Award dated 30th
September, 2005 the Tribunal observed that the management did
not prefer any appeal, revision or writ petition against the order
dated 4th July, 2000 declining the grant of approval under Section
33(2)(b) of the Industrial Disputes Act. It is perhaps this
observation, which activated the petitioner to challenge the said
order dated 4th July, 2000 and that is the reason the present
petition was filed immediately after passing of the Award dated
30th September, 2005. I do not find myself in agreement with the
counsel for the petitioner that the matter of limitation cannot be
raised at the stage of final hearing of the petition. This can be only
in a case where the objection of limitation itself is taken at such a
belated stage, but that is not the case here as the respondent No. 1
has already taken the preliminary objection in his counter affidavit
to the maintainability of the present petition on the ground of
delay and laches. I also do not agree with the argument of counsel
for the petitioner that once the industrial dispute was pending,
therefore, the petitioner could have taken his remedy against the
order passed by the Tribunal under Section 33(2)(b) as and when it

WP (C) No. 23295/05

Page 4 of 7

liked.

In the absence of any period of limitation prescribed for

challenging orders under the Industrial Disputes Act the parties
are still required to take their remedies within a reasonable time.
For any unreasonable delay, the party is required to give
explanation as to how such a delay has been caused in taking his
remedy, if such a party felt aggrieved with any order passed by the
Tribunal/Labour Court under relevant provision of the Industrial
Disputes Act. Perusal of the present petition filed by the petitioner
clearly shows that the petitioner has not even made any endeavour
to explain as to how such a long delay of 5 years has taken place in
filing the present petition. In a very casual and perfunctory
manner the petitioner stated that the record of the petitioner was
unfortunately misplaced and after thorough

check up fresh

certified copies were applied and same were obtained on 7.5.2005.
5.

At this stage Mr. Vinay Sabharwal, counsel appearing for the

petitioner has drawn attention of this Court to one supplementary
affidavit filed by the petitioner to explain the delay in filing the
present petition. Contention of counsel for the petitioner is that
notice in the present case was issued only after filing of the said
supplementary affidavit. Counsel for the respondent on the other
hand states that no copy of such an affidavit was supplied by the

WP (C) No. 23295/05

Page 5 of 7

petitioner to the respondent and, therefore, the averments made
therein could not be rebutted by the respondent. In any event of
the matter, perusal of the said affidavit also disclose that no proper
explanation has been rendered by the petitioner in not filing the
present petition at the earliest opportune time. In the absence of
any explanation much less the plausible explanation, I do not find
that there is any justification for the petitioner to have approached
this Court after a lapse of five years period. Unexplained delay on
the part of the litigant does stare on its face. Non-applicability of
the provision of Limitation Act cannot be justification for any party
to say that he can approach the Court at any point of time, if he so
wishes, if one is aggrieved by the outcome of any order passed by
the Courts below. It is well settled that delay and laches is one of
the factors which a High Court must bear in mind while exercising
powers under Article 226 of the Constitution and in an appropriate
case, it may refuse to exercise its extraordinary powers.

In the

absence of any explanation given by the petitioner in the present
petition and in their affidavit, the present petition suffers from the
vice of delay and laches. Based on the above discussion, I do not
feel inclined to exercise jurisdiction under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India in favour of the petitioner and accordingly the

WP (C) No. 23295/05

Page 6 of 7

same is hereby dismissed. It is, however, made clear that any
observation made in this order will not preclude the parties to the
present petition to their respective positions in the main matter
pending consideration before this Court in CWP No. 292/2007.

February 11, 2009

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.

rkr

WP (C) No. 23295/05

Page 7 of 7

