IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC. APP. No. 338/2007
Judgment delivered on: December 11, 2007
United India Insurance Co. Ltd.

..... Appellant

Through: Mr.Sameer Nandwani, Adv.
versus
Smt. Santosh Rajpal & Ors.
Through:

..... Respondents
Mr. Sundeep Kumar, Adv. for
Respondent No.1

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

No

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

No

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
*
The appellant, United India Insurance Company Ltd.,
insurer of the offending vehicle has preferred an appeal

MAC. APP. No. 338/2007

Page 1 of 9

challenging the impugned order dated 09.04.2007 passed by the
learned MACT. The impugned award has arisen out of the claim
petition filed by respondent No.1 against the appellant as well as
against respondent Nos.2 & 3 claiming compensation for the
injuries sustained by respondent no. 1, Smt. Santosh Rajpal.
The brief facts which are necessary for deciding the
present appeal inter alia are that respondent No.1 Smt. Santosh
Rajpal was going towards her residence in a rickshaw after seeing
her doctor. When she reached near Escorts Hospital, a vehicle
bearing registration no. DL 3CB 2635, driven by the driver Sh.
Ashok Kumar Gupta in a very rash and negligent manner hit the
petitioner due to which she suffered multiple injuries and she was
removed to Holy Family Hospital from the accident site.
The Tribunal after taking into consideration the facts of
the case as well as evidence led by the parties had passed an
award vide order dated 09.04.2007 in the sum of Rs. 2,81,100/along with interest at the rate of 7% per annum payable from the
date of the institution of the petition till the date of realisation.

MAC. APP. No. 338/2007

Page 2 of 9

The said order passed by the Tribunal is now under
challenge in the present appeal.
I have heard learned counsel for the appellant at
considerable length.
Mr.

Sundeep

Kumar,

counsel

appearing

for

the

respondent has taken a preliminary objection to the very
maintainability of the present appeal on the ground that the
appellant cannot assail the findings of the Tribunal on the
quantum of compensation as determined by the Tribunal. Counsel
contends that the appellant had not taken over the defence of the
owner and driver as envisaged under Section 170 of the Motor
Vehicles Act and, therefore, is debarred from challenging the
impugned award so as to assail the findings of the Tribunal on the
quantum of compensation. Counsel for the respondent has placed
reliance on the following judgments of the Apex Court:1. JT 2002 (7) SC 251, National Insurance Co. Vs. Nicollata
Rohtagi;
2. AIR 1998 SC 2968, Shankarayya & Anr. vs. United India
Insurance Co. Ltd.;

MAC. APP. No. 338/2007

Page 3 of 9

3. (2002) 9 SCC 527, Jagdish Prasad Pandey vs. Darshan Singh &
Anr.;
4. (2002) 6 SCC 52, H.S. Ahammed Hussain & Anr. Vs. Irfan
Ahammed & Anr.;
5. AIR 2003 SC 1817, Abati Bezbaruah v. Dy. Director General,
Geological Survey of India, (2003) 3 SCC 148; and
6. AIR 2000 Cal 145 (DB), United India Insurance Co. Ltd. Vs. Smt.
Namita Das & Ors.
The contention of counsel for the respondent is that
right to file an appeal is a statutory right and the insurer can
assail the findings of the Tribunal only under Section 149(2) of the
Motor Vehicles Act. Counsel further contends that it is only in a
case where there is collusion between the claimants and the
insured, the insurer can assail the findings of the Tribunal on the
grounds of quantum as well as negligence subject however to the
condition that the insurer had taken permission of the Court to
take over the defence of the owner or driver as the case may be
as envisaged under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act. No
such permission was sought by the appellant under Section 170
of the Motor Vehicles Act by the Tribunal and, therefore, in the
absence of the same, the appellant being the insurer of the
offending vehicle cannot maintain the present appeal on grounds

MAC. APP. No. 338/2007

Page 4 of 9

other than those available to it under Section 149(2) of the Motor
Vehicles Act.
Per contra, Mr.Sameer Nandwani, counsel for the
appellant seriously disputes this position and contends that the
insurer cannot be rendered remediless especially in a case where
the Tribunal has awarded an excessive amount of compensation
in favour of the claimants ignoring all basic principles of law for
the award of compensation. Counsel for the appellant has also
placed reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court reported in
2007 (9) Scale 216, New India Assurance Company Ltd. Vs.
Smt. Shanti Pathak & Ors. to contend that the Apex Court had
interfered to lower down the compensation amount even in a
case where the insurer had not taken any permission from the
Court under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act. Counsel for
the appellant also contends that the Hon'ble Supreme Court has
already referred the said issue of lack of competence of the
insurer to assail the findings of the Tribunal on the ground of
quantum of compensation and negligence to a larger Bench and,
therefore, this Court may follow the decision of the Supreme
Court in this regard.
MAC. APP. No. 338/2007

Page 5 of 9

After having given my thoughtful and conscious
consideration to the issue involved in the present case, I am of
the view that the issue is no more res integra as in the judgments
cited by the respondent, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has
authoritatively held that in the absence of permission sought from
the Court as envisaged under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles
Act, the insurer has no right to file an appeal to challenge the
quantum of compensation or finding of the Tribunal as regards
the negligence or contributory negligence of offending vehicles is
concerned. It would be appropriate to refer Section 170 of the
Motor Vehicles Act as under:“170. Impleading insurer in certain cases- Where
in the course of any inquiry the Claims Tribunal is
satisfied that -

(a) there is collusion between the person
making the claim and the person against
whom the claim is made, or
(b) the person against whom the claim is made
has failed to contest the claim,
It may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, direct
that the insurer who may be liable in respect of such
claim, shall be impleaded as a party to the proceeding
and the insurer so impleaded shall thereupon have,

MAC. APP. No. 338/2007

Page 6 of 9

without prejudice to the provisions contained in subsection (2) of section 149, the right to contest the
claim on all or any of the grounds that are available
to the person against whom the claim has been
made.“

It is an admitted case between the parties that no such
permission under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act was
sought by the appellant which clearly means that the procedure
laid down under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act was not
followed. In the judgment of the Supreme Court reported in
(1998) 3 SCC 140, Shankarayya Vs. United India Insurance
Co. Ltd., the Supreme Court has held that the insurance
company when impleaded as a party by the Court can be
permitted to contest the proceedings on merits only if the
conditions mentioned in Section 170 are found to be satisfied and
for that purpose the insurance company has to obtain an order in
writing from the Tribunal and such an order should be a reasoned
order of the Tribunal. In such circumstances unless the said
procedure is followed, the appellant insurer cannot have a wider
defence on merits than what is available to it by way of a

MAC. APP. No. 338/2007

Page 7 of 9

statutory defence. Relevant part of Para 4 of the said judgment in
this regard is referred as under:“4. It clearly shows that the Insurance
Company when impleaded as a party by the
Court can be permitted to contest the
proceedings on merits only if the conditions
precedent mentioned in the section are found
to be satisfied and for that purpose the
Insurance Company has to obtain order in
writing from the Tribunal and which should be
a reasoned order by the Tribunal. Unless that
procedure is followed, the Insurance Company
cannot have a wider defence on merits than
what is available to it by way of statutory
defence. “

In view of the said legal position, I cannot appreciate
the argument of counsel for the appellant that even without
seeking permission of the Court as required under Section 170,
the Appellant can proceed with the appeal. Once the application
under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act was preferred by the
appellant before the Tribunal for taking over the defence of an
owner or driver, the Tribunal is required to pass specific order and
that too a reasoned order as per the observations of the Supreme
Court referred above and, therefore, in the instant matter the
argument of counsel for the appellant cannot be appreciated that
non-filing of an application under Section 170 of the Motor

MAC. APP. No. 338/2007

Page 8 of 9

Vehicles Act by the appellant in this regard is no bar in preferring
present appeal.
In the light of the above discussion, I do not find any
merit in the submission of counsel for the appellant. The
judgment cited by the counsel in Shanti Pathak's case (supra)
has not dealt with the said legal proposition and, therefore, the
same is not applicable in the facts and circumstances of the
present case.
There is no merit in the appeal and the same is
dismissed.

December 11, 2007

MAC. APP. No. 338/2007

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J

Page 9 of 9

