IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC. APP. No. 704/2007
Judgment delivered on: December 11, 2007
National Insurance Co. Ltd.
..... Appellant
Through: Ms.Shantha Devi Raman, Adv.
versus
Mamta & Ors.

..... Respondents
Through: Ms.Avnish Ahlawat, Adv.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR,
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
*
The appellant, National

Insurance Company

insurer of the offending vehicle has preferred

Ltd.,

an appeal

challenging the impugned order dated 6.10.2007 passed by the
MAC. APP. No. 704/2007

Page 1 of 10

learned MACT. The impugned award has arisen out of the claim
petition filed by respondent Nos.1 to 3 against the appellant as
well as against respondent Nos. 4 & 5 claiming compensation for
the death of Shri Gopal Singh Negi.
The brief facts which are necessary for deciding the
present appeal inter alia are that respondent Nos.1 to 3 are the
legal heirs of deceased Shri Gopal Singh Negi who died on
16.11.2006 on the way to the hospital from the accident spot. On
16.11.2006 at about 9:15 am when the deceased was in the
process of boarding a DTC bus bearing registration no. DL 1PB
2499 at Bye-pass bus stand, Outer Ring Road, Burari, Timarpur,
when the driver, Sh. Attar Singh, rashly and negligently started
the said bus with a sudden jerk and hit another bus bearing
registration no. DL 1PB 6874. The deceased Shri Gopal Singh Negi
was at the rear gate of the bus and due to the sudden jerk and
collision of the aforesaid two buses fell on the road and received
fatal injuries. He died on the way to the hospital.
The Tribunal after taking into consideration the facts of
the case as well as evidence led by the parties had passed an
award vide order dated 6.10.2007 in the sum of Rs. 8,51,000/MAC. APP. No. 704/2007

Page 2 of 10

along with interest at the rate of 7.5% per annum payable from
the date of the institution of the petition till the date of realisation.
The said order passed by the Tribunal is now under challenge in
the present appeal.
I have heard learned counsel for the appellant at
considerable length.
Ms.

Avnish

Ahlawat,

Counsel

appearing

for

the

respondent has taken a preliminary objection to the very
maintainability of the present appeal on the ground that the
appellant cannot assail the findings of the Tribunal on the
quantum of compensation as determined by the Tribunal. Counsel
contends that the appellant had not taken over the defence of the
owner and driver as envisaged under Section 170 of the Motor
Vehicles Act and, therefore, is debarred from challenging the
impugned award so as to assail the findings of the Tribunal on the
quantum of compensation.
The contention of counsel for the respondent is that
right to file an appeal is a statutory right and the insurer can
assail the findings of the Tribunal only under Section 149(2) of the

MAC. APP. No. 704/2007

Page 3 of 10

Motor Vehicles Act. Counsel further contends that it is only in a
case where there is collusion between the claimants and the
insured, the insurer can assail the findings of the Tribunal on the
grounds of quantum as well as negligence subject however to the
condition that the insurer had taken permission of the Court to
take over the defence of the owner or driver as the case may be
as envisaged under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act. No
such permission was sought by the appellant under Section 170 of
the Motor Vehicles Act by the Tribunal and, therefore, in the
absence of the same, the appellant being the insurer of the
offending vehicle cannot maintain the present appeal on grounds
other than those available to it under Section 149(2) of the Motor
Vehicles Act.
Per contra, Ms.Shantha Devi Raman, counsel for the
appellant sincerely disputes this position and contends that the
insurer cannot be rendered remedlyless especially in a case where
the Tribunal has awarded an excessive amount of compensation
in favour of the claimants ignoring all basic principles of law for
the award of compensation. Counsel for the appellant has also
placed reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court reported in

MAC. APP. No. 704/2007

Page 4 of 10

2007 (9) Scale 216, New India Assurance Company Ltd. Vs.
Smt. Shanti Pathak & Ors. to contend that the Apex Court had
interfered to lower down the compensation amount even in a case
where the insurer had not taken any permission from the Court
under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act. Counsel for the
appellant also contends that the Hon'ble Supreme Court has
already referred the said issue of lack of competence of the
insurer to assail the findings of the Tribunal on the ground of
quantum of compensation and negligence to a larger Bench and,
therefore, this Court may follow the decision of the Supreme Court
in this regard.
The counsel for the appellant has also placed reliance
on the judgment of this court reported in 134 (2006) DLT 340
entitled National Insurance Co. Ltd. Vs. Ramesh Kumar &
Anr.
After having given my thoughtful and conscious
consideration to the issue involved in the present case, I am of the
view that the issue is no more res integra as in the judgments
cited by the respondent, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has
authoritatively held that in the absence of permission sought from
MAC. APP. No. 704/2007

Page 5 of 10

the Court as envisaged under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles
Act, the insurer has no right to file an appeal to challenge the
quantum of compensation or finding of the Tribunal as regards the
negligence or contributory negligence of offending vehicles is
concerned. It would be appropriate to refer Section 170 of the
Motor Vehicles Act as under:“170. Impleading insurer in certain cases- Where
in the course of any inquiry the Claims Tribunal is
satisfied that (a) there is collusion between the person
making the claim and the person against whom
the claim is made, or
(b) the person against whom the claim is made
has failed to contest the claim,

It may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, direct
that the insurer who may be liable in respect of such
claim, shall be impleaded as a party to the proceeding
and the insurer so impleaded shall thereupon have,
without prejudice to the provisions contained in subsection (2) of section 149, the right to contest the
claim on all or any of the grounds that are available to
the person against whom the claim has been made.“

It is an admitted case between the parties that no such
permission under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act was
sought by the appellant which clearly means that the procedure
laid down under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act was not
MAC. APP. No. 704/2007

Page 6 of 10

followed. In the judgment of the Supreme Court reported in
(1998) 3 SCC 140, Shankarayya Vs. United India Insurance
Co. Ltd., the Supreme Court has held that the insurance
company when impleaded as a party by the Court can be
permitted to contest the proceedings on merits only if the
conditions precedent mentioned in Section 170 are found to be
satisfied and for that purpose the insurance company has to
obtain an order in writing from the Tribunal and such an order
should be a reasoned order of the Tribunal. In such circumstances
unless the said procedure is followed, the appellant insurer
cannot have a wider defence on merits than what is available to it
by way of a statutory defence. RElevant part of Para 4 of the said
judgment in this regard is referred as under:“4. It clearly shows that the Insurance
Company when impleaded as a party by the
Court can be permitted to contest the
proceedings on merits only if the conditions
precedent mentioned in the section are found
to be satisfied and for that purpose the
Insurance Company has to obtain order in
writing from the Tribunal and which should be a
reasoned order by the Tribunal. Unless that
procedure is followed, the Insurance Company
cannot have a wider defence on merits than
what is available to it by way of statutory
defence. “

MAC. APP. No. 704/2007

Page 7 of 10

In another judgment of the Apex Court entitled
National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Nicolletta Rohtagi, (2002) 7
SCC 456, it was observed as under:“25. We have earlier noticed that motor
vehicle accident claim is a tortious claim
directed against tortfeasors who are the
insured and the driver of the vehicle and the
insurer comes to the scene as a result of
statutory liability created under the Motor
Vehicles Act. The legislature has ensured by
enacting Section 149 of the Act that the
victims of motor vehicle are fully compensated
and protected. It is for that reason the insurer
cannot escape from its liability to pay
compensation on any exclusionary clause in
the insurance policy except those specified in
Section 149(2) of the Act or where the
condition precedent specified in Section 170 is
satisfied.
26. For the aforesaid reasons, an insurer if
aggrieved against an award, may file an appeal
only on those grounds and no other. However,
by virtue of Section 170 of the 1988 Act,
where in course of an enquiry the Claims
Tribunal is satisfied that ( a ) there is a
collusion between the person making a claim
and the person against whom the claim has
been made, or ( b ) the person against whom
the claim has been made has failed to contest
the claim, the Tribunal may, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, implead the insurer and in
that case it is permissible for the insurer to
contest the claim also on the grounds which
are available to the insured or to the person
against whom the claim has been made. Thus,
unless an order is passed by the Tribunal
permitting the insurer to avail the grounds
MAC. APP. No. 704/2007

Page 8 of 10

available to an insured or any other person
against whom a claim has been made on being
satisfied of the two conditions specified in
Section 170 of the Act, it is not permissible to
the insurer to contest the claim on the grounds
which are available to the insured or to a
person against whom a claim has been made.
Thus where conditions precedent embodied in
Section 170 are satisfied and award is adverse
to the interest of the insurer, the insurer has a
right to file an appeal challenging the quantum
of compensation or negligence or contributory
negligence of the offending vehicle even if the
insured has not filed any appeal against the
quantum of compensation. Sections 149, 170
and 173 are part of one scheme and if we give
any different interpretation to Section 173 of
the 1988 Act, the same would go contrary to
the scheme and object of the Act.”

In view of the said legal position, I cannot appreciate
the argument of counsel for the appellant that even without
seeking permission of the Court as required under Section 170,
the Appellant can proceed with the appeal. Once the application
under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act was preferred by the
appellant before the Tribunal for taking over the defence of an
owner or driver, the Tribunal is required to pass specific order and
that too a reasoned order as per the observations of the Supreme
Court referred above and, therefore, in the instant matter the
argument of counsel for the appellant cannot be appreciated that
non-filing of an application under Section 170 of the Motor
MAC. APP. No. 704/2007

Page 9 of 10

Vehicles Act by the appellant in this regard is no bar in preferring
present appeal.
In the light of the above discussion, I do not find any
merit in the submission of counsel for the appellant. The judgment
cited by the counsel in Shanti Pathak's case (supra) has not
dealt with the said legal proposition and, therefore, the same is
not applicable in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
The legal position remain the same in view of the
pronouncement of Supreme Court in Nicolletta Rohtagi's case
(supra) and even in above judgment of this Court in Ramesh
Kumar's case (supra) that in the absence of an order of the Court
under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act, the insurance
company would not have larger defences on merits available to it.

dismissed.

There is no merit in the appeal and the same is

December 11, 2007

MAC. APP. No. 704/2007

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.

Page 10 of 10

