IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC APP. NO. 701/2007
Judgment delivered on: December 11,2007
Pushpa Devi & Ors.
..... Appellants
Through: Mr. Yashpal Shankar, Advocate
versus
United India Insurance Co.Ltd.
..... Respondents
Through: Mr. Sameer Nandwani, Advocate.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR,
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
Since a short controversy is involved in the
present appeal the matter can be disposed of at this
stage itself.

Counsel appearing for the parties have

MAC APP. No. 701/2007

page 1 of 11

also no objection if the matter is taken up for final
disposal.
Admit.
By way of this appeal, the appellants seeks to
challenge the impugned award dated 27.4.2007 to
claim enhancement in compensation. The Tribunal has
awarded compensation to the tune of Rs.7,81,348/along with interest @ 7.5% p.a.
The brief facts relevant for deciding the
present appeal are that on 25.11.2005 at about 7.30
A.M. the deceased Sh.Vijay Kumar Prasad received fatal
injuries due to the rash and negligent driving of
thedriver, Shri Ishwar Prasad, while driving the bus
bearing registration no.DL 1PB 4299 on the road
opposite to the Main Gate, Tihar Jail, Jail Road, New
Delhi.
Mr.

MAC APP. No. 701/2007

Yashpal

Shankar,

counsel

for

the

page 2 of 11

appellant

contends

that the Tribunal has not

considered the grant of future prospects, although the
appellants have produced PW-3, Shri Jagdish Prasad,
Superintendent of the concerned school where the
deceased was employed who in his deposition has
deposed that
promoted

the deceased

to the post of

had a chance to be

Lab Assistant.

The second

contention of the counsel for the appellant is that the
deceased is survived by seven members in the family
comprising of his widow, five children and his father,
but the Tribunal has deducted 1/3rd income of the
deceased towards

personal

expenses.

The third

contention of the counsel for the appellant is that the
rate of interest as awarded by the Tribunal is quite on
the lower side.
Per contra, Mr. Sameer Nandwani, counsel for
the respondent contends that appellants have failed to

MAC APP. No. 701/2007

page 3 of 11

prove on record the future prospects of the deceased.
Placing reliance on the judgment of Bijoy Kumar
Dugar Vs. Bidya Dhar Dutta, (2006) 3 SCC 242,
counsel for the respondent contends that the appellants
are not entitled

to any compensation towards the

future prospects as no evidence has been placed on
record by the appellants in this regard. As regards the
second contention of the counsel for the appellant the
counsel for the respondent contends that the Tribunal
has rightly deducted 1/3rd income towards personal
expenses of the deceased. Counsel for the respondent
also contends that the rate of interest as awarded by
the Tribunal is also reasonable.
I have heard counsel for the parties and have
also perused the record.
Perusal

of

the

record

shows

that

the

appellants did examine one witness from the school

MAC APP. No. 701/2007

page 4 of 11

where the deceased was employed but he did not place
any material on record or made any categorical
deposition in his testimony to show as in what manner
the deceased would have got the promotion and at
which rank and within how much span of time.

The

Tribunal has referred to the cross-examination of the
said witness and came to the conclusion that the
appellants have failed to prove and establish that the
deceased would have got promotion in near future or
there would have been increase in
account of his promotion.

his income

on

It would be appropriate to

refer to the said para of the impugned judgment as
under:
“I have given my thoughts
to the matter. So far as promotion of the
deceased is concerned, the same can only
be taken into account it there is evidence
regarding the same on record.
In the
present case there is no evidence on record
to prove that deceased was going to be
promoted shortly or because of his special
MAC APP. No. 701/2007

page 5 of 11

merit or qualification, he would have got a
promotion within two,three, five or ten
years.
In fact PW-3, in his crossexamination has submitted that there was
no chance of promotion of the deceased at
the time of his death and he also could not
say whether he would have got promoted
within one, five or ten years. In these
circumstances, it cannot be held that
petitioners have proved the fact that
deceased would have got promoted in near
future and thus, there would have an
increase in income. The contention of Ld.
Counsel for the petitioner, therefore,
cannot be accepted.”
The issue of future prospects has been
discussed extensively by the Apex Court in Bijoy
Kumar Dugar Vs. Bidya Dhar Dutta, (2006) 3 SCC
242. Relevant para of the said judgment is reproduced
as under:
“The mere assertion of the claimants that
the deceased would have earned more than Rs
8000 to Rs 10,000 per month in the span of his
lifetime cannot be accepted as legitimate income
unless all the relevant facts are proved by leading
cogent and reliable evidence before MACT. The
claimants have to prove that the deceased was in
a trade where he would have earned more from
time to time or that he had special merits or
MAC APP. No. 701/2007

page 6 of 11

qualifications or opportunities which would have
led to an improvement in his income. There is no
evidence produced on record by the claimants
regarding future prospects of increase of income
in the course of employment or business or
profession, as the case may be.”

In the light of the above position, I do not find
any merit in the contention of the counsel for the
appellant. For claiming future prospects the appellants
should have placed some material on record as to how
and in what manner the deceased would have got
promotion in future and at what period of time. In the
absence of any such evidence placed on record, the
appellants are not entitled to the

claim

of any loss

towards future increase in the income. As regards the
other contention of the counsel for the appellant that
the Tribunal has deducted 1/3rd

income of the

deceased towards personal expenses, I find that there
is merit in the submission of counsel for the appellant.
The deceased is survived by his wife and five children
MAC APP. No. 701/2007

page 7 of 11

besides his father. The deceased died at the young age
of 45 years, therefore, there was a large family
dependent upon him for their sustenance. In the facts
of the present case, I consider the deceased would not
have spent more than 1/5th
personal expenses.

of his income towards

Therefore, the finding of the

Tribunal holding deduction of 1/3rd income towards
personal expenses is modified and the same is now
held to be 1/5th in place of 1/3rd deduction towards
personal expenses of the deceased.
As regards the last contention of the counsel
for the appellant

that the rate of interest is on the

lower side, I do not find any force in the argument of
counsel for the appellant. The rate of interest of 7.5%
cannot be considered to be on the lower side. In this
regard in Abati Bezbaruah v. Dy. Director General,
Geological Survey of India, (2003) 3 SCC 148, the

MAC APP. No. 701/2007

page 8 of 11

Hon'ble Apex Court has observed as under:

“6. The question as to what should be the rate of
interest, in the opinion of this Court, would depend
upon the facts and circumstances of each case. Award
of interest would normally depend upon the bank rate
prevailing at the relevant time.
18. No ratio has been laid down in any of the decisions
in regard to the rate of interest and the rate of
interest was awarded on the amount of compensation
as a matter of judicial discretion. The rate of interest
must be just and reasonable depending upon the facts
and circumstances of each case and taking all relevant
factors including inflation, change of economy, policy
being adopted by Reserve Bank of India from time to
time, how long the case is pending, permanent injuries
suffered by the victim, enormity of suffering, loss of
future income, loss of enjoyment of life etc., into
consideration. No rate of interest is fixed under
Section 171 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. Varying
rates of interest are being awarded by Tribunals, High
Courts and the Supreme Court. Interest can be
granted even if a claimant does not specifically plead
for the same, as it is consequential in the eye of law.
Interest is compensation for forbearance or detention
of money and that interest being awarded to a party
only for being kept out of the money, which ought to
have been paid to him. No principle could be deduced
nor can any rate of interest be fixed to have a general
application in motor accident claim cases having
regard to the nature of provision under Section 171
giving discretion to the Tribunal in such matter. In
other matters, awarding of interest depends upon the
statutory provisions, mercantile usage and doctrine of
equity. Neither Section 34 CPC nor Section 4-A (3) of
MAC APP. No. 701/2007

page 9 of 11

the Workmen’s Compensation Act are applicable in the
matter of fixing rate of interest in a claim under the
Motor Vehicles Act. The courts have awarded the
interest at different rates depending upon the facts
and circumstances of each case. Therefore, in my
opinion, there cannot be any hard-and-fast rule in
awarding interest and the award of interest is solely
on the discretion of the Tribunal or the High Court as
indicated above.”

On the basis of the above discussion, I do not
find any infirmity in the award in relation to the rate of
interest.
Counsel

for

the

appellant

respondent has already complied with

states

that

the impugned

award.
In the light of the above discussion, the
respondent shall now be liable to pay the differential
amount of Rs.1,63,332/- along with up-to-date interest
@ 7.5% on the differential amount from the date of
filing of petition till realisation.
With these directions, appeal stands disposed

MAC APP. No. 701/2007

page 10 of 11

of.

December 11, 2007
J.

KAILASH GAMBHIR

mg

MAC APP. No. 701/2007

page 11 of 11

