IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC. APP. No. 69/2005
Judgment delivered on: November 12, 2007
State of Haryana & Anr.
..... Appellants
Through: Mr.Vikas Kumar, Advocate.
versus
Sh. Ajay Kumar & Ors.
..... Respondents
Through: Ms.Uma, Advocate.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
*
By way of this appeal, the appellant seeks to assail the
impugned award primarily on the ground that the driver of the
offending vehicle has already been acquitted by the Criminal
Court and, therefore, no liability of the compensation could have
MAC. APP. No. 69/2005

Page 1 of 6

been fastened on the driver by the Tribunal in a compensation
case. It is also stated that there is a discrepancy in the age of the
deceased as in the cross-examination of PW-1, the age of the
deceased has been stated to be between 25-30 years, but the
Tribunal has taken the age of the deceased at the time of his
death at 35 years. Yet another contention has been taken by the
appellant that no accident involving the bus of the appellant
bearing registration No. HR-12-A-1120 took place as no such
accident was reported by any person to the appellant either at
ISBT, Delhi or at Panchkosi or at Hanumangarh. The contention is
that the said bus of the appellant was being followed by another
bus bearing registration No. HR-12-A-1121 which was on its way
to Hanumangarh and possibly the said bus might have caused the
said accident.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have
perused the record.

Mr.Vikas Kumar, counsel for the appellant

contended that the testimony of PW-1 could not have been relied
upon by the Tribunal as the said witness, Mr.Bishambar Nath was
not in the list of prosecution witnesses in the criminal case. The
contention of counsel for the appellant is that had the said witness
been an eye-witness, then, the police would have taken a
MAC. APP. No. 69/2005

Page 2 of 6

statement under Section 161 of the Criminal Procedure Code and
then, also would have examined him as a prosecution witness.
Counsel for the appellant also contends that the said discrepancy
in the age of the deceased shows that the Tribunal has not
properly appreciated the evidence adduced by the respondents
on record. On the negligence point, the contention of counsel for
the appellant is that once the presence of the said eye-witness
itself is in dispute, therefore, it cannot be held that the said bus of
the appellant was involved in causing the accident and not the
bus which was following the bus of the appellant.
Per

contra,

Ms.Uma,

counsel

appearing

for

the

respondent refutes the submission of counsel for the appellant by
contending that it is a settled legal position that the acquittal in a
criminal case cannot have any effect on the findings of the Civil
Court or MACT Court in compensation cases.

Counsel further

contended that the age of 35 years of the deceased was taken
into consideration as per the post mortem report in which his age
was mentioned as 35 years. Counsel further stated that no fault
could be found with the deposition of PW-1 simply on account of
the fact that the statement of the witness was not recorded by the
police under Section 161 of the Criminal Procedure Code.
MAC. APP. No. 69/2005

Page 3 of 6

The

case

as

set

up

by

the

appellants

in

the

compensation application was that on the fateful date i.e.
13.8.1995 at about 11.00 a.m. Shri Prem Parkash, the deceased
was accompanying his brother-in-law Shri Bishamber Nath when
he was going to Majnu Ka Tila for hiring a TSR. While two of them
were crossing the road near Petrol Pump, Shri Prem Parkash was
slightly ahead of Shri Bishamber Nath and at that time a bus
bearing registration No. HR-12-A-1120 coming from the side of
ISBT, being driven by its driver at a very fast speed and in a most
rash and negligent manner struck against the deceased causing
him multiple injuries.

After the accident, the deceased was

shifted to Hindu Rao Hospital from where he was referred to RML
Hospital where he took his last breath on 13.8.1995.

The said

brother-in-law who was accompanying the deceased at the time
of accident with the offending vehicle complained to the
appellant.

The testimony of the said eye witness remains

unimpinged as nothing adverse, however, could be extracted from
him in his cross-examination. Simply because the statement of
the said witness was not recorded by the police during the course
of

investigation

under

Section

161

of

the

Cr.P.C.,

the

creditworthiness of the said witness cannot be doubted. Similarly
MAC. APP. No. 69/2005

Page 4 of 6

the acquittal of the driver of the offending vehicle of the appellant
by the criminal court cannot be taken to have any adverse effect
on the findings reached by the Tribunal in an independent
compensation case. The MACT cases have to be decided on their
own footings and the same are not dependant upon the result or
an outcome of a criminal case. In this regard the Hon'ble Apex
Court in its judgment entitled N.K.V. Bros. (P) Ltd. Vs. M.
Kurumai Ammal & Ors., in Air 1980 SC 1354 gave following
observations:“The plea that the criminal case had ended in
acquittal and that, therefore, the civil suit must
follow suit, was rejected and rightly.
The
requirement of culpable rashness under Section
304-A, I.P.C. is more drastic than negligence
sufficient under the law of Torts to create liability.
The quantum of compensation was moderately fixed
and although there was, perhaps, a case for
enhancement, the High Court dismissed the crossclaims also.
Being questions of fact, we are
obviously unwilling to reopen the holding on
culpability and compensation.”
Moreover, no evidence to the contrary was led in the
present case by the appellants and therefore, the evidence
adduced by the respondents to prove that case remains
unrebutted. As regards the controversy raised on the age of the
deceased, I find that there is no merit in the submission of counsel
MAC. APP. No. 69/2005

Page 5 of 6

for the appellant as the Tribunal has referred to the post mortem
report in which the age of the deceased has been stated to be of
35 years of age. On the contention of counsel for the appellant
that the bus of the appellant was not involved in the accident, the
same also, I find equally devoid of any force as I do not find any
logic in the plea that since the offending bus was being followed
by some other bus bearing registration No. HR 12A 1121,
therefore, on this analogy alone, it should be presumed that the
vehicle was not involved in the accident. The testimony of the
eye witness that the bus bearing registration No. HR-12-A-1120
was involved in the accident cannot be disbelieved merely
because he was not made a witness in the criminal proceedings
and also because his statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C. was
not recorded.
There is no merit in this appeal. Dismissed.

November 12, 2007
J.
ga

MAC. APP. No. 69/2005

KAILASH GAMBHIR

Page 6 of 6

