IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CRP NO. 162/2007
Judgment delivered on: September 12,2007
Bennett Coleman &Co Ltd.

..... Petitioner

Through: Mr. Sanjay Kumar Singh, Advocate
versus
1. Rajan Verma & Ors.

..... Respondent

Through: Mr.J.S. Bakshi, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR,
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may Yes
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported Yes
in the Digest?
KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
This revision petition has been preferred by the
petitioner feeling aggrieved with the order passed by the
CRP. No. 162/2007

page 1 of 11

learned Additional District Judge dismissing the application
of the petitioner under Order 7 Rule 11 read with Section
151, CPC.
petitioner

Mr. Sanjay Kumar Singh,
has

counsel for the

contended that the order passed by the

learned trial court is illegal and perverse as the learned trial
court has adopted a hyper technical approach in dismissing
the said application of the petitioner.

Counsel for the

petitioner also contended that the petitioner is well within
its rights to carry out the publication of advertisement as
required by the principal of M/s. Nokia Pvt. Ltd. and other
various dealers etc., for the promotion of their mobile
phone.

Counsel for the petitioner contended that

no

fetters can be put on the rights of the petitioner who is a
publisher of a leading newspaper to carry out advertisement
of the said company and any curtailment in the exercise
of their rights shall be violative of their fundamental rights
under Articles 14 & 16 of the Constitution of India. Counsel
for the petitioner also contends that no injunction orders
CRP. No. 162/2007

page 2 of 11

can be passed in the suit filed by the respondent no.1 on
account of detection of some defect in the mobile phone
set which was purchased by him from the Nokia company.
The contention of the counsel is that such a suit filed by the
respondent no.1 is not only misconceived but is also devoid
of any merit.

Counsel for the

petitioner

has placed

reliance on the judgments of the Supreme Court in T.
Arivandandam Vs. T.V. Satyapal & Anr., (1978) 1 SCR
743, I.T.C. Limited Vs. Debts Recovery Appellate
Tribunal, AIR 1998 SC 634, Subodh Kumar Gupta Vs.
Shrikant Gupta & Ors., 1993 (3) ALT 59 (SC), and
Saleem Bhai & Ors. Vs. State of Maharashtra & Ors.,
AIR 2003 SC 759; decision of Division Bench of this Court
in Khushwant Singh & Anr. Vs. Maneka Gandhi, AIR
2002 DELHI 58 and decision of the Allahabad High Court
in

Umesh

Chandra

Saxena

&

Ors.

etc.

Vs.

Administrator General & Ors., AIR 1999 ALL 109.
Mr. J.S. Bakshi counsel for the respondent no.1 on
CRP. No. 162/2007

page 3 of 11

the other hand vehemently opposes the said submissions
of the counsel

for the petitioner.

Counsel

for the

respondent no.1 contended that the application moved by
the petitioner under Order 7 Rule 11, CPC was not
maintainable

and therefore, the same has been rightly

dismissed by the trial court. Inviting attention of this Court
to the prayer in

the said application, counsel for the

respondent contended that even as per the prayer the
relief

claimed

was

for

the

deletion

of

the

petitioner/defendant no.4 from the array of parties and not
for rejection of the plaint.

Mr.

Bakshi counsel for the

respondent also contended that it is not the case of the
petitioner

that the plaint does not disclose any cause of

action which can merit rejection under Order 7 Rule 11 of
the CPC but the petitioner has only vaguely stated that
there is no cause of action to file the above suit by the
respondent no.1 against the petitioner.

In support of his

arguments Mr. Bakshi counsel for the respondent has placed
CRP. No. 162/2007

page 4 of 11

reliance on the judgment of this Court in Maharaji
Educational Trust & Anr. Vs. Punjab & Sind Bank &
Anr., 127 (2006) DLT 161.
I find force in the arguments of counsel for the
respondent that for passing any order under the provision
of Order 7 Rule 11, CPC the Court has to look into the
averments made in the plaint. A matter pertaining to
rejection of plaint is a serious matter as it non suits the
plaintiff and kills the cause of action. Order 7 Rule 11 of the
Code was brought on the statute book in order to curb the
malpractice of

pursuing frivolous and vexatious litigation.

Under the said provision the court has jurisdiction to reject
the plaint where it does not disclose a cause of action;
where the relief claimed is undervalued and the valuation is
not corrected within the time as fixed by the court; where
insufficient court fee is paid and the additional court fee is
not supplied within the period given by the court and where
the suit appears from the statement in the plaint to be
CRP. No. 162/2007

page 5 of 11

barred by any law. While dealing with an application filed
by the petitioner/defendant under Order 7 Rule 11 of the
Code the Court has to find out whether the real cause of
action has been set out in the plaint or something illusory
has been projected in the plaint with a view to get out of the
purview of the said provision and for the said purpose the
entire plaint and the averments made therein have to be
read as a whole, taking those averments to be correct. In
pursuance of this obligation, upon a meaningful and not
formal or cursory reading of the plaint, if the plaint is found
to be manifestly vexatious, nettlesome and meritless, in the
sense of not disclosing a clear right to sue, then only the
court should exercise its power under Order 7 Rule 11 of the
Code taking care to see that the ground mentioned under
the said provision is fulfilled. The allegations made by the
defendant in his written statement or in an application for
rejection of the plaint cannot be the basis for the exercise of
the power under the said provision and also, the mere fact
CRP. No. 162/2007

page 6 of 11

that in the opinion of the Judge the plaintiff may not
succeed cannot be a ground for rejection of the plaint. There
is a difference between a suit

which

has no cause of

action, and a case where the plaint does not disclose a
complete or even a partial cause of action in the plaint.
is a

It

settled position of law that while considering an

application under Order 7 Rule 11, CPC the Court has to
accept the facts as contained in the plaint to be primarily
correct, more
maintainability

particularly

when deciding

the very

of the plaint on an application moved by

the contesting party under Order 7 Rule 11, CPC. Without
commenting on the merits of the claim of the respondent
as against the petitioner,

a bare perusal of the averments

contained in the plaint on the very face of it shows that it
does disclose a cause of action for trying the suit against
the

petitioner.

It would be appropriate to reproduce the

following paragraphs of the plaint in this regard.
“17. That the Defendants No.3 and 4 are
CRP. No. 162/2007

page 7 of 11

indulging
in causing false and misleading
advertisements
regarding the products of the
Defendant
No. 1 an the media.
The said
advertisements are meant to cheat other unwary
people like the Plaintiff and are in instrument of aid
in the Defendants' indulgence in Unfair Trade
Practice.
..............That the Defendants No 3 and 4 have
not responded to the Notice of the Plaintiff and to
save unwary public from bearing further cheated
by the Defendant No 1, it would be in the interest
of justice that the Defendants No3 and 4 are
restrained from publishing advertisements in their
publications on behalf of Defendant No 1 regarding
its products.
That the cause of action arose in favour
of the plaintiff and against the Defendants on
various dates when the misleading advertisements
appeared in the publications of Defendants No 3
and 4. The cause of action further arose against the
Defendants No 1 and 2 when they sold
the
inherently defective Nokia
hand set.
As
the
demands made in the legal notice dated 18.10.2006
have not been complied with the cause of action in
favour of the plaintiff and against the Defendants is
arising every day.”

Taking the said averments of the plaint on its face
value it cannot be said that the plaint does not disclose any
cause of action against the petitioner/defendant no.4. The
underlying idea
CRP. No. 162/2007

of Order 7 Rule 11 (a) no doubt is that the
page 8 of 11

Court should not be flooded with unnecessary frivolous or
vexatious litigation. But at the same time the courts have
to be very careful in passing an order rejecting a plaint
right at the threshold

as such a course has the effect of

finally determining the rights of the parties without there
being any trial.

Relevant para

from

Maharaji

Educational Trust's case (Supra) is reproduced below:
“13 . It is a settled principle of law that in order
to take up the pleas under Order 7 Rules 10 and
11 of the Code, the party concerned has to
essentially take the averments made in the plaint
as correct. Such a plea being the plea of
demurrer the defendants cannot take advantage
of the averments made in the written statement
or the factual narration to show that averments
made in the plaint are incorrect. The Court would
take into consideration the plaint as a whole and
the documents placed by the plaintiffs on record,
in order to examine such pleas. This principle of
law is no more res integra and has been settled
by various judgments of the Court.
In this
regard, reference can be made to the judgment
of this Court in the case of New Holland Tractors
(India) Pvt. Ltd. v. M/s. Raja Industrial Works
and Ors., IA 6689/2005 in CS (OS) 501/2004,
decided on 8th September, 2005:
“4. It is further a settled canon of civil
jurisprudence that the Court while considering an
CRP. No. 162/2007

page 9 of 11

application under Order 7 Rule 11 of the CPC has
to assume that the facts averred in the plaint are
primarily
correct
particularly
when
such
averments are supported by the documents in
the case. Reference in this regard can be made to
the judgment of ABN-Amre Bank v. The Punjab
Urban Planning and Development Authority, 1993
(3) PLR 479, where the Court held as under:
‘7. It is a settled rule of law that the plea of
rejection of plaint is founded on the “PLEA of
Demurrer”. A person raising such plea in law has
to take the facts as stated by the opponent as
correct. Despite tentative admission of such
correctness, the plaint does not disclose a
complete or even partial cause of action or the
relief claimed is barred by law and thus, the
plaint is liable to be rejected within the provision
of Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
Plain language of this rule shows that for
determination of an application under this
provision, the Court has to look into the plaint.
This concept has been extended by judicial
pronouncement of various Courts so as to take
within its ambit even the documents filed by the
plaintiff along with plaint or subsequent thereto
but
prior
to
the
hearing
of
such
application...........’
5.
Reference can also be made to the
judgment of Supreme Court in Liverpool and
London S.P. & I. Association Ltd. v. M.V. Sea
Success I and Another, (2004) 9
SCC 512,
wherein the Supreme Court held as under:
‘139. Whether a plaint discloses a cause of action
or not is essentially a question of act. But
CRP. No. 162/2007

page 10 of 11

whether it does or does not must be found out
from reading the plaint itself. For the said
purpose the averments made in the plaint in their
entirety must be held to be correct. The test is as
to whether if the averments made in the plaint
are taken to be correct in their entirety, a decree
would be passed’.”

In the light of the aforesaid discussion the
judgments cited by the counsel for the petitioner are not
found to be applicable in the facts and circumstances of
the present case.
I do not find any infirmity in the impugned order.
There is no merit.
Dismissed.

September 12, 2007
mg

CRP. No. 162/2007

KAILASH GAMBHIR J.

page 11 of 11

