IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC APP. No.710/2007 & CM Nos.16946-67/2007
Judgment delivered on: December 12, 2007
Suresh Chand & Ors.

..... Appellants.
Through: Mr.Jatinder Kamra, Advocate.
versus

Ajay Kumar & Ors.

Through:

..... Respondents
Mr.Pradeep Gaur, Advocate for
respondent No.3.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
*
A short controversy has been raised by the appellant in
the present appeal. The grievance of the appellants is that the
Tribunal has not considered the correct income of the deceased
although salary certificate showing an income of Rs.4,160/- was

MAC APP. No.710/2007

Page 1 of 8

duly proved on record. It is also contended that the Tribunal has
not considered the grant of any compensation due to the
increase of the income in future. Since this is a short controversy
and respondent No.3 is duly represented by their designated
counsel Mr.Pradeep Gaur, therefore, this matter can be disposed
of at this stage itself. The counsel appearing for the parties have
also no objection if the matter is taken up for final hearing.
Admit.
The facts which are necessary for deciding the present
appeal is as under:On 17.2.2004 at around 4.30 am., the deceased Nitin
Ahuja was riding his scooter bearing registration No. DL8SR-1359
on GTK Road in front of Invitation Banquest Hall (Bijli) Bijli
Apartment

and

in

the

meantime

a

TATA

Qualis

bearing

registration No. DL-IVB-0672 which was coming from Azadpur side
on GTK Road hit the vehicle of the deceased in a most rash and
negligent manner and at a very high speed, due to which
deceased suffered fatal injuries and he diedd.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties.
Counsel for appellants contends that the deceased
Mr.Nitin Ahuja was of 20 years of age at the time of accident and
MAC APP. No.710/2007

Page 2 of 8

he was working as Crew Member on part time basis in Plaza
Restaurants Pvt. Ltd. and also part time salesman for S.S. Super
Sales Corporation and from the said sources, he was earning a
sum of Rs.8,000/- p.m. The deceased is survived by his parents
and two sisters. Counsel further contends that Shri Suresh Chand
who appeared as a witness in support of the claim petition had
produced and proved the appointment letter of Mr.Nitin Ahuja as
Ex.PW2/2.

But the Tribunal did not believe the income of the

deceased as no witness from the employer of the deceased was
produced. In any case of the matter, counsel for the appellants
contends that no increase in the Minimum Wages Act has been
considered by the Tribunal. Counsel also contends that under the
Minimum Wages Act, in a period of 15 years, the minimum wages
certainly gets increased to manifold.
Per contra, counsel appearing for respondent No.3
refutes the said submissions of counsel for the appellant.
Mr.Pradeep Gaur, counsel for respondent No.3 contends that once
the appellants had failed to prove the salary certificate of the
deceased by producing the employer, therefore, no infirmity can
be found with the finding of the Tribunal by not relying upon the
salary certificate of the deceased. As regards the submission of
MAC APP. No.710/2007

Page 3 of 8

counsel for the appellant for considering increase in the future
wages under the Minimum Wages Act, Mr.Gaur, counsel for
respondent No.3 contends that the grant of future wages cannot
be considered in the present case as in the case relied upon by
the Tribunal in Fakeerappa & Anr. Vs. Karnataka Cement
Pipe Factory & Ors., 2004 ACJ 699, no such increase was
considered by the Supreme Court. Counsel further contends that
since the deceased was 20 years of age, therefore, a young
person of such an age would have got married at least between
the age of 25 to 27 years and, therefore, he would be spending
2/3rd of his income towards maintaining himself and his family.
The contention of counsel for the respondent is that after a gap of
5 to 7 years, 2/3rd income should have been taken into account
towards personal expenses of the deceased.

Counsel also

contends that the Hon'ble Supreme Court in many such cases
where death of an unmarried boy is involved has awarded
compensation varying

between Rs.1,80,000/- upto Rs.3 lakhs.

Counsel, thus, contends that just and fair compensation has been
awarded by the Tribunal.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties at
considerable length and have perused the records.
MAC APP. No.710/2007

Page 4 of 8

In the instant case, the death of a young boy of 20
years has taken place who is survived by his parents and two
sisters. It is no doubt true that the appellants failed to prove the
income of the deceased by leading any cogent evidence. In this
regard the Hon'ble Apex Court in Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. v.
Meena Variyal, (2007) 5 SCC 428 held as under:“It was necessary for the claimants to
establish what was the monthly income and
what was the dependency on the basis of
which the compensation could be adjudged as
payable. Should not any Tribunal trained in law
ask the claimants to produce evidence in
support of the monthly salary or income
earned by the deceased from his employer
company? Is there anything in the Motor
Vehicles Act which stands in the way of the
Tribunal asking for the best evidence,
acceptable evidence? We think not. Here again,
the position that the Motor Vehicles Act vis--vis
claim for compensation arising out of an
accident is a beneficent piece of legislation,
cannot lead a Tribunal trained in law to forget
all basic principles of establishing liability and
establishing the quantum of compensation
payable. The Tribunal, in this case, has chosen
to merely go by the oral evidence of the widow
when without any difficulty the claimants could
have got the employer Company to produce
the relevant documents to show the income
that was being derived by the deceased from
his employment.”

To prove the income of the deceased, the owner or the
employer are the best witnesses. But since no such witness was
MAC APP. No.710/2007

Page 5 of 8

produced by the appellants, therefore, the Tribunal rightly and
correctly disbelieved the income of the deceased at Rs.4,160/p.m.

In the absence of any such documentary evidence, the

Tribunal has rightly taken recourse to the Minimum Wages Act to
assess the income on the basis of the wages of an unskilled
workman, which at the relevant date of accident was Rs.2862.90
p.m. which has been taken at Rs.2,900/- p.m. to make a round
figure.

This Court has already taken this view that once the

income of the deceased is being assessed under the Minimum
Wages Act then the increase in the minimum wages in such like
cases should also be taken into consideration. It has been noticed
that under the Minimum Wages Act, the increase in a period of 10
years almost comes to more than double of the income and such
increase in the wages is determined under the Minimum Wages
Act after taking into consideration the inflation and price index
and also the denunciation of currency. So this increase is just to
neutralize the cost factor and the same cannot be treated at par
with the future prospects.

Future prospects of the deceased

relate to the promotional avenues of the deceased, grant of
increments or any other advancement in his career.

By

considering the increase in the Minimum Wages Act, the status of
MAC APP. No.710/2007

Page 6 of 8

the person remains the same as in the present case.

The

deceased has taken to have been working as an unskilled
workman and the salary of the unskilled workman alone would be
taken into consideration for granting the increase as well.
I, therefore, do not find any merit in the argument of
counsel for respondent No.3 that income under the Minimum
Wages Act should not be taken into consideration in such like
cases. The income as assessed by the Tribunal at Rs.2,900/would get doubled within a period of 10 years which would come
to Rs.5,800/-

and taking an average of the same, the monthly

income of the deceased would come to Rs.4,350/-. The Tribunal
has already deducted 50% towards his personal expenses and I
do not feel inclined to interfere in the same.

Applying the

multiplier of 15 on the annual multiplicand of Rs.26,100/-, the
total financial dependancy of the parents would come to
Rs.3,91,500/-.

The award of Rs.2,61,000/- as

granted by the

Tribunal towards loss of dependancy would stand enhanced to
Rs.3,91,500/-. Rest of the award does not need any interference
nor any challenge has been made by the appellants during the
course of the arguments.
Counsel for the appellants states that the appellants
MAC APP. No.710/2007

Page 7 of 8

have already received the compensation amount as awarded by
the Tribunal.

Respondent No.3 shall now pay the differential

amount along with interest at the rate of 7.5% from the date of
filing of the petition till its realization.
With these directions, the appeal stands disposed of.

December 12, 2007
ga

MAC APP. No.710/2007

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.

Page 8 of 8

