IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CM (M) 1273/2007
Judgment delivered on: September 17, 2007
M/s Trend Setters

..... Petitioner
Through:

Mr. Sunil Fernandes with
Mr. Rajat, Advs.

versus
North Delhi Power Ltd.

..... Respondent
Through:

Mr. K. Datta, Adv.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR,
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
CM No. 12760/2007
Allowed subject to all just exceptions.
CM stands disposed of.

CM (M) 1273/2007
CM(M) 1273 of 2007

Pages 1 of 9

By this petition the petitioner seeks to challenge the
impugned order dated 20th July, 2007 passed by the learned Trial
Court whereby the Trial Court has allowed the application of the
respondent

filed

under

Section

151

CPC.

The

respondent/defendant had moved the said application under
Section 151 CPC so as to place its written statement on record for
defending the suit filed by the present petitioner on its merits. The
said application of the respondent/defendant was allowed by the
Trial Court and the written statement filed by the respondent was
directed to be taken on record subject to imposition of costs of Rs.
4,000/-. Aggrieved with the said order the petitioner has preferred
the present writ petition. I have heard Shri Sunil Fernandes,
learned counsel for the petitioner and Shri K. Datta, learned
counsel for the respondent, who has appeared at the admission
stage. Counsel for the petitioner has taken serious exception to
the filing of the application by the respondent/defendant under
Section 151 CPC ignoring the specific statutory provision ordained
in the CPC to deal with the situation and contingency envisaged
therein.

CM(M) 1273 of 2007

Pages 2 of 9

Counsel for the petitioner contends that the respondent has
filed an application under Section 151 CPC although there is a
specific provision in the CPC to take recourse to Order 8 Rule 1
CPC. Counsel for the petitioner further contends that once the
specific provision is there in the Statute, the parties cannot invoke
the inherent powers of the Court under Section 151 CPC. In
support of his arguments counsel for the petitioner has placed
reliance on the judgments of the Supreme Court reported in
(2005) 2 SCC 256 titled National Institute of Mental Health
& Neuro Sciences vs C. Parameshwara; and in (1999) 1 SCC
37 titled Mahabir Prasad Singh vs Jacks Aviation Pvt. Ltd.
Counsel for the petitioner has also placed reliance on the
judgment of the Supreme Court reported in (2005) 4 SCC 480
titled Kailash vs. Nanhku and Ors. to contend that the
extension can only be granted by the Court as an exception after
taking into consideration the reasons assigned by the defendant
and also duly recorded in writing by the Court in its order to its
satisfaction. Counsel contends that no plausible reasons were
advanced by the respondent in the application moved under
Section 151 CPC for the condonation of such a long delay. Counsel
for the respondent, who is appearing on advance notice, submits
CM(M) 1273 of 2007

Pages 3 of 9

that sufficient reasons have been given by the respondent in
paras No. 4 and 5 of the reply placed at pages 45 and 46 of the
paper book. Counsel submits that inspection in question is related
to the period before unbuilding of the erstwhile DVB and coming
into existence of the present respondent/defendant. Counsel
states that the relevant file pertaining to the inspection and other
documents of the present case were not traceable with the
concerned

district

of

the

respondent,

therefore,

parawise

comments could not be prepared by the legal department of the
respondent/defendant and, therefore, the written statement could
not be placed before the Court within the period of 90 days from
the date of the service.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Kailash vs
Nankhu & Ors. (supra) has held that the said provision of Order
8 Rule 1 CPC is directory in nature. The Hon'ble Supreme Court
has also held that the person seeking time beyond 90 days for
filing the written statement must give reasons for the delay in
filing the written statement. The Apex Court has also held that the
Court is not powerless to permit a written statement being filed if
the Court may require such written statement and the Court need
not pronounce judgment against the defendant, who failed to file
CM(M) 1273 of 2007

Pages 4 of 9

the written statement. The Court has also held that all the rules of
procedure are the handmaid of justice and the language
employed by the draftsman of procedural law may be liberal or
stringent, but the fact remains that the object of prescribing
procedure is to advance the cause of justice. The Hon'ble
Supreme Court has also held that no straitjacket formula can be
laid down for examining the circumstances, but however the time
schedule contemplated by Order 8 Rule 1 CPC shall be the rule
and departure therefrom an exception, which can be only made
for satisfactory and sufficient reasons. It would be worthwhile to
refer to the following paras of the said judgment of the Apex Court
reported in Kailash vs Nanhku (Supra)
“28. All the rules of procedure are the handmaid
of justice. The language employed by the
draftsman of processual law may be liberal or
stringent, but the fact remains that the object of
prescribing procedure is to advance the cause of
justice. In an adversarial system, no party should
ordinarily be denied the opportunity of
participating
in
the
process
of
justice
dispensation. Unless compelled by express and
specific language of the statute, the provisions of
CPC or any other procedural enactment ought
not to be construed in a manner which would
leave the court helpless to meet extraordinary
situations in the ends of justice. The observations
made by Krishna Iyer, J. in Sushil Kumar Sen v.
State of Bihar 10 are pertinent: (SCC p. 777,
paras 5-6)
CM(M) 1273 of 2007

Pages 5 of 9

“The mortality of justice at the hands of law
troubles a judge’s conscience and points an
angry interrogation at the law reformer.
The processual law so dominates in certain
systems as to overpower substantive rights and
substantial justice. The humanist rule that
procedure should be the handmaid, not the
mistress, of legal justice compels consideration
of vesting a residuary power in judges to act ex
debito justitiae where the tragic sequel otherwise
would be wholly inequitable. Justice is the goal of
jurisprudence — processual, as much as
substantive.”
29. In State of Punjab v. Shamlal Murari 11 the
Court approved in no unmistakable terms the
approach
of
moderating
into
wholesome
directions what is regarded as mandatory on the
principle that: (SCC p. 720)
“Processual law is not to be a tyrant but a
servant, not an obstruction but an aid to justice.
Procedural prescriptions are the handmaid and
not the mistress, a lubricant, not a resistant in
the administration of justice.”
In Ghanshyam Dass v. Dominion of India 12 the
Court reiterated the need for interpreting a part
of the adjective law dealing with procedure alone
in such a manner as to subserve and advance
the cause of justice rather than to defeat it as all
the laws of procedure are based on this principle.
30. It is also to be noted that though the power
of the court under the proviso appended to Rule
1 Order 8 is circumscribed by the words “shall
not be later than ninety days” but the
consequences flowing from non-extension of
time are not specifically provided for though they
may be read in by necessary implication. Merely
because a provision of law is couched in a
negative
language
implying
mandatory
CM(M) 1273 of 2007

Pages 6 of 9

character, the same is not without exceptions.
The courts, when called upon to interpret the
nature of the provision, may, keeping in view the
entire context in which the provision came to be
enacted, hold the same to be directory though
worded in the negative form.
32. Our attention has also been invited to a few
other provisions such as Rules 9 and 10 of Order
8. In spite of the time-limit appointed by Rule 1
having expired, the court is not powerless to
permit a written statement being filed if the court
may require such written statement. Under Rule
10, the court need not necessarily pronounce
judgment against the defendant who failed to file
written statement as required by Rule 1 or Rule
9. The court may still make such other order in
relation to the suit as it thinks fit.
43. A prayer seeking time beyond 90 days for
filing the written statement ought to be made in
writing. In its judicial discretion exercised on
well-settled parameters, the court may indeed
put the defendants on terms including imposition
of compensatory costs and may also insist on an
affidavit,
medical
certificate
or
other
documentary evidence (depending on the facts
and circumstances of a given case) being
annexed with the application seeking extension
of time so as to convince the court that the
prayer was founded on grounds which do exist.”

Since the matter is right at the very initial stage, where only
question before the Trial Court was to examine whether in the
given circumstances the respondent was to be given the

CM(M) 1273 of 2007

Pages 7 of 9

permission to place on record the written statement or not. The
application in issue has been filed by the respondent invoking
Section 151 CPC in place of Order 8 Rule 1 CPC. Although the
respondent could have filed the said application under Order 8
Rule 1 CPC, but may be because the period of 90 days has
already expired, therefore

the respondent/defendant appear to

have taken recourse to invoke the inherent powers of the Court
under Section 151 CPC. I, therefore, do not find myself in
agreement with the counsel for the petitioner that the Trial Court
should not have entertained the application as filed by the
respondent under Section 151 CPC in the presence of express
statutory provision ordained in Order 8 Rule 1 CPC. Once the
Hon'ble Apex Court has said that the provision of Order 8 Rule 1
itself is directory in nature, therefore, no serious

fault can be

found on the part of the respondent in seeking the relief as
envisaged under Order 8 Rule 1 CPC by labeling the application
under Section 151 CPC. As regards the discretion exercised by
the Trial Court in condoning the delay and permitting the
respondent to file the written statement, I do not feel inclined to
interfere in the discretion exercised by the Court while exercising
jurisdiction

under

CM(M) 1273 of 2007

Article

227

of

the

Constitution.

Written

Pages 8 of 9

statement of the respondent is already on record and the delay
period has been taken due care of by the Trial Court by awarding
costs in favour of the petitioner.
In view of the above discussion I do not find any merit in the
present petition. At this stage counsel for the petitioner urges that
at least directions be given to the Trial Court for expeditious
disposal of the case. Since there is already delay on the part of
the respondent in filing the written statement, I see no reason to
decline the oral prayer made by the counsel for the petitioner for
expeditious disposal of the case as the petitioner has already
deposited about Rs. 6 lakhs in the Trial Court.
In the light of the submission made by the counsel for the
petitioner, the suit No. 26/2006 be tried by the Trial Court as
expeditiously as possible.
The petition stands disposed of.

September 17, 2007
rkr

CM(M) 1273 of 2007

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J

Pages 9 of 9

