IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC. App. No. 466/2006
Judgment delivered on:

2007

National Insurance Co. Ltd.

Through:

September 18,

..... Appellant
Mr.L.K. Tyagi, Adv.

versus
Smt. Chander Devi & Ors.

..... Respondent
Through: Mr.Sudarshan Rajan with
Ms.Mamta Rani , Advs. for
respondent No.1.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
*
By way of this appeal, the insurer i.e. National
Insurance Company Ltd. has assailed the impugned award mainly

MAC. App. No. 466/2006

Page 1 of 7

on the ground that the insurer could not have been held
responsible for payment of the compensation amount on account
of the fact that the cheque towards premium issued by
respondent No.3 got dishonoured and pursuant thereto, the
insurance policy was cancelled by the appellant. It was further
contended that the appellant company being a public undertaking
is not supposed to distribute public funds unless there is any legal
liability of the insurance company under the contract of insurance
to indemnify the loss. It is stated that the insurance cover note in
the present case was issued by the appellant for a period w.e.f.
22.5.2000 to 21.5.2001 on receipt of the premium through
cheque, but the said cheque was returned unpaid due to
insufficient funds lying in the account of the insured as informed
to the appellant by the banker of the insured vide memo dated
21/25.5.2000.

It is further stated that said bouncing of the

cheque and cancellation of the insurance policy by the insurance
company was immediately informed by the insurance company
vide letter dated 21.5.2000 but despite the said communication,
the insurer did not come forward to pay the amount towards
premium.
therefore,

It is stated that the contract was not complete and,
no

liability

MAC. App. No. 466/2006

to

pay

compensation

to

the

Page 2 of 7

respondents/claimants could be fastened on the appellant insurer.
The appellant has also relied upon Section 64 VB of the Insurance
Act to state that no risk be assumed unless the premium is
received by the insurer in advance.
Mr.L.K. Tyagi, counsel for the appellant has urged that
the decision of the Supreme Court in Oriental Insurance Co.
Ltd. Vs. Inderjit Kaur & Ors., 1 (1998) ACC 1 (SC) is
distinguishable from the facts of the present case inasmuch as in
the present case policy of the insured was cancelled and despite
notice being given to the insured, the insured did not pay the
premium. The contention of counsel for the petitioner is that the
decision of the Apex Court in Inderjit Kaur's case will be of no
help to the respondents/claimants in the present case.

The

counsel also contended that no consideration was ever passed on
to the appellant insurer and, therefore,

in the absence of any

consideration no contract between the insurer and the insured
came into existence and in the absence of any contract no liability
for payment of any compensation amount could have been
imposed upon the appellant by the Tribunal.
Mr.Sudarshan Rajan, counsel appearing for respondent
No.1 has urged that the legal position on this issue has been
MAC. App. No. 466/2006

Page 3 of 7

settled by a catena of decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court as
well as the State High Courts.

Counsel for the respondent has

placed reliance on the following judgments:
1. Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. Vs. Indierjit Kaur & Ors, AIR 1998 SC
588; and
2. National Insurance Co. Ltd. Vs. Swaran Singh & Ors., (2004) 3
SCC 297
Counsel has contended that even in a case where the
insurer has not received the premium but has issued the policy in
favour of the insured, the insurer becomes liable to indemnify the
third party in respect of the liability covered by the said policy.
The counsel contends that even in a case where the insurance
company has cancelled the policy on account of non-payment of
premium and accident has taken place after the cancellation, still
the insurance company cannot avoid its liability as far as third
party is concerned. I find force in the submissions of counsel for
the respondent.
The Tribunal has relied upon decision of the Apex Court
in the case of Inderjit Kaur's case (supra) and has held the
appellant insurer to be liable for compensation as far as the third
party is concerned. The Tribunal has also observed the factum of

MAC. App. No. 466/2006

Page 4 of 7

cancellation of the policy due to non-receipt of premium by the
insurer but after taking into consideration the decisions of the
Supreme Court reported in Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. Vs.
Inderjeet Kaur & Ors, 1998 ACJ 123 and National Insurance
Co. Ltd. Vs. Lakshmi & Ors., 2004 ACJ 197, holding that the
insurer

cannot

be

absolved

from

the

liability

indemnification of third party is concerned.

as

regards

The Tribunal has

however, given the right of recovery of amount paid under award
to the insurer from the insured i.e. owner of the vehicle,
respondent No.3 here. In view of the said findings given by the
Tribunal, I do find any infirmity or perversity in the order passed
by the Tribunal, more particularly, when Tribunal has given the
right of recovery to the insurer appellant to recover the awarded
amount from the insured i.e. Mr.O.P. Juneja, respondent No.3
here.
At this stage, counsel for the appellant has placed
reliance on the order passed by this Court in MAC. App. No.
08/2005 dated 01.8.2007 where instead of filing a recovery suit
the Court has given the right to the insurer to take recourse to file
an application for execution against the insured treating the
award as decree in favour of the insurance company.
MAC. App. No. 466/2006

Page 5 of 7

In view of the said order of this Court, let the award
passed in question be treated as decree in favour of the insurance
company and against the insured i.e. respondent No.3 here and
recovery against him be affected in terms of Section 174 of Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988.
Counsel for the respondent has drawn my attention to
order dated 03.7.2006 whereby the directions were given to the
appellant to deposit the entire award amount with the Registrar
General of this Court. Counsel prays that the said amount may be
directed to be released in favour of respondent No.1.

Counsel

further contends that the amount of Rs.25,000/- which was
deposited by the appellant is also towards the said compensation
amount and, therefore, the same also needs to be released in
favour of respondent No.1.

Since respondent No.1 succeeds in

the present appeal, therefore, the said amount lying deposited
with the Registrar General of this Court i.e. Rs.25,000/- and
amount of Rs.5,45,977/- be released in favour of respondent No.1
along with interest, if any, accrued thereon.
With the aforesaid directions, the appeal is disposed of.

MAC. App. No. 466/2006

Page 6 of 7

September 18, 2007
ga

MAC. App. No. 466/2006

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J

Page 7 of 7

