IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
FAO NO. 326/2002.
Judgment delivered on: September 19, 2007
Smt. Sushila Dabas
W/o Late Sh. Raj Singh Dabas
R/o B-86, Pushpanjali Enclave,
Pitampura, Delhi & Ors.
Through:

..... Appellants
Mr. Jai Raj Mudgal, Advocate

versus
M/s The New India Assurance Co. Ltd., & Ors.
..... Respondent
Through: Mr. D.K.Sharma, Advocate.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR,
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:

FAO No.326/2002

page 1 of 11

CM. No. 685/2002
Counsel for the appellant contends that a meager amount of
compensation has been awarded in favour of the appellants, only
on account of the fact that certain important documents concerning
the status of the deceased as well as proof of his age etc., were not
placed by the appellants/claimants before the Tribunal.
By way of the present appeal, the appellants have
claimed enhancement of compensation from Rs.1,98,000/- to Rs.
6,50,000/-.

It is an admitted position that the awarded

compensation can be

enhanced only if this Court allow the

application moved by the appellant under

Order 41

Rule 27,

otherwise no grievance can be raised against the impugned award
dated 25.8.2001. Under these circumstances the application filed
by the appellants under Order 41 Rule 27 is taken up to see whether
any case is made out for allowing the said application.
In this application the

appellants have stated that

accident had occurred in the year 1994, when the deceased Dr. Raj

FAO No.326/2002

page 2 of 11

Singh Dabas was about 45 years of age and he was highly educated,
having Ph.D in Zoology Science

as well as other professional

degrees in Library Science like B.Lib. and M.Lib. The deceased
husband of the appellant no.1

had worked as a Librarian in

Aurobindo College, University of Delhi and thereafter he went to
Libya to join as Chief Librarian in the Library of Central Hospital,
Szuara, Municipality of EL-Nekat-EL-Khamse between the period
1980 to 1986. In the year 1986 the deceased Dr. Raj Singh Dabas
returned to India from Libya and started his personal business as a
Builder and in the said business he was fully successful and was
earning handsome income for the family.

All the documents

pertaining to the age proof, educational qualification, work
experience as Librarian and also Chief Librarian and financial
status of the deceased were handed over by the appellants to their
counsel at the time of filing of the claim petition and they were
informed by their counsel that all the documents have been
submitted on record before the learned Tribunal. Till the time
decision of the case by the Tribunal, the appellants remained under
FAO No.326/2002

page 3 of 11

bona fide impression that the counsel must have filed the said
documents. The appellants have stated that the claim petition was
decided by the learned Tribunal on 25.8.2001 and, thereafter, the
certified copy of the impugned order was obtained and it was
only, thereafter, it came to their notice that the said documents
were not placed on record

by the counsel and

due to non

production of the said documents the learned trial court wrongly
observed that the deceased, Dr. Raj Singh Dabas, was not a skilled
person and he was not having any Doctorate Degree and he never
worked as a Librarian in Aurobindo College, University of Delhi
and also never went to Libya and also did not work as Chief
Librarian in Libya.
I have heard the arguments advanced by the counsel
for the appellants at considerable length.
The explanation for not filing the said documents has
been given by the appellants in para 4 of the application. The same
is reproduced as under:
“That the appellants/applicants handed
FAO No.326/2002

page 4 of 11

over all the documents referred above to their
counsel at the time of filing of the claim petition
before the Ld. Tribunal and they were told by their
counsel even during the pendency of claim petition
that all the documents have been submitted on
record before the Ld. Tribunal and as such the
appellants/applicants remained in bona fide belief
that all the above referred documents are available
on record of Ld. Tribunal and the decision will be
given after considering and appreciation of the
documentary evidence as well as oral evidence, and
moreover, the present appellants/applicants
despite their best efforts and due diligence could
not come to know about hte fact that the above
referred documents, have not been submitted on
record by their Ld. counsel as they never suspected
over the statement of their Ld. Counsel about the
submissions of documents and as such till the
decision of the case by the Ld. Tribunal the
appellants/applicants remained under the bona
fide belief that all above referred documents are
available on record.”
The contention of the counsel for the petitioner is that
authenticity of the said documents cannot be doubted as various
certificates and degrees were awarded to the deceased during his
life time.
Counsel for the appellant has also drawn my attention
to the reference

made to the deposition made by PW1 in the

impugned order where, PW1 who is widow of the deceased has
FAO No.326/2002

page 5 of 11

stated that the deceased has worked as Librarian in

Aurbindo

College, New Delhi up to 1980. The witness had also stated that
her husband went to Libya in the year 1980 and thereafter returned
back to India in the year 1986. The said witness also deposed that
the deceased started his own business as a builder after his return
to India.
The contention of the counsel for the appellants is that
the appellant no.1

has made reference to the education of the

deceased as well as to his business but since the documents were
not on record, therefore, the witness was not in a position to
prove the same.
Mr. D.K. Sharma counsel appearing for the respondent
on the other hand contends that this is not the stage to allow the
appellants to place on record such vital documents which were in
possession of the appellants. Counsel for the respondent further
contends that no reasonable explanation has been given by the
appellants in the application for not placing the said documents for
such a long period.
FAO No.326/2002

Mr. Sharma states that in a routine manner
page 6 of 11

the blame has been put on the counsel, for not filing the
documents.
I find force in the arguments advanced by the counsel
for the respondent. The appellants have filed the claim petition in
the year 1995 and the award in this case was passed on 25.8.2001.
The Tribunal has made categorical observation in the impugned
order by stating that the petitioner has not adduced any evidence
to show that the deceased had been awarded the Doctorate Degree
or he had worked as a Librarian in Aurbindo College, University of
Delhi or had gone to Libya and then returned back to India in
1986. No documentary evidence was adduced by the appellants
that the deceased had started working as a builder after his return
from Libya to India in the year 1986. Even the witness could not
divulge as to what was the income of her deceased husband from
the building work. The income proof, age certificate and the proof
of educational qualifications as well as service etc., are very vital
documents as far as

compensation case is concerned.

These

documents are required to be filed right at the very inception of the
FAO No.326/2002

page 7 of 11

filing of the claim or at least prior to the beginning of the trial in
the case.

In the application in a ritualistic manner, blame has

been put on the counsel by

vaguely stating that the documents

referred were handed over to the counsel.

Not only the non

placement of the documents by the appellants, even the wife of the
deceased who entered the witness box could not disclose

the

income of the deceased from his alleged business as a builder.
It is thus apparent that the appellants are trying to fill
up the lacuna which had crept during the trial of the case in the
absence of

documentary evidence, by moving

the present

application under Order 41 Rule 27.
Order 41 Rule 27 is an exception to the general rule.
The application for production of additional evidence
cannot be allowed at the appellate stage if the appellants failed to
advance any justifiable reason for not placing the additional
evidence before the Lower Court at the appropriate stage. The
provisions of Order 41 Rule 27 have not been engrafted in the Code
so as to patch up the weak points in the case and fill up the
FAO No.326/2002

page 8 of 11

omissions in the Court of appeal. The parties seeking to produce
additional

evidence

has

to

satisfy

the

the

Court

that

notwithstanding exercise of due diligence such evidence was not
within his knowledge or could not, after the exercise of due
deligence, be produced by him at the time when the decree was
passed. The only ground taken by the appellants in the application
moved under Order 41 Rule 27 is that they had handed over the
documents to their counsel at the time of filing the claim petition
and the same were not filed by the counsel and this fact of nonfiling of the documents came to the knowledge of the applicants
only after the decision of the case. I do not find this to be a
plausible reason or show any kind of excuse of due diligence on the
part of the appellant in prosecuting the claim petition. It is
generally found that the Advocates are made easy scape goats for
all such maladies. Although it cannot be ruled out that there can be
a negligence on the part of an Advocate in not effectively protecting
the interest of his clients by not placing on record the essential
documents or by not taking other effective steps in proper
FAO No.326/2002

page 9 of 11

prosecuting a particular case, but at the same time one has to be
totally cautioned as if the plea of non-filing of the documents in the
manner as has been taken by the appellant is accepted, then in
every such like case the parties would shift the blame on their
counsels to claim such kind of reliefs. This cannot be permitted to
happen and unless there are specific allegations against a particular
Advocate it cannot be accepted that the concerned Advocate
represented the applicants would not have placed the said
additional evidence on record, had the same been handed over by
the appellant during the course of the trial. I, therefore, do not feel
satisfied with the kind of explanation given in the application under
Order 41 Rule 27 and find the application totally devoid of any
merit. The same is, accordingly, dismissed.
FAO No. 326/2001
In view of the order passed in C.M. 685/2002 , the
appeal stands dismissed.

FAO No.326/2002

page 10 of 11

September 19, 2007
mg

FAO No.326/2002

KAILASH GAMBHIR J.

page 11 of 11

