IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CM(M) No. 1832/2005
Judgment delivered on: 20th September, 2007
Shri J.K. Bhatia

Through:

..... Petitioner
Mr.Lalit Trakru, Adv.

versus
Shri A.K. Bhatia & Ors.
..... Respondents
Through: Mr.Pawan Kumar Agarwal, Adv.
for respondent No.1
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
This petition is directed against the order dated
06.07.2005 passed by the Trial Court whereby the application
filed by one of the plaintiffs/respondent No.1 Shri A.K. Bhatia was
disposed of with the directions that the order of withdrawal of suit
CM(M) No. 1832/2005

Page 1 of 7

dated 20.4.2004 was recalled as a result of which the other
plaintiffs would stand transposed as defendant Nos.3 and 4. The
Court also gave the directions that the position in the case would
be relegated back to the proceedings as it existed on 13.04.2004.
Aggrieved with the said order, the present petitioner who was one
of the plaintiffs in the suit and at whose behest the suit was
withdrawn by moving an application under Order 23 Rule 1 CPC
has approached this Court assailing the said order dated
6.7.2005.

Brief

facts

necessary

for

deciding

the

present petition inter alia are that a suit for recovery of
Rs.6,40,055/- was filed by the present petitioner along with his
two brothers, respondent Nos.1 and 2 herein, against respondent
Nos.3 and 4 on the allegation that the said respondent Nos.3 and
4 were tenants under the plaintiffs in respect of premises bearing
No. C-16, First Floor, Shopping Centre, Vasant Vihar, New Delhi.
It was alleged that these respondent Nos.3 and 4 had illegally
recovered a sum of Rs.5,50,000/- as Pugri/unlawful consideration
for vacating and

relinquishing their tenancy rights in the suit

premises and consequently the said suit for refund/recovery of
the said amount along with interest and recovery of arrears of
rent etc was filed.
CM(M) No. 1832/2005

Needless to say that the suit was being
Page 2 of 7

contested by respondent Nos.3 and 4 who were defendant Nos.1
and 2 before the Trial Court.

During the pendency of the said

case, one of the plaintiffs i.e. petitioner herein, had filed an
application under Order 23 Rule 1 CPC seeking withdrawal of the
said suit against the defendants. The reason for withdrawal as
stated by plaintiff No.3 was that in a partition suit between the
brothers, final decree of compromise vide judgment dated
11.1.2002 came to be passed and as a result of the said decree,
plaintiff No.3 became absolute owner of the said premises i.e. C16, First Floor, Shopping Centre, Vasant Vihar, New Delhi.

The

relevant portion of the judgment was also reproduced in the said
application. Based on the said compromise decree, plaintiff No.3
had moved an application for withdrawal of the said suit which
was originally filed by all the plaintiffs No. 1 to 3 against the
defendants and vide order dated 20.4.2004, the Trial Court after
recording the statement of the attorney of the said plaintiff
No.3/petitioner herein and of the counsel representing the
defendants directed the suit to be disposed of as compromised.
Against the said compromise the plaintiff No.1/respondent No.1
herein had preferred an application under Order 23 Rule 1 and 3
read with Section 151 CPC seeking recall and setting aside of the
CM(M) No. 1832/2005

Page 3 of 7

order dated 204.2004 and for restoration of the suit for its proper
and

effective

adjudication

on

immediately prior to 20.4.2004.
plaintiff

No.1,

Mr.A.K.

Bhatia,

merits

as

the

same

stood

On the said application of
the

impugned

order

dated

06.7.2005 was passed by the Trial Court and this very order is
under challenge in the present writ petition preferred by the
petitioner/plaintiff No.3.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties at
considerable length. The contention of counsel for the petitioner
is that once the compromise decree came into effect whereby the
petitioner became sole and absolute owner of the said property
bearing No. C-16, First Floor, Shopping Centre, Vasant Vihar, New
Delhi which was in occupation of respondent Nos.3 and 4, then
the petitioner alone had the right and locus standi to move the
application under Order 23 Rule 1 seeking withdrawal of the suit.
Counsel states that there is nothing illegal on the part of the
petitioner in moving such an application and seeking withdrawal
of the suit.
Per contra, Mr.Pawan Kumar Agarwal, counsel for
respondent No.1 urges that once the suit was filed by all the
plaintiffs, the withdrawal could only take place after same is
CM(M) No. 1832/2005

Page 4 of 7

sought by all the plaintiffs and not by a single plaintiff. Counsel
for the respondent has placed reliance on sub-rule 5 of Rule 1 of
Order 23 for better appreciation of the matter. The said sub-rule
5 of Order 23 is reproduced as under:“(5) Nothing in this rule shall be deemed to
authorise the Court to permit one of several
plaintiffs to abandon a suit or part of a claim
under sub-rule (1), or to withdraw, under subrule (3), any suit or part of a claim, without the
consent of the other plaintiffs.”
I find myself in agreement with the submissions of
Mr.Pawan Kumar Agarwal, Advocate representing respondent
No.1. The said sub-rule 5 of Rule 1 of Order 23 clearly mandates
that withdrawal under sub-rule 1 or under sub rule 3 of Order 23
for any suit or even a part of the claim at the instance of one of
the several plaintiffs cannot take place unless there is a consent
of all the other plaintiffs. The said provision of law thus mandates
that consent of the co-plaintiffs for seeking withdrawal of the suit
or part thereof is mandatory and unless there is a consent of the
other plaintiffs, the withdrawal cannot take place. The perusal of
the application filed by the petitioner under Order 23 Rule 1 does
not even state that there was any kind of consent given to the
petitioner by the respondent Nos.1 and 2. The said application is
CM(M) No. 1832/2005

Page 5 of 7

stated to have been moved on behalf of co-plaintiffs and even in
prayer para 2 of the said application it is nowhere stated that the
petitioner alone was seeking withdrawal of the suit. Perusal of the
averments contained in the said application shows that the
petitioner thought of moving the application alone without taking
the consent of the other plaintiffs on the strength of compromise
deed under which the petitioner is stated to have become sole
and absolute owner of the property in question to the exclusion of
other plaintiffs. Even if this position is accepted as correct that
the present petitioner became sole and absolute owner of the said
property but still for withdrawal of the suit the consent of other coplaintiffs was imperative and it is not that single plaintiff could
come forward and withdrew the suit. It has not been explained
as to what prevented the petitioner to take the consent of the
other plaintiffs/respondents No.1 & 2 for seeking withdrawal of
the suit.
It is no doubt true that the plaintiff has unqualified right to
withdraw or abandon the suit or part thereof, but in case where
there are more than one plaintiffs then such a suit or part thereof
can be withdrawn only with the consent of the other co-plaintiffs.
Sub Rule 5 of Rule 1 of Order 23 CPC is a non-obstante clause
CM(M) No. 1832/2005

Page 6 of 7

and, therefore, the Courts have to be very careful in permitting
withdrawal of the suit filed by several plaintiffs unless all the coplaintiffs have consented to the same. In the case in hand
admittedly the petitioner, who was plaintiff No.3 before the Trial
Court had moved the said application seeking withdrawal of the
suit without taking any consent of the other co-plaintiffs and such
an act on the part of the petitioner is clearly in violation of
mandate of sub Rule 5 of Rule 1 of Order 23 CPC.
I, therefore, do not find any infirmity in the order
passed by the learned trial court. I do not find any merit in the
present petition and the same is dismissed. DASTI.

September 20, 2007
ga

CM(M) No. 1832/2005

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J

Page 7 of 7

