IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
FAO. No. 33/1996
Judgment reserved on: November 12, 2007
Judgment delivered on: 20.12.2007
D.T.C.

.....

Appellant

Through: Mr.J.N. Aggarwal with
Mr.Rama Nath Jha,
Advocates.
versus
Nirmala Devi

..... Respondents
Through: None.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.

Yes

The present appeal is preferred against the award
FAO No. 33/1996

page 1 of 15

dated 3.8.95 of the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal, whereby
an award of Rs.3,22,200 was made.
Brief facts of the case are that on 4.4.85, Sh.
Jitender Singh, aged 21 years was going in

TSR bearing

registration no. DIR 3014 driven by its driver, at about 6 A.M..
On reaching near St. Michel School on Bawana Road, a DTC
bus bearing registration no. DEP 8462 driven in a rash and
negligent manner by its driver, hit thesaid TSR resulting into
death of Sh. Jitender Singh due to fatal injuries received in the
accident. A claim petition was filed on 29.5.1985 and award
was made on 3.8.1995.

Aggrieved with the said award the

present appellant DTC has preferred this appeal.
Mr. J.N. Aggarwal, counsel for the appellant contended
that the tribunal erred in holding Nirmala Devi as the legal heir
of the deceased Sh. Jatinder Singh when there is evidence on
record that she has remarried.

Second contention of the

counsel is that the driver of the bus was not solely negligent but
the driver of TSR also contributed and was negligent to the
FAO No. 33/1996

page 2 of 15

extent of 50% for the accident. The counsel also alleged that
the tribunal erred in relying upon the testimony of PW-5, Shri
Suraj Mal, owner and driver of TSR in coming to the conclusion
that the bus was running at a high speed and it did not blow any
horn and

reversed towards the right side. Further, it was

maintained by the counsel that the version of the bus driver
was not only plausible but duly corroborated by the facts of the
case, wherein it was stated that it was the TSR driver who
wanted to overtake and due to his careless attitude alone the
unfortunate accident happened. therefore, the TSR driver was
equally negligent. It was further urged by the counsel that the
tribunal erroneously relied on the FIR which suggests that the
front right side of the bus

was damaged and, therefore, it

should be taken as if the bus had hit the TSR with force. The
counsel also contended that

there was no documentary

evidence to prove the income of the deceased, therefore, the
tribunal erred in calculating loss of dependency at Rs.1600/P.M. The counsel submitted that the multiplier of 16, interest
FAO No. 33/1996

page 3 of 15

rate of 12% and compensation of Rs.3,07,200/- towards
pecuniary damages and Rs.15,000/- towards non-pecuniary
damages, all are on the higher side, excessive and exorbitant.
Per contra counsel for the respondents has
vehemently denied the averments of the counsel for the
appellant and in his cross objection contended that the learned
MACT fell into an error of law while looking at the aspect of the
income of the deceased Jatinder Singh, when PW5, Shri Suraj
Mal, driver and owner of TSR had stated on oath that deceased
used to carry milk in 20 liter cans, five cans at a time for supply
to various customers. It was further stated by PW5 that the
deceased was keeping 12 buffaloes in his diary farm, therefore,
the monthly income of the deceased at Rs.7,000/- cannot be
said to be on the higher side and therefore, enhancement in
compensation should be granted by this Court.

The counsel

further maintained that PW5 was an independent witness and
was resident of the same locality, where the deceased was
carrying out his diary farming business, therefore, the learned
FAO No. 33/1996

page 4 of 15

Tribunal fell in grave error in not relying on the deposition of
PW5. The counsel urged that the observation of the Tribunal
that the deceased was not keeping any account books nor was
an income tax payee is erroneous as it is a matter of common
knowledge that the persons in rural area generally do not
maintain any account and do not appoint any accountant.
Further it was maintained by the counsel that no income tax is
levied on the income derived from diary farming and therefore,
the Tribunal erred in observing that the deceased was not an
income tax payee.

The counsel, therefore, urged for

enhancement in compensation.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and
have perused the record.
On the contention of remarriage of the claimant
Smt. Nirmala Devi with her brother-in-law, Shri Harinder
Singh, it is clear from the award that though some material
regarding the remarriage has been placed on record but the
same has not been proved. Mere placing material on the record
FAO No. 33/1996

page 5 of 15

is not sufficient, the same should also be proved in accordance
with law. Although, a DTC officer, who was examined as RW2,
investigated the case of re-marriage of the claimant for official
purposes and had placed a photocopy, Ex.R-1, of the same on
record, but the said investigation was done ex-parte. Further,
the tribunal has observed that the said DTC officer, RW-2 has
himself admitted that while conducting such investigation, no
statement of the witness was recorded, therefore, the same is
self serving and an ex parte report which cannot be relied upon.
No person who attended the second marriage of the claimant or
the name of the person on the basis of whose statement the said
report was made was not produced by the said officer, RW-2. I
do not find any infirmity in the decision of the Tribunal on this
issue.
As regards the issue of contributory negligence as
raised by the counsel for the appellant the same is also without
any force. On perusal of the award it is clear that the claimants
have not only relied on the testimony of the driver of the TSR,
FAO No. 33/1996

page 6 of 15

Shri Suraj Mal, but have also placed reliance on the testimony
of

an independent eye witness PW-4, Shri Mahabir, who

deposed that the bus was at a high speed and without blowing
any horn it sewered towards its right side and hit the TSR. The
decision of Shri Ratan Singh, driver of the DTC, offending
vehicle cannot be believed as he is an interested witness.
It has also been observed by the learned Tribunal
that the police had also in the course of its investigation found
the DTC driver rash and negligent and therefore, had challaned
the DTC driver and, therefore, even the circumstantial evidence
does not support the version of DTC driver.

I do not find

infirmity in the approach of the Tribunal relying upon the FIR
report which is Ex. PW 3/A, wherein, it was narrated by the
TSR driver that the front right side of the DTC bus was
damaged.
The

Apex

Court

has

explained

'contributory

negligence' in the following words in the judgment in Municipal
Corpn. of Greater Bombay v. Laxman Iyer, (2003) 8 SCC 731.
FAO No. 33/1996

page 7 of 15

“6. To determine whether an act would
be or would not be negligent, it is
relevant to determine if any reasonable
man would foresee that the act would
cause damage or not. The omission to do
what the law obligates or even the failure
to do anything in a manner, mode or
method envisaged by law would equally
and per se constitute negligence on the
part of such person. If the answer is in
the affirmative, it is a negligent act.
Where an accident is due to negligence
of both parties, substantially there would
be contributory negligence and both
would be blamed. In a case of
contributory negligence, the crucial
question on which liability depends would
be whether either party could, by
exercise of reasonable care, have
avoided the consequence of the other’s
negligence. Whichever party could have
avoided the consequence of the other’s
negligence would be liable for the
accident. If a person’s negligent act or
omission
was
the
proximate
and
immediate cause of death, the fact that
the person suffering injury was himself
negligent and also contributed to the
accident or other circumstances by which
the injury was caused would not afford a
defence to the other. Contributory
negligence is applicable solely to the
conduct of a plaintiff. It means that there
has been an act or omission on the part
of the plaintiff which has materially
contributed to the damage, the act or
omission being of such a nature that it
may properly be described as negligence,
although negligence is not given its usual
FAO No. 33/1996

page 8 of 15

meaning.
(See
Charlesworth
on
Negligence , 3rd Edn., para 328.) It is
now well settled that in the case of
contributory negligence, courts have the
power to apportion the loss between the
parties as seems just and equitable.
Apportionment in that context means
that damage is reduced to such an
extent as the court thinks just and
equitable having regard to the claim
shared in the responsibility for the
damage. But in a case where there has
been no contributory negligence on the
part of the victim, the question of
apportionment does not arise.”

On the basis of the above discussion and after
relying upon the FIR, I do not feel that the TSR driver was also
contributory negligent.
On the issue of income of the deceased, multiplier,
rate of interest and non-pecuniary damages granted by the
Tribunal, I feel that as regards the income of the deceased,
since there was no proof of income of the deceased on record,
the Tribunal has rightly not believed the income of deceased at
Rs.7000/- p.m. The Tribunal has assessed the income of the
deceased at Rs.1200/- p.m. after taking into consideration the
FAO No. 33/1996

page 9 of 15

business of selling milk as a joint family business. Under such
circumstances, the Tribunal could have taken aid of the
Minimum Wages Act to determine the minimum wages as
prevailing on the date of accident being the monthly income of
the deceased. Since, the deceased was into business of dairy
farming, then the minimum wages of a semi-skilled workman
as prevailing on the date of accident could have been taken as
the income of the deceased. Once minimum wages are taken in
account then the increase under the Minimum Wages Act could
also have been considered. Although, the Tribunal has wrongly
doubled the income of the deceased considering the future
increase of wages but the net result would not be different if the
income is doubled under the Minimum Wages Act, therefore, I
do not feel inclined to interfere with the findings of the Tribunal
with regard to the income of the deceased. The Supreme Court in
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Meena Variyal, (2007) 5 SCC 428 has observed as
under:“It was necessary for the claimants to
establish what was the monthly income
FAO No. 33/1996

page 10 of 15

and what was the dependency on the
basis of which the compensation could be
adjudged as payable. Should not any
Tribunal trained in law ask the claimants
to produce evidence in support of the
monthly salary or income earned by the
deceased from his employer company? Is
there anything in the Motor Vehicles Act
which stands in the way of the Tribunal
asking for the best evidence, acceptable
evidence? We think not. Here again, the
position that the Motor Vehicles Act vis-vis claim for compensation arising out of
an accident is a beneficent piece of
legislation, cannot lead a Tribunal trained
in law to forget all basic principles of
establishing liability and establishing the
quantum of compensation payable. The
Tribunal, in this case, has chosen to
merely go by the oral evidence of the
widow when without any difficulty the
claimants could have got the employer
Company to produce the relevant
documents to show the income that was
being derived by the deceased from his
employment.”

On the issue of multiplier of 16 as applied by the
Tribunal, I do not find any infirmity in the same as the applied
multiplier of 16 in the facts of the present case is in consonance
with the IInd Schedule of the M.V. Act. It has been laid down
by the Hon'ble Apex Court in Abati Bezbaruah v. Dy. Director
General, Geological Survey of India, (2003) 3 SCC 148 that the IInd
FAO No. 33/1996

page 11 of 15

schedule is a good guide for the purpose of computation of
compensation and any deviation therefrom should be made
only in peculiar facts of the case. The relevant para of the said
judgment is reproduced below:“11. It is now a well-settled principle of
law that the payment of compensation
on the basis of structured formula as
provided for under the Second Schedule
should not ordinarily be deviated from.
Section 168 of the Motor Vehicles Act
lays
down
the
guidelines
for
determination
of
the
amount
of
compensation in terms of Section 166
thereof. Deviation from the structured
formula, however, as has been held by
this Court, may be resorted to in
exceptional cases. Furthermore, the
amount of compensation should be just
and fair in the facts and circumstances of
each case.”

On the question of rate of interest of 12% as granted
by the tribunal. I do not feel any infirmity in the same. Interest
is the compensation for forbearance or detention of money to
be paid to the claimants. The tribunal has granted 12% rate of
interest keeping in mind the policy of of reserve bank, interest

FAO No. 33/1996

page 12 of 15

payable on fixed deposits and many other such factors. In this
regard the Hon'ble Apex Court has observed in Abati Bezbaruah
v. Dy. Director General, Geological Survey of India, (2003) 3 SCC
148, as reproduced below:
“6. The question as to what should be
the rate of interest, in the opinion of this
Court, would depend upon the facts and
circumstances of each case. Award of
interest would normally depend upon the
bank rate prevailing at the relevant time.
18. No ratio has been laid down in any of
the decisions in regard to the rate of
interest and the rate of interest was
awarded on the amount of compensation
as a matter of judicial discretion. The
rate of interest must be just and
reasonable depending upon the facts and
circumstances of each case and taking all
relevant
factors
including
inflation,
change of economy, policy being adopted
by Reserve Bank of India from time to
time, how long the case is pending,
permanent injuries suffered by the
victim, enormity of suffering, loss of
future income, loss of enjoyment of life
etc., into consideration. No rate of
interest is fixed under Section 171 of the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. Varying rates
of interest are being awarded by
Tribunals, High Courts and the Supreme
Court. Interest can be granted even if a
claimant does not specifically plead for
the same, as it is consequential in the
FAO No. 33/1996

page 13 of 15

eye of law. Interest is compensation for
forbearance or detention of money and
that interest being awarded to a party
only for being kept out of the money,
which ought to have been paid to him.
No principle could be deduced nor can
any rate of interest be fixed to have a
general application in motor accident
claim cases having regard to the nature
of provision under Section 171 giving
discretion to the Tribunal in such matter.
In other matters, awarding of interest
depends upon the statutory provisions,
mercantile usage and doctrine of equity.
Neither Section 34 CPC nor Section 4-A
(3) of the Workmen’s Compensation Act
are applicable in the matter of fixing rate
of interest in a claim under the Motor
Vehicles Act. The courts have awarded
the interest at different rates depending
upon the facts and circumstances of each
case. Therefore, in my opinion, there
cannot be any hard-and-fast rule in
awarding interest and the award of
interest is solely on the discretion of the
Tribunal or the High Court as indicated
above.”

On the basis of the above observation, I do not
find any infirmity in the award of 12% rate of interest.
On the issue of non-pecuniary damages I feel that
Rs.15,000/- towards loss of consortium is sufficient but the
the tribunal has
FAO No. 33/1996

not granted any amount towards funeral
page 14 of 15

expenses, therefore, Rs.5,000/- is granted under that head
of compensation.

The tribunal has also not granted any

amount towards loss of love and affection to the other four
claimants who are father and brothers of the deceased,
therefore, Rs.20,000/- (Rs.5,000/- each) is granted to them
towards loss of love and affection to them.
With these observations, the present appeal and
cross objections are accordingly disposed of.

December 20, 2007

FAO No. 33/1996

KAILASH GAMBHIR
JUDGE

page 15 of 15

