IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC APP NO. 490/2006
Judgment reserved on: November 03, 2007
Judgment delivered on: 20.12.2007
Oriental Insurance Co.Ltd.
Through:

..... Appellant.
Mr.R.N.Sharma, Advocate

versus
Smt.Kanak Lata Bhunia & Ors.
Through:

..... Respondents
Mr.D.D.Singh for respondents.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.
The present appeal preferred under Section 173 of The
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, arises out of the award dated 19th April,
2006 of the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, whereby the Tribunal
MAC APP. No.490/2006

page 1 of 11

awarded a sum of Rs. 6,32,000/- along with interest @ 6% per
annum as compensation.
The brief facts relevant for deciding the instant case are
that on 21/04/2000, deceased Sh. Manindra Bhunia, aged 32 years,
after purchasing flowers from the market opposite Hanuman Mandir,
Connaught Place was going to Preet Vihar in a TSR bearing
registration no. DL 1R F 1803, driven by Sh. Inderjeet Parshad in a
rash and negligent manner and at a very high speed. On reaching the
outer circle near Minto Road, the aforesaid TSR hit a stationary bus
bearing registration no. DL 1P 9275, which was stationary on the
road. As a result, Sh Maninder received fatal injuries. A claim petition
was filed by widow, minor children and mother of the deceased
before the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal on 12/4/2006 and award
was made on 19/4/2006. Aggrieved with the said award present
appeal is preferred by the appellant insurance company.
Sh. R.N. Sharma counsel for the appellant has assailed the said
award on two grounds. Firstly, it is urged that the tribunal has erred
in granting compensation to the tune of Rs.6,32,000/- by taking
income @ Rs. 36,000 pa, when there was no documentary evidence

MAC APP. No.490/2006

page 2 of 11

in support of the same. The counsel maintained that the tribunal
relied upon the oral testimony of the witness and on the basis of the
same it took income at Rs. 3,000 p.m. instead of taking the aid of
Minimum Wages Act for assessing the income of the deceased.
Secondly, the counsel contended that the multiplier of 17 applied by
the tribunal in the instant case for the deceased who was 32 yrs of age
is on the higher side.
Per Contra, Sh. D.D. Singh counsel for respondents refuted the
contentions of counsel for the appellant. The respondent nos.1 to 4
also filed

cross objections wherein, they have

urged for

enhancement of rate of interest granted by the tribunal from 6% to
9% pa. In this regard the counsel has placed reliance on the judgment
of this court in Sayri & Ors. vs. Vijender Singh & Ors. reported
in 2005 ACJ 1083 (Del).
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have perused
the record.
As regards the contention of the counsel for the appellant that
the tribunal

without there being

any documentary evidence on

record to prove the income of the deceased, merely relied on the

MAC APP. No.490/2006

page 3 of 11

deposition of the witness and has assessed the income of the
deceased at Rs. 3,000, without the aid of Minimum Wages Act for
computing the

compensation. I, feel there is a merit in the

submission of the counsel for the appellant. On perusal of the award
it is explicit that it is not proved on record as to what was the exact
income of the deceased. Also, it has been observed by the learned
tribunal that the minimum rates of wages at the time of accident was
Rs. 2419 but still the tribunal assessed compensation after taking Rs.
3,000 as income of the deceased. It is no more res integra that in
the absence of any cogent evidence on record to prove the monthly
income at the time of accident the minimum wages notified under the
Minimum Wages Act prevalent at the time of accident can be safely
taken into account. In this regard the Hon’ble Apex Court has in
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Meena Variyal,(2007) 5 SCC
428 observed as under:
“It was necessary for the claimants to
establish what was the monthly income and what
was the dependency on the basis of which the
compensation could be adjudged as payable. Should
not any Tribunal trained in law ask the claimants to
produce evidence in support of the monthly salary
or income earned by the deceased from his
employer company? Is there anything in the Motor
MAC APP. No.490/2006

page 4 of 11

Vehicles Act, which stands in the way of the
Tribunal asking for the best evidence, acceptable
evidence? We think not. Here again, the position
that the Motor Vehicles Act vis--vis claim for
compensation arising out of an accident is a
beneficent piece of legislation, cannot lead a
Tribunal trained in law to forget all basic principles
of establishing liability and establishing the
quantum of compensation payable. The Tribunal, in
this case, has chosen to merely go by the oral
evidence of the widow when without any difficulty
the claimants could have got the employer Company
to produce the relevant documents to show the
income that was being derived by the deceased from
his employment.”
The thumb rule is that in the absence of clear and cogent
evidence pertaining to income of the deceased learned Tribunal
should determine income of the deceased on the basis of the
minimum wages notified under the Minimum Wages Act. In my
considered view, in the instant case, the tribunal erred in taking Rs.
3,000 pm as the income of the deceased. The income of the deceased
should have been taken at Rs. 2419 pm.
As regards the contention of the counsel for the appellant
that the multiplier of 17 is on the higher side, I do not find any force
in the said contention of the counsel. The age of the deceased at the
time of the accident was 32 yrs and the multiplier of 17 adopted by
the tribunal is as per the II Schedule to the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.
MAC APP. No.490/2006

page 5 of 11

In plethora of cases the Hon’ble Apex Court has held that the II
Schedule can be taken as a guide in computing compensation and any
deviation therefrom, should take place only in the peculiar facts and
circumstances of the case. In this regard in Abati Bezbaruah v.
Dy. Director General, Geological Survey of India,(2003) 3
SCC 148 the Hon’ble Apex Court has observed as under:

“11. It is now a well-settled principle of law that
the payment of compensation on the basis of
structured formula as provided for under the Second
Schedule should not ordinarily be deviated from.
Section 168 of the Motor Vehicles Act lays down the
guidelines for determination of the amount of
compensation in terms of Section 166 thereof.
Deviation from the structured formula, however, as
has been held by this Court, may be resorted to in
exceptional cases. Furthermore, the amount of
compensation should be just and fair in the facts and
circumstances of each case.”
In my view, in the instant case the tribunal has correctly
applied 17 as the multiplier for assessing compensation.
No evidence has been led to show the prospects of future
increase in the income of the deceased. However, a perusal of the
minimum wages notified under the Minimum Wages Act show that to
neutralize increase in inflation and cost of living, minimum wages
MAC APP. No.490/2006

page 6 of 11

virtually gets more than double after every 10 years. For instance,
minimum wages of skilled labourers as on 1.1.1980 were Rs. 320/per month and same rose to Rs. 1,083/- per month in the year 1990.
Meaning thereby, from year 1980 to year 1990, there there has been
an increase of nearly 238% in the minimum wages. Thus, it could
safely be assumed that income of the deceased would have doubled in
the next 10 years. Therefore, taking Rs. 2419 p.m. as the income of
the deceased and doubling the same i.e Rs. 4838 and taking mean of
both of them, the monthly income of the deceased along with the
increase in the minimum wages would come out as Rs.3628.5, which
may be rounded of to Rs. 3629 and the annual income of the
deceased would come out as Rs. 43,548. After making 1/3rd
deductions towards personal expenses the annual dependency would
come out as Rs. 29,032. After applying multiplier of 17, the loss of
dependency would be Rs. 4,93,544. The tribunal has further awarded
general damages to the tune of Rs. 20,000., therefore the total
compensation shall come out to Rs. 5,13,544.
In relation to the contention of counsel for respondents
that the rate of interest of 6% p.a. awarded by the tribunal is on the

MAC APP. No.490/2006

page 7 of 11

lower side and the same should be enhanced to 9% p.a., I feel that the
rate of interest awarded by the tribunal is on the lower side but rate of
interest @ 9% p.a. as claimed by the respondents is also on the
higher side. In catena of cases the Hon’ble Supreme Court has
observed that the rate of interest to be awarded should be just and
fair depending upon the facts and circumstances of the case and
taking in to consideration relevant factors including inflation, growth
of economy, policy of Reserve Bank of India from time to time and
other such factors. In this regard in Abati Bezbaruah v. Dy.
Director General, Geological Survey of India,(2003) 3 SCC
148 the Hon’ble Apex Court has observed as under:
“6. The question as to what should be
the rate of interest, in the opinion of this
Court, would depend upon the facts and
circumstances of each case. Award of
interest would normally depend upon the
bank rate prevailing at the relevant time.
18. No ratio has been laid down in
any of the decisions in regard to the rate of
interest and the rate of interest was
awarded on the amount of compensation as
a matter of judicial discretion. The rate of
interest must be just and reasonable
depending
upon
the
facts
and
circumstances of each case and taking all
MAC APP. No.490/2006

page 8 of 11

relevant factors including inflation, change
of economy, policy being adopted by
Reserve Bank of India from time to time,
how long the case is pending, permanent
injuries suffered by the victim, enormity of
suffering, loss of future income, loss of
enjoyment of life etc., into consideration.
No rate of interest is fixed under Section
171 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.
Varying rates of interest are being awarded
by Tribunals, High Courts and the Supreme
Court. Interest can be granted even if a
claimant does not specifically plead for the
same, as it is consequential in the eye of
law. Interest is compensation for
forbearance or detention of money and that
interest being awarded to a party only for
being kept out of the money, which ought
to have been paid to him. No principle
could be deduced nor can any rate of
interest be fixed to have a general
application in motor accident claim cases
having regard to the nature of provision
under Section 171 giving discretion to the
Tribunal in such matter. In other matters,
awarding of interest depends upon the
statutory provisions, mercantile usage and
doctrine of equity. Neither Section 34 CPC
nor Section 4-A (3) of the Workmen’s
Compensation Act are applicable in the
matter of fixing rate of interest in a claim
under the Motor Vehicles Act. The courts
have awarded the interest at different rates
depending
upon
the
facts
and
circumstances of each case. Therefore, in
my opinion, there cannot be any hard-andfast rule in awarding interest and the award
of interest is solely on the discretion of the
MAC APP. No.490/2006

page 9 of 11

Tribunal or the High Court as indicated
above.”
In the facts of the present case, I am inclined to enhance
the rate of interest from 6% pa to 7.5% p.a.
Vide order dated 17th May 2006, directions were given for
release of 75% of the award amount to the respondents without any
security and the remaining 25% of the amount was to be released on
furnishing security. In case the said 25% of the amount has still not
been released in favour of the respondents then the balance amount
in terms of the above discussion shall be released in favour of the
respondents with upto date interest @ 7.5%. In case the entire award
amount has been received by the respondents then the remaining
amount which is in excess shall be paid by the respondents to the
appellant. The interest @ 7.5% shall be payable by the appellant on
the entire award amount after adjusting the amount already paid by
the appellant @6% p.a.
With these directions the present appeal and cross
objection stands disposed of.
Parties are to bear their own costs.

MAC APP. No.490/2006

page 10 of 11

December 20, 2007

MAC APP. No.490/2006

KAILASH GAMBHIR
JUDGE

page 11 of 11

