IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC. APP. 100/2006
Judgment reserved on: 14th November ,2007
Judgment delivered on: 20.12.2007
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd.
..... Appellant
Through: Mr.Ram N. Sharma, Advocate.
versus
Smt.Jyoti Malhotra & Ors.
..... Respondents
Through: Mr.L.K. Tyagi, Advocate for R-1 to 4.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.
By way of this appeal, the appellant insurance
company seeks to challenge the impugned award mainly on the
ground that the offending vehicle bearing registration No. DL-1PAMAC. APP. 100/2006

Page 1 of 10

1920 was never involved in the alleged accident and secondly,
the Tribunal by ignoring the judgments of the Apex Court has
wrongly applied the multiplier of 16. The award is also assailed
by the appellant on the ground that the Tribunal has committed
illegality in deducting 1/4th income of the deceased towards self
expenses. The brief summary of the facts necessary for deciding
the present appeal are set out as under:On 06.01.2003 at about 9.00 p.m. near Monastery,
ISBT, within the jurisdiction of PS Civil Lines, Sh. Rakesh Kumar
Malhotra was driving his scooter bearing registration No. DL 1 SM
4500 and was hit by a bus bearing registration No. DL 1 PA 1920,
being driven in the most rash and negligent manner by its driver,
Sh. Prithviraj, who ran away along with the bus after hitting
Sh.Rakesh Kumar Malhotra.

Sh. Malhotra was removed to

Sushruta Trauma Centre, from the site of the accident, where he
succumbed to his injuries on 17.1.2003. A claim petition was filed
on 05.06.2003 and award was made on 29.11.2005. Aggrieved
with the said award, present appeal is preferred by the appellant
insurance company.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have
perused the records.
MAC. APP. 100/2006

Page 2 of 10

The present appeal has been preferred by

the

insurance company without taking over the defence of the owner
to contest the claim on all or any of the grounds that are available
to the owner insured. Mr.L.K. Tyagi, Advocate appearing for the
respondents/claimants has taken a preliminary objection to the
very maintainability of the present appeal in the absence of there
being any permission in favour of the appellant under Section 170
of the Motor Vehicles Act to contest the case on any of the
grounds as are available to the insured not merely confining to
the statutory defences available to the insurer under Section
149(2) of the Motor Vehicles Act. In reply to the said objection of
the respondents, counsel for the appellant vehemently submitted
that respondent Nos.1 and 2, owner and driver of the offending
vehicle were ex-parte and thereafter they were thoroughly crossexamined by the appellant insurance company and, therefore,
even in the absence of any specific application moved by the
appellant or permission granted by the Tribunal under Section
170 of the Motor Vehicles Act, the present appeal challenging the
award on the ground of quantum can be maintained by the
insurance company. Counsel also contended that in the written
statement filed by the insurance company, this stand has already
MAC. APP. 100/2006

Page 3 of 10

been taken by the appellant that in the event of the owner and
driver willfully abstaining from the proceedings or on account of
their failure to contest the claim the insurance company shall
have the right to contest the claim petition by taking up all the
defences as are available to it under the law.
The contention of counsel for the appellant is that for
taking over the defence of the owner and driver of the offending
vehicle, no specific order from the Tribunal is required and in the
given facts and circumstances of the case, the order under
Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act can be taken to have been
passed.

Counsel for the appellant thus, urged that there is a

deemed order under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act in
favour of the appellant when the claim is not contested by the
owner and driver and then the insurer is permitted to crossexamine the witnesses on the quantum and negligence aspects.
The legal position on this aspect is no more res integra.
It is a settled legal position that the insurer can avoid its liability
only on the statutory defence expressly provided under subsection 2 of Section 149 of Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and except
the said statutory defence, the insurer cannot avoid its liability on
any other ground.
MAC. APP. 100/2006

In the case of Shankarayya & Anr. Vs.
Page 4 of 10

United India Insurance Co. Ltd., (1998) 3 SCC 140, the Apex
Court has clearly held that the insurance company has to obtain
an order in writing from the Tribunal and the Tribunal has to pass
a reasoned order after finding the conditions as envisaged under
Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act being satisfied. Thus, Apex
Court was also categorical in holding that unless this procedure is
followed, the insurance company cannot have a wider defence on
merits then what is available to it by way of statutory defences.
The relevant para of the said judgment is reproduced below:“4. It clearly shows that the Insurance
Company when impleaded as a party by the
Court can be permitted to contest the
proceedings on merits only if the conditions
precedent mentioned in the section are
found to be satisfied and for that purpose
the Insurance Company has to obtain order
in writing from the Tribunal and which should
be a reasoned order by the Tribunal. Unless
that procedure is followed, the Insurance
Company cannot have a wider defence on
merits than what is available to it by way of
statutory defence.”
Further

in

Rita

Devi

&

Ors.

Vs.

New

India

Assurance Co. Ltd., 2000 ACJ 801, the Supreme Court held that
if the insurer has not obtained permission under Section 170 of
the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, then it is not entitled to prefer any
MAC. APP. 100/2006

Page 5 of 10

appeal to the High Court against the award given by the Tribunal
on merits other than the grounds available to the insurer under
Section 149(2) of the Motor Vehicles Act.

The same view was

again reiterated by the Supreme Court in National Insurance
Co. Ltd., Chandigarh Vs. Nicolletta Rohtagi & Ors., (2002) 7
SCC 456 and National Insurance Co. Ltd. Vs. Mastan & Anr.,
(2006) 2 SCC 641. In the matter of United India Insurance Co.
Ltd. Vs. Jyotsnaben Sudhirbhai Patel & Ors., (2003) 7 SCC
212 relied upon by counsel for the appellant, the position is no
different than the said view held by the Apex Court in catena of
judgments. In the said case, the insurance company had applied
for the permission under Section 170(b) of the Motor Vehicles Act.
But the Tribunal while passing an order did not record the
reasons. Although reasons as envisaged under Section 170(b) of
the Motor Vehicles Act existed in the facts of the case. In these
circumstances, the Apex Court held that on account of failure of
the Tribunal to give the reasons, the insurer is justified in
contesting the case on the grounds other than those enumerated
under Section 149(2) of the Motor Vehicles Act. However, in the
facts of the present case, the situation is entirely different. One,
no separate application was moved by the insurance company
MAC. APP. 100/2006

Page 6 of 10

under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act, secondly, there is no
order passed by the Tribunal under the said provisions of law and
therefore, the decision of the Apex Court in Jyotsnaben's case
(supra) can be of no help to the appellant.
Section

170

of

the

Motor

Vehicles

Act

clearly

postulates that the Tribunal shall give right to the insurer to
contest the claim on all the grounds as are available to the person
against whom the claim has been made only when, firstly, there is
a collusion between the person making the claim and the person
against whom the claim is made or secondly, in a situation where
the person against whom the claim is made has failed to contest
the claim.

If any of the said condition is satisfied, then, the

Tribunal shall permit the insurer to contest the claim on all the
grounds by spelling out the reasons to be recorded in writing after
being fully satisfied with the fulfillment of either of the said
conditions arising during the course of the trial of claim petition.
Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act, thus envisage passing of a
specific order and where no such order is passed, it cannot be
said that such an order can be presumed to have been passed in
the given facts and circumstances of the case. In the facts and
circumstances of the present case, therefore, it cannot be said
MAC. APP. 100/2006

Page 7 of 10

that the appellant insurance company has the right to assail the
findings of the Tribunal on all the grounds as are otherwise
available to the owner and driver of the offending vehicle. The
present appeal, therefore, fails on this sole ground.
Counsel for the appellant also urged that even if the
defence under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act was not
taken over by the appellant still this Court can examine as to
whether at all the alleged offending vehicle was involved in the
accident or not.
I do not appreciate this argument of counsel for the
appellant.

It is the settled legal position that the insurer can

avoid its liability only on the statutory defences expressly
provided under sub section 2 of Section 149 of the Motor Vehicles
Act, 1988 and not beyond that. In this regard, relevant para in
Nicolletta Rohatgi's case is reproduced below:
“25. We have earlier noticed that motor vehicle
accident claim is a tortious claim directed against
tortfeasors who are the insured and the driver of the
vehicle and the insurer comes to the scene as a result of
statutory liability created under the Motor Vehicles Act.
The legislature has ensured by enacting Section 149 of
the Act that the victims of motor vehicle are fully
compensated and protected. It is for that reason the
insurer cannot escape from its liability to pay
compensation on any exclusionary clause in the
insurance policy except those specified in Section 149(2)
MAC. APP. 100/2006

Page 8 of 10

of the Act or where the condition precedent specified in
Section 170 is satisfied.
26. For the aforesaid reasons, an insurer if aggrieved
against an award, may file an appeal only on those
grounds and no other. However, by virtue of Section
170 of the 1988 Act, where in course of an enquiry the
Claims Tribunal is satisfied that ( a ) there is a collusion
between the person making a claim and the person
against whom the claim has been made, or ( b ) the
person against whom the claim has been made has
failed to contest the claim, the Tribunal may, for reasons
to be recorded in writing, implead the insurer and in that
case it is permissible for the insurer to contest the claim
also on the grounds which are available to the insured or
to the person against whom the claim has been made.
Thus, unless an order is passed by the Tribunal
permitting the insurer to avail the grounds available to
an insured or any other person against whom a claim
has been made on being satisfied of the two conditions
specified in Section 170 of the Act, it is not permissible
to the insurer to contest the claim on the grounds which
are available to the insured or to a person against whom
a claim has been made. Thus where conditions
precedent embodied in Section 170 are satisfied and
award is adverse to the interest of the insurer, the
insurer has a right to file an appeal challenging the
quantum of compensation or negligence or contributory
negligence of the offending vehicle even if the insured
has not filed any appeal against the quantum of
compensation. Sections 149, 170 and 173 are part of
one scheme and if we give any different interpretation to
Section 173 of the 1988 Act, the same would go
contrary to the scheme and object of the Act.”

Moreover, the MACT Tribunal is a final Court of findings
of facts and it has arrived at the said finding of involvement of the
offending vehicle which is duly insured with the appellant
insurance company.
MAC. APP. 100/2006

Page 9 of 10

In the light of the discussion hereinabove, the other
pleas raised by the appellant needs no consideration.
There is no merit in the present appeal and the same is
hereby dismissed.

December 20, 2007
ga

MAC. APP. 100/2006

KAILASH GAMBHIR J.

Page 10 of 10

