IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

FAO No.120/2003
Judgment reserved on: 7th November, 2007

Judgment delivered on: 20.12.2007
Smt. Vidya

..... Appellant
Through: Ms.Saroj Bakshi, Advocate.
versus

D.T.C. & Anr.

..... Respondents
Through: Mr.Jyotindra Kumar, Advocate.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported

Yes

FAO No. 120/2003

page 1 of 11

in the Digest?

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.
By way of the present appeal, the appellant
seeks enhancement in compensation over and above the
amount already awarded by the Tribunal in favour of the
appellant vide order dated 18.10.2002.
Factual scenario of the case in nutshell is that
the present appellant received serious injuries including
multiple fractures on her leg due to the accident involving
bus bearing registration No. DBP-6242 of respondent
No.1. According to the case set up by the appellant in her
claim petition, she along with

baby Priyanka, her small

baby of 2 years age, were travelling in a three-wheeler
scooter bearing registration No.DHR-4551 in a most
careful manner and at a low speed on the left side of the
road near Azad Market Chowk and Railway Bridge when
FAO No. 120/2003

page 2 of 11

the DTC bus bearing registration No. DBP-6242 being
driven by one Shri Mehmood Khan, respondent No.2
herein, suddenly appeared from the opposite side
which the said bus collided with the scooter.

due to

The said

DTC bus was being driven by the driver of the offending
vehicle in a most rash and negligent manner and at a very
high speed. Due to the said accident, the appellant had
received serious injuries including multiple fractures in
her

leg

due

to

which

the

appellant

had

suffered

permanent disability.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and
have perused the records.
Ms. Saroj Bakshi, counsel for the appellant
contended that the Tribunal has disallowed the interest on
the compensation amount for a period of 7 years without
their being any lapse or default on the part of the
appellant. The appellant is also aggrieved on account of
the fact that the Tribunal has not taken the correct
FAO No. 120/2003

page 3 of 11

notional income of the appellant who was a housewife.
The contention of counsel for the appellant is that at least
the minimum wages applicable for semi-skilled workman
should have been taken into consideration. The appellant
is also aggrieved that the Tribunal has also erred in
allowing a meager sum as payment towards all the
medical expenses incurred by the parties towards her
treatment.

Even the disability of the appellant to the

extent of 50% as proved by the appellant was not taken
into consideration.

Counsel for the appellant further

contended that even the expenses incurred by the
appellant for buying the shoes were not granted.
Per

contra,

Mr.

Jyotindra

Kumar,

counsel

appearing for the respondent refutes the contentions of
counsel for the appellant. He submitted that already the
Court

has

granted

much

more

than

the

just

compensation, therefore, any further enhancement of
compensation would only be a bonanza for the appellant.
FAO No. 120/2003

page 4 of 11

Counsel also contended that the issues in the present
case before the Tribunal were framed on 15.01.1991 and
first evidence of the petitioner was recorded on the same
date and thereafter the husband of the appellant entered
the witness box on 31.8.2000 after a gap of more than 9
years. Counsel for the respondent did not find fault with
the findings of the Tribunal so far as medical expenses are
concerned as the award towards medical expenses has
been made on the basis of proofs furnished by the
claimants.
I have heard learned counsel at bar and have
perused the record.
I do not find force in the submission of the
counsel for the appellant so far as the same is concerned
regarding the Tribunal not taking into consideration the
law laid down by the Apex Court in Lata Wadhwa Vs.
State of Bihar & Ors. (2001) 8 SCC 197 in its proper
perspective.
FAO No. 120/2003

The Tribunal has correctly not applied
page 5 of 11

Rs.3,000/- as income of housewife as was done in Lata
Wadhwa's case (Supra), as the same was done in the
facts and circumstances of that case.

In that case, the

housewife belonged to higher strata of the society, but
the Tribunal had taken the notional income of the
appellant at Rs.800/- per month towards the income of
housewife discharging her household duties. The accident
in the present case

had occurred on 5.9.89 and the

nature of the job of a household lady is akin to a skilled
workman, therefore, taking the wages payable for a
skilled workman as on the date of the accident as per the
Minimum Wages Act, same were Rs.1000/therefore,

per month,

the said wages would be appropriate

for

considering the income of a housewife who became
disabled due to the occurrence of the said accident.
The age of the appellant was 36 years on the
date of the accident, therefore, as per the Second
Schedule of the Motor Vehicles Act, the appropriate
FAO No. 120/2003

page 6 of 11

multiplier would be 16 and thus the multiplier of 16 would
be applicable instead of

12 as has been applied by the

Tribunal.
As regards the second contention of the
counsel for the appellant that a meager amount towards
the medical expenses has been allowed by the Tribunal, I
do not find any force in the argument of counsel for the
appellant.

The compensation

towards

the medical

expenses cannot be claimed in vacuum and for whatever
medical expenses the amount as claimed, necessary
proof has to be furnished by the appellant. The relevant
para of Lata Wadhwa's case (Supra) is reproduced as
under:
“In examining the question of damages for
personal injury, it is axiomatic that pecuniary and
non-pecuniary heads of damages are required to be
taken into account. In case of pecuniary damages,
loss of earning or earning capacity, medical, hospital
and nursing expenses, the loss of matrimonial
prospects, if proved, are required to be considered.
In the case of non-pecuniary losses, loss of
expectation of life, loss of amenities or capacity for
FAO No. 120/2003

page 7 of 11

enjoying life, loss or impairment of physiological
functions, impairment or loss of anatomical
structures or body tissues, pain and suffering and
mental suffering are to be considered. But for
arriving at a particular figure on each of the
aforesaid heads, the claimant is duty-bound to
produce relevant materials, on the basis of which, a
determination could be made, as to what would be
the best compensation.”

The medical bills to the extent of Rs.6,300/- were
placed on record and proved by the appellant and the
same have accordingly been awarded by the Tribunal. I
do not find any infirmity in the finding of the Tribunal, as
far as the medical expenses are concerned.
The appellant
finding of the

is also aggrieved

Tribunal considering

with the

the permanent

disability of the petitioner to the extent of 25%, whereas,
disability certificate certifying permanent disability to the
extent of 50% was placed on record and proved by the
appellant. The perusal of the impugned award shows that
the disability to the extent of 25% was taken for the whole
FAO No. 120/2003

page 8 of 11

body.

The permanent disability certificate placed on

record by the appellant shows that the appellant had
suffered 50% disability of the lower limb of her leg and
there is nothing wrong or illegal if the said disability of
50% has been considered to be 25% as far as the whole
body is concerned.
I, therefore, do not feel inclined to interfere with the
said finding of the Tribunal.
The last contention of the counsel for the appellant
is that the Tribunal has illegally denied the interest on
the compensation amount for a period of seven years.
The claim petition was filed by the appellant on 5.1.90
and the evidence of the appellant was recorded for the
first time on 15.1.91 and thereafter only on 31.8.2000 the
remaining evidence was produced by the appellant.

The

Tribunal has taken a serious note of this negligence on
the part of the appellant

in not taking the effective steps

to pursue her case. It is not only shocking but disturbing
FAO No. 120/2003

page 9 of 11

as well that compensation cases get delayed
on account of contesting

not only

respondents but due to the

carelessness, negligence and procrastination on the part
of claimants themselves. If the claimants themselves are
responsible for delay of their own cases then the insurer
or other contesting
to be burdened

respondents cannot be made liable

to pay the interest for the lapses and

inaction of such claimants.
I, therefore, do not find any infirmity or illegality
in the finding of the Tribunal denying the interest for a
period of seven years when the matter was delayed by
the appellant herself by not coming forward to produce
the evidence for a period of nine years. The contention
of the counsel for the appellant on this score is rejected.
As regards the plea of the appellant for the
enhancement of compensation under other heads is
concerned, I do not find any justification being given by
the appellant for claiming such enhancement.
FAO No. 120/2003

page 10 of 11

In the light of the aforesaid discussion, following
directions are passed in the present appeal.
1.

The notional income of the appellant housewife

shall be taken at Rs.1000/- per month in place of Rs.800/per month as determined by the Tribunal.
2.

Multiplier of 16 shall be applicable as per the

Second Schedule of the Motor Vehicles Act in place of
multiplier of 12 as applied by the Tribunal in the
impugned award.
With the aforesaid directions, the matter is
remanded back to the Tribunal to carry out the said
directions and pass appropriate orders quantifying the
amount of compensation to which the appellant is entitled
to.
With these directions, the present appeal stands
disposed of.
December 20, 2007
mg
FAO No. 120/2003

(Kailash Gambhir)
Judge
page 11 of 11

