IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC APP No. 48/2007
Judgment reserved on: November 14, 2007
Judgment delivered on: December 20, 2007
M/s United India Insurance Co. Ltd.
Through:
Mr. A.K. De, Adv.

..... Appellant

versus
Budhi Ram & Ors.
Through:

..... Respondents
Mr. Rajiv Gupta, Adv. for R-1 & 2.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.

By way of the present appeal the appellant seeks to challenge
the impugned award mainly on three grounds that the Tribunal has
wrongly applied the multiplier of 17 years by ignoring the age of the
parents of the deceased and has taken into consideration the age of

MAC APP. No. 48 of 2007

pages 1 of 8

the deceased. The next contention of the counsel for the appellant is
that the Tribunal has wrongly taken into consideration future
prospects of the deceased when no such future prospects were proved
by the respondents/ claimants on record. Thirdly, the appellant is
aggrieved by the finding of the Tribunal, granting 1/3rd personal
expenses out of the income of the deceased, although the deceased
being of 26 years of age at the time of accident would have soon got
married and thereafter the personal expenses were bound to be
increased. Before adverting to deal with the said contentions of the
counsel for the appellant it would be desirable to set out the brief
facts of the case, which are as under:On 15.8.2003, Shri Rohi Bahal and Shri Dharamvir were
travelling on a two wheeler scooter bearing registrationNo. DL4S
0401 from the residence of Shri Rohit Bahal towards Raja Garden via
Ring Road. The scooter was being driven by Shri Rohit Bahal and
Shri Dharamvir was the pillion rider. On their reaching near
Gurudwara, Rajouri Garden, a truck bearing registration No. DL1GB
1250, being driven in a most rash and negligent manner by its driver,
came from behind and collided with the scooter, as a result, both the

MAC APP. No. 48 of 2007

pages 2 of 8

riders fell down and suffered fatal injuries. The driver of the said
offending vehicle ran away from the accident site. A claim petition
was filed by the parents of the deceased, appellants herein, in 2003
itself and award was passed on 18.11.2005. Aggrieved with the said
Award present appeal is preferred by the appellants insurer of the
offending vehicle.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties at a considerable
length and have perused the records. On the first contention
pertaining to the multiplier, the counsel for the appellant contended
that the age of the deceased was 26 years while, age of the mother of
the deceased was 50 years and that of the father was 55 years and,
therefore, appropriate multiplier under the Second Schedule taking
the average of the age of the parents would be 11 years, but the
Tribunal has applied the multiplier of 17 after taking into account the
age of the deceased, who died at the age of 26 years. The contention
of the counsel for the appellant is that the legal position in this regard
is well settled that the multiplier has to be applied considering the age
of the deceased or the age of the dependents whichever is higher, but
in the present case the Tribunal has ignored this settled law position

MAC APP. No. 48 of 2007

pages 3 of 8

and has wrongly applied the multiplier after considering the age of
the deceased only and not considering the age of the parents of the
deceased. In this regard, the Apex Court has held in New India
Assurance Co. Ltd. v. Kalpana,(2007) 3 SCC 538
“7.
The
multiplier
method
involves
the
ascertainment of the loss of dependency or the
multiplicand having regard to the circumstances of
the case and capitalising the multiplicand by an
appropriate multiplier. The choice of the multiplier is
determined by the age of the deceased (or that of
the claimants whichever is higher) and by the
calculation as to what capital sum, if invested at a
rate of interest appropriate to a stable economy,
would yield the multiplicand by way of annual
interest. In ascertaining this, regard should also be
had to the fact that ultimately the capital sum
should also be consumed-up over the period for
which the dependency is expected to last.“

As per the age of the parents of the deceased the multiplier
under the Second Schedule of the Motor Vehicles Act is 11 and,
therefore, the impugned Award determining the said multiplier of 17
needs to be modified by applying the multiplier of 11. As observed
above, the legal position in this regard is no more res integra that the
choice of multiplier is determined by the age of the deceased or that
of the claimant whichever is higher. Taking the age of the
claimants/respondents, the appropriate multiplier as per the Second
Schedule of the Motor Vehicles Act, would be 11 and not 17 as
MAC APP. No. 48 of 2007

pages 4 of 8

assessed by the Tribunal. The multiplier is accordingly modified from
17 to 11.
As regards the contention of the counsel for the appellant that
the Tribunal has wrongly taken into consideration the future increase
in the income of the deceased without their being any material placed
by the claimants on record or any evidence laid in this regard. Perusal
of the Award shows that the deceased was working as a private driver
on a monthly salary of Rs. 3000/- and the Tribunal has taken the
help of Minimum Wages to assess the monthly income of the
deceased. On the relevant date of the accident as per the Minimum
Wages Act the deceased was entitled to minimum wages of Rs.
2784/- and the said minimum wages would certainly have increased
within a period of 11 years and, therefore, there is nothing wrong in
the findings of the Tribunal if the increase in the Minimum Wages
have been taken into consideration. Further taking note of the
increase in the minimum wages for the past 10 years, it can be
noticed that there is almost 225% increase in these wages. In the year
1980 wages for skilled worker was Rs. 320 per month and in the year
1990 the said wages came to be Rs. 1043/- per month. This increase

MAC APP. No. 48 of 2007

pages 5 of 8

in the wages cannot be treated at par or akin to the future prospects,
as such increase in the wages are bare minimum and the same are
determined by the Government after taking into account the price
index, cost of living, inflation and denunciation of currency value.
This increase in the Minimum Wages is thus cost neutralizing factor
as the inflation eats into the purchasing power of the rupee and,
therefore, such a future increase if taken into account would provide
the bare minimum for the sustenance of the dependent family
members of the deceased. Although the Tribunal has used the
philosophy of such increase as towards future prospects, but
practically the same is in the shape of future increase in the Minimum
Wages and, therefore, I do not find any infirmity in the finding of the
Tribunal on this issue.
I do not find any force in the contention of the counsel for the
appellant that the Tribunal has wrongly deducted 1/3rd of the income
of the deceased towards personal expenses and the same should have
been at least half of the personal expenses keeping in view the age of
the deceased, who would have certainly got married after some time.
In the case of Fakeerappa v. Karnataka Cement Pipe Factory,(2004) 2 SCC

MAC APP. No. 48 of 2007

pages 6 of 8

473 the Apex Court has restricted the deduction of personal income to
1/3rd from the monthly income in the case of deceased, who was 27
years of age and applying the same principle I do not find that there is
any illegality in the finding of the Tribunal deducting 1/3rd of the
income of the deceased towards personal expenses. Relevant para of
the said judgment is reproduced below:“7. What would be the percentage of deduction for
personal expenditure cannot be governed by any
rigid rule or formula of universal application. It
would depend upon circumstances of each case.
The deceased undisputedly was a bachelor. Stand
of the insurer is that after marriage, the
contribution to the parents would have been lesser
and, therefore, taking an overall view the Tribunal
and the High Court were justified in fixing the
deduction.
8. It has to be noted that the ages of the parents
as disclosed in the claim petition were totally
unbelievable. If the deceased was aged about 27
years as found at the time of post-mortem and
about which there is no dispute, the father and
mother could not have been aged 38 years and 35
years respectively as claimed by them in the claim
petition. Be that as it may, taking into account
special features of the case we feel it would be
appropriate to restrict the deduction for personal
expenses to one-third of the monthly income.
Though the multiplier adopted appears to be
slightly on the higher side, the plea taken by the
insurer cannot be accepted, as there was no
challenge by the insurer to the fixation of the
multiplier before the High Court and even in the
appeal filed by the appellants before the High
Court, the plea was not taken.”

MAC APP. No. 48 of 2007

pages 7 of 8

In the light of the aforesaid discussion, the impugned Award is
modified to the extent of reducing the multiplier from 17 to 11 and
rest of the Award shall remain the same. With these directions the
present appeal is disposed of. The appellant shall now be liable to pay
a sum of Rs. 4,17,488/- and shall pay the amount along with upto
date interest @ 6% from the date of filing of the petition till
realisation.
Vide order dated 22.1.2007, the directions were given to the
appellant to deposit 60% of the award amount and balance 40% of
the awarded sum was under stay. The matter is now remitted back
to the Tribunal for carrying out the said modification and for
appropriate apportionment of the award.
Parties are directed to appear before the concerned
Tribunal on ------.

December 20, 2007
rkr

MAC APP. No. 48 of 2007

KAILASH GAMBHIR
JUDGE

pages 8 of 8

