IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC. APP. NO. 315/2007
Judgment reserved on: November 15, 2007
Judgment delivered on: 20.12.2007
Oriental Insurance Company Ltd.
Through:

..... Appellant
Ms. Neerja Sachdeva, Adv.

versus
Shobha Balram & Ors.
Through:

..... Respondents
Mr. H.S. Arora, Adv. for R-1 to 4.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.
By way of this present appeal the appellant insurance company
seeks to challenge the impugned Award dated 5.3.2007 mainly on the
grounds that there was no rash and negligent driving on the part of

MAC App No. 315 of 2007

page 1 of 7

the driver of the offending vehicle as the deceased, who was driving
Maruti car had hit the bus from behind, which resulted in causing
fatal injuries to the deceased. Before examining the rival contentions
of the parties it would be appropriate to give a brief summary of the
facts:On 5.7.1997, deceased Shri K. Balaraman met with an accident
at around 5.30 p.m. while he was driving his Maruti car bearing
registration No. DL 2 CG 7982 from his office to his residence. The
accident was caused by driver, Radhey Shyam, while driving the bus
bearing registration No. DL 1P 3462 in a most rash and negligent
manner and due to sudden stoppage of the bus without any
indication, therefore, the deceased smashed into the bus. A claim
petition was filed on 9.12.1997 before the Motor Accident Claims
Tribunal and award was made on 5.3.2007. Aggrieved with the said
award, the appellant insurance company has preferred the present
appeal.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have perused
the records. The contention of the counsel for the appellant
Ms.Neerja Sachdeva is that the learned Tribunal has not properly

MAC App No. 315 of 2007

page 2 of 7

appreciated and considered the circumstances under which the
accident in question had taken place. Counsel for the appellant also
contended that the Tribunal has completely ignored the FIR and the
other accompanied documents including the site plan, which clearly
shows that the alleged offending vehicle was standing right in front of
the bus stop just adjacent to the Krishi Bhawan Building and the
deceased took a right turn from Raisina Road at a very high speed
and in a most rash and negligent manner and while turning on his
right smashed into the rare portion of the bus. The counsel for the
appellant also contended that the authenticity of the said site plan
filed in the criminal proceedings cannot be doubted and even the FIR
in the said case was closed due to the said fact of the involvement of
the deceased himself in driving his Maruti car most recklessly
resulting into the said accident. Counsel for the appellant further
contended that the Tribunal has unnecessarily given credence to the
deposition of one eye witness, who never came forward to give any
statement to the police and was in fact a planted witness by the
respondents. Counsel further submitted that the respondents are not
entitled to any amount of compensation due to no fault liability of the

MAC App No. 315 of 2007

page 3 of 7

appellant. To substantiate her arguments counsel for the appellant
invited my attention to the copy of the site plan placed on the Trial
Court records. Counsel for the appellant also invited my attention to
the deposition of Constable, Sh. Joginder Singh, who in his crossexamination clearly stated that the deceased victim had hit the bus
from behind as a result of which he had died in the hospital. In
support of her arguments counsel for the appellant has placed
reliance on the judgment of the Apex Court in Mohd. Hanif and
Anr. vs H.P. Road Transport Corpn. and Ors. (2206) 2 SCC
(Cri) 293.
Per contra Mr.H.S. Arora, counsel for the respondent seriously
refuted the contentions of the counsel for the appellant. Counsel for
the respondent contended that the offending bus had given a sudden
abrupt halt without giving any signal and indication and were trying
to accommodate some passenger to board the bus due to which the
Maruti car coming from behind rammed into the bus. The counsel
contended that the bus driver was most rash and negligent in driving
the offending vehicle and sudden stoppage of the vehicle only led to
causing the said accident. Counsel for the respondent further

MAC App No. 315 of 2007

page 4 of 7

contended that rash and negligent driving on the part of the driver of
the offending vehicle was duly proved by the respondents. In as much
as the testimony of the eye witness PW4 remained unrebutted, who in
his deposition clearly gave the first hand account of the said accident
and held the driver of the bus responsible for causing the said
accident. The said witness also stated that his name was noted down
by the police on the spot of accident itself, but his statement was not
recorded by the police. Counsel further contended that the appellant
failed to examine driver of the offending vehicle and, therefore,
adverse inference against the appellant has rightly been drawn by the
Tribunal. In support of his arguments counsel for the respondent
has placed reliance on the following judgments.
1.
Ors.

Laxmi Gontiya and Anr. vs Nandlal Tahalramani &
1999 ACJ 241;

2.

Mahadeb Roy vs Sikha Das & Ors. 1999 ACJ 1042;

3.

Santosh Kumari vs Ram Sarup etc. 2001 RLR 241
It is a settled legal position that burden of proving the issue is

on the party who after proving the same can be placed at
advantageous position and on not proving the same, it would be put

MAC App No. 315 of 2007

page 5 of 7

to a disadvantages position. In this regard, the Hon'ble Apex Court
has given following observations in Narcinva V. Kamat v. Alfredo
Antonio Doe Martins, (1985) 2 SCC 574
“The insurance company complains of breach of a
term of contract which would permit it to disown
its liability under the contract of insurance. If a
breach of a term of contract permits a party to the
contract to not to perform the contract, the
burden is squarely on that party which complains
of breach to prove that the breach has been
committed by the other party to the contract. The
test in such a situation would be who would fail if
no evidence is led.”

The defence of imputing negligence on the part of the
victim, who was driving the Maruti vehicle has not been proved by
the appellant. Mere reliance on the copy of the site plan or contents of
the FIR would not lead to create any strong presumption in favour of
the appellant unless the same was further substantiated with the help
of some other supporting material and cogent evidence. The best
evidence in the present case was the testimony of the driver of the
offending vehicle, who for the reasons best known to the appellant
was not examined and, therefore, the best evidence was withheld by
the appellant itself. The Tribunal has referred to certain judgments in
support of the proposition that the evidence recorded in criminal case

MAC App No. 315 of 2007

page 6 of 7

and findings arrived there on should not be used in claim cases and
there cannot be any dispute on this proposition of law. The
respondents/claimants had produced an eye witness Mr. Darshan
Singh and the testimony of the said witness remained almost
unrebutted as in his cross-examination the appellant failed to shatter
his testimony. In the absence of any evidence to the contrary the
Tribunal has rightly placed reliance upon the testimony of an eye
witness and the statements of other witnesses and has also rightly
ignored the criminal records.
I do not find any merit in the present appeal and the same is
hereby dismissed.

December 20, 2007
rkr

MAC App No. 315 of 2007

KAILASH GAMBHIR
JUDGE

page 7 of 7

