IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CM(M) No. 996/2006

Judgment delivered on: September 20, 2007
Mrs. Priyanka Batra

... Petitioner
Through:

Mr. Pradeep Bakshi with
Mr.Manwal Chaudhary, Advs.

versus
Shri Sandeep Grover

..... Respondent
Through:

Mr. Dinesh Goyal, Adv.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR,
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:

The present petition is directed against the order dated 1st

July, 2007 passed by the Appellate Court. The short and
interesting point involved in the present petition is as to whether
the First Appellate Court hearing an appeal against the dismissal
of an interim application under Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 can also

CM (M) No. 996/2006

pages 1 of 8

examine and look into the maintainability/non-maintainability of
the suit itself on the ground that it lacked pecuniary jurisdiction to
entertain the plaint itself. Mr. Pradeep Bakshi, learned counsel
appearing for the petitioner urges that the First Appellate Court
could not have travelled beyond the controversy as was involved
in the appeal impugning an order passed on the application under
Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 CPC. Counsel further contends that the
issue of return of plaint in the suit as envisaged under Order 7
Rule 10 CPC could only be decided by the Court of first instance
trying the said suit i.e. Trial Court and not by the Appellate Court
and, therefore, the directions given to this effect by the Appellate
Court are ex facie illegal. Counsel has placed reliance on the
judgment of this Court reported in 1973 (9) DLT 377 titled Ram
Babu and Anr. Vs Jaswant Singh and also another judgment of
the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported in 1995 Supp (1) SCC 244
titled Salil Kumar Roy vs Badu Devi Bhansali (Smt) & Ors.
Mr. Dinesh Goyal, learned counsel appearing for the
respondent on the other hand contends that the appeal being in
continuation of the suit, therefore, the Appellate Court can
exercise all the powers as available to it as laid down under Order
41 CPC. The counsel placed reliance on Order 43 Rule 2, which
CM (M) No. 996/2006

pages 2 of 8

deals

with

the

procedure

for

trying

the

appeals

under

interlocutory orders. For better appreciation of his contention the
said provision is reproduced as under:“43(2) Procedure- The rules of Order XLI
shall apply, so far as may be, to appeals from
orders.”
The contention of the counsel for the respondent is that once
Order 41 applies to the interlocutory order, then Rule 33 of Order
43 comes to the aid of the respondent, under which the Appellate
Court can pass any order or further orders as the case may
require.

The

counsel

further

contends

that

the

issue

of

maintainability/non-maintainability of a particular suit goes to the
very root of the matter and, therefore, it cannot be said that the
Appellate Court trying an appeal even though against an
interlocutory order, has no powers to examine whether the suit
itself is maintainable or not. The counsel also contends that while
examining as to whether there is a prima facie case or not the
maintainability question can always be looked into by the first
Appellate Court. Counsel thus contends that there is no illegality
in the impugned order passed by the Appellate Court giving
direction to the Trial Court to return the plaint in suit to the

CM (M) No. 996/2006

pages 3 of 8

plaintiff due to the lack of pecuniary jurisdiction.
I

have

heard

learned

counsel

for

the

parties

at

a

considerable length. Order 43 Rule 2 deals with the procedure and
it lays down that the rules of Order 41 shall apply, which clearly
implies that the same procedure as laid down for trying the
appeals against final decrees and orders shall be applicable while
trying appeals against the interlocutory orders as well. However,
the said rule is qualified by the words “so far as may be, to
appeals from orders”.

The necessary consequence of the use of

the said expression in the rule appears to be that the same
procedure as prescribed in the order 41 shall be applicable to the
appeals filed against the interlocutory orders.

The said Rule 2

of Order 43 CPC only says that the procedure as prescribed in
various rules under Order 41 shall apply so far as may be to the
appeals from interlocutory orders, but the said rule dealing with
the procedure part cannot widen the scope of the Appellate Court
while dealing with an appeal against an interlocutory order in
comparison to the Appellate Court dealing with an appeal under
Order 41 against a final decree. Rule 2 of Order 43 has been
engrafted in the manner so as to avoid insertion of similar set of
rules in the said provision and, therefore, in this rule itself, similar
CM (M) No. 996/2006

pages 4 of 8

set of rules dealing with the procedure part as inserted in Order
41 CPC have been made applicable. The present case is squarely
covered by the judgment of this Court as cited by the counsel for
the petitioner i.e. Ram Babu and Anr. Vs Jaswant Singh
(Supra) and reference in this regard is invited to para 2 of the
said judgment as under:
“2. In this revision petition by Ram Babu the
first question for consideration is whether the
Additional District Judge had any jurisdiction to
entertain the application under Order XXIII rule
1 Civil Procedure Code. IT is common sense
that an appeal is a continuation of a suit. This
is only when the suit terminates in the trial
court and thereafter it continues in the
appellate court. This is why the powers of the
appellate court are as large as the powers of
the trial court in respect of the whole of the
suit in an appeal of which the subject matter
comp-rises the whole of the suit. But what
about an appeal against an order? Orders are
themselves of two kinds, namely, (A) final
orders and (B) interlocutory orders. If a suit is
disposed of by a final order, an appeal against
a final order may cover the same subject
matter as may be covered by an appeal against
a decree. For, a suit may cease to be pending
in the trial court after a final order. On the
contrary appeal against an interlocutory order
has a much more limited scope than an appeal
against a decree or an appeal against a final
order. The question before the Additional
District Judge in the appeal was whether
temporary injunction refused by the trial court
should be granted to Jaswant Singh or not. In
respect of that matter, the jurisdiction of the
trial court had been exhausted and, therefore,
CM (M) No. 996/2006

pages 5 of 8

the jurisdiction was vested only in the appellate
court. For the same reason the jurisdiction of
the trial court over the rest of the suit
continued and no part of that jurisdiction
vested in the appellate court. For, it is also
common sense that the trial court and the
appellate court bother do not have jurisdiction
over the same matter simultaneously. Had that
been so, conflicting orders by the two courts
would come to be passed. A mere filing of the
appeal does not operate as a stay of the suit.
Much less can the filing of an appeal take away
the jurisdiction of the trial court to decide the
suit. In the appeal before the Additional District
Judge no stay order seems to have been
passed staying the proceedings in the suit in
the trial court. The Trial court, therefore, had
the jurisdiction to dispose of the suit on the
merits or under Order XXIII Rule 1 Civil
Procedure Code if Jaswant Singh were to make
an application there-under to the trial court. It
must follow, therefore, the Additional District
Judge did not have the jurisdiction either to
dispose of the suit on merits or under Order
XXIII Rule 1 Civil Procedure Code. The
application under Order XXIII Rule 1 Civil
Procedure Code would, therefore, be made only
to the trial court and not to the appellate
court.”

In the said judgment this Court has clearly held that

the

Appellate Court has much more limited scope when trying the
appeal against the interlocutory order in comparison to when
trying the appeal against a final order. The same legal position
has also been propounded by the Supreme Court in Salil Kumar
CM (M) No. 996/2006

pages 6 of 8

Roy vs. Badu Devi Bhansali (Smt.) & Ors. (Supra) where the
Division Bench of High Court while hearing an appeal against the
order of the learned Single Judge allowed an application for
amendment and directed that the Single Judge has no pecuniary
jurisdiction to entertain the suit. The Apex Court observed that the
Division Bench of the High Court was not justified in going into
question of jurisdiction specially when the said question was
pending consideration before the learned Single Judge.
In view of the settled legal position, I am of the view that the
Appellate Court committed an illegality by giving directions to the
Trial Court to return the plaint in the suit to the plaintiff while
trying an appeal against the order of the Trial Court dismissing the
application of the petitioner under Order 39 Rule 1 and 2 CPC. As
regards the contention of the learned counsel for the respondent
that the maintainability issue can always be looked into by the
first Appellate Court while hearing an appeal against the
interlocutory order, I am of the view that the said objection of nonmaintainability of the suit due to the lack of pecuniary jurisdiction
is always available to the contesting defendant and the same can
be taken up before the Trial Court.
In the light of the above discussion, the present matter is
CM (M) No. 996/2006

pages 7 of 8

remanded back to the first Appellate Court to rehear the matter
confining itself to the issues raised by the Trial Court while
dismissing the application of the plaintiff under Order 39 Rule 1
and 2.
The parties are directed to appear before the first Appellate
Court on 22nd October, 2007 and till that date the interim order
granted by this Court vide orders dated 7th July, 2006 shall remain
in force.

September 20, 2007
rkr

CM (M) No. 996/2006

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J

pages 8 of 8

