IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC APP.NO.360/2007
Judgment reserved on: 25th September ,2007
Judgment delivered on: 20.12.2007
National Insurance Company Ltd.,
2/2-E/9, Jhandewalan Extn.
New Delhi
Through:

..... Appellant.
Mr.S.L.Gupta, Advocate

versus
Smt.Pushpa Rana & Ors.
Through:

..... Respondents
Mr.S.K.Tiwari, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.

MAC APP No.360/2007

page 1 of 10

The present appeal preferred under Section 173 of
The Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, arises out of an award dated 24th
April, 2007 of the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, whereby the
Tribunal awarded a sum of Rs. 13,26,000/- along with interest
@ 7% per annum to the appellant from the date of filing of the
petition.
The brief facts are that the deceased Sh. Kailash Singh
Rana, aged 26 years while driving his scooter No.DL 9S G 4738
on 30th December 2004 at about 7:30 pm dropped Ms. Ramni
Taneja to her residence at A-34, Defence Colony, New Delhi
and after finishing off his duty he left for his residence situated
at Bijwasan, Delhi. At around 8:30 pm, when he was
approaching the turning point of the petrol pump opposite to
Shiv Murti and was about to take a right turn towards Bijwasan,
suddenly a TATA Tempo bearing registration no. HR 47 6169
driven by Sh. Shambhu Kumar Singh hit the scooter badly in a
rash and negligent manner from behind due to which he fell on
MAC APP No.360/2007

page 2 of 10

the ground and sustained fatal injuries and was removed to
AIIMS hospital where he succumbed to his injuries. The legal
representatives of the deceased filed the claim petition on 12th
May 2005 and

the Tribunal passed the impugned award.

Aggrieved with the award dated 24th April 2007, the appellant
insurance company has preferred the instant appeal.
Sh. S.L. Gupta, counsel for the appellant contended
that the overtime of Rs. 1000 per month considered by the
learned tribunal couldn’t be treated as regular income of the
deceased. It has been maintained by the counsel that the
multiplier of 18 applied by the learned tribunal is on the higher
side and the multiplier has not been reduced for uncertainty of
life by the learned tribunal. Further, it has been urged by the
counsel that the future prospects could not be considered as the
deceased was in a private job working as a driver. The counsel
lashed out that no negligence was proved by the respondents
claimants and hence the finding of the tribunal is bad in view of
the judgment of the Hon’ble Apex Court in Oriental

MAC APP No.360/2007

page 3 of 10

Insurance Co. Ltd. Vs. Meena Variyal reported in 2007
(5) Scale 269.
The counsel for the appellant has further relied on
following judgments of the Apex court in this regard:
1. Sarla Dixit & Anr. Vs. Balwant Yadav & Ors. – AIR
1996 SC 1274
2. Managing Director, TNSTC Ltd. Vs. K.I. Bindu & Ors. –
(2005) 8 Scale 173
Per Contra, Sh. Sanjeev K. Tiwari, counsel for
respondent nos. 1 to 4 has vehemently controverted the
contentions of the counsel for the appellant. The counsel while
relying on the deposition of PW4, Ms. Ramni Taneja, employer
of the deceased contended that the employer of the deceased
her self submitted that the deceased was working as a driver on
the salary of Rs. 5000 per month besides earning a sum of Rs.
2,500 per month on account of over time. The counsel further
urged that Ms. Ramni Taneja is a respectable member of the
Bar and is an advocate practising in Supreme Court and Delhi
high Court and the deceased used to work overtime on regular

MAC APP No.360/2007

page 4 of 10

basis in a month because of her professional association with
various senior advocates with whom she used to attend various
conferences. Hence, the overtime of Rs. 1000 per month
considered by the learned tribunal could be treated as regular
income of the deceased. Regarding the issue of future prospects
the counsel maintained that in her cross examination PW4, Ms.
Ramni Taneja had submitted that she would have paid him Rs.
1000 per annum as increment plus overtime because the
deceased was a sincere, diligent and a dedicated employee.
Further, reliance was placed on the deposition of PW3, Sh.
Abhishek Ojha, working as secretary and accounts executive of
Ms. Ramni Taneja, who deposed in his cross examination that
the deceased had joined at a salary of Rs. 4250 which was
subsequently increased to Rs. 5000. Hence, the tribunal has
correctly considered the future prospects of the deceased. The
counsel has also stoutly denied that the multiplier of 18 is on
the higher side as the deceased died at a young age of 26 yrs
and is survived by his young widow, his 2 children of tender age

MAC APP No.360/2007

page 5 of 10

and a widowed mother. Counsel has also denied that the
respondent claimants did not prove the negligence of the
respondent.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and
have also perused the records.
The first contention raised by the counsel for the
appellant was that the Tribunal has wrongly taken into
consideration the overtime amount of Rs.1,000/- per month.
The deceased was admittedly employed as a driver with Ms.
Ramni Taneja, Advocate and as per the deposition of the
Advocate herself the overtime was a part of his regular income
on account of the fact that she was regularly attending
conferences held with the senior advocates till late hours in the
night.

The respondents claimants have claimed

a sum of

Rs.2,500/- towards the overtime, but the Tribunal has
considered only

Rs. 1,000/- per month as earnings of the

deceased towards the overtime on average basis.
I do not agree with the contention of the counsel for the

MAC APP No.360/2007

page 6 of 10

appellant that

as the Tribunal

has adopted the criteria of

Sarla Dixit's case, in which the benefit towards the future
prospect is taken into consideration, therefore, the overtime
allowance should not have been considered while giving the
benefit towards the future prospects.

Future prospects and

advancement in career cannot be equated with the overtime
allowance. Moreover, the claimants have proved on record that
the deceased was earning a sum of Rs.2500/- per month
towards the overtime allowance.

The contention of

the

counsel for the appellant on this score is therefore, rejected.
I also do not find force in the contention of counsel
for the appellant that the Tribunal has wrongly applied the
multiplier of 18. The deceased was 26 years of age at the time
of occurrence of the accident and he was survived by his widow
and two minor children besides his mother. The Tribunal has
observed in the impugned award that the deceased was
survived by widow of a very young age besides two minor
children, therefore, taking in view the age of the deceased as

MAC APP No.360/2007

page 7 of 10

26 years, the appropriate multiplier of 18 as laid down in the
Second Schedule of the Motor Vehicles Act has been applied by
the Tribunal. Therefore, I do not find any infirmity in the
impugned order with regard to the multiplier of 18. The Apex
Court has

taken a view in catena of judgments

that

the

multiplier as laid down in the Second Schedule of M.V. Act
1988 can be deviated only under exceptional circumstances
otherwise normally the same acts as a safe guide. The Apex
Court in United India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Patricia Jean Mahajan,(2002) 6
SCC 281 has held as under:
“12. It thus makes it clear that it is for the
Tribunal to arrive at an amount of compensation,
which it may consider to be just in the facts and
circumstances of the case. This Court however has
been of the view that structured formula as provided
under the Second Schedule would be a safe guide to
calculate the amount of just compensation. Deviation
though permissible, may only be resorted to for some
special reasons to do so.”

I, therefore, do not find

any infirmity in the

impugned award so far as the said multiplier

of 18 is

concerned.

MAC APP No.360/2007

page 8 of 10

As regards the future prospects, the Tribunal has
applied the criteria laid down in Sarla Dixit's case (Supra).
I also do not find any force in the argument of
counsel for the appellant that since the deceased was in private
job, therefore, future prospects should not have been taken
into consideration. The Apex Court has not made any
distinction between the private or Government employees in
this regard.
The last contention of the appellant insurance
company is that

the

respondents claimants should have

proved negligence on the part of the driver and in this regard
the counsel has placed reliance on the judgement of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. Vs. Meena
Variyal; 2007 (5) SCALE 269. On perusal of the award of
the Tribunal, it becomes clear that the wife of the deceased
had produced (i) certified copy of the criminal record of
criminal case in FIR No. 955/2004, pertaining to involvement
of the offending vehicle, (ii) criminal record

showing

MAC APP No.360/2007

page 9 of 10

completion of investigation of police and issue of charge sheet
under Section 279/304-A, IPC against the driver; (iii) certified
copy of FIR, wherein criminal case against the driver was
lodged; and (iv) recovery memo and mechanical inspection
report of offending vehicle and vehicle of the deceased. These
documents are sufficient proofs to reach the conclusion that
the driver was negligent. Proceedings under Motor Vehicles Act
are not akin to proceedings in a civil suit and hence strict rules
of evidence

are not required to be followed in this regard.

Hence, this contention of the counsel for the appellant also falls
face down.

There

is ample evidence on record to prove

negligence on the part of the driver.
On the basis of these observations, I feel that there
is no infirmity in the impugned award of the learned Tribunal.
Dismissed.

December 20, 2007
mg

MAC APP No.360/2007

KAILASH GAMBHIR
JUDGE

page 10 of 10

