IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
FAO. NO. 188/2003
Judgment delivered on: November 21 ,2007
Smt. Bimla Devi
Through:

..... Appellant.
Ms. Aruna Mehta, Advocate

versus
Shri Sanjeev Oberoi & Ors.
Through:

..... Respondents
Mr.S.N.Parashar for respondent no.3

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
The present appeal is preferred against the award dated
15.11.2002 made by the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal.
FAO No. 188/2003

page 1 of 8

Brief facts of the case are that on 24.2.87 at about 1.20
P.M. Smt. Saraswati Devi, Smt. Bimla Rani and Shri Amir
Chand were sitting outside their house at 12/24 Moti Nagar,
Delhi when a car bearing registration no DEA 6/05 came from
Sudershan Park's direction and without caring for the red light
traffic signal and without blowing any horn, the aforesaid car
rashly and negligently driven by its driver, ran into the cot lying
outside the aforesaid house with such a force that Shri Amir
Chand and Smt. Saraswati Devi died whereas Smt. Bimla Rani
received injuries.

Three claim petitions were filed by the

claimants and a common award was made in this regard on
15.11.2002. Aggrieved with the said award present appeal is
preferred by the appellant. By way of this appeal, the appellant
has assailed the finding of the Tribunal on the ground that the
Tribunal has granted a meager amount of compensation for a
sum of Rs.25,000/- on account of the disability suffered by the
appellant to the extent of 25%. The appellant is also aggrieved

FAO No. 188/2003

page 2 of 8

on account of the fact that no compensation has been awarded
towards pain and sufferings and also towards the expenses
incurred by the appellant for taking the services of a domestic
servant. The appellant has also assailed the finding of the
Tribunal on the grant of lower rate of interest of 6% per annum
by the Tribunal.
Mr. Parashar, counsel for the respondent on the
other hand contends that the award passed by the Tribunal is
absolutely just and fair and there is no infirmity in the said
award. Counsel for the respondent contends that disability has
been considered as per the disability certificate produced by
the appellant and the Tribunal has also placed reliance on the
judgment of Madhawan Vs. M.D. Marudhu Pandiyar
transport Corporation, 2001 ACJ 873. In the said
judgment the compensation in the sum of Rs.25,000/- has
been awarded in the case of permanent disability to the extent
of 25%. Counsel for the respondent also contends that no

FAO No. 188/2003

page 3 of 8

independent evidence was adduced by the appellant to show
that

any service of

a domestic servant was taken by the

appellant. Counsel also contends that the rate of interest as
awarded by the Tribunal is reasonable.
I have heard counsel for the parties and have
perused the record.
There is no dispute that the appellant has suffered
permanent disability to the extent of 25%. At the time of the
accident the appellant was 28 years old, but the Tribunal has
not applied the structured formula of multiplier as laid down
in the Second Schedule of the Motor Vehicles Act. The Supreme
Court in Smt. Supe Dei & Ors. Vs. National Insurance
Co.Ltd & Anr. 2002 ACJ 1166 has held as under:
“While considering the question of just
compensation payable in a case all relevant factors
including the appropriate multiplier are to be kept in
mind. The position is well settled that the second
schedule under Section 163A of the Act which gives
the amount of compensation to be determined for the
purpose of claim under the Section can be taken as a
guideline while determining the compensation under
Section 166 of the Act.”
FAO No. 188/2003

page 4 of 8

The Tribunal has granted a lump sum amount of
Rs.25,000/-

taking into consideration the

permanent

disability to the extent of 25%. The appropriate multiplier as
laid down in the Second Schedule of the Motor Vehicles Act is
16 and taking the said multiplier as well as inflationary trends
into consideration, the income which was being earned by the
appellant has to be doubled. Under the Minimum Wages Act,
in a period of 10 years, the income of skilled or semi-skilled
worker

gets doubled, and therefore, adopting the same

yardstick, the income of the appellant can be assumed to get
doubled during that period. After applying the multiplier of 16,
the total loss of income as suffered by the appellant due to
permanent disability to the extent of 25% would come to
Rs.96,000/- . The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Sarla Dixit v.
Balwant Yadav, (1996) 3 SCC 179

has taken into

consideration the future prospects while in the present case it is
only the increase in the minimum wages under the Minimum
FAO No. 188/2003

page 5 of 8

Wages Act which has been taken into consideration.
The Tribunal has also not awarded any amount towards
pain and sufferings and has also deprived the appellant from
any compensation towards loss of amenities. Counsel for the
appellant has placed reliance on the judgment of the Supreme
Court in Amar Singh Vs. Ishwar & Ors. 1999 ACJ 809
and Dr. (Mrs.)K.R. Tandon Vs. Om Prakash & Ors.
1999 ACJ 1299.

In Amar Singh's case (Supra), the

injured had suffered the permanent disability to the extent of
30% and the Supreme Court has enhanced the amount from
Rs.50,000/- to Rs.1,00,000/-. However, the distinguished
feature

in

the said case is that the injured had suffered

prolonged period

of hospitalisation and had undergone

operations as well. Be that as it may, in the instant case the
appellant is entitled to

some reasonable and just amount

towards loss of amenities as well as pain and sufferings. The
possession of one's own body is the first and most valuable of

FAO No. 188/2003

page 6 of 8

all human rights and while awarding compensation for bodily
injuries this primary element is to be kept in mind. Bodily
injury is to be treated as a deprivation, which entitles a claimant
to damages. The amount of damages varies on account of
gravity of bodily injury. Though it is impossible to equate
money with human suffering, agony and personal deprivation,
the Court and Tribunal should make an honest and serious
attempt to award damages so far as the money can compensate
the loss. Regard must be given to the gravity and degree of
deprivation as well as the degree of awareness of the
deprivation. Damages awarded in personal injury cases must be
substantial and not token damages. The general principle which
should govern the assessment of damages in personal injury
cases is that the Court should award to injured person such a
sum as will put him in the same position as he would have been
in, if he had not sustained the injuries.
Considering the facts and circumstances of the present

FAO No. 188/2003

page 7 of 8

case, a sum of Rs.50,000/- is awarded

in favour of the

appellant towards pain and sufferings and sum of Rs.25,000/towards loss of amenities. The rate of interest as awarded by
the Tribunal is also on the lower side. Accordingly the same is
raised to 9% per annum.
In the light of above discussion, the matter is remitted
back to the Tribunal to modify the award in terms of the above
directions.
Parties are directed to appear before the Tribunal on
7.1.2008.
With these directions, appeal stands disposed of.

November 21, 2007
mg

FAO No. 188/2003

KAILASH GAMBHIR J.

page 8 of 8

