IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC APP.No. 559/2004
Judgment delivered on: November 22 ,2007
Uttar Pradesh State Road Transport Corp.
Through:

..... Appellant.

Ms.Neha Goyal, Advocate

versus
Smt. Indu & Ors.
Through:

..... Respondents
Mr.A.K.Verma, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR,
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
Aggrieved

with

the

impugned

award

the

appellant has assailed the findings of the Tribunal mainly
on four grounds. Firstly, the bus of the appellant had not
MAC APP. No. 559/2004

page 1 of 8

caused the accident; secondly, the respondent injured being
the police constable was entitled to medical reimbursement
and still the Tribunal has awarded a sum of Rs.45,000/towards medical expenses; thirdly, amount of Rs.15,000/has been awarded towards pain and sufferings and fourthly,
the Tribunal has considered the future prospects for
awarding the compensation.
Before dveling on the merits of the case, it would
be appropriate to give the brief facts of the case as under:
On 1.7.96, the respondent had boarded the bus
No. UP-14B-2510 from Khekhra for coming to Delhi at about
7.45 A.M.,

the conductor continued to get the passengers

boarding in the bus and the said bus became over crowded.
The driver of the said bus was driving at a very high speed,
without caring for the traffic rules . When the bus crossed
the village Mandola at Sahranpur to Delhi Road, the driver
while trying to overtake another vehicle in a very rash and
negligent manner got imbalanced the bus and the door of
the bus got opened due to which the respondent fell down
on the road from the said bus. The respondent sustained
MAC APP. No. 559/2004

page 2 of 8

head injuries and suffered several injuries on other parts of
the body.

She was admitted

in the GTB hospital and

continued to get the treatment but she could not be
completely recovered and had suffered permanent disability
to the extent of 75%.
Learned counsel for the appellant contends that
no FIR was registered against the driver of the alleged
offending vehicle. Counsel further contends that daily diary
entry was also not proved as the same was stated to have
been destroyed.

Counsel also contends that except one

witness there was no other eye witness. Counsel for the
appellant contends that testimony of the driver was not
relied upon by the Tribunal

who in his deposition clearly

stated that his bus was not involved in the accident.
On the second contention, counsel for the
appellant contends that the respondent

was

entitled to

medical reimbursement and if she had not applied for
medical reimbursement within the stipulated period, then
the appellant could not have been fastened with the liability
to pay the medical claim of the respondent. Relying upon
MAC APP. No. 559/2004

page 3 of 8

the Second schedule, on the third ground, counsel for the
appellant contends that for pain and sufferings the amount
as laid down in the Second Schedule is Rs.15,000/- and the
same position is with regard to the grant of compensation
towards special diet.

Counsel also contends that no

evidence was adduced by the respondent to prove grant of
any compensation for future prospects.
Per contra, Mr. A.K.Verma counsel for the
respondent seriously refutes the contentions raised by the
counsel for the appellant.

He states that the Tribunal has

passed just and fair award in favour of the respondent. He
contends that the respondent being an injured person then
she herself is the best witness to prove the negligence. He
further states that her deposition was duly supported by
another eye witness who entered the witness box as PW-6.
Counsel also contends that

daily diary no. 12A was duly

recorded, therefore, it cannot be said that the accident was
not reported to the police. Counsel also contends that due to
the serious injuries suffered by the respondent,
respondent could not claim
MAC APP. No. 559/2004

the

reimbursement within the
page 4 of 8

prescribed period. On future prospects, contention of the
counsel for the respondent is that the respondent had duly
proved in her deposition that she would have risen up to the
rank of Assistant Commissioner had she not received injuries
and suffered disability to the extent of 75%.
The present case involve the respondent who was
a head constable in the police. The respondent claimant had
suffered
which

injuries due to the occurrence of the accident in
she fell down from the bus because of the over

speeding of the bus due to which the bus lost control while
overtaking another vehicle.

The respondent being injured

herself is the best witness to

the exact occurrence of the

accident and besides that her deposition is duly supported
by the testimony of PW-6, who categorically stated that the
offending bus of the appellant was being driven at a very
fast speed and when it took a little turn, one lady passenger
from the bus fell down.

Ex. PW-5, Head Constable also

proved the copy of the daily diary which is exhibited as
Ex.PW-5/A and therefore, it cannot be said that the accident
was not reported to the police. It is a settled legal position
MAC APP. No. 559/2004

page 5 of 8

that unlike in a criminal case the case before Tribunal is
not to be proved beyond any reasonable doubt. The enquiry
before the Tribunal

is summary in nature. I do not find any

infirmity in the finding of the Tribunal holding the driver of
the appellant vehicle negligent in driving the said vehicle.
The contention of the appellant on the aspect of negligence
is thus repelled.
As regards the contention of the counsel for the
appellants on the

grant of Rs.45,000/- towards

medical

expenses, I do not find any force in the contention of the
counsel for the appellant as the respondent was not given
any medical reimbursement by the Department only on
account of the fact

the respondent could not apply for

medical reimbursement within the prescribed period of 90
days. It is evident that the respondent had suffered serious
injuries which led to the permanent disability to the extent of
75% and therefore, it cannot be ruled out that the
respondent must be in a great shock and trauma and might
not have been in a position to take timely steps to claim
medical reimbursement. This contention of the counsel for
MAC APP. No. 559/2004

page 6 of 8

the appellant is also rejected.
On the grant of compensation towards pain and
sufferings and for special diet, reliance has been placed by
the appellant on the Second Schedule of the Motor Vehicles
Act.

The structured formula in the Second Schedule was

brought in the

Statute

book in the year 1994 and

revision since then has been
Government

and

pronouncement

no

made therein by the Central

therefore,

as

per

of the Supreme Court in

the

recent

the case of

United India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Patricia

Jean

Mahajan,(2002) 6 SCC 281, the structured formula in the
Second Schedule has to be treated as a guide and the same
cannot

be

taken

as

a

ready

reckoner

for

granting

compensation under various heads. The relevant para of the
said judgment is reproduced as under:
“It is further observed that multiplier
method is the accepted method for determining
just compensation, which also brings about
uniformity and certainty of award. In para 18 it
has however, been observed about the Second
Schedule that neither the tribunals nor the court
can go by the ready reckoner, it can only be
used as a guide.”
MAC APP. No. 559/2004

page 7 of 8

The compensation granted by the Tribunal for
pain and suffering thus does not call for any interference.
On the aspect of the future prospects, the Tribunal
has taken into consideration the evidence adduced by the
respondent

wherein it was categorically stated that

normal course she would have reached

in

up to the rank of

Assistant Commissioner and it is only on account of the
permanent disability, that her future prospects have been
blocked.

There is thus no merit in the last submission of

counsel for the appellant as well.
I do not

find any infirmity in the finding of the

Tribunal.
Dismissed.

November 22, 2007
J.
mg

MAC APP. No. 559/2004

KAILASH GAMBHIR

page 8 of 8

