IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC APP. No. 164/2005
Judgment delivered on: October 23 ,2007
Smt. Sarbati
W/o Late Sh. Jagdish
R/o-595, Panna Udyan
Narela,
Delhi
Through:

..... Petitioner
Mr. O.P.Mannie, Advocate

versus
Sh. Kalu Khan & Ors.
Through:

..... Respondent
Ms. Ritu Bhardwaj, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR,
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Not necessary

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Not necessary

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Not necessary

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:

MAC APP No. 164/2005

page 1 of 6

The appellant is primarily aggrieved with the impugned
award dated 31.8.2004

passed by the Tribunal on account of

deduction of 3/4th of the income of the deceased towards his
personal expenses and also wrong application of the multiplier.
The appellant is a widowed mother of the deceased Sh.
Satpal, who died at the age of 28 years due to injuries sustained on
3.10.2001 in a road accident at about 9.00 a.m. near Gangwa Bus
stand within the jurisdiction of Police Station Parbatsar (Nagaur)
Rajasthan.

The deceased was driving Maruti Car bearing

registration No. RJ 21 C 5494 while travelling to Bakrana from
Parbatsar, Rajasthan when it collided with a bus bearing
registration No. RJ 09 P 1355, driven on the wrong side of the road
by Sh. Kalu Khan in a rash and negligent manner
The contention of Sh.O.P. Mannie, counsel for the
appellant is that the deceased was only survived by his widowed
mother and at the most

one half of the personal expenses could

have been taken into consideration so

as to determine the

dependency of the surviving dependent. Counsel for the appellant
MAC APP No. 164/2005

page 2 of 6

further contends that the multiplier of 11 has been made applicable
by the Tribunal which should have been at least 15 as per the
Second Schedule of the Motor Vehicles Act. Counsel contends that
on the date of the accident, age of the dependent mother was about
44 and a half years and this fact can be borne out from the age
disclosed by her in the deposition dated 27.1.2004 as a witness in
support of her claim petition. In the deposition the appellant has
stated her age as 48 years while the date of accident in the present
case is 3.10.2001. Based on this position, counsel for the appellant
states that the age of dependent mother was not more than 44 and
a half years on the date of accident.
Per contra, Ms.Ritu Bhardwaj, counsel for

the

respondent seriously refutes the contention raised by the counsel
for the respondent. She states that the respondent has already
taken a sympathetic view by not preferring an appeal against the
impugned order.
that

Counsel for the respondent further contends

no evidence was led by the appellant to disclose the correct

income of the deceased. Counsel for the respondent also contends
MAC APP No. 164/2005

page 3 of 6

that as per settled legal position in all such cases where the correct
income is not disclosed, resort has been made to the Second
Schedule of Section 163-A of the Motor Vehicles Act. As regards
multiplier, the contention of the counsel for the respondent is that
no age proof was placed on record by the appellant and due to
absence of the

same, the Court

has arrived at

the correct

multiplier taking into consideration the age of dependent appellant
as 48 years.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and
perused the award. Perusal of the award shows that the Tribunal
has deducted half of the income of the deceased

towards his

personal expenses and again has taken into consideration the
annual dependency of single parent at Rs. 14,400/- after deducting
the same amount from the annual income and in this manner the
Tribunal has taken into consideration 3/4th of the income of the
deceased towards personal expenses of the deceased.
I do not find any justification in deduction of 3/4th of
the

income of the deceased towards his personal expenses.

MAC APP No. 164/2005

page 4 of 6

However, I am not in agreement with the contention of counsel for
the appellant for considering 1/3rd of the income of the deceased
towards his personal expenses. The deceased was survived by his
mother alone and therefore, half of the income can be taken into
consideration towards his personal expenses. The impugned order
is accordingly modified to that extent.
As regards
shows that

the multiplier, the perusal of the award

the appellant has failed to

place on record

any

document in proof of her age, and therefore, in the absence of the
same, the Tribunal has rightly taken into consideration the age of
the appellant at 48 years as per the deposition made by her in the
evidence. Taking into consideration the said age of the appellant,
the

multiplier of 15 cannot be applied.

For determining the

multiplier as per the Second Schedule the age of the deceased in
comparison with the age of the dependent whichever is higher is to
be taken into consideration, therefore, the finding on the issue of
multiplier is upheld.
The matter is remitted back to the Tribunal to carry out
MAC APP No. 164/2005

page 5 of 6

recalculation in terms of the above position.
With these directions appeal stands disposed of.
Parties are directed to appear before the Tribunal on
30.11.2007.

October 23, 2007
mg

MAC APP No. 164/2005

KAILASH GAMBHIR J.

page 6 of 6

