IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC APP. 634-37/2005
Judgment delivered on: October 23rd, 2007
Smt. Seema Walia & Ors.
..... Appellants
Through: Mr.B.V.K. Ahluwalia, Advocate.
versus
Sh.R.P. Mishra & Ors.

Through:

..... Respondents
Mr.Pradeep Gaur, Advocate.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
*
By way of this appeal, the appellant has sought
enhancement of the compensation. The only ground for seeking
enhancement is that that the Tribunal has not taken into
consideration the salary certificate of the deceased, which as per
the counsel for the appellant was duly proved on record.
Mr.B.V.K. Ahluwalia, counsel for the appellant contends that the
MAC APP. 634-37/2005

Page 1 of 5

deceased was working as a supervisor with one Mr.Ashok Kumar
and was drawing a salary of Rs.6,500/- on the relevant date of the
accident in the present case.

Counsel also contends that the

salary of the deceased was duly proved by the appellant by
producing one Mr.Ashok Kumar who was employer of the
deceased.

Counsel

also contends that the said employer has

clearly deposed in his evidence about the employment of the
deceased with him and also about the fact of his drawing a salary
of Rs.6,500/- per month.

Counsel also contends that the

testimony of the said witness remains unimpinged as there was
no effective cross-examination on the deposition made by him in
his examination-in-chief.
Per contra, Mr.Pradeep Gaur, counsel appearing for the
respondent contends that the said witness Shri Ashok Kumar
miserably failed to prove the income of the deceased and even
the employment of the deceased with him. Counsel also contends
that the witness failed to produce the books of accounts, income
tax records or other assessment orders in respect of the returns
filed by him or even the balance sheet maintained by him.
Counsel also contends that the said witness had admitted in his
cross-examination that he was an income tax payee and has
MAC APP. 634-37/2005

Page 2 of 5

stated that he could produce the income tax record but still failed
to produce any such record before the Tribunal. Counsel, thus,
contends that there is no infirmity and perversity in the award
passed by the Tribunal as regards, the income of the deceased
which was taken according to the Minimum Wages Act and even
the future increase was considered by the Tribunal with full
multiplier.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and
perused the records. The cross-examination of the said witness
Mr.Ashok Kumar clearly shows that he had admitted that he was
income tax payee and he had shown the income of Rs.3 lakhs in
the previous assessment year.

He also stated that he could

produce the relevant income tax records. He also admitted that
he maintained his accounts regarding income from his business.
In the cross-examination he also stated that he was in possession
of the assessment order in respect of the income tax returns filed
by him but did not produce the same. He also did not produce
statement of accounts filed by him along with income tax return.
He also did not produce the carbon copy of the appointment letter
but merely produced the photocopy of the appointment letter.
The witness also stated that he had regular five employees
MAC APP. 634-37/2005

Page 3 of 5

besides 2-3 employees on daily wages. The cross-examination of
the said witness, thus, evidently shows that he was in possession
of all the relevant documents regarding the appointment of the
deceased

and

account

books,

income

tax

records

and

assessment order etc. but still failed to produce the same. In the
absence of these documents, the adverse inference has rightly
been drawn against the appellant.

Even the photocopy of the

appointment letter issued by the said employer was not signed by
the deceased as would be evident from cross-examination of the
employer.
In the light of the said testimony of Mr.Ashok Kumar
who failed to place any documentary evidence or any other
cogent material to prove the income of the deceased, I do not find
that there is any infirmity or perversity in the finding of the
Tribunal in disbelieving the income of the deceased at Rs.6,500/.
In the absence of proper and satisfactory evidence to prove the
income of the deceased, the Tribunal has taken resort to the
Minimum Wages Act and has also adopted the criteria laid down
in Sarla Dixit's case by taking into consideration the future
prospects.

MAC APP. 634-37/2005

Page 4 of 5

The appeal filed by the appellant is devoid of any
merits.
Dismissed.

October 23, 2007
ga

MAC APP. 634-37/2005

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.

Page 5 of 5

