IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
WP(C) No. 15232/2004
Judgment reserved on: July 9, 2007
Judgment delivered on: September ,2007
M.C.D

..... Petitioner
Through: Ms.Nandita Rao, Advocate
versus

Mr. Narender Kumar & Anr.
..... Respondents
Through: Mr. Sanjay Ghose, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
Yes
KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.
By way of this writ petition the petitioner seeks to challenge
the impugned award dated 18.9.2003 passed by the Labour Court No.IX,

W.P.(C). No. 15232/2004

page 1 of 12

Karkardooma Courts, Shahdara, Delhi. The brief facts for deciding the
present writ petition are that pursuant to industrial disputes raised by the
respondents, the appropriate Government made the following reference
for adjudication as under:

“Whether the services of S/Sh. Narender Kumar
and Inder Pal Sharma, casual/daily rated/muster
roll workers have been terminated illegally and/or
unjustifiably by the management and if so to what
relief are they entitled and what directions are
necessary in this respect?”

The Labour Court after taking into consideration the pleadings
filed by the parties, evidence led by them and the documents filed on
record, came to the conclusion that these respondents cannot be given
protection of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, as they did
not complete 240 days of

continuous service in a calendar year.

However, the Labour Court found violation of Section 25-G and 25-H of
the Industrial Disputes Act on the part of petitioner. This finding was
given by the Labour Court after referring to the cross-examination of
MW-I, adduced by the petitioner, who in his cross-examination admitted
the fact of appointment of some

Beldars during the year 1991-1992

without inviting the present respondents for their employment on the
W.P.(C). No. 15232/2004

page 2 of 12

said post of Beldars. The Labour Court thus gave directions to the
petitioner management to reinstate the respondents workmen with back
wages to the extent of 50% as admissible to them under the Industrial
Disputes (Central) Rules, 1957 w.e.f. 14.1.1990. Aggrieved with the said
order the petitioner management has preferred the present writ petition.
I have heard counsel for the parties and perused the records.
The main contention of the counsel for the petitioner is that the
respondents were engaged on daily wage basis for a seasonal work for a
limited period of 53 days in the Horticulture Department of MCD,
Shahdara (North) Zone and upon completion of the said work, their
services were disengaged w.e.f. 14.1.90. The counsel for the petitioner
further submitted that it is an admitted case between the parties that
respondents have not completed the requisite period of 240 days of
continuous employment in a particular year so as to claim protection
under Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, and, therefore, the
only issue which is required to be considered by this Court is whether
there is any violation

of Sections 25-G and 25-H of the Industrial

Disputes Act on the part of the petitioner. The thrust of the argument of
the counsel for the petitioner with regard to Sections 25-G and 25-H of
W.P.(C). No. 15232/2004

page 3 of 12

the I.D. Act is that once the respondents did not complete 240 days of
service, there could not have been any question of compliance of Sections
25-G and 25-H of the I.D. Act. Counsel for the petitioner management
contended that once, termination of the services of the respondents
cannot be considered to be retrenchment within the meaning of Section
25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, consequently,
Sections 25-G and 25-H

the provisions of

also cannot be made applicable to such

workmen.
Mr. Sanjay Ghosh, counsel for the respondents on the other
hand did not press his argument with regard to Section 25-G of the I.D.
Act and confined his submissions only to Section 25-H of the I.D. Act.
The contention of the counsel for the respondents is that admittedly, the
petitioner management had deployed/engaged Beldars in the year 199192 after terminating the services of the present respondents. Counsel for
the respondent further contended that this admission has been made by
the witness produced by the management itself, who in his deposition has
categorically stated that in the year 1991-92 appointments were made on
the post of Beldars.

Admittedly,

the present respondents were not

considered at the time of appointment on the said post of Beldars and no
W.P.(C). No. 15232/2004

page 4 of 12

letter or any notice was given to the respondents in the year 1991-92 when
other Beldars were appointed.
contended

The counsel for the respondents thus

that violation of Section 25-H stands admitted by the

petitioner itself. Counsel for the petitioner management, in reply, thereto
contended that the employment of the respondents was purely temporary
and contractual in nature, against seasonal work for a specified period of
53 days and therefore, it cannot be said that their services were
terminated by the petitioner management.
Counsel for the respondents has relied upon the judgment of
S.M.Nilajkar & Ors. Vs. Telecom District Manager, Karnataka,
JT 2003 (3) SC 436 to put across his point that in order to exclude the
termination of a scheme/project from the definition of retrenchment it is
for the employer to prove the ingredients of S.2(oo)(bb) of the I.D. Act.
Counsel for the respondents has also placed reliance on the judgment of
the Apex Court in Samishta Dubey Vs. Citi Board, Etawah & Anr.,
1999 II AD (SC) 257, Amar Pal & Anr. Vs. MCD, 2006 II AD
(Del) 43

and Central Bank of India Vs. S. Satyam, 1996 SCC

(L&S) 1273 in support of his argument that for application of Section 25H of the I.D. Act, workmen who have even less than 240 days of service
W.P.(C). No. 15232/2004

page 5 of 12

are also protected. Furthermore, where any workman is retrenched and
the employer proposes to take into employment any other person, then,
such a retrenched person should be considered first for re-employment
when he offers himself for employment.
Para 7 of Central Bank of India (supra) is reproduced
below:“7. Section 25-H then provides for reemployment of retrenched workmen. It says
that when the employer proposes to take into
his employ any persons, he shall, in such
manner as may be prescribed, give an
opportunity to the retrenched workmen who are
citizens of India to offer themselves for reemployment, and such retrenched workmen
who offer themselves for re-employment shall
have preference over other persons. Rules 77
and 78 of the Industrial Disputes (Central)
Rules, 1957 prescribe the mode of reemployment. Rule 77 requires maintenance of
seniority list of all workmen in a particular
category
from
which
retrenchment
is
contemplated arranged according to seniority of
their service in that category and publication of
that list. Rule 78 prescribes the mode of reemployment of retrenched workmen. The
requirement in Rule 78 is of notice in the
manner prescribed to every one of all the
retrenched workmen eligible to be considered
for re-employment. Shri Pai contends that Rules
77 and 78 are unworkable unless the
application of Section 25-H is confined to the
category of retrenched workmen to whom
Section 25-F applies. We are unable to accept
W.P.(C). No. 15232/2004

page 6 of 12

this contention.”

Para 25 of Amar Pal's case (supra) is reproduced below:
“The rights of daily wagers have fallen for
consideration in several cases both before the
Apex Court as well as this Court. Im Samishtha
Dubey's case (supra) the Apex Court has held
that the workman who have seven less that 240
days of service would be entitled to the
protection
of Section 25 F, G & H of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1957.
In Central Bank of India Vs. S. Satyam and
others 1996 SCC L&S 1273, it was held by the
Apex Court that the applicability of the Section
25H was not confined to workmen who were in
continuous service for one year or both only.
Th principle of ' last come, first go' has to be
complied in respect of daily wagers in service
for a period of less than 240 days as well.”

The counsel for the respondent has also relied on the judgment
of MCD Vs. Asha Ram & Anr., 2005 (II) AD (Del) 285 to support
his contention that High Court can exercise its powers under Article 226
to interfere in the Award of the Labour Court only when the award
suffers from an error of jurisdiction or is made in breach of the principles
of natural justice or is vitiated by a manifest or apparent error of law and
not otherwise.

Relevant portion of para 6 of the said judgment is

W.P.(C). No. 15232/2004

page 7 of 12

reproduced below:

“6. The position of law in respect of
interference by Writ Court under Article 226 of
the Constitution is well settled in view of the
following:
(a) The Supreme Court in para 5 in
Sadhu
Ram
v.
Delhi
Transport
Corporation, AIR 1984 SC 1967 observed“.........nor we think that it was right
for the High Court to interfere with the
Award of the Labour Court under
Article 226 on a mere technically.
Article 226 is a device to secure and
advance justice and not otherwise. In
the result, we allow the appeal, set
aside the judgment of the High Court
and restore the Award of the Presiding
Officer.”
(b) The Supreme Court in Harbans Lal v.
Jag Mohan, (1985) 4 SCC 333 in Para 5
held as under—
“.......The
limitations
on
the
jurisdiction of the High Court under
Article 226 of the Constitution are well
settled. The Writ Petition before he
High Court prayed for a writ in the
nature of certiorari, and it is well
known that a writ in the nature of
certiorari may be issued only if the
order of the inferior tribunal of
W.P.(C). No. 15232/2004

page 8 of 12

subordinate Court suffers from an
error of jurisdiction, or from a breach
of the principles of natural justice or is
vitiated by a manifest or apparent
error of law. There is no sanction
enabling the High Court to reappraise
the evidence without sufficient reason
in law and reach finding of fact
contrary to those rendered by an
inferior Court or subordinate Court.
When a High Court proceeds to do so,
it acts plainly in excess of its power.”

I find

merit

in the submissions of counsel for the

respondents so far Section 25-H of the Industrial Disputes Act is
concerned.

Section 25-H of the I.D. Act does enjoin a duty on the

employer to give an opportunity to the retrenched workman, in the event
of employer proposing to take into his employment any person on the
same post, and in such an eventuality the retrenched workman who
offers himself for re-employment shall have

preference

over other

person. The Supreme Court in Samishta Dube's case (supra) has
held that the definition of 'workman' in industrial law is not restricted to
regular employees and the same would also include daily wagers and the
rule of seniority is applicable to daily wagers also. With this settled legal
position, the only ground which was available to the petitioner
management was to bring its case within the scope of Section 2 (oo) (bb)
W.P.(C). No. 15232/2004

page 9 of 12

of the Industrial Disputes Act which is an exception to Sections 25-F, G &
H of the Industrial Disputes Act. Although, in the present petition as well
as in the reply filed by the petitioner management to the statement of
claim

of respondents workmen, a plea has been taken that these

workmen were employed on daily wages for seasonal work for a period
of 53 days

but no document in support

thereof was placed by the

petitioner to support the said assertion of seasonal employment of the
respondents workmen for a limited period of 53 days. In the absence of
any documentary

or oral evidence adduced by the petitioner

management it is difficult to believe the said assertion of the petitioner
management.

There cannot be any dispute that all the documents

relating to appointment of the respondents workmen were in power and
possession of the petitioner

MCD and it was

for the petitioner

management to establish that the case of the respondents workmen falls
within the exception

as provided

Industrial Disputes Act.

under Section 2 (oo) (bb) of the

In the evidence

adduced by the petitioner

management the witness pleaded his ignorance about the specific work
and specific duration for which the services of the respondents workmen
were taken. The said witness also admitted that some of the persons
W.P.(C). No. 15232/2004

page 10 of 12

were appointed as Beldar, in the later period,

after retrenchment of

the present workmen from their said job of Beldar. In view of such clear
admission on the part of the witness produced by the petitioner, no
credence can be given to the bald assertion of the petitioner , pleading
the case of seasonal employment covered within the said exception of
Section 2(oo)(bb) of the I.D. Act.
In the light of the aforesaid discussion, I do not find any merit
in the present writ petition.

The case of the respondent is squarely

covered under Section 25-H of the I.D. Act.

Since the respondent has

not pressed his claim with regard to Section 25-G of the I.D. Act,
therefore, findings of the Tribunal with regard to Section 25-G of the I.D.
Act are set aside and to that extent the present petition is partly allowed.
However, the findings of the Tribunal are upheld so far Section 25-H of
I.D. Act is concerned. The present writ petition, therefore, fails so far
Section 25-H is concerned.
With these directions, the present petition is disposed of.

W.P.(C). No. 15232/2004

page 11 of 12

September , 2007

W.P.(C). No. 15232/2004

KAILASH GAMBHIR
(JUDGE)

page 12 of 12

