IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
WP(C) No. 4412/2005
Judgment reserved on: 2.8.2007
Judgment delivered on: September
Smt. Swapna Sood
W/o Shri Sunil Sood,
R/o 1/16, First Floor,
Old Rajinder Nagar,
New Delhi

, 2007

..... Petitioner
Through: Mr. M.A. Niyazi with
Ms. Anamika Gahi, Advs.
versus

1.

Directorate of Education
Vikas Bhawan, I.T.O.
New Secretariat,
Delhi

2.

Army Welfare Education Society (AWES)
Through its Director
HQ Delhi Area,
Delhi Cantt – 110 010

3.

Army Public School
Through its Principal
Ridge Road, Dhaula Kuan
New Delhi – 110 010

..... Respondents

Through: Ms.Avnish Ahlawat with
Nidhi Gupta, Ms. Simran and
WP 4412 of 2005

page 1 of 37

Ms. Latika
Chaudhary,
for R-1.
Mr. Kartik Anand, Adv. for
2.
Mr. R.R. Ojha, Adv. for R-3.

Advs.
RCORAM:

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.
By way of present writ petition, the petitioner has sought
quashing of interview dated 17th February, 2005, held or the
appointment of Post Graduate Teacher (PGT) (Chemistry) against
regular post in respondent No. 3 school. The petitioner has further
sought direction for regularization of her appointment as PGT
(Chemistry) in respondent No. 3 school on the basis of Combined
Screening Board (CSB) Exam held in the year 2004 and interview in
May, 2004.
WP 4412 of 2005

page 2 of 37

Brief facts necessary for the decision of the present petition in
nutshell, inter alia, are that the petitioner was appointed initially on
contract basis by respondent No. 3 w.e.f. 14th July, 2003 to 30th April,
2004.

As

per

the

rules/procedure/guidelines

formulated

by

respondent No. 2 for seeking appointment of a regular teacher
against the post of TGT/PGT, the requirement is to clear the test of
Combined Screening Board and after qualifying such test the
candidates are given score cards. It is not in dispute that the
petitioner had qualified the written test of CSB and she was issued a
score card, which has been placed by the petitioner on record. This
score card indicates that serial number of the petitioner is 41866 and
it further shows that the petitioner had qualified written exam for
Combined Screening Board held in the year 2004. This screening
card was issued in favour of the petitioner on 27th January, 2004.
When a person qualifies the test whether CSB or LSB, that makes him
or her eligible to appear for the final interview either for the post of
TGT or PGT. The petitioner stated that she was called for interview by
the Selection Committee constituted by respondent No. 2 society for

WP 4412 of 2005

page 3 of 37

her appointment against a regular vacancy of PGT (Chemistry). The
petitioner further stated that the interview of the petitioner was
conducted as per the rules/procedures adopted by the Selection
Committee, which comprised of the representative of the Chairman of
the school, head of the school and expert in the subject besides other
members. The petitioner further stated that the petitioner had duly
qualified the said interview. The petitioner further stated that even
after qualifying the interview the petitioner was not given any
appointment letter, but was again appointed on contractual basis vide
appointment letter dated 14th July, 2004 for a period of one year
w.e.f. 1st July, 2004 to 30th June, 2005. When the said appointment
was not given to the petitioner on the basis of her qualifying the said
interview, she was told by the school that still the petitioner will have
to qualify the Combined Screening Board Interview and only
thereafter she will be considered for the appointment on the said post
of PGT (Chemistry). With this impression in mind the petitioner kept
on waiting for the CSB interview to be conducted by respondents No.
2 and 3. In the year 2005 CSB was held but the petitioner was not

WP 4412 of 2005

page 4 of 37

called for the interview and she was informed that 12 candidates were
called for interview by the selection board for selecting candidates for
the post of PGT (Chemistry) available in the cluster of three schools
of respondent No. 2 society. The petitioner was also intimated that
percentage of the last candidate called for interview in the CSB by the
selection board was 62.5%. Aggrieved with the said actions of
respondent No. 2, the petitioner has preferred the present petition.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties at considerable
length. The main thrust of argument of the counsel for the petitioner
revolves around the selection of the petitioner against the regular
post of PGT (Chemistry) after she was declared as successful by the
Selection Committee.

The counsel had drawn my attention to the

letter dated 21st June, 2004 issued by respondent No. 2. This letter is
a kind of covering letter, forwarding therewith, the result of the
selected candidates for which the interview was held by the Selection
Committee. This letter is addressed by respondent No. 2 to all the
schools of their cluster and it states that appointment letters in terms
of the said selection be issued in favour of the selected candidates as

WP 4412 of 2005

page 5 of 37

per the terms and conditions laid in the same. The name of the
present petitioner appears at serial No. 8 against the post of PGT
(Chemistry). The same indicates that she was duly selected by the
said Selection Committee. The counsel contended that once the
petitioner was selected by the Selection Board and the society had
given directions to all the concerned schools of their cluster, then as
to why the appointment letter in terms of the said letter dated 21st
June, 2004 was not issued to the petitioner. The counsel also
contended that once the petitioner was selected against a regular post
then where was the need to appoint the petitioner on contractual
basis from 1st July, 2004 to 30th June, 2005. The counsel for the
petitioner also contended that once the petitioner was selected
against the said regular post of PGT (Chemistry), then, no fresh
process of appointment on the said post as far as Army Public School,
Dhaula Kuan is concerned, could have taken place. The counsel also
contended that the said selection process in the year 2005 was
illegally undertaken by respondent No. 2 with a mala fide intention to
deprive the petitioner from the said post of PGT (Chemistry). The

WP 4412 of 2005

page 6 of 37

counsel further contended that the mala fide intention of respondent
No. 2 was apparent from the fact that a wrong information was
rendered to the petitioner by stating that 12 candidates were called
for the interview while the list of candidates, placed by the
respondent on record showed that there were 15 candidates, who had
participated in the interview. The counsel further contended that the
petitioner was intimated that the last candidate, who was called for
interview, possessed 62.5% marks, while Ms. Renu Aggarwal, who
was shown at serial No. 13, scored 187 marks in the written
examination out of total 350 marks, which approximately comes to
53% marks. Counsel also contends that the said candidate, who had
secured 53% marks was not only permitted for the interview, but she
was also recommended as one of the selected candidates.
Per contra, Mr. R.R. Ojha, counsel appearing for respondent
No. 3 mainly contended that the reliefs as claimed by the petitioner in
the present petition cannot be granted in her favour. Counsel
contended that prayer (a) in which the petitioner has sought quashing
of the interview dated 17th February, 2005 is not available to the

WP 4412 of 2005

page 7 of 37

petitioner as the eligible candidates, who had secured the requisite
laid down percentage of marks, were only called for interview and
since for that particular interview the petitioner did not fulfill the
eligibility criteria of scoring the requisite marks, therefore, the said
relief of seeking quashing of the interview dated 17th February, 2005
cannot be held to be available to the petitioner. Prayer (b) is also not
available to the petitioner as per the contention of the counsel for the
respondent No.3. The counsel stated that the petitioner is seeking
regularization on the post of PGT (Chemistry) without there being
any appointment in her favour on the said post. The counsel also
contended that the petitioner can only claim her right to participate
in the process, but cannot claim any right to seek the appointment
itself. The counsel also contended that even this Court cannot issue
any such direction for appointment of a person unless such a person
is so appointed by the concerned authorities. Counsel for the
respondent stated that in the year 2004 there was only one candidate
and there was only one vacancy in July, 2004 and that is why the
petitioner was not given the appointment letter and that is the reason

WP 4412 of 2005

page 8 of 37

for giving her another appointment letter on contractual basis.
Counsel appearing for respondent No. 2, Mr. Kartike Anand
states that as far as the schools run by the Society are concerned,
the society is bound by the provisions of the Delhi School Education
Act and the Rules framed thereunder. Counsel further contended that
as far as the selection process, which was undertaken by the society in
the year 2005 is concerned, still the process for constituting a
Selection Committee in compliance with the provisions of Rule 96 of
the Delhi School Education Rules was to take place and, therefore, no
finality could be attached to the result declared by the Selection
Committee of CSB held in the year 2005. Counsel also contended that
the petitioner had simply qualified the CSB written exam, but still she
was required to undergo and qualify the final interview of the CSB
and since the petitioner was not eligible as far as 2005 CSB was
concerned having not scored the cut off marks, so she was not called
for an interview.
Counsel for respondent No.2 has also placed reliance on the
judgment reported in 2002 VI AD (Delhi) 109 Smt. Asha Vij &

WP 4412 of 2005

page 9 of 37

Others vs The Chief of the Army Staff and Others in support
of his argument that the writ petition filed by the petitioner is not
maintainable against respondent No. 2 society under Article 12 of the
Constitution of India as the society would not fall within the ambit of
the expression “State”.
Counsel for respondent No.2 society has further placed reliance
on the following judgments in support of the contention that the
society being registered under the Societies Registration Act and
being neither controlled nor managed by the Government of India or
a State Government, therefore, cannot be held to be State under
Article 12 of the Constitution of India.

Counsel for the respondent

no.2 has placed reliance on the judgments mentioned below:
1. UOI vs. Chote Lal & Anr. AIR 1999 SC 376
2. Asha Khosa vs. Chairman, Army Public School
(SLP (Civil No. 6482/97).
3.Ram Lubhai vs. Secretary, MOD 2004 Lab IC 1319
4. Hem Chand vs. UOI, CWP No. 8308/2001, P&H HC
(DB)
5. A.K. Upadhyaya vs UOI, CWP No. 23130/2004, ALL
HC
WP 4412 of 2005

page 10 of 37

6. K.C. Tewari vs. UOI, CWP No. 17380/1992, All HC.
7. Nijmullah Ansari vs. UOI, WP (C) No. 6191/2005,
Gauhati
HC.
Besides placing reliance on the aforesaid judgments the counsel
for respondent No.2 also contended that even if it is held that under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India the society respondent No. 2
is amenable to the writ jurisdiction then the remedy of the petitioner
does not lie under Article 226 of the Constitution of India on account
of the fact that the service of the petitioner was contractual in nature
and the same cannot be enforced by invoking writ jurisdiction of this
Hon'ble Court. The counsel appearing for respondent No. 3, Mr. R.R.
Ojha, Advocate, also seriously refuted the arguments of the counsel
for the petitioner. Mr. Ojha contended that the petitioner has no right
to be appointed on the post of PGT (Chemistry) as she has never
qualified the CSB interview, which is a prerequisite for selecting a
candidate to the aforesaid post. The counsel further contended that
the petitioner was selected in the LSB interview conducted on 24th
May, 2004 and on the same basis she was appointed again on a fixed
tenure for a period w.e.f. 1.7.2004 to 30th June, 2005. As regards CSB
WP 4412 of 2005

page 11 of 37

interview held on 17th February, 2005, the contention of the counsel
was that the petitioner was rightly not allowed to participate in the
said interview as she did not score the cut off marks of 62.5% as laid
down by respondent No.2 society for drawing a fresh panel of
candidates for the purpose of CSB interview. The counsel also
contended that no selection as per the mandate of Rule 96 of the
Delhi School Education Rules has taken place and, therefore, the
petitioner cannot claim to have been legally and validly selected on
the said post of PGT (Chemistry). Counsel contended that she was not
appointed against the existing vacancy and she does not have any
vested right for regularization of her service unless she is selected by
the Selection Committee duly constituted by respondent No.2 under
Rule 96 of the Delhi School Education Rules. The counsel for the
respondent school also contended that since the petitioner had
already accepted the contractual appointment for a temporary period
of one year w.e.f. 1.7.2004 to 30.6.2005, therefore, the petitioner
having acquiesced to her such appointment cannot now claim
contrary to the same. The contention of the counsel for the

WP 4412 of 2005

page 12 of 37

respondent school is that the petitioner has never challenged her
said contractual appointment and once having accepted the same
cannot turn around, and now claim appointment against a regular
post without having been selected in accordance with Rule 96 of the
Delhi School Education Rules. In support of his arguments counsel
for respondent No. 2 placed reliance on the judgment reported in JT
2003 (5) SC 144 Dr. (Mrs.) Chanchal Goyal vs. State of
Rajasthan, wherein the Supreme Court has held that unless the
initial recruitment is regularized through a prescribed agency and the
appointment is made on a regular basis, there is no scope of
regularization. Counsel for respondent No. 3 also placed reliance on
the judgment reported in 1963 (1996) DLT 150 entitled Satya
Prakash Vermani vs. Govt. of NCT of Delhi and Ors. in
support of the proposition that once the petitioner having accepted
her appointment on the contractual basis for a temporary period then
right to challenge the validity of such an order is barred by the
doctrine of estoppel and waiver. Both the counsels appearing for the
respondents also laid considerable emphasis on the self written letter

WP 4412 of 2005

page 13 of 37

of the petitioner dated 16.2.2005 in which the petitioner had clearly
admitted that she was yet to appear for CSB interview. In this letter
the petitioner also made a request to the Principal of the school to
allow her to appear in the CSB interview scheduled to be held on 17th
February, 2005. Both the counsels also contended that in all 12
candidates were called for CSB interview for the vacancy of PGT
(Chemistry) and these candidates were shortlisted on the basis of
their respective merit in the CSB written exam and percentage of the
last candidate called for interview was 62.5%. The petitioner who had
secured 53% was, thus, not eligible to be considered for the CSB
interview which was held on 17th February, 2005 and there was
nothing wrong on the part of the respondents in not calling the
petitioner for the CSB interview held on 17th February, 2005. Counsel
for respondents No. 2 and 3 also contended that no relief can be given
to the petitioner in terms of the prayers made in the present writ
petition.
In prayer (a) the petitioner has sought writ of mandamus for
quashing of interview dated 17th February, 2005 and in reply to this

WP 4412 of 2005

page 14 of 37

prayer paragraph the contention of the counsel for the respondent
No. 2 is that once the petitioner did not qualify the laid down criteria
of scoring minimum percentage, therefore, the petitioner cannot seek
quashing of interview dated 17th February, 2005 in which she was not
eligible to participate. In prayer (b) the petitioner has sought
directions against the respondents for her regularization on the post
of the PGT (Chemistry) on the basis of 2004 CSB exam and LSB
interview of May, 2004. In this regard counsel appearing for the
respondent No. 3 says that since no appointment of the petitioner
was made on the said post, therefore, the petitioner cannot seek any
direction from this Court for her regularization. The contention of
both the counsel appearing for respondents nos. 2 & 3 is that
regularization should follow the appointment and it cannot be vise
versa.
After giving my thoughtful and anxious consideration to the
arguments advanced by counsel for the parties and perusal of the
documents placed on record including the original record placed by
respondent No.2 my conclusions are as follows:-

WP 4412 of 2005

page 15 of 37

There is no doubt that respondent No. 3 school is being run by
respondent No. 2 society, which is a society registered under the
Societies Registration Act. It is also not in dispute that the respondent
school although unaided, but is a duly recognized school, recognized
by the Directorate of Education, Govt. of NCT of Delhi and provisions
of Delhi School Education Act and the Rules framed thereunder are
fully applicable to respondents No. 2 and 3. It is also not in dispute
that the appointment of any teacher be it regular or ad hoc has to take
place through the Selection Committee duly constituted in
accordance with Rule 96 of the Delhi School Education Rules and
unless the mandate of Rule 96 is followed in the selection of the
petitioner, the appointment of the petitioner cannot be considered to
be legal and valid on the said regular post of PGT (Chemistry). It also
cannot be in dispute that the petitioner has no vested right of
appointment or of regularization and the only right she has, is to be
considered for an appointment on the regular post by the Selection
Committee duly constituted under Rule 96 of the Delhi School
Education Rules. In view of the said position, the precise question to

WP 4412 of 2005

page 16 of 37

be answered by this Court is as to whether the petitioner was lawfully
and validly selected in terms of Rule 96 of the Delhi School Education
Rules or not.

Before adverting to

Rule 96 of the Delhi School

Education Rules, it may be pointed out that respondent No. 2 has
evolved an elaborate selection procedure for the appointment of
teachers through the process of conducting Combined Screening
Board (in short referred to as CSB) and Local Screening Board (in
short referred to as LSB). The candidates who qualify the written test
either LSB or CSB are given authenticated “score cards”. This score
card, issued by the respondents, gives details as to when the
candidate has qualified a particular written test and for which post,
including the percentage scored by the candidate in part A and B
exams. The guidelines of respondent No.2 school for the selection of
teachers through CSB and LSB are reproduced below:-

“CONDUCT OF COMBINED SCREENING BOARD
(CSB) & LOCAL SCREENING BOARD (LSB)
•

CSB is conducted once every year for the following
categories:

➔

For fresh applicants of PGTs, TGTs & PRTs.
For PGTs/TGTs/PRTs appointed earlier on ad hoc

➔

WP 4412 of 2005

page 17 of 37

➔

•

basis.
For teachers seeking higher grade i.e. PRT to TGT
and TGT to PGT.
LSB is conducted for PRTs.

Procedure in Outline
•

CSB and LSB is conducted in three stages as
under:-

Written Test (200 Marks) -09 Jan 2005 (Sunday).
Interview – (200 Marks) – PGT & TGT – 15 to 25
Feb
every year. PRT-2nd/3rd
week Mar & 3rd/4th week
Jun.
Teaching Skills (200 Marks) – for short listed
candidates
after interview.

➔
➔

➔

Written Test
•
Qualifying in the written test only makes you
eligible for a panel interview. Reporting time
0900 hrs.

(a) Part A
(Commo
n
for
PGT/TG
T/PRT)

General
90
Min
Awareness, Mental (0930 –
Ability,
English 1100h)
Comprehension,
Educational
Concept
and
Methodology

(b) Part B
Subject
Specific 2 hrs
(PGT & (Less English & (1130TGT)
Hindi
1330h)

WP 4412 of 2005

PGT
&
TGT-80
Marks
PRT 200
Marks

Objectiv
e type Q
Paper
using
QMR

120
Marks

Objectiv
e type Q
paper
using
QMR

page 18 of 37

(c) Part B
English, Hindi
Languag
es (PGT
& TGT)

•

2
hrs 120
(1130Marks
1330 h)

90 Mks
Objectiv
e
30
Mks
Descript
ive

To qualify you must score 50% in EACH Part 'A' and 'B'
(PFT & TGT) and Part A ONLY(PRT). “

PGT/TGT Qualifying in Part A entitles you for a PRT 'Score Card'.”

The CSB and LSB procedure are further defined in the
guidelines and the same are also reproduced as under:“12. Category. CSB will be for following category of
teachers:(a)
For PGTs/TGTs who were earlier employed on
Adhoc basis.
(b)

For fresh applications of PGTs/TGTs.

(c)For upgradation of PRTs in TGTs and TGTs in PGTs.
13.
CSB (interviews) will be conducted from 15-21
Feb. This will consist of two or more Boards per
Command
making
clusters
at
Sub
Area/Area/Div/Corps level. If a school is located in
distant and isolated place, Comd. HQ may have a
separate board exclusively for that school, e.g. Srinagar,
Dinjan.
14.
Convening of CSB. HQ Commands will be
responsible for convening requisite no of CSBs based
on their cluster of schools.

15.
WP 4412 of 2005

Composition (CSB).
page 19 of 37

Presiding Officer
Members

- Brig
- All Principals,
Eminent
Educationalist,
Subject Expert and
Psychologist
(desirable).

Notes:
1.
All Principals of the cluster will be members,
however, only two will sit in for any interview; Out of
these two, one Principal must be of the school for
which the particular candidate is being interviewed.
2.
For CSB having only one school i.e. only one
Principal the second Principal will be invited from any
local school.
16.
Interview. Each CSB will conduct the interview
in one location. In the interview following aspects
should be evaluated:(a)

Confidence and ability to communicate

TEACHERS
SELECTION
THROUGH CSB & LSB

PROCEDURE

(b)
(c)

Knowledge and clarity of concepts.
Ability to Contribute to extra circular activities.

(d)

General Awareness.

(e)

Computer literacy

(f)

Experience

(g)

Attitude

(h)

Whether teacher has the requisite QR.

WP 4412 of 2005

page 20 of 37

(i)

Emotional balance and stability.

17.

Merit List & Weightages
(a)
(b)

Written Test
Interview

- 200 marks
- 200 marks

18.
A candidate must score 50% marks in written
test (Aggregate of two papers) to qualify for interview.
In interview also minimum qualifying percentage is 50.
A candidate qualifying both in written test and
interview will be approved. Merit list will be made
taking both the written test and interview into
consideration. Appointment will made based on the
merit list. Those approved but not in merit will be kept
in the reserve panel. In case an approved candidate
does not join or a vacancy occurs in mid session,
candidates from this panel may be appointed. The
reserve panel will remain effective for current academic
session only.
19.
'B'.

Format for preparing Merit Sheets as per Appx

20.
Appointing Selected Teachers. presiding Officer
of CSB will send the Bd Proceedings to reach HQ
Comds and respective Chairman by 05 Mar. HQ Comd
will confirm the Proceedings by 15 Mar. Chairman may
issue appointment letters wef 20 Mar even if
confirmation from HQ Comd has not been recd.
LSB.
21.

LSB will be for following category of teachers:-

(b)

Primary Teachers (PRTs).

(c)
Adhoc Teachers employed as TGTs or PGTs
(those who could not be screened through CSB).
(d)
Activity Teachers – Through LSB without
written test.
WP 4412 of 2005

page 21 of 37

TEACHERS
SELECTION
THROUGH CSB & LSB.

PROCEDURE

22.
It will be conducted and composed similar to
CSB, except Presiding Officer who may be of the rank of
Colonel if necessary. Written paper will be prepared by
SMC.
23.
LSB will be conducted in the period May-Jul,
after CSB has been completed. Screening will be
organized by School Mgt. Committee. The procedure
will consist of local advt., shortlisting written test,
interview and appointment of teachers.
Other Instructions
24.
TGTs selected through CSB will be on probation
for 1 year, which may be extended upto maximum 2
years. Thereafter their appointment will stand
confirmed.
25.
A TGT, if qualified, may be upgraded to PGT
after screening through a CSB for PGT selection (i.e.
incl. written test).
26.
Similarly a PRT, if qualified may be upgraded to
TGT after screening through a CSB or TGT selection
(i.e. incl written test).
27.
A candidate who has been found fit by CSB will
not have to appear for written test again if he/she
applies for another school. However, they will be put
through interview to finalise the inter se merit. In such
cases their merit position in new school will be decided
based on the marks of interview.
28.
For those who are initially employed as Adhoc
teachers after LSB and are subsequently selected by
CSB, he/she can be considered for direct enrolment
without going through CSB. This discretion rests with
WP 4412 of 2005

page 22 of 37

SMC.
29.
For those who are initially employed as Adhoc
teachers after LSB and are subsequently selected by
CSB, the Adhoc period will be considered as on
probation. Even in such cases they will be under
probation for a minimum period of 6 months as a
regular teacher.”

From the perusal of the aforesaid selection procedure devised
by respondent No. 2 Society, it is evident that the Presiding Officer of
the Board of CSB is a rank of a Brigadier, while that of the LSB is of a
rank of a Colonel. It further differentiates that CSB selection
procedure is for the appointment of PGT/TGT whether through fresh
applications or for those who are already employed on ad hoc basis.
The CSB is also for upgradation of primary teachers to the TGT and
from TGT to PGT. Whereas, LSB is for the appointment of primary
teachers, activity teachers and it is also meant for the candidates
aspiring to become PGT and TGT who could not be screened through
the CSB process. In the case of the petitioner it is not denied that she
has qualified the CSB test in the year 2004 but as per the counsel for
respondents no. 2 & 3 for selection to the post of PGT (Chemistry)
she

was required to qualify the CSB interview. However, in the

WP 4412 of 2005

page 23 of 37

present case, the petitioner had qualified the LSB interview, which as
per the respondents is prescribed for appointment of ad hoc teachers.
However, as per the petitioner, there is no difference between LSB
and CSB screening procedure, if the procedure is in due compliance
with the provisions of Rule 96 of the Delhi School Education Rules.
Although, sub-clause (c) of Clause 21 of the said Selection procedure
is not correctly and aptly worded, as the same refers to ad hoc
teachers already employed as TGT or PGT and as per the respondents
the said sub clause deals with the fresh appointment of ad hoc
teachers as TGT/PGT. Clause 29 of the said Guidelines dispel the said
confusion to some extent as it states that the teachers, who are
initially employed as ad hoc teachers after LSB, their ad hoc period
will be considered as probation if they are subsequently selected by
the process of CSB. Therefore, a combined reading of sub rule (b) &
(c) of rule 21 and sub rule 28 of the Selection Procedure shows that
the LSB procedure is meant for appointment of primary teachers and
activity teachers and for ad hoc appointment of teachers on the post
of TGT or PGT. With this position, the pertinent question would be

WP 4412 of 2005

page 24 of 37

what is the sanctity of these guidelines and whether they are strictly
being followed in practice or not
In the present case, the petitioner had qualified CSB written
examination in the year 2004 by securing over all 53% while she was
already in the ad hoc employment of the school w.e.f. 14th July, 2003
to 30th April, 2004. Thereafter, the petitioner was asked to appear for
LSB interview, which was held on 24th May, 2004. The LSB, which
was held on 24th May, 2004 was in fact comprised of all the necessary
members as are required in accordance with Rule 96 of the Delhi
School Education Rules. The meeting of this Board was presided over
by Brigadier G.S. Rathor with a subject expert and the concerned
heads of the schools, where the said regular vacancy for the post of
PGT (Chemistry) existed. The perusal of the original record produced
by respondent No.3 clearly shows that the petitioner was selected in
the said LSB interview and the word 'selected' is duly mentioned
against her name in the list of selected candidates. It is also noticed
from this list of selected candidates that wherever the person is
appointed on ad hoc basis the same is duly indicated in the said list

WP 4412 of 2005

page 25 of 37

itself. The perusal of the record further shows that vide letter dated
21st June, 2004, respondent No.2 through their Director, AWES had
duly conveyed the list of selected candidates to all members of the
cluster with a request to issue appointment letters in favour of the
selected candidates. Despite repeated queries raised by this Court
respondents No. 2 and 3 could not give any sufficient explanation as
to why the requisite appointment letter in favour of the petitioner was
not issued by any of the schools despite the petitioner being duly
selected through the said LSB interview. The only answer given by the
counsel was that being the LSB interview, the said selection was also
for ad hoc appointment and for regular selection on the post of PGT
(Chemistry) the petitioner was yet to qualify the CSB interview. This
contention of the counsel appearing for respondents No.2 and 3
appears to be fallacious and the same is not even supported by the
said documents placed by them on record. Had the LSB interview
been only for ad hoc appointment then the same could have been
clearly indicated in the said letter. I also do not find any force in the
submission of the counsel for the respondents that since the

WP 4412 of 2005

page 26 of 37

petitioner did not score the cut off percentage as laid down by them,
therefore, she was not called for CSB interview, which was held on
17th February, 2005. The petitioner had scored 53% in her CSB
interview and counsel for the petitioner had drawn my attention to
the final merit list of the candidates of Combined Screening Board
held on 17.2.2007 which shows that in all, 15 candidates appeared in
the said screening test and even a candidate, who had scored 54%
was not only permitted to appear in the said interview, but was also
recommended for appointment. In view of the said position the stand
of respondents No. 2 and 3 gets totally belied. Earlier, the
respondents had stated that only 12 candidates were permitted in the
CSB held on 17th February, 2005, but the said final merit list shows
participation of 15 candidates in the CSB interview. The said final
merit list also shows that the candidate who had secured 54% was
recommended for appointment. Although the cut off percentage as
communicated to the petitioner was 62.5%. The participation of Ms.
Renu Aggarwal in the said list of candidates evidently shows that the
petitioner was illegally deprived of her chance to appear in the CSB

WP 4412 of 2005

page 27 of 37

interview held on 17th February, 2005, although she was duly eligible
to participate in the same. The petitioner was thus illegally deprived
of her chance to appear in the CSB. As regards the selection of
candidates in LSB interview held in 2004, the counsel for respondent
No.2 was repeatedly asked by the Court to clarify the position of other
candidates whose names appeared in the list of selected candidates
against PGT posts of different disciplines. For instance, in the list of
candidates at serial No. 9, Ms. Vandana Sharma had been shown
selected for the post of PGT (Physics) and when asked whether the
said candidate was still to undergo CSB interview or the said selection
of LSB interview was enough to appoint her on the regular post of
PGT (Physics), no proper answer was received. In the absence of any
explanation by respondents No. 2 and 3, I have no option but to
believe that the petitioner was duly selected by the Selection
Committee on the said post of PGT (Chemistry), but still the
petitioner was not appointed on the post of PGT (Chemistry) against
the vacant post of PGT (Chemistry) at Dhaula Kuan. No plausible
explanation has also been given by respondents No. 2 and 3 with

WP 4412 of 2005

page 28 of 37

regard to the letter dated 21st June, 2004, which clearly shows that
the appointment letter was to be issued by the members of the cluster
in favour of the candidate found to have been selected in the LSB
interview. I do not agree with the contention of the counsel appearing
for respondents No. 2 and 3 that as far as Delhi was concerned the
procedure as contemplated under Rule 96 of the Delhi School
Education Rules was yet to be followed. In the case of unaided
schools following category of members constitute a Selection
Committee:“96 (3)(b) in the case of an appointment of a
teacher (other than the head of the school):
(i)the Chairman of the managing committee or a
member of the managing committee
nominated by the Chairman;
(ii) the head of the school.
(iii) in the case of a primary school, a female
educationist having experience of school
education;
(iv)in the case of an aided school, one
educationist to be nominated by the Director,
and one representative of the Director;
(v)in the case of appointment of a teacher for any
class in the middle stage or any class in the
higher secondary stage, an expert on the
subject in relation to which the teacher is
proposed to be appointed, to be nominated, in
the case of an unaided school by the managing
WP 4412 of 2005

page 29 of 37

committee, or in the case of an aided school, by
the Director.”
In the selection which was carried out for LSB in 2004 all the
members as envisaged under Rule 96 were duly present and,
therefore, it cannot be said that still a fresh selection was to take
place so as to comply with Rule 96 of the Delhi School Education
Rules. As regards the other contention of the counsel for respondent
No. 3 that the petitioner was required to qualify the CSB interview
and not LSB interview for her selection on the post of PGT
(Chemistry), I am of the view that the selection of the petitioner on
the said post in the year 2004 although was for LSB, but the same
fulfilled all the essential requirements of CSB interview. Moreover, if
the contention of respondent No.3 is accepted, then, it was the
decision of respondent No. 2 alone to have selected the petitioner
against the regular post of PGT (Economics) after she was declared
successful in the LSB interview. The respondents No. 2 and 3 now
cannot turn around and say that the petitioner was yet to qualify the
CSB interview. It may be relevant to mention here that the above

WP 4412 of 2005

page 30 of 37

guidelines for conducting CSB and LSB proceedings have no
statutory back up and the facts of the present case clearly show that
these guidelines are not being strictly adhered to by respondent No.2
Society itself. When other candidates after qualifying LSB interview
could be appointed against a regular post without insisting upon for
qualifying CSB interview then how the respondent No.2 could treat
the petitioner differently.
There is yet another fallacy in the arguments of counsel for
respondents No. 2 and 3 as on the one hand they have deprived the
petitioner from appearing in the CSB interview by taking a wrong
stand of intimating the cut off marks as 62.5% while in fact
candidates of much lower marks in CSB exam were entertained in the
CSB interview of 2005, and, on the other hand, did not appoint the
petitioner although having declared her successful in the year 2004
itself. The conduct of the respondent No. 2 in this entire process does
not appear to be bona fide as the petitioner was deprived to appear in
CSB interview in a most clandestine and mischievous manner.
As regards the prayer paragraphs of the petition, there is no

WP 4412 of 2005

page 31 of 37

doubt that the prayer paras are not properly worded. The petitioner
ought to have sought the relief of an appointment on the basis of her
selection in LSB 2004 and not of regularization on the post of PGT
(Chemistry). However, simply because of the said defect in prayer
para, the relief to the petitioner cannot be denied, if otherwise such a
relief is available and legally permissible. This Court while exercising
powers under Article 226 of the Constitution of India can always
mould reliefs and grant even those reliefs which are not specifically
claimed so as to advance the cause of justice, therefore, even if it is
taken that prayer (b) of the present petition is defective still this
Court can grant appropriate relief to the petitioner.
I also do not find any force in the arguments of the counsel for
respondent No. 2 that respondents No. 2 and 3 being not the State,
the writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is not
maintainable. Admittedly, respondents No. 2 and 3 are discharging
important public functions, namely, imparting education to the
children, therefore, to that extent the respondents are performing the
functions of the State and recruitment of teachers to achieve the said

WP 4412 of 2005

page 32 of 37

object is also in discharge of the public function by respondents No.2
and 3. The teachers who impart education have an element of public
interest in the performance of their duties and in view of the settled
legal position as authoritatively pronounced by the Supreme Court at
(2005) 4 SCC 649 entitled Zee Telefilms Ltd. and Anr. vs
Union of India & Ors. the present writ petition is maintainable. It
will be relevant to reproduce the following paragraphs from the
judgment:“31. Be that as it may, it cannot be denied that
the Board does discharge some duties like the
selection of an Indian cricket team, controlling the
activities of the players and others involved in the
game of cricket. These activities can be said to be
akin to public duties or State functions and if
there is any violation of any constitutional or
statutory obligation or rights of other citizens, the
aggrieved party may not have a relief by way of
petition under Article 32. But that does not mean
that the violator of such right would go scot-free
merely because it or he is not a State. Under the
Indian jurisprudence there is always a just remedy
for the violation of a right of a citizen. Though the
remedy under Article 32 is not available, an
aggrieved party can always seek a remedy under
the ordinary course of law or by way of a writ
petition under Article 226 of the Constitution,
which is much wider than Article 32.

WP 4412 of 2005

page 33 of 37

32. This Court in the case of Andi Mukta
Sadguru Shree Muktajee Vandas Swami Suvarna
Jayanti Mahotsav Smarak Trust vs. V.R. Rudani
has held:
“Article 226 confers wide powers on the
High Courts to issue writs in the nature of
prerogative writs. This is a striking departure from
the English law. Under Article 226, writs can be
issued to 'any person or authority'. The term
'authority' used in the context, must receive a
liberal meaning unlike the term in Article 12
which is relevant only for the purpose of
enforcement of fundamental rights under Article
32. Article 226 confers power on the High Courts
to issue writs for enforcement of the fundamental
rights as well as non-fundamental rights. The
words 'any person or authority' used in Article 226
are, therefore, not to be confined only to statutory
authorities and instrumentalities of the State.
They may cover any other person or body
performing public duty. The form of the body
concerned is not very much relevant. What is
relevant is the nature of the duty imposed on the
body. The duty must be judged in the light of
positive obligation owed by the person or
authority to the affected party, no matter by what
means the duty is imposed. If a positive obligation
exists mandamus cannot be denied.”
33. Thus, it is clear that when a private body
exercises its public functions even if it is not a
State, the aggrieved person has a remedy not only
under the ordinary law but also under the
Constitution, by way of a writ petition under
Article 226. Therefore, merely because a nongovernmental body exercises some public duty,
WP 4412 of 2005

page 34 of 37

that by itself would not suffice to make such body
a State for the purpose of Article 12. In the instant
case the activities of the Board do not come under
the guidelines laid down by this Court in Pradeep
Kumar Biswas case hence there is force in the
contention of Mr. Venugopal that this petition
under Article 32 of the Constitution is not
maintainable.”

I also do not find any merit in the arguments of the counsel for
the respondent that the petitioner has acquiesced and waived her
right to claim the relief of appointment on the post of PGT
(Chemistry) by accepting her contractual and ad hoc employment
w.e.f. 1.7.2004 to 30.6.2005. The petitioner has duly clarified in the
petition under what circumstances she was kept under a belief that
she would be interviewed for CSB for her final selection on the
regular post of PGT (Chemistry). The letter dated 16.2.2005 issued by
the petitioner was due to her bona fide belief and, therefore, it cannot
be said that by writing the said letter the petitioner can be debarred
from claiming the relief of appointment on the post of PGT
(Chemistry) in case of such a relief is otherwise legally available to
her. Doctrine of estoppel does not come in the way of the present
WP 4412 of 2005

page 35 of 37

facts and circumstances of the case.
In view of the foregoing position, I do not find applicability of
the judgments cited by the respondents No.2 and 3 in support of
their arguments.

Ms.Avnish Ahlawat, Advocate appearing for

respondent No.1 has placed reliance on Rule 96 of the Delhi School
Education Rules for recruitment of a teacher in an unaided
recognised school and the same has been discussed hereinabove.
In the light of the aforesaid discussion the respondents No.2
and 3 are directed to issue an appointment letter in favour of the
petitioner for her appointment on the regular post of PGT
(Chemistry) in Army Public School, Dhaula Kuan pursuant to her
selection by the Local Screening Board in the meeting held on 24th
May, 2004 as a result of which letter dated 21st June, 2004 was issued
by respondent No.2 to the concerned schools of the cluster of
respondent No.2 Society for appointment of the selected candidates.

WP 4412 of 2005

page 36 of 37

With these directions, the writ petition is disposed of.

September
GAMBHIR
rkr

, 2007

KAILASH
JUDGE

It is certified that the data has been
sent today to the main server.

WP 4412 of 2005

page 37 of 37

