IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
WP(C) No. 15203 of 2004
Judgment reserved on:

1st February ,2007

Judgment delivered on: September
M/s Vinyl Products

,2007

..... Petitioner
Through : Mr. Rajesh Goyal, Adv.

versus

Shri Ram Ujjagar & Ors.

..... Respondent
Through: Mr. Gajendra Giri, Adv.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.

1.

By way of this writ petition the petitioner seeks to challenge the

WP 15203/2004

page 1 of 13

order dated 25th June, 2002 passed by the Claims Authority constituted
under The Minimum Wages Act, 1948. The petitioner has also sought
quashing and setting aside of the criminal proceedings and warrants of
attachment dated 28.8.2004 issued by the Additional Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate, Karkardooma Courts, Delhi, pursuant to the orders of the
Claims Authority dated 25th June, 2002.
2.

The brief facts relevant for deciding the present writ petition,

inter alia, are that the respondent had invoked the jurisdiction of the Claims
Authority constituted under the Minimum Wages Act to claim the
differential amount of minimum wages along with the compensation w.e.f.
November, 1998 upto April, 1999 and vide orders dated 25.6.2002 the
Claims Authority had allowed the application of the respondents and it
gave directions to the petitioner to pay the balance amount along with
compensation within a period of 30 days. The present petitioner had filed its
reply, but absented itself to contest the said proceedings which resulted into
passing of the said ex parte order against the petitioner management. The
petitioner management failed to appear on 4 dates, although notices to
appear were issued by the Claims Authority. The petitioner had moved

WP 15203/2004

page 2 of 13

application for setting aside of the ex parte proceedings, but in the absence
of any proper explanation, the Claims Authority refused to set aside the ex
parte proceedings and after hearing the parties on merits passed the
impugned Award.
3.

Counsel for the petitioner in support of its case contended that

the Competent Authority passed final orders without considering the
application moved by the petitioner under Order 9 Rule 7 seeking setting
aside of the ex parte decree. Therefore, there is a blatant violation of
principles of natural justice as the petitioner was neither able to crossexamine the witnesses produced by the respondents nor could file its
evidence in support of its case. The second contention advanced by counsel
for the petitioner was that even if

no good cause was shown in the

application seeking setting aside of ex parte order, still the Court could not
have denied him hearing

and participation in the proceedings. The third

contention raised by the petitioner was that even after proceeding ex parte
against the petitioner, it was still obligatory on the part of the Competent
Authority to take into consideration merits of the case.

The fourth

contention which has been raised by counsel for the petitioner was that the

WP 15203/2004

page 3 of 13

Minimum Wages Act itself is not applicable as there is no dispute as
regards the rates of wages and therefore, the appropriate remedy of the
respondents was either under the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 or under the
provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.

The fifth contention

advanced by the petitioner was that the claim of the respondents itself was
barred as the respondents did not file the petition within the mandatory
period of six months so far as the arrears for the period of November and
December, 1998 were concerned. The sixth contention of the petitioner was
that the damages which were awarded by the Competent Authority are
arbitrary as no reasons have been given in support thereof in the award.
Therefore, the Competent Authority has not exercised the judicial discretion
in a right manner. Counsel for the petitioner in support of his proposition,
that even after ex parte proceedings the petitioner had a right to participate
in the proceedings and to be heard in the matter, placed reliance on the
following judgments:1.
2.
3.

Badimeni Pochaiah and others vs. Gatla Akkapalli and
others, AIR 1992 Andra Pradesh 42.
Arjun Singh vs. Mohindra Kumar and Others, AIR 1964
SC 993.
Sangram Singh vs. Election Tribunal Kotah and Another,
AIR 1955 S.C. 425.

WP 15203/2004

page 4 of 13

4.
4.

Ravi N. Tikoo vs Deputy Commissioner (S.W.) & Ors,
128 (2006) DLT 267.
In support of his arguments that there is no delay on the part of

the petitioner in approaching this Court under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India, the petitioner had placed reliance on the judgment of
the Supreme Court in State of Madhya Pradesh and Anr. vs. Bhailal Bhai
AIR 1964 SC 1006. The petitioner further placed reliance on the judgment
of The Manager Warangal Branch, A.P. State Handloom Weavers Cooperative Society, Warangal vs The Authority under Minimum Wages
Act, Warangal and Ors. 1935 Lab. I.C. 767 to support his argument that
the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is entitled to
interfere in a case where the Authority did not exercise its jurisdiction
judiciously. Counsel for the petitioner also relied on Syed Yakoob Vs. K.S.
Radhakrishna, AIR 1964 SC 477 in support of his argument that the writ
of certiorari can be issued by this Court for correcting errors of jurisdiction
committed by inferior Courts or Tribunals. Counsel for the petitioner
further placed reliance on Manganese Ore (India) Ltd. vs Chandi Lal
Saha And Ors, 1992 SCC (L&S) 202 & Binod Kumar vs Union of India
and Ors, 2000 (87) FLR 200 in support of his proposition that where there
WP 15203/2004

page 5 of 13

is no dispute regarding the rates payable to the employee in relation to the
wages payable under the Minimum Wages Act, then the jurisdiction in such
a matter lies either under Section 15(1) of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936
or under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
5.

Counsel for the respondents on the other hand submitted that

the conduct of the petitioner Management clearly reflects that it was totally
negligent in prosecuting its case and twice it was proceeded ex parte i.e., on
10.04.2001 & 04.06.2001 and after remaining absent on four dates the
petitioner had moved the application for setting aside of the ex parte order
only on 16.10.2001. Counsel for the respondents further submitted that the
Competent Authority had heard the arguments not on the application alone
but also on the merits of the case. He also submitted that the Competent
Authority had duly considered the application for setting aside the ex parte
order in the final order passed by it. As regards non filing of the claim for
the period November and December, 1998 the argument of the counsel for
the respondents is that the Competent Authority had entertained the
application and no objection at any stage was raised by the petitioner to the
maintainability of the claim for the period concerned and, therefore, there is

WP 15203/2004

page 6 of 13

deemed satisfaction on the part of the Competent Authority in condoning
the delay and as such this objection is not available to the petitioner at this
belated stage. As regards the applicability of the Minimum Wages Act is
concerned, the submission of counsel for the respondents is that the remedy
of the respondents lies only under the Minimum Wages Act as they were
being paid less wages than the minimum wages as notified by the Statutory
Authorities and, therefore, the workmen- respondents at the earliest moved
an application for the minimum wages.
6.

I have heard counsel for the parties. The short question which

needs to be examined by this Court is, as to, whether any indulgence can be
given to the petitioner by this Court while exercising the writ jurisdiction
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, who remained not only
negligent in prosecuting its case before the Claims Authority, but also
remained equally negligent in preferring the present writ petition on time.
Admittedly, the petitioner remained absent on various dates before the
Claims Authority. Perusal of the proceeding sheets filed by the petitioner on
record reveals that the petitioner was absent before the Claims Authority on
21st April, 2000 then on 14th July, 2000 and again on 16th February, 2001

WP 15203/2004

page 7 of 13

when the Claims Authority had given the directions to issue notice to
proceed ex parte against the petitioner. On 10th April, 2001 Mr. J.S. Bajaj
authorised representative of the petitioner, was present but again he
absented himself on the next adjourned date i.e. 4th June, 2001, when again
the notice was directed by the Claims Authority for proceeding ex parte
against the petitioner and the matter was adjourned for 10 th August, 2001.
On 10th August, 2001 although the representative of the petitioner was
present, but no steps were taken for setting aside of the ex parte proceedings
and on the next adjourned date i.e. 16th October, 2001 the application was
moved by the petitioner for setting aside of the ex parte proceedings, on
which date the Claims Authority heard the arguments on the application as
well as on its merit. The Claims Authority passed the order on 25 th June,
2002. The order of the Claims Authority dated 25th June, 2002 was not
challenged by the petitioner till he received warrants of attachment from the
Court of Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate and preferred the writ
petition on 14th September, 2004 i.e. again after a lapse of more than two
years from the date of the interim order.
7.

The petitioner has not offered any explanation as to why the

WP 15203/2004

page 8 of 13

present petition has been belatedly filed against the impugned order of the
Claims Authority. It is true that no limitation for entertaining the petition
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is prescribed and the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in catena of cases has held that normally the period of
limitation as prescribed for civil suits & appeals under the Limitation Act,
1963, shall be the guiding factor. The limitation to challenge an order
against the Lower Court in appeal is 90 days. In the present case, the
petitioner has not given any explanation much less sufficient or plausible
explanation for the unreasonable or inordinate delay on its part in preferring
the present writ petition against the impugned order of the Claims Authority
and, therefore, in the absence of the same, this Court cannot come to the aid
of such a negligent party. The Labour Court, Industrial Tribunal or other
Authorities under various Statutes are governing the rights and liabilities of
employers and employees. These Authorities are the final fact finding
Authorities and, therefore, while exercising a writ jurisdiction, this Court
will not appreciate or reappreciate the findings of fact as arrived by these
Authorities in the exercise of the power conferred upon them under various
Statutes. The Claims Authority has accepted the case of the respondents

WP 15203/2004

page 9 of 13

after considering their status as that of skilled labourers on the post of
machine men. The petitioner wanted to dispute this position by contending
that some of them were either working as Assistant Machine Operators or
as Helpers. Even in the reply filed by the petitioner management before the
Claims Authority the petitioner has not categorically stated as to which of
the workers out of 10 of them were employed as Assistant Machine
Operators and which of them were employed as Helpers. Para 4 of the reply
as filed by the petitioner before the Claims Authority needs to be referred,
which is reproduced herein below:“That some of the workers as mentioned in the annexures are
employed by the management as assistant machine operator and
remaining are the helpers. The management is paying them the
regular salary and they are in the muster roll of the
management.”

8.

It would be thus evident that the petitioner even in its reply did

not place the proper facts before the Claims Authority and, therefore, under
these circumstances the Claims Authority has rightly accepted the status of
these workmen on the post of machine men, whose job is in the nature of
skilled labourers and, therefore, they were held to be entitled to the grant of
minimum wages as fixed under the Minimum Wages Act for skilled
labourers. Another contention of the petitioner that the payment of
WP 15203/2004

page 10 of 13

Minimum Wages Act is not attracted also does not hold any water, as the
petitioner itself has disputed the nature of the job of these workmen and,
therefore, this dispute regarding the exact status of these workmen whether
that of skilled labourers or unskilled labourers was required to be
determined by the Claims Authority and under these circumstances, it
cannot be said that Section 20 of the Minimum Wages Act was not attracted
in the present case. Reference is made to the following observations of the
Supreme Court in Manganese Ore (India) Ltd. vs. Chandi Lal Saha and
Ors. (Supra)
“16. The third argument of Mr. Sanghi based on the
interpretation of Section 20 of the Act is again devoid of any
force. This precise argument was considered by this Court in
Town Municipal Council, Athani vs. Presiding Officer, Labour
Court, Hubli and decided in the following terms:
“The Minimum Wages Act is concerned with the fixing of
rates – rates of minimum wages, overtime rates, rates for payment
of work on a day of rest – and is not intended for enforcement of
payment of wages. Under Section 20(1) of the Minimum Wages
Act, in which provision is made for seeking remedy in respect of
claims arising out of payment of less than minimum rates, or in
respect of remuneration for days of rest, or for work on such days,
or of wages at the overtime rates, the Authority is to exercise
jurisdiction for deciding claims which relate to rates of wages,
rates for payment of work done on days of rest and overtime rates.
The power under Section 20(3) of the Minimum Wages Act given
to the Authority dealing with an application under Section 20(1)
to direct payment of the actual amount found due, is only an
incidental power for working out effectively the directions under
Section 20(1) fixing various rates under the Act. That is, if there
is no dispute as to rates between the employer and the employee
WP 15203/2004

page 11 of 13

and the only question is whether a particular payment at the
agreed rate is due or not, then Section 20(1) of the Minimum
Wages Act would not be attracted at all and the appropriate
remedy would only be either under Section 15(1) of the Payment
of Wages Act, 1936, or under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial
Disputes Act.”
17.
In the present case there was no dispute regarding the rates
of wages and it is admitted by the parties that the minimum rates
of wages were fixed by the Government of India under the Act.
The workmen demanded the minimum wages so fixed and the
appellant denied the same to the workmen on extraneous
considerations. Under the circumstances the remedy under
Section 20 of the Act was not available to the workmen and the
Labour Court rightly exercised its jurisdiction under Section 33C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.”

9.

As regards the contention of the counsel for the petitioner that

the petitioner had a right to participate in the ex parte proceedings, there
cannot be any quarrel to this legal proposition that a party has every right to
participate in the proceedings from the stage when such a party joins in the
proceedings without seeking reversal of the clock. In the present case the
petitioner has failed to point out as to from which stage it was denied the
opportunity to participate in the proceedings. The judgments cited by the
petitioner in this regard are not applicable to the facts and circumstances of
the present case.
10.

In the light of the aforesaid discussion, I do not find any merit

WP 15203/2004

page 12 of 13

in the present writ petition and the same is, accordingly, dismissed.

September , 2007
rkr

KAILASH GAMBHIR
JUDGE

It is certified that the data has been
sent today to the main server.

WP 15203/2004

page 13 of 13

