IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
WP(C) No. 6138/2006
Judgment reserved on: 25.07.2007
Judgment delivered on: September
Smt. Khazani Devi
Widow of Late Shri Sardar Singh
R/o B-106, Near Shiv Mandir
Village & Post office Kanjhawla
Delhi - 110081
Through:

, 2007

..... Petitioner
Mr. N.L. Bareja, Adv.

versus
1.

The Commissioner
Municipal Corporation of Delhi
Town Hall, Chandni Chowk,
Delhi – 110006

2.

The Deputy Commissioner
Municipal Corporation of Delhi
(Department of Education)
Narela Zone, Sindu Border,
Delhi

3.

The Assistant Education Officer
Municipal Corporation of Delhi
(Department of Education)
Narela Zone, Sindu Border
Delhi
..... Respondents
Through: Ms. Samita Shankar, Adv.
CORAM:

WP (C) 6138/2006

page 1 of 14

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.
1.

By way of this writ petition the petitioner widow of late Shri

Sardar Singh has approached this Court seeking quashing/setting
aside of the order dated 9.11.1999, whereby husband of the petitioner
was prematurely retired from his service before completing the age of
superannuation. The petitioner also seeks quashing of office order
dated 15th July, 2002 whereby decision was taken to pay GPF and
leave encashment, considering the date of retirement of the deceased
as 31.8.1984 and to recover the excess payment made to the
deceased.
2.

The brief facts relevant for deciding the present case, inter alia,

are that the husband of the petitioner was working on the post of
Chowkidar on regular basis w.e.f. 5.9.1974. Prior to conferment of
regular status, the petitioner was asked to produce his age proof. The
WP (C) 6138/2006

page 2 of 14

deceased was not in possession of his school leaving certificate or
birth certificate. The deceased had submitted an affidavit in support
of his age proof. In the absence of any such certificate the deceased
was examined by the Medical Board so as to assess his age and as per
the assessment of the Medical Board, the age of the deceased was
considered at that time to be of about 30-32 years. The date of birth
of the deceased was assessed as 1.5.1943 accordingly, and the
deceased was given proper appointment letter on the said post of
Chowkidar. The deceased was also alloted GPF No. BB 6148 in which
he started making regular contribution. While husband of the
petitioner was performing his normal duties on the said post of
Chowkidar he got the shock of his life by receiving letter dated
9.11.1999 from the respondent thereby abruptly relieving him from
his duties immediately from the said date. In the said letter, it was
mentioned that the deceased husband of the petitioner was being
relieved from his duties on the basis of his date of birth being
8.8.1924 and in terms of the directions/orders dated 16.4.1999 issued
in this regard by the Additional Deputy Commissioner (Education).
Husband of the petitioner was taken aback as he was neither aware of

WP (C) 6138/2006

page 3 of 14

any decision taken by the Additional Deputy Commissioner
(Education) on 16.4.1999 nor came to know that on what basis his
date of birth was being taken as 8.8.1924. After receiving the said
letter the husband of the petitioner made efforts to find out as to why
his date of birth was taken as 8.8.1924 when his age was duly
certified by the Medical Board. It is further stated by the petitioner
that the deceased husband of the petitioner was surprised to know
that the respondent had acted at the behest of some Class IV
employee who had lodged some false complaint against the deceased
husband of the petitioner about his date of birth. Acting on the said
complaint, the respondent verified the records of MC (Boys) School,
Kanjhawla, wherefrom the date of birth of the deceased husband of
the petitioner was ascertained as 8.8.1924.

Believing such an

information as correct the respondent without seeking any
clarification or explanation from the deceased husband of the
petitioner in a most illegal and arbitrary manner took the decision of
prematurely retiring the husband of the petitioner. The illegality on
the part of the respondent did not stop here alone, but vide office
order dated 15th July, 2002 the deceased husband of the petitioner

WP (C) 6138/2006

page 4 of 14

was informed that he will be paid GPF and leave encashment taking
into consideration his date of retirement as 31st August, 1984 and
recovery proceedings would be launched if it was found that any
excess payment was made to him. It is further stated that retiral
benefits including GPF, leave encashment etc. were not given either
to the deceased husband of the petitioner or to the petitioner even by
taking the said date of premature retirement of the deceased i.e.
9.11.1999.
3.

The right of the respondent/MCD to file the counter affidavit

was closed vide order dated 4.4.2007 as despite repeated
opportunities granted to the respondent no counter affidavit was filed
by it.
4.

I have heard learned counsel for the parties at considerable

length. Counsel for the respondent has produced the records and
same have been examined.
5.

Counsel for the petitioner has vehemently contended that it is a

case of gross injustice meted out to the petitioner and her deceased
husband as without holding any enquiry or calling for any kind of
clarification from the deceased husband of the petitioner, the

WP (C) 6138/2006

page 5 of 14

respondent MCD took the decision to prematurely retire the deceased
husband of the petitioner. The counsel for the petitioner contended
that in the normal course the petitioner would have retired on 30th
April, 2003, on his attaining the age of 60 years. The counsel for the
petitioner also contended that the respondent had acted at the behest
of some adversely interested person in carrying out some kind of
unreliable enquiry to trace the exact date of birth of the deceased
husband of the petitioner. The counsel also contended that the
possibility of the persons having identical particulars in regard to
their name and parentage in one school cannot be ruled out, although
such person may have different age and residence. The counsel for
the petitioner thus contended that there is a serious and blatant
violation of principles of natural justice on the part of the respondent
in taking the said decision of, unilaterally and arbitrarily,
prematurely retiring the deceased husband of the petitioner on
9.11.1999. The counsel for the petitioner also impinged the decision of
the respondent MCD in not paying the entire terminal benefits even
after taking into consideration the said date of his premature
retirement.

WP (C) 6138/2006

page 6 of 14

6.

The counsel for the respondent on the other hand has drawn my

attention to the photocopy of school leaving certificate of MCD
Primary School, Kanjhawla (East) Delhi, in which the date of birth
column shows the date of birth of the deceased petitioner as 8.8.1924.
This certificate shows that the deceased petitioner had left the school
on 9.7.1934. The counsel for the respondent has also placed reliance
on a medical certificate, which describes the age of the deceased
petitioner at about 40 years from his appearance. Counsel for the
respondent has also drawn my attention to the photocopy of a
complaint written by some class IV employee to the Director of
Education, MCD, complaining about the fraud played by the deceased
husband of the petitioner in disclosing wrong date of his birth. The
complainant also informed that correct date of birth of the deceased
husband of the petitioner could be ascertained from MCD Primary
School, Kanjhawla.
7.

The case in hand is a glaring example of the napotic style of

functioning of MCD. In a most brazen and blatant manner MCD has
flouted the principles of natural justice. The least, MCD could do was
to seek a clarification from the deceased husband of the petitioner on

WP (C) 6138/2006

page 7 of 14

the complaint received against him regarding his correct date of
birth. Without taking this little trouble, the respondent MCD is said
to have carried out some kind of unreliable investigation and
obtained some school leaving certificate of a person with the same
name and parentage. Not only this, the respondent MCD also
obtained one medical certificate and the printed column of the same
makes interesting reading. The same is as follows:“MEDICAL CERTIFICATE FORM
I do hereby certify that I have examined Sardar
Singh a candidate for employment in the Chowkidar
Education Department, and cannot discover that he has
any disease, constitutional affection, or bodily infirmity,
except NIL I do not consider this a disqualification for
employment in the office of.
His age is, according to his own statement 28 years,
and by appearance about 40 years.
Left-hand thumb and finger impression:
Fourth or Third
small
finger
finger

Second
finger

First Thumb
finger
L.T.I. of
Sardar Singh
COUNTER SIGNED

Sd/Medical Superintendent
WP (C) 6138/2006

page 8 of 14

HINDU RAO HOSPITAL
Taken before _____________________
Name of Officer
Designation of Officer

8.

Assistant Surgeon
Grade I (Gazetted)
Hindu Rao Hospital
DELHI -8

On (date) 17/6/71”
One gets totally flabbergasted to find how any doctor could

certify one's age just from his appearance. Photocopy of the school
leaving certificate also shows that the date of admission of Sardar
Singh, deceased husband of the petitioner is given as 9th June, 1934
and date of school leaving as 9th July, 1934 i.e. just after a period of
one month and in the column of remarks it is mentioned that the
name was struck off due to regular absence of the student for a period
of 6 days. No credence or weightage can be given to such
unsubstantiated document. If there was a serious doubt about the age
of the petitioner then the MCD could have given the directions to the
deceased husband of the petitioner to undergo Ossification Test,
which is a medical test to determine the age of a person. However, be
that as it may, nothing prevented the respondent to call upon the
deceased petitioner by way of show cause notice so as to seek
WP (C) 6138/2006

page 9 of 14

explanation or for conducting a proper enquiry into the matter. One
cannot lose sight of the fact that to retire a person prematurely is a
major punishment and such an action could not have been taken by
MCD without observing the principles of natural justice.
9.

By order dated 9.11.1999, the respondent has cut short the

service tenure of the deceased husband of the petitioner for a period
of about four years. In normal course the deceased husband of the
petitioner would have retired on 30th April, 2003, but he was
prematurely retired on 9.11.1999. The illegality of the respondent
MCD does not stop here alone. Totally blind folded to the rule of law
it passed another order dated 15th July, 2002 for initiating recovery
proceedings against the deceased husband of the petitioner, who
unfortunately died on 30.12.2004. The entire approach of the MCD is
so procrustean and reprehensible and the same deserves utmost
condemnation.
10.

The

power

to

terminate

the

service

of

an

employee/workman or for taking any other disciplinary action there
has to be strict adherence to laid down procedure and after due
observance of principles of natural justice. Grant of Just, fair and

WP (C) 6138/2006

page 10 of 14

reasonable opportunity is an essential inbuilt of natural justice. The
cardinal principle of law is that no one can be condemned unheard. A
person against whom any action is in contemplation, has a right of
first being informed of the case and then such person should have a
reasonable opportunity of presenting his case, thereafter, the
concerned authority must act fairly, justly, reasonably, impartially
and not in a slipshod manner. Any order involving civil consequences
should be made after due observance of the principles of natural
justice. It has been held in plethora of cases by the Apex Court that
substantive and procedural laws and actions taken under such laws
shall have to pass the test under Article 14 of the Constitution. The
duty to give reasonable opportunity of being heard will be implied
from the nature of the function to be performed by the authority
which has vested power to take punitive action.

Every executive

authority which takes administrative action involving any deprivation
or restriction on inherent fundamental rights of the citizens, must
take care that justice is not only done but also appears to have been
done. It is trite law that procedure prescribed for depriving a person
of his livelihood must be strictly followed. It should not be arbitrary,

WP (C) 6138/2006

page 11 of 14

fanciful or oppressive and should be tested on the touchstone of
Article 14 of the Constitution.

Wherever any employee in public

employment is visited with any punitive action during his
employment till his continuation in same, the employer must strictly
act in accordance with just, fair and reasonable procedure prescribed
under the provisions of the Constitution and the rules made under
proviso to Article 309 of Constitution or any other statutory provision
governing such employment or the rules, regulations or instructions
having a statutory flavour.
11.

In the instant case, admittedly, no opportunity was given to the

deceased employee and no enquiry was held.

The order of

termination of service of an employee/workman certainly visits him
with civil consequences of jeopardizing not only his own livelihood
but of his dependants, as well. Therefore, before taking any action
putting an end to the tenure of an employee/workman fair play
required that the respondent MCD ought to have given reasonable
opportunity to the deceased employee to put forth his case and
domestic enquiry should have been conducted in compliance with the
principles of natural justice. In the present case, conduct of MCD is

WP (C) 6138/2006

page 12 of 14

not only arbitrary, unjust, unfair and violative of principles of natural
justice, but is also highly censurable.
12.

In the light of the aforesaid discussion the present writ petition

is allowed. The respondent MCD is directed to forthwith release the
entire retiral benefits of the deceased husband of the petitioner after
taking into consideration the date of birth of the deceased husband of
the petitioner as 1.5.1943 and since the husband of the petitioner
expired on 30.12.2004, therefore, the date of death of the husband of
the petitioner be taken as last date in service for the purpose of
granting retiral benefits. This Court is not directing grant of any
backwages w.e.f. 1999 till the date of the demise of the deceased
husband of the petitioner as the petitioner did not challenge the said
order in time, but the entire retiral benefits be paid taking into
consideration the date of birth of the deceased husband of the
petitioner on 1.5.1943 within two months from the date of this order.
Costs of Rs. 10,000/- is also awarded in favour of the petitioner.

September,
rkr

WP (C) 6138/2006

2007

KAILASH GAMBHIR
JUDGE

page 13 of 14

It is certified that the data has been
sent today to the main server.

WP (C) 6138/2006

page 14 of 14

