IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC. App. No. 379/2005
Judgment delivered on: September 25, 2007
National Insurance Co. Ltd.
..... Petitioner
Through: Mr. Amit Kumar Pandey, Adv.
versus
Smt. Sewa Devi & Ors.
..... Respondent
Through: Mr. S.N. Prashar, Adv.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR,
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

No

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

No

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
By the present appeal, the appellant has assailed the
findings of the Tribunal mainly on two grounds, firstly the
wrong multiplier has been made applicable in the case of the
deceased, who was 50 years of age at the time of accident
MAC.APP 379/05

pages 1 of 7

and secondly that the Tribunal has wrongly mentioned the
age of the deceased as 38 years in para 12 of the impugned
Award. Counsel appearing for the appellant contends that as
per the election identity card filed on record age of the
deceased was duly shown as 50 years and not 38 years.
Counsel also contends that correct multiplier as specified in
schedule II relevant to the age of the deceased was not
taken into consideration by the Tribunal.
Per contra Mr. Prashar, counsel appearing for the
respondent on the other hand contends that although in
para 12 of the Award age of the deceased has been
mentioned as 38 years, but the same appears to be due to
some error on the part of the Tribunal, which is manifest
from the fact that in the operating para of the judgment the
correct age of the deceased i.e. 50 years has been taken
into consideration. Counsel also contends that between the
age of 45-50 years the multiplier as specified in the second
schedule of Motor Vehicles Act is 13 years and, therefore,
there is no infirmity or illegality on the part of the Tribunal in
MAC.APP 379/05

pages 2 of 7

taking into account the multiplier of the 13 years for the age
of 50 years. Counsel for the respondent also challenges the
very maintainability of the present appeal and submits that
the appellant has even no right to file an appeal so as to
challenge

either

the

negligence

or

the

quantum

as

determined by the Court. Learned counsel placed reliance on
the judgment of the Supreme Court reported in (2002) 7
SCC

456

titled

National

Insurance

Co.

Ltd.

vs

Nicolletta Rohtagi & Ors. He has referred to paras 13, 19
and 32 of the said judgment, which are reproduced below:
“13. To answer the question, it is necessary to
find out on what grounds the insurer is entitled
to defend/contest against a claim by an injured
or dependants of the victims of a motor vehicle
accident. Under Section 96(2) of the 1939 Act
which corresponds to Section 149(2) of the
1988 Act, an insurance company has no right to
be a party to an action by the injured person or
dependants of the deceased against the
insured. However, the said provision gives the
insurer the right to be made a party to the case
and to defend it. It is, therefore, obvious that
the said right is a creature of the statute and its
content depends on the provisions of the
statute. After the insurer has been made a
party to a case or claim, the question arises,
what are the defences available to it under the
statute? The language employed in enacting
sub-section (2) of Section 149 appears to be
plain and simple and there is no ambiguity in it.
MAC.APP 379/05

pages 3 of 7

It shows that when an insurer is impleaded and
has been given notice of the case, he is entitled
to defend the action on grounds enumerated in
the sub-section, namely, sub-section (2) of
Section 149 of the 1988 Act, and no other
ground is available to him. The insurer is not
allowed to contest the claim of the injured or
heirs of the deceased on other ground which is
available to an insured or breach of any other
conditions of the policy which do not find place
in sub-section (2) of Section 149 of the 1988
Act. If an insurer is permitted to contest the
claim on other grounds it would mean adding
more grounds of contest to the insurer than
what the statute has specifically provided for.
19. In Shankarayya v. United India Insurance
Co. Ltd. it was held that an insurance company
when impleaded as a party by the court can be
permitted to contest the proceedings on merits
only if the conditions precedent mentioned in
Section 170 are found to be satisfied and for
that purpose the insurance company has to
obtain an order in writing from the Tribunal and
which should be a reasoned order by the
Tribunal. Unless this procedure is followed, the
insurance company cannot have a wider
defence on merits than what is available to it by
way of statutory defences. In absence of the
existence of the conditions precedent mentioned
in Section 170, the insurance company was not
entitled to file an appeal on merits questioning
the quantum of compensation.
32. For the aforesaid reasons, our answer to
the question is that even if no appeal is
preferred under Section 173 of the 1988 Act by
an insured against the award of a Tribunal, it is
not permissible for an insurer to file an appeal
questioning the quantum of compensation as
well as findings as regards negligence or
contributory negligence of the offending
MAC.APP 379/05

pages 4 of 7

vehicle.”

I have heard learned counsel for the parties at
considerable length and have perused the records including
the impugned Award. There is a total fallacy on the part of
the appellant in saying that the Tribunal has taken into
consideration the age of the deceased as 38 years. Perusal
of the Award clearly shows that in para 13 of the impugned
Award the Tribunal has taken the age of the deceased as 50
years and accordingly made the multiplier of 13 years
applicable. It appears that in para 12 of the impugned order
due to some error reference has been made to the age of
the deceased as 38 years at the time of his death. The
mention of 38 years of the age in the preceding paragraph of
the impugned order can be easily ignored.
I also do not find any merit in the submission of learned
counsel for the appellant that a wrong multiplier has been
made applicable in the impugned Award by the Tribunal.
Counsel contends that the correct multiplier for the said age
of 50 years is 11 years. However, perusal of the second
MAC.APP 379/05

pages 5 of 7

schedule clearly shows that between the age of 45-50 the
multiplier applicable is 13 years. Accordingly, I also do not
find any merit in this submission of counsel for the appellant.
At this stage another argument is also urged by the
counsel for the appellant contending that the Tribunal has
not strictly followed the

guidelines as laid down in the

judgment of the Supreme Court reported in 1996 ACJ 581
titled Sarla Dixit and Anr. vs Balwant Yadav and Ors.
Counsel contends that in that case the multiplier as specified
in the second schedule was reduced. In reply to this, counsel
for the respondent contends that in para 6 of the

Sarla

Dixit (supra) case itself the Supreme Court has observed
that only in exceptional circumstances deviation from the
multiplier method can be made by the Tribunal. It is no
doubt true that the Apex Court in some of the recent
pronouncements has taken a view that Schedule II of the Act
is to serve as a guide but the same cannot be said to be an
invariable ready reckoner.

Adopting the said principle the

appellant still has to satisfy the Court as to for what reasons
MAC.APP 379/05

pages 6 of 7

the departure should be made from the guidelines of
Schedule II of Motor Vehicles Act. Since the appellant has
failed to advance any reason for deviating from the
multiplier of Schedule II, therefore, I do not find any ground
to interfere in the multiplier of 13 years. There is no merit in
the petition.
Dismissed.

September 25, 2007
rkr

MAC.APP 379/05

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J

pages 7 of 7

