IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
FAO no. 593/2002
Judgment delivered on: October 25,2007
Master Mohit
S/O Sh. Shyam Bir Singh
R/o 695/39, Gazipur Village
Delhi
through Sh.Shyambir Singh
Natural Guardian being father

..... Appellant.

Through: Mr. K. Sunil for the appellant.
versus
Mrs. Madhu Sharma &Ors.

..... Respondents

Through: Mr.B.S.Arora for the respondents.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR,
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
FAO No. 593/2002

page 1 of 6

By way of this appeal the appellant

is seeking

enhancement in the compensation on account of the injuries
sustained by the appellant. The interest in favour of the appellant
has been declined by the Tribunal after placing reliance on the
judgment of the Supreme Court in R.D. Hattan Garhi Vs. Pest
Control India, reported in 1995 (1) ACJ 366, and decision of
the Division Bench of Karnataka High Court in Nalima vs. M.D.
Karnataka Insurance Department reported in 1996 ACJ
758
Mr. K. Sunil, counsel for the appellant contends that the
Tribunal has wrongly taken into consideration the permanent
disability to the extent

of 25 %

although the appellant had

suffered fracture of pelvis and, rupture of urethra of which the
documentary evidence was placed on record by the appellant.
Counsel for the appellant further contends that the appellant is still
suffering from the urinary problem and is under continuous
treatment of AIIMS.

FAO No. 593/2002

page 2 of 6

Per contra Mr. Arora, counsel for the respondent
contends that just and fair compensation has been awarded in
favour of the appellant and

the same is itself based on the

documentary evidence produced by the appellant. Counsel for the
respondent further contends that appellant had failed to produce
any permanent disability certificate despite various opportunities
granted by the Tribunal and still in the absence of the same the
Tribunal has taken the disability of the appellant to the extent of
25%.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have
perused the record. I have also interviewed the appellant who is
present in person.

Appellant states that the appellant is still

suffering from urinary problem. On a question as to when he had
last gone to AIIMS for his treatment or examination, the appellant
replied that although he does not remember the exact date of his
visit to AIIMS for treatment but it was somewhere in the last year.
In the impugned award also the Tribunal has observed that the
appellant failed to place on record any certificate showing
FAO No. 593/2002

page 3 of 6

permanent disability or percentage of disability inspite of the fact
that he was also not given any interim compensation due to lack of
such a certificate. It was also observed by the Tribunal that the
appellant failed to

adduce any additional evidence although

permission to this effect was granted to the appellant. Even this
Court vide order dated 25.10.2002 gave directions to the appellant
to get a report from the Orthopaedic

as well as Eurology

Department of AIIMS but till date no such report has been placed
on record even after a lapse of five years. I, therefore do not find
myself in agreement with the contentions raised by the counsel for
the appellant seeking enhancement of compensation on the ground
of disability as has been considered by the Tribunal. The disability
of a person can only be determined with the help of medical reports
or certificates certifying particular disability and in the absence of
such certificate

or expert medical opinion, Judges being not

experts in the medical field cannot themselves arrive at definite
conclusion. Be that as it may, I do not find any illegality on the part
of Tribunal in taking into account the nature of injuries suffered by
FAO No. 593/2002

page 4 of 6

the appellant has taken into consideration the total disability of
the appellant to the extent of 25% of the whole body.
At this stage, counsel for the appellant has pointed out
that award which was passed as long back as on 6.9.2002, no
compliance to the same has been made by the respondent no.1.
This appeal was filed by the appellant in the year 2002 and for the
first time the same was taken up by the Court on 25.10.2002.
Although, not interfering with the impugned award declining
the request of the appellant to grant interest for the past period, I
deem it fit to award the interest on the award amount to the
appellant from the date of passing of the award i.e., 6.9.2002 on
the failure of the respondent no.1 to satisfy the said award till date.
The interest

shall be payable @ 7.5% from 6.9.2002 till its

realization.

With these directions, appeal stands disposed of.

FAO No. 593/2002

page 5 of 6

October 25, 2007
mg

FAO No. 593/2002

KAILASH GAMBHIR J.

page 6 of 6

