IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC. APP. No.19/2006
Judgment delivered on: November 26,2007
Sh.Ram Avtar

..... Appellant.
Through: Mr.O.P. Mannie, Advocate.
versus

Sh. Davinder Singh & Ors.
Through:

..... Respondents
Ms.Suman Bagga, Advocate for
respondent No.3.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR,
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
*
By way of this appeal, the appellant seeks to challenge
the impugned award on the ground that the same is quite on the
lower

side.

compensation.

The

appellant

has

claimed

enhancement

of

The main grievance of the appellant is that the

Tribunal has not taken into consideration the payment of
MAC. APP. No.19/2006

Page 1 of 5

Rs.33,000/- towards the expenses incurred by the appellant for his
medical treatment after his discharge from the hospital.

The

second grievance of the appellant is that the Tribunal has granted
a lumpsum amount of Rs.1 lakh towards disability without taking
into consideration the loss to the appellant in his earning capacity
due to the kind of permanent disablement suffered by him. The
third grievance of the appellant is that a meagre amount of
Rs.20,000/- has been granted towards pain and sufferings.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have
perused the records.
Ms.Suman

Bagga,

counsel

appearing

for

the

respondent has placed reliance on the recent judgment of the
Supreme Court reported in 2007 (12) Scale 792, Sunil Kuamr
Vs. Ram Singh Gaud to support her argument that in a case of
permanent disablement of 45%, the Apex Court has granted
interest @ 6% p.a. on the enhanced amount as well as deduced
1/3rd

towards

miscellaneous

expenses.

Counsel

for

the

respondent also contends that no future prospects can be
considered in the present case as no evidence to this effect was
led by the appellant.
The Tribunal has taken the income of the appellant at
MAC. APP. No.19/2006

Page 2 of 5

Rs.3,000/- p.m. by taking aid of the Minimum Wages Act.
Although the appellant has placed salary certificate showing his
income as Rs.4,500/- per month but the Tribunal has not believed
the said certificate as no witness from the company where the
appellant was stated to be working was summoned to prove the
same. The income of the appellant was thus taken at Rs.3,000/p.m.

The said wages of Rs.3,000/- are not even as per the

Minimum Wages Act as the appellant on the relevant date of
accident was matriculate and he has proved his said qualification
before the Tribunal vide Ex.PW.1/228.

Once the appellant was

possessing the said qualification on the date of accident and he
was working as an Electrician, therefore, at least the income
applicable to a matriculate under the Minimum Wages Act could
be taken into consideration. The income of matriculate under the
Minimum Wages Act on the relevant date was Rs.3231.90

and

making it a round figure, the same is taken as Rs.3,200/-. The
multiplier of 16 is applicable under the IInd Schedule of the Motor
Vehicles Act as on the date of accident, the appellant was of 40
years of age.
This Court has already taken a view that minimum
wages get doubled in a period of 10 years and applying the same
MAC. APP. No.19/2006

Page 3 of 5

yardstick and taking an average of both the incomes, the monthly
loss of the appellant for suffering 66% disability would come to
Rs.4,800/- per month and deducting 1/3rd towards miscellaneous
expenses, the net loss would come to Rs.3,200/- and applying
multiplier of 16, the total loss would be about Rs.4,05,504/-. The
Tribunal has granted a sum of Rs.1 lakh in all towards the
permanent disability and the same is enhanced from Rs.1 lakh to
Rs.2 lakh.
As regards pain and suffering, I find myself in
agreement with counsel for the appellant that a meagre amount
of Rs.20,000/- has been allowed. The appellant admittedly suffers
66% disability in relation to its left arm which has practically
rendered himself totally disfunctional so far as his job of
electrician is concerned.

Rs.20,000/- would be an inadequate

amount towards pain and sufferings and the same is accordingly
enhanced to Rs.30,000.
As regards, the contention of counsel for the appellant
that the Tribunal has not taken into consideration medical bills
placed and proved on record by the appellant, the matter is
remanded back to the Tribunal. If the said bills have been placed
and proved on record and the same have not been already
MAC. APP. No.19/2006

Page 4 of 5

included in the amount of Rs.2,93,000/- as granted by the
Tribunal, then the same may be taken into consideration for
paying the amount incurred by the appellant towards purchase of
medicines and medical treatment after his discharge from the
hospital.
As

regards,

the

contention

of

counsel

for

the

respondent that the interest of 6% has been granted by the
Supreme Court, perusal of the judgment shows that the sum is on
the enhanced amount of compensation. The Tribunal has already
awarded interest @ 9% on the award amount from the date of
filing of the petition till realisation. The said amount has already
been paid to the appellant and, therefore, this Court is not
inclined to interfere on the said rate of interest.

However, the

respondent shall pay interest @ 6% on the enhanced amount of
compensation from the date of filing of the petition till realisation.
With these directions, the appeal stands disposed of.
Parties to appear before the Tribunal on 09.01.2008.

November 26, 2007
ga

MAC. APP. No.19/2006

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.

Page 5 of 5

