IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC. APP. No.868/2006
Judgment delivered on: November 26 ,2007
National Insurance Co.Ltd.
Through: Ms.
Advocate.

..... Appellant.
Manjusha
Wadhwa,

versus
Sh.Sandeep Kumar & Ors.
Through:

..... Respondents
Mr. Chandrani Prasad, Advocate
for R-1.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR,
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
*
Respondent No.3 has been served through publication.
Nobody is present on his behalf. He is proceeded ex parte.
By way of this appeal, the appellant has assailed
findings of the Tribunal on the ground that the driver of the
offending vehicle was admittedly holding license for LMV but was
MAC. APP. No.868/2006

Page No.1 of 7

driving Medium Goods Vehicle.

Counsel for the appellant has

tried to draw a distinction between LMV and Medium Goods
Vehicle.

Counsel for the appellant has placed reliance on the

written submissions of the appellant submitted before the
Tribunal. There is a difference between the two vehicles as would
be evident from the definition given under Section 2(21) and
2(23) of Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, counsel for the appellant
argued.
Counsel for the respondent, on the other hand,
contends that it was incumbent upon the appellant/insurance
company to plead and prove on record that driver of the vehicle
in question was untrained to drive that particular vehicle which
was involved in the accident.

Counsel for the respondent also

contends that this is an admitted position between the parties
that driver of the offending vehicle was holding an LMV license
and not the license for goods vehicle and such a technical plea
cannot completely absolve him from his liability. Counsel for the
appellant contends that claimant is a poor man and he has
unnecessarily been put to sufferings due to deprivation of
payment of the award-amount.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have
MAC. APP. No.868/2006

Page No.2 of 7

perused the record. Counsel for the appellant has placed reliance
on two judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported in 2005
SCC (Crl.) 148 Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. Vs. Nanjappan
and others and (2006) 4 SCC 250 National Insurance Co.
Ltd. Vs. Kusum Rai and others. A bare perusal of both the
decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court shows that the Apex Court
has given directions to the insurance company to first pay the
compensation amount and then recover the same from the owner
of the offending vehicle.

The contention of the counsel for the

appellant is that the same view may be taken in the present case
and the directions given in Nanjappan's case may be followed.
For better appreciation of the matter, counsel for the appellant
has referred to para 8 of the said judgment. The relevant portion
of the said judgment is reproduced as under :-

“8.

Therefore,

while

setting

aside

the

judgment of the High Court we direct in
terms of what has been stated in Baljit Kaur
Case that the insurer shall pay the quantum
of compensation fixed by the Tribunal, about
which there was no dispute raised, to the
respondent claimants within three months

MAC. APP. No.868/2006

Page No.3 of 7

from today.

For the purpose of recovering

the same from the insured, the insurer shall
not be required to file a suit. It may initiate a
proceeding

before

the

executing

court

concerned as if the dispute between the
insurer and the owner was the subjectmatter of determination before the Tribunal
and the issue is decided against the owner
and in favour of the insurer. Before release
of the amount to the claimants, owner of the
vehicle shall be issued a notice and he shall
be required to furnish security for the entire
amount which the insurer will pay to the
claimants.

The offending vehicle shall be

attached, as a part of the security.

If

necessity arises the executing court shall
take assistance of the Regional Transport
Authority concerned.

The executing court

shall pass appropriate order in accordance
with law as to the manner in which the
insured, owner of the vehicle shall make
payment to the insurer. In case there is any
default it shall be opened to the executing
court to direct realization by disposal of the
securities to be furnished or from any other
property or properties of the owner of the
vehicle, the insured. The appeal is disposed

MAC. APP. No.868/2006

Page No.4 of 7

of in the aforesaid terms, with no order as to
costs.”
A perusal of the aforesaid para of the judgment would
clearly reveal that the court has given directions to the Tribunal to
straightway initiate execution proceedings against the owner of
the offending vehicle instead of wasting time in filing a regular
civil suit for recovery of the amount, but in Kusum Rai's case,
the Apex Court has given recovery rights to the insurance
company by exercising its jurisdiction under Article 136 of the
Constitution of India, while holding an opinion that the appellant
in the given circumstances of the case, was not liable to pay
compensation amount on the ground of the driver being not
holding a valid license.
In these circumstances, considering facts of the said
two decisions and the facts of the present case, there is no
difficulty in holding that the appellant can ultimately claim the
compensation amount paid by the insurance company, from the
owner of the offending vehicle. Even otherwise, the owner has
not chosen to appear in the present appeal although duly served
through publication.

MAC. APP. No.868/2006

As regards contention of counsel for the

Page No.5 of 7

appellant that the amounts so deposited by the appellant, be not
directed to be released in favour of the claimant/respondent
without following the complete process as laid down in para 8 of
Nanjappan's judgment (supra), I find that such course would
be too harsh for the claimant. Para 8 of the said judgment begins
with the direction to the insurer to pay the amount to the
claimants within a period of three months but in the later portion,
directions have been given so as to put the owner of the
offending vehicle to certain terms of furnishing security, etc.
Once the recovery rights are being given to the appellant
insurance company and the Motor Vehicles Act being a beneficial
legislation for protecting rights of the victims of the accidents, the
course being suggested for putting on hold the payment till the
owner appears in the case and furnishes security would amount
to depriving the claimant from the fruits of the award and such a
course will further unnecessarily prolong the mental agony of the
claimants.

The intent of the Apex Court is quite clear, i.e.,

immediate payment to the claimant and then its recovery by the
insurer. The insurer being a public company, can afford to wait
the recovery but the same course cannot be made applicable so
far the claimants are concerned.
MAC. APP. No.868/2006

Page No.6 of 7

Going by the directions of the Apex Court, the
appellant/insurance company is given rights to recover the
amount by filing an execution petition against owner of the
offending vehicle. Let the amount which is lying deposited with
the Tribunal, be released forthwith in favour of the claimant.
With the above directions, the present appeal is
disposed of.

November 26, 2007
spg

MAC. APP. No.868/2006

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.

Page No.7 of 7

