IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

MAC. APP. No.307/2007
Judgment delivered on: November 26, 2007

National Insurance Co. Ltd.
Appellant

.....
Through: Mr.S.L. Gupta, Adv.

versus

Shashi Kant Gupta & Ors.

..... Respondents
Through: Nemo

CORAM:

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR,

1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
MAC APP. No. 307/2007

page 1 of 8

The

appellant,

National

Insurance

Company

insurer of the offending vehicle has preferred

Ltd.,

an appeal

challenging the impugned order dated 21.03.2007 passed by the
learned MACT. The impugned award has arisen out of three claim
petitions, viz., Suit nos. 67/2006; 68/2006 & 69/2006 filed by
respondent No.1

against the appellant as well as against

respondent Nos.2 & 3 claiming compensation for the death of Shri
Dharam Chand Gupta.
The brief facts which are necessary for deciding the
present appeal inter alia are that respondent No.1 is the legal heir
of deceased Shri Dharam Chand Gupta who died on 30.04.2005 at
the site of the accident itself. On 30.04.2005 deceased Shri
Dharam Chand Gupta and deceased Smt. Jaswanti Devi along with
their children were travelling from Delhi to Jind in the car bearing
registration no. DL 3CJ 2901. On their reaching Jind Road at about
11:15 am, a Swaraj Majda bearing registration no. HR 46A 8146
driven by its driver in a rash and negligent manner and at a very
high speed came from the wrong side and hit the front of the
aforesaid car with a great force. All the incumbents of the car
received serious injuries whereas, Shri Dharam Chand Gupta died
MAC APP. No. 307/2007

page 2 of 8

on the spot. The Tribunal after taking into consideration the facts
of the cases as well as evidence led by the parties had passed an
award in the sum of Rs. 4,30,000/- along with interest at the rate
of 8% per annum payable from the date of the institution of the
petition till the date of realization in suit no. 67/2006; Rs.
3,51,000/- along with interest at the rate of 8% per annum
payable from the date of the institution of the petition till the date
of realization in suit no. 68/2006 and Rs. 3,75,000/- along with
interest at the rate of 8% per annum payable from the date of the
institution of the petition till the date of realization in suit no.
69/2006. The said order passed by the Tribunal is now under
challenge in the present appeal.
I have heard learned counsel for the appellant at
considerable length.
Counsel for the appellant contends that in the written
statement the insurance company had prayed to the learned
tribunal to allow it to take over the defence available under
Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act on the non-participation of
the driver or the owner or on their being proceeded ex-parte, but
specific order was not passed by the Tribunal. The contention of
counsel for the appellant is that there is no fault on the part of the
MAC APP. No. 307/2007

page 3 of 8

appellant if no speaking order was passed by the Tribunal and,
therefore, the appellant cannot be deprived of the remedy of
appeal to challenge the award even on the grounds of quantum
and negligence. Counsel further contends that there is a deemed
permission in favour of the appellant as the appellant did move an
application before the Tribunal under Section 170 of the Motor
Vehicles Act but the Court did not pass any order thereto and,
therefore, it cannot be assumed that permission under Section
170 of the Motor Vehicles Act was not granted by the Tribunal.
Counsel for the appellant has placed reliance on the judgment of
the Supreme Court reported in 2007 (9) Scale 216, New India
Assurance Company Ltd. Vs. Smt. Shanti Pathak & Ors. to
contend that the Apex Court had interfered to lower down the
compensation amount even in a case where the insurer had not
taken any permission from the Court under Section 170 of the
Motor Vehicles Act. The counsel for the appellant also contends
that the Hon'ble Supreme Court has already referred the said
issue of lack of competence of the insurer to assail the findings of
the Tribunal on the ground of quantum of compensation and
negligence to a larger Bench and, therefore, this Court may award
the decision of the Supreme Court in this regard.
MAC APP. No. 307/2007

page 4 of 8

After having given my thoughtful and conscious
consideration to the issue involved in the present case, I am of the
view that the issue is no more res integra as in a catena of
judgments the Hon'ble Supreme Court has authoritatively held
that right to file an appeal is a statutory right and the insurer can
assail the findings of the Tribunal under Section 149(2) of the
Motor Vehicles Act, only in a case where there is collusion
between the claimants and the insured that the insurer can assail
the findings of the Tribunal on the grounds of quantum as well as
negligence, subject however to the condition that the insurer had
taken permission of the Court to take over the defence of the
owner or driver as the case may be as envisaged under Section
170 of the Motor Vehicles Act. No such permission was granted to
the appellant under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act by the
Tribunal and, therefore, in the absence of the same, the appellant
being the insurer of the offending vehicle cannot maintain the
present appeal on grounds other than those available to it under
Section 149(2) of the Motor Vehicles Act.
It would be appropriate to refer Section 170 of the
Motor Vehicles Act as under:“170. Impleading insurer in certain cases- Where
MAC APP. No. 307/2007

page 5 of 8

in the course of any inquiry the Claims Tribunal is
satisfied that (a) there is collusion between the person making the
claim and the person against whom the claim is
made, or

(b) the person against whom the claim is made
has failed to contest the claim,

It may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, direct
that the insurer who may be liable in respect of such
claim, shall be impleaded as a party to the proceeding
and the insurer so impleaded shall thereupon have,
without prejudice to the provisions contained in subsection (2) of section 149, the right to contest the
claim on all or any of the grounds that are available to
the person against whom the claim has been made.“

Admittedly, no such permission under Section 170 of
the Motor Vehicles Act was obtained by the appellant which
clearly meant that the circumstances as envisaged under Section
170 of the Motor Vehicles Act were not in existence for the Court
to grant such permission. In the judgment of the Supreme Court
reported in (1998) 3 SCC 140, Shankarayya Vs. United India
Insurance Co. Ltd., the Apex Court has held that the insurance
company when impleaded as a party by the Court can be
permitted to contest the proceedings on merits only if the
MAC APP. No. 307/2007

page 6 of 8

conditions preceding mentioned in Section 170 are found to be
satisfied and for that purpose the insurance company has to
obtain an order in writing from the Tribunal and such an order
should be a reasoned order of the Tribunal. In such circumstances
unless the said procedure is followed, the appellant insurer cannot
have a wider defence on merits than what is available to it by way
of a statutory defence. Ralevant part of Para 4 of the said
judgment in this regard is referred as under:“4. It clearly shows that the Insurance
Company when impleaded as a party by the
Court can be permitted to contest the
proceedings on merits only if the conditions
precedent mentioned in the section are found
to be satisfied and for that purpose the
Insurance Company has to obtain order in
writing from the Tribunal and which should be a
reasoned order by the Tribunal. Unless that
procedure is followed, the Insurance Company
cannot have a wider defence on merits than
what is available to it by way of statutory
defence. “

In view of the said legal position, I cannot appreciate
the argument of counsel for the appellant that there is a deemed
permission in favour of the appellant. Once the application under
Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act was preferred by the
appellant before the Tribunal for taking over the defence of an
MAC APP. No. 307/2007

page 7 of 8

owner or driver, the Tribunal is required to pass specific order and
that too a reasoned order as per the observations of the Supreme
Court referred above and, therefore, the argument of counsel for
the appellant cannot be appreciated that filing of an application
under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act by the appellant in
this regard was a sufficient compliance of a said statutory
requirement.
In the light of the above discussion, I do not find any merit in the
submission of counsel for the appellant. In the judgment cited by
the counsel in Shanti Pathak's case (supra) the Hon'ble Apex
Court has not dealt with the said legal proposition and, therefore,
the same is not applicable in the facts and circumstances of the
present case.
There is no merit in the appeal and the same is
dismissed.

November 26, 2007

MAC APP. No. 307/2007

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.

page 8 of 8

