IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC. App. No. 723/2006
Judgment delivered on:

2007

September 26,

M/s. New India Assurance Co. Ltd.
..... Appellant
Through: Mr. D.K. Sharma, Adv.
versus
Rekha Pandey & Ors.

..... Respondent
Through: Mr. Arvind Sharma, Adv. for
respondents 1-4.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR,
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

No

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

No

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
*
By way of the present appeal, the appellant has sought to
challenge the quantum of compensation awarded by the Tribunal
in favour of the respondents/claimants.
At the very outset, the counsel for the respondents has
raised a preliminary objection about the maintainability of the
present appeal. The contention of the counsel for respondent is

that the appellant being insurer cannot travel beyond the defence
available to the insurer under Section 49(2) of the Motor Vehicles
Act. The counsel contends that it is the settled position of law that
the negligence of the quantum cannot be challenged by the
insurer. Counsel for the respondent has placed reliance on the
judgment of the Supreme Court reported as 2002 ACJ 1250
National Insurance Company Ltd vs. Nicolletta Rohtagi &
Ors.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties. I find subtance
in the submissions of the learned counsel for the respondent. It is
no more res integra that the insurer can avoid its liability only
within the four corners of statutory defence available to it under
Section 149(2) of the Motor Vehicles Act. The insurer is entitled to
defend the action and contest the claim on grounds enumerated
in the Sub Section 2 of Section 149 of the Motor Vehicles Act.
Permitting the insurer to contest the claim on grounds other than
provided in Section 149(2) of the Motor Vehicles Act would mean
adding more grounds of contest to the insurer,

then, what the

statute has provided in quite explicit terms. It would be relevant
to refer para 11 of the said judgment as under:“11. Subsequently in 1934, second Road Traffic
Act was enacted.
The object of the said
legislation was to satisfy the liability of the

insured. Under the said enactment three actions
were provided. The first was to satisfy the
award passed against the insured. The second
was that, in case the insurer did not discharge
its liability the claimant had right to execute
decree against the insurer. However, in certain
events, namely, what was provided in section
96 (2)(a) which corresponds to section 149 (2)
(a) of 1988 Act, the insurer could defend his
liability. The third action provided for was
contained in section 10(3) of the Toad Traffic
Act. Under the said provision, the insurer could
defend his liability to satisfy decree on the
ground that insurance policy was obtained due
to misrepresentation or fraud.
The said
provision also finds place in section 149 (2)(b)
of 1988 Act. While enacting the 1939 Act and
1988 Act, all the three actions have been
engrafted in section 96 of 1939 Act and section
149 of 1988 Act. It may be remembered that
neither the 1939 Act nor the 1988 Act conferred
greater rights to the insurer than what had been
conferred in English law. Thus, in common law,
an insurer was not permitted to contest a claim
of a claimant on merits, i.e., offending vehicle
was not negligent or there was contributory
negligence. The insurer could contest the claim
only on statutory defences specified for in the
statute.”
In the light of the aforesaid discussion, I do not find any
merit in the appeal and the same is accordingly dismissed.

September 26, 2007
'raj'

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.

