IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC. APP. No. 777/2006
Judgment delivered on:

2007

September 26,

M/s. United India Insurance Co. Ltd.
..... Appellant
Through: Mr. Atul Nanda, Mr. Sandeep
Bajaj and Mr. Rajesh Kumar,
Advs.
versus
Master Imran Khan & Ors.
..... Respondents
Through: Mr. Vikas Kumar, Adv. for
respondents No. 2 and 3
Mr. Iqbal Asharaf Rahmani,
Adv.for respondent No.1
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
*
The appellant is aggrieved with the impugned award mainly
on the ground that prior to the passing of this award, the matter

MAC. APP. No. 777/2006
of 6

Page 1

was settled before the Lok Adalat for a total sum of Rs.30,000/vide orders dated 26.8.2001.
The contention of the counsel for the appellant is that once
the settlement took place before the Lok Adalat, the same could
not re-opened by the Tribunal. Counsel for the appellant has
placed reliance on Section 21 of the Delhi Legal Service
Authorities Act, 1987 and contends that every award of the Lok
Adalat is a deemed decree of the civil court. The counsel further
contends that such an order passed by the Lok Adalat is not
appealable in any court of law.
For better appreciation of the contention raised by the
counsel for the appellant, Section 21 of the Delhi Legal Service
Authorities Act, 1987 is referred to as under:“21. Award of Lok Adalat. - (1) Every
award of the Lok Adalat shall be deemed to be a
decree of a civil court or, as the case may be, an
order of any other court and where a
compromise or settlement has been arrived at,
by a Lok Adalat in a case referred to it under
sub-section (1) of Section 20, the court-fee paid
in such case shall be refunded in the manner
provided under the Court Fees Act, 1870 (7 of
1870).
(2) Every award made by a Loak Adalat shall be
final and binding on all the parties to the dispute,
and no appeal shall lie to any court against the
MAC. APP. No. 777/2006
of 6

Page 2

award.”
On the other hand, counsel appearing for the respondent has
placed reliance on the order dated 21.10.2002 passed by the
MACT whereby learned MACT had not accepted the award passed
by the Lok Adalat and had directed the matter to be proceeded
further for admission/denial of documents and framing of issues.
The contention of learned counsel for the respondent is that the
said order dated 21.10.2002 had attained finality and the same
was never assailed by the appell ant. Counsel further contends
that even after passing of the said order, the appellant had duly
participated in the proceedings by adducing evidence and by
cross examining the witnesses produced by the respondent.
Counsel, therefore, submits that now the appellant is estopped
under law from assailing the said order dated 21.10.2002 by filing
the present appeal against the final award taking shelter of
Section 21 of the Delhi Legal Service Authorities Act, 1987.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties at considerable
length and I find force in the submission of learned counsel for the
respondent. I have also perused the records. It is no doubt true
that under Section 21 of the Delhi Legal Service Authorities Act,
MAC. APP. No. 777/2006
of 6

Page 3

every award passed by the Lok Adalat is to be treated as a decree
passed by the civil court and such an award passed by the Lok
Adalat being final has a binding effect on all the parties to the
dispute. But the question here arises as to whether the parties to
the dispute have willfully and without exercise of any fraud, undue
influence, coercion, pressure or mis-representation, came forward
to settle/compromise the matter which led to the passing of the
award by the Lok Adalat. In the case in hand, the respondent had
moved an application dated 6.9.2001 wherein the order passed by
the Lok Adalat was assailed on the ground that the appellant was
misled by his counsel and acting on his advice, the appellant had
signed and executed certain documents.

The respondent has

further stated in the application that the appellant was defrauded
by his own counsel representing him before the Lok Adalat.
Perusal of the said application, thus, clearly shows that the
allegations of fraud have been made by the appellant against his
own counsel which led him to sign the documents although the
respondent was not exactly aware that he was entering into some
kind of final settlement. It is a settled principle of law that fraud
vitiates every transaction.

MAC. APP. No. 777/2006
of 6

Learned Tribunal, believing the said

Page 4

version of the respondent, had ignored the said award of the Lok
Adalat and gave directions to the parties to proceed with the case.
Perusal of the record further reveals that even reply was also not
filed by the appellant to the said application of the respondent
seeking setting aside of the Lok Adalat award. It is also admitted
case between the parties that the said order dated 21.10.2002
was never challenged by the appellant and for the first time the
same is being assailed in the present appeal.
In these circumstances, I am of the view that since the
appellant did not contest the said application of the respondent
and also even failed to challenge the order dated 21.10.2002
passed by the Tribunal, therefore the said order attained finality.
I, therefore, do not find myself to be in agreement with the
contentions raised by the appellant in the present appeal.

There

is no other ground taken by the appellant to assail the said
impugned award.
There is no merit in the appeal and the same is accordingly
dismissed.

MAC. APP. No. 777/2006
of 6

Page 5

September 26, 2007
'raj'

MAC. APP. No. 777/2006
of 6

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.

Page 6

