IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC. APP. No.672/2007
Judgment delivered on: November 28 ,2007

National Insurance Company
..... Appellant
Through: Mr.Ram Ashray, Advocate.
versus
Shri Rajender Kumar & Ors.
Through: Nemo.

..... Respondents

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
*
The present appeal is preferred against the award
dated 18.8.2007 of the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal.
On 28.22.3005, Sh. Rajender Kumar was walking near
G.T.K. Road by-pass.
MAC. APP. No.672/2007

At about 6.00 a.m., an RTV bearing
Page 1 of 6

registration No. DL 1VA 5294 being driven in a rash and negligent
manner hit Sh. Rajender Kumar and as a result he fell down and
became unconscious.

He was taken to the hospital from the

accident site, where he was declared as 'brought dead'. A claim
petition was filed on 30.11.2005 and award was made on the said
claim on 18.8.2007.

Aggrieved with the said award, present

appeal is preferred by the appellant insurance company.
The appellant in the present case has taken over the
defence of the owner and driver of the offending vehicle as
envisaged under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act.

The

challenge to the impugned award is on the ground that the
Tribunal has wrongly taken into consideration the income of the
deceased boy on notional basis. The second contention raised by
counsel for the appellant is that dependancy of the unmarried boy
should have been taken 1/3rd instead of 2/3rd or at the most half.
The third contention raised by counsel for the appellant is that
wrong multiplier of 15 has been applied and excessive amount of
Rs.15,000/- has been awarded towards funeral expenses has also
been challenged.
I have heard learned counsel for the appellant and I do
not find any merit in the contentions raised by counsel for the
MAC. APP. No.672/2007

Page 2 of 6

appellant.

The income of the deceased respondent has been

claimed at Rs.5,000/- and since the same was not proved with the
help of any evidence, therefore the Court has taken into
consideration the minimum wages. This Court has time and again
said that in the absence of any cogent evidence as to the income
of the deceased the aid of Minimum Wages Act, should be taken.
In this regard this Court in Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd.

Vs.

Smt. Rajwati Devi, observed as under:“11. I agree with the contention advanced
by the learned counsel for the insurance
company. In absence of clear and cogent
evidence pertaining to income of the
deceased, learned Tribunal should have
determined income of the deceased on
the basis of minimum wages notified
under the Minimum Wages Act. As the
deceased was employed as a driver, I
place him in the category of skilled
labourers.
Minimum wages for skilled
labourers as on 1.2.1996 was Rs.2,101/per month. (rounded off to Rs.2100/- per
month). I adopt this figure as the monthly
income of the deceased at the time of the
accident.”
It is, therefore, not a case where the deceased boy was
not earning prior to the date of accident. The multiplier of 15 has
been applied, taking into consideration the structured formula of
IInd Schedule of the Motor Vehicles Act. After taking the mean of
MAC. APP. No.672/2007

Page 3 of 6

age of the parents of the deceased, I do not find there is any
infirmity in the findings of the Tribunal even on this aspect. In this
regard the Supreme Court in New India Assurance Co. Ltd. v.
Kalpana, (2007) 3 SCC 538 has observed as under:“7. The multiplier method involves the
ascertainment of the loss of dependency or
the multiplicand having regard to the
circumstances of the case and capitalising the
multiplicand by an appropriate multiplier. The
choice of the multiplier is determined by the
age of the deceased (or that of the claimants
whichever is higher) and by the calculation as
to what capital sum, if invested at a rate of
interest appropriate to a stable economy,
would yield the multiplicand by way of annual
interest. In ascertaining this, regard should
also be had to the fact that ultimately the
capital sum should also be consumed-up over
the period for which the dependency is
expected to last.”

Simply the boy was unmarried, that in itself would not
mean that unmarried boy would have spent 2/3rd of his income
towards his personal expenses.

The Supreme Court in the

Fakeerappa v. Karnataka Cement Pipe Factory, (2004) 2
SCC 473 has observed as under:“7. What would be the percentage of
deduction for personal expenditure cannot be
governed by any rigid rule or formula of
universal application. It would depend upon
circumstances of each case. The deceased
undisputedly was a bachelor. Stand of the
MAC. APP. No.672/2007

Page 4 of 6

insurer
is
that
after
marriage,
the
contribution to the parents would have been
lesser and, therefore, taking an overall view
the Tribunal and the High Court were justified
in fixing the deduction.
8. It has to be noted that the ages of the
parents as disclosed in the claim petition
were totally unbelievable. If the deceased
was aged about 27 years as found at the
time of post-mortem and about which there
is no dispute, the father and mother could
not have been aged 38 years and 35 years
respectively as claimed by them in the claim
petition. Be that as it may, taking into
account special features of the case we feel it
would be appropriate to restrict the deduction
for personal expenses to one-third of the
monthly income. Though the multiplier
adopted appears to be slightly on the higher
side, the plea taken by the insurer cannot be
accepted, as there was no challenge by the
insurer to the fixation of the multiplier before
the High Court and even in the appeal filed
by the appellants before the High Court, the
plea was not taken.”

The Tribunal has rightly taken into account, 1/3rd
personal expenses out of the said income of the deceased and /3rd
towards the dependants.

Even towards funeral expenses, the

award is not on the higher side.

I find no merit in the present appeal. Dismissed.

MAC. APP. No.672/2007

Page 5 of 6

November 28, 2007
ga

MAC. APP. No.672/2007

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.

Page 6 of 6

