IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC APP. No. 506/2006
Judgment delivered on: September 28, 2007
Smt. T. Chandramathiamma
wife of Late Shri M.P. Narayanan Pillai
R/O Mangalalhit House,
Manchadikar,
Changnachery
Distt. Kottayam
Kerala State

.....Appellant.

Through: Mr.Divakaran Kanoth for the appellant.
versus
..... Respondent
Pappi
S/o Shri Lal Mohamad
R/o Hari Nangal Colony
P.S. Badarpur
New Delhi & Ors.
Through:

Mr. R.N. Sharma for the respondent.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR,
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
MAC APP.No.506/2006

Yes
page 1 of 8

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
The present appeal has been filed against the impugned
order dated 7.3.2006 passed by the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal.
The facts which are not in dispute inter alia, are that the
petition under Section 166 read with Section 140 of The Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988 was preferred by the mother of the deceased
seeking compensation on account of death of her son M.N. Nand
Kumar. The deceased son of the appellant was 24 years old and was
working as

an Engineer with M/s. Fasci Comp Systems on a

monthly salary of Rs.3000/-. On 15.3.90 at about 4.00 P.M. the
deceased who was pillion riding a motor cycle bearing registration
No. DNF 124 driven by one Mr. Pradeep Kumar was hit due to the
rash and negligent driving by one truck bearing registration no.
DLL 6858 which collided with the Maruti Car which led to causing
the said accident of the motor cycle. The deceased received serious

MAC APP.No.506/2006

page 2 of 8

injuries and was declared brought dead at the hospital.
In the present appeal Mr. Divakaran Kanoth, the counsel
the appellant has assailed the findings of the award dated 7.3.2006
mainly on two grounds; firstly the age of the mother/appellant has
been wrongly taken into consideration as 67 years, although her
correct age

was 54 years on the date of accident.

The second

contention of the counsel for the appellant is that the Tribunal has
not correctly taken into consideration the future prospects of the
deceased as he has a promising career being a qualified engineer.
The contention of the counsel for the appellant is that the deceased
who was employed as an engineer could have earned much more
till the date of his retirement had he not met with the said tragic
accident.
Mr.R.N. Sharma, counsel appearing for respondent no.3 very
fairly conceded

to the first contention of the

counsel for

the

appellant. Counsel for the respondent has admitted that a mistake
has crept in the award as regards the age of the appellant as her
correct age on the date of the accident was 54 years. On the second

MAC APP.No.506/2006

page 3 of 8

contention counsel for the respondent states that the appellant is
not entitled to any further enhancement as far as future prospects
are concerned. Mr. Sharma says that Tribunal has already taken
into consideration the future prospects of the deceased in accordance
with the principles laid down in Sarla Dixit & Anr. Vs. Balwant
Yadav & Ors., 1996 ACJ 581. Counsel for the respondent further
says that rather the multiplier is required to be reduced in the
present case as the future prospects have been given in favour of the
appellant/claimant in accordance with Sarla Dixit's case (supra).
Counsel further contends that appellant was the only surviving
legal heir and therefore, the Tribunal ought to have taken into
consideration one half of the income towards personal expenses.
I have heard the counsel for the parties. As far as the age
of the appellant/claimant is concerned, there is no doubt that the
same has been wrongly taken into consideration at the age of 67
years.

The correct age of appellant/claimant on the date of the

accident is 54 years and that is borne out from the date of birth
certificate of the appellant, which shows the date of birth of the

MAC APP.No.506/2006

page 4 of 8

appellant as 19.9.36. Since the counsel for the respondent has also
not disputed this fact, therefore, I see no reason to disbelieve the
said contention of the counsel for the appellant that the age of the
claimant was 54 years on the date of the accident. Taking the said
age into consideration the Tribunal ought to have applied the
applicable multiplier of 11 years as per the Second Schedule.
As far as the second contention of the appellant is
concerned, I find that the Tribunal has duly taken into consideration
the future prospects of the deceased by applying the principle of law
laid down in Sarla Dixit's case (supra). I do not find that the
appellant is entitled to any separate compensation under the head
'future prospects' once the criteria laid down in Sarla Dixit's case
has been duly taken into consideration by the Tribunal.
Although, I

find that

the Tribunal has taken into

consideration 1/3rd of the salary towards personal expenses without
giving any basis for doing so, yet, however, since in the present case
the precious life of a young engineer has been lost, and the said
finding has not been assailed by the insurer, therefore, I am not

MAC APP.No.506/2006

page 5 of 8

inclined to interfere with the said finding.
Counsel for the respondent has also argued that the
appellant had failed to give evidence in support of her claim till
2004 although the claim by the appellant was filed in the year 1990.
This certainly shows that there is an undue delay on the part of the
appellant in completing her evidence due to which long period of
more than 16 years was taken by the Tribunal in deciding the case.
It is no more res integra that the compensation to be awarded to the
claimants in motor accident matters should be just and fair
compensation. The Supreme Court in

Nagappa v. Gurudayal

Singh,(2003) 2 SCC 274 has observed as under:
“7. Firstly, under the provisions of the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988, (hereinafter referred to as “the MV
Act”) there is no restriction that compensation could be
awarded only up to the amount claimed by the claimant.
In an appropriate case, where from the evidence brought
on record if the Tribunal/court considers that the claimant
is entitled to get more compensation than claimed, the
Tribunal may pass such award. The only embargo is — it
should be “just” compensation, that is to say, it should be
neither arbitrary, fanciful nor unjustifiable from the
evidence.”

The Supreme Court in Divisional Controller, KSRTC v.
Mahadeva Shetty,(2003) 7 SCC 197 has held as under:
MAC APP.No.506/2006

page 6 of 8

“ It has to be kept in view that the Tribunal constituted

under the Act as provided in Section 168 is required to
make an award determining the amount of compensation
which to it appears to be “just”. It has to be borne in mind
that compensation for loss of limbs or life can hardly be
weighed in golden scales. Bodily injury is nothing but a
deprivation which entitles the claimant to damages. The
quantum of damages fixed should be in accordance with
the injury. An injury may bring about many consequences
like loss of earning capacity, loss of mental pleasure and
many such consequential losses. A person becomes entitled
to damages for mental and physical loss, his or her life may
have been shortened or that he or she cannot enjoy life,
which has been curtailed because of physical handicap.
The normal expectation of life is impaired. But at the same
time it has to be borne in mind that the compensation is
not expected to be a windfall for the victim. Statutory
provisions clearly indicate that the compensation must be
“just” and it cannot be a bonanza; not a source of profit but
the same should not be a pittance. The courts and tribunals
have a duty to weigh the various factors and quantify the
amount of compensation, which should be just. What would
be “just” compensation is a vexed question. There can be
no golden rule applicable to all cases for measuring the
value of human life or a limb. Measure of damages cannot
be arrived at by precise mathematical calculations. It would
depend upon the particular facts and circumstances, and
attending peculiar or special features, if any. Every method
or mode adopted for assessing compensation has to be
considered in the background of “just” compensation which
is the pivotal consideration. Though by use of the
expression “which appears to it to be just”, a wide
discretion is vested in the Tribunal, the determination has
to be rational, to be done by a judicious approach and not
the outcome of whims, wild guesses and arbitrariness. The
expression “just” denotes equitability, fairness and
reasonableness, and non-arbitrariness. If it is not so, it
cannot be just. (See Helen C. Rebello v. Maharashtra SRTC
8 .)”

MAC APP.No.506/2006

page 7 of 8

In these circumstances, the interest awarded by the
Tribunal is reduced from 7.5% to 6% from the date of the institution
of the petition till the date of realisation.
In the light of the aforesaid discussion the matter is
remanded back to the Tribunal to recalculate the award amount as
per the directions given above.
With these directions, appeal stands disposed of.

September 28 , 2007
mg

MAC APP.No.506/2006

KAILASH GAMBHIR J.

page 8 of 8

