IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC APP. No. 626/2006
Judgment delivered on: November 29 ,2007
Madan Lal

..... Appellant.
Through: Mr. Sudhir Talwar with Mr. Rajeev
Chauhan, Advs.
versus

Kanwal Sethi & Ors.

Through:

..... Respondents
Ms. Shantha Devi Raman, Adv.
for respondent No. 3.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR,
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
By way of this appeal the appellant has sought enhancement
in the compensation amount over and above as awarded by the
Tribunal. The contention of the counsel for the appellant,
Mr.Sudhir Talwar, is that the Court has not considered the rise in
the Minimum Wages while awarding the compensation towards

MAC.APP No. 626 of 2006

page 1 of 5

the loss of dependency. Counsel further contends that the
appellant has suffered a kind of permanent memory loss and due
to which even now he is not in a position to work. Counsel further
contends that the appellant was discharged from the trauma
centre just after four days not because that his treatment was
over, but because of the fact that there were no beds to
accommodate him. Counsel thus claims that the case of the
appellant deserves further enhancement as a meager amount of
Rs. 58,276/- has been awarded.
Per

contra

Ms.Shantha

Devi

Raman,

counsel

for

the

respondent refutes the submission of the counsel for the
appellant. She states that just and fair compensation has been
awarded by the Tribunal. Counsel contends that in the absence of
any evidence to prove the income, the Tribunal has assessed the
income of the appellant on the basis of the Minimum Wages Act.
Counsel further contends that the appellant has been given
compensation towards his income for a period of four months
although he remained hospitalized only for a period of six days.
Counsel also contends that no evidence has been placed on
record or proved by the appellant to show that the appellant has
suffered any kind of permanent memory loss.
MAC.APP No. 626 of 2006

page 2 of 5

I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the
records.
The appellant had pleaded his income at Rs. 8,000/- per
month from his avocation as a carpenter. Since no cogent or
material evidence was adduced to prove the income, therefore,
the Tribunal has assessed the income of the appellant in the
category of skilled worker on the basis of the Minimum Wages as
applicable on the relevant date of the accident.
The appellant remained under treatment for a period of four
months, therefore, the Tribunal has granted four months income
towards the loss of income suffered by the appellant. The Tribunal
has also been quite considerate to award a sum of Rs. 10,000/towards the loss of future income although no evidence in this
regard was placed by the appellant. Special diet and conveyance
charges have also been allowed by the Tribunal even in the
absence of any proper evidence placed by the appellant. This
case appears to be the case of simple injury and had it been the
case of some kind of permanent disablement or of suffering of
any grave injury, as is alleged, the same could have been proved
only with the help of a medical evidence and not in the absence of
such evidence. The appellant has failed to place anything on
MAC.APP No. 626 of 2006

page 3 of 5

record to show that he had suffered any kind of brain injury due to
the accident or any permanent loss to his memory. In this regard
the Hon'ble Supreme in Lata Wadhwa v. State of Bihar,(2001)
8 SCC 197 has observed as follows:“In examining the question of damages for
personal injury, it is axiomatic that pecuniary and
non-pecuniary heads of damages are required to
be taken into account. In case of pecuniary
damages, loss of earning or earning capacity,
medical, hospital and nursing expenses, the loss
of matrimonial prospects, if proved, are required
to be considered. In the case of non-pecuniary
losses, loss of expectation of life, loss of
amenities or capacity for enjoying life, loss or
impairment of physiological functions, impairment
or loss of anatomical structures or body tissues,
pain and suffering and mental suffering are to be
considered. But for arriving at a particular figure
on each of the aforesaid heads, the claimant is
duty-bound to produce relevant materials, on the
basis of which, a determination could be made, as
to what would be the best compensation.”
In the absence of any evidence placed on record no infirmity
can be found in the findings of the Tribunal.
No merit. Dismissed.
At this stage counsel for the appellant points out that the
Tribunal has given the direction to keep the 75% of the amount in
a fixed deposit with any nationalized bank for a period of three

MAC.APP No. 626 of 2006

page 4 of 5

years. Counsel claims that the appellant being the poor person,
therefore, at least the said amount be made available to him for
his sustenance and for his medical treatment. The request of the
counsel for the appellant appears to be genuine. Let the entire
amount be made available to the appellant.

November 29, 2007
rkr

MAC.APP No. 626 of 2006

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.

page 5 of 5

