IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
FAO. No. 403/2003
Judgment delivered on: October 29, 2007
Smt. Vidya Mowar & Anr.
..... Petitioner
Through: Mr. O.P. Goyal, Adv.
versus
Mohd. Sahuket Ali & Ors.
..... Respondents
Through: Mr.D.K. Sharma for respondent
No. 3.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR,
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
In the present

FAO No. 403/2003

appeal

the appellant

is primarily

pages 1 of 8

aggrieved on two grounds i.e. firstly, the Tribunal has taken
into consideration 2/3rd of the personal expenses instead of
1/3rd and secondly, wrong multiplier has been applied.
Relevant facts of the instant case in brief are that on
22.1.1992 at about 10.00 p.m. the deceased Shri Tarun Hari
Mowar was going from Janakpuri towards Safdurjung Enclave
as a pillion rider on two wheeler scooter driven by his friend
Vinay and when they reached Moti Bagh crossing on the
Ring Road, Shri Vinay slowed down his scooter on account of
barriers laid down on the road and all of a sudden a truck
bearing registration No. DEG-4184 driven in the most rash
and negligent manner came from behind at a very high
speed struck the scooter and both driver and pilliion rider of
the scoooter fell on road and before deceased could get up,
the truck ran over his left side causing grevious hurt. The
deceased was rushed to Safdarjung Hospital immediately
but he succumbed to his injuries on the following day at 5.50
a.m. A claim petition was filed before the MACT and vide
order dated 19.4.2003, the Tribunal awarded Rs. 2,33,500/FAO No. 403/2003

pages 2 of 8

@ 9% to the claimants. Aggrieved with the said order the
appellant has preferred present appeal.
Mr. O.P. Goyal, counsel for the appellant contends that
as per II Schedule of the Motor Vehicles Act the multiplier of
13 should have been made applicable after taking into
consideration the age of the mother, whose age at the time
of accident was 52 years. On personal expenses the
contention of the counsel for the appellant is that in catena
of

judgments

the

Supreme

Court

has

taken

into

consideration 1/3rd of the personal expenses and not 2/3rd
and, therefore, in the present case also the same personal
expenses were required to be taken into consideration.
Counsel for the appellant has also placed reliance on the
judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported in 2003
ACJ 2152 Gyanchand Jain and Anr. vs Parmanand &
Ors.
Per contra Mr. D.K. Sharma, counsel appearing for the
respondent states that the correct multiplier has been
applied by the Tribunal by taking average age of both the
FAO No. 403/2003

pages 3 of 8

petitioners,

parents

of

the

deceased.

Counsel

further

contends that the age of the father was more than 60 years
and the age of the mother was more than 52 years and
taking the average of both the said ages the Tribunal has
applied the multiplier of 8 in accordance with the II Schedule
of the Motor Vehicles Act. The contention of the counsel is
that no grievance can be made by the appellant as far as
multiplier is concerned. On the deduction of 2/3rd personal
expenses the contention of the counsel is that the deceased
was 27 years of age and, therefore, in the normal course he
would have got married within a period of one or two years
and thereafter he would have spent at least 2/3rd of his
personal income on himself and his family. Counsel for the
respondent thus contends that the Tribunal has rightly taken
into consideration 2/3rd of the personal expenses to be spent
by the deceased on himself and on his family leaving 1/3rd
towards dependents for their subsistence.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and
perused the records. On the submission of the counsel for
FAO No. 403/2003

pages 4 of 8

the appellant relating to the multiplier, I do not find any
infirmity in the impugned Award so far as the same has
taken

into

consideration

the

average

age

of

the

appellants/dependant members as 56.5 years. The father of
the deceased was more than 60 years of age and the mother
of the deceased was 52 years of the age at the time of death
of the deceased. I do not accept the contention of the
counsel for the appellants that amongst the parents also the
age of that parent, which is lowest has to be taken into
consideration and then the multiplier as per the II Schedule
has to be made applicable. This contention of the counsel
even does not find support from the judgment of the
Supreme Court relied upon by him in Gyanchand Jain's
case (supra). In that case also the appellants/claimants
therein were father and mother aged 55 and 48 years
respectively and multiplier of 12 was upheld by the Supreme
Court. Had the Supreme Court taken the lower age of 48
years into consideration then as per the II Schedule of the
Motor Vehicles Act the appropriate multiplier applicable
FAO No. 403/2003

pages 5 of 8

would have been 13 years and not 12 years. I, therefore, do
not find any infirmity in the impugned order so far as the
multiplier of 8 is concerned.
As regards the second contention of the counsel for the
appellant, I find myself in agreement with the same. It is a
well settled law that the compensation to be granted in
favour of the claimants has to be just and fair and the same
cannot be calculated with an arithmetic precision. In the
catena of judgments the Hon'ble Supreme Court has taken
into consideration 1/3rd of the personal expenses even where
the deceased was of young age and even unmarried. I,
therefore, do not find any justification in the impugned order
deducting 2/3rd personal expenses from the income of the
deceased.
In this regard in Fakeerappa vs. Karnataka Cement
Pipe Factory,(2004) 2 SCC 473 Apex Court has observed
as follows:“7. What would be the percentage of deduction for
personal expenditure cannot be governed by any
rigid rule or formula of universal application. It would
depend upon circumstances of each case. The
FAO No. 403/2003

pages 6 of 8

deceased undisputedly was a bachelor. Stand of the
insurer is that after marriage, the contribution to the
parents would have been lesser and, therefore,
taking an overall view the Tribunal and the High
Court were justified in fixing the deduction.
8. It has to be noted that the ages of the parents as
disclosed in the claim petition were totally
unbelievable. If the deceased was aged about 27
years as found at the time of post-mortem and about
which there is no dispute, the father and mother
could not have been aged 38 years and 35 years
respectively as claimed by them in the claim petition.
Be that as it may, taking into account special features
of the case we feel it would be appropriate to restrict
the deduction for personal expenses to one-third of
the monthly income. Though the multiplier adopted
appears to be slightly on the higher side, the plea
taken by the insurer cannot be accepted, as there
was no challenge by the insurer to the fixation of the
multiplier before the High Court and even in the
appeal filed by the appellants before the High Court,
the plea was not taken.”

In view of the aforesaid, the 1/3rd personal expenses
from the income of the deceased have to be deducted and to
this extent the order of the Tribunal is modified.
Parties are directed to appear before the Tribunal on
19th November, 2007 for granting the said enhancement and
thereafter giving necessary directions as to how the said
amount is to be disbursed/apportioned. The Tribunal need
FAO No. 403/2003

pages 7 of 8

not send notice to the other respondents except the insurer,
who is the only contesting respondent before this Court.
With these directions the present appeal is disposed of.

October 29, 2007
rkr

FAO No. 403/2003

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.

pages 8 of 8

