IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC.APP. No. 764/2006
Judgment delivered on: November 30 ,2007
Himanshu Gupta
Through:

..... Appellant.
Mr. Ravindra Narayan, Adv.

versus
Kundan Singh & Ors.
Through:

..... Respondents
Ms. Sakshi Mittal, Adv.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR,
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
By way of this appeal the appellant seeks enhancement
in the compensation amount over and above the one
awarded by the Tribunal.
The facts of the case in a nutshell are as follows:
Sh.Hem Chand Gupta, Sh.Neeraj Gupta, Sh.Himanshu

MAC.APP. No. 764/2006

page 1 of 7

Gupta and Sh.Nitin Gupta were travelling in a Maruti car on
7.12.2000, while proceeding towards Anoopshahar from
Delhi via Hapur.

When they reached village Akdauli at

about 7.30 a.m., a truck bearing registration No. UP 14N
1551 being driven at a high speed and in a rash and
negligent manner collided with the Maruti car. As a result
of the accident all the incumbents of the Maruti car suffered
serious multiple injuries and were rushed to the nearest
Nursing Home at Hapur and were later referred to
Maharaja Agarsain Hospital, Delhi.

Four claim petitions

were filed before Motor Accident Claims Tribunal and all
the four petitions were disposed of by way of a common
order dated 20.5.2006.

Aggrieved with the said order

present appeal is preferred by the appellant.
Counsel for the appellant contends that the appellant
was a student of second year MBBS course and due to the
said accident he could not perform well in his exams,
therefore, the appellant could complete his MBBS course in
a period of seven years. Counsel for the appellant contends
MAC.APP. No. 764/2006

page 2 of 7

that the appellant lost two precious years only due to the
said serious injuries suffered by him and as per the
testimony of PW-4 the appellant would continue to suffer
from epileptic fits in his entire life time. Counsel further
contends that the said accident has affected his memory
besides causing physical and mental exertion, irritability
etc. and these characteristics were even observed by the
Court when the appellant had entered into the witness box.
Counsel for the appellant thus contends that the Tribunal
has awarded a very meager amount of Rs. 1 lakh towards
the permanent disablement and loss of future prospects.
Per contra counsel appearing for the respondent
seriously refutes the said submission of the counsel for the
appellant. The counsel contends that the Tribunal has
awarded appropriate compensation taking into account the
facts and circumstances of the case. Counsel also contends
that in the kind of injuries suffered by the appellant, the
compensation of Rs. 1 lakh towards permanent disablement
cannot be considered to be on the lower side.
MAC.APP. No. 764/2006

page 3 of 7

Perusal

of the

Award

shows

that

the

appellant

remained in a coma for a period of 7 days due to the head
injuries sustained by him and as per the deposition of PW-4
the said disability to the extent of suffering fits would
continue till the life time of the appellant. It is also not
disputed that the appellant lost two precious years in
completing his MBBS course and due to which it has
certainly affected his future prospects and career. In any
case, since the appellant was a student of second year in
the MBBS and has already completed his 12th standard, the
income of a graduate can safely be applied in the case of
the appellant under the Minimum Wages Act. The income
of the graduate under the Minimum Wages Act as on the
relevant date of the accident was Rs. 3284/- and the annual
income would come to Rs.39,408/- and for 25% disablement
the annual loss and suffering would come to Rs.9,852/-. The
appellant was of 23 years of age on the date of the accident.
Appropriate multiplier under the Second Schedule is 17
years. Applying the said multiplier to the multiplicand of
MAC.APP. No. 764/2006

page 4 of 7

Rs.9,852/- the total loss towards the permanent disablement
would come to Rs.1,67,484/-. The compensation awarded by
the Tribunal under this head stands enhanced from Rs. 1
lakhs to Rs.1,67,484/-.
The appellant is also aggrieved on account of the fact
that the Tribunal has not adequately compensated the
appellant for pain and agony as well as for loss of
expectation of life and amenities including the time taken to
clear his academic qualification. The contention of the
counsel for the appellant is that only a meager amount of
Rs. 50,000/- has been granted for pain, agony and similar
amount has been granted towards loss of amenities,
expectation of life including loss of time taken to clear his
academic qualification. The contention of the counsel for
the appellant is that the appellant has suffered immensely
on account of the said injuries, which has the affect of
crippling the life of the appellant as there is temporary
memory loss and he would continue to receive the epileptic
fits during his life time. Counsel contends that the testimony
MAC.APP. No. 764/2006

page 5 of 7

of the Doctor i.e. PW-4 remained almost unrebutted.
Counsel thus contends that the compensation needs to be
enhanced under these heads. Counsel for the respondent
disputes the said submissions of the counsel for the
appellant. She states that Rs. 50,000/- for suffering such
kind of disability meets the end of justice and, therefore, the
same does not need any further enhancement. The same is
the submission of the counsel for the respondent as regards
the

other

heads

of

compensation.

As

regards

the

compensation for pain and agony, I am not inclined to
interfere as it cannot be said that the grant of Rs. 50,000/for suffering 25% disability is inappropriate. However, grant
of Rs. 50,000/- towards loss of amenities, expectation of life
and for loss of time taken to clear his academic qualification
appears on the lower side. The appellant was a student of
MBBS and was in the second year course at the time of the
accident. He has taken 7 years time to complete the MBBS
course, which certainly means that two precious years were
lost. The course, which he would have completed within 5
MAC.APP. No. 764/2006

page 6 of 7

years that has taken 7 years. Due to the said injury the
appellant has also not been able to appear in the advance
course and which ultimately has affected his entire medical
career. There is force in the arguments of the counsel for
the appellant, I, therefore, enhance the said compensation
of Rs. 50,000/- towards loss of amenities and expectations of
life including the loss of time taken to clear his academic
qualification from Rs. 50,000/- to Rs. 1,50,000/-. The
respondent

shall

pay

the

differential

amount

of

compensation along with upto date interest @ 6% from the
date of the filing of the petition till the realisation.
With these directions the appeal is disposed of.

November 30, 2007
rkr

MAC.APP. No. 764/2006

KAILASH GAMBHIR J.

page 7 of 7

