*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+ 1.

Writ Petition (Civil) No.15945 of 2006
Judgment reserved on: August 30, 2007

%

Judgment delivered on: December 3, 2007
Kalyani Steels Ltd.
Through its Company Secretary
Mundhwa, Pune-411 036.
Through

...Petitioner

Mr. Sandeep Sethi, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Rajesh Sharma, Advocate
Versus

1.

The Secretary, Revenue
The Ministry of Finance
Government of India
North Block, New Delhi.

2.

The Designated Authority
Directorate General of Anti-Dumping & Allied Duties
Ministry of Commerce and Industry
Department of Commerce
Government of India
Udyog Bhawan, New Delhi.

3.

Maharashtra Seamless Ltd.
H.O. : 235, Okhla Industrial Estate
New Delhi-110 020.
Through

...Respondents

Mr. P.P. Malhotra, ASG with Mr. Suresh
Kait, Advocate for Respondents No.1 & 2
Mr. Atul Sharma, Advocate for Resp. 3
WITH

+ 2. Cus. A.C. No.16 of 2006
Kalyani Steels Ltd.
Mundhwa, Pune-411 036.
Through

...Appellant
Mr. Sandeep Sethi, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Rajesh Sharma, Advocate
Versus

WP(C) No.15945/2006

Page 1 of 20

1.

The Secretary (Revenue)
The Ministry of Finance
Government of India
North Block, New Delhi.

2.

The Designated Authority
Directorate General of Anti-Dumping & Allied Duties
Ministry of Commerce and Industry
Department of Commerce
Government of India
Udyog Bhawan, New Delhi.
...Respondents
Through

Mr. P.P. Malhotra, ASG with Mr. Suresh
Kait, Advocate for the Respondents.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE S. MURALIDHAR
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

MADAN B. LOKUR, J.
1.

In a writ petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution,

the Petitioner has prayed for an appropriate writ to the Central
Government not to withdraw the anti-dumping duty imposed by
Notification No.65/2001-Cus dated 25th June, 2001.
2.

It may be mentioned that the anti-dumping duty was

provisionally imposed by Notification No. 151/2000-Cus dated 26th
December, 2000 till 25th June, 2001. Thereafter, it was extended by the
Notification dated 25th June, 2001 and was to remain in force for 5 years
with effect from 26th December, 2000. However, it was prematurely

WP(C) No.15945/2006

Page 2 of 20

withdrawn by Notification No.69/2005-Cus dated 19th July, 2005. That
is why the Petitioner is aggrieved.
3.

The withdrawal Notification dated 19th July, 2005 was challenged

by the Petitioner before the Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate
Tribunal (for short the Tribunal) and in its decision dated 2nd August,
2006 the Tribunal set aside the impugned Notification but declined to
extend the imposition of anti-dumping duty beyond the initial period of
5 years.

Therefore, the prayer of the Petitioner before us is that

effectively we should continue the anti-dumping duty imposed by the
Central Government by the Notification dated 26th December, 2000 read
with the Notification dated 25th June, 2001 beyond the original period of
5 years.
4.

Against the decision dated 2nd August, 2006, the Petitioner

preferred an appeal in this Court being Cus. A.C. No. 16/2006. On 7th
May, 2007, the appeal was admitted and the following substantial
question of law was framed for consideration: “Whether the Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate
Tribunal was right in law in holding that under the first
proviso to Section 9A(5) of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 the
Central Government cannot extend the period of imposition
of anti-dumping duty in view of the main part of Section
9A(5) of the Act?

5.

Essentially since the question raised in the writ petition as well as

in the appeal is the same, we propose to dispose of both the matters by
this common judgment and order.
FACTS:

WP(C) No.15945/2006

Page 3 of 20

6.

India is a signatory to the General Agreement on Tariffs and

Trade, 1994 (for short the GATT). It is also bound by the Agreement on
Implementation of Article VI of the GATT, 1994 which is commonly
referred to as the Anti Dumping Agreement.
7.

Pursuant to the Anti Dumping Agreement, the Customs Tariff

Act, 1975 was amended to incorporate Section 9A, 9AA, 9B and 9C
therein. By virtue of powers conferred by Section 9A(6) of the Customs
Tariff Act, 1975 (for short the Act) the Central Government notified the
Customs Tariff (Identification, Assessment and Collection of Anti
Dumping Duty on Dumped Articles and for Determination of Injury)
Rules, 1995 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
8.

The broad background facts of the case as placed before us

suggest that representations were made by the domestic industry to the
Central Government, in which it was alleged that certain seamless grade
alloy and non-alloy steel billets, bars and rounds (for short the subject
goods) originating in or exported from Russia, China and Ukraine are
being dumped into India.

Consequently, the Designated Authority

under the Act initiated an investigation as contemplated by Rule 5 of the
Rules. As a result of the investigation, the Designated Authority made a
recommendation on 1st December, 2000 that anti-dumping duty should
be provisionally imposed on the subject goods originating in or
exported from Russia and China. The recommendation was accepted by
the Central Government and a Notification dated 26th December, 2000
was issued by the Central Government provisionally imposing anti-

WP(C) No.15945/2006

Page 4 of 20

dumping duty on the import of the subject goods from Russia and
China upto 25th June, 2001.
9.

Later on 1st June, 2001, the Designated Authority gave its final

findings recommending imposition of definitive anti-dumping duty on
all imports of the subject goods from Russia and China.

This

recommendation was also accepted by the Central Government and on
25th June, 2001 a Notification was issued by the Central Government
imposing anti-dumping duty on the subject goods for a period of five
years with effect from 26th December, 2000 till 25th December, 2005.
10.

On 3rd March, 2004, Respondent No.3 (Maharashtra Seamless

Ltd.) requested the Designated Authority under the Act to carry out a
mid-term review of the anti-dumping duty on the subject goods
imported from Russia, China and Ukraine. The purpose of a mid-term
review, as contemplated by Section 9A(5) of the Act read with Rule 23 of
the Rules is to ascertain whether there is any justification for continuing
with the anti-dumping duty.
11.

Sections 9A(5) of the Act and Rule 23 of the Rules read as follows:
“9A. Anti-dumping duty on dumped articles:
(1) to (4)
xxx xxx xxx
(5) The anti-dumping duty imposed under this section
shall, unless revoked earlier, cease to have effect on the
expiry of five years from the date of such imposition:
Provided that if the Central Government, in a review, is of
the opinion that the cessation of such duty is likely to lead
to continuation or recurrence of dumping and injury, it
may, from time to time, extend the period of such
imposition for a further period of five years and such
further period shall commence from the date of order of
such extension:
Provided further that where a review initiated before the
expiry of the aforesaid period of five years has not come to
a conclusion before such expiry, the anti-dumping duty

WP(C) No.15945/2006

Page 5 of 20

may continue to remain in force pending the outcome of
such a review for a further period not exceeding one year.
(6) to (8)
xxx xxx xxx”
23. Review. – (1) The designated authority shall, from time
to time, review the need for the continued imposition of the
anti-dumping duty and shall, if it is satisfied on the basis of
information received by it that there is no justification for
the continued imposition of such duty recommend to the
Central Government for its withdrawal.
(2) Any review initiated under sub-rule (1) shall be
concluded within a period not exceeding twelve months
from the date of initiation of such review.
(3) The provisions of rules 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 16, 17, 18, 19, and
20 shall be mutatis mutandis applicable in the case of
review.”
12.

As a result of the representation, the Designated Authority issued

a public notice on 24th May, 2004 initiating a mid-term review regarding
anti-dumping duty imposed on imports of certain seamless grade alloy
and non-alloy steel billets, bars and rounds from Russia, China and
Ukraine.

At this stage, it is necessary to quote the language of

paragraph 3 of the public notice. This is what is said in paragraph 3 of
the public notice: “Having decided to review the final findings notified vide
No 31/1/99 dated 1st June, 2001 and final duty imposed on
26th June, 2001, the Authority hereby initiates investigations
to review the need for the continued imposition of antidumping duty and whether cessation of anti dumping duty
is likely to lead to continuation or recurrence of dumping
and injury on imports of certain seamless grade alloy and
non alloy steel billets, bars and rounds originating in or
exported from Russia, China and Ukraine in accordance
with the Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act, 1995 and the
Customs Tariff (Identification, Assessment and Collection
of Anti Dumping Duty on Dumped Articles and for
Determination of Injury) Rules, 1995.”
It is important to note that the public notice mentioned the need
to review the continued imposition of anti-dumping duty and whether

WP(C) No.15945/2006

Page 6 of 20

cessation of anti-dumping duty is likely to lead to continuation or
recurrence of dumping and injury on the import of the subject goods.
This is quite the same language employed in the first proviso to Section
9A(5) of the Act.
13.

On a reading of the public notice dated 24th May, 2004 issued by

the Designated Authority, it appears that though it was captioned as an
initiation of a mid-term review, it was in letter and spirit a ‘sunset
review’ in terms of the first proviso to Section 9A(5) of the Act.
14.

Apparently realizing that what was intended was a mid-term

review (though the language employed was different) or perhaps back
tracking on its stated intention, the Designated Authority issued a
Corrigendum dated 5th January, 2005 to the public notice dated 24th May,
2004.

The original paragraph 3 was substituted by the following

paragraph:
“Having decided to review the final findings notified vide
No. 31/1/99 dated 1st June, 2001 and final duty imposed on
26th June, 2001, the Authority hereby initiates mid-term
review investigations to review the need for the continued
imposition of anti-dumping duty on imports of certain
types/grades of alloy and non alloy steel billets, bars and
rounds originating in or exported from Russia and China
PR in accordance with the Customs Tariff (Amendment)
Act, 1975 and the Customs Tariff (Identification,
Assessment & Collection of Anti-Dumping Duty on
Dumped Articles and for Determination of Injury) Rules,
1995.”
15.

In the meanwhile, proceedings continued before the Designated

Authority on the basis of a sunset review postulated by the first proviso
to Section 9A(5) of the Act. This is clear from the representation dated
27th July, 2004, written submissions filed subsequent to the oral hearing

WP(C) No.15945/2006

Page 7 of 20

granted by the Designated Authority on 7th December, 2004 and the
rejoinder submissions dated 3rd January, 2005 all filed by the domestic
industry.

In the representation dated 27th July, 2004 the domestic

industry concluded and prayed as follows:
“1.
The present initiation of investigations is without
sufficient cause and justification with no material evidence
with regard dumping and/or injury;
2.
Subject goods continues to be dumped in the Indian
market by the producers and/or exporters in Russia
resulting in continued dumping;
3.
The dumping margin has increased;
4.
The domestic industry continues to suffer injury and
there is a great likelihood that revocation would lead to
injury to the domestic industry;
5.
The injury to the domestic industry is being caused
by the dumped imports from Russia;
6.
The injury margin has increased in respect of imports
from both the countries;
7.
Anti Dumping Duties are required to be continued
further for a further period of five years.”
In the written submissions subsequent to the oral hearing on 7th
December, 2004 the summary and conclusions of the domestic industry
were as follows:
“1.
The petitioner have failed to brought any evidence,
which suggests a need for withdrawal of duty;
2.
Present initiation is bad in law as petitioner failed to
establish “changed circumstances” warranting initiation of
review investigation.
3.
Imposition of duty has helped the domestic industry
improve its performance. The anti dumping duty should
therefore be continued further.
4.
Continued dumping from Russia and Ukraine is
required to be checked with imposition of continued anti
dumping duty.
5.
Dumping margin in case of Russian exports has
increased.
6.
In case duty is withdrawn dumping and consequent
injury to the domestic industry will intensify.”

WP(C) No.15945/2006

Page 8 of 20

Finally, in the rejoinder submissions dated 3rd January, 2005 the
domestic industry concluded as follows:
“It would be seen that there is no justifiable ground for
withdrawal of anti dumping duty. In fact, the present anti
dumping duty is required to be enhanced. Domestic
industry has provided all relevant information in this
regard and is willing to provide any further information.”
16.

In view of the corrigendum dated 5th January, 2005, the focus of

investigations by the Designated Authority shifted from a sunset review
to a mid-term review, that is to say from continuation of the antidumping duty beyond a period of five years to the justification for
continuing the anti-dumping duty for the existing period of five years.
17.

There is no dispute between the parties that procedural

formalities resulting from the shift in focus were duly carried out and
eventually the Designated Authority gave its final findings which were
gazetted on 20th May, 2005.

As per the final findings, the

recommendation of the Designated Authority was as follows: “Having concluded that no material injury to the domestic
industry has been established on account of dumped
imports of subject goods from the subject countries and
there is no likelihood of recurrence of injury on account of
import of subject goods from subject countries, the
Authority finds no justification for continuation of the duty
against subject countries and therefore, in terms of Rule 23
of the said Rules recommends revocation of anti dumping
duty in force against subject countries i.e. China PR and
Russia. Hence, in view of the above, the Authority
recommends withdrawal of the anti dumping duty
imposed vide notification No. 65/2001-Customs dated
25.6.2001 with effect from the date of notification issued by
the Central Government.”
18.

It may be mentioned that the recommendation made in the final

findings was only confined to the injury aspect of dumping and

WP(C) No.15945/2006

Page 9 of 20

concerned itself only with the justification for continuing the antidumping duty for the balance of the five year period originally notified
by the Notification dated 25th June, 2001.
19.

The final findings of the Designated Authority were accepted by

the Central Government which issued a Notification dated 19th July,
2005 withdrawing the anti-dumping duty.
20.

In the meanwhile, since the Petitioner was aggrieved by the final

findings of the Designated Authority, it filed WP (C) No.10615/2005 in
this Court. When that petition came up for hearing on 1st August, 2005,
it was pointed out to the Court that the final findings of the Designated
Authority were appealable before the Tribunal and that a Notification
dated 19th July, 2005 had already been issued by the Central
Government withdrawing the anti-dumping duty.

Upon hearing

learned counsel for the parties, a learned Single Judge of this Court
passed an order staying the operation of the Notification dated 19th July,
2005 conditional on the Petitioner filing an appeal before the Tribunal
within a period of 15 days.
21.

It appears that the Petitioner did file its appeal within the

prescribed time but the matter could not be taken up by the Tribunal for
final disposal. Consequently, the Petitioner was again constrained to
file WP (C) No. 24007/2005 requesting for expeditious disposal of the
appeal as well as for continuation of the stay of operation of the
Notification dated 19th July, 2005.
22.

The fresh writ petition being WP (C) No. 24007/2005 was

disposed of by this Court on 20th December, 2005 with a direction that

WP(C) No.15945/2006

Page 10 of 20

the operation of the Notification dated 19th July, 2005 would remain
stayed till the Petitioner’s application for interim relief is disposed of by
the Tribunal by a speaking order. The effect of the order dated 20th
December, 2005 was really for a period of few days only since by efflux
of time the original Notification imposing anti-dumping duty lapsed on
25th December, 2005.
23.

The appeal filed by the Petitioner before the Tribunal was

eventually taken up for final disposal and by an order dated 2nd August,
2006, the appeal was allowed to the extent that the final findings dated
20th May, 2005 given by the Designated Authority as well as the
Notification dated 19th July, 2005 were set aside by the Tribunal.
24.

It appears that before the Tribunal the Petitioner had contended

that the imposition of anti-dumping duty may be continued for a period
of five years beyond 25th December, 2005 since there was adequate
material available on record to suggest that the conditions of the first
proviso to Section 9A(5) of the Act were fulfilled. This contention was
rejected by the Tribunal in the following words: “The contention that we should extend the imposition of
duty for a further period of five years cannot be
countenanced.
When the review is initiated for
determining whether as a result thereof, anti dumping duty
should be revoked before the expiry of the period of five
years, obviously its continuance beyond five years can
never be a matter under consideration in such a review,
because, the impost itself was for a statutory duration of
five years, and the question of continuance can arise only
beyond that. Since we are concerned only with mid-term
review in which duty could only be revoked earlier, and
there would be no new imposition of duty, the provisions
of continuing the duty beyond five years as contained in the
two provisos to Section 9A(5) would not be attracted. In a
mid-term review the real question is whether duty should

WP(C) No.15945/2006

Page 11 of 20

be revoked earlier than the period of five years of its
statutory duration and not whether it should be continued
beyond the period of five years, which would be the scope
of enquiry in a “sunset review”. We, therefore reject the
contention that on our finding that there was no case made
out for earlier revocation, we should be directing the
continuance of duty beyond five years in a mid term
review.”
25.

It is against the view expressed by the Tribunal that it cannot

extend the anti-dumping duty beyond the original period of five years
that the Petitioner filed Cus. A.C. No. 16/2006 in this Court.

As

mentioned above, the Petitioner also filed a writ petition for restraining
the Central Government from withdrawing the anti-dumping duty
imposed vide Notification dated 25th June, 2001.
SUBMISSIONS AND DISCUSSION:
26.

It is submitted by learned counsel for the Petitioner that clearly

there is no valid reason for the Designated Authority to make a
recommendation on 20th May, 2005 that continuing the anti-dumping
duty till 25th December, 2005 was not justified. It is also submitted that
there is no valid reason for the Central Government to accept the final
findings of the Designated Authority and issue the Notification dated
19th July, 2005 withdrawing the anti-dumping duty. This was the view
clearly expressed by the Tribunal and that view has been accepted both
by the Designated Authority as well as by Central Government, neither
of whom challenged the order passed by the Tribunal. It is, therefore,
manifest that, in any case, the anti-dumping duty ought to have
continued till 25th December, 2005. To this extent, we are in complete
agreement with learned counsel for the Petitioner. In fact, the view

WP(C) No.15945/2006

Page 12 of 20

canvassed by learned counsel for the Petitioner is not even seriously
challenged by the learned Additional Solicitor General who admits that
the decision rendered by the Tribunal on 2nd August, 2006 has been
accepted by the Designated Authority and the Central Government.
27.

The second limb of the contention of learned counsel for the

Petitioner is that the conditions postulated by the first proviso to Section
9A(5) of the Act are met, in as much as the cessation of anti-dumping
duty is more than likely to lead to continuation and recurrence of
dumping and also injury to the domestic industry. This was repeatedly
stated by the domestic industry in all its representations before the
Designated Authority which had initially intended to look into the
question of recurrence of dumping and injury to the domestic industry
when it issued the public notice dated 24th May, 2004. However, for
some reason, the Designated Authority decided to convert the `sunset
review’ postulated by the first proviso to Section 9A(5) of the Act into a
mid-term review. It is submitted that even if the original intention of
the Designated Authority was only to conduct a mid-term review, there
was certainly no bar on its conducting a sunset review when adequate
materials were placed before the Designated Authority. Moreover, the
prayer that a sunset review should be conducted was made by the
domestic industry on more than one occasion before the Designated
Authority. Even assuming that the Designated Authority could not
consider the extension of anti-dumping duty, it was incumbent upon the
Designated Authority to have forwarded the necessary materials to the
Central Government to conduct a suo motu sunset review as postulated

WP(C) No.15945/2006

Page 13 of 20

by the first proviso to Section 9A(5) of the Act read with Rules 23 of the
Rules.
28.

Unfortunately, we are not able to get any satisfactory answer from

the learned Additional Solicitor General to the contention raised by
learned counsel for the Petitioner.

All that is submitted is that the

powers of the Designated Authority are limited in view of the decision
of the Supreme Court in Rishiroop Polymers Pvt. Ltd. vs. Designated
Authority and Additional Secretary, 2006 (196) ELT 385. We were taken
through the decision by the learned Additional Solicitor General and
while it is correct that the powers of the Designated Authority are
limited only to conducting a mid-term review, but that does not prevent
the Designated Authority, on the material placed before it, to
recommend to the Central Government to conduct a sunset review.
Moreover, there is nothing in the Act which prohibits the Central
Government from exercising suo motu powers for conducting a sunset
review. It is true that the parameters for conducting a sunset review are
completely different from the parameters for conducting a mid-term
review but that does not mean that the authorities under the Act, that is,
the Designated Authority as well as the Central Government cannot
shift gears and conduct a suo motu sunset review if the situation so
warrants.

In the present case, there was no need for the Central

Government to have exercised suo mou powers, since the domestic
industry had already requested for a sunset review, and this request
ought to have been considered.

WP(C) No.15945/2006

Page 14 of 20

29.

Admittedly, there was no valid reason for the Central

Government to have prematurely withdrawn the anti-dumping duty by
issuing the Notification dated 19th July, 2005. What this means, in other
words, is that it was necessary to continue the anti-dumping duty at
least upto 25th December, 2005.

The question that we are asked to

answer is whether the anti-dumping duty ought to have continued even
beyond that date. We are of the opinion that this is really for the Central
Government to decide.

While the facts and figures may ultimately

prove or disprove the apprehensions of the domestic industry that there
would be continuance or recurrence of dumping and injury to the
domestic industry the least that could be expected from the Central
Government is to consider the issue whether anti-dumping duty should
be continued beyond the initial period of five years or not. This is
because the domestic industry had voiced its apprehensions repeatedly
in the representation dated 27th July, 2004, the written submissions filed
subsequent to the oral hearing granted by the Designated Authority on
7th December, 2004 and the rejoinder submissions dated 3rd January,
2005. It was, therefore, incumbent on the Designated Authority or the
Central Government to have applied its mind to the representations
made by the domestic industry and taken a view thereon, one way or
the other. This was not done by the Central Government leading to the
filing of the writ petition which we are considering.
30.

The counter affidavit filed by the Central Government seeks to

justify the non-consideration of the representation of the domestic
industry by making a distinction between Article 11.3 of the Anti

WP(C) No.15945/2006

Page 15 of 20

Dumping Agreement and the law as enacted in India. The contention of
the Central Government is that the municipal law will override the Anti
Dumping Agreement.

Of course, there is no doubt about this

proposition but the question is whether there is any conflict between the
municipal law and Article 11.3 of the Anti Dumping Agreement. The
municipal law is laid down in the provisions that we have referred to
above while Article 11 of the Anti Dumping Agreement reads as
follows: “11.1 An anti-dumping duty shall remain in force only as
long as and to the extent necessary to counteract dumping
which is causing injury.
11.2 The authorities shall review the need for the continued
imposition of the duty, where warranted, on their own
initiative or, provided that a reasonable period of time has
elapsed since the imposition of the definitive anti-dumping
duty, upon request by any interested party which submits
positive information substantiating the need for a review.
Interested parties shall have the right to request the
authorities to examine whether the continued imposition of
the duty is necessary to offset dumping, whether the injury
would be likely to continue or recur if the duty were
removed or varied, or both. If, as a result of the review
under this paragraph, the authorities determine that the
anti-dumping duty is no longer warranted, it shall be
terminated immediately.
11.3 Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2,
any definitive anti-dumping duty shall be terminated on a
date not later than five years from its imposition (or from
the date of the most recent review under paragraph 2 if that
review has covered both dumping and injury, or under this
paragraph), unless the authorities determine, in a review
initiated before that date on their own initiative or upon a
duly substantiated request made by or on behalf of the
domestic industry within a reasonable period of time prior
to that date, that the expiry of the duty would be likely to
lead to continuation or recurrence of dumping and injury.
The duty may remain in force pending the outcome of such
a review.”

WP(C) No.15945/2006

Page 16 of 20

We are of the view that there is no conflict between Article 11 of
the Anti Dumping Agreement and the municipal law. Both contemplate
an initial imposition of anti-dumping duty, a review from time to time
(or a mid-term review) to determine whether the said imposition should
be continued or withdrawn and a final review (or sunset review) at the
end of five years from the initial imposition to determine whether the
anti-dumping duty should cease or should continue for a further period
of five years. The parameters laid down by the municipal law as well as
Article 11.3 of the Anti Dumping Agreement are the same, namely, that
the cessation of anti-dumping duty would lead to continuation or
recurrence of dumping and injury to the domestic industry. The error
that the Central Government has made in its interpretation of the
municipal law is that it has given a very restricted meaning to Section
9A(5) of the Act read with Rules 23 of the Rules.
31.

It is true that neither Section 9A(5) of the Act nor Rule 23 of the

Rules mention a mid-term review or a sunset review but it is quite clear
that the first proviso to Section 9A(5) of the Act refers to nothing else but
a sunset review as commonly understood. Rule 23 of the Rules clearly
applies to a mid-term review (as suggested by the Central Government).
The question is, does it apply to a sunset review also. If the answer is in
the negative, as sought to be suggested in the counter affidavit of the
Central Government, it would only mean that the power conferred by
the first proviso to Section 9A(5) of the Act is completely uncanalized
and no procedure is laid down for the Central Government to conduct a
sunset review. Obviously, this cannot be the intention of the legislature

WP(C) No.15945/2006

Page 17 of 20

since every such power conferred cannot be arbitrary and must be
guided through an appropriate mechanism and in the instant case the
mechanism proposed by the Central Government itself is contained in
Rules 23(3) of the Rules. There is, therefore, no conflict between the
municipal law and Article 11.3 of the Anti Dumping Agreement. Both
seek to serve the same purpose and while the Anti Dumping Agreement
does not lay down the procedure for conducting a sunset review, the
first proviso to Section 9A(5) read with Rule 23 lays down the procedure
for conducting a sunset review.
32.

We are, therefore, not at all in agreement with the view canvassed

by the learned Additional Solicitor General on behalf of the Central
Government that a sunset review was not possible in the circumstances
of the case and that the domestic industry was only entitled to be heard
in respect of a mid-term review. A request having been made by the
domestic industry for a sunset review, it ought to have been considered
by the Central Government and if so advised, rejected on merits.
33.

We may note that we have taken the same view in Indian Metal

& Ferro Alloys Ltd. v. Designated Authority & Anr., WP (C) No.
16893/2006 decided on 1st November, 2007.
34.

In so far as the substantial question of law that has been framed in

Cus. A.C. No. 16/2006 is concerned, we are of the view that it must be
answered in the affirmative in as much as the Tribunal exercises a
statutory jurisdiction. What was before the Tribunal was the question
whether the Central Government was justified in prematurely
withdrawing the anti-dumping duty or not. The question before the

WP(C) No.15945/2006

Page 18 of 20

Tribunal was not whether the Central Government can extend the antidumping duty beyond the original period of five years. If such an issue
could have been raised before the Tribunal it could only have been done
after the Central Government had taken a decision on the sunset review
but since that has not happened, we need not go into that question and
leave it to be considered in an appropriate case.
RELIEF:
35.

The sole question that now remains is with regard to the grant of

relief to the Petitioner. Obviously, the Notification dated 25th June, 2001
has worked itself out. The Central Government has not yet applied its
mind to the question whether anti-dumping duty should continue
beyond 25th December, 2005 although the domestic industry has
represented for its continuation.

Under the circumstances, the only

relief that can be granted to the Petitioner is that the Central
Government must consider the question, in exercise of powers conferred
by the first proviso to Section 9A(5) of the Act, whether anti-dumping
duty on the subject goods should continue for a period of five years
from 25th December, 2005. The procedure that the Central Government
is required to follow is laid down in Rules 23(3) of the Rules.
36.

Since almost two years have gone by in the litigation initiated by

the Petitioner before the Tribunal as well as before this Court, we cannot
really turn the clock back to December, 2005. We are also of the opinion
that some importers of the subject goods, such as Respondent No. 3 and
perhaps others may have already entered into contracts for the import
of seamless grade alloy and non-alloy steel billets, bars and rounds

WP(C) No.15945/2006

Page 19 of 20

originating in or exported from Russia and China. It would not be
appropriate to interfere with the contractual liabilities that have already
been established since it may lead to avoidable controversies.

We,

therefore, direct that all imports of the subject goods made from Russia
and China with effect from 1st February, 2008 should be provisionally
cleared by the Central Government and its nominees such as the
Customs Officers. In the meanwhile, the Central Government should
carry out a review to determine whether the anti-dumping duty
imposed by the Notification dated 25th June, 2001 should continue
beyond the period of five years from 26th December, 2005 onwards. If it
is found by the Central Government that the requirements of the first
proviso to Section 9A(5) of the Act are met and anti-dumping duty
should continue, then the provisional assessments made with effect
from 1st February, 2008 will take care of the interests of the domestic
industry. On the other hand, if it is found that there is no reason to
continue with the anti-dumping duty, the provisional assessment can
always be finalized without any detriment to the rights of the Indian
importers of the subject goods.

It is expected that the Central

Government will complete the review as expeditiously as possible.
37.

With the above directions, the writ petition is allowed. No costs.

Madan B. Lokur, J

December 3, 2007
kapil

WP(C) No.15945/2006

S. Muralidhar, J

Page 20 of 20

