*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
ITR No. of 200/1987

+

Judgment reserved on: September 25, 2007
%

Judgment delivered on: October 05, 2007

M/s. Kushwaha Exports (P) Ltd.
Delhi.
Through

...Appellant
: In person.

Versus
Commissioner of Income Tax, Delhi-I,
New Delhi.
Through :

...Respondent
Ms. Prem Lata Bansal,
Advocate.

Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE S. MURALIDHAR
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Not necessary

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Not necessary

MADAN B. LOKUR, J.
This reference under Section 256(1) of the Income Tax Act,
1961 has been made in respect of the assessment year 1981-82.
ITR No.200/1987

Page 1 of 7

Although as many as 8 questions have been referred for our opinion, we
are of the view that only two of them really arise for our consideration.
These two questions are:
“1. Whether the finding of the Income-tax Appellate
Tribunal that the assessee company was not entitled to
deduction in respect of travelling expenses of
Rs.1,17,525/- claimed by it, is based on a proper
interpretation of the relevant provisions of law as
contained in Sec.37(1), 37(3) and 35B of the Incometax Act, 1961?
2. Further, whether the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal
was justified in law in holding that the assessee
company was not entitled to weighted deduction u/s,
35B of the Act in respect of the aforesaid travelling
expenses, simply because the same were allegedly not
otherwise allowable as a deduction by virtue of Rule
6D of the Income-tax Rules, 1962?”

2.

The Assessee is a private limited company and one S.S.

Kushwaha is one of its Directors. Mr. Kushwaha resides in Moscow
and West Germany and visits India to procure business for the Assessee
company. Mr. S.S. Kushwaha also procures contracts for Indian parties
desirous of making exports to Russia and other foreign countries and the
Assessee-company gets a commission on such export orders.

3.

The Assessee made a claim for deduction for the expenditure

ITR No.200/1987

Page 2 of 7

incurred on two items: 1.
2.

Travelling and conveyance – Rs.2,71,188.90
Weighted deduction under Section 35B of the Income
Tax Act on foreign tour expenses of Rs.1,34,430.00.

4.

The Income Tax Officer allowed a sum of Rs.1,17,525/- out

of the entire travelling and conveyance expenditure and a part of the
weighted deduction.

5.

The Commissioner of Income Tax was of the view that the

order passed by the Income Tax Officer was erroneous and prejudicial
to the interest of the Revenue and therefore, exercised his power under
Section 263 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (for short 'the Act'). After
hearing the Assessee, the Commissioner disallowed the entire
expenditure claimed.

6.

Feeling aggrieved, the Assessee preferred an appeal before

the Tribunal which came to be dismissed and that is how the aforesaid
questions have been referred for our opinion.

ITR No.200/1987

Page 3 of 7

7.

In so far as the first item of travelling and conveyance

expenditure is concerned, the relevant provision is Section 37(3) of the
Act. At the relevant time, Section 37(3) of the Act read as follows: “(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in subsection (1), any expenditure incurred by an assessee
after the 31st day of March, 1964, on advertisement or
on maintenance of any residential accommodation
including any accommodation in the nature of a guesthouse or in connection with travelling by an employee
or any other person (including hotel expenses or
allowances paid in connection with such travelling)
shall be allowed only to the extent, and subject to such
conditions, if any, as may be prescribed.”

8.

The conditions are prescribed in Rule 6D(1)(i) of the Income

Tax Rules, 1961 which reads as follows: “6D (1) (i) The allowance in respect of expenditure
incurred by an assessee in connection with travelling
by an employee or any other person outside India for
the purposes of the business or profession of the
assessee shall not exceed the amount which bears to
the aggregate of the amount, if any, covered by foreign
exchange granted, or permitted to be acquired, for the
purpose of such travel under the law relating to foreign
exchange for the time being in force and the amount
expended on such travel in Indian currency the same
proportion as is determined in the manner specified in
clause (ii).”

9.

The operative words in Rule 6D (1) (i) are that “the

ITR No.200/1987

Page 4 of 7

expenditure incurred must be covered by foreign exchange granted, or
permitted to be acquired, for the purpose of such travel”. In other
words, to the extent of the foreign exchange granted or permitted to be
acquired, the Assessee would be entitled to the benefit of the deduction.

10.

In so far as the present case is concerned, the facts clearly

show that Mr. S.S. Kushwaha had travelled to India from Russia or
West Germany and the expenditure incurred by him for the trip was
incurred outside India and, therefore, in foreign currency. Later, Mr.
S.S. Kushwaha was reimbursed by the Assessee in Indian rupees in
India. Therefore, the expenditure incurred by him for travel is not in
foreign exchange. Moreover, there is nothing on the record to suggest
that he acquired any foreign exchange or was granted any foreign
exchange under any law in force in India relating to foreign exchange.
Therefore, on a plain reading of Rule 6D(1)(i), the Assessee was not
entitled to claim the expenses incurred by Mr. S.S. Kushwaha on
travelling and conveyance. It may be added that Mr. S.S. Kushwaha's
travels were not to a place outside India but were to India.

ITR No.200/1987

Page 5 of 7

11.

Under these circumstances, the authorities below correctly

declined to grant to the Assessee, the benefit of the provisions of
Section 37(3) of the Act read with Rule 6D(1)(i) of the Act.

12.

As regards the second question, it is really consequential to

the first question and must also be decided against the Assessee.
Additionally, it may be noted that Section 35B(b)(vii) provides for
weighted deduction only if the expenditure is incurred for travelling
from India to a place outside India for sales promotion outside India of
goods, services or facilities.

13.

The Tribunal has found, and this is not disputed, that the

travel undertaken by Mr. S.S. Kushwaha was not from India to a place
outside India but was from Russia to India. Therefore, the provisions of
Rule 35B (b) (vii), ex facie do not assist the Assessee. Moreover, it has
been found that the sales promotion undertaken by Mr. S.S. Kushwaha
was within India. As already noted above, he would encourage export
by Indian parties to foreign countries, particularly Russia, and the
Assessee would earn commission on export orders obtained. In that

ITR No.200/1987

Page 6 of 7

sense, the sale promotion was actually in India and not abroad.
Therefore, the Assessee did not satisfy any of the conditions required by
Section 35B of the Act and hence, it was not entitled to the deduction
claimed.

14.

Under the circumstances, both the questions are answered in

the affirmative in favour of the Revenue and against the Assessee.

15.

The reference is disposed of accordingly.

Madan B. Lokur, J

October 05, 2007
sk

S. Muralidhar, J

Certified that the corrected
copy of the judgment has
been transmitted in the main
Server.

ITR No.200/1987

Page 7 of 7

