*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 16893 of 2006

Judgment reserved on: September 25, 2007
%

Judgment delivered on: November 01, 2007

Indian Metal & Ferro Alloys Ltd.
having its registered office at
IMFA Building
Bomikhal, Rasulgarh
Bhubaneswar, Orissa
Also at:
IMFA Building
B-4/147, Safdarjung Enclave
New Delhi
Through

...Petitioner

Mr. Krishnan Venugopal with
Mr. Siddhartha, Mr. Pawan Sharma &
Mr. Harpreet S. Popli, Advs.

Versus

1.

Designated Authority
Ministry of Commerce & Industry
Udyog Bhavan
New Delhi – 110 011

WP (C) No.16893/2006

Page 1 of 29

2.

Department of Revenue
Ministry of Finance
North Block
New Delhi – 110 011
Through

...Respondents
Mr. P.P. Malhotra, Additional Solicitor
General with Mr. Suresh Kait, Adv.

Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE S. MURALIDHAR
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

MADAN B. LOKUR, J.
There is no major dispute between the parties on the facts of
the case. The real dispute is with regard to the interpretation of the antidumping provisions of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 (for short the Act)
and the Customs Tariff (Identification, Assessment and Collection of
Anti-Dumping Duty on Dumped Articles and for Determination of
Injury) Rules, 1995 (for short the Rules). The question that we are called
upon to answer is whether the Designated Authority (Respondent No. 1)
appointed under Rule 3 of the Rules, if called upon to do so, is obliged
WP (C) No.16893/2006

Page 2 of 29

to carry out what is commonly known as a “sunset review” or can it
decline to do so.

2.

In our opinion, if it is called upon to do so, the Designated

Authority is under an obligation to conduct a sunset review and the
Central

Government

(Respondent

No.

2)

must

consider

the

recommendation made by the Designated Authority and take a decision
thereon.
The facts:
3.

The broad facts of the case, as have been pointed out to us

during the course of hearing on 24th and 25th September, 2007 are that
the Petitioner and others jointly petitioned the Designated Authority
(Respondent No. 1), appointed under Rule 3 of the Rules, alleging that
ferro alloys originating in or exported, inter alia, from China and Russia
are being dumped in India. It was requested that the Designated
Authority may initiate investigations into the allegations and thereafter
impose anti-dumping duties under the Act.

4.

As a result of the joint petition, the Designated Authority,

WP (C) No.16893/2006

Page 3 of 29

acting under Rule 5 of the Rules, decided to initiate anti-dumping
investigations concerning the import of ferro silicon originating in or
exported from Russia and China. Consequently, an Initiation
Notification dated 5th June, 2000 was issued to determine the existence,
degree and effect of the alleged dumping of the subject goods
originating in or exported into India from the subject countries.

5.

After conducting its investigations, the Designated Authority

notified its Preliminary Findings under Rule 12 of the Rules on 16 th
November, 2000. The findings are to the following effect:
• Ferro silicon originating in or exported from Russia and China
has been exported into India below the normal value resulting in
dumping.
• The domestic industry has suffered injury caused by imports from
China and Russia.

6.

On the basis of its findings, the Designated Authority

proposed to the Central Government to impose provisional antidumping duty on ferro silicon originating in or exported from China and

WP (C) No.16893/2006

Page 4 of 29

Russia, pending a final determination. Accepting the preliminary
findings of the Designated Authority, the Central Government
(Respondent No. 2), acting under Rule 13 of the Rules, issued a
Notification dated 26th December, 2000 imposing anti-dumping duty of
Rs. 33,120/- per metric tonne on the imports of ferro silicon from Russia
and China. The anti-dumping duty was to remain in force till 25th June,
2001.

7.

The

Designated

Authority

then

conducted

further

investigations into the allegations made by the Petitioner and others and
after following the procedure (on which there is no dispute) gave its
Final Findings under Rule 17 of the Rules, which were then notified on
28th May, 2001. The Designated Authority confirmed its Preliminary
Findings given on 16th November, 2000 and recommended the definitive
imposition of anti-dumping duty on all imports of ferro silicon
originating from or exported from Russia and China. The recommended
duty was USD 764/- per metric tonne.

8.

Accepting the final findings of the Designated Authority, the

WP (C) No.16893/2006

Page 5 of 29

Central Government issued a Notification dated 25th June, 2001 under
Rule 18 of the Rules levying anti-dumping duty on the imports, as
proposed, with effect from the date of imposition of the provisional
duty, that is, 26th December, 2000. In terms of Section 9A(5) of the Act,
the anti-dumping duty was to remain in force, unless revoked earlier, for
a period of five years from the date of imposition, that is, 26 th December,
2000.

9.

On 5th January, 2004 Respondent No. 2 (the Central

Government) issued a Trade Notice with reference to Section 9A(5) of
the Act read with Rule 23 of the Rules. It was stated in the Notice that
henceforth the Director General of Anti-Dumping & Allied Duties
would consider initiating a sunset review of anti-dumping duty on
receiving an appropriate request six months before the date of expiry of
the anti-dumping duty. The delay in making a request could be
condoned if there was sufficient justification for it.

10.

The Petitioner made a request to the Central Government on

18th July, 2005 for a sunset review. The Petitioner also gave its reasons

WP (C) No.16893/2006

Page 6 of 29

for the request. The prima facie delay on the part of the Petitioners
appears to have been condoned by the Central Government since no
issue was joined in this regard before us nor was such an issue raised by
the Central Government. On the contrary, the Central Government, by a
letter dated 17th November, 2005 requested the Petitioner to supply some
details, evidence and information in support of its case.

11.

By a letter dated 13th December, 2005 the Petitioner gave to

the Designated Authority all the further necessary information that it
had. The relevant material appears to have been considered by the
Designated Authority who then passed an order on 21st December, 2005
declining to initiate a sunset review of the anti-dumping duty. What was
actually said is:
“Your application has been carefully examined by the
Authority and after examining the information submitted by
you, it has been considered appropriate not to review the
anti-dumping duty imposed on Ferro Silicon originating in or
exported from Russia and China PR.”

12.

Feeling aggrieved by the order dated 21st December, 2005,

the Petitioner preferred a writ petition being CW No. 24646 of 2005 in
this Court in which it was prayed that the impugned order be quashed
WP (C) No.16893/2006

Page 7 of 29

since the Designated Authority is obliged to conduct a sunset review
and the Central Government can then take a decision thereon. When the
writ petition came up for hearing on 26th December, 2005 learned
counsel for the Respondents stated that the matter would be considered
by the Central Government and an appropriate order passed.

13.

On 20th July, 2006 the Central Government passed an order,

which is now impugned in the writ petition that we are dealing with. On
15th September, 2006 the Petitioner withdrew CW No.24646 of 2005
and on 13th November, 2006 filed the present writ petition praying for
setting aside the order dated 20th July, 2006.

14.

In the impugned order the Central Government concluded

that the Designated Authority’s earlier “decision not to review the antidumping duty is well-founded and there exist no grounds to take a
contrary view. It has, therefore, been decided by the Central
Government that initiation of review for continuance of anti-dumping
duty on imports of Ferro-silicon for Russia and China PR is not
required.”

WP (C) No.16893/2006

Page 8 of 29

The contentions:
15.

Learned counsel for the Petitioner raised two contentions

before us. Firstly, it was submitted that under the provisions of the Act
and the Rules, the Designated Authority is obliged to conduct a sunset
review, and secondly that on merits, the decision of the Central
Government is incorrect and ought to be set aside. Since we are in
agreement with learned counsel on his first contention, we are not
examining the merits of the decision taken by the Central Government
and, indeed, we have reservations whether we can at all do so.

16.

The two key provisions that came up for discussion before us

are Section 9A(5) of the Act and Rule 23 of the Rules. They read as
follows:

“9A. Anti-dumping duty on dumped articles. –
(1) to (4) xxx xxx xxx
(5) The anti-dumping duty imposed under this section shall,
unless revoked earlier, cease to have effect on the expiry of
five years from the date of such imposition:
Provided that if the Central Government, in a review, is of
the opinion that the cessation of such duty is likely to lead to
continuation or recurrence of dumping and injury, it may,
WP (C) No.16893/2006

Page 9 of 29

from time to time, extend the period of such imposition for a
further period of five years and such further period shall
commence from the date of order of such extension:
Provided further that where a review initiated before the
expiry of the aforesaid period of five years has not come to a
conclusion before such expiry, the anti-dumping duty may
continue to remain in force pending the outcome of such a
review for a further period not exceeding one year.
(6) to (8) xxx xxx xxx
23. Review. – (1) The designated authority shall, from time
to time, review the need for the continued imposition of the
anti-dumping duty and shall, if it is satisfied on the basis of
information received by it that there is no justification for the
continued imposition of such duty recommend to the Central
Government for its withdrawal.
(2) Any review initiated under sub-rule (1) shall be
concluded within a period not exceeding twelve months from
the date of initiation of such review.
(3) The provisions of rules 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 16, 17, 18, 19,
and 20 shall be mutatis mutandis applicable in the case of
review.”

17.

Rule 5 (which is not applicable to a review) deals with the

initiation of investigations – a step, it may be recalled, taken by the
Designated Authority by issuing an Initiation Notification on 5th June,
2000. Rule 6 and the subsequent rules deal with the principles
governing investigations (mutatis mutandis), determination of normal

WP (C) No.16893/2006

Page 10 of 29

value, export price and margin of dumping, determination of injury,
final findings of the Designated Authority and levy of duty – rules that
are essentially procedural.

18.

However, what is more important in this context is Rule

4(1)(e)of the Rules. Rule 4(1) reads as follows:
“4. Duties of the designated authority. – (1) It shall be
the duty of the designated authority in accordance with
these rules(a) to investigate as to the existence, degree and
effect of any alleged dumping in relation to import of
any article;
(b) to identify the article liable for anti-dumping
duty;
(c) to submit its findings, provisional or otherwise to
Central Government as to (i) normal value, export price and the margin of dumping in
relation to the article under investigation, and
(ii) the injury or threat of injury to an industry established
in India or material retardation to the establishment
of an industry in India consequent upon the import of
such article from the specified countries.
(d) to recommend the amount of anti-dumping duty equal to
the margin of dumping or less, which if levied, would
remove the injury to the domestic industry, and the date of
commencement of such duty; and

WP (C) No.16893/2006

Page 11 of 29

(e) to review the need for continuance of anti-dumping
duty.”

19.

According to the learned Additional Solicitor General, neither

the Act nor the Rules mention a sunset review.

It is, therefore,

contended that there is no provision for a sunset review, nor is any
procedure laid down for a sunset review.
A sunset review:
20.

The concept of a sunset review has been recognized by the

Supreme Court. In Rishiroop Polymers (P) Ltd. v. Designated
Authority & Others, (2006) 4 SCC 303 the Supreme Court considered
the scope of Section 9A(5) of the Act and observed as follows:
“Under Section 9-A(5), the said initial imposition of antidumping duty is ordinarily contemplated to be continued
and remain in effect for a full period of five years, at the
end of which it would be subject to Sunset Review, the
possible consequence of which would be the extension of
the operation of the period of anti-dumping duty for
another period of five years. This is subject to the
provisions of sub-rule (1) of Rule 23 of the Anti-Dumping
Rules, under which the Designated Authority is empowered
to review the anti-dumping duty imposed from time to time.
Having regard to the scheme of the abovementioned
provisions of the statute, once anti-dumping duty has been
initially imposed, it would be ordinarily continued for five
years unless on a review it is found by the Designated
Authority that there has been such a significant change in
the facts and circumstances, that it is considered necessary
WP (C) No.16893/2006

Page 12 of 29

either to withdraw or modify appropriately the antidumping duty which has been imposed. It is, therefore,
clear that unless the Designated Authority suo motu or the
applicant for review is in a position to establish clearly that
there has been a significant change in the facts and
circumstances relating to each of the basic requirements or
conditions precedent for imposing duty, the finding given
by the Designated Authority at the time of initial imposition
of anti-dumping duty must be considered to continue to
hold the field.”

21.

Learned counsel for the Petitioner drew our attention to a

decision rendered by the Appellate Body of the World Trade
Organization in United States – Sunset Review of Anti-Dumping
Duties on Corrosion-Resistant Carbon Steel Flat Products from
Japan (AB-2003-5 decided on 28th November, 2003) in which India
was the Third Participant. The question in that appeal related to “a
complaint by Japan against the United States regarding the continuation
of anti-dumping duties on certain corrosion-resistant carbon steel flat
products from Japan following the conduct of a five-year, or “sunset”,
review of those duties.” This is being mentioned to show that the
concept of a sunset review or a review of the continuation of antidumping duties at the end of the initial period of five years is not a
concept that is alien to the Indian legal system – and it hardly matters if
WP (C) No.16893/2006

Page 13 of 29

there is no specific mention of such a review in the Act or the Rules.
Consequently, a ‘review’ mentioned in the Act and the Rules must,
where the context so requires, have reference to both a mid-term and a
sunset review.
Mandate for a sunset review:
22.

Rule 23 of the Rules has to be read and appreciated in the

context of Rule 4(1)(e). What these two rules lay down is the statutory
duty of the Designated Authority “to review the need for continuance of
anti-dumping duty”.

The procedure for carrying out that review is

prescribed in the various rules mentioned in Rule 23(3). The alternative
contention of the learned Additional Solicitor General that Rule 23 has
limited application, in as much as it does not concern itself with a sunset
review, is also untenable in view of the broad statutory duty on the
Designated Authority “to review the need for continuance of antidumping duty” – the word ‘continuance’ has reference both to a midterm review and to a (sunset) review. Were it not so, acceptance of the
restrictive interpretation given by the learned Additional Solicitor
General would mean that even though the concept of a sunset review is
recognized, neither the Act nor the Rules provide for a procedure for

WP (C) No.16893/2006

Page 14 of 29

carrying out a sunset review - a situation which is surely not intended
either by Parliament or the Central Government.

23.

More importantly, the substantive part of Section 9A(5)

clearly mandates that anti-dumping duty shall cease to have effect on the
expiry of five years from the date of imposition (unless revoked earlier).
The Central Government may, however, extend the period of five years
if (in a review) it is of the opinion that “the cessation of such duty is
likely to lead to continuation or recurrence of dumping and injury”. Two
important pre-requisites are postulated by the first proviso, namely,
●

A review being conducted, and

●

Thereafter the formation of an opinion (by the Central
Government) on the basis of that review that the cessation of antidumping duty would lead to “continuation or recurrence of
dumping and injury”.

24.

Who is to conduct the review? It could be argued, though

that does not arise for consideration, that the Central Government may
itself conduct the review suo motu. It could also be argued that in view

WP (C) No.16893/2006

Page 15 of 29

of Rule 4(1)(e) and Rule 23 of the Rules, the review is to be conducted
by the Designated Authority, which can make a recommendation to the
Central Government for the withdrawal of anti-dumping duty if there is
no justification for its continued imposition. As would be seen a little
later, both contentions are valid.

25.

What is really the need for conducting a review? There are

three reasons: the first is given by the Supreme Court, the second by the
first proviso to Section 9A(5) of the Act and the third given by treaties
to which India is a signatory.

26.

Firstly, in Reliance Industries v. Designated Authority,

2006 (10) SCC 368 the Supreme Court observed that the purpose of
Section 9A of the Act is to “maintain a level playing field and prevent
dumping, while allowing for healthy competition. The purpose is not
protectionism in the classical sense … … but to prevent unfair trade
practices.” A little earlier in the same decision, it was observed that the
purpose of Section 9A of the Act is:
“… … that our industries which had been built up after
independence with great difficulties must not be allowed to
WP (C) No.16893/2006

Page 16 of 29

be destroyed by unfair competition of some foreign
companies. Dumping is a well-known method of unfair
competition which is adopted by the foreign companies.
This is done by selling goods at a very low price for some
time so that the domestic industries cannot compete and are
thereby destroyed, and after such destruction has taken
place, prices are again raised.”
These observation of the Supreme Court give the raison d'etre for the
concerned authorities to carry out a sunset review.

27.

Secondly, the first proviso to Section 9A(5) of the Act casts an

obligation on the Central Government to ensure that for the protection
of the domestic industry (for the reasons given by the Supreme Court)
withdrawal of anti-dumping duty should not lead to continuation or
recurrence of dumping as well injury to the domestic industry. In other
words, the Central Government has to ensure that the status quo ante is
not restored, for that would then mean that the Designated Authority
would have to conduct, all over again, a fresh investigation under Rule 5
of the Rules and the subsequent statutory procedures would also have to
be repeated. It is, therefore, not only to protect the domestic industry but
to avoid repetitive exercises that a review is mandated by the Act and
the Rules.

WP (C) No.16893/2006

Page 17 of 29

28.

The key words in Section 9A(5) of the Act are contained in

the first proviso thereto, namely, “the cessation of such duty is likely to
lead to continuation or recurrence of dumping and injury”. It is possible
that imposition of anti-dumping duty may control the problem, insofar
as the domestic industry is concerned, during the five-year period when
the anti-dumping duty is exigible, but the problem may recur after the
anti-dumping duty is withdrawn. If this is coupled with injury to the
domestic industry, then the anti-dumping duty should continue. It is for
this reason that a proper assessment, through a review, is necessary to
determine whether anti-dumping duty should continue or not.

29.

In so far as international obligations are concerned, Article

VI Clause 1 of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, 1947
(GATT) recognizes that dumping, “by which products of one country
are introduced into the commerce of another country at less than the
normal value of the products, is to be condemned if it causes or
threatens material injury to an established industry in the territory of a
contracting party or materially retards the establishment of a domestic
industry.” Clause 2 of the same Article provides:

WP (C) No.16893/2006

Page 18 of 29

“In order to offset or prevent dumping, a contracting party
may levy on any dumped product an anti-dumping duty not
greater in amount than the margin of dumping in respect of
such product.”

Significantly, Article VI of GATT does not provide for any period for
the levy or imposition of anti-dumping duty. However, the subsequent
Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade, 1994 (the Implementation Agreement) deals with
this aspect in Article 11 thereof.

30.

Article 11.1, 11.2 and 11.3 of the Implementation Agreement

read as follows:
“11.1 An anti-dumping duty shall remain in force only as
long as and to the extent necessary to counteract dumping
which is causing injury.
11.2 The authorities shall review the need for the
continued imposition of the duty, where warranted, on their
own initiative or, provided that a reasonable period of time
has elapsed since the imposition of the definitive antidumping duty, upon request by any interested party which
submits positive information substantiating the need for a
review. Interested parties shall have the right to request the
authorities to examine whether the continued imposition of
the duty is necessary to offset dumping, whether the injury
would be likely to continue or recur if the duty were
removed or varied, or both. If, as a result of the review
under this paragraph, the authorities determine that the antiWP (C) No.16893/2006

Page 19 of 29

dumping duty is no longer warranted, it shall be terminated
immediately.
11.3 Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2,
any definitive anti-dumping duty shall be terminated on a
date not later than five years from its imposition (or from
the date of the most recent review under paragraph 2 if that
review has covered both dumping and injury, or under this
paragraph), unless the authorities determine, in a review
initiated before that date on their own initiative or upon a
duly substantiated request made by or on behalf of the
domestic industry within a reasonable period of time prior
to that date, that the expiry of the duty would be likely to
lead to continuation or recurrence of dumping and injury.
The duty may remain in force pending the outcome of such
a review.”

31.

Article 11.1 provides that an anti-dumping duty shall remain

in force only as long as and to the extent necessary to counteract
dumping which is causing injury. Article 11.2 deals, inter alia, with a
review for the need to continue the imposition of anti-dumping duty,
either suo motu by the authorities concerned or on a request by an
interested party which submits positive information substantiating the
need for a review. Article 11.3 provides that definitive anti-dumping
duty shall be terminated on the expiry of five years (subject to a review
postulated by Article 11.2) unless the authorities determine on a suo
motu review or on the basis of a duly substantiated request of the

WP (C) No.16893/2006

Page 20 of 29

domestic industry that the expiry of the duty “would be likely to lead to
continuation or recurrence of dumping and injury.” In other words, a
review is necessary, by the authorities suo motu or on a request made to
the appropriate authorities to determine whether the anti-dumping duty
should continue or not and whether withdrawal of the duty would result
in recurrence of dumping.

32.

Therefore, our conclusion on the first part of the issue before

us is that there is a well-recognized and accepted concept of a sunset
review; that there is a statutory requirement of a sunset review
recognized both by the Act and the Rules; the sunset review may be
conducted by the concerned authorities suo motu or an application made
by the domestic industry.
Is a sunset review mandatory:
33.

The final issue is whether the law mandates a sunset review,

if a request is so made by an aggrieved domestic industry. Given the
view expressed by the Supreme Court in Reliance Industries, it is
difficult to answer the question in the negative. In this regard, it is also
necessary to ask the question: is it possible for the Central Government

WP (C) No.16893/2006

Page 21 of 29

to conclude, without any review, that withdrawal of the anti-dumping
duty would not lead to continuation or recurrence of dumping and injury
to the domestic industry? Surely, the answer to this must be in the
negative. At worst, at least a perfunctory review would have to be
carried out by the Central Government before forming an opinion on the
necessity of continuing, or not continuing, with the anti-dumping duty.
The Rules, however, mandate that the review should not be perfunctory
(and advisedly so) but should be meaningful, purposive and necessarily
elaborate, and it with this intention that Rule 23(3) of the Rules has been
enacted, by the Central Government itself. It must be appreciated that
the rationale for introducing anti-dumping duties is the protection of the
domestic industry and this protection must not be taken lightly because
dumping can very easily destroy the fabric of our policy of
industrialization and in a given situation destroy our domestic industry.

34.

It is one thing to say that a sunset review may result in a

decision not to continue the anti-dumping duty and another thing to say
that a sunset review is not required to be carried out. Unfortunately, the
stand taken by the Central Government in its counter affidavit is to the

WP (C) No.16893/2006

Page 22 of 29

latter effect.

35.

There are two aspects to a sunset review. It may be on the

initiative of the concerned authorities (suo motu sunset review) or on a
request made by the domestic industry. In the present case, we are not
concerned with a suo motu review and, therefore, we make no comment
on the parameters laid down for such a review. However, in so far as a
request is concerned, it must be made by or on behalf of the domestic
industry and it cannot be casual or based on perfunctory material – it
must be a duly substantiated request (as mentioned in Article 11.3 of the
Implementation Agreement). Indeed, even the counter affidavit
highlights the necessity of a duly substantiated request. However, what
the counter affidavit seems to suggest is that the request made in the
present case was not ‘duly substantiated’ and that is why it was rejected.
Unfortunately, that is not what the Designated Authority states in its
rejection letter dated 21st December, 2005, the relevant extract of which
has been quoted by us earlier. The order dated 20th July, 2006 passed by
the Central Government is, no doubt, far more elaborate, but that rejects
on merits the ‘initiation of review’ and even that does not seem to have

WP (C) No.16893/2006

Page 23 of 29

been passed in conformity with the procedures laid down in Rule 23(3)
read in conjunction with the other Rules. In other words, a two stage
procedure seems to have been introduced by the Respondents – first,
taking a decision whether a sunset review should at all be initiated and
secondly, if such review is decided to be undertaken then deciding on
merits if the anti-dumping duty requires to be continued. The contention
is that the request for a sunset review in the instant case has been
rejected by the Designated Authority at the first stage itself. Therefore,
the question of following the procedure mentioned above for taking a
decision on merits did not arise and, in any event there is nothing
according to the learned Additional Solicitor General that necessitates
following the procedure laid down in Rule 23 of the Rule.

36.

The contention of the learned Additional Solicitor General

really begs the question, how does anyone judge whether the application
should be entertained or is ‘duly substantiated’? It is only to arrive at a
decision on this that an elaborate procedure has been laid down in Rule
23 of the Rules, otherwise (it is possible) that what is actually a ‘duly
substantiated’ application may be arbitrarily rejected at a preliminary

WP (C) No.16893/2006

Page 24 of 29

stage without a speaking order as has been done by the Designated
Authority in this case. Even otherwise, there is no warrant for
introducing a two stage procedure as has been done by the Respondents.
What the law requires is that a sunset review has necessarily to be
conducted – it may fail on merits because the claim is not duly
substantiated – and that review has to be conducted in accordance with
Rules 23 of the Rules.

37.

It appears that this issue had arisen before the Respondents

on an earlier occasion and the advice of the Ministry of Law was sought.
The question framed for the consideration of the Ministry was:
“Whether a request filed by the domestic industry for
initiation of Sunset review can be rejected without calling
for information from interested parties by initiating a
review as provided for in Section 9A(5) of the Customs
Tariff Act?”

38.

The answer given by the Ministry of Law was to the

following effect:
“As regards the second issue it may be stated that since the
anti dumping duty imposed is likely to effect the rights of
certain parties, in that event it may not be legally
permissible to dispose of a representation/request filed by
the domestic industry for initiation of Sunset Review
WP (C) No.16893/2006

Page 25 of 29

without calling for information from the interested parties.
The duty case on the Designated Authority is a statutory
duty and hence the Rules of Natural Justice demand that
where a person is likely to be affected by any action of an
authority, that person needs to be heard before a lis is
adjudicated. The Department itself has referred to CEGAT
Order No. 34/2000 dated 18.8.2000 in Iso Butile Benzene
case [since reported as Vinati Organics Ltd. v. Designated
Authority, 2001 (127) ELT 629 (Tri – Delhi)] wherein the
CEGAT in the pen ultimate para has observed that the
Central Government has to form an opinion as to whether
discontinuance of anti dumping duty will create a situation
wherein injury to domestic industry may recur or not.
These observations would seem to imply that the finding
should be arrived by the designated authority only after due
notice to the concerned parties and after providing them
due opportunity to be heard and thereafter forming its
subjective opinion as to whether a possible injury may be
caused or threat of injury in case of discontinuation of anti
dumping duty.”

In the counter affidavit filed by the Respondents, it has been stated that
the opinion of the Law Ministry is “still under examination”.

39.

In this context, we may add only two more reasons that

suggest that a sunset review is mandatory. Firstly, the Trade Notice
dated 5th January, 2004 lays down a time frame within which a request
should be made for continuing with the anti-dumping duty. Secondly,
even Article 11.3 of the Implementation Agreement mentions that a suo
WP (C) No.16893/2006

Page 26 of 29

motu initiative or a duly substantiated request should be made within a
reasonable period of time prior to the termination of the period of five
years for which the definitive anti-dumping duty is imposed. More
significantly, this Article also says that, “The duty shall remain in force
pending the outcome of such a review.” The cumulative effect of this is
that a sunset review is required to be conducted within a limited time
frame and if it is not concluded by then, the anti-dumping duty levied
shall remain in force for a period of one year more in terms of the
second proviso to Section 9A(5) of the Act. However, in a case like the
instant one where even that period has run out, and the sunset review
has not concluded, some other interim arrangement has to be put in
place till the conclusion of such review. These requirements, in our
opinion, point to the mandatory nature of a sunset review.
Conclusion and relief:
40.

Therefore, in view of our discussion we hold:
(a)

A sunset review is mandatory and the contention of the
Respondents to the contrary is rejected.

(b)

A sunset review is required to be conducted in accordance
with the procedure laid down in Rule 23 of the Rules.

WP (C) No.16893/2006

Page 27 of 29

(c)

The order dated 20th July, 2006 passed by the Central
Government is liable to be quashed and we do so.

41.

As a result of our conclusions, we direct the Respondents to

reconsider the request of the Petitioner taking into account their letter
dated 18th July, 2005, their response to the Respondents letter dated 17 th
November, 2005 and their letter dated 13th December, 2005. The request
of the Petitioners should be considered in accordance with Rule 23 of
Rules. We do not lay down any time frame for the Respondents to take a
decision but would, naturally, expect them to do so expeditiously.

42.

We are conscious that setting the clock back may cause some

commercial difficulties to the importers of ferro-silicon originating from
or exported from Russia and China PR. We, therefore, direct that with
effect from two months after the date of our decision (that is from 1st
January, 2008) the Respondents will ensure that all imports of ferrosilicon originating from or exported from Russia and China PR are
cleared on a provisional basis till the sunset review is completed by the
Respondents and a final decision taken.
WP (C) No.16893/2006

Page 28 of 29

43.

The writ petition is allowed on the above terms. No costs.

Madan B. Lokur, J

November 01, 2007
ncg

S. Muralidhar, J

Certified that the corrected
copy of the judgment has
been transmitted in the main
Server.

WP (C) No.16893/2006

Page 29 of 29

