*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

ITR No. 90 of 1985
Judgment reserved on: September 19, 2007

%

Judgment delivered on: October 05, 2007
Jay Engineering Works Ltd.
New Delhi.
Through

...Appellant
Mr.Santosh K. Aggarwal, Advocate

Versus
Commissioner of Income Tax
Delhi-III, New Delhi.
Through

...Respondent

Mrs. P.L. Bansal, Advocate

Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE S. MURALIDHAR
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

MADAN B. LOKUR, J.
At the instance of the Assessee, the following questions have

ITR No.90/1985

Page 1 of 14

been referred for our opinion under Section 256(1) of the Income Tax
Act, 1961 (for short the Act) in respect of the assessment year 1979-80:
1.
Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of
the case and in law the Tribunal was justified in holding
that the pre-operative expenditure of Fuel Injection
Equipment Project amounting to Rs.20,14,158/- was a
capital expenditure?
2.
Whether on the facts and circumstances of the
case, Tribunal was right in deleting the addition of
Rs.41,666/- on the ground that the same was not
disallowable u/s 37(3) read with rule 6B?

2.

With regard to the second question, the tax effect of the

amount in question is quite inconsequential and, therefore, we decline to
answer this question and return the reference unanswered.

3.

The first question is really the only substantive question that

would require our consideration.

4.

The Assessee is a company which manufactures fans and

sewing machines at various units, including in Hyderabad.

The

Assessee decided to expand its activities and, therefore, undertook a

ITR No.90/1985

Page 2 of 14

Fuel Injection Equipment Project (for short the Project) in Hyderabad.
In respect of this Project, the Assessee incurred an expenditure of
Rs.1.56 crores out of which it spent Rs.1.35 crores towards acquisition
of plant and machinery. This amount is not in dispute. The balance
amount consisting of Rs.20,41,158/- is in dispute and the break up of
this amount is as follows: -

Particulars
1. Testing Charges

Amounts/Rs.
51,021

2. Interest/Commitment Charges

7,39,019

3. Bank Commission

2,82,944

4. L.C. Opening

88,461

5. Salary/Perquisites/Motor Car upkeep

1,16,254

6. Foreign Travelling

6,25,304

7. Consultants Fees

1,09,000

8. Miscellaneous Expenses
–
–
–

–

ITR No.90/1985

Travelling Charges of IFCI
Stamp – ICICI
Consultancy fees to Dev Sons for
existing Machines
Interview Charges
Total

457
45
1,050
27,603
20,41,158

Page 3 of 14

5.

According to the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner (the

Assessing Officer) the above expenditure is in the nature of expenses
incurred in connection with the setting up of a new line of business and,
therefore, it should have been capitalized. In other words, the Assessing
Officer rejected the contention of the Assessee that the expenditure
incurred was revenue in nature.

The view taken by the Assessing

Officer was upheld by the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) as
well as by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (for short the Tribunal).

6.

During the course of hearing, neither learned counsel

required us to go into each item of expenditure which aggregate to the
sum of Rs.20,41,158/-. Indeed, we do not think it necessary to do so
because there is broad agreement that the said items of expenditure are
pre-operative in relation to the Project and the only question that is
required to be decided is whether the expenditure falls in the category of
revenue expenditure or in the category of capital expenditure.

7.

Among the decisions cited, the first was India Cements Ltd.

v. Commissioner of Income Tax, Madras, [1966] 60 ITR 52. In this

ITR No.90/1985

Page 4 of 14

decision, a large number of cases have been referred to by the Supreme
Court and two important conclusions flow out from a reading of this
decision. The first is that the law as contained in the English Income
Tax Act has no relevance to cases arising under the Indian Income Tax
Act. This is of some importance because the Tribunal, while deciding
against the Assessee, has relied upon Atherton v. British Insulated and
Helsby Cables Ltd., (1925) 10 Tax Cases 155. The second important
conclusion is the approval of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in
its earlier decision in Bombay Steam Navigation Co. Ltd. v.
Commissioner of Income Tax, [1965] 56 ITR 52 wherein it was
observed as follows: “Whether a particular expenditure is revenue expenditure
incurred for the purpose of business must be determined on
a consideration of all the facts and circumstances, and by
the application of principles of commercial trading. The
question must be viewed in the larger context of business
necessity or expediency. If the outgoing or expenditure is
so related to the carrying on or conduct of the business, that
it may be regarded as an integral part of the profit-earning
process and not for acquisition of an asset or a right of a
permanent character, the possession of which is a condition
of the carrying on of the business, the expenditure may be
regarded as revenue expenditure.”

8.

Keeping the above conclusions in mind, learned counsel took

ITR No.90/1985

Page 5 of 14

us through several other decisions rendered by various Courts including
this Court.

9.

In Prem Spinning and Weaving Mills Company Ltd. v.

Commissioner of Income Tax, U.P., [1975] 98 ITR 20, the assessee
was a limited company running a spinning and weaving mill as well as a
new project of straw-board manufacturing factory. The question before
the Court was whether the expenditure incurred for the new venture was
a revenue expenditure or not. The Allahabad High Court noted that
control over the existing spinning mill as well as the new project of
straw-board manufacturing factory was in the hands of the assessee and
it was effectively one establishment controlling both the units. The
business of the two units were interconnected; the profit and loss
account of the company embraced the business of the straw-board
manufacturing factory and the balance sheet represented the financial
picture of the company after taking into consideration the affairs of both
the units.

Relying upon Produce Exchange Corporation Ltd. v.

Commissioner of Income Tax, [1970] 77 ITR 739, it was held that
unity of control is a decisive test and not the nature of the two lines of

ITR No.90/1985

Page 6 of 14

business.

It was further held that if the management, the trading

organization, the administration, the funds and the place of business
were common, then it cannot be said that the two ventures are two
different businesses carried on by the same company.

10.

In Commissioner of Income Tax, Gujarat II v. Alembic

Glass Industries Ltd., [1976] 103 ITR 715, the assessee was a company
manufacturing glass at Baroda. The assessee desired to set up a new
glass manufacturing unit in Bangalore and the question that arose was
whether the amount spent for the undertaking in Bangalore should be
taken on the revenue account or on the capital account. The Gujarat
High Court took into consideration the fact that the business
organization, administration and fund of both the units of the assessee
are common; there was, therefore, complete interconnection, interlacing
and interdependence between the two units. The fact that the Bangalore
unit is many miles away from Baroda was of no consequence since the
head office at Baroda controlled the affairs of both the units.

11.

Commissioner of Income Tax v. Expanded Metal

ITR No.90/1985

Page 7 of 14

Manufacturers, [1991] 189 ITR 317 was a case in which the assessee
was engaged in the business of expanding of iron metal by a mechanical
process and its supply. It started a new business of manufacturing of
rubber products. Relying upon Prem Spinning and Weaving Mills
Company Ltd., it was held that the expenditure incurred for setting up a
unit for the manufacture of rubber products was a revenue expenditure.

12.

In Commissioner of Income Tax v. Modi Industries Ltd.

(No.3), [1993] 200 ITR 341 the supplementary factors earlier laid down
were reiterated viz. whether the management of the new business and
the earlier business is the same and whether there is also unity of control
and a common fund. The assessee in this case was engaged in the
manufacture of various commodities like sugar, vanaspati, soaps, paints
and varnish, torch and lantern and it was intending to diversify its
activities by manufacturing a new commodity, that is, special alloy wire
and billets. Based on the finding that the new business and the earlier
business is the same, in a broad sense namely that the activity is of
manufacture and that there is unity of control and a common fund, it was
held that the business of manufacture of special alloy wire and billets

ITR No.90/1985

Page 8 of 14

was an extension of the existing business and not a new business.
Consequently, the expenditure incurred was held to be a revenue
expenditure.

13.

Finally, in Veecumsees v. Commissioner of Income Tax,

[1996] 220 ITR 185 (SC), the assessee ran a jewellery business and then
commenced business in the exhibition of cinematographic films. The
assessee obtained loans for building a cinema theater and the question
was whether the interest payable on the loans borrowed for the new
business was a revenue expenditure or not. While answering the
question in favour of the assessee, the Supreme Court found that the two
businesses were composite in the sense that there was interconnection,
interlacing or interdependence between the jewellery business and the
cinema business.

14.

On an appreciation of the law laid down by the various

decisions referred to above, it is clear that the nature of the new business
is not a decisive test for determining whether or not there is an
expansion of an existing business. The nature of the business could be

ITR No.90/1985

Page 9 of 14

as distinct as a jewellery business and a business of cinematographic
films; it could be as different as manufacture of metal alloys and
manufacture of rubber products.

What is of importance is that the

control of both the ventures, the existing venture as well as the new
venture, must be in the hands of one establishment or management or
administration. The place of business of the existing business and the
new business may not be in close proximity – it could be as far apart as
Baroda and Bangalore. However, the funds utilised for the management
of both the concerns must be common as reflected in the balance sheet
of the company.

15.

In other words, there may be several permutations and

combinations that may arise for determining whether the expenditure is
revenue or capital and each case must, of course, be dealt with on the
broad principles that have been accepted by the Courts as are mentioned
above.

16.

Applying these principles to the present case, it is quite clear

to us that the control over the two units is in the hands of the same

ITR No.90/1985

Page 10 of 14

management and administration. There is no doubt on this score and in
fact, the annual report of the Assessee, which has been shown to us by
learned counsel, makes a reference to the Project at Hyderabad. There
can be no dispute from the facts that have been placed before us on
record that the new venture was managed from common funds and there
is the necessary unity of control leading to an interconnection,
interdependence and interlacing of the two ventures such that it can be
said that the fuel injection equipment project is only an extension of the
existing business of the Assessee and, therefore, the expenditure
incurred by the Assessee on this Project is a revenue expenditure.

17.

Learned counsel for the Revenue relied upon Challapalli

Sugars Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income Tax, A.P., [1975] 98 ITR 167
to contend that the expenditure incurred by the Assessee, as mentioned
above, is a part of the actual cost of its assets and, therefore, this amount
needs to be capitalized and added to the cost of the fixed assets of the
Assessee.

18.

There can, of course, be no quarrel with the proposition laid

ITR No.90/1985

Page 11 of 14

down by the Supreme Court in Challapalli Sugars Ltd. but the facts of
that case are completely distinguishable in as much as that decision did
not concern itself with an extension of an existing business but
concerned itself with the setting up of a new business altogether. In
fact, the Supreme Court distinguished the decision in India Cements
Ltd. by observing that in India Cements Ltd. the assessee at the time
when it raised the loan was a running concern. In Challapalli Sugars
Ltd., the case of the assessee was that it had borrowed considerable
sums of money for the installation of machinery and plant and that the
interest should be added to the cost of plant and machinery. As such,
while calculating depreciation admissible, the interest paid should be
treated as a part of the cost of the machinery and plant to the assessee.
The Income Tax Officer rejected the claim of the assessee and held that
interest was an admissible item of revenue expenditure and no
depreciation could be claimed thereon.

The argument advanced on

behalf of the assessee and which was accepted by the Supreme Court
was that the interest for the period before the commencement of
production (on money borrowed for the purposes of acquiring and
installing the machinery and plant) should be included in the actual cost

ITR No.90/1985

Page 12 of 14

of the plant and as such capitalized for the purpose.

19.

We are of the view that the decision in Challapalli Sugars

Ltd. is clearly inapplicable to the facts of the present case. On the other
hand, the law laid down by the Supreme Court in India Cements Ltd.
would be applicable.

20.

Learned counsel for the Assessee also relied upon E.I.D.

Parry (India) Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income Tax, [2002] 257 ITR
253 to contend that the Assessee cannot convert capital expenditure into
revenue expenditure. We are unable to appreciate the relevance of this
decision. The Assessee has shown the cost of acquisition of plant and
machinery amounting to Rs.1.35 crores as capital expenditure. It is only
an amount of Rs.20,41,158/- that has been claimed as revenue
expenditure and there is no question of converting capital expenditure
into revenue expenditure.

21.

Under the circumstances, we answer the question referred to

us in the negative, in favour of the Assessee and against the Revenue.

ITR No.90/1985

Page 13 of 14

The reference is disposed of accordingly.

Madan B. Lokur, J

October 05, 2007
kapil

S. Muralidhar, J

Certified that the corrected copy of
the judgment has been transmitted
in the main Server.

ITR No.90/1985

Page 14 of 14

