*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+ 1.

ITA No.1466 of 2006
Judgment reserved on: February 21, 2008

%

Judgment delivered on: March 04, 2008

Delhi Milk Scheme
New Delhi

…Appellant
Through Mr. P.N. Monga with Mr. Manu
Monga, Advocates
Versus

1.

Commissioner of Income-tax, Delhi-II
C.R. Building, I.P. Estate, New Delhi

2.

Deputy Commissioner of Income Tax
Circle 4(1), C.R. Building, I.P. Estate
New Delhi

…Respondents

Through Ms. Rashmi Chopra, Advocate
WITH
2.

ITA No. 636 of 2007

Delhi Milk Scheme
New Delhi

…Appellant
Through Mr. P.N. Monga with Mr. Manu
Monga, Advocates
Versus

ITA 1466/2006

Page 1 of 7

1.

Commissioner of Income-tax, Delhi-II
C.R. Building, I.P. Estate, New Delhi

2.

Deputy Commissioner of Income Tax
Circle 4(1), C.R. Building, I.P. Estate
New Delhi

…Respondents

Through Ms. Rashmi Chopra, Advocate
Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

MADAN B. LOKUR, J.
The assessee is aggrieved by an order dated 20 th January,
2006 passed by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Delhi Bench „C‟ in
ITA (TDS) No.102 and 103/Del/2003 relevant for the assessment years
2002-2003 and 2003-2004 respectively.

2.

The issue that arises in this case is whether the assessee was

liable to deduct tax at source on milk and milk products sold by it
through `concessionaires‟ appointed by it.

ITA 1466/2006

Page 2 of 7

3.

A survey operation under Section 133A of the Income Tax

Act, 1961 (the Act) was carried out on 12 th June, 2002 on the basis of
information that the assessee was not deducting tax at source on the
commission paid by it to its agents (called concessionaires) who sell
milk on behalf of the assessee. During the course of survey, it was
found that the information was correct and it was also found that the
assessee has appointed a large number of agents all over Delhi to sell
milk and milk products from booths which are owned by the assessee.
The assessee appoints its agents by issuing appointment letters to them
and also enters into an agreement with them specifying the terms and
conditions of the appointment. A commission is paid to the agent for
the goods sold. In respect of the milk which is not sold, the same is
taken back by the assessee. Cash collections are daily made by the
assessee from the concessionaires.

4.

According to the assessee, there was no principal to agent

relationship between the assessee and the concessionaires but it was a
principal to principal relationship and, therefore, commission as defined
in the Explanation to Section 194-H of the Act was not applicable.

ITA 1466/2006

Page 3 of 7

5.

The contention urged by the assessee was rejected by the

Assessing Officer as well as by the Commissioner of Income Tax
(Appeals) and by the Tribunal and that is how the assessee is now before
us in an appeal under Section 260-A of the Act.

6.

It was submitted by learned counsel for the assessee that in

fact the assessee was giving a discount to the concessionaires and there
was no question of any commission being paid to them.

7.

Looking to the facts of the case, namely, that the ownership

of the milk booth rests with the assessee who does not charge any rent
for the use of the booths from the concessionaires; the unsold milk is
taken back by the assessee from the concessionaires who are prohibited
from selling any other product of any other brand; the sale collections
of the concessionaires are collected in cash by the concerned clerk of the
assessee from them on a daily basis, there can be no doubt that the
concessionaires are selling milk for and on behalf of the assessee and
are being paid a commission for it.

8.

The expression „commission‟ has been defined in the

ITA 1466/2006

Page 4 of 7

Explanation to Section 194-H of the Act as follows:
“Commission or brokerage
194-H.

xxx xxx xxx

Explanation. – For the purposes of this section, –
(i) “commission of brokerage” includes any payment
received or receivable, directly or indirectly, by a person
acting on behalf of another person for services rendered (not
being professional services) or for any services in the course
of buying or selling of goods or in relation to any transaction
relating to any asset, valuable article or thing, not being
securities;
(ii) to (iv) xxx xxx xxx”

9.

On the other hand, the word „discount‟ had come up for

consideration in Harihar Cotton Pressing Factory v. Commissioner of
Income-tax, [1960] 39 ITR 594. In that decision, it was held that a
discount or a drawback is another word for a rebate which is a remission
or a payment back and of the nature of a deduction from the gross
amount. In other words, it includes a refund to the purchaser of a thing
or commodity of a portion of the price paid by him.

10.

In a slightly different but nevertheless an apposite context,

the Supreme Court described a `trade discount‟ in A.K. Roy v. Voltas

ITA 1466/2006

Page 5 of 7

Ltd., (1973) 3 SCC 503 as a percentage deduction from the regular list
or catalogue price of goods.

11.

On the facts of the case, it is quite clear that the milk and

milk products are not sold by the assessee to the concessionaires. On
the contrary, unsold milk is taken back by the assessee from the
concessionaires, without any price reduction. Therefore, whichever way
one looks at the matter, from the point of view of the definition of the
word „commission‟, as appearing in the Explanation to Section 194-H of
the Act or from the meaning of the word „discount‟, the transaction
between the assessee and the concessionaires is a principal to agent
transaction and not a principal to principal transaction.

12.

The Tribunal has found, as a matter of fact, that the milk

booths are owned by the assessee; the assessee has a right to enter the
milk booth and take charge thereof any time without assigning any
reason or without any intimation to the concessionaires; unsold milk is
taken back by the assessee from the concessionaires; cash collection is
daily handed over to the assessee by the concessionaires; the
concessionaires only render a service to the assessee for selling milk to

ITA 1466/2006

Page 6 of 7

the customers; and finally ownership of the goods does not pass from
the assessee to the concessionaires inasmuch as there is no sale of the
milk or milk products to the concessionaires. No material has been
brought on record to controvert these findings of fact.

13.

We also do not find any perversity in the findings of fact that

have been arrived at by the Tribunal on the basis of the agreement
entered into between the assessee and the concessionaires and the terms
of their appointment.

13.

That being the position, we are of the opinion that no

substantial question of law arises.

14.

The appeal is dismissed. No costs.

MADAN B. LOKUR, J

March 04, 2008
ncg

V.B. GUPTA, J

Certified that the corrected copy of the judgment
has been transmitted in the main Server.

ITA 1466/2006

Page 7 of 7

