*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 8916 of 2005
Judgment reserved on: August 1, 2007

%

Judgment delivered on: August 10, 2007
M/s H & R Johnson India Ltd.
501, Surya Kiran Building
19, K.G. Marg, New Delhi
Through

...Petitioner
Mr. S.K. Sharma, Advocate

Versus
1.

Commissioner, Sales Tax, Delhi

2.

Delhi Administration,
through Secretary Law
Secretariat, Delhi

...Respondents
Through

Mr. H.L. Taneja, Advocate

Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Not necessary

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Not necessary

WP (C) No.8916/2005

Page 1 of 5

MADAN B. LOKUR, J.
Rule D.B.
2.

The Petitioner is aggrieved by an order dated 21st April, 2003

passed by the Commissioner of Sales Tax, Delhi in a revision petition
bearing No.735/CST/99-2000.
3.

The Assessee had made local sales to one registered dealer called

M/s Shashi Nagpal & Sons during the assessment year 1994-95. It
appears that the purchasing dealer did not issue any statutory
declarations in form ST-1 to the Petitioner and, therefore, the Petitioner
could not produce them before the assessing authority. On these broad
facts, the Sales Tax Officer imposed sales tax on the Assessee and also
charged interest on the amount not deposited.
4.

The Petitioner preferred an appeal which was dismissed by the

Deputy Commissioner of Sales Tax by an order dated 20 th November,
1999. Since there was no Appellate Tribunal in existence at that time,
the Petitioner preferred a revision petition which came to be disposed of
by the impugned order.
5.

The Commissioner noted, and there is no dispute about this, that

WP (C) No.8916/2005

Page 2 of 5

the Petitioner had already deposited the tax and the only grievance was
with regard to the interest levied by the assessing authority.
6.

It was submitted by learned counsel for the Petitioner before the

Commissioner, as well as before us, that his client had furnished ST-1
forms received from M/s Shashi Nagpal & Sons in respect of earlier
assessment years and there was no reason why he should be disbelieved
in respect of the present assessment year only because he was able to
produce the requisite forms.
7.

The Commissioner did not agree with the view canvassed by the

Petitioner and it was held that the Petitioner had not produced any
documentary evidence to prove that sales had been made to M/s Shashi
Nagpal & Sons. On the contrary, it appeared that the purchasing dealer
had not even obtained any statutory forms in the name of the Petitioner
for the year that we are concerned with. Moreover, it was found, as per
a report received from the Sales Tax Officer, that M/s Shashi Nagpal &
Sons was not available at the given address for the last three years and
the registration certificate granted to him was recommended for
cancellation.

Finally, the account payee cheques received by the

WP (C) No.8916/2005

Page 3 of 5

Petitioner from M/s Shashi Nagpal & Sons in respect of the transactions
in question could not be fully verified.
8.

In view of these facts, the Commissioner disbelieved the

Petitioner and came to the conclusion that the Petitioner was liable to
pay the necessary interest.
9.

Before us, learned counsel for the Petitioner sought to contend

that his client was not liable to pay any interest on the amount of tax.
Reference was made to J.K. Synthetics Ltd. v. Commercial Tax
Officer, AIR 1994 SC 2393 but we find that that case pertains to the
Rajasthan Sales Tax Act, 1954 and the decision concerns the language
used in that statute, which is not similar to the Delhi statute. Moreover,
we find that the facts of J.K. Synthetics are completely different from
the case of the Petitioner.
10.

In so far as the present case is concerned, even though the sales

were made in 1994-95, tax was paid by the Petitioner only on 30th
October, 1998. There was no reason for the Petitioner to have withheld
the amount that was legitimately due to the exchequer. By withholding
the amount, the Petitioner would have earned some interest on the

WP (C) No.8916/2005

Page 4 of 5

amount or in any case the Revenue would have lost some amount by
way of interest on the tax due. Levy of interest is compensatory and not
punitive.

Consequently, the Petitioner is liable to compensate the

exchequer for utilizing the amount that was legitimately due to the
exchequer.
11.

Even otherwise, on merits, we find that the reasons given by the

Commissioner for denying relief to the Petitioner are quite cogent and
no fault can be found with the view taken in this regard.
12.

Under the circumstances, we find no reason to interfere with the

view taken by the Commissioner. There is no merit in this writ petition
which is, accordingly, dismissed.

Madan B. Lokur, J

August 10, 2007
ncg

V.B. Gupta, J

Certified that the corrected copy of
the judgment has been transmitted
in the main Server.

WP (C) No.8916/2005

Page 5 of 5

