*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

ITA No.332 of 2007
Judgment reserved on: January 25, 2008

%

Judgment delivered on: February 19, 2008

Commissioner of Income Tax
Delhi-VII, New Delhi

...Appellant

Through Mrs. Prem Lata Bansal, Advocate
Versus
Shri Vivek Dougall
3, Racquet Road
Civil Lines
Delhi

...Respondent
Through Mr. Salil Aggarwal with
Mr. Prakash Kumar, Advocates

Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

ITA No.332/2007

Page 1 of 9

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

MADAN B. LOKUR, J.
The Revenue is aggrieved by an order dated 11th
August, 2006 passed by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Delhi
Bench D, in IT (SS) A No.137/Del/2002 relevant for the block
period ending on 8th July, 1999.

2.

The Assessee is one of the promoters of M/s Atul Glass

Industries Limited (AGIL) and Maharashtra Glass & Agro
Limited (MGAL).

3.

A French company called Sekruti Saint Gobain (SSB)

which was also in the same business as AGIL and MGAL, that is,
safety glazing of automobile windshields had the intention of
becoming a major supplier in India. Accordingly, AGIL, MGAL
and SSB decided to join forces to meet the anticipated demand for
laminated windshields and a joint venture agreement was
entered into between them on 24th February, 1994. As per the
ITA No.332/2007

Page 2 of 9

joint venture agreement, SSB was to be allotted certain
preferential shares in AGIL and MGAL.

4.

As a result of the joint venture agreement and certain

other developments that took place, the promoters, including the
Assessee, relinquished their right to manage MGAL in favour of
SSB and also agreed not to compete with MGAL‟s business other
than their involvement with AGIL. This non-compete agreement
was entered into on 26th December, 1997 and in consideration
thereof, SSB agreed to pay to the promoters an aggregate amount
of Rs.400 lakhs to be apportioned between the promoters as per
their shareholding.

5.

On 8th July, 1999, a search and seizure operation was

carried out at the residence of one Gulati and during the search of
the premises, an MoU between A.C. Gulati on behalf of the Indian
promoters and SSB was recovered as well as a copy of the noncompete agreement dated 3rd October, 1997.

ITA No.332/2007

Page 3 of 9

6.

As a result of the above recovery of documents, the

Assessee was required to file its return for the block period
pursuant to a notice under Section 158BC of the Income Tax Act,
1961 (the Act). The Assessee filed a nil return on 13th November,
2000.

7.

At this stage, it is important to note that much before

the search, the Assessee had filed a regular return of income for
the Assessment Year 1998-99 and had claimed the amount
received by him as non-compete fee and had claimed it to be not
chargeable to tax. However, after the search and seizure, the
Assessing Officer sought to treat the non-compete fee as
undisclosed income of the Assessee during the block assessment
proceedings. The contention of the Assessee was that the amount
of non-compete fee was not undisclosed income within the
meaning of Section 158B(b) of the Act.

This contention was

rejected by the Assessing Officer who concluded that the noncompete fee was really a consideration paid for a change in the
shareholding in MGAL. The Assessing Officer also held that the
ITA No.332/2007

Page 4 of 9

non-compete fee was a revenue receipt and, therefore, chargeable
to tax.

8.

The appeal filed by the Assessee was accepted by the

Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) [CIT(A)] who concluded
that the Assessee had made a proper disclosure of the receipt of
non-compete fee much prior to the search and, therefore, the
amount in question could not be treated as undisclosed income.
It was also held that the non-compete fee received by the
Assessee was a capital receipt not chargeable to tax.

9.

The view expressed by CIT (A) was upheld by the

Tribunal on the question of not treating the amount as
undisclosed income.

The Tribunal declined to go into the

question whether the amount received was a capital receipt or a
revenue receipt.

10.

The expression “undisclosed income” has been defined

in Section 158B(b) of the Act. This reads as follows:
ITA No.332/2007

Page 5 of 9

“Definitions.
158B.
In this chapter, unless the context otherwise
requires, –
(a)

xxx xxx xxx

(b)
“undisclosed income” includes any money,
bullion, jewellery or other valuable article or thing or
any income based on any entry in the books of account
or other documents or transactions, where such money,
bullion, jewellery, valuable article, thing, entry in the
books of account or other document or transaction
represents wholly or partly income or property which
has not been or would not have been disclosed for the
purposes of this Act, or any expense, deduction or
allowance claimed under this Act which is found to be
false.”

11.

On the basis of the above definition, what is important

to note is that the non-compete fee should represent wholly or
partly income or property which has not been or would not have
been disclosed by the Assessee. In the present case, there is no
doubt about the fact that the Assessee had disclosed the income in
his regular return well before the search was carried out in the
premises of Gulati. By no stretch of imagination can it, therefore,
be said that the amount received by the Assessee as non-compete

ITA No.332/2007

Page 6 of 9

fee was undisclosed income. As held by the Bombay High Court
in Commissioner of Income Tax v. Vikram A. Doshi, [2002] 256
ITR 129, the transaction having been disclosed in the return, it is
the subject matter of a regular assessment and not a block
assessment. A similar view was expressed by the Bombay High
Court in Commissioner of Income Tax v. Shamlal Balram
Gurbani, [2001] 249 ITR 501.

12.

A reading of the above provisions also makes it clear

that there should be non-disclosure of income on the part of the
Assessee and that such non-disclosure should have been detected
as a result of the search. Neither of these two ingredients are
present in so far as this appeal is concerned.

13.

In N.R. Paper & Board Ltd. v. Deputy Commissioner of

Income Tax, [1998] 234 ITR 733, the issue of „non-disclosure‟ was
discussed and it was explained:
“The definition of “undisclosed income” in section
158B(b) includes any money, bullion, jewellery or other
valuable article or thing or any income based on any
ITA No.332/2007

Page 7 of 9

entry in the books of account or other documents or
transactions, where such asset, entry or other document
or transaction representing wholly or partly income or
property which has not been or would not have been
disclosed for the purposes of the Act. It, therefore,
follows that what the assessee had already disclosed or
would have disclosed is not to be treated as
undisclosed income.” (emphasis in original)

14.

As regards the second ingredient, in Commissioner of

Income Tax v. Ravi Kant Jain, [2001] 250 ITR 141, this Court held,
and this view has been repeated on several occasions, that in a
block assessment the adverse material ought to have been
unearthed during the search and that the assessment for the block
period can be made only on the basis of the evidence found as a
result of the search.

15.

Under the circumstances, we are of the view that the

law being well settled and the facts of the case being quite clear
inasmuch as the Assessee had disclosed the amount received by
him towards non-compete fee in its regular returns, no
substantial question of law arises for consideration. The appeal is

ITA No.332/2007

Page 8 of 9

dismissed. We assess counsel‟s fee at Rs.10,000/- which amount
will be deposited by the Revenue within a period of four weeks
from today by a cheque drawn in favour of the Registrar General
of this Court.

16.

List for compliance on 24th March, 2008.

MADAN B. LOKUR, J

February 19, 2008
ncg

V.B. GUPTA, J

Certified that the corrected
copy of the judgment has
been transmitted in the
main Server.

ITA No.332/2007

Page 9 of 9

