*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

ITA No. 77 of 2007
Judgment reserved on: July 11, 2007

%

Judgment delivered on: July 13, 2007

Rajeev Tandon
D-404, Defence Colony
New Delhi

...Appellant
Through

Mr. Krishan Mahajan, Adv.

Versus
Assistant Commissioner of Income Tax
Circle 31(3)
New Delhi
Through

...Respondent
Mr. R.D. Jolly with
Mr. Vishnu Sharma, Advs.

Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

MADAN B. LOKUR, J.
The Assessee is aggrieved by an order dated 8th September,

ITA No.77/2007

Page 1 of 5

2006 passed by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Delhi Bench 'C' in
ITA No.3495(Del)/2004 relevant for the assessment year 2001-02.

2.

The Assessee claims to have received two gifts from abroad.

One gift was from Mr. P.B. Bhardwaj and was of an amount of
Rs.30,04,300/- while the second gift was from Mr. Surender Khoka of
an amount of Rs.4,61,942/-. The Assessee produced documentation to
show the creditworthiness of both the donors but the Assessing Officer
took the view that the gifts were bogus and that the Assessee had merely
routed his own money through these persons to increase his capital for
purchasing a house. The alleged gifts were given to the Assessee by
persons who were not related to him in any manner and were not given
to him for any particular reason except because he needed the money to
purchase a house and these donors wanted to help him.

3.

The Assessee preferred an appeal before the Commissioner

of Income Tax (Appeals) [CIT (A)] before whom he contended that the
identity and creditworthiness of the donors had been established and
consequently it was submitted that the Assessing Officer should not

ITA No.77/2007

Page 2 of 5

have come to the conclusion that the gifts were bogus. The CIT (A) did
not agree with the view canvassed by the Assessee and dismissed the
appeal.

Similarly, the Tribunal also dismissed the appeal of the

Assessee and that is how we are required to deal with this appeal under
Section 260A of the Income Tax Act, 1961.

4.

Having heard learned counsel for the Assessee, we find that

the Tribunal considered the entire case law on the subject including
several decisions of the Supreme Court and this Court. Reference has
been made to Commissioner of Income Tax v. Durga Prasad More,
(1971) 82 ITR 540 wherein the Supreme Court observed that the taxing
authorities were entitled to look into the surrounding circumstances to
find out the real and factual position. Similarly, this Court in Sajan
Dass and Sons v. Commissioner of Income-tax, (2003) 264 ITR 435
took the view that not only must the Assessee establish the identity of
the donor and his capacity to make the gift, but he must also establish
that the amount received by him was in fact a gift.

5.

We find from the facts of this case that the two donors had

ITA No.77/2007

Page 3 of 5

absolutely no connection with the Assessee and they made gifts to the
Assessee only because he needed money to buy a house and they wanted
to help him. It appears to us that this is not only quite unusual but also
quite unnatural. It sounds rather incredible that a complete stranger
would want to gift lakhs of rupees to a person only because that person
wanted the amount for purchasing a house. The taxing authorities were
entitled to look into the surrounding circumstances, which they did, and
came to the conclusion that the gifts could not be said to be genuine.
On these facts, we find no reason why a different view should be taken.

6.

We may note that very recently, the Supreme Court dealt

with a somewhat similar situation in Commissioner of Income-tax v. P.
Mohanakala, (2007) 291 ITR 278. While dealing with Section 68 of
the Act, the Supreme Court held that:
(i)

There has to be a credit of the amount in the books

maintained by the assessee.
(ii)

Such credit has to be of a sum during the previous year.

(iii)

The assessee offers no explanation about the nature and

source of such credit found in the books, or if the assessee offers an

ITA No.77/2007

Page 4 of 5

explanation then, in the opinion of the Assessing Officer, it is not
satisfactory it is only then that the sum so credited may be charged to
income tax as the income of an Assessee.

7.

The Supreme Court considered the expression “the assessee

offers no explanation” and observed that what it means is that the
Assessee offers no proper, reasonable and acceptable explanation in the
opinion of the Assessing Officer, formed objectively with reference to
the material available on record.

8.

In so far as the present case is concerned, the explanation

offered by the Assessee does not appear to be reasonable, much less
acceptable. Consequently, we do not find any error in the view taken by
the Tribunal. No substantial question of law arises for consideration.
Dismissed.

Madan B. Lokur, J

July 13, 2007
ncg
ITA No.77/2007

V.B. Gupta, J

Page 5 of 5

