*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

ITA No.643 of 2007
Judgment reserved on: January 23, 2008

%

Judgment delivered on: February 19, 2008
The Commissioner of Income Tax
Delhi-IV
New Delhi.

...Appellant

Through Mrs. P.L. Bansal, Adv.
Versus
Eltek SGS (P) Ltd.
F-225A, Sainik Farms,
New Delhi.

...Respondent

Through Mr.Kaanan Kapur, Adv.
Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

ITA No.643/2007

Page 1 of 12

MADAN B. LOKUR, J.
The Revenue is aggrieved by an order dated 30th June, 2006
passed by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Delhi Bench „C‟ in ITA
No. 3669/D/2003 relevant for the Assessment Year 2001-2002.
2.

The short question that has arisen for consideration in this

appeal under Section 260-A of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (for short the
Act) is with regard to the claim of deduction by the Assessee on
customs duty drawback of Rs.42,92,725/- under Section 80-IB of the
Act.
3.

The Assessing Officer declined to grant a deduction by

relying upon the decision of the Supreme Court in Commissioner of
Income Tax v. Sterling Foods, [1999] 237 ITR 579. It may at one be
pointed out that the decision of the Supreme Court related to import
entitlement under the Export Promotion Scheme of the Government of
India and on the interpretation of Section 80-HH of the Act.
4.

Feeling aggrieved by the assessment order, the Assessee

preferred an appeal before the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals)
[CIT (A)] who set aside the order passed by the Assessing Officer by
holding that Sterling Foods did not apply to the facts of the case and

ITA No.643/2007

Page 2 of 12

the language used in Section 80-HH of the Act was materially different
from the language used in Section 80-IB of the Act.
5.

The Revenue preferred an appeal before the Tribunal which

dismissed the appeal and upheld the view expressed by the CIT (A).
6.

In the first instance, it is necessary to appreciate the decision

of the Supreme Court in Sterling Foods.
7.

The Assessee in that case was engaged in processing prawn

and other sea foods which it had exported. As a result of an Export
Promotion Scheme announced by the Central Government, the
Assessee earned certain import entitlements. The Assessee could either
use the import entitlement or sell it to others. In that case, the Assessee
sold the import entitlements to some third parties and its income,
therefore, included the sale proceeds of such import entitlements, for
which the Assessee claimed relief under Section 80-HH(1) of the Act,
which reads as follows:
“80HH. Deduction in respect of profits and gains from
newly established industrial undertakings or hotel
business in backward areas. – (1) Where the gross total
income of an assessee includes any profits and gains
derived from an industrial undertaking, or the business of
a hotel, to which this section applies, there shall, in
accordance with and subject to the provisions of this
section, be allowed, in computing the total income of the
assessee, a deduction from such profits and gains of an

ITA No.643/2007

Page 3 of 12

amount equal to twenty per cent thereof.”
It will at once be seen that the language used in Section 80HH of the Act relates to “profits and gains derived from an industrial
undertaking”.
8.

In Cambay Electric Supply Industrial Co. Ltd. v. CIT, [1978]

113 ITR 84, the Supreme Court drew a distinction between the
expression “derived from” and “attributable to”, the latter being wider
in import than the expression “derived from”. It was observed that the
expression “attributable to” was used when the legislature intended to
cover receipts from sources other than the actual conduct of the
business.
9.

In Sterling Foods, the Supreme Court held that on the

language of Section 80-HH of the Act, the expression “derived from” is
a narrower expression and so the industrial undertaking had to be the
source of the profit or gain. In other words, the industrial undertaking
had to be the direct source of the profit and not a means to earn the
profit. Referring to import entitlements under the Export Promotion
Scheme, the Supreme Court concluded that they were entitlements that
the Assessee had earned under the scheme of the Central Government
which was intended to encourage exports. The source referable to the

ITA No.643/2007

Page 4 of 12

profits and gains arose out of the sale proceeds of the import
entitlements and was, therefore, referable to the Scheme of the Central
Government and not the industrial undertaking of the Assessee. This
is what the Supreme Court had to say in the penultimate paragraph of
the decision –
“We do not think that the source of the import
entitlements can be said to be the industrial undertaking of
the assessee. The source of the import entitlements can, in
the circumstances, only be said to be the Export Promotion
Scheme of the Central Government whereunder the export
entitlements become available. There must be, for the
application of the words “derived from”, a direct nexus
between the profits and gains and the industrial
undertaking. In the instant case, the nexus is not direct but
only incidental.
The industrial undertaking exports
processed sea food. By reason of such export, the Export
Promotion Scheme applies. Thereunder the assessee is
entitled to import entitlements, which it can sell. The sale
considerations therefrom cannot, in our view, be held to
constitute a profit and gain derived from the assessee‟s
industrial undertaking.”
10.

On the other hand, the entitlement to duty drawback that

we are concerned with is referable to Section 75 of the Customs Act,
1962. This Section reads as follows: “75. Drawback on imported materials used in the
manufacture of goods which are exported. – (1) Where it
appears to the Central Government that in respect of
goods of any class or description manufactured, processed
or on which any operation has been carried out in India,
being goods which have been entered for export and in

ITA No.643/2007

Page 5 of 12

respect of which an order permitting the clearance and
loading thereof for exportation has been made under
section 51 by the proper officer, or being goods entered for
export by post under section 82 and in respect of which an
order permitting clearance for exportation has been made
by the proper officer, a drawback should be allowed of
duties of customs chargeable under this Act on any
imported materials of a class or description used in the
manufacture or processing of such goods or carrying out
any operation on such goods, the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that
drawback shall be allowed in respect of such goods in
accordance with, and subject to, the rules made under subsection (2):
Provided

xxx

xxx

Provided further that

xxx

xxx”

A perusal of the above provision shows that an exporter is
entitled to drawback on the duty of customs chargeable under this Act
on any imported material if those imported materials have been used
in the manufacture or processing of goods for export. Of course, this is
subject to a notification issued by the Central Government with respect
to the goods of any class or description.
12.

In other words, duty drawback is in the nature of re-

imbursement of the customs duty that an exporter has paid on
imported goods, which are subjected to a manufacturing process and
then exported. In that sense, the export has a direct nexus with the

ITA No.643/2007

Page 6 of 12

industrial undertaking itself.
13.

That apart, Section 80-IB of the Act does not use the

expression “profits and gains derived from an industrial undertaking”
as used in Section 80-HH of the Act but uses the expression “profits
and gains derived from any business referred to in sub-section……..”
Section 80-IB (1) of the Act reads as follows: “80-IB (1) Where the gross total income of an assessee
includes any profits and gains derived from any business
referred to in sub-section (3) to (11), (11A) and (11B) such
business being hereinafter referred to as the eligible
business, there shall, in accordance with and subject to the
provisions of this section, be allowed, in computing the
total income of the assessee, a deduction from such profits
and gains of an amount equal to such percentage and for
such number of assessment years as specified in this
section.”
A perusal of the above would show that there is a material
difference between the language used in Section 80-HH of the Act and
Section 80-IB of the Act. While Section 80-HH requires that the profits
and gains should be derived from the industrial undertaking, Section
80-IB of the Act requires that the profits and gains should be derived
from any business of the industrial undertaking. In other words, there
need not necessarily be a direct nexus between the activity of an
industrial undertaking and the profits and gains.

ITA No.643/2007

Page 7 of 12

14.

This issue, particularly in relation to duty drawback, came

up for consideration in Commissioner of Income Tax v. Indian Gelatine
and Chemicals Ltd., [2005] 275 ITR 284. While considering the object
of the duty drawback scheme, the Gujarat High Court explained it in
the following terms –
“The object of the duty drawback scheme is to reimburse
exporters for tariffs paid on the imported raw materials
and intermediates and Central excise duties paid on
domestically produced inputs which enter into export
production. Customs duties and excise duties on inputs
raise the cost of production in industries and thereby affect
the competitiveness of exports. Therefore, exporters need
to be assisted for neutralizing the escalation in their costs
attributable to such customs and excise duties. Duty
drawback is, therefore, intended to reduce the cost of
production. Hence, duty drawback is an integral part of
the pricing of the goods and, therefore, part of the cost of
production of the industrial undertaking and, therefore
duty drawback has to be treated as “derived from” the
industrial undertaking.”
15.

We have no reason to disagree with the interpretation given

by the Gujarat High Court to the object of the duty drawback scheme.
16.

While dealing with the merits of the case, the Gujarat High

Court rejected the contention of the Revenue that benefits under the
duty drawback scheme are not derived from the industrial undertaking
but merely attributable to it. The Gujarat High Court observed as

ITA No.643/2007

Page 8 of 12

follows –
“The object of the duty drawback is to reimburse customs
duties and excise duties paid by the assessee. As customs
duties and excise duties are admittedly an integral part of
the cost of production any receipts by way of
reimbursement of such duties are inextricably linked with
the cost of production which has to be reflected in the
profit and loss account of the assessee and, therefore, the
Revenue‟s argument cannot be accepted”
17.

Learned counsel for the Revenue has relied upon a decision

of this Court in Commissioner of Income Tax v. Ritesh Industries Ltd.,
[2005] 274 ITR 324.

The question of law that was framed for

consideration by this Court was as follows “Whether the amount of „duty drawback‟ can be regarded
as income derived from an industrial undertaking so as to
entitle the assessee to a deduction under section 80-I of the
Income Tax Act, 1961?”
18.

While answering the question in favour of the Revenue, in

the context of Section 80-I of the Act, this Court held that “merely
because under the scheme to encourage exports the duty is refunded
subsequently by way of “duty drawback”, it cannot be regarded as the
profit and gain “derived” from the industrial undertaking.

It may

constitute profits or gains of the business by virtue of Section 28 of the
Act, but, it cannot be construed as profits or gains “derived” from the

ITA No.643/2007

Page 9 of 12

industrial undertaking for, its immediate and proximate source is not
the industrial undertaking but the scheme for duty drawback.”
19.

We are of the view that the decision in Ritesh Industries is

distinguishable since it concerns Section 80-I of the Act which again
uses the expression “profits and gains derived from an industrial
undertaking”.
20.

It is crucial to appreciate the difference in language in

Section 80-HH, Section 80-I and Section 80-IB of the Act. While the
language used in Section 80-HH of the Act and in Section 80-I of the
Act is similar, there is a clear departure in the language used in Section
80-IB of the Act and it is this choice of words that makes all the
difference that we are concerned with.
21.

We are of the opinion that it is not necessary for us to go as

far as the Gujarat High Court has done in coming to the conclusion that
duty drawback is profit or gain derived from an industrial
undertaking. It is sufficient if we stick to the language used in Section
80-IB of the Act and come to the conclusion that duty drawback is
profit or gain derived from the business of an industrial undertaking.
The language used in Section 80-IB of the Act is not as broad as the
expression “attributable to” referred to by the Supreme Court in

ITA No.643/2007

Page 10 of 12

Sterling Foods and Cambay Electric nor is it as narrow as the
expression “derived from”. The expression “derived from the business
of an industrial undertaking” is somewhere in between.
22.

Consequently, we are of the view that the source of the duty

drawback is the business of the industrial undertaking which is to
manufacture and export goods out of raw material that is imported and
on which customs duty is paid. The entitlement for duty drawback
arises from Section 75(1) of the Customs Act, 1962 read with the
relevant notification issued by the Central Government in that regard.
23.

Learned counsel for the Revenue also drew our attention to

Pandian Chemicals Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income Tax, [2003] 262
ITR 278. However, on a reading of the judgment we find that that also
deals with Section 80-HH of the Act and does not lay down any
principle different from Sterling Foods. In fact, in Pandian Chemicals
reliance has been placed on Cambay Electric Supply Industrial Co. Ltd.
and the decision seems to suggest, as we have held above, that the
expression “derived from an industrial undertaking” is a step removed
from “the business of the industrial undertaking”.
24.

In view of the law laid down and explained by various

decisions, in our opinion, no substantial question of law arises for

ITA No.643/2007

Page 11 of 12

consideration.
25.

The appeal is dismissed.

We assess counsel‟s fee at

Rs.10,000/-. The Revenue will deposit this amount by a cheque drawn
in favour of the Registrar General of this Court within four weeks from
today.
26.

List for compliance on 24th March, 2008.

MADAN B. LOKUR, J

FEBRUARY 19, 2008
kapil

V.B. GUPTA, J

Certified that the corrected
copy of the judgment has
been transmitted in the
main Server.

ITA No.643/2007

Page 12 of 12

