*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

ITA No.15 of 2007
Judgment reserved on: January 7, 2008

%

Judgment delivered on: February 19, 2008

Director of Income Tax (Exemptions)
Aayakar Bhawan, IIIrd Floor,
Laxmi Nagar, Distt. Centre
Delhi – 110 092

...Appellant

Through Mrs. Prem Lata Bansal, Advocate
Versus
Dalmia Shiksha Prathishthan
4, Scindia House
New Delhi

...Respondent

Through Mr. R.M. Mehta, Advocate
Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

ITA No.15/2007

Page 1 of 10

MADAN B. LOKUR, J.
The Revenue is aggrieved by an order dated 20th
February, 2006 passed by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal,
Delhi Bench A, in ITA No.1059/Del/2002 relevant for the
Assessment Year 1997-98.

2.

The Assessee is a trust imparting education through

four educational institutions in Orissa and Rajasthan.

It is

registered under Section 12A(a) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (the
Act) since 1985. Upto and including the Assessment Year 199697, the Assessee was allowed exemption under Section 10(22) of
the Act but for the Assessment Year 1997-98, the Assessing
Officer departed from the past stand despite the contention of the
Assessee that there was no change in its activities, mode of
investment or functioning.

3.

The

Assessing

Officer

took

three

factors

into

consideration for deciding against the Assessee, namely, –
(i)

The Assessee had let out a property owned by it on

ITA No.15/2007

Page 2 of 10

rent. According to the Assessee, it owned House No.55 at Palam
Vihar, Gurgaon and one of the rooms therein was given to an
employee of Dapel Investment for security purposes of the
building and rent of Rs.375/- per month was received by the
Assessee. Dapel Investment is a sister concern of the Assessee
trust and the annual rent received by the Assessee was only
Rs.4,500/-. We are of the view that this amount is far too
insignificant for taking a decision against the Assessee and
denying it exemption under Section 10(22) of the Act. Indeed,
learned counsel for the Revenue also did not raise any contention
in this regard.
(ii)

The Assessee had earned some amount on sale of books

and thus it existed for purposes of profit. In this regard, the
contention of the Assessee was that it had earned an amount of
only Rs.9,603/- through sale of books. The explanation given by
the Assessee was that some of the schools of the Assessee were in
backward areas of Rajasthan and books were required to be
procured from the main cities and sold to the students. This
resulted in a minor profit to the Assessee and this cannot by itself
ITA No.15/2007

Page 3 of 10

be construed to mean that the Assessee did not exist solely for
educational purposes but had a profit motive. In this regard also,
we are of the opinion that the amount is far too insignificant for
consideration and learned counsel for the Revenue merely
mentioned it without actually raising any contentions in this
regard.
(iii)

The main ground on which submissions were made by

learned counsel for the Revenue was the conclusion of the
Assessing Officer that the Assessee had invested its funds with a
non-governmental body. The Assessing Officer, therefore, held
that the Assessee had diverted funds for non-educational
activities.

4.

The Assessee contested this view of the Assessing

Officer and the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) [CIT (A)]
accepted the contention of the Assessee and came to the
conclusion that there was no material to suggest that the Assessee
had invested the funds with a profit motive.

ITA No.15/2007

Page 4 of 10

5.

The Revenue had challenged the view of CIT (A) but

that was rejected by the Tribunal and that is how the Revenue is
before us in this regard.

Apart from the fact that there is a

concurrent finding against the Revenue, we find that even
otherwise no case has been made out for interference by the
Revenue.

6.

In Commissioner of Income Tax v. Delhi Kannada

Education Society, [2000] 246 ITR 731, this Court laid down the
conditions precedent for availing exemption under Section 10(22)
of the Act. This was the view expressed by this Court:“The conditions precedent for availing of exemption to
an educational institution under section 10(22) of the
Act are as follows:
(a) The educational institution must actually exist for
application of the said provision and mere taking of
steps would not be sufficient to attract the exemption.
(b) The educational institution need not be affiliated to
any university or Board; in fact a society need not itself
be imparting education and it is enough if it runs some
schools or colleges;
(c) The educational institution must exist solely for
educational purposes and not for purposes of profit.
ITA No.15/2007

Page 5 of 10

But, merely because there is a surplus, that is to say a
surplus of receipts over expenditure it cannot be said
that the educational institution exists for profit;
(d) An entity may be having income from different
sources, but if a particular income is from an
educational institution which exists solely for
educational purposes and not for purposes of profit,
then that income would be entitled to exemption and
further the income should be directly relatable to
educational activity.”

7.

In Governing Body of Rangaraya Medical College v.

Income Tax Officer, [1979] 117 ITR 284, the Andhra Pradesh High
Court observed as follows:“Merely because certain surplus arises from its
operations, it cannot be held that the institution is being
run for the purpose of profit so long as no person or
individual is entitled to any portion of the said profit
and the said profit is used for the purposes and for the
promotion of the objects of the institution.”

8.

As observed by the Supreme Court in Aditanar

Educational Institution v. Additional Commissioner of Income
Tax, [1997] 224 ITR 310 at 318, the decisive or acid test is whether
on an overall view of the matter, the object of the trust is to make

ITA No.15/2007

Page 6 of 10

a profit.

9.

Applying the principles laid down by this Court, the

Andhra Pradesh High Court and, of course, the Supreme Court, it
cannot be said that the object of the Assessee was to make a profit
by investing its funds in a non-governmental organization. The
fact of the matter is that the Assessee had certain amounts which
it could have either kept with itself or it could have invested for
the purposes of earning interest.

In this particular case, the

Assessee chose to earn some interest on the funds that it had and
that is, of course, far more prudent a proposition then merely
keeping the amount with it and not earning any interest thereon.
Merely because the Assessee earns interest as a result of its
investment would not mean that the Assessee ceased to exist
solely for educational purposes.

10.

In this regard, the Tribunal has referred to Circular

No.712 issued by the Central Board of Direct Taxes on 25 th July,
1995. The Circular reads as follows:ITA No.15/2007

Page 7 of 10

“Investment of Funds by Educational Institutions
Covered Under Section 10(22).
Under section 10(22) of the Income-tax Act, any income
of a university or other educational institution, existing
solely for educational purposes and not for purposes of
profit, is exempt from tax.
2. The Board have received representations from
various institutions which fulfil the conditions laid
down under section 10(22) of the Act, but are denied
exemption because their funds are not invested in
accordance with the provisions of section 11(5) of the
Act. It is hereby clarified that since section 10(22) does
not impose any restriction regarding mode of
investment of funds, such institutions are not required
to invest their funds in the modes specified under
section 11(5) of the Income-tax Act. This clarification
will not apply to the institutions seeking exemption
under section 11 of the Act.
Sd-/
H.K. Choudhary
Under Secretary to the
Government of India.
[F.No.165/3/95-ITA.I]”

11.

A perusal of the above would show that there is no

restriction regarding the mode of investment of funds by an
educational institution. There is no obligation that an educational
institution must invest its funds in the modes specified in Section
ITA No.15/2007

Page 8 of 10

11(5) of the Act.

12.

In so far as the present case is concerned, the Assessee

invested its funds and the intention was to use the funds and any
interest earned thereon for educational purposes. At least there is
no finding given by the Assessing Officer to the contrary and,
therefore, it cannot be said that the funds were invested by the
Assessee for non-educational purposes or for making a profit and
for utilizing that profit for purposes other than education.

13.

We may also note that learned counsel for the Assessee

stated at the Bar that even for the subsequent Assessment Year,
that is, 1998-99, without there being any change in circumstances,
the contention of the Assessee that it continues to be an
educational institution and is entitled to exemption under Section
10(22) of the Act was accepted. The present Assessment Year
1997-98 is the only odd assessment year for which the Assessee
has been denied exemption and that too for reasons that are not at
all germane to the issue.
ITA No.15/2007

Page 9 of 10

14.

On these facts, in our opinion, no substantial question

of law arises. The appeal is, accordingly, dismissed. We assess
counsel’s fee at Rs.10,000/- which amount will be deposited by
the Revenue within a period of four weeks from today by a
cheque drawn in favour of the Registrar General of this Court.

15.

List for compliance on 24th March, 2008.

MADAN B. LOKUR, J

February 19, 2008
ncg

V.B. GUPTA, J

Certified that the corrected
copy of the judgment has
been transmitted in the
main Server.

ITA No.15/2007

Page 10 of 10

