*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

ITA No. 79 of 2007

Judgment reserved on: July 11, 2007
%

Judgment delivered on: July 13, 2007

Dev Features Pvt. Ltd.
14, Babar Road
New Delhi

...Appellant
Through

Mr. Krishan Mahajan, Adv.

Versus
Assistant Commissioner of Income Tax
Central Circle-9
New Delhi
Through

...Respondent
Mr. R.D. Jolly with
Mr. Vishnu Sharma, Advs.

Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Not necessary

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Not necessary

ITA No.79/2007

Page 1 of 5

MADAN B. LOKUR, J.
The Assessee is aggrieved by an order dated 23rd June, 2006
passed by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Delhi Bench 'F' in ITA
No.1218/Del of 2004 relevant for the assessment year 1992-93.

2.

The Assessee is a private limited company engaged in the

business of syndication and equipment hiring.

3.

The assessment was originally framed under Section

143(1)(a) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (for short the Act).
Subsequently, the Assessing Officer issued a notice under Section 148
of the Act for re-assessment. The Assessee was asked, during the reassessment proceedings, to prove the genuineness of the claim of Rs.18
lakhs shown as payable to Mr. R.G.N. Swami. The assessee was unable
to satisfy the Assessing Officer about the genuineness of the claim. An
opportunity was given to place on record a confirmation from Mr.
R.G.N. Swami that this amount was due to him but no such confirmation
was obtained. Even though the transaction was said to be of Rs.18 lakhs
but neither was this amount ever claimed by Mr. R.G.N. Swami for

ITA No.79/2007

Page 2 of 5

almost a decade nor was any evidence produced in support of the
contention that the amount was payable to Mr. R.G.N. Swami.

4.

In appeal, the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) [CIT

(A)] took into consideration a memorandum of settlement dated 1st
October, 2003 entered into between the Assessee and Mr. R.G.N.
Swami in which the Assessee's liability was settled. On this basis, the
CIT (A) accepted the contention of the Assessee that the amount was
payable to Mr. R.G.N. Swami but a settlement had taken place between
the parties and so the addition made by the Assessing Officer was
deleted.

5.

In further appeal, the Tribunal set aside the order of the CIT

(A). It was observed by the Tribunal that the Assessee had not produced
any material to show that the amount was to be paid to Mr. R.G.N.
Swami. The amount was said to be payable for some video footage
acquired from Mr. R.G.N. Swami but no agreement or any document
was produced on the basis of which it could be said that the Assessee
was obliged to make any payment to Mr. R.G.N. Swami. No material

ITA No.79/2007

Page 3 of 5

was produced before the CIT (A) also who merely proceeded on the
basis of the memorandum of understanding signed between the Assessee
and Mr. R.G.N. Swami.

6.

The Assessee is in appeal before us against the decision of

the Tribunal. We find no merit in the appeal since on going through the
record, it is quite clear that there was absolutely no material on the basis
of which it could be said that the Assessee was liable to pay any amount
to Mr. R.G.N. Swami. The amount is not a small amount (Rs.18 lakhs)
and Mr. R.G.N. Swami does not appear to have made any effort to
recover that amount from the Assessee nor is there any material to show
that any video footage was received by the Assessee on the basis of any
agreement or any understanding entered into between the Assessee and
Mr. R.G.N. Swami. All that is available on record is the ipse dixit of the
Assessee which was not accepted by the Assessing Officer.

7.

The memorandum of understanding relied upon by the CIT

(A) is on the record before us and we find that it is devoid of any
material particulars. The nature of the video footage and “other related

ITA No.79/2007

Page 4 of 5

activities” are not particularized; there is no indication as to when this
was given to the Assessee or why and how the Assessee disputed the
quality and contents of video footage etc.

8.

Under the circumstances, we do not find any error having

been committed by the Tribunal in taking the view that it did.

9.

No substantial question of law arises for consideration.

Dismissed.

Madan B. Lokur, J

July 13, 2007
ncg

V.B. Gupta, J

Certified that the corrected
copy of the judgment has
been transmitted in the main
Server.

ITA No.79/2007

Page 5 of 5

