*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

ITR No. 193 of 1988
Judgment reserved on: April 02, 2008

%

Judgment delivered on: April 11, 2008
The Commissioner of Income Tax
Delhi-XIII,
New Delhi
…. Petitioner
Through Mr. J.R. Goel, Advocate.
Versus
Dr. Yogender Sharma,
E-34, Krishan Nagar,
Delhi-110051
…. Respondent
Through Ms. Kavita Jha with Mr. Sandeep
S. Karhail, Advocates.

Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

MADAN B. LOKUR, J.
In this reference under Section 256(1) of the Income Tax
ITR No.193/1988

Page 1 of 8

Act, 1961 (for short the Act), the following question of law has been
referred for our opinion: “Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case,
the ITAT was correct in law in directing the ITO to grant
investment allowance to the assessee in terms of Section 32A
of the Income-tax Act, 1961?”
2.

The Assessee is a practicing Radiologist and he had installed

an X-ray machine on which he claimed a deduction by way of an
investment allowance under Section 32A of the Act.

This was

disallowed by the Assessing Officer and also by the Commissioner of
Income Tax (Appeals). However, the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal
(for short the Tribunal) while relying upon an order passed by the
Nagpur Bench of the Tribunal in some other case came to the
conclusion that the Assessee was entitled to the deduction under Section
32A of the Act. It is in these circumstances that the present reference is
made to this Court.
3.

It is not clear from the statement of the case whether the

Assessee had purchased the X-ray machine for installation in his clinic
or somewhere else. Learned counsel for the parties say that we may
proceed on the basis that X-ray machine was installed in the clinic of the
Assessee.

ITR No.193/1988

Page 2 of 8

4.

Section 32(A) (1) of the Act provides that an Assessee may

claim a deduction (under certain conditions) in respect of machinery or
plant specified in sub-section (2), which is owned by the Assessee and is
wholly used for the purposes of the business carried on by him.
5.

Section 32A (2) of the Act provides that the machinery or

plant referred to in sub-Section (1) would, inter-alia, be the following
namely: “any new machinery or plant installed after 31 st March,1976
in a small-scale industrial undertaking for the purposes of
business of manufacture or production of any article or
thing.”
6.

A reading of the above provision shows (as far as we are

concerned) that the machinery or plant should first of all be installed in
a small scale industrial undertaking. The second requirement is that the
machinery or plant must be used for the purposes of business of
manufacture or production of any article or thing.
7.

We have been told by learned counsel for the parties that an

issue similar to the present, had arisen in several High Courts and all the
High Courts except the Bombay High Court have taken a view that in a
clinic or a hospital or a diagnostic centre, such machinery or plant
would be entitled to the benefit of investment allowance. Unfortunately,
we are not in agreement with the High Courts other than the Bombay
ITR No.193/1988

Page 3 of 8

High Court.
8.

In Commissioner of Income Tax v. Trinity Hospital, [1997]

225 ITR 178, the Rajasthan High Court dealt with X-ray machines,
ultrasound scanner etc. installed in a hospital/nursing home.

The

Rajasthan High Court proceeded to consider whether an X-ray machine,
ultrasound scanner etc. produces or manufactures any article or thing.
This question was answered in the affirmative and with regard to the
question whether the hospital was a small scale industrial undertaking,
reliance was placed upon Explanation (2) to Section 32A(2) of the Act,
which provides as follows: “An industrial undertaking shall be deemed to be a “smallscale undertaking”, if the aggregate value of the machinery
and plant (other than tools, jigs, dies and moulds) installed,
as on the last day of previous year, for the purposes of the
business of the undertaking, does not exceed……….”
9.

The Rajasthan High Court held that for being classified as a

small scale undertaking, it is necessary that the investment made should
be less than the prescribed financial limit provided in the Act and since
the Assessee had spent less than that limit on the installation of
machines, it is a small scale industrial undertaking.
10.

In Commissioner of Income Tax v. Upasana Hospital,

[1997] 225 ITR 845 the Kerala High Court dealt with an X-ray machine

ITR No.193/1988

Page 4 of 8

and other accessories such as I.C.C.U. and E.C.G. equipment in a
hospital.

The Kerala High Court proceeded on the basis that the

Assessee in that case was carrying on a business and reliance was again
placed upon Explanation (2) to Section 32A(2) of the Act for coming to
the conclusion that the Assessee was a small scale industrial
undertaking since the cost of the plant and machinery installed was
below the prescribed financial limit.
11.

The Andhra Pradesh High Court in Commissioner of

Income Tax v. Dr. S.Surender Reddy, [2000] 243 ITR 110 held that an
X-ray machine produces a different article from what is put into the
machine, namely, an X-ray film and, therefore, the Assessee in that case
would be entitled to the benefit of investment allowance since the
machine is used for the manufacture or production of an article or thing.
12.

The Gauhati High Court in Commissioner of Income Tax v.

Dr. M.L. Agarwalla, [2002] 258 ITR 102 followed the view expressed
by the aforesaid three High Courts as well as the view expressed by the
Madras High Court in Commissioner of Income Tax v. Prasad
Productions (P.) Ltd., [2001] 247 ITR 445. The same view has been
expressed by the Kerala High Court in Mar Gregorious Memorial
Muthood Medical Centre v. Commissioner of Income Tax, [2003] 261

ITR No.193/1988

Page 5 of 8

ITR 443 and by the Gujarat High Court in Commissioner of Income
Tax v. Suresh and Family Trust, [2007] 288 ITR 101.
13.

As mentioned above, the Bombay High Court has taken a

different view in Insight Diagnostic and Oncological Research
Institute Pvt. Ltd. v. Deputy Commissioner of Income Tax, [2003] 262
ITR 41. In this case, a CT Scan machine was installed in a diagnostic
centre and it was held that a diagnostic centre is not an industrial
undertaking in the context of the Income Tax Act. In fact the expression
“industrial undertaking” must be read in the context of the Income Tax
Act and not in the context of the Industrial Disputes Act.
14.

As mentioned above, we are in agreement with the view

taken by the Bombay High Court. What is required to be seen is that the
machinery or plant must be installed first of all in a small scale
industrial undertaking and secondly it must be used for the purposes of
business of manufacture or production of any article or thing. The
primary question is, therefore, whether a clinic or a diagnostic centre is
at all a small scale industrial undertaking. Explanation (2) to Section
32A(2) is a deeming provision and an industrial undertaking shall be
deemed to be a small scale industrial undertaking, if it satisfies certain
conditions. But, first of all, it must be an industrial undertaking before

ITR No.193/1988

Page 6 of 8

the deeming provision with regard to the financial limits can be invoked.
In other words, if a unit is not an industrial undertaking then, even if it
fulfills the financial requirements, it cannot be deemed to be a small
scale industrial undertaking.

Therefore, what is to be first seen is

whether a unit is an industrial undertaking or not. If the answer is in the
negative then the deeming provision cannot be invoked.
15.

In our opinion the expression “industrial undertaking” is to

be used in the context in which it is used in the Income Tax Act and not
in the context in which it is used in other laws such as the Industrial
Disputes Act. If so understood, it cannot be said by any stretch of
imagination or by the use of common English language, that a hospital
or a clinic or a diagnostic centre or any such unit is an industrial
undertaking.

It may be that a machine or a plant within a clinic or a

hospital or a diagnostic centre may manufacture or produce an article or
thing; but that would not convert a clinic or a hospital or a diagnostic
centre into an industrial undertaking. The unit must first be an industrial
undertaking and it is then that we have to see whether it can be deemed
to be a small scale industrial undertaking and then if it is involved in the
production or manufacture of an article or thing.
16.

The primary condition in the present case is not met

ITR No.193/1988

Page 7 of 8

inasmuch as the clinic of the Assessee cannot be said to be an industrial
undertaking. If that be so, it is of no consequence whether the X-ray
machine manufactures or produces an article or a thing. The primary
condition is not met in the first place
17.

In our opinion, the question of law referred to us is required

to be answered in the negative in favour of the Revenue and against the
Assessee.
18.

We wish to express our gratitude to Ms. Kavita Jha,

Advocate who spent so much time and effort on the case as an amicus
and assisted us unflinchingly.
19.

The reference is disposed of.

MADAN B. LOKUR, J

April 11, 2008
vk

V.B. GUPTA, J

Certified that the corrected
copy of the judgment has been
transmitted in the main Server.

ITR No.193/1988

Page 8 of 8

