*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

ITA No. of 1094/2006

Judgment reserved on: March 12 , 2008
%

Judgment delivered on: March 20, 2008

Commissioner of Income Tax,
Delhi-IV, New Delhi.
Through

…Appellant
Mrs. P.L. Bansal, Adv.

Versus
M/s Eicher Limited,
(Previously Royal Enfield Motors Ltd.)
12, Commercial Complex,
Masjid Moth,
G.K.-II,
New Delhi-110048.
…Respondent
Through
Mr. Ajay Vohra with Ms. Kavita
Jha, Advs.
Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

ITA No.1094/2006

Page 1 of 10

MADAN B. LOKUR, J.
1.

The Revenue is aggrieved by an order dated 9th December, 2005

passed by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Delhi Bench “F”, New
Delhi (the Tribunal) in ITA No.2881/Del/2001 relevant for the
Assessment Year 1995-96.

2.

A full time employee of the Assessee called Vishwanathan had

acquired, during the course of his employment, specialized knowledge of
technology in the two-wheeler industry as well as of managing the
dealership of the market place and other specialized knowledge relating
to the two-wheeler business. Vishwanathan entered into an agreement
with a company called VCPL to the effect that he would promote VCPL
and collaborate with it to set up manufacturing facilities for twowheelers upon his retirement from the Assessee.

3.

On coming to know of this, the Assessee negotiated a “non-

compete agreement” with VCPL and Vishwanathan whereby the
Assessee paid a sum of Rs.4 crores to VCPL so that VCPL and
Vishwanathan would not carry out any business activity with regard to
two wheelers.
ITA No.1094/2006

The Assessee claimed this amount as a business
Page 2 of 10

expenditure but it was disallowed by the Assessing Officer.

4.

Feeling aggrieved, the Assessee preferred an appeal, which was

heard by the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) [`CIT (A)‟], who
set aside the assessment order and held that the expenditure incurred was
a business expenditure.

The Revenue then preferred a second appeal,

which was dismissed by the Tribunal and that is how the Revenue is
before us under Section 260A of the Income Tax Act, 1961.

5.

At the outset, it is important to appreciate that we are dealing with

a case where payment is made by the Assessee towards non-compete
fees or pursuant to a restrictive covenant. The question is: Is this a
business expenditure or is it a capital expenditure?

6.

According to the Revenue, the payment of an amount of Rs.4

crores as non-compete fee is not allowable as a business expenditure.
There is nothing to show how the Assessee‟s business would be
adversely affected if VCPL and Vishwanathan had a tie up. It is also
submitted that there is nothing to show how long VCPL and
Vishwanathan would not concern themselves with the two wheeler
ITA No.1094/2006

Page 3 of 10

business to the advantage of the Assessee. As such, it is submitted that
the payment made to Vishwanathan cannot be treated as a business
expenditure.

7.

These contentions were dealt with both by the CIT (A) as well as

by the Tribunal. The undisputed fact is that the payment of Rs. 4 crores
is to restrain or prevent VCPL and Vishwanathan from becoming
potential business rivals of the Assessee. The payment is to protect the
Assessee‟s business interests, its market position and profitability. No
new asset is created thereby nor is the Assessee‟s profit making
apparatus expanded or increased. The Assessee does not suffer any loss
or diminution or erosion in its capital assets. On these conclusions, the
CIT (A) and the Tribunal decided that the payment was allowable as a
business expenditure and that it was not a capital expenditure.

8.

The submissions made by learned counsel for the Revenue before

us are to the same effect and we are of the opinion that there is no
substantial reason for us to depart from the concurrent view already
taken by the CIT (A) and the Tribunal.

ITA No.1094/2006

Page 4 of 10

9.

Learned counsel for the Revenue relied upon Neel Kamal Talkies

v. Commissioner of Income Tax, [1973] 87 ITR 691. In that case, an
agreement was entered into between the assessee and M/s Prakash
Talkies Distributors. In terms of the agreement, M/s Prakash Talkies
Distributors was prohibited from exhibiting any films at Virendra
Talkies for a period of five years.

Relying upon several decisions

including Assam Bengal Cement Co. v. Commissioner of Income Tax,
[1955] 27 ITR 34, the Allahabad High Court held that the amount paid
by the assessee to M/s Prakash Talkies Distributors was in the nature of
capital expenditure since it completely eliminated competition.

10.

Learned counsel for the Assessee pointed out, and we think

rightly, that the length of time for which the competition was eliminated
was important in the facts of that case, but that is not always so. What is
more necessary to appreciate is the purpose of the payment and its
intended object and effect. In Commissioner of Income Tax v. Coal
Shipments P. Ltd., [1971] 82 ITR 902, the Supreme Court noted the
contention of the Revenue to the effect that payments made to eliminate
competition were capital expenditure. Rejecting this contention, it was
held on page 909 of the Report as follows:
ITA No.1094/2006

Page 5 of 10

“The case which has been set up on behalf of the revenue is
that, as the object of making the payments in question was to
eliminate competition of a rival exporter, the benefit which
enured to the respondent was of an enduring nature and, as
such, the payment should be treated as capital expenditure.
We find ourselves unable to accede to this contention because
we find that the arrangement between the respondent and
M/s. H.V. Lowe & Co. Ltd. was not for any fixed term but
could be terminated at any time at the volition of any of the
parties. Although an enduring benefit need not be of an everlasting character, it should not, at the same time, be so
transitory and ephemeral that it can be terminated at any time
at the volition of any of the parties. Any other view would
have the effect of rendering the word “enduring” to be
meaningless. No cogent ground or valid reason has been
given to us in support of the contention that, even though the
benefit from the arrangement to the respondent may not be of
a permanent or enduring nature, the payments made in
pursuance of that arrangement would still be capital
expenditure.”

11.

Dealing with the contention that eliminating competition over

some length of time is important, the Supreme Court held as follows:
“Although we agree that payment made to ward off
competition in business to a rival dealer would constitute
capital expenditure if the object of making that payment is to
derive an advantage by eliminating the competition over
some length of time, the same result would not follow if there
is no certainty of the duration of the advantage and the same
can be put to an end at any time. How long the period of
contemplated advantage should be in order to constitute
enduring benefit would depend upon the circumstances and
the facts of each individual case.”

ITA No.1094/2006

Page 6 of 10

12.

It is quite clear from the above that to decide whether an

expenditure of this nature is a capital expenditure or not would depend
on the facts of the case. However, it is necessary to know whether the
advantage derived by the payer is of an enduring nature, and for this one
of the considerations is the length of time for which the non-compete
agreement would operate – although that is not decisive. While the
length of time for which competition is eliminated may not strictly be
decisive in all cases, yet, at the same time, it should not be so brief as to
virtually be transitory.

13.

In Commissioner of Income Tax v. Late G.D. Naidu, [1987] 165

ITR 63, compensation paid to the assessee was referable to a restrictive
covenant in an agreement between the assessee and another party. The
question that arose was whether the amount was a capital expenditure or
not. The Supreme Court held that in so far as the assessee is concerned,
he did not acquire any separate business nor was any competition
eliminated by such an acquisition. Since there was no acquisition of any
business by payment of the amount referable to the restrictive covenant
and no benefit of an enduring nature was acquired, the Tribunal was
correct in holding that the payment could only be treated as revenue
ITA No.1094/2006

Page 7 of 10

outlay and not capital in nature.

14.

In Alembic Chemical Works Co. Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income

Tax, [1989] 177 ITR 377, the Supreme Court observed as follows:
“There is also no single definitive criterion which, by itself, is
determinative as to whether a particular outlay is capital or
revenue. What is relevant is the purpose of the outlay and its
intended object and effect, considered in a common sense
way having regard to the business realities. In a given case,
the test of „enduring benefit‟ might break down.”

15.

In Commissioner of Income Tax v. Madras Auto Service (P)

Ltd., [1998] 233 ITR 468, the Supreme Court referred to Assam Bengal
Cement Co. Ltd. and summarized the tests for determining whether an
outlay is revenue or capital by giving the following three principles:
“1. Outlay is deemed to be capital when it is made for the
initiation of a business, for extension of a business, or for a
substantial replacement of equipment.
2.
Expenditure may be treated as properly attributable to
capital when it is made not only once and for all, but with a view
to bringing into existence an asset or an advantage for the
enduring benefit of a trade. … If what is got rid of by a lump sum
payment is an annual business expense chargeable against
revenue, the lump sum payment should equally be regarded as a
business expense, but if the lump sum payment brings in a capital
asset, then that puts the business on another footing altogether.
3.
Whether for the purpose of the expenditure, any capital was
withdrawn, or, in other words, whether the object of incurring the
ITA No.1094/2006

Page 8 of 10

expenditure was to employ what was taken in as capital of the
business. Again, it is to be seen whether the expenditure incurred
was part of the fixed capital of the business or part of its
circulating capital.” (Italics in original)

16.

In Madras Auto Service, the assessee had spent some amount to

construct a new building after demolishing the old building in which the
assessee was a lessee. The assessee had the benefit of the existing lease
in respect of the new building at an agreed rent for a period of 39 years.
The rent as stipulated in the lease was extremely low but it was found
that the concessional rent was on account of the fact that the new
building was constructed by the lessee at its own cost. The Supreme
Court held that the advantage that the assessee derived by spending the
money was that it got the lease of a new building at a low rent. From a
business point of view, therefore, the assessee got the benefit of reduced
rent and the expenditure must, consequently, be treated as a revenue
expenditure.

17.

Applying all these principles to the present case, a few facts stand

out quite clearly. The Assessee did not acquire any capital asset by
making the payment of non-compete fee. It merely eliminated

ITA No.1094/2006

Page 9 of 10

competition in the two wheeler business, for a while. From the record, it
is not clear how long the restrictive covenant was to last, but it was
neither permanent nor ephemeral. In that sense, the advantage was not of
an enduring nature. There is also nothing to show that the amount of Rs.
4 crores was drawn out of the capital of the Assessee. On a cumulative
appreciation of these facts, it must be held that the CIT (A) and the
Tribunal did not err in concluding that the payment of non-compete fee
by the Assessee was a business expenditure and not a capital
expenditure.

18.

No substantial question of law arises for consideration. The appeal

is dismissed.

MADAN B. LOKUR, J

March 20, 2008
ncg

V.B. GUPTA, J

Certified that the corrected
copy of the judgment has been
transmitted in the main Server.

ITA No.1094/2006

Page 10 of 10

