*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

ITA No. 611 of 2007
Judgment reserved on: January 10, 2008

%

Judgment delivered on: March 20, 2008

Rohitasava Chand
B-19, Defence Colony
New Delhi-110024.
…Appellant
Through Mr. B. Gupta with Mr. R.K. Chaufla,
Advocates
Versus
Commissioner of Income Tax
New Delhi .
…Respondent
Through Ms. Prem Lata Bansal, Advocate
Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

MADAN B. LOKUR, J.
The Assessee is aggrieved by an order dated 19th January,
2007 passed by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Delhi Bench „B‟ in
ITA No.4713 (Del)/2003 relevant for the assessment year 2000-2001.
ITA No.611/2007

Page 1 of 16

2.

After hearing learned counsel for the parties, we admit this

appeal and frame the following substantial question of law for
consideration:
“Whether the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal was correct in
law in holding that the non-compete fee received by the
Assessee in terms of the agreement dated 4th December, 1997
was a capital receipt in the hands of the Assessee?”
Filing of paper books is dispensed with.

3.

The Assessee was a shareholder and a Director in a company

called IIS Infotech Ltd.

He entered into two agreements dated 4 th

December, 1997 with F.I. Group Plc, U.K. (hereinafter referred to as the
„foreign company‟). By one agreement, the Assessee agreed to sell all
his shares in IIS Infotech Ltd. and by the other agreement, the Assessee
agreed that till 31st May, 1999 he would not take up any business
activity

relating

to

software

development

in

all

the

seven

companies/organizations in which he was a director, major shareholder
or a member since his expertise in the matter may adversely affect the
business of the foreign company.

For convenience, the second

agreement is referred to as the “non-compete agreement”.

ITA No.611/2007

Page 2 of 16

4.

The relevant terms of the non-compete agreement are as

follows:
“2.1 Save in relation to a potential breach of Article (b) as
otherwise disclosed to the Covenantee and accepted by the
Covenantee in writing from time to time provided however
such acceptance shall not be unreasonably withheld by the
Covenantee, the Covenantor shall not for the period up to
May 31, 1999 directly or indirectly, either alone or jointly
with or on behalf of any person, firm, company or entity and
whether on his own account or as principal, partner,
shareholder (unless such shareholding is less than 10% of the
issued share capital of the company concerned and is held by
way of bona fide investment only), director, employee,
consultant or in any other capacity whatsoever:
(a)
solicit or interfere with or endeavor in the Relevant
Territory to entice away from the Covenantee Group any
person, firm, company or entity who was a client or customer
of the Covenantee Group in relation to the Relevant Business
in the months (12) prior to the Completion Date or becomes a
client or customer of the Covenantee Group in relation to the
Relevant Business prior to May 31, 1999;
(b)
be concerned with the supply of services or products
in the Relevant Territory to any person, firm, company or
entity which is or was a client or customer of the Covenantee
Group in relation to the Relevant Business in the months (12)
prior to the Completion Date or becomes a client or customer
of the Covenantee Group in relation to the Relevant Business
prior to May 31, 1999 where such services or products are
identical or similar to or in competition with those services or
products supplied by the Covenantee Group;
(c)
solicit or interfere with or endeavor in the Relevant
Territory to entice away from the Covenantee Group any
person, firm, company or entity who is was a supplier of
services or goods to the Covenantee Group in relation to the
Relevant Business in the months (12) prior to the Completion
ITA No.611/2007

Page 3 of 16

Date or becomes a supplier of services or goods to the
Covenantee Group in relation to the Relevant Business prior
to May 31, 1999;
(d)
offer to employ or engage or solicit the employment
or engagement of any person who, at the time of, or
immediately prior to the date of, making an order to employ
or engage or solicitation, was an employee of the Covenantee
Group, provided that nothing contained herein shall prevent
the Covenantor from making an offer to employ or engage
his personal staff such as secretary, personal assistant or
driver;
(e)
save as consistent with the provisions of any
agreement entered into with the Company, represent himself
as being in any way connected with or interested in the
business of the Covenantee Group;”

5.

In terms of the non-compete agreement, the Assessee was

required to be paid an amount of Rs.1,07,36,570/- as the first installment
and a sum of Rs.1,26,25,940/- as the second installment towards noncompete fees.

The Assessee received the first installment of

Rs.1,07,36,570/- in the period relevant to the assessment year 1998-99.
According to the Assessing Officer, this was a capital receipt as stated
by the Assessee in his return.

6.

When the Assessee received the second installment of

Rs.1,26,25,940/- in the previous year relevant to the assessment year

ITA No.611/2007

Page 4 of 16

2000-2001 he relinquished the office of Director of IIS Infotech Ltd.
and also transferred all his shares in IIS Infotech Ltd. to the foreign
company.

7.

In respect of the assessment year 2000-2001, the Assessee

again claimed the receipt as a capital receipt and this was accepted by
the Assessing Officer. Later on, however, the Assessing Officer initiated
re-assessment proceedings by issuing a notice to the Assessee under
Section 148 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (for short the Act).

8.

In the reassessment order, the Assessing Officer did not

accept the contention of the Assessee that the second installment
received by him was a capital receipt.

The following facts (as

mentioned in the order of the Tribunal) were taken into consideration by
the Assessing Officer in coming to this conclusion:
(i)

The Assessee was not carrying on the business of software
and, thus, there was no question of putting any embargo on
him from carrying on software business by paying him noncompete fees;

(ii)

There was no loss to the Assessee for which he was
required to be compensated in any manner;

(iii)

The Assessee was not doing any business in the line of
computer software, it was only his employer that was doing

ITA No.611/2007

Page 5 of 16

this business, and
(iv)

9.

The question whether a particular receipt is capital or
revenue in nature is largely a question of fact.

Feeling aggrieved, the Assessee preferred an appeal before

the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) [CIT (A)]. With regard to
reopening of the assessment, the CIT (A) came to the conclusion that the
assessment order had been validly reopened and that the principles of
res judicata would not apply to the facts of the case. On merits, the CIT
(A) set aside the assessment order and came to the conclusion that since
the non-compete agreement was valid only for 1½ years and that too in
some limited jurisdictions, it was not really in the nature of a noncompete agreement. He was of the view that the main reason behind
signing the non-compete agreement was not to put restrictions on the
Assessee but to compensate him and he, therefore, held that the amount
received by the Assessee towards the second installment was in fact a
capital receipt.

10.

In the appeal filed by the Revenue, the Tribunal agreed with

the view expressed by CIT (A) on the question of reopening the
assessment. Feeling aggrieved, the Assessee has preferred this appeal
ITA No.611/2007

Page 6 of 16

before us under Section 260-A of the Act. On 10th July, 2007, we heard
learned counsel for the Appellant but were not inclined to issue notice
on the correctness of the assessment being reopened.

11.

On the merits of the case, the Tribunal was of the view that

the second installment received by the Assessee represented a revenue
receipt in his hands. We are required to consider only the correctness of
this conclusion arrived at by the Tribunal.

12.

At the outset, it needs to be appreciated that the Assessee was

a Director and an employee in IIS Infotech Ltd. It is true that he was
also a shareholder but he transferred all his shares in favour of the
foreign company by an agreement other than the non-compete
agreement. In terms of the non-compete agreement, the prohibition in
respect of the Assessee was with regard to software development and
that pertained to his activity in IIS Infotech Ltd. and the six other
companies in which he was a director or a shareholder or a member.

13.

According to the Tribunal, there was no increase in the profit

making apparatus of the Assessee. Indeed, the Assessee did not own

ITA No.611/2007

Page 7 of 16

any profit making apparatus. He was not carrying on any business on
his own but was merely an employee of IIS Infotech Ltd. In regard to
this company, the Assessee had resigned as its Director and transferred
his shares to the foreign company and, therefore, had nothing further to
do with IIS Infotech Ltd. In so far as the other six organizations are
concerned, it appears that the Assessee had agreed not to carry on his
activity of software development in these companies also in which he
was a director, shareholder or member. In essence, therefore, the noncompete agreement was consideration paid to the Assessee for loss of
his office as a Director and shareholder of IIS Infotech Ltd. leaving him
free to carry out his other employment but without being involved in
software development. Payment for loss of office was held by the
Tribunal to be a revenue receipt and not a capital receipt.

14.

In our opinion, the Tribunal has approached the issue from

an incorrect legal standpoint and a narrow interpretation of the noncompete agreement. As such, a substantial question of law arises for
consideration.

15.

Among the first few cases on the subject of a restrictive

ITA No.611/2007

Page 8 of 16

covenant or a non-compete agreement is the decision of the Supreme
Court in Commissioner of Income Tax v. Best & Co. (Pvt). Ltd., [1966]
60 ITR 11. In that case, the assessee was paid, as a result of a restrictive
covenant, some compensation to refrain from selling or accepting any
business which would compete with the business of the covenantor.
The question was whether the compensation received for the noncompete agreement is a revenue receipt. The Supreme Court observed
as follows:
“The next question is whether that part of the compensation
attributable to the restrictive covenant is a capital receipt or a
revenue receipt.
The House of Lords in Beak (H.M. Inspector of Taxes) v.
Robson ([1942] 25 T.C. 33.), had to consider, whether
compensation paid for a restrictive covenant was a capital
receipt or a revenue receipt. Under a service agreement the
respondent therein covenanted in consideration of the
payment to him of sterling pounds 7,000 on the execution of
the agreement, that if the agreement were determined by
notice given by him or by his breach of its provisions, he
would not compete directly or indirectly with the company
within a radius of fifty miles of its place of business until the
five years had expired. The House of Lords held that the said
amount was a payment for giving up a right wholly
unconnected with his office and operative only after he
ceased to hold that office and, therefore, it was not taxable
under Schedule E of the Income-tax Acts.
This Court in Gillanders Arbuthnot and Co. Ltd. v.
Commissioner of Income-tax, Calcutta [1964] 53 ITR 283
accepted the said principle and held that the compensation
paid for agreeing to refrain from carrying on competitive
ITA No.611/2007

Page 9 of 16

business in the commodities in respect of the agency
terminated or for loss of goodwill was prima facie of the
nature of a capital receipt.
In the present case, the covenant was an independent
obligation undertaken by the assessee not to compete with
the new agents in the same field for a specified period. It
came into operation only after the agency was terminated. It
was wholly unconnected with the assessee‟s agency
termination. We, therefore, hold that that part of the
compensation attributable to the restrictive covenant was a
capital receipt and hence not assessable to tax.”

16.

In Commissioner of Income Tax v. Saraswathi Publicities,

[1981] 132 ITR 207 the question was the nature of compensation
received under an agreement to refrain from carrying on competitive
business. One of the findings in Saraswathi was that no business was
taken over or acquired of the assessee. On this basis, the Madras High
Court considered the law applicable to restrictive covenants and receipts
in connection therewith. After discussing the law laid down in Best &
Co. and Gillanders Arbuthnot it was held by the Madras High Court
that the compensation paid was a capital receipt and not liable to income
tax. This is how the Madras High Court dealt with the two decisions:
After considering the agreement in the case in CIT v. Best
and Co. (P.) Ltd., the Supreme Court held that the
compensation agreed to be paid was not only in lieu of the
giving up of the agency but also for the assessee accepting a
ITA No.611/2007

Page 10 of 16

restrictive covenant for a specified period. As far as the loss
of agency was concerned, it was only a normal trading loss
and the income received on that account was only a revenue
receipt. But, with reference to the loss on account of the
restrictive covenant, after referring to the decision in
Gillanders Arbuthnot and Co. Ltd. v. CIT the Supreme
Court reiterated that the restrictive covenant was an
independent obligation undertaken by the assessee not to
compete with the new agent in the same field and that part of
the compensation attributable to the restrictive covenant was
a capital receipt, not assessable to tax. As to how the
compensation was to be apportioned was left to be
determined by the assessing authorities.”

17.

The Madras High Court noted that the cases decided by the

Supreme Court fell into two categories: the first category consisting of
those cases where there is a mere loss of a trading agency of a company
which has a number of such agencies while the second category refers to
those cases where the receipt is not for the loss of an agency but for
certain restrictive covenants preventing the assessee from carrying on
business to that extent.

On the facts of the case, it was held that

Saraswathi Publicities fell in the second category and the amounts
received by it amounted to a capital receipt.

18.

In Commissioner of Income Tax v. Late G.D. Naidu, [1987]

165 ITR 63 payment was received pursuant to a restrictive covenant and

ITA No.611/2007

Page 11 of 16

the question was whether it was a revenue receipt. The Madras High
court followed its earlier view and held that compensation received in
respect of a restrictive covenant is not taxable as it is a capital receipt.

19.

In Commissioner of Income Tax v. Saroj Kumar Poddar,

[2005] 279 ITR 573, the assessee had acquired considerable knowledge
and expertise in the field of manufacture of shaving blades and other
products with special reference to the manufacturing process, sources of
raw materials and the marketing of the products of Gillette. On 18th
January, 1996, Gillette entered into a non-compete agreement with the
assessee wherein the facts relating to the expertise of the assessee were
mentioned and thereafter the assessee undertook, on receipt of
consideration of Rs.18 million, that he would not engage himself in any
business relating to the manufacturing, marketing or distribution of
razors, razor blade, shaving systems or shaving preparations.

20.

On these facts, the question before the Calcutta High Court

was whether the payment under the non-compete agreement is a
colourable device to earn some income since the assessee did not sell
any assets. After considering the case law, the Calcutta High Court

ITA No.611/2007

Page 12 of 16

came to the conclusion that the non-compete agreement entered into
between the assessee and Gillette resulted in a payment to the assessee
which was in the nature of the capital receipt.

21.

In Commissioner of Income Tax v. A.S. Wardekar, [2006]

283 ITR 432, the assessee received a sum of Rs.1.75 crores for entering
into a restrictive covenant of not entering into a competing business
with the United Breweries Group for a period of five years. Referring to
and relying upon Saroj Kumar Poddar, the question was answered in
favour of the assessee by holding that the amount received by the
assessee for entering into a restrictive covenant of not entering into a
competitive business was a receipt by the assessee of a capital nature
and thus not liable to tax.

22.

On the other hand, in Tam Tam Pedda Guruva Reddy v.

Joint Commissioner of Income Tax, [2007] 291 ITR 44, the question
before the Karnataka High Court related to an agreement whereby the
assessee agreed not to compete with Tam Tam Pedda Guruva Reddy
Constructions (P) Ltd. within the local limits of Turuvekere, Tumkur
and Kunigal for a period of five years.

ITA No.611/2007

In consideration of this

Page 13 of 16

covenant, the assessee was paid a sum of Rs.8 lakhs by way of
compensation. The Karnataka High Court referred to Saraswathi
Publicities and A.S. Wardekar but concluded, on the facts of the case,
that the amount received was not a capital receipt but a revenue receipt.

23.

The various decisions that we have referred to above show

that the law is quite well settled that where an amount is received by
way of compensation under a restrictive covenant or under a noncompete agreement, it would amount to a capital receipt in the hands of
the recipient but a lot would depend on the agreement entered into
between the parties. This being the position, it is necessary to take note
of the relevant clauses of the agreement that we are concerned with.

24.

There is no doubt that the non-compete agreement

incorporates a restrictive covenant on the right of the Assessee to carry
on his activity of development of software. It may not alter the structure
of his activity, in the sense that he could carry on the same activity in an
organization in which he had a small stake, but it certainly impairs the
carrying on of his activity. To that extent it is a loss of a source of
income for him and it is of an enduring nature, as contrasted with a

ITA No.611/2007

Page 14 of 16

transitory or ephemeral loss. During the currency of the non-compete
agreement, the Assessee was restrained from soliciting, interfering,
engaging in or endeavouring to carry on any activity, including supply
or services or goods concerning software development. The noncompete agreement was independent of the first agreement whereby the
Assessee agreed to transfer his shares to the foreign company. Under the
circumstances, looking to the case law on the subject and the terms of
the non-compete agreement, particularly the restrictive covenant, it is
difficult to agree with the view taken by the Tribunal. The receipt in the
hands of the Assessee was certainly a capital receipt in as much as it
dented his profit making capabilities.

25.

In so far as the question of consistency is concerned, this was

agitated before us by learned counsel for the Assessee on the basis that
in the assessment year 1998-99 the receipt of non-compete fee was held
to be a capital receipt by the Assessing Officer and, therefore, in the
assessment year 2000-2001, the Assessing Officer ought to have been
consistent and ought to have held the receipt to be a capital receipt. We
find that for the assessment year 2000-2001, a notice under Section 148
of the Act was issued to the Assessee and the re-assessment order was

ITA No.611/2007

Page 15 of 16

passed on 21st February, 2003.

The reopening of the assessment

proceedings has been upheld both by CIT (A) as well as by the Tribunal.
Even we have not issued any notice on the grievance made by the
Assessee in this regard. The reopening having been held to be valid, the
question of consistency would not arise because if this argument were to
be accepted, then it would mean that the reopening was erroneous. We
cannot do something indirectly if it cannot be done directly. We are,
therefore, not in agreement with learned counsel for the Assessee that
the rule of consistency would be applicable to the facts of this case.

26.

Consequently, the substantial question of law is answered in

the negative, in favour of the Assessee and against the Revenue.

The

appeal is disposed of.

MADAN B. LOKUR, J

March 20, 2008
ncg

V.B. GUPTA, J

Certified that the corrected
copy of the judgment has been
transmitted in the main Server.

ITA No.611/2007

Page 16 of 16

