*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

WP (C) No. 1604 of 2008

%

Decided on: February 27, 2008

Saraya Industries Ltd.
309,D-2, DDA Distt. Centre,
Saket, New Delhi-17
Through

...Appellant
Mr. O.S. Bajpai, Advocate.

Versus
1.

Union of India,
Ministry of Finance,
Department of Revenue,
Through its Secretary

2.

Assistant Commissioner of Income Tax,
Centre Circle-4,
E-2, ARA Center, Jhandewalan Extn.,
New Delhi.

3.

Deputy Commissioner of Income Tax,
Centre Circle-19,
E-2, ARA Center, Jhandewalan Extn.,
New Delhi.
...Respondents
Through Mrs. P.L. Bansal, Advocate.

Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA

1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

ITA No. 1604/2008

Page 1 of 6

MADAN B. LOKUR, J. (ORAL)
The grievance of the Petitioner is with regard to the
constitutional validity of Section 153C read with Section 153A of the
Income Tax Act, 1961 (the Act).
2.

According to the Petitioner, both these provisions deserve to be

declared unconstitutional and in the alternative they have to be read
down suitably. It was not explained to us how and in what manner
should the provisions be read down, and the only submissions made
were that the provisions were constitutionally invalid.
3.

Sections 153A and 153C of the Act read as follows:“Assessment in case of search or requisition.
153A. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 139, section
147, section 148, section 149, section 151 and section 153, in the
case of a person where a search is initiated under section 132 or
books of account, other documents or any assets are requisitioned
under section 132A after the 31st day of May, 2003, the Assessing
Officer shall
(a)
issue notice to such person requiring him to furnish
within such period, as may be specified in the notice, the
return of income in respect of each assessment year
falling within six assessment years referred to in clause
(b), in the prescribed form and verified in the prescribed
manner and setting forth such other particulars as may
be prescribed and the provisions of this Act shall, so far
as may be, apply accordingly as if such return were a
return required to be furnished under section 139;
(b)
assess or reassess the total income of six assessment years
immediately preceding the assessment year relevant to
the previous year in which such search is conducted or
requisition is made :
Provided that the Assessing Officer shall assess or reassess the
total income in respect of each assessment year falling within
such six assessment years:
Provided further that assessment or reassessment, if any, relating

ITA No. 1604/2008

Page 2 of 6

to any assessment year falling within the period of six assessment
years referred to in this section pending on the date of initiation
of the search under section 132 or making of requisition under
section 132A, as the case may be, shall abate.
Explanation. For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that,
(i)

(ii)

save as otherwise provided in this section, section 153B
and section 153C, all other provisions of this Act shall
apply to the assessment made under this section;
in an assessment or reassessment made in respect of an
assessment year under this section, the tax shall be
chargeable at the rate or rates as applicable to such
assessment year.

153B

xxx xxx

xxx

xxx xxx

xxx

Assessment of income of any other person.
153C. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 139,
section 147, section 148, section 149, section 151 and section 153,
where the Assessing Officer is satisfied that any money, bullion,
jewellery or other valuable article or thing or books of account or
documents seized or requisitioned belongs or belong to a person
other than the person referred to in section 153A, then the books
of account or documents or assets seized or requisitioned shall be
handed over to the Assessing Officer having jurisdiction over
such other person and that Assessing Officer shall proceed
against each such other person and issue such other person notice
and assess or reassess income of such other person in accordance
with the provisions of section 153A :
Provided that in case of such other person, the reference to the
date of initiation of the search under section 132 or making of
requisition under section 132A in the second proviso to section
153A shall be construed as reference to the date of receiving the
books of account or documents or assets seized or requisitioned
by the Assessing Officer having jurisdiction over such other
person.
(2) Where books of account or documents or assets seized or
requisitioned as referred to in sub-section (1) has or have been
received by the Assessing Officer having jurisdiction over such
other person after the due date for furnishing the return of
income for the assessment year relevant to the previous year in
which search is conducted under section 132 or requisition is
ITA No. 1604/2008

Page 3 of 6

made under section 132A and in respect of such assessment year
(a)
no return of income has been furnished by such other
person and no notice under sub-section (1) of section 142
has been issued to him, or
(b)
a return of income has been furnished by such other
person but no notice under sub-section (2) of section 143
has been served and limitation of serving the notice
under sub-section (2) of section 143 has expired, or
(c)
assessment or reassessment, if any, has been made,
before the date of receiving the books of account or documents or
assets seized or requisitioned by the Assessing Officer having
jurisdiction over such other person, such Assessing Officer shall
issue the notice and assess or reassess total income of such other
person of such assessment year in the manner provided in section
153A.”

4.

According to learned counsel for the Petitioner, the provisions

treat unequal persons as equals. The two different categories of
persons are those in respect of whom a search is conducted and books
of accounts, documents or assets are recovered (Section 153A of the
Act) and other persons in respect of whom books of accounts,
documents or assets are recovered (other than those persons referred
to in Section 153A of the Act). According to learned counsel, both
distinguishable categories of persons are treated the same for the
purposes of assessing or reassessing their income.
5.

The opening portion of Section 153A of the Act makes it clear

that it applies to a person in respect of whom a search is initiated
under Section 132 of the Act, or whose books of accounts, other
documents or any assets are requisitioned under Section 132A after 31 st
May, 2003. Section 153C of the Act is with reference to a person in
respect of whom any money, bullion, jewellery or other valuable
ITA No. 1604/2008

Page 4 of 6

articles or things or books of account or documents seized or
requisitioned belongs. The persons mentioned in Section 153A of the
Act are specifically excluded from Section 153C of the Act.

The

procedure that is sought to be followed in respect of these two
categories of persons has been provided for in Sections 153A and 153C
of the Act. That the procedure in respect of both of them overlaps or is
similar is hardly of any consequence, since both have to be treated in
accordance with the principles of natural justice. We are of the opinion
that the argument advanced is not adequate for declaring the
provisions unconstitutional.

There is nothing arbitrary in the

procedure adopted. It must also be appreciated that essentially both
categories of persons are the same in as much as their books of
account, assets, documents etc. are seized or requisitioned, though
from different locations. Moreover, the seizure or requisition must be
of such a character as to persuade the Assessing Officer to even reopen
closed assessments. In this sense, there is no hostile discrimination
between the two categories of persons.
6.

The second submission made by learned counsel is that the

principles of natural justice appear to be excluded from the provisions
of Section 153C of the Act. We do not agree with learned counsel. It is
clearly mentioned in the substantive portion of Section 153C(1) of the
Act that the Assessing Officer shall proceed against a person covered
by the section by issuing a notice to him for the purpose of assessing or
reassessing his income. The very fact that notice is required to be

ITA No. 1604/2008

Page 5 of 6

issued clearly postulates that the principles of natural justice are
incorporated in the provision.
7.

We do not find any substance in the writ petition. It is

accordingly dismissed.

MADAN B. LOKUR, J

FEBRUARY 27, 2008
vk

ITA No. 1604/2008

V.B. GUPTA, J

Page 6 of 6

