*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

WP (C) No. 5462 of 2007 and other connected cases.
Judgment reserved on: March 20, 2008

%

Judgment delivered on: March 28, 2008

1.

Vatika Farms Private Limited
Through its Director Sh. Anil Bhalla
98, 2nd Floor, Sant Nagar
New Delhi.

2.

Sh. Anil Bhalla
Director of Vatika Farms Private Limited
4, Hyde Park, Bandh Road
Prakrati Marg, Village-Sultanpur
Delhi.

…Petitioners

Through Mr. Soli J. Sorabjee and Mr. C.S.
Agarwal, Sr. Advs. with Mr. Ajay
Vohra, Ms. Kavita Jha, Mr. Preetesh
Kapoor, Mr. Rahul Yadav,
Mr. Sandeep Karhail, Mr. O.S. Bajpai,
Mr. Kaanan Kapur, Mr.Rajiv Garg,
Mr. Ashish Garg, Dr. Rakesh Gupta,
Mr. Prakash Kumar and Mr. S.R.
Wadhwa, Advocates
Versus
1.

Union of India
Through its Secretary
Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue
Government of India
North Block, New Delhi.

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 1 of 44

2.

Income Tax Settlement Commission
Principal Bench
4th Floor, Lok Nayak Bhawan
Khan Market, New Delhi.

…Respondents

Through Mr. P.P. Malhotra, ASG with
Ms. Sonia Mathur and Mr. R.D. Jolly,
Advocates
Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

MADAN B. LOKUR, J.
By this order, we propose to deal with the existing
grievances of the Petitioners, at a prima facie and interim stage, in a
batch of over a hundred writ petitions. Learned counsel for all the
parties were heard on these grievances from 17th to 20th March, 2008
when orders were reserved.

2.

In this particular writ petition (along with a few connected

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 2 of 44

writ petitions), we had earlier passed a detailed interim order on 18 th
December, 2007 and the present order is really a continuation thereof.

3.

The Petitioners have challenged the provisions of Sections

245D(2A), 245D(2D), 245D(4A) and 245HA(1) of the Income Tax Act,
1961 (the Act) as being arbitrary and unconstitutional. There is also a
challenge to some provisions of the Finance Bill, 2008 but we are
presently not concerned with that.

4.

The challenge has arisen out of amendments to the Act by the

Finance Act, 2007.

The effect of the amendments is that where a

settlement application has been filed under Section 245-C of the Act in
the Settlement Commission, before 1st June, 2007 (as in all the writ
petitions before us) the Settlement Commission “shall pass an order
under sub-section (4)” on or before 31st March, 2008 [Section 245-D
(4A)]. In the event the Settlement Commission does not pass such an
order, effectively deciding the settlement application on or before 31 st
March, 2008, the settlement application “shall abate” by operation of
law [Section 245-H(1)].

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 3 of 44

5.

On their part, the Petitioners were expected to pay the

additional tax on the income disclosed in the settlement application filed
before the Settlement Commission and also pay interest thereon on or
before 31st July, 2007 failing which the settlement application filed
under Section 245-C of the Act “shall abate” by operation of law
[Section 245-H(1)].

6.

Feeling aggrieved by this, some Petitioners approached this

Court before 31st July, 2007 and contended that even though they had
paid the additional tax, it was not possible to compute or pay the interest
thereon before 31st July, 2007. It was prayed that, therefore, an interim
order be passed so that their settlement application does not abate by
operation of law.

7.

Upon a consideration of the issues raised, this Court passed

an ad interim order before 31st July, 2007 to the effect that the settlement
application of those Petitioners would not abate on that date only
because of their failure to pay interest on the additional tax paid. This
Court also directed the Settlement Commission to dispose of the
settlement application of those Petitioners on or before 31st March, 2008

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 4 of 44

so that their settlement application does not abate by operation of law.

8.

The Respondents later on filed an application for vacation of

the ad interim order passed by this Court but that was declined by the
order dated 18th December, 2007 and the interim order granted was
simultaneously confirmed.

9.

In the interim order dated 18th December, 2007 it was noted

that the Respondents had not expressed their inability to decide the
settlement applications on or before 31 st March, 2008. This Court,
therefore, assumed that it was theoretically possible for the Respondents
to comply with the mandate of the law, inter alia, by setting up a large
number of benches of the Settlement Commission to deal with the
pending settlement applications. It was also noted that all the writ
petitions would become infructuous if the settlement applications of the
Petitioners are decided on or before 31st March, 2008 but that the factual
position would be known only quite close to 31st March, 2008. It was
noted, in this context, that in fact the submission of the learned
Additional Solicitor General was that the present writ petitions may be
pre-mature since the crucial date of 31 st March, 2008 is still quite far

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 5 of 44

away.

10.

Based on the above, while confirming the ad interim order

and dismissing the application of the Respondents for vacation thereof,
this writ petition (and other connected writ petitions) was listed for
directions on 3rd March, 2008 by which time it was expected that the
Respondents would take some decision one way or the other, either on
the disposal of the settlement applications or some other remedial
measure as for example setting up additional benches of the Settlement
Commission or extending the cut-off date from 31st March, 2008 to
some other date, or some such measure as may be deemed appropriate.

11.

Since January, 2008 we have been receiving a very large

number of writ petitions filed by several other persons raising the very
same challenge as the Petitioners in this writ petition and other
connected writ petitions. In fact, over a hundred writ petitions have
been filed and following the earlier orders passed by this Court,
directions were given to the Settlement Commission to comply with the
mandate of the law and dispose of the settlement applications of the
Petitioners before 31st March, 2008 so that they do not abate.

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 6 of 44

12.

The main difference between the earlier set of writ petitions

and the later writ petitions is that the date of 31st July, 2007 had passed
and, therefore, the Petitioners in the later writ petitions are all those
persons who had in fact not only paid the additional tax but had also
paid interest thereon and their limited concern is that their settlement
application should be disposed of on or before 31 st March, 2008 so that
it does not abate and they are not required to face the consequences of
abatement.

13.

We are not inclined to go into the interlocutory application

filed in each individual petition because the substantive grievance of all
the Petitioners is the same, and even if any one of them has not filed an
appropriate interlocutory application (as it appears), in our opinion, it
would be unjust if those Petitioners are discriminated against for a
clerical fault. The additional consideration that we have in mind is that
we had directed the Settlement Commission in almost all these cases to
dispose of the settlement application of the Petitioners on or before 31st
March, 2008 and there was no reason for any one of them or for us to
assume that the Settlement Commission would not comply with the

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 7 of 44

orders passed by this Court. Consequently, we are treating all Petitioners
equally, whether they have moved a suitable application for interim
relief or not, as long as they have made a substantive prayer for
quashing the „offending‟ provisions of the Finance Act, 2007.

14.

We may also mention that in CWP No. 245/2008 (Vardhman

Properties Ltd. v. Union of India and another), the Secretary to the
Settlement Commission filed an affidavit dated 29 th January, 2008 in
which it is candidly admitted that it is not possible for the Settlement
Commission to dispose of all the pending cases before 31 st March, 2008.
It is also mentioned in the affidavit that the disposal of cases for the last
five years from 2002-2003 to 2006-2007 was 100, 88, 75, 85 and 101
respectively. Therefore, a direction from this Court to the Settlement
Commission to decide the settlement application of all the Petitioners on
or before 31st March, 2008 would really be a futile direction, incapable
of compliance.

15.

It is for all these reasons that we took up this batch of more

than 100 cases together with the clear and express understanding given
to all learned counsel including learned counsel for the Respondents that

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 8 of 44

what we would be deciding is whether the settlement application filed
by the Petitioners should abate on 31st March, 2008 by operation of law
or not.

16.

As a backgrounder, we may recall that the Settlement

Commission was constituted as a result of a Report given by a
Committee headed by Hon‟ble Mr. Justice K.N. Wanchoo, a former
Chief Justice of India. The Wanchoo Committee recommended a
settlement machinery since, in the administration of fiscal laws, the
primary objective is to raise revenue and so there has to be room for
compromise and settlement. “A rigid attitude would not only inhibit a
one-time tax-evader or an unintending defaulter from making a clean
breast of his affairs, but would also unnecessarily strain the
investigational resources of the Department in cases of doubtful benefit
to revenue, while needlessly proliferating litigation and holding up
collections. We would, therefore, suggest that there should be a
provision in the law for a settlement with the taxpayer at any stage of
the proceedings.” The Committee opined that such a settlement should
be fair, prompt and independent.

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 9 of 44

17.

The Wanchoo Committee recommended the setting up of a

Direct Taxes Settlement Tribunal which would ensure impartial and
quick decisions. That Tribunal would proceed with a settlement petition
only if the Income Tax Department raised no objection to its being
entertained otherwise that Tribunal might become an escape route for
the tax evaders. In other words, the Wanchoo Committee gave adequate
protection both to the tax payer in terms of ensuring an impartial and
quick decision or settlement in his case and also to the Income Tax
Department by enabling it to oppose a settlement application in case the
tax evader sought to use the process of the Settlement Tribunal as an
escape route for evading tax. Acting on these recommendations, the Act
was amended with effect from 1st April, 1975 by introducing Chapter
XIX-A for settlement of cases through a Settlement Commission.

18.

Learned counsel for the Petitioners submitted that admittedly

the purpose of setting up the Settlement Commission is quite laudable.
Consequently, several assessees approached the Settlement Commission
for a one-stop settlement of their cases. The Income Tax Department
has, for valid reasons, opposed several settlement applications from time
to time and in many cases they were successful in their opposition.

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 10 of 44

19.

To ensure that the settlement process is not unduly

prolonged, the Act was amended with effect from 1 st June, 2002 so that
the Settlement Commission “shall, where it is possible, pass an order
under sub-section (4) within a period of four years from the end of the
financial year in which such [settlement] application was allowed to be
proceeded with.” We have been told that the period of four years for
final disposal of a settlement application is inadequate, since many
settlement applications are pending disposal for a much longer period.
Ironically, however, instead of taking remedial steps, the Finance Act,
2007 was introduced whereby the period of four years was reduced to
eight months (from 31st July, 2007 to 31st March, 2008) for the disposal
of a settlement application, in so far as the Petitioners are concerned.

20.

For the present purposes, the sum and substance of the

grievances and contentions of learned counsel for the Petitioners is that
they had, in good faith, approached the Settlement Commission for a
settlement of their disputes in accordance with law. They have always
been ready and willing to have the dispute settled at the earliest, and
they have not unnecessarily tried to delay the disposal of the settlement
application - in any case, no such allegation has been made by the

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 11 of 44

Respondents in this regard. Yet, for reasons that are completely beyond
their control, they are being made to confront a situation whereby their
settlement application shall abate. On the other hand, and to compound
the irony of the situation, the Respondents had (and still do) the power,
resources and capacity to ensure that the settlement application is
disposed of by 31st March, 2008 but they have not even moved a little
finger to do so leaving the Petitioners to their own devices. The
Respondents have, through their complete inaction, virtually subverted
the mandate of the law to the detriment of the Petitioners. This,
according

to

learned

counsel,

is

hopelessly

arbitrary

and

unconstitutional.

21.

Learned counsel for the Petitioners submitted that the

consequence of a settlement application not being disposed of by 31 st
March, 2008 is calamitous. Broadly, the adverse consequences are:
 The Petitioners would be required to face a regular assessment by
the income tax authority (as defined in Section 116 of the Act)
before whom the case of the Petitioner was pending when the
settlement application was made. In most cases, the authority
would be the Assessing Officer whose superior, the
Commissioner, may have opposed the admission of the settlement
application before the Settlement Commission [Section 245-D(1)
before its amendment by the Finance Act, 2007]. Under such
circumstances, the Petitioners cannot be expected to get a fair and
just hearing or treatment from the Assessing Officer, who is, in a
WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 12 of 44

sense, a litigant against the Petitioners before the Settlement
Commission.
 Additionally, the Assessing Officer would be inherently biased
against the Petitioners in such a situation because he would be
fully aware of the fact that the Petitioners had approached the
Settlement Commission for a settlement on the basis of material
not earlier disclosed. In other words, the Assessing Officer would
have already pre-judged the „guilt‟ of the Petitioners inviting him
to go all out to investigate the affairs of the Petitioners so as to
completely nail them. The bias would not only be „personal‟ but
also institutional.
 Confidential information disclosed by the Petitioners to the
Settlement Commission (which was otherwise not available to the
Assessing Officer) would now be made available to him and
could be used by him against the Petitioners [Section 245-HA(3)].
The procedure now laid down by the Finance Act, 2007 is neither
just, nor fair nor reasonable.
22.

It must be appreciated that the assumptions made by the

Wanchoo Committee and the rationale given by it for setting up a
settlement body are still valid, and the Respondents have not submitted
anything to the contrary. The Wanchoo Committee assumed that the
primary objective of fiscal laws is to raise revenue – this is not doubted;
it also assumed that a rigid attitude on the part of the State would inhibit
a tax-evader from coming forward to make a clean breast of his affairs –
this is also not doubted; if a settlement machinery is not provided for,
the investigational machinery of the State would be under a considerable
strain and in fact resources may be wasted in pursuing cases where
WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 13 of 44

success is doubtful – this again is not doubted; a rigid attitude would
lead to needless litigation and will hold up collections – again not
doubted. Taking all these factors into consideration, it was
recommended that there should be a provision for settlement with a
taxpayer.

23.

Similarly, even the Supreme Court has made certain

assumptions in favour of the Revenue and given a justification for
having a settlement machinery. In Commissioner of Income Tax v.
Express Newspapers Ltd. [1994] 206 ITR 443 the Supreme Court noted
that there may be certain cases that need to be given a quietus to, once
and for all, and they should not be fought through the usual channels.
For example, there may be cases that are complex or cases that may
require a prolonged investigation or cases that may require a
cumbersome investigation etc. and it is these kind of cases that may be
entertained by the Settlement Commission.

24.

That the assumptions made by the Wanchoo Committee and

the Supreme Court are valid even today and that they subsist is clear
from the fact that the Wanchoo Committee Report has not been trashed

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 14 of 44

by the Respondents and the fact that the Settlement Commission still
exists and has not been wound up. After all, if all the assumptions and
reasons were not correct, the Respondents would have wound up the
Settlement Commission – why keep an ineffectual or worthless body in
place for no apparent reason? The fact that the Settlement Commission
has been allowed to exist, and continues to exist and entertain fresh
settlement applications, clearly suggests that it is needed, even if it is for
a few cases. And, if it is needed for a few cases, why is it not needed for
a greater number of cases? These are a few of the many doubts that the
Respondents have not even cared to respond to or clear.

25.

In this context, it is also important to note three other facts

which suggest that the Settlement Commission is not a redundant
appendage. Firstly, the Act provides that the Settlement Commission
shall have “exclusive jurisdiction to exercise the powers and perform the
functions of an income-tax authority under this Act in relation to the
case” before it [Section 245-F(2)]. Secondly, when a taxpayer (or a tax
evader, as the case may be) files a settlement application before the
Settlement Commission, he cannot withdraw the application [Section
245-C(3)]. It may either be dismissed by the Settlement Commission

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 15 of 44

(not further proceeded with) or it would have to result in a settlement
under Section 245-D(4) of the Act. Thirdly, Section 245-I of the Act
makes every order passed by the Settlement Commission conclusive as
to the matters stated therein and no matter covered by the final order
passed by the Settlement Commission shall be re-opened in any
proceeding under the Act or under any other law for the time being in
force. All these facts show the enormous power wielded by the
Settlement Commission, which still exists and which it still retains. All
the assumptions and facts also show that the Settlement Commission is
unlikely to be wound up in the near future.

26.

For these reasons, we are of the prima facie opinion that even

though the Settlement Commission continues to exist, the requirement
that the settlement application “shall abate” if an order under Section
245-D(4) of the Act is not made by 31st March, 2008 is unfair, unjust
and arbitrary. This is all the more so since the abatement could have
been prevented by the Respondents by taking remedial measures, which
they failed to take. The result of the inaction of the Respondents was
clear, obvious and foreseeable, but they unfortunately, shut their eyes to
realism and pragmatism.

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 16 of 44

27.

The consequences of abatement are calamitous, as submitted

by learned counsel for the Petitioners. This can best be appreciated by
comparing and contrasting the pre and post 31st March, 2008 situation.
Some of these are:
 The Wanchoo Committee recommended that the constitution of
the settlement body should “encourage officers with integrity and
wide knowledge and experience to accept assignments on the
Tribunal” and so the status and emoluments of its members
should be as of the members of the Central Board of Direct Taxes
(the CBDT). The Act requires that the members of the Settlement
Commission must be “persons of integrity and outstanding ability,
having special knowledge of, and experience in, problems relating
to direct taxes and business accounts.” [Section 245-B(3)]. In
contrast, once the settlement application abates, the fate of the
Petitioners will be in the hands of an Assessing Officer or a
Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals). Both these categories of
officers are no doubt persons of integrity, but they certainly do
not have the wide knowledge and experience that a member of the
CBDT would have. The fate of the Petitioners would, therefore,
be placed in the hands of far less experienced and knowledgeable

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 17 of 44

persons, to their detriment and prejudice. This may not be
objectionable, per se, but coupled with other factors, it would
have an adverse impact on the Petitioners.
 Proceedings before the Settlement Commission are conducted by
a Bench of independent persons and they are judicial proceedings
for all intents and purposes but the proceedings before the
Assessing Officer are conducted by only one person and they are
only quasi judicial. The Assessing Officer is an officer of the
Income Tax Department, having loyalty to his department (not
that there is anything wrong in it as such), but in the present
circumstances, that officer may not necessarily be independent in
a case pertaining to any one of the Petitioners. It is well settled
that a hearing by an impartial tribunal is a fundamental
requirement of the rule of law and that may be missing in the case
of some of the Petitioners.
 An order passed by the Settlement Commission is final and
conclusive “as to matters stated therein and no matter covered by
such order shall, save as otherwise provided in this Chapter [XIXA], be reopened in any proceeding under this Act or any other law
WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 18 of 44

for the time being in force.” [Section 245-I]. A settlement
application is decided on a one-stop basis but an aggrieved
Petitioner would still have a constitutional remedy of judicial
review in a High Court.

However, in the case of a regular

assessment after abatement of a settlement application, the
Petitioner would have to go through a plethora of appeals and
authorities before a final decision is taken in his case and even
then the remedy available to him is extremely limited – only on a
substantial question of law in a High Court. This is clearly not an
adequate substitute available in law.
 The Settlement Commission has exclusive jurisdiction and
plenary powers to decide all issues brought before it including, in
an appropriate case and where expediency so demands, the power
to reopen completed proceedings [Sections 245-E and 245-F]. In
other words, the entire gamut of disputes raised by the Petitioners
can be settled before the Settlement Commission, impartially and
quickly, as postulated by the Wanchoo Committee. As a part of
the settlement, the Settlement Commission also has the plenary
power to grant immunity from prosecution and penalties to the
Petitioners [Section 245-H]. On the other hand, the income tax
WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 19 of 44

authority, after abatement of a settlement application has no such
exclusive jurisdiction or plenary power. Even in the matter of
grant of immunity from prosecution and penalties, there is no
provision in the Finance Act, 2007 although the Finance Bill,
2008 has made a provision for it, with power being vested for
granting immunity in the Commissioner of Income Tax, through
the insertion of Section 273-AA and Section 278-AB in the Act.
 There is a fundamental distinction between a settlement under
Chapter XIX-A of the Act and a regular assessment through
adjudication under the provisions of the Act. As far as the
Petitioners are concerned, this has considerable relevance to the
way in which the problem is viewed and addressed by the
appropriate authority.
 The Assessing Officer to whose jurisdiction the Petitioners are
relegated on the abatement of the settlement application, is
himself a litigant before the Settlement Commission having a
right to oppose (and in many cases having opposed) admission of
a settlement application. If the assessment of the Petitioners
income is to be made by someone who has opposed the case of
WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 20 of 44

the Petitioners, it is not possible or realistic for them to expect to
get fair or even handed treatment from such an Assessing Officer.
The Petitioners ask: how can a litigant expect a fair adjudication
from a party opposing its case? In addition to the above, even if a
Petitioner

succeeds

before

the

Assessing

Officer,

the

Commissioner is entitled to use his powers under Section 263 of
the Act to revise an assessment order on the ground that it is
prejudicial to the interests of the Revenue. This is pointed out not
only in the context of bias and a fair hearing but also in the
context of the Petitioners having to go through a multiplicity of
proceedings rather than getting a one-stop settlement from the
Settlement Commission.

28.

Learned counsel for the Petitioners referred to Francis

Bennion‟s Statutory Interpretation (1984 edition page 237) quoted in
Shashikant Laxman Kale v. Union of India, [1990] 185 ITR 104
wherein a distinction is made between the purpose and object of a
legislation and the legislative intention. It is stated:
“The distinction between the purpose or object of an
enactment and the legislative intention governing it is that
the former relates to the mischief to which the enactment is
directed and its remedy, while the latter relates to the legal
WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 21 of 44

meaning of the enactment.”

The question raised by learned counsel was: what is the true purpose or
object of the challenged provisions of the Finance Act, 2007? No one
really seems to know. It appears to be to ensure expeditious disposal of
settlement applications pending before the Settlement Commission. If
that is so, is the arbitrary though expeditious abatement of these
applications the only solution or the most appropriate solution? When
the Petitioners are desirous of having their settlement applications
disposed of quickly, can the Respondents be permitted to say that they
will not dispose of the applications, but wait for them to abate, because
that is the comparatively easier option? Surely, the answer to these
questions raised by learned counsel for the Petitioners must be in the
negative. The Petitioners cannot be prejudiced for no fault of theirs and
entirely on the basis of the whims and fancies of the Respondents who
may or may not finally decide a settlement application on or before 31 st
March, 2008.

29.

In this regard, another question of seminal importance was

raised by learned counsel – what is the criterion for deciding which

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 22 of 44

settlement application should be taken up first? With such a large
number of pending applications, the Settlement Commission may, at its
whims and fancies, take up the application of one Petitioner for disposal
and postpone the disposal of the settlement application of another
Petitioner. The „first‟ Petitioner would have the benefit of disposal of his
settlement application by the Settlement Commission, while the
settlement application of the „second‟ Petitioner would abate and he
would be relegated to a regular assessment by the Assessing Officer.
Why should one Petitioner benefit or steal a march over another, when
all things are equal? This would lead to a hostile discrimination and
palpable arbitrariness in the selection criteria, completely violating the
equality clause enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution. “While
dealing with the validity of a classification, the rational nexus of the
differentia on which the classification is based has to exist with the
purpose or object of the legislation so determined.” [Shashikant
Laxman Kale]. In so far as the Petitioners are concerned, there is no
basis for a valid classification for disposing of or not disposing of a
particular settlement application, and if there is a valid classification, it
has no nexus with the object sought to be achieved, namely, expeditious
disposal of all settlement applications within a time-bound period. In

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 23 of 44

other words, similarly placed persons are being subjected to hostile
discrimination.

30.

Learned counsel for the Petitioners also raised the issue of an

arbitrary cut-off date for disposal of a settlement application, namely,
31st March, 2008. It was submitted that all the Petitioners are similarly
circumstanced and similarly placed. Having grouped all of them
together, where is the occasion for giving an expeditious hearing to
some Petitioners and not to others? What is the basis for „benefiting‟
some and not others? It would have been a different matter altogether,
according to learned counsel, if all the Petitioners are given an
expeditious disposal before 31 st March, 2008 with several benches of
the Settlement Commission being set up, or none of them being given a
hearing before 31st March, 2008. By placing similar Petitioners in
dissimilar situations, many of them disadvantageously, the Respondents
have violated Article 14 of the Constitution. Reliance in this respect was
placed on M.C. Dhingra v. Union of India, AIR 1996 SC 2963.

31.

In University Grants Commission v. Sadhana Chaudhary,

(1996) 10 SCC 536 the Supreme Court held that:

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 24 of 44

“It is settled law that the choice of a date as a basis for
classification cannot always be dubbed as arbitrary even if no
particular reason is forthcoming for the choice unless it is
shown to be capricious or whimsical in the circumstances.
When it is seen that a line or a point there must be and there
is no mathematical or logical way of fixing it precisely, the
decision of the legislature or its delegate must be accepted
unless it can be said that it is very wide off the reasonable
mark.”

32.

Similarly, in Ami Lal Bhat (Dr) v. State of Rajasthan,

(1997) 6 SCC 614 the Supreme Court said:
One must accept that such a cut-off date cannot be fixed with
any mathematical precision and in such a manner as would
avoid hardship in all conceivable cases. As soon as a cut-off
date is fixed there will be some persons who fall on the right
side of the cut-off date and some persons who will fall on the
wrong side of the cut-off date. That cannot make the cut-off
date, per se, arbitrary unless the cut-off date is so wide off
the mark as to make it wholly unreasonable. This view was
expressed by this Court in Union of India v. Parameswaran
Match Works [(1975) 1 SCC 305] and has been reiterated in
subsequent cases.”

33.

Finally, in Union of India v. M.V. Valliappan, (1999) 6 SCC

259 it was said:
“It is settled law that the choice of a date as a basis for
classification cannot always be dubbed as arbitrary even if no
particular reason is forthcoming for the choice unless it is
shown to be capricious or whimsical in the circumstances;
while fixing a line, a point is necessary and there is no
mathematical or logical way of fixing it; precisely, the
WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 25 of 44

decision of the legislature or its delegate must be accepted
unless it is very wide off the reasonable mark.”

34.

While it is true that in situations such as the present, some

cut-off date has to be fixed, that date cannot be arbitrarily fixed without
having any reasonable or real basis. Why the date for disposal of all
pending settlement applications on or before 31 st March, 2008 is
unrealistic (if not illusory) is clear from the affidavit filed by the
Settlement Commission on 29th January, 2008 and which we have
adverted to above. Even in the order passed by this Court on 18 th
December, 2007 reference has been made to the Report submitted by the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India to illustrate the sheer
magnitude of the task of disposal of all pending settlement applications
by 31st March, 2008 and the impossibility of achieving the goal without
concrete steps being taken by the Respondents on a war footing.

35.

The cut-off date of 31st March, 2008 appears to have been

fixed without giving a thought to ground realities and it is so wide off
the mark and incapable of being adhered to that it is nothing but
capricious and whimsical. The unreasonableness can be tested, even
today, by the fact that presently a few thousand settlement applications
WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 26 of 44

are pending and they will abate in a few days from now. On the other
hand, some fortunate Petitioners (or others similarly placed) may yet get
the benefit of a settlement by the Settlement Commission. There is no
apparent reason for this discriminatory treatment by which some persons
are left out in the cold.

36.

On the issue of the Petitioners getting a fair hearing in the

regular assessment after abatement of the settlement application,
reliance was placed on State of West Bengal v. Shivananda Pathak &
Ors, AIR 1998 SC 2050. Referring to paragraphs 29 to 34 of the
Report, it was submitted that a „fair hearing‟ or „fair play‟ in quasi
judicial matters means that the adjudicating authority must not only be
impartial, but he should also be neutral enough to apply his mind
objectively to a given set of facts. While it is not possible to have actual
proof of bias in a case, there must be a real likelihood of bias and justice
must not only be done, but it must visibly be seen to be done. In so far
as the Petitioners are concerned, the Assessing Officer or his superior,
the Commissioner is actually a litigant against the Petitioners before the
Settlement Commission. The Commissioner is entitled to oppose (and in
most cases has opposed) the admission of the settlement application for

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 27 of 44

being proceeded with any further. The Petitioners ask: how can they
expect to get a fair hearing from someone who opposes their case? It is a
bit like asking the plaintiff or defendant in a case to arbitrate the dispute
with the opposite party. Since this is one of the direct consequences of
abatement of the settlement application, the Petitioners submit that the
provision for abatement is arbitrary and unconstitutional.

37.

Learned counsel for the Petitioners relied on Bidhannagar

(Salt Lake) Welfare Association v. Central Valuation Board, AIR 2007
SC 2276 to contend that where a decision making power is taken away
from an independent authority, which has unlimited and plenary powers,
and statutorily conferred on persons who are not independent or are
otherwise interested in the matter, then such provisions of law are per se
unreasonable and the provisions per se contravene the values attached to
the

principles

of

natural

justice. When there is substantive

unreasonableness in a statute, it may have to be declared
unconstitutional and the decision making process may suffer from an
institutional bias.

38.

Another issue that greatly agitated learned counsel for the

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 28 of 44

Petitioners relates to a breach in the confidentiality of materials made
available to the Settlement Commission. To appreciate the prejudice to
the Petitioners after abatement of the settlement application, it is
necessary to understand the procedure laid down by law that is binding
on the Settlement Commission.

39.

Rule 44C and Rule 44CA of the Income Tax Rules, 1962

prescribe the form of application (under Section 245-C of the Act) for
settlement of cases. The application is required to be submitted in Form
34B in Appendix II to the Income Tax Rules. The annexure to Form
34B is of some importance and this requires the Assessee to state the
following: “1. Amount of income which has not been disclosed before
the Assessing Officer.
2. Additional amount of income-tax payable on the said
income.
3. Full and true statement of facts regarding the issues to
be settled, including the terms of settlement sought for by
the applicant.
4. The manner in which the income referred to in item
No.1 has been derived.”

40.

Rule 44CA of the Income Tax Rules is important and this

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 29 of 44

reads as follows: “44CA. Disclosure of information in the application for
settlement of cases.
(1) The Settlement Commission may, while calling for a
report from the Commissioner under sub-section (1) of
section 245D, forward a copy of the application filed in
Form No. 34B (other than the Annexure and the
statements and other documents accompanying such
Annexure).
(2)
Where an order under sub-section (1) of section
245D allowing the application to be proceeded with is
made by the Settlement Commission, the information
contained in the Annexure to the application in Form No.
34B and in the statements and other documents
accompanying such Annexure shall be sent to the
Commissioner along with a copy of the said order.”
(Emphasis given)

41.

A perusal of Rule 44CA (1) of the Income Tax Rules shows

that the Settlement Commission may call for a report from the
Commissioner under sub-section (1) of Section 245D of the Act and
while doing so it shall forward a copy of the application in Form 34B in
Appendix II to the Income Tax Rules other than the annexure and the
statement and other documents accompanying such annexure. It is only
when a settlement application is admitted for final consideration under
Section 245D of the Act (and therefore the Settlement Commission has
exclusive jurisdiction over the case) that the information contained in
WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 30 of 44

the annexure as well as in the statement and other documents
accompanying the annexure shall be disclosed to the Commissioner.

42.

Under the provisions of Section 245-F(7) of the Act, the

Settlement Commission is entitled to regulate its own procedure. In
exercise of this power the Income Tax Settlement Commission
(Procedure) Rules, 1997 have been framed (for short the Procedure
Rules). Rule 6 of the Procedure Rules prescribes that the Settlement
Commission shall forward a copy of the settlement application,
excluding the annexure to the Commissioner for furnishing a report and
Rule 9 of the Procedure Rules prescribes that where the settlement
application is allowed to be proceeded with or admitted by the
Settlement Commission, only then would the Commissioner be entitled
to receipt of the annexure to Form 34B in Appendix II to the Income
Tax Rules furnished by the Petitioner. This is in consonance with Rule
44CA of the Income Tax Rules.

43.

Rule 6 and Rule 9 of the Procedure Rules read as follows: “6. Commissioner’s report, etc., under section 245D(1).
On receipt of a settlement application, a copy of the said
application (excluding the Annexure) shall be forwarded

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 31 of 44

by the Commission to the Commissioner with the direction
to furnish his report under sub-section (1) of section 245D
within 45 days of the receipt of the said copy of the
application by him. (Emphasis given)
9. Commissioner’s further report.
Where an order is passed by the Commission under subsection (1) of section 245D allowing the settlement
application to be proceeded with, a copy of the annexure to
the said application together with a copy of each of the
statements and other documents accompanying such
annexure, shall be forwarded to the Commissioner along
with a copy of the said order with the direction that the
Commissioner shall furnish a further report within ninety
days of the receipt of the said annexure (including the
statements and other documents accompanying it) or within
such further period as the Commission may specify.
If the Commissioner fails to furnish his report on or before
the expiry of the specified period of 90 days or such
extended period, the Commission may pass the appropriate
order without such report.”

44.

The proceedings before the Settlement Commission are

judicial proceedings (Section 245-L of the Act) and they are not open to
the public (Rule 16 of the Procedure Rules). Similarly, under Section
245-G of the Act, no person (other than the applicant) is entitled to
inspect or obtain copies of any report made by any income tax authority
to the Settlement Commission. In other words, the proceedings before
the Settlement Commission are completely confidential and any material

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 32 of 44

adverse to the applicant is kept away from the public eye and cannot be
used against the applicant for any purpose whatsoever.

45.

Our attention was drawn to Chhotalal S. Ajmera (HUF) v.

Commissioner of Income tax, [2007] 289 ITR 1 wherein the Supreme
Court has considered the annexure to Form 34B in Appendix II to the
Income Tax Rules “as a confidential document, which is not disclosed
to the Commissioner of Income Tax until the Settlement Commission
admits the application for being proceeded with.” Consequently, there
can be no doubt that the information in the annexure is confidential.

46.

By virtue of Section 245-HA(3) of the Act, as incorporated

by the Finance Act, 2007, the Assessing Officer or any other income tax
authority shall be entitled to use all the confidential information
produced by the Petitioners before the Settlement Commission and can
even use it in proceedings before him against the Petitioners. The result
of this is that the confidentiality of the settlement proceedings, earlier
guaranteed by the Act and the Rules framed there under, has now been
taken away and materials that were strictly within the domain of the
Settlement Commission prior to the Finance Act, 2007 can now be used

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 33 of 44

against the Petitioners for all purposes including for assessment
proceedings, penalty proceedings and for prosecution purposes also.
This appears to us to be clearly arbitrary.

47.

For the purposes of grant of interim relief, learned counsel

for the Petitioners have also relied upon a very brief order passed by the
Bombay High Court on 4th March, 2008 in Writ Petition No. 525/2008
(M/s. Sunita Textiles Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income Tax) wherein it
has been directed that the Settlement Commission will not consider the
settlement application filed by that Petitioner as having abated under
Section 245-HA of the Act for want of compliance with Section 245-D
(2D) of the Act, as mandated by the Finance Act, 2007.

48.

Reliance is also placed by learned counsel for the Petitioners

on an order dated 12th March, 2008 passed by the Allahabad High Court
in Writ Petition No. 454 of 2008 (R.B. Society Jewellers v. Union of
India & ors), wherein it has been directed as follows: “After hearing learned counsel for the petitioner and Sri
Bharat J. Agarwal, Senior Advocate assisted by Sri Shambhu
Chopra, appearing for respondents no.1, 2, 3 and 4, we
dispose of this writ petition with a direction to the respondent
no.2 to decide the petitioner‟s application under Section 245C which was moved on (illegible) 31.03.2008.
WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 34 of 44

If despite its best efforts, the Settlement Commission is
unable to decide that application for any valid reasons, it
would not entitle the petitioner to move an application in
contempt but the petitioner‟s right to raise other challenges
which have been made in this writ petition will revive to the
petitioner.
The writ petition is disposed of as above.”

49.

Reliance has also been placed upon an order dated 14 th

March, 2008 passed by the Rajasthan High Court in the batch of writ
petitions wherein a direction has been given to the Respondents to
settle/decide the cases of the Petitioners on or before 31st March, 2008
positively, if the period is not extended.

50.

As things stand today, the Settlement Commission has

already filed an affidavit before us saying that it is not possible for it to
decide all the pending settlement applications before 31 st March, 2008.
The Settlement Commission has not indicated what steps it has taken to
comply with the mandate of the law. Similarly, the Central Government
has also not provided for any remedy to the Petitioners against the
abatement of their settlement applications either by urging Parliament to
extend the time limit for disposal of the settlement application by the

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 35 of 44

Settlement Commission (as postulated by the Rajasthan High Court) or
any other remedial step. The Central Government has also not indicated
what steps, if any, have been taken to comply with the mandate of the
law. It cannot be that only the Petitioners and other citizens are bound
by the law, but the Settlement Commission and the Central Government
are not bound by the law. Such a situation would lead to anarchy, and a
situation whereby the rule of law is effectively disabled.

51.

The learned Additional Solicitor General reiterated his

submissions that were made and noted in the order passed on 18 th
December, 2007. It was submitted that the Settlement Commission is a
creature of the statute and only a procedural change has been brought
about by the Finance Act, 2007 and the Petitioners have no vested right
to have a certain procedure being followed. Parliament in its wisdom
has decided to change the procedure and no fault can be found with this.
Moreover, it was submitted that the Petitioners have only a statutory
right to have their case processed by the Settlement Commission and not
a constitutional right. A statutory right can be taken away by the
Legislature and that is what has been done. Reliance was placed upon
Dharam Dutt and others v. Union of India and others, (2004) 1 SCC

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 36 of 44

712, Kuldip Nayar and others v. Union of India and others, (2006) 7
SCC 1, Anukul Chandra Pradhan, Advocate Supreme Court v. Union
of India and others, (1997) 6 SCC 1, Jose Da Costa and another v.
Bascora Sadasiva Sinai Narcornim and others, (1976) 2 SCC 917 and
M/s. Pannalal Binjraj and others v. Union of India and others, 1957
SCR 233.

52.

We are of the opinion that it is now too late in the day for the

learned Additional Solicitor General to wish away or ignore the concept
of procedural unfairness – this is now ingrained in our Constitutional
jurisprudence. Merely because the Petitioners have been conferred a
statutory right does not mean that they can be discriminated against and
arbitrarily treated in the exercise of that right. Nor can the Respondents
be heard to say that they will arbitrarily decide which Petitioner or
applicant before the Settlement Commission be given the benefit of that
right.

Similarly, that statutory right cannot be taken away and the

Petitioners placed in a worse position than what they were in before. It
may be another question if the status quo ante is restored, but that is not
what has been legislated by the Finance Act, 2007 – the Settlement
Commission continues to exist and continues to deal with cases that are

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 37 of 44

similar if not identical in law to those of the Petitioners. In that sense,
the right available to the Petitioners has not been taken away, except by
fixing the cut-off date of 31st March, 2008.

53.

As regards the effect of abatement of the settlement

applications, the learned Additional Solicitor General did not make any
submissions except to say that since the law mandates the abatement of
the settlement applications on 31 st March, 2008, the Petitioners cannot
challenge the procedure adopted by Parliament in the matter of
abatement. The learned Additional Solicitor General did not give any
indication about what steps, if at all, have been taken either by the
Settlement Commission or the Central Government to comply with the
mandate of the law to ensure that the Settlement Commission “shall”
decide all the settlement applications pending before it on or before 31st
March, 2008.

It appears that no steps have been taken by the

Respondents to comply with the mandate of the law prescribed by
Parliament and the Petitioners have been simply left to fend for
themselves and to face the dire consequences of the inaction of the
Settlement Commission as well as the Central Government.

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 38 of 44

54.

On the issue of bias, learned Additional Solicitor General did

not make any submissions, while on the question of confidential
information being revealed, the learned Additional Solicitor General
submitted that as of now the information ceases to be confidential
because all the settlement applications have either been admitted or are
deemed to have been admitted and, therefore, all the confidential
information is already known to the Income Tax Department.
Consequently, the information revealed by the Petitioners in the
annexure to Form 34B in Appendix II to the Income Tax Rules is no
longer confidential and there is no harm if it is used against the
Petitioners who are in any case tax evaders.

55.

In our opinion, the learned Additional Solicitor General has

overlooked that the confidential information was and continues to
remain within the exclusive domain of the Settlement Commission
during the pendency of the settlement application in the Settlement
Commission, even after it is disclosed to the Commissioner. Whatever
information is disclosed by the Petitioners before the Settlement
Commission can be used and will be used only by persons of integrity
and experience and exclusively for the purpose of settling the dispute

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 39 of 44

raised by the Petitioners before the Settlement Commission. The
confidential information cannot be used for any purpose other than for
the settlement of applications filed under Section 245-C(1) of the Act.
The procedure having been set into motion by the Petitioners by filing
settlement applications under Section 245-C of the Act, they are
precluded from withdrawing that application and the Settlement
Commission is obliged to settle or decide the matter one way or the
other, as required by law. There is no half way house once the process
is set into motion. Moreover, even after the matter is settled, it cannot
be reopened by any authority under the Act for any other purpose and
the decision of the Settlement Commission is final. In other words,
there is a complete termination of all matters that are dealt with by the
Settlement Commission as postulated by Section 245-I of the Act.

56.

The trust that the Petitioners placed in the Settlement

Commission is completely dashed by the amendments brought about by
the Finance Act, 2007 and the entire confidential and undisclosed
material can be used by any income tax authority for any purpose,
prejudicial to the interests of the Petitioners.

The confidential

information disclosed by the Petitioners will be put into the hands of the

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 40 of 44

Assessing Officer who is likely to have an implicit and inherent bias
against them knowing fully that they have approached the Settlement
Commission for a settlement in respect of income which they have not
disclosed to any income tax authority.

57.

We are of the view that under these circumstances,

irreparable harm and injury would be caused to the Petitioners if they
are relegated to the position which would follow as a result of the
abatement of the settlement applications. There is no doubt that the
balance of convenience would lie in favour of the prayer of the
Petitioners being granted at least until the disposal of these writ
petitions which pertain to the constitutional validity of some provisions
of the Finance Act, 2007 including those relating to abatement of the
settlement applications filed by the Petitioners.

58.

Even though we are obliged to presume every statute to be

constitutionally valid, the circumstances in the present batch of writ
petitions is such that severe harm and prejudice will be caused to the
Petitioners if the provisions discussed by us and incorporated in the Act
by the Finance Act, 2007 are permitted to operate. This is particularly so

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 41 of 44

since the provisions (despite the presumption) appear to be
discriminatory and arbitrary. No rational basis that has been shown to
us by the learned Additional Solicitor General for providing for
abatement or for fixing the cut-off date of 31st March, 2008 despite
knowing full well that it is not possible for the Settlement Commission
to dispose of all the pending applications before that date, particularly in
the face of an affidavit having been filed by the Settlement Commission
on 29th January, 2008. The learned Additional Solicitor General has
also not been able to show us any reason whatsoever why the impugned
provisions of the Finance Act, 2007 were incorporated – there is no
Statement of Objects and Reasons for the amendment brought about and
there is absolutely no reason given whatsoever why the period of four
years that was earlier in existence for the disposal of settlement
applications by the Settlement Commission in the statute prior to the
Finance Act, 2007 has been unreasonably curtailed, in the case of the
Petitioners, to a maximum period of eight months.

59.

For all these reasons, we are of the view that the appropriate

directions to issue in this batch of writ petitions would be as follows:
(a)

The application for settlement filed by the Petitioners under

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 42 of 44

Section 245-C of the Act would not abate on 31st March, 2008.
(b)

In keeping with the mandate of Parliament, the Settlement
Commission shall endeavour to dispose of all pending
applications as expeditiously as possible.

(c)

To enable the Settlement Commission to dispose of all pending
applications as expeditiously as possible, the Central Government
will render all assistance to the Settlement Commission including,
if necessary, setting up additional Benches.

(d)

Any information disclosed by the Petitioners in the annexure to
Form 34B in Appendix II to the Income Tax Rules,1962 will not
be used against the Petitioners for any purpose whatsoever until
the disposal of the settlement application of the Petitioners by the
Settlement Commission.

(e)

All the writ petitions are admitted for final hearing. Since all the
writ petitions are still at a preliminary stage and in many of them a
counter affidavit has still not been filed by the Respondents, all
the amendment applications are allowed. The Respondents will
be at liberty to file counter affidavits to the amended writ
petitions in accordance with the High Court Rules.

(f)

The interlocutory applications filed by the Petitioners for interim

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 43 of 44

relief are disposed in terms of the above. Since more than 100
writ petitions have been filed and we have taken them up as a
batch and with the clear understanding that we will be deciding
the issue of abatement of the pending settlement applications, the
directions given by us above will apply in the present batch of
writ petitions even where no specific interlocutory application has
been made by the Petitioners for grant of interim relief in the
terms that we have indicated above.

60.

Needless to say, the observations made in this order will not

bind the final disposal of the writ petitions.

MADAN B. LOKUR, J

March 28th, 2008
kapil/ncg

V.B. GUPTA, J

Certified that the corrected copy of the
judgment has been transmitted in the
main Server.

WP (C) No.5462/2007

Page 44 of 44

