*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

ITA No. 76 of 2006

Judgment reserved on: May 21, 2007
%

Judgment delivered on: May 24, 2007

Commissioner of Income Tax
Delhi-IV, New Delhi

Through

...Appellant

Mrs. Prem Lata Bansal, Advocate

Versus
M/s Gujarat Guardian Ltd.
M-38/1, International Business Centre
Connaught Place, New Delhi
Through

...Respondent

Mr. Ajay Vohra with Ms. Kavita Jha,
Advocates

Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

ITA No.76/2006

Page 1 of 8

MADAN B. LOKUR, J.
The Revenue is aggrieved by an order dated 30th May, 2005
passed by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Delhi Bench “F” in I.T.
Appeals No.4118 and 4119 (Del) of 2001 relevant for the assessment
years 1994-95 and 1995-96.

2.

In this appeal under Section 260A of the Income Tax Act,

1961 (the Act), we are concerned only with the assessment year 199495.

3.

The question that has arisen for our consideration is whether

the assessee is entitled to depreciation on account of capitalization of
engineering service fees paid to a foreign company or whether the
assessee is entitled to a deduction under Section 35AB of the Act.
According to the Tribunal, the assessee is entitled to depreciation on
account of capitalization of engineering service fees and it is this
conclusion that has been disputed by the Revenue.

4.

The broad facts of the case are that the assessee set up a float

ITA No.76/2006

Page 2 of 8

glass plant in Gujarat on the basis of technical know-how obtained from
Guardian Industries Corporation, USA.

The foreign company also

deputed its technicians for supervising the setting up of the plant.
During the financial year 1992-93, the assessee paid engineering service
fees towards know-how to the foreign company. The amount paid was
initially debited by the assessee under the head “deferred revenue
expenditure” but later, on being advised that the engineering service
fees having been incurred by the assessee prior to commencement of
production are required to be capitalized, the assessee filed a revised
return of income for the assessment year 1994-95 and also made the
necessary entries for capitalization in its books of account.

5.

The arrangement between the assessee and the foreign

company was through a collaboration agreement dated 5th June, 1990.
Paragraph 8.1 of this agreement records that the parties had entered into
an engineering service and sub-licence agreement separately and that
the latter agreement was identified as a “Float Plant Services
Agreement”. As per the collaboration agreement dated 5th June, 1990
the foreign company agreed to provide complete basic design,

ITA No.76/2006

Page 3 of 8

engineering services, training and assistance to the assessee for setting
up a float gas glass plant in consideration of a lump sum payment of
US$ 7.5 million to be paid in three installments. Paragraph 8.2 of the
collaboration agreement records that the foreign company would
provide supervision services for the erection, commissioning and setting
up of the float glass plant by making available personnel and equipment,
materials and components suppliers. In so far as the float plant services
agreement is concerned, that was intended to provide to the assessee
engineering services needed to construct a float glass plant and services
needed to provide for future process improvements in the operation of
the float glass plant after it begins production on a commercial basis; to
provide assistance in the day to day manufacturing operations of the
float glass plant to ensure its efficient operation; and to grant to the
assessee a sub-licence to practice certain inventions for the manufacture
of flat glass by the float process in India and for the sale of such glass
anywhere in the world.

6.

The Assessing Officer disallowed the depreciation claimed

by the assessee, inter alia, on the ground that it was entitled to a

ITA No.76/2006

Page 4 of 8

deduction under Section 35AB of the Act.

The Commissioner of

Income Tax (Appeals) [CIT (A)] allowed the depreciation on the ground
that the expenditure incurred by the assessee related to planning, design,
installation, construction, etc., that is, towards the setting up of the plant
only. This conclusion of the CIT (A) was disputed by the Revenue
before the Tribunal.

7.

There are two issues that actually arise for consideration.

One is whether the collaboration agreement between the assessee and
the foreign company was for setting up a float glass plant or for
rendering technical know-how for the process of manufacture of float
glass. The second issue that arises is whether the assessee is entitled to
claim depreciation under Section 32 of the Act or deduction under
Section 35AB of the Act.

8.

In so far as the first issue is concerned, the Tribunal

considered the provisions of paragraph 8.1 of the collaboration
agreement and concluded that the agreement was only for setting up the
float gas glass plant in consideration of a lump sum fee of US$ 7.5

ITA No.76/2006

Page 5 of 8

million. Similarly, after considering paragraph 8.2 of the collaboration
agreement, the Tribunal concluded that it deals with erection,
commissioning and starting of the float glass plant.

9.

On a review of the collaboration agreement, the Tribunal

concluded that there was no doubt, and we think that this conclusion is
quite correct on the facts of the case, that the payment made by the
assessee to the foreign company was only for the purposes of setting up
the float glass plant. It appears that bills that were produced by the
assessee also indicated that payments were made for services of foreign
technicians engaged for the purpose of setting up the float glass plant.
All in all, therefore, the assessee was able to show that the engineering
service fees paid to the foreign company were towards setting up of the
plant and not for the manufacture and production of float glass.

10.

With regard to the question whether the assessee is entitled to

claim depreciation under Section 32 of the Act or deduction under
Section 35AB of the Act, the Tribunal looked at the meaning of “knowhow” as given in the Explanation to sub-section (3) of Section 35AB of

ITA No.76/2006

Page 6 of 8

the Act. This Explanation reads as follows:

“Explanation: For the purposes of this section, “know-how”
means any industrial information or technique likely to assist in
the manufacture or processing of goods or in the working of a
mine, oil well or other sources of mineral deposits (including the
searching for, discovery or testing of deposits or the winning of
access thereto).”

11.

On a plain reading of the Explanation, it is clear that know-

how means information or technique likely to assist in the manufacture
or processing of goods. The payment made by the assessee to the
foreign company was not in connection with information or technique
likely to assist in the manufacture or processing of goods – the payment
was made for setting up of a float glass plant.

The payment for

assistance in manufacture or processing of goods was the subject matter
of a separate agreement entered into between the assessee and the
foreign company.

12.

This being the position, the Tribunal was quite right in

holding that the collaboration agreement did not relate to the
manufacture or processing of goods by the assessee. Consequently, it
must be held that the assessee is entitled to depreciation under Section
ITA No.76/2006

Page 7 of 8

32 of the Act and not for deduction under Section 35AB of the Act for
the expenditure incurred, which was not relatable to the manufacture or
processing of goods.

13.

The question whether the assessee is at all entitled to

depreciation under Section 32 of the Act in respect of a “plant” is not in
dispute before us and, therefore, we need not give any finding in this
regard except to record that the Tribunal found that the word “plant” in
Section 43(3) of the Act is defined in very wide terms and technical
know-how in the shape of drawings, designs, charts, plans, etc. falls
within the definition of “plant” and is, therefore, a depreciable asset.

14.

We find no error in the conclusions of the Tribunal. No

substantial question of law arises for consideration.

15.

The appeal is dismissed.

Madan B. Lokur, J

May 24, 2007
ncg
ITA No.76/2006

V.B. Gupta, J

Page 8 of 8

