*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

ITA No. 1384 of 2006
Judgment reserved on: May 9, 2007

%

Judgment delivered on: May 23, 2007

The Commissioner of Income Tax, Delhi-X
New Delhi
...Appellant
Through Ms. P.L. Bansal with Ms. Sonia
Mathur, Advocates
Versus
Shri Atul Jain
1188, Chatta Madan Gopal
Maliwara, Delhi
Through

...Respondent
Dr. Rakesh Gupta with Mr. Jitender
Saini, Advocates
WITH

2.

ITA No. 1385 of 2006

The Commissioner of Income Tax, Delhi-X
New Delhi
...Appellant
Through Ms. P.L. Bansal with Ms. Sonia
Mathur, Advocates
Versus
Smt. Vinita Jain
1188, Chatta Madan Gopal
Maliwara, Delhi
Through

ITA No.1384/2006

...Respondent
Dr. Rakesh Gupta with Mr. Jitender
Saini, Advocates
Page 1 of 11

Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

MADAN B. LOKUR, J.
The Revenue is aggrieved by an order dated 2nd March,
2006 passed by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Special Bench
SMC, New Delhi in ITA No.4824-25/Del/2004 relevant for the
assessment year 1997-98.

2.

The assessees had purchased shares of M/s Globe

Commercials Ltd. through M/s Maheshwari Sons, stock and share
broker. Subsequently, these shares were sold at a much higher value
through another broker Satish Kumar Goel, proprietor of R.K. Aggarwal
& Co. The assessees had disclosed long term capital gains arising from
the transaction.

ITA No.1384/2006

Page 2 of 11

3.

It appears that some intra-departmental information was

received by the Assessing Officer to the effect that the assessees had
taken a bogus entry of long term capital gain after paying the equivalent
amount in cash together with premium for the accommodation entry to
Satish Kumar Goel. This information was received from the Deputy
Director of Income Tax (Investigation), Gurgaon.

Based on the

information received, the Assessing Officer took action to issue a notice
under Section 148 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (the Act) to the
assessees.

4.

In the case of Smt. Vinita Jain, the reasons for issuing a

notice, as recorded by the Assessing Officer, read as follows:
“As per information received from DDIT (Inv.) Gurgaon, the
assessee had taken bogus entry of capital gains Rs.2,12,635/on 27.6.95 (A.Y. 1997-98) by paying cash along with some
premium and taking cheque of same amount.”

Similarly, in the case of Atul Jain, the reasons for issuing a notice are as
follows:
“As per information received from DDIT (Inv.) Gurgaon, the
assessee had taken bogus entry of capital gains Rs.1,08,845/on 22.6.96 (A.Y. 1997-98) by paying cash along with some
premium and taking cheque of same amount.”
ITA No.1384/2006

Page 3 of 11

5.

The concerned files were then put up before the

Commissioner of Income Tax and in response to the question whether
the Commissioner was satisfied that income had escaped assessment, he
wrote “Yes”.

6.

As one would expect, the income of the assessees was then

re-assessed by the Assessing Officer who thereupon issued a demand
notice and also sought to charge interest and levy penalty upon the
assessees.

7.

Both

the

assessees

preferred

appeals

before

the

Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) [CIT (A)] and by separate
orders, the CIT (A) partly allowed the appeals filed by the assessees.
Feeling aggrieved, the assessees then approached the Tribunal which
decided the appeals in their favour and concluded that the initiation of
proceedings was vitiated.

Accordingly, the assessment made was

annulled and the appeals allowed.

8.

The Revenue has preferred two separate appeals against the

ITA No.1384/2006

Page 4 of 11

combined order passed by the Tribunal. We heard submissions made by
learned counsel for the parties and are of the view that there is no error
in the opinion expressed by the Tribunal and that no substantial question
of law arises for our consideration.

9.

Broadly speaking, the view taken by the Assessing Officer

(and which is canvassed before us) was that the assessees had invested
their money received from undisclosed sources and taken back the
amounts through a negotiable instrument. The amounts so invested
were treated as undisclosed income and the Assessing Officer estimated
10% commission for the accommodation entry and thereupon made a
further addition to the undisclosed investment.

10.

For deciding whether the issuance of notice is vitiated or not,

our attention has been drawn to Chhugamal Rajpal v. S.P. Chaliha &
Ors., (1971) 79 ITR 603. In that case, re-assessment proceedings were
struck down by the Supreme Court on the ground that in the reasons
recorded by him, the Income Tax Officer had vaguely referred to certain
communications that he had received; he did not mention the facts

ITA No.1384/2006

Page 5 of 11

contained

in

those

communications

except

that

from

those

communications “it appears that these persons (alleged creditors) are
name lenders and the transactions are bogus”; he did not come to any
prima facie conclusion that the referred transactions are not genuine; he
appeared to have a vague feeling that the referred transactions may be
bogus transactions and finally, his conclusion was to the effect that a
proper investigation regarding the loans is necessary. The Supreme
Court was of the view that the conclusion of the Income Tax Officer
was that there is a case for investigating the truth of the alleged
transactions but that is not the same thing as reasons for issuing a notice
under Section 148 of the Act. In the decision of the Supreme Court
also, when the matter was sent to the Commissioner, in the proforma
against the question “Whether the Commissioner is satisfied that it is a
fit case for the issue of notice under Section 148” he noted “Yes” and
affixed his signatures. The Supreme Court was of the view that upon
reading the report given by the Income Tax Officer (which is not the
same as reasons for issuing a notice), the Commissioner could not have
come to the conclusion on the material before him that it is a fit case for
issuance of a notice under Section 148 of the Act.

ITA No.1384/2006

Page 6 of 11

11.

From the decision of the Supreme Court, it is clear that a

mere statement of facts in the form of a report is not a substitute for
reasons that are required to be recorded before issuing a notice under
Section 148 of the Act. The Supreme Court also noted that substance
cannot be substituted by form and it is in that context that the Supreme
Court expressed the view that by merely saying “Yes”, the
Commissioner did not fulfill the duty cast upon him.

12.

In P. Munirathnam Chetty and P. Satyanarayana Chetty v.

Income-tax Officer, (1975) 101 ITR 385, the Andhra Pradesh High
Court analyzed Chhugamal Rajpal and distinguished it on the ground
that since the Income Tax Officer had given reasons for issuing a notice
to the assessee, the mere fact that the Commissioner recorded “Yes” in
respect of the question “Whether the Commissioner is satisfied that it is
a fit case for issue of notice under Section 148” would not by itself
vitiate the proceedings. What follows from this is that if there are
reasons recorded for issuing a notice and the Commissioner applies his
mind to those reasons and even if he merely says “Yes” in respect of his
satisfaction, that is good enough; but if reasons are not recorded by the

ITA No.1384/2006

Page 7 of 11

Assessing Officer (as in Chhugamal Rajpal) then in any case the
proceedings would be vitiated, and even if the Commissioner says
“Yes” in the appropriate column, that would not save the notice from
being vitiated.

13.

The above two decisions lead to the conclusion that there

must be reason to believe warranting the issuance of a notice by the
Assessing Officer. If there are no reasons, then the entire foundation for
initiating the proceedings is bad and the notice initiating proceedings
must be quashed.

14.

At this stage, it is worth recalling that in Ganga Saran &

Sons Pvt. Ltd. v. Income-tax Officer & Others, (1981) 130 ITR 1, the
Supreme Court noted that the expression “reason to believe” as
occurring in Section 147 of the Act is stronger than the expression “is
satisfied”. In other words, mere satisfaction of the Assessing Officer for
the issuance of a notice is not enough – there must be reasons on record
which have led him to believe that a notice should be issued.

ITA No.1384/2006

Page 8 of 11

15.

In United Electrical Co. Pvt. Ltd. v. Commissioner of

Income-tax, (2002) 258 ITR 317, this Court considered the entire issue
afresh.

It was observed that the expression “reason to believe”

occurring in Section 147 of the Act is crucial. Reference was made to
Bawa Abhai Singh v. Deputy Commissioner of Income Tax, (2002)
253 ITR 86 wherein it was observed that “reason to believe” postulates
a foundation based on information and a belief based on reasons. In so
far as “information” is concerned, a Division Bench of this Court held in
L.R. Gupta v. Union of India, (1992) 194 ITR 32 that:
“The expression 'information' must be something more than
a mere rumour or a gossip or a hunch.”

Of course, this was in the context of Section 132 of the Act but as held
in United Electrical, the logical is equally applicable to a case under
Section 147 of the Act.

16.

After a foundation based on information is set up, there must

still be some reasons which warrant the holding of a belief so as to
necessitate the issuance of a notice under Section 148 of the Act.

17.

Looked at in the light of the decisions placed before us and

ITA No.1384/2006

Page 9 of 11

the law laid down therein, it is necessary to appreciate the information
available with the Assessing Officer in the present case.

The only

information is that the assessees had taken a bogus entry of capital gains
by paying cash along with some premium for taking a cheque of that
amount. The information does not indicate the source of the capital
gains (which in this case are shares). We do not know which shares
have been transacted and with whom has the transaction taken place.
There are absolutely no details available and the information supplied is
extremely scanty and vague. In so far as the basis for the reasons is
concerned, even this is absent. The Assessing Officer did not verify the
correctness of the information received by him but merely accepted the
truth of the vague information in a mechanical manner. The Assessing
Officer has not even recorded his satisfaction about the correctness or
otherwise of the information or his satisfaction that a case has been
made out for issuing a notice under Section 148 of the Act. Read in this
light, what has been recorded by the Assessing Officer as his “reasons to
believe” is nothing more than a report given by him to the
Commissioner of Income Tax.

As held by the Supreme Court in

Chhugamal Rajpal, the submission of a report is not the same as

ITA No.1384/2006

Page 10 of 11

recording of reasons to believe for issuing a notice. The Assessing
Officer has clearly substituted form for substance and, therefore, the
action of the Respondent falls foul of the law laid down by the Supreme
Court in Chhugamal Rajpal which is clearly applicable to the facts of
these appeals.

18.

For these reasons, we are of the view that there is no error in

the decision rendered by the Tribunal and no substantial question of
law has arisen for our consideration.

Therefore, the appeals are

dismissed.

Madan B. Lokur, J

May 23, 2007
ncg

V.B. Gupta, J

Certified that the corrected
copy of the judgment has
been transmitted in the main
Server.

ITA No.1384/2006

Page 11 of 11

