*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

CRL.M. 11677/2007 IN WP (CRL.) NO. 796/2007
Judgment reserved on: October 24, 2007

%

Judgment delivered on: November 29, 2007

Court on its own motion

…Petitioner
Through:

Mr. Arvind Nigam, Advocate and
Amicus Curiae
Versus

State & Others

…Respondents
Through:

Mr. Sanjay Jain, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Vijay K. Sondhi, Advocate for
NDTV.
Mr. Vinay Bhasin and Mr. Ashok
Bhasin, Sr. Advocates with
Ms. Shivani Lal and Mr. Vishv Nidhi,
Advocates for the Applicant Mr. R.K.
Anand along with Applicant.
Mr. S.P. Kalra, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Munish Malhotra for noticee
Mr. S.B. Sharma with noticee in
person.
Mr. H.R. Khan Suhel with
Mr. Amaan Khan & Mr. Saif Khan,
Advocates for Mr. I.U. Khan with
Mr. I.U. Khan in person.

Crl. M. 11677/2007 in W.P. (Crl.) No.796/2007

Page 1 of 32

Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MANMOHAN SARIN
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

MADAN B. LOKUR, J.
1.

The application under consideration, styled as an application for
th

clarification of the order dated 4 October, 2007 arises in circumstances
that may only be described as unfortunate. The prayers in the application
are as follows:
(a)

clarify/review the order passed by it [this Court] on
4.10.2007

(b)

in view of the difference of opinion between Hon’ble Mr.
Justice Manmohan Sarin and Hon’ble Mr. Justice Sudarshan
Kumar Mishra, the matter be ordered to be placed before the

Crl. M. 11677/2007 in W.P. (Crl.) No.796/2007

Page 2 of 32

Third Judge to be nominated by the Hon’ble Chief Justice;
(c)

pass any other order/orders which this Hon’ble Court may
deem fit and proper in the facts and circumstances of the
case.

2.

th

At the outset, it is necessary to make it clear that on 4 October, 2007

three orders were passed by this Court – the first by one of us (Manmohan
Sarin, J – hereinafter referred to as the first order), the second by Hon’ble
Mr. Justice Sudershan Kumar Misra (hereinafter referred to as the second
order) and the third by the Bench comprising both the learned judges
(hereinafter referred to as the third order). On the basis of the contents of the
application, the contentions urged as well as nothing having been said to the
contrary, it is quite clear that the clarification or review of the order prayed
for is the first order passed by Manmohan Sarin, J and we are proceeding on
that basis.

3.

th

Briefly, the circumstances in which the first order dated 4 October,

2007 came to be passed are that Mr. R.K. Anand, Senior Advocate and a

Crl. M. 11677/2007 in W.P. (Crl.) No.796/2007

Page 3 of 32

noticee in criminal contempt proceedings pending before us, moved an
application (before the Bench consisting of Manmohan Sarin, J and
Sudershan Kumar Misra, J) in which it was prayed that Sarin, J recuse
himself from hearing the contempt case. It was, inter alia, alleged by Mr.
R.K. Anand that he is not likely to get justice from Sarin, J for a variety of
reasons. In a rather detailed order, Sarin, J dealt with all those reasons and
held that “There is no factual basis or any foundation for nurturing any
apprehension of bias, leave aside any reasonable basis therefor, which is
altogether missing.” Sarin, J then declined the prayer for recusal and
dismissed the application. As noted above, it is this order of which Mr. R.K.
Anand seeks a review or clarification.

4.

Misra, J passed the second order and it is necessary to quote it in full

since it resulted in considerable discussion. The second order reads as
follows:
“With deference to the decision of my very learned and far
more experienced brother, which I have had the privilege of
reading in draft; and with respect, I regret that I find myself

Crl. M. 11677/2007 in W.P. (Crl.) No.796/2007

Page 4 of 32

unable to concur. I do so with great diffidence in view of the
fact that the nature of the controversy before us pertains to my
learned brother alone. It revolves around a number of factual
assertions, which can only be known to my learned brother
personally, and which must necessarily be examined in the light
of the law on the subject. Therefore, I consider it inappropriate
to express any opinion in the matter, one way or the other.”

5.

In view of the second order, Mr. R.K. Anand has made the second

prayer in the application under consideration. In general terms, the
submission being that there is a difference of opinion between the two
learned judges regarding the disposal of the application for recusal and,
therefore, the difference of opinion should be resolved by a third learned
judge.

6.

th

The third order passed on 4 October, 2007 (by the Bench) really

provides a cue to the controversy and has, in our opinion, a vital impact on
the second prayer made in the application under consideration. It is,
therefore, necessary to quote the third order in full. This reads as follows:
“Replies have been filed on behalf of Mr. R.K. Anand, Mr. I.U.
Khan and Mr. Sri Bhagwan Sharma. The same are taken on

Crl. M. 11677/2007 in W.P. (Crl.) No.796/2007

Page 5 of 32

record. Copies have been received by the Amicus Curiae today,
who may study the same.

Following the note given by Sudershan Kumar Misra, J., he has
now expressed his disinclination to hear the matter any further,
th
list for directions on 11 October, 2007.
Manmohan Sarin, J
Sukershan K. Misra, J”

th

7.

As a result of the third order dated 4 October, 2007, Hon’ble the

Chief Justice constituted the present Bench to further hear the matter. We
heard learned counsel for Mr. R.K. Anand and the learned Amicus Curiae on
th

th

12 and 14 October, 2007 when we reserved orders.

The first issue: constitution of the Bench
8.

The first issue canvassed before us was that since the application was
th

one for review of the order dated 4 October, 2007 it should be heard by the
Bench consisting of Sarin and Misra, JJ. It was submitted that under these
circumstances, it would be inappropriate for this Bench to deal with the

Crl. M. 11677/2007 in W.P. (Crl.) No.796/2007

Page 6 of 32

application. It was suggested (as a possibility) that if both the learned judges
once again sit together as a Bench, there may be a change of opinion (by
either of them) resulting in a total reversal of fortunes. It was submitted that
quite obviously, unless there is a very good reason, the same learned judge
or judges who render a decision must hear the application seeking review of
that decision. It was contended that in the present situation, no such good
reason exists in as much as Misra, J is very much a part of this Court and
available to hear the review application. That being so, the application must
be placed before a Bench of Sarin and Misra, JJ and Hon’ble the Chief
Justice erroneously constituted another Bench, excluding Misra, J from the
newly constituted Bench to hear the application under consideration.

9.

The contention urged on behalf of the Applicant is misconceived, in

as much as it overlooks a very crucial fact. The application filed by Mr. R.K.
Anand is for clarification or review of the first order passed by Sarin, J – it is
not for review of the order passed by Misra, J. Indeed, the Applicant has no
grievance against the second order or the third order. This is clear from a

Crl. M. 11677/2007 in W.P. (Crl.) No.796/2007

Page 7 of 32

reading of the application itself, which extensively quotes from the first
order and criticizes it. There is not a whisper that the second order is
factually erroneous or otherwise requires to be reviewed. Nor is there
anything to suggest that the third order requires a review. Consequently, as
long as the author of the first order – Sarin, J – hears the review application,
that is good enough. In the present situation, he is sitting as a member of the
Bench hearing the review application and there can be no objection to that.
No case law or any other precedent or academic treatise has been shown by
learned counsel to suggest that as a hard and fast rule, Misra, J ought to be a
member of the Bench hearing the application for review of the first order.
Consequently, there is no reason to list the application under consideration
before the Bench of Sarin and Misra, JJ.

10.

Of course, learned counsel is right in contending that unless there is

some supervening circumstance, Misra, J ought to be a member of the Bench
hearing the application under consideration. But, this is where another
crucial fact is overlooked by learned counsel, which is that Misra, J has

Crl. M. 11677/2007 in W.P. (Crl.) No.796/2007

Page 8 of 32

expressed (in no uncertain terms) in the third order his “disinclination to
hear the matter any further”.

11.

One of the issues debated was what is meant by the disinclination

expressed by Misra, J. Does his disinclination have an all-encompassing
meaning that he would not like to have anything further to do with the
matter, signifying that he has completely washed his hands off the matter?
Or, does it have a limited meaning that henceforth he would not like to
participate in any proceedings in the matter, leaving open his participation in
relation to earlier proceedings, such as a review or clarification of earlier
orders passed by the Bench of which he was a member? According to
learned counsel for the Applicant, the third order has a limited application
and Misra, J has not washed his hands off the case completely.
Alternatively, it was submitted that the interpretation of the third order is
best left to be decided by a Bench consisting of Sarin and Misra, JJ.

12.

As far as the alternative contention is concerned, it merits rejection for

Crl. M. 11677/2007 in W.P. (Crl.) No.796/2007

Page 9 of 32

the simple reason that the Applicant has not requested for a clarification of
the third order – and so it remains for us to interpret the third order as best as
we can. We have, therefore, necessarily to proceed on the basis that even
according to the Applicant, the third order needs to be meaningfully
interpreted and nothing more.

13.

In our opinion, the third order must be given an all-encompassing

meaning, particularly when it is read in sequence with the first and second
order. But, before doing that, it would be necessary to understand the
second order.

The second issue: interpreting the second order
14.

What actually does the second order say? It would be necessary to

comprehend the second order not only for dealing with the contention of
learned counsel for the Applicant but also for considering the second prayer
made by the Applicant. It may be mentioned, en passant, that the major
portion of the proceedings were occupied in trying to appreciate the second

Crl. M. 11677/2007 in W.P. (Crl.) No.796/2007

Page 10 of 32

order and that is why it is necessary to deal with it in some detail.

15.

It was submitted by learned counsel for the Applicant that in the

second order Misra, J has expressed his inability to concur with the opinion
expressed by Sarin, J in the draft order circulated by him to Misra, J.
Learned counsel submitted that ‘concur’ means ‘to agree’ and he cited
th

Black’s Law Dictionary (7 edition) in this regard. There is no difficulty in
accepting that ‘concur’ means ‘to agree’. But Misra, J has given no reason
why he does not concur with Sarin, J. On the contrary, he says a little later in
his order that in the nature of the controversy, the factual assertions made by
Mr. R.K. Anand would have to be examined in the light of the law on the
subject. Having said this, Misra, J considered it inappropriate to express any
opinion in the matter, one way or the other.

16.

On a reading of the second order as a whole, it appears that Misra, J

merely did some loud thinking that he did not agree with the opinion of
Sarin, J without giving a reasoned opinion on the factual assertions. Why

Crl. M. 11677/2007 in W.P. (Crl.) No.796/2007

Page 11 of 32

Misra, J adopted this course is because he felt that the factual assertions
were in the personal knowledge of Sarin, J only. Misra, J also chose not to
express any opinion or even examine the law on the subject. Since Misra, J
did not give any definitive or conclusive opinion either on the facts or on the
law, his inability to concur with Sarin, J was, therefore, only an observation
or a comment neither supported by an analysis of the facts nor the law. The
observation or comment does not have any binding value or cast any
obligation on anybody – the result being that only the opinion of Sarin, J has
any force in law. There are several reasons for saying so.

17.

A binding decision or expression of opinion is conveyed either in a

judgment or in an order or direction. This is perhaps more than obvious, but
if any authority is required for this, it is to be found both in the Code of Civil
Procedure (CPC) and the Criminal Procedure Code (CrPC).

18.

In so far as the CPC is concerned, one needs only go through Section

2 (9) read with Order XX Rules 4 and 5, Order XLI Rule 31 and Order XLII

Crl. M. 11677/2007 in W.P. (Crl.) No.796/2007

Page 12 of 32

Rule 32 to realize that a judgment must contain reasons for the decision
arrived at. The position in the CrPC is no different. Under the CrPC, a
judgment is explained in Section 354 thereof and this may be read along
with Sections 264 and 387.

19.

All the above provisions make it abundantly clear that in the absence

of reasons, neither procedural statute recognizes a judgment as having
binding force if it is not supported by reasons. It is nobody’s case that the
second order is supported by reasons. That being so, it is not a judgment as
anyone versed in the law would understand it.

20.

The requirement of giving reasons for sustaining a judgment was laid

down by the Supreme Court almost forty years ago when it was said in
Swaran Lata Ghosh v. H.K. Banerjee, (1969) 1 SCC 709:
“A judicial determination of a disputed claim where substantial
questions of law or fact arise is satisfactorily reached, only if it
be supported by the most cogent reasons that suggest
themselves to the Judge a mere order deciding the matter in
dispute not supported by reasons is no judgment at all.”

Crl. M. 11677/2007 in W.P. (Crl.) No.796/2007

Page 13 of 32

21.

More recently, the requirement of giving reasons in support of a

judgment was reiterated in Union of India v. Essel Mining & Industries
Ltd.,(2005) 6 SCC 675 when it was said:
“It is not the number of pages in a judgment which is relevant.
It is on the other hand, the sufficiency of reasons indicated to
justify the conclusions.”

22.

Similarly, in Sanjay Singh v. U.P. Public Service Commission,

(2007) 3 SCC 720 it was said:
“Broadly speaking, every judgment of superior courts has three
segments, namely, (i) the facts and the point at issue; (ii) the
reasons for the decision; and (iii) the final order containing the
decision.”

23.

Under no circumstances, therefore, can the second order be said to be

a judgment particularly since it is not supported by any reasons. Can it be
described as a ‘decision’ or a ‘direction’ or an ‘order’? The answer to this
must also be in the negative since no conclusion has been stated in as much
as it has not been held that either the application is dismissed or it is
allowed. That this is not a matter of semantics is clear from Sanjay Singh

Crl. M. 11677/2007 in W.P. (Crl.) No.796/2007

Page 14 of 32

wherein a distinction is made between the reasons for a judgment and the
relief given – the reasons given may not result in a particular relief. It is said,
“The reasons for the decision or the ratio decidendi is not the
final order containing the decision. In fact, in a judgment of this
Court, though the ratio decidendi may point to a particular
result, the decision (final order relating to relief) may be
different and not a natural consequence of the ratio decidendi of
the judgment. This may happen either on account of any
subsequent event or the need to mould the relief to do complete
justice in the matter.”

24.

Therefore, even if it could be said by some stretch of imagination that

Misra, J gave some reasons in the second order, he certainly did not pass any
final order or give any direction or render any decision, rendering the
reasons meaningless and without any conclusion.

25.

Learned counsel for the Applicant relied on State of U.P. v. Jeet S.

Bisht, (2007) 6 SCC 586 wherein a different sort of situation had arisen. The
contention of learned counsel was that even where there is a concurrence of
views, but a difference in the reasons for the conclusion, the matter may be
referred to a third judge for resolution. In that case, both the Hon’ble Judges

Crl. M. 11677/2007 in W.P. (Crl.) No.796/2007

Page 15 of 32

of the Supreme Court came to the same conclusion, but for different reasons.
The Hon’ble Judges then referred the matter to Hon’ble the Chief Justice of
India for nominating another Bench. This is not the issue that arises in the
present case, but it nevertheless underscores the complexities involved in
deciding cases where there is a difference of views. However, as already
mentioned, such an issue does not arise in the present case since Misra, J has
neither passed a final order nor does the second order contain any reasons.

26.

The second order, therefore, is neither a judgment, nor an order, nor a

decision, nor a direction, nor does it contain any reasons. In fact, even Misra,
J does not classify the second order as a judgment, decision, order or
direction. In the third order, the Bench (of which Misra, J was a member)
describes the second order as a ‘note’ (Following the note given by
Sudershan Kumar Misra, J. ….. ….).

27.

This is not to say that every ‘order’, ‘direction’ or ‘decision’ given by

a superior court must be supported by reasons – not at all. There are

Crl. M. 11677/2007 in W.P. (Crl.) No.796/2007

Page 16 of 32

interlocutory directions, orders or decisions given by superior courts day in
and day out. They are not always supported by reasons but that does not
detract from their binding force. All such orders or directions or decisions
mandate the performance of some duty or to refrain from doing something.
The second order, however, as already mentioned does not conclude
anything in as much as it does not dispose of the application or even
postpone its consideration. The first sentence of the second order, therefore,
cannot be read as anything other than an observation or a comment made by
Misra, J without having any conclusive or binding result.

28.

Learned counsel for the Applicant referred to In re Sham Lal, (1978)

2 SCC 479 to contend that it is not always necessary for a Court to give
reasons in support of its decision. The decision cited is not at all apposite. In
the first place, the decision was in the context of suo motu proceedings
initiated by the Supreme Court, and that too in its contempt jurisdiction.
Moreover, the Supreme Court decided to drop the proceedings and not
proceed further in the matter. The Supreme Court did mention in its order

Crl. M. 11677/2007 in W.P. (Crl.) No.796/2007

Page 17 of 32

that it had taken all the pros and cons into consideration for initiating
contempt proceedings but found that it is not a fit case for doing so. The
contempt jurisdiction of the Supreme Court is a special jurisdiction and the
general principles advocated by learned counsel would surely not be
applicable, given the full facts and circumstances of the case. It would
certainly have been a different matter if the Supreme Court had decided to
punish the alleged contemnor, but that was not so.

29.

It is possible to argue (though we do not give any final conclusion on

it, since it is not necessary to do so) that Misra, J was entitled to take a view
on the application for recusal even if ‘allegations’ were made only against
Sarin, J. This is because it is the Court that speaks, not an individual judge.
This appears to be so from In re Arundhati Roy, (2002) 3 SCC 343 where a
request was made that one of the learned judges recuse himself from the case
and that request was turned down by the Bench, not by the individual judge.
Similarly, in P.K. Ghosh v. J.G. Rajput, (1995) 6 SCC 744 the Supreme
Court held that one of the learned judges constituting the Bench ought to

Crl. M. 11677/2007 in W.P. (Crl.) No.796/2007

Page 18 of 32

have recused himself from hearing the matter (on merits) but did not find
fault in the Bench per se hearing the matter even though the ‘allegations’
pertained only to one learned Judge.

30.

Perhaps a clearer exposition on this issue is to be found in Election

Commission of India v. Dr. Subramaniam Swamy, (1996) 4 SCC 104
wherein the Supreme Court suggested the procedure that ought to be
followed in a situation concerning recusal. This is what the Supreme Court
said:
“We are, therefore, of the opinion that the proper course to
follow is that the Chief Election Commissioner should call a
meeting of the Election Commission to adjudicate on the issue
of disqualification of Ms J. Jayalalitha on the grounds alleged
by Dr Swamy. After calling the meeting he should act as the
Chairman but then he may recuse himself by announcing that
he would not participate in the formation of opinion. If the two
Election Commissioners reach a unanimous opinion, the Chief
Election Commissioner will have the opinion communicated to
the Governor. If the two Election Commissioners do not reach a
unanimous decision in the matter of expressing their opinion on
the issue referred to the Election Commission, it would be
necessary for the Chief Election Commissioner to express his
opinion on the doctrine of necessity. We think that in the
special circumstances of this case this course of action would

Crl. M. 11677/2007 in W.P. (Crl.) No.796/2007

Page 19 of 32

be the most appropriate one to follow because if the two
Election Commissioners do not agree, we have no doubt that
the doctrine of necessity would compel the Chief Election
Commissioner to express his views so that the majority opinion
could be communicated to the Governor to enable him to take a
decision in accordance therewith as required by Article 192(1)
of the Constitution.”

31.

From the above, it follows that there were various combinations

available to the Bench consisting of Sarin and Misra, JJ. They could have (as
a Bench) taken a unanimous decision on the application for recusal; both the
learned judges could have taken a decision and disagreed with each other;
Sarin, J could have left it to Misra, J to take a decision for the Bench after
abstaining himself; Misra, J could have abstained from taking a decision and
left it to Sarin, J to decide for the Bench. As it happens, the fourth alternative
was taken – Misra, J heard the learned counsel but chose not to participate in
the formation of the decision or to express his opinion, apart from the
comment that he made. This appears to be perfectly legal and valid and the
decision so rendered by Sarin, J (effectively, in the circumstances, for the
Bench) would be the appropriate decision to adopt as the opinion of the

Crl. M. 11677/2007 in W.P. (Crl.) No.796/2007

Page 20 of 32

Bench.

32.

This view is supported by Guardians of Poor v. Guardians of Poor,

(1889) 24 QBD 117 wherein it was said,
“We know that each of them considers the matter separately,
and then they consider the matter jointly, interchanging their
judgment, so that every one of them has seen the judgments of
others. If they mean to differ in their view, they say so openly
when they come to deliver their judgments and if they do not do
this, it must be taken that each of them agrees with the
judgments of the others.”

33.

Similarly, in Overseers of Manchester v. Guardians of Ormskrik

Union, (1890) 24 QBD 678 it was said,
“Where in the House of Lords one of the learned Lords gives an
elaborate explanation of the meaning of a statute, and some of
the other learned Lords present concur in the explanation, and
none express their dissent from it, it must be taken that all of
them agreed in it.”

Crl. M. 11677/2007 in W.P. (Crl.) No.796/2007

Page 21 of 32

34.

It also appears that the latter part of the second order makes it clear

that Misra, J has chosen not to enter into any controversy on the merits of
the allegations made against Sarin, J on facts or to analyze the law on the
subject. Perhaps, the learned judge felt some embarrassment in doing so, but
in any event, Misra, J refrained from expressing any opinion in the matter.
Quite obviously, therefore, what was said by Misra, J in the earlier portion
of the second order was not an expression of opinion – otherwise it would
appear as if the earlier portion and the latter portion of the second order
contradict each other – a result that cannot be countenanced.

35.

It must follow from this discussion that Misra, J did not express any

definitive or binding opinion on the controversy in the beginning of the
second order as contended by learned counsel for the Applicant; Misra, J did
not deliver any judgment or pass any order or direction on the application for
recusal. This is fortified by what he has unequivocally said that he considers
it “inappropriate to express any opinion in the matter, one way or the other.”

Crl. M. 11677/2007 in W.P. (Crl.) No.796/2007

Page 22 of 32

36.

Even if it is assumed that Guardians of Poor and Overseers of

Manchester do not lay down the correct law, Misra, J did right by not
expressing any opinion on the ‘allegations’ made against Sarin, J. In Jewell
Ridge Coal Corporation v. Local No. 6167, United Mine Workers of
America, 325 US 897 (1945) it was held that a complaint as to the
qualification of a justice of the Supreme Court to take part in the decision of
a cause “cannot properly be addressed to the Court as a whole…” and it is
the responsibility of each justice to determine for himself the propriety of
withdrawing from a case.

37.

Similarly, an application for the recusal of Justice Scalia from hearing

Cheney, Vice President of the United States v. United States District Court
for the District of Columbia, 542 US 367 (2004) was heard and decided, not
by the Court, but by Justice Scalia only. In Laird v. Tatum, 409 US 824
(1972) Justice Rehnquist alone decided an application for his recusal from a
case. He stated the practice followed in the United States Supreme Court in
Hanrahan v. Hampton, 446 US 1301 (1980) in the following words:

Crl. M. 11677/2007 in W.P. (Crl.) No.796/2007

Page 23 of 32

“Plaintiffs-respondents and their counsel in these cases have
moved that I “be recused from the proceedings in this case” for
the reasons stated in their 14-page motion and their five
Appendices filed with the Clerk of this Court on April 3, 1980.
The motion is opposed by the state - defendant petitioners in the
action. Since generally the Court as an institution leaves such
motions, even though they be addressed to it, to the decision of
the individual Justices to whom they refer, see Jewell Ridge
Coal Corp. v. Mine Workers, 325 U.S. 897 (1945) (denial of
petition for rehearing) (Jackson, J., concurring), I shall treat the
motion as addressed to me individually. I have considered the
motion, the Appendices, the response of the state defendants,
28 U.S.C. 455 (1976 ed. and Supp. II), and the current
American Bar Association Code of Judicial Conduct, and the
motion is accordingly Denied.”

38.

Therefore, whichever way one looks at it, the second order has no

binding force, it does not express any opinion and, therefore, it is difficult to
accept the contention of learned counsel for the Applicant that there is a
difference of opinion between Sarin, J and Misra, J – in fact, Misra, J has not
expressed any opinion. Consequently, there is no need to request Hon’ble
the Chief Justice to send the case to a third learned judge to resolve the
‘difference of opinion’ – there is only one opinion expressed and that is of
Sarin, J and that opinion is the decision of the Court and there is no

Crl. M. 11677/2007 in W.P. (Crl.) No.796/2007

Page 24 of 32

difference of opinion between the two learned judges constituting the Bench.

39.

We may look at the problem from another angle. If a learned judge

decides to recuse himself from hearing a case, for some personal reason, can
another learned judge sitting with him differ and insist that the learned judge
should not recuse himself, thereby virtually compelling him to hear and
decide a case, which he does not want to for personal reasons? The answer
to this must obviously be in the negative.

Third issue: effect of the third order
40.

The third order, quite naturally, comes after the second order wherein

Misra, J has categorically stated that he does not express any opinion on the
facts surrounding the controversy or the correct position in law. Having said
that, Misra, J withdrew from the case by expressing his disinclination to hear
the matter any further. What does this mean? Earlier in the day Misra, J
chose not to express any opinion on facts or in law and a little later he chose
to withdraw from the case. The only conclusion that one can reasonably

Crl. M. 11677/2007 in W.P. (Crl.) No.796/2007

Page 25 of 32

arrive at from this is that Misra, J did not want to have anything to do with
the case – on facts, in law or even otherwise. When the opportunity
presented itself before him for expressing an opinion, he decided not to. Had
he any judicial interest in the matter, he would have certainly expressed
himself one way or the other. From this, it must be concluded, in our
opinion, that he had washed his hands off the case and explicitly said so at
the first available opportunity.

41.

To suggest, as the Applicant is doing, that notwithstanding the third

order, Misra, J further hear or deal with the matter is uncalled-for. As we
have already held, the issue of recusal could have (possibly) been decided by
the Bench, but Misra, J left it for Sarin, J to decide and he then had really no
effective role to play in the decision making process as he himself has
indicated by necessary implication. To insist that Misra, J hears the matter is
to needlessly embarrass him. If a judge does not want to substantively deal
with a case, then to require him to do so - unless it is absolutely necessary –
will only cause him discomfiture and surely the Applicant does not have any

Crl. M. 11677/2007 in W.P. (Crl.) No.796/2007

Page 26 of 32

such intention.

42.

It was contended on behalf of the Applicant that Hon’ble the Chief

Justice erred in constituting the present Bench, to the exclusion of Misra, J.
On the basis of the reasons indicated above, we are of the opinion that there
is no error committed by Hon’ble the Chief Justice in constituting a special
Bench to hear the application filed by the Applicant and that it was not
obligatory to have the application under consideration listed before the
Bench of Sarin and Misra, JJ.

43.

Hon’ble the Chief Justice is undoubtedly the master of the roster. [see

for example State of Maharashtra v. Narayan Shamrao Puranik, (1982) 2
SCC 440 and State of Rajasthan v. Prakash Chand, (1998) 1 SCC 1]. What
would one expect the learned Chief Justice to do under the circumstances?
He receives the third order which unequivocally suggests to him that Misra,
J has “expressed his disinclination to hear the matter any further”. He also
receives with it an application with the prayers as mentioned above. Hon’ble

Crl. M. 11677/2007 in W.P. (Crl.) No.796/2007

Page 27 of 32

the Chief Justice is aware, on going through the case papers, that
‘allegations’ have been made only against Sarin, J and that he has rejected
those ‘allegations’. He is also aware that Misra, J has expressed no opinion
on the ‘allegations’. On the totality of the facts, Hon’ble the Chief Justice
decides, in the interest of the Applicant and in the interests of justice, to
constitute a special Bench to hear the application, even though the learned
Chief Justice had the option to request Sarin, J to alone hear the application.
In doing so, Hon’ble the Chief Justice discharged his duty, as one would
expect him to and no fault can be found in this regard.

44.

Moreover, the Applicant has not substantively challenged the order

passed by Hon’ble the Chief Justice in constituting the special Bench. There
is no reason, therefore, to set aside the administrative order passed by
Hon’ble the Chief Justice. The order passed by Hon’ble the Chief Justice
constituting the special Bench to hear the application under consideration is
correct, with respect, in law and even on merits, more so considering the
facts of this case.

Crl. M. 11677/2007 in W.P. (Crl.) No.796/2007

Page 28 of 32

Conclusions:
45.

On the basis of our opinion expressed on the various issues raised, we

conclude as follows:
1. Given the nature of the prayers made in the application under

consideration, it is not at all necessary that only a Bench consisting of
Sarin and Misra, JJ should hear and decide it. Sarin, J is competent to
decide the application alone and it was not even necessary for Lokur,
J to be a member of the Bench hearing the application.
2. There is no illegality in the application under consideration being

heard and decided by a Bench consisting of Sarin, J and Lokur, J.
3. Hon’ble the Chief Justice is fully competent to constitute the present
Bench to hear the application under consideration.
4. In the second order, Misra, J has expressed no opinion, let alone any

binding opinion, on the merits of the ‘allegations’ made against Sarin,
J and in the circumstances of the case commendably so, even though
the law in our country apparently does not prohibit him from doing so.
On the contrary, it would have been unfortunate if Misra, J had

Crl. M. 11677/2007 in W.P. (Crl.) No.796/2007

Page 29 of 32

expressed an opinion on the ‘allegations’ made against Sarin, J.
5. There is no doubt that Misra, J would not like to hear the case any

further and it would be inadvisable to request him, let alone compel
him, to do so. Misra, J has completely washed his hands off the case
for all intents and purposes. Hon’ble the Chief Justice took the right
step, with respect, in constituting a special Bench to hear the
application under consideration.

On the merits of the request for review:
46.

Learned counsel for the Applicant submitted that he had nothing to

say on the merits of the request for review, if the other submissions made by
him were rejected. Since we have rejected all the submissions made by
learned counsel for the Applicant, we dismiss the request for a review of the
first order since no submissions have been made in support of the request.
Even otherwise, in the first order Sarin, J has comprehensively dealt with the
grounds and pleas which are sought to be raised in the application under
consideration. These do not constitute valid grounds for review and no

Crl. M. 11677/2007 in W.P. (Crl.) No.796/2007

Page 30 of 32

clarification is needed. At best, the grounds can be urged in an appeal.

47.

It may be mentioned that learned counsel for the Applicant referred to

a few decisions of this Court where there has been a difference of opinion
between two learned judges and also the procedure for making a reference to
a third learned judge. Since we have come to the conclusion that there was
no difference of opinion between Sarin, J and Misra, J it is not necessary to
deal with those decisions.

48.

As a postscript, we may add that a copy of this decision be placed

before Hon’ble the Chief Justice for framing a practice direction, if deemed
advisable, to the effect that when an application for recusal of a judge is
made, then that application should be considered only by that learned judge
and his decision on the application would be final, since the application
would essentially pertain to him only. This would not only set a healthy
practice to be followed but would also obviate any unnecessary discussion
as has happened in this case.

Crl. M. 11677/2007 in W.P. (Crl.) No.796/2007

Page 31 of 32

49.

Both the substantive prayers in the application are rejected.

Madan B. Lokur, J.

November 29, 2007
ncg

Manmohan Sarin, J

Certified that the corrected copy of
the judgment has been transmitted
in the main Server.

Crl. M. 11677/2007 in W.P. (Crl.) No.796/2007

Page 32 of 32

