*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

Criminal Appeal No.275 of 2002
Judgment reserved on: January 2, 2007

%

Judgment delivered on: February 23, 2007

Sunil Kumar
S/o Shri Kedar Nath
R/o B-I/346, New Ashok Nagar
New Delhi
Through

...Appellant
Mr. V.K. Raina, Amicus Curiae

versus
N.C.T. of Delhi

...Respondent
Through Mr. Sunil Sharma,
Additional Public Prosecutor

Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Not necessary

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Not necessary

Crl. A. No.275/2002

Page 1 of 9

MADAN B. LOKUR, J.
This appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated
14th   September,   2001   as   well   as   the   order   of   sentence   dated   15th
September, 2001 in SC No.135/2001.

2.

The Appellant (Sunil Kumar) was charged on 18th January,

2000 as follows:­
“That on 31.7.99 at about 2.30 P.M. at B­1/346, New Ashok
Nagar,   Delhi  (Kondly)  within  the jurisdiction  of P.S. New
Ashok Nagar, in furtherance of common intention of you all,
you   committed   murder   of   Smt.   Meena   wife   of   Sunil   by
pouring   kerosene   and   lighting   the   fire   and   committed   an
offence u/S 302 r.e. 34 IPC and within the cognizance of this
court. 
OR
That on the aforesaid date, time and place, Smt. Meena died
of burns within seven years of marriage and soon before her
death she was subjected to cruelty in connection with demand
of dowry by all of you who are the husband, father­in­law
and   mother­in­law   respectively   and   thereby   you   all
committed   an   offence   punishable   under   Section   304­B/34
IPC and within the cognizance of this court.”
Crl. A. No.275/2002

Page 2 of 9

The Appellant pleaded not guilty and claimed trial.

3.

In so far as Accused No.2 (Kedar Singh) and Accused No.3

(Raj Kumari) are concerned, they are the parents of the Appellant and
both of them were acquitted of the charge against them.

4.

Broadly, the facts of the case are that the deceased (Meena

Devi) was married to the Appellant  some time in 1995.   There were
allegations that her husband and her in­laws demanded dowry and used
to mistreat the deceased for bringing inadequate dowry.  On 31st July,
1997,   it   is   alleged   that   the   Appellant   poured   kerosene   oil   on   the
deceased and set her on fire at about 2.30 pm.   Naturally, she started
shouting and some neighbours heard her and poured water on her to put
out the fire.  She was also taken to the nearby hospital and admitted soon
thereafter.  At the time of her admission in the hospital, she informed the
Crl. A. No.275/2002

Page 3 of 9

doctor on duty (Dr. Rajeev Grover, PW­9) that her husband had poured
kerosene oil on her with the consent of her parents­in­law and he had
then set her aflame.   Dr. Grover confirmed having prepared the MLC
which is Ex.9A in which it is recorded that the deceased had come to the
hospital at about 4.00 pm and she was fit for making a statement even
though   she   had   approximately   100%   burns.     At   that   time,   the   Staff
Nurse and Surgeon on duty were also present.
5.

Due intimation was also given to the SDM of the area and he

recorded the dying declaration of the deceased at about 4.40 pm on the
same day.  The SDM, Shri Ravi Dadhich appeared in the witness box as
PW­3 and stated that he had received a telephone call at about 4.20 pm
from   the   local   police   and   he   put   some   preliminary   questions   to   the
deceased and on being satisfied that she was able to give a statement, he
started recording her statement at about 4.40 pm.   The Chief Medical
Officer   had   also   confirmed   to   him   that   she   was   fit   for   making   a
statement.  The statement of the deceased was recorded as Ex.PW­3/B.

Crl. A. No.275/2002

Page 4 of 9

We have gone through the statement and find that it is consistent with
the first statement made by the deceased when she was admitted in the
hospital and the MLC prepared by Dr. Rajeev Grover, PW­9.

6.

It   appears   that   the   investigating   officer   also   recorded   her

statement as Ex.PW­17/A and this was slightly at variance with the first
two statements inasmuch as in the third dying declaration she alleges a
greater role to her parents­in­law in respect of the incident.  This dying
declaration   was   not   accepted   by   the   learned   Trial   Judge   who   relied
entirely upon the first two dying declarations to convict the Appellant of
an offence punishable under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).
7.

The post­mortem report in respect of the deceased (Ex.PW­

2/A) shows that the deceased was about 23 years of age at the time of
her death which is given as 8.05 pm on 31st July, 1997.  It also indicates
that there were soot deposits in her nostrils and she had suffered around
98% burns.   There was a smell of kerosene present on the body and

Crl. A. No.275/2002

Page 5 of 9

scalp hair and the cause of death was due to shock   consequent upon
98% burn injuries which were ante­mortem in nature.

8.

Learned Amicus Curiae has taken us through the statements

of the relevant witnesses including the statement of Net Ram (PW­8)
who is the father of the deceased.   He confirmed the fact that Meena
Devi   was   married   to   the   Appellant   and   that   there   were   demands   of
dowry made by the Appellant as well as his family.

9.

Dr. Rajeev Grover, PW­9 confirmed the MLC prepared by

him and confirmed that the deceased was not given any sedation and
was fully conscious at the time of admission and was capable of making
a   statement.     His   testimony   was   not   shaken   in   cross­examination   in
respect of its material portions.

10.

Meera, who is the sister of the deceased, entered the witness

Crl. A. No.275/2002

Page 6 of 9

box as PW­10 and she also confirmed that the deceased was married to
the Appellant.  She confirmed that the deceased had told her about the
dowry demands made from her family.

11.

Having gone through the entire evidence on record with the

assistance   of   the   learned   Amicus   Curiae   as   well   as   the   learned
Additional Public Prosecutor, we do not find any discrepancy in the first
two   important   dying   declarations   made   by   the   deceased.     She   had
consistently stated that her husband had poured kerosene oil on her and
set her on fire.  This information was given by the deceased not only to
the   doctor   on   duty   but   also   to   the   SDM   who   recorded   her   dying
declaration.     The   deceased   was   conscious   when   she   made   her   dying
declaration   and   she   was   not   under   any   sedation   which   would   have
affected   her   mental   faculties.     The   statements   were   made   by   the
deceased soon after the incident and, as has been noted by the learned
Trial Judge, without any pressure or coercion.

Crl. A. No.275/2002

Page 7 of 9

12.

It was submitted before us that the third dying declaration

recorded by the investigating officer makes out a completely different
version of the incident.  We are not in agreement with this interpretation
given   to   the   third   dying   declaration.     The   basic   facts   relating   to   the
incident are confirmed in the third dying declaration; the only material
departure   is   with   respect   to   the   role   of   the   parents   of   the   Appellant
which seems to have been given greater weightage in the third dying
declaration.   However, since the third dying declaration has not been
believed and the parents of the Appellant have been acquitted, we do not
propose   to   delve  any   further into the merits  or demerits  of  the third
dying declaration.  In any event, that dying declaration does not reduce
the complicity of the Appellant in any manner and for this reason the
Appellant cannot draw any advantage from the third dying declaration.  

13.

We do not find any merit in this appeal and are of the view

Crl. A. No.275/2002

Page 8 of 9

that the learned Trial Judge rightly convicted the Appellant of an offence
punishable under Section 302 IPC.

14.

The appeal is dismissed.  The conviction and sentence of the

Appellant is confirmed.

15.

For  the efforts  put  in by  Mr. V.K. Raina, learned  Amicus

Curiae, we direct the Delhi Legal Services Authority to pay him a sum
of Rs.3,300/­ within a period of six weeks from today.

Madan B. Lokur, J

February 23, 2007
ncg

Aruna Suresh, J

Certified that the corrected
copy of the judgment has
been transmitted in the main
Server.

Crl. A. No.275/2002

Page 9 of 9

