*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

ITA No. 112 of 2006
Judgment reserved on: July 10, 2007

%

Judgment delivered on: July 25, 2007
Commissioner of Income Tax
Delhi-I, New Delhi.
Through

...Appellant
Mr. J.R. Goel, Advocate

Versus
M/s. Capital Flour Mills Pvt. Ltd.
B-28, Lawrence Road, Industrial Area
Delhi-110035.
Through

...Respondent

Mr.Sandeep Sapra, Advocate

Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

ITA No.112/2006

Page 1 of 8

MADAN B. LOKUR, J.

The Revenue has preferred this appeal under Section 260A of the
Income Tax Act, 1961 (for short the Act) in respect of an order dated
26th May, 2005 passed by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Delhi
Bench ‘B’ in ITA No.1482/Del/2005 relevant for the assessment year
1998-99.

2.

It appears that a search and seizure operation was carried out in

respect of one Kamal Chand Jain group on 15th December, 1997.
During the operation, a large number of hundi receipts were seized
showing sums advanced to various persons mostly of old Delhi areas.

3.

One of the hundis seized suggested that the assessee had

purchased the hundi for a sum of Rs.10,00,000/- and since the amount
was in cash, it was not recorded in the books of Kamal Chand Jain. A
photocopy of the hundi was made available to the Assessing Officer and
on this basis a notice under Section 148 of the Act was issued to the
assessee on 10th May, 2001.

ITA No.112/2006

Page 2 of 8

4.

In re-assessment proceedings, the statement of one Suresh

Goenka, a Director of the assessee was recorded and he denied having
anything to do with the document. The Assessing Officer disbelieved
the Director and made an addition of Rs.10,00,000/- to the income of the
assessee under the provisions of Section 69D of the Act. He also made
an addition of Rs.80,000/- being the interest paid on the loan.

5.

A photocopy of the so-called hundi has been placed on our

record. This is on the letterhead of the assessee and is dated 25 th July,
1997. It reads as follows:
“Received Rs.10,00,000.00 (Ten Lacs only) from Sh.
Ravinder Kumar as loans interest @ 12% P.A. th. Sh. Brij
Mohanji (illegible but perhaps referable to an area in Delhi6).”

The document is signed by some person whose signature is totally
illegible.

ITA No.112/2006

Page 3 of 8

6.

The Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) upheld the view

taken by the Assessing Officer but in an appeal filed by the assessee, the
Tribunal reversed. That is how the matter is now before us.

7.

The Tribunal has noted that apart from the fact that the original

document was not placed before the Assessing Officer and that a
photocopy of the hundi has no real evidentiary value, it relied upon the
decision of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in Commissioner of
Income-tax v. Dexan Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd., [1995] 214 ITR 576.
In that decision, it has been noted that “hundi” is neither defined in the
Act nor in the Negotiable Instruments Act. However, it finds a mention
in the Indian Stamp Act, 1899. Section 2(2) thereof defines a bill of
exchange which includes a hundi.

8.

Thereafter, the High Court considered various commentaries and

decisions and concluded that for a transaction to be a hundi transaction,
the following are necessary:(i)

There are always three parties to such a transaction. They
are the drawer, the drawee and the payee. The drawer
cannot himself also be the drawee. If the transaction is

ITA No.112/2006

Page 4 of 8

bilateral it is a very strong indication to show that it is not a
hundi transaction.
(ii)

A hundi is payable to satisfy a person or order but
negotiable without endorsement by the payee.

(iii)

The holder of a hundi is entitled to sue on its basis without
any endorsement in his favour.

(iv)

A hundi once accepted by the donee, could be negotiated
without endorsement.
In the case of loss of a hundi, the owner can claim duplicate
or triplicate from the drawer and present the same to the
drawee for claiming payment.

(v)

(vi)

9.

A hundi is normally in the oriental language as per the
mercantile custom.

If we examine the document in the light of the law laid down by

the Andhra Pradesh High Court, with which we have no reason to differ,
it is clear that the document is not a hundi. First of all, we do not even
know whose signatures are appended to the document and whether he
has any connection at all with the assessee.

Merely because the

letterhead of the assessee has been used does not lead to any
presumption one way or the other. Then we find that the transaction is
bilateral. The document is written in English and not in any oriental

ITA No.112/2006

Page 5 of 8

language. It is difficult, under these circumstances, to even hold the
document to be a hundi.

10.

A similar issue had arisen in Commissioner of Income-tax v.

Paranjothi Salt Co., [1995] 211 ITR 141. In that decision, the Madras
High Court mentioned some other characteristics of a hundi, namely that
it should be an unconditional order signed by the maker directing a
certain person to pay a certain sum of money only to or to the order of a
certain person or to the bearer of the instrument. Such a document
should be executed on a hundi paper. It was also observed that it may
not be necessary whether the document is in an oriental language or not.

11.

We find that taking the tests laid down by the Andhra Pradesh

High Court as well as the Madras High Court, it would not be
imperative, in this day and age, to insist upon a hundi being written only
in an oriental language nor would it be necessary to insist upon the
hundi being executed on a hundi paper.

What is required, on a

composite reading of the document and on a cumulative reading of the
tests laid down, is to be able to arrive at a conclusion that the document
ITA No.112/2006

Page 6 of 8

is nothing but a hundi as would be understood in normal commercial
parlance as being a bill of exchange.

12.

The document, the contents of which we have reproduced above,

do not seem to suggest anything specific except that the assessee
(assuming the letterhead of the assessee is genuine) received an amount
from Ravinder Kumar “through” Shri Brij Mohan. Who received the
amount on behalf of the assessee is not at all clear – the Director of the
assessee Suresh Goenka having denied the transaction completely and
who is Brij Mohan is also not clear nor is it clear who is Ravinder
Kumar.

13.

This being the position, we find it difficult to differ with the view

taken by the Tribunal that the document is not a hundi, without even
going into the evidentiary value of the photocopy. Consequently, it
would be difficult to hold that the Assessing Officer had any valid
reason to believe that income had escaped assessment thereby enabling
him to initiate proceedings against the assessee under Section 148 of the
Act.
ITA No.112/2006

Page 7 of 8

15.

In our opinion, no substantial question of law is made out by the

Revenue. The appeal is dismissed.

Madan B. Lokur, J

July 25, 2007
ncg

V.B. Gupta, J

Certified that the corrected copy of
the judgment has been transmitted
in the main Server.

ITA No.112/2006

Page 8 of 8

