*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

ITA No. 1117 of 2006
Judgment reserved on: July 16, 2007

%

Judgment delivered on: August 27, 2007

The Commissioner of Income Tax
Delhi-I, New Delhi
Through

...Appellant

Mrs. Prem Lata Bansal with
Ms. Sonia Mathur, Advocates

Versus
M/s Balaji Wire Pvt. Ltd.
F-3, Main Road
Shastri Nagar
Delhi-110052
Through

...Respondent
Mr. Ajay Vohra with Ms. Kavita Jha,
Advocates

Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

ITA No.1117/2006

Page 1 of 12

MADAN B. LOKUR, J.

The Revenue is aggrieved by an order dated 31st January,
2006 passed by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Delhi Bench 'A' in
respect of a batch of appeals filed by a group of assessees called the
Bansal Group.

2.

Search and seizure operations under Section 132(1) of the

Income Tax Act, 1961 (for short the Act) were conducted on 11th
September, 2001 at various residential and business premises of a group
of assessees, including the assessee before us, collectively called the
Bansal Group. Thereafter, proceedings were initiated against the
assessee under Section 158-BC of the Act. The Assessing Officer made
huge additions and these additions were, by and large, confirmed by the
Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) [CIT (A)]. The Tribunal set
aside the orders of the CIT (A) and that is why the Revenue is before us.
Since the facts of all the cases are more or less similar, they were dealt
with by the Tribunal by one order and we do the same.

3.

Two issues have been canvassed before us: firstly with

ITA No.1117/2006

Page 2 of 12

regard to unexplained payment of commission and secondly with regard
to excess stock of goods found in the searched premises.

4.

There is no dispute that the search and seizure operation was

conducted on 11th/12th September, 2001. Nothing incriminating was
found during the course of search except the books of account of the
assessee and the Revenue wanted to verify their correctness.
Accordingly, on 25th September, 2001, the Deputy Director of Income
Tax recorded the statement of one V.P. Jain. According to V.P. Jain, he
had made purchases of Rs.25 crores from the Bansal Group out of which
delivery was made only to the extent of about Rs.2 or Rs.3 crores. In
respect of the balance Rs.22 or Rs.23 crores, no material or steel wires
were purchased and only bills were issued. The assessee on its part
showed sales having been made in cash. The allegation is that V.P. Jain
received a commission for giving these bills.

5.

Subsequently, it appears that V.P. Jain retracted his statement

and, therefore, another statement of V.P. Jain was recorded on 14th
December, 2001 when he was cross-examined by one of the members of

ITA No.1117/2006

Page 3 of 12

the Bansal Group. In his statement recorded on 14th December, 2001,
V.P. Jain stated that the goods were directly sent to his customers and,
therefore, he (V.P. Jain) did not physically receive the goods in his shop.
V.P. Jain stated that he had received no commission from the Bansal
Group but the amounts received only represented cash receipts in
respect of the sales effected.

6.

The Assessing Officer was of the view that V.P. Jain was

only preparing false bills for the Bansal Group for which he received a
commission. Therefore, the Assessing Officer added back some amounts
in the accounts of the assessee.

7.

The principal contention urged by the assessee before the

Tribunal, and which was accepted, was that during the course of search,
no evidence was found of any bogus payments.

Under these

circumstances, the provisions of Chapter XIV-B of the Act were not at
all applicable. The statements of V.P. Jain were post-search statements
having no direct nexus with the search and they could not have been
relied upon for the purposes of proceedings under Section 158-BC of

ITA No.1117/2006

Page 4 of 12

the Act.

8.

As we understand it, in respect of a block assessment,

undisclosed income is required to be computed on the basis of evidence
found during the search or being directly relatable to evidence found
during the search. In the present case, nothing was found during the
search which would suggest that the books maintained by the assessee
were unreliable. It is only subsequent to the search and with a view to
verify the correctness of the books that the Deputy Director of Income
Tax recorded the statement of V.P. Jain. Whatever be the merits or
demerits of both statements of V.P. Jain, unless they could be directly
connected with the recovery of any incriminating material during the
search, they cannot be used against the assessee.

9.

In Commissioner of Income Tax v. Ravi Kant Jain, [2001]

250 ITR 141, this Court laid down the law with regard to the special
procedure contemplated by Chapter XIV-B of the Act. It was held as
follows:
“The special procedure of Chapter XIV-B is intended to
provide a mode of assessment of undisclosed income, which
ITA No.1117/2006

Page 5 of 12

has been detected as a result of search. As the statutory
provisions go to show, it is not intended to be a substitute for
regular assessment. Its scope and ambit is limited in that
sense to materials unearthed during search. It is in addition
to the regular assessment already done or to be done. The
assessment for the block period can only be done on the basis
of evidence found as a result of search or requisition of
books of account or documents and such other materials or
information as are available with the Assessing Officer.
Evidence found as a result of search is clearly relatable to
sections 132 and 132A.”

10.

Similarly, in Commissioner of Income Tax v. Elegant

Homes Pvt. Ltd., [2003] 259 ITR 232, the Rajasthan High Court held:
“In Chapter XIV-B of the Act, special provisions for
assessment in search cases have been given and if any
amount of income has not been taxed and during the course
of search, if some “undisclosed” income is found on the basis
of material seized, that should be treated as undisclosed
income as per the scheme of special assessment under the
aforesaid Chapter.”

11.

The view expressed by this Court in Ravi Kant Jain is, of

course, binding on us and we have also followed the view expressed by
the Rajasthan High Court in Elegant Homes. In Commissioner of
Income Tax v. Jupiter Builders Pvt. Ltd., [2006] 287 ITR 287, this
Court reiterated the law that the undisclosed income must be unearthed
as a result of the search. This is what was said on page 298 of the

ITA No.1117/2006

Page 6 of 12

Report:
“Assessment proceedings undertaken under Chapter XIV-B
are only in respect of undisclosed income that is that income
which has not been, or would not have been disclosed and
which has been unearthed as a result of the search or
requisition.
Assessment proceedings under Chapter XIV-B are not
concerned with that income which has already been disclosed
and in respect of which regular assessment proceedings stand
concluded or are still pending, or in respect of which time for
filing of return has not expired on the date of search/
requisition and which stand recorded in the books of account
on the date of search. The proceedings under Chapter XIV-B
cannot be used as an opportunity to either reopen concluded
assessments or to reassess the returned income by taking a
fresh look at the disclosed facts and figures, unless, of
course, they are found to be false as a result of the search or
requisition.”

12.

In view of the above, we are clearly of the opinion that in the

absence of any incriminating material found during the search
conducted on 11th/12th September, 2001 in the premises of the Bansal
Group, the statement of V.P. Jain recorded on 25th September, 2001 and
on 14th December 2001 could not be used for proceedings under
Chapter XIV-B of the Act.

13.

Reliance was placed by learned counsel for the Revenue on

ITA No.1117/2006

Page 7 of 12

the statement of V.P. Jain recorded on 25th September, 2001. That
statement was recorded after the search proceedings and appears to have
been recorded only with a view to confirm the correctness of the
account books. It is not as if the statement was recorded during the
search proceedings nor is it the case of the Revenue that because of
some incriminating material that was unearthed during the search
proceedings that it became necessary to record the statement of V.P.
Jain. It cannot, therefore, be said that the statement of V.P. Jain was a
direct consequence or result of obtaining some incriminating material
which showed that the assessee had undisclosed income.

14.

Quite apart from the above, we also find that the statement of

V.P. Jain was recorded behind the back of the assessee. When the
assessee was in fact allowed to cross-examine V.P. Jain, after his second
statement was recorded on 14th December, 2001, V.P. Jain had retracted
from his earlier statement. The Assessing Officer, nevertheless, relied
upon the statement given by V.P. Jain on 25th September, 2001
completely disregarding his subsequent statement.

ITA No.1117/2006

Page 8 of 12

15.

Under these circumstances, we are of the view that the

Revenue has not been able to raise any substantial question of law
which would necessitate admission of this appeal.

16.

The second question urged before the Tribunal and before us

relates to excess stock being found during the course of the search. The
assessee is engaged in the manufacture of mild steel galvanized iron
wires. The wires are stacked in bundles and they apparently run into
thousands of bundles. The search party did not physically count the
bundles (as it was not possible) but took a visual estimate. There was
also no actual weighment of the goods and the weight of the stock was
taken on an estimate basis. As a result of this exercise, it was found that
there was a discrepancy in the inventory as shown in the books and the
inventory as found during the course of the search proceedings.

17.

The assessee sought to explain this and contended that

making an estimate of the number of bundles and estimating the weight
of the goods visually is totally inadequate. It was contended by the
assessee that different bundles have a different weight and it cannot be

ITA No.1117/2006

Page 9 of 12

said with any degree of certainty that the average weight of the goods
was 65 kg per bundle. That the entire exercise was an estimate is
confirmed by the CIT (A) who arrived at an average weight at 60 kg per
bundle. Similarly, in respect of the fine wire products, the Assessing
Officer took the average weight at 20 kg per bundle and this was
reduced by the CIT (A) to 16 kg per bundle.

This fact is being

mentioned only to show that both the Assessing Officer as well as the
CIT (A) made a guess with regard to the average weight of each bundle.
The Assessing Officer as well as the CIT (A) took into consideration the
fact that the employees of the assessee accompanying the search party
did not raise any objection when the estimates were made and in fact
they signed the panchnama indicating the number of bundles and the
average weight.

18.

The Tribunal came to the conclusion, with which we agree,

that it would have been appropriate if the number of bundles and the
average weight was worked out on some empirical basis rather than
through mere guess work. It appears that during the search, the number
of bundles and weight estimate in respect of half a dozen business

ITA No.1117/2006

Page 10 of 12

concerns were made within a few hours. The search party either did not
have the necessary time or did not have the necessary expertise to
correctly assess the stock position. A short cut appears to have been
taken by the search party which came to a certain conclusion on an
estimate basis. In law, as in life, a short cut is often a wrong cut.

19.

The mere fact that some employees of the assessee signed the

panchnama does not mean that they certified the correctness of the
number of bundles or the average weight of each bundle. They only
certified that they were witnesses to the proceedings. What conclusions
have to be drawn from the panchnama is of no concern to those
employees.

20.

Of course, the best method of determining the number of

bundles and their average weight would be to actually count the bundles
and use machines/cranes for weighing each bundle. This is no doubt a
tedious exercise but where a liability is sought to be foisted upon an
assessee, the Revenue has to be a little more serious while exercising
powers conferred upon it under the Act.

ITA No.1117/2006

Mere guess work or an

Page 11 of 12

estimate cannot be an adequate substitute for a scientific investigation or
carrying out some empirical study. The officers who conducted the
search did not want to take the necessary trouble which, of course,
would have been time consuming, but the impact of making a
guesstimate can be quite damaging in so far as the assessee is
concerned. The assessee cannot be made to suffer the consequences of
lethargy on the part of the officers of the Revenue.

21.

Under these circumstances, we are of the opinion that the

Tribunal rightly came to the conclusion that the alleged excess stock
calculated by the Revenue needs to be deleted. It is, of course, not
possible today to redetermine the stock so the question of any remand
does not arise.

22.

In our view, no substantial question of law arises.

Dismissed.

Madan B. Lokur, J

August 27, 2007
ncg
ITA No.1117/2006

V.B. Gupta, J

Page 12 of 12

