*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

ITA No. 1189 of 2006

Judgment reserved on: May 9, 2007
%

Judgment delivered on: May 29, 2007

Commissioner of Income Tax
Delhi-X, New Delhi
Through

Appellant
Mrs. Prem Lata Bansal with
Ms. Sonia Mathur, Advocates

Versus
Vipin Batra
D-12, Rana Pratap Bagh
New Delhi
Through

...Respondent
Dr. Rakesh Gupta with Mr. Jitender
Saini, Advocates

Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

ITA No.1189/2006

Page 1 of 10

MADAN B. LOKUR, J.
The Revenue is aggrieved by an order dated 30th November,
2005 passed by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Delhi Bench SMC
in ITA No.5020/Del02004 relevant for the assessment year 1996-97.

2.

By the impugned order, the Tribunal took the view that re-

assessment proceedings carried out by the Assessing Officer in terms of
Section 147/148 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (the Act) lacked in valid
jurisdiction and were, therefore, liable to be set aside.

3.

After hearing learned counsel for the parties, we admit this

appeal and frame the following substantial question of law for
consideration:
“Whether the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal was correct in
law in holding that the notice issued by the Assessing Officer
under Section 148 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 was bad in
law and, therefore, the assessment framed in pursuance
thereof was liable to be quashed?”

4.

Filing of paper books is dispensed with.

5.

The assessment was framed in respect of the assessee under

ITA No.1189/2006

Page 2 of 10

Section 143(3) of the Act read with Section 147 thereof on 29th March,
2004. By this assessment, an addition of Rs.1,27,650/- was made to the
assessee's income as a result of a finding that it represented the
assessee's own unaccounted money which had been introduced in the
garb of long term capital gains arising out of the sale of shares.

6.

It appears that the alleged sale of shares was carried out

through a broker M/s Maheswari Sons whose proprietor was Shri
Shankar Hari Maheswari. The broker appears to have admitted in a
statement that he has not carried out any sale or purchase of shares.

7.

On these broad facts, the Assessing Officer recorded the

following reasons for issuing a notice under Section 148 of the Act for
carrying out a re-assessment:
“Information is received from the office of DDIT
(Investigation) Gurgaon that investigation were conducted by
that office with respect to bogus entries of long term capital
gain taken by some assessees from one bank account of M/s
Maheswari Sons, A/c No. 8627, Punjab National Bank, Karol
Bagh, New Delhi.
It has come to light that beneficiaries have taken entries by
paying in cash an amount equivalent to the draft/cheque
amount and certain premium on that. No sale/purchase of
ITA No.1189/2006

Page 3 of 10

shares has actually taken place. The operator of the said
account Sh. Praveen Mittal has also admitted in his statement
that bogus transactions relating to sale/purchase of shares
were done through this bank account and most of the
beneficiaries have availed relief u/s 54F of the I.T. Act, 1961.
Some of the beneficiaries like firm/company took capital
losses to offset their business gains.
The name of Shri Vipin Batra is included in the list of
beneficiaries from the said account of M/s Maheswari Sons
in the form of following transaction having received the said
amount in his bank account no. 10007 with Syndicate Bank,
Mori Gate, Delhi.
S.No.

Date of taking entry

Amount

1

27.5.95

1,27,650/-

There was a reason to believe that income of the assessee
from undisclosed sources had escaped assessment in the form
of bogus capital gain for AY 1996-97.”

8.

It is not necessary to go into the merits of the controversy

because, as noted above, the Tribunal concluded that there was no
specific information before the Assessing Officer entitling him to come
to the conclusion that the transaction of long term capital gains was not
genuine so as to constitute escapement of income. It was held that the
assumption of jurisdiction was clearly flawed and, therefore, subsequent
proceedings including the assessment framed were liable to be quashed.

ITA No.1189/2006

Page 4 of 10

9.

We are of the view that the opinion of the Tribunal is

erroneous in law.

10.

In Raymond Woollen Mills Ltd. v. Income-tax Officer &

Ors., (1999) 236 ITR 34, the Supreme Court held that what is required
to be seen in a case such as this is whether prima facie there was some
material before the Assessing Officer on the basis of which he could
reopen the case of the assessee. The sufficiency or correctness of the
material is not to be considered because it is open to the assessee to
prove that the facts assumed by the Assessing Officer in the notice were
erroneous.

11.

Much earlier, in Phool Chand Bajrang Lal & Anr. v.

Income-tax Officer & Anr., (1993) 203 ITR 456, the Supreme Court
reviewed the entire case law and concluded that:
(a) There must be some specific, reliable and relevant
information available with the Assessing Officer.
(b) The Assessing Officer must have reasons, which he must
record, that income has escaped assessment.

ITA No.1189/2006

Page 5 of 10

(c) The case should not be one of a mere change of opinion by
the Assessing Officer or the drawing of a different inference
from the same facts but that those reasons must be based on
facts which have subsequently come into possession of the
Assessing Officer.
(d) The sufficiency of reasons for forming the belief is not for
the Court to judge although the assessee can contend that the
belief was not bona fide or was based on vague, irrelevant
and non-specific information or that the material did not
have any rational connection or a live link for the formation
of the requisite belief.

This is what the Supreme Court said:
“From a combined review of the judgments of this court, it
follows that an Income-tax Officer acquires jurisdiction to
reopen an assessment under section 147(a) read with section
148 of the Income-tax Act, 1961, only if on the basis of
specific, reliable and relevant information coming to his
possession subsequently, he has reasons, which he must
record, to believe that, by reason of omission or failure on the
part of the assessee to make a true and full disclosure of all
material facts necessary for his assessment during the
concluded assessment proceedings, any part of his income,
profits or gains chargeable to income-tax has escaped
assessment. He may start reassessment proceedings either
ITA No.1189/2006

Page 6 of 10

because some fresh facts had come to light which were not
previously disclosed or some information with regard to the
facts previously disclosed comes into his possession which
tends to expose the untruthfulness of those facts. In such
situations, it is not a case of mere change of opinion or the
drawing of a different inference from the same facts as were
earlier available but acting on fresh information. Since the
belief is that of the Income-tax Officer, the sufficiency of
reasons for forming the belief is not for the court to judge but
it is open to an assessee to establish that there in fact existed
no belief or that the belief was not at all a bona fide one or
was based on vague, irrelevant and non-specific information.
To that limited extend, the court may look into the
conclusion arrived at by the Income-tax Officer and examine
whether there was any material available on the record from
which the requisite belief could be formed by the Income-tax
Officer and further whether that material had any rational
connection or a live link for the formation of the requisite
belief.”

12.

This Court also had occasion to deal with the issue of

reopening a completed assessment in United Electrical Co. P. Ltd. v.
Commissioner of Income-tax & Ors., (2002) 258 ITR 317.

This

decision has been relied upon by the Tribunal but we find that it is
clearly distinguishable because in that case the Division Bench came to
the conclusion that the statement on the basis of which reopening was
sought was too general and it did not mention any name, much less the
name of the assessee.

It was, therefore, held that there was no

information on record which could provide a foundation for the
ITA No.1189/2006

Page 7 of 10

Assessing Officer's belief that the assessee's transaction was not genuine
and that this income had escaped assessment on that account.

13.

Applying the law laid down by the Supreme Court as well as

this Court, we need to take a look at the reasons recorded by the
Assessing Officer for initiating proceedings under Section 148 of the
Act.

14.

In the first place, we find that information available with the

Assessing Officer was not vague or general in nature because it referred
to bogus entries of long term capital gain taken by some assessees from
M/s Maheswari Sons whose bank and account number were identified.
One of the bogus entries related specifically by name to the assessee and
the date of his taking the entry and his bank and account number as well
as the amount have been specified in the reasons recorded. It has also
been noted that in fact no sale or purchase of shares had actually taken
place and the person who had operated the account of M/s Maheswari
Sons, that is, Shri Praveen Mittal admitted in his statement that bogus
transactions relating to sale and purchase of shares were done through

ITA No.1189/2006

Page 8 of 10

this bank account and most of the beneficiaries have availed relief under
Section 54F of the Act.

15.

On this material, which must be examined only prima facie,

we find that there was specific and adequate reason for the Assessing
Officer to come to the conclusion that the transaction entered into by the
assessee with M/s Maheswari Sons for the sale and purchase of shares
was a bogus transaction which was entered into through an identifiable
bank and an account number. The truth or otherwise of this information
is not a matter that is required to be considered by the us. All that we
have to see is whether there was sufficient material and that it was not
vague or of a general nature.

16.

We are satisfied, on the basis of the information disclosed in

the reasons to believe recorded by the Assessing Officer, that there was
legitimate ground for him to issue a notice to the assessee under Section
148 of the Act and the assessee was entitled to contend that the facts
taken into consideration by the Assessing Officer were incorrect.

ITA No.1189/2006

Page 9 of 10

17.

We find that the Tribunal has not gone into the merits of the

controversy. Therefore, while answering the question in the negative,
we set aside the order passed by the Tribunal and remand the matter
back to its file for taking a decision on merits.

18.

The appeal is, accordingly, disposed of.

Madan B. Lokur, J

May 29, 2007
ncg

V.B. Gupta, J

Certified that the corrected
copy of the judgment has
been transmitted in the main
Server.

ITA No.1189/2006

Page 10 of 10

