*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

ITA No. 463 of 2007
Judgment reserved on: May 17, 2007

%

Judgment delivered on: May 23, 2007
Commissioner of Income Tax
Delhi (Central) – II
ARA Centre, E-2
Jhandewalan Extn.
New Delhi.
Through

....Appellant
Mr. R.D. Jolly

Versus
Usha Iron & Ferro Metal Corporation Ltd.
B-11/100, Mohan Co-operative Industrial Area
Badarpur, New Delh.
...Respondent
Through
None
WITH
2.

ITA No. 462 of 2007
Commissioner of Income Tax
Delhi (Central) – II
ARA Centre, E-2
Jhandewalan Extn.
New Delhi.
Through

....Appellant
Mr. R.D. Jolly

Versus
Usha Iron & Ferro Metal Corporation Ltd.
B-11/100, Mohan Co-operative Industrial Area
Badarpur, New Delh.
...Respondent
Through
None
ITA No.463/2007

Page 1 of 7

Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

MADAN B. LOKUR, J.
The Revenue is aggrieved by an order dated 16th June, 2006 passed
by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Delhi Bench 'A' in ITA
No.915/Del/1999, ITA No. 2389/Del/2000 and ITA No.4366/Del/2004
relevant for the assessment years 1995-96 to 1997-98.

2.

The Assessee carries on the business of manufacturing and

production of CTD bars as also different types of iron rods. The Assessee
used to procure the raw material, that is, billets from the open market. The
Assessee decided to manufacture the raw material on its own and for this
purpose it set up a Steel Melting Shop. In the course of setting up the Steel
Melting Shop, the Assessee incurred substantial expenditure and this was
ITA No.463/2007

Page 2 of 7

shown by the Assessee in its books as capital expenditure incurred. The
Assessee also filed its returns on this basis.

3.

Later the Assessee filed revised returns wherein it claimed that the

expenditure was revenue expenditure having been incurred for the
expansion of its business. On this basis, the Assessee claimed a deduction.
The Assessing Officer did not accept the view canvassed by the Assessee
primarily on the ground that the Assessee had shown the expenditure as
being of a capital nature in its own books.

4.

Feeling aggrieved, the Assessee preferred an appeal before the

Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) who accepted the view canvassed
by the Assessee to the effect that mere capitalization of the amount in its
books would not bind the Assessee. It was also held that the Steel Melting
Shop was set up for production of raw material which was required by the
Assessee for its existing business and, therefore, it was clearly an expansion
of the existing business.

5.

The Revenue then preferred an appeal before the Tribunal which

ITA No.463/2007

Page 3 of 7

dismissed the appeal and that is how the Revenue is before us under Section
260-A of the Income Tax Act, 1961. We are of the view that the expenses
incurred by the Assessee were in connection with an expansion of its
business and not for the setting up of a new business and no fault can be
found with the view taken by the Tribunal.

6.

In Commissioner of Income Tax v. India Discount Co. Ltd., (1970)

75 ITR 191, the Supreme Court expressed the view, though in a different
context, that it is well established that a receipt, which in law cannot be
regarded as income, cannot become so merely because the Assessee credited
it to the profit and loss account. It follows from this that merely because the
assessee showed the amount as capital expenditure in its books would not
mean that it was bound by that statement and that it could not file a revised
return claiming the amount as a revenue expenditure incurred in connection
with the expansion of its existing business.

7.

What is to be considered for deciding whether there is an expansion

of an existing business or not was before the Calcutta High Court in
Kesoram Industries and Cotton Mills Ltd. v. Commissioner of IncomeITA No.463/2007

Page 4 of 7

tax, (1992) 196 ITR 845. One of the considerations would be the purpose
of the expenditure and its object and effect. If expenses are incurred in
setting up a new business, it would be an expenditure incurred on capital
account but where it does not amount to the starting of a new business, the
expenses in connection therewith would be revenue expenses. In Kesoram
Industries, the assessee was a manufacturer of cement. In addition to its
factory in Andhra Pradesh, it proposed to start another cement factory in
Rajasthan. The expenses incurred related to exploring the feasibility of
expanding or extending the existing business by setting up a new factory in
the same line of business.

It was held that the expenditure was

unmistakably connected with the running of an existing business.

8.

In Commissioner of Income Tax v. Goodyear India Ltd., (2000) 243

ITR 239, a Division Bench of this Court relied upon Jonas Woodhead and
Sons (India) Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income Tax, (1997) 224 ITR 342
and concluded that it is now well settled that when expenditure is incurred
for the expansion / extension or for the betterment of the product which was
already being produced, and / or the improvisation made is part and parcel
of the existing business, it is allowable as a revenue expenditure.
ITA No.463/2007

Page 5 of 7

9.

Following the law laid down by the Supreme Court as well as this

Court, we find that what the Assessee had done was to spend some amounts
in connection with his existing business in the sense that instead of
purchasing billets from the open market, the Assessee decided to
manufacture that raw material on its own. It was for this purpose that the
Assessee set up the Steel Melting Shop. The expenditure incurred by the
Assessee was towards improving its business and in a sense expanding or
extending its business for the manufacture of its products, that is, CTD bars
and iron rods.

10.

Relying on India Discount, we are of the opinion that merely because

the Assessee treated the amount as a capital expenditure in its books, it
would not be bound by it and relying on Kesoram Industries and
Goodyear, there is no doubt that the expenditure incurred by the Assessee
was for the expansion and betterment of its existing business. Manufacture
of the raw material for the benefit of its existing business cannot, in our
opinion, amount to setting up a new business.

ITA No.463/2007

Page 6 of 7

11.

Under the circumstances, we are of the view that no substantial

question of law arises for consideration. The appeal is dismissed.

Madan B. Lokur, J

May 23, 2007
kapil/ncg

V.B. Gupta, J

Certified that the corrected copy of
the judgment has been transmitted
in the main Server.

ITA No.463/2007

Page 7 of 7

