*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

ITA No. 612 of 2006
Judgment reserved on: July 09, 2007

%

Judgment delivered on: July 25, 2007

Marvel Polymers Pvt. Ltd.
Flat No.321, Allied House,
Inderlok Chowk, Delhi-110035.
Through

...Appellant
Mr.Deepak Aggarwal with
Mr. R.K. Chauhan

Versus
Commissioner of Income Tax – II
New Delhi.
Through

...Respondent
Mr. R.D. Jolly

Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

MADAN B. LOKUR, J.
The Assessee is aggrieved by an order dated 4th January,

ITA No.612/2006

Page 1 of 7

2004 (since rectified to read 4th January, 2005) passed by the Income
Tax Appellate Tribunal, Delhi Bench 'E' in ITA No.3770/Del/2001
relevant for the assessment year 1998-99.

2.

The Assessee, as per its Memorandum and Articles of

Association, was set up to engage itself in the business of manufacture
of footwear and footwear parts as well as trading of goods.

3.

The Assessee claimed some expenditure in the profit and loss

account (including depreciation) but the Assessing Officer disallowed it
on the ground that the Assessee had not been set up and had not
commenced any business activity during the relevant previous year.

4.

The Assessee preferred an appeal which was allowed by the

Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) who held that the Assessee had
commenced its business during the relevant previous year and,
therefore, the Assessing Officer was directed to allow the expenses, as
claimed in the profit and loss account.

ITA No.612/2006

Page 2 of 7

5.

Against the order passed by the Commissioner, the Revenue

preferred an appeal to the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal which
allowed the appeal and that is how the Assessee is before us under
Section 260-A of the Income Tax Act, 1961.

6.

Learned counsel for the Assessee contended that there are

several factors which go to show that not only had the Assessee been set
up but that it had commenced business during the relevant year. It was
submitted that a completion certificate had been obtained for the
structure that the Assessee had built up; the Assessee had obtained an
electric connection and excise licence; it was registered with the
Director of Industries as a small scale industry; it had been granted a
Registration Certificate with the Sales Tax department; it had purchased
raw materials and it was registered with the Regional Provident Fund
Commissioner.

7.

We find that the Tribunal has considered all these facts,

including the contentions made on behalf of the Revenue by the
Departmental Representative.

ITA No.612/2006

Page 3 of 7

8.

It has been found, as a matter of fact, that the only business

activity conducted by the Assessee, whose principal activity was to
manufacture footwear and footwear parts, was to have purchased 84
pairs of shoes / footwear for Rs.2,660/-, which were later sold for
Rs.3,127/-. This was the solitary transaction of purchase and sale of
footwear. The Assessee appears to have admitted that it was necessary
for it to have had at least one transaction for the purposes of registration
with the Sales Tax department and that is why this transaction was
entered into. Clearly, the solitary transaction by the Assessee was not as
a part of its trading activity but was for the purposes of getting
registration from the Sales Tax department. Reliance, therefore, cannot
be placed by the Assessee on this transaction to substantiate its claim of
having commenced trading activity.

9.

In so far as the manufacturing activity is concerned, while it

is true that the Assessee was granted a completion certificate by the
Municipal Corporation of Delhi in respect of the structure built by it and
was also granted an electric connection but the fact remains that it was
granted a excise licence only on 31st March,1998, the last day of the

ITA No.612/2006

Page 4 of 7

relevant previous year. No labour was employed by the Assessee prior
to this date and its employees were recruited only with effect from 1st
April, 1998. Registration with the Provident Fund Commissioner was
also with effect from 1st April, 1998. Clearly, no labour, either skilled
or unskilled, was available with the Assessee for carrying out any
manufacturing activity prior to 1st April, 1998. Even otherwise, there
was nothing on facts to suggest that the Assessee had taken any
substantive steps which could lead to the inference that the business of
the Assessee had been set up or had commenced during the relevant
previous year.

10.

In Commissioner of Wealth Tax, Madras v. Ramaraju

Surgical Cotton Mills Ltd., [1966] 62 ITR 21, the Supreme Court drew
a distinction between “setting up” and “commencement”. It was held
that “setting up” is a stage anterior to “commencement”. The actual
functioning of a factory or its going into production is not necessary for
concluding that a factory has been set up. The Supreme Court accepted
the view that the proper meaning to be assigned to the expression “set
up” would be “ready to commence business”, that is to say that a unit

ITA No.612/2006

Page 5 of 7

cannot be said to have been set up unless it is ready to discharge the
function for which it was being set up. It is only when the unit has been
put into such a shape that it can start functioning as a business or a
manufacturing organisation that it can be said that the unit has been set
up. Of course, the Supreme Court was dealing with the Wealth Tax Act,
but the principles laid down by it would be equally applicable to the
present case.

11.

Applying the law laid down by the Supreme Court, it would

appear that on paper the factory of the Assessee had been “set up” but in
actual fact, it would be difficult to accept the proposition that the unit
was ready to discharge the function for which it was set up. This is
because on the basis of the cumulative facts available on record such as
the fact that the excise licence was granted only on 31st March, 1998
and employees were recruited only on 1st April, 1998 there was no way
that the Assessee could be said to have been in such a position that on
31st March, 1998, it was ready to commence its business activity. Even
though it may have had an electric connection and had purchased some
raw material, there was no one to take advantage of it.

ITA No.612/2006

Page 6 of 7

12.

The Tribunal has come to the conclusion that the facts of the

case are rather peculiar but the total effect of all these facts and the law
laid down by the Supreme Court point to the conclusion that it is not
possible to entirely agree with the views expressed by learned counsel
for the Assessee. The opinion expressed by the Tribunal is a possible
view. It is not perverse in the sense that no reasonable person could
have reached the conclusion that the Tribunal did in view of the facts of
the case, peculiar or not.

14.

Under these circumstances, we are of the view that no

substantial question of law arises for consideration. The view expressed
by the Tribunal may or may not be correct but that by itself does not
raise a substantial question of law.

15.

Dismissed.

Madan B. Lokur, J

July 25, 2007
kapil
ITA No.612/2006

V.B. Gupta, J

Page 7 of 7

