*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

Criminal Appeal Nos.193/2000
Judgment reserved on: December 06, 2006

%

Judgment delivered on: January 29, 2007
Nand Lal @ Nandu
S/o Sh. Jadha Ram
Presently lodged in Central Jail No.4,
Tihar, New Delhi
..... Appellant
Through
Mr. D.K. Mathur, Amicus Curiae
versus
State
..... Respondent
Through
Mr.Anil Soni,
Additional Public Prosecutor
WITH
Criminal Appeal No.468/1998
Lajpat @ Billu
S/o Sh. Hir Lal
Presently lodged in Central Jail No.4,
Tihar, New Delhi
..... Appellant
Through
Mr. Arvind Gupta, Amicus Curiae
versus
State
..... Respondent
Through
Mr.Anil Soni,
Additional Public Prosecutor

Crl.A.No.193/2000

Page 1 of 15

Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

MADAN B. LOKUR, J.
These are two appeals, one filed by Nand Lal @ Nandu and the other
filed by Lajpat @ Billu. Both the appeals are directed against the judgment
and order dated 2nd February, 1998 passed by the learned Additional
Sessions Judge in Sessions Case No.141/1996. Both the Appellants were
held guilty of an offence punishable under Section 392 and 397 of the
Indian Penal Code (for short the IPC) read with Section 34 thereof. They
were also convicted of an offence punishable under Section 300 read with
Section 302 and 34 of the IPC for having caused the murder of Sunil and
Crl.A.No.193/2000

Page 2 of 15

under Section 307 read with Section 34 of the IPC for attempting to murder
Sunil's brother Mukesh. Subsequently, by an order dated 3rd February,
1998, the Appellants were sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life for
the offence of murder and to pay a fine. They were also sentenced to
undergo rigorous imprisonment

for 7 years

for attempting to murder

Mukesh and for committing a robbery with a dangerous weapon. They
were also fined.

2.

The case of the prosecution is that on 16th January, 1994 at about

10.15 pm Mukesh and his brother Sunil (since deceased) were returning
home. They were accosted by the Appellants and according to Mukesh, in
his statement under Section 161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (for
short Cr.P.C.), he was caught by one of them who was carrying a long knife,
while the other person caught hold of his brother Sunil. He was asked to
empty out his pocket and when both Mukesh and Sunil resisted, Mukesh
was stabbed in his abdomen. Sunil came to save him but he was stabbed in
Crl.A.No.193/2000

Page 3 of 15

his chest by the same person. On this, the other person uttered the words
“Nandu ye to mar gaya. Bhag lo”. Thereafter, both the persons ran away.
On hearing the cries of Mukesh, one or two persons came there. Mukesh
gave them his address and asked them to inform his house.

3.

From the above description, it appears that according to Mukesh,

Nandu was carrying a long knife and he stabbed both Mukesh and Sunil.
The statement does not indicate whether the other person (later identified to
be Billu) was carrying a knife or not.

4.

Among the persons who came to the scene of occurrence on hearing

the cries of Mukesh was one Chetan Lal who informed Imrati Devi, the
mother of both the injured brothers. It seems that Imrati Devi then took
Sunil and Mukesh to RML Hospital but Sunil was declared as brought dead.

5.

On his part, Chetan Lal also went to the shop of one Mahi Lal and

Crl.A.No.193/2000

Page 4 of 15

asked him to inform the police, which he did.

Thereupon, the police

reached the scene of occurrence and took necessary steps for investigating
the crime. There was no other eyewitness to the crime except Mukesh, who
was hospitalised and declared unfit for making a statement.

6.

The dead body of Sunil was sent for a post-mortem examination and

it was found that he had six injuries on his person, all of them being antemortem and recent. According to the doctor who conducted the postmortem, Dr. Basant Lal, PW-17 injury No.6 which was an incised stab
wound in the chest cavity, was sufficient to cause death in the ordinary
course of nature. The cause of death was opined to be hemorrhage and
shock consequent upon the incised stab injury to the heart. According to
the doctor, injuries 1 to 5 were caused by a blunt object/surface impact
while injury No.6 was caused by a single edged sharp penetrating weapon.

7.

It may be mentioned here that subsequently, the knife that was

Crl.A.No.193/2000

Page 5 of 15

allegedly used to stab Sunil was recovered by the police on the basis of a
disclosure statement made by Nandu. However, that knife was not single
edged but was double edged. It may also be mentioned that the learned
Trial Judge did not accept the version of the prosecution with regard to the
recovery of the knife.

8.

As mentioned above, Mukesh was hospitalised and was not fit to

make a statement and it was only on 21st January, 1994 that he was
declared fit. At that time the details given by him (which are mentioned
above) were recorded. Further investigations by the police revealed that
Nandu had about 17 cases of snatching and robbery against him.

9.

On 21st January, 1994 secret information was received by the police

about the presence of both the Appellants near some bushes near a
telephone exchange in Prasad Nagar. They went to that place and arrested
the Appellants who were interrogated and their statements recorded.
Crl.A.No.193/2000

Page 6 of 15

10.

Both the Appellants were also produced before the Court for a test

identification parade (for short TIP) but they refused to participate in these
proceedings on the ground that they were shown to the witnesses at the
police station. The learned Metropolitan Magistrate who conducted the test
identification parade adequately cautioned the Appellants of the
consequences of their failure to participate in the TIP.

11.

On these broad facts, a challan was filed under Section 173 of the

Cr.P.C. and the following charges were then framed against both the
Appellants.
“That on 16.1.1993 at about 10.23 P.M. in front of H.No.5781 &
5780 in gali No.1, block No.5, Dev Nagar, Karol Bagh, New Delhi,
within the jurisdiction of P.S. Prasad Nagar, you both in furtherance
of your common intention robbed Sunil Kumar of his cash at the
point of knife and in that process you also caused dangerous injuries
to Mukesh and you thus both thereby committed an offence
punishable under section 392/397 read with section 34 IPC and
within my cognizance.
Secondly, on the aforesaid date, time and place you both in
furtherance of your common intention committed murder of Sunil
Crl.A.No.193/2000

Page 7 of 15

Kumar son of Bishan Lal and you thus both committed an offence
punishable under section 302 read with section 34 IPC and within my
cognizance.
Thirdly, on the aforesaid date, time and place you both in furtherance
of your common intention voluntarily caused injuries to Mukesh son
of Shri Bishan Lal and if the injured Mukesh would have died by the
injuries caused by you, you both would have been guilty of culpable
homicide amounting to murder and you thus both committed an
offence punishable under section 307 read with section 34 IPC and
within my cognizance.
Lastly, you Nand Lal alias Nandu son of Jodha Ram on the aforesaid
date, time and place used the knife for unlawful purposes i.e., in
causing murder of Sunil and causing dangerous injuries to Mukesh
which you later on got recovered on 21.1.1994 and you thus thereby
committed an offence punishable under section 27 Arms Act and
within my cognizance.”

12.

The Appellants pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. The prosecution

exemined as many as 27 witnesses but only three of them are of some
consequence, that is, Mukesh PW-4, Gul Mohammad PW-5 and Chetan Lal
PW-6. The testimony of Dr. Basant Lal, PW-17 has already been adverted
to.

Crl.A.No.193/2000

Page 8 of 15

13.

Mukesh, PW-4 confirmed in the witness box what he had stated

during the course of investigations. But he made a material departure on
oath by asserting that Billu had stabbed Sunil and Nandu had stabbed him
(Mukesh). We will consider the effect of this material improvement a little
later. Gul Mohammad, PW-5 reached the scene of occurrence at about
10.30 pm on 16th January, 1994. He stated that he saw both the Appellants,
present in Court, running with knives in their hands. Other than this, his
testimony does not lead us any further.

14.

Chetan Lal, PW-6 confirmed the events that we have narrated above,

but it is important to note that he did not say anything about the Appellants'
running away from the scene of crime or that any one of them was armed
with a knife.

15.

From the above narration, it is clear that the entire case of the

prosecution is dependent upon the statement of Mukesh, PW-4. As we have
Crl.A.No.193/2000

Page 9 of 15

noted above, there is a material change and an improvement in the
statement made by Mukesh on oath as per what he had stated before the
police during investigations. It may be recalled that during investigations, it
was stated by Mukesh that both he and Sunil was stabbed by Nandu but on
oath he stated that only he was stabbed by Nandu and while Sunil was
stabbed by Billu.

16.

It is submitted by learned counsel for the Appellants that even if the

statement of Mukesh on oath is taken to be correct, Nandu cannot be
convicted of murder – it is only Billu who can be convicted of murder. In
Dhanna vs. State of Madhya Pradesh, 1996 Cri.LJ 3516, the Supreme
Court accepted the view of the Trial Court to the effect that when a
statement is made under Section 161 of the Cr.P.C. and that is improved
upon at the trial, then a conviction for the offence of murder ought not to be
made. Applying the law laid down by the Supreme Court, we are of the
view that even if Mukesh stated the truth on oath it would be unsafe to
Crl.A.No.193/2000

Page 10 of 15

convict Billu only on the basis of his statement in Court which was an
improvement over what he had stated to the police during investigations.
Therefore, whichever way one looks at the issue, it is not possible for us to
identify on the basis of the evidence on record as to who caused the murder
of Sunil, whether it was Nandu or whether it was Billu. This being the
situation, we cannot convict either of them for the offence of murder since
the issue is not free from doubt.

17.

The testimony of Mukesh is, however, quite categorical that both the

Appellants had wanted to (and did) rob him and Sunil. That either Nandu
or Billu or both were armed with a knife is quite clear because of the fact
that Sunil was stabbed to death. Additionally, Gul Mohammad, PW-5 had
stated that he saw both the Appellants running away and they had knives in
their hands.

However, it appears that only Nandu was charged with

carrying a knife and was alleged to have committed an offence punishable
under Section 27 of the Arms Act. The learned Trial Judge has acquitted
Crl.A.No.193/2000

Page 11 of 15

Nandu of this offence and the State has not challenged the decision given by
the learned Trial Judge.

But there is no doubt, given the facts and

circumstances of the case, that the intention of the Appellants was to rob
Mukesh and Sunil, which they successfully did, making them liable to
punishment under Section 392 and Section 397 of the IPC.

18.

In Ashfaq v. State (Govt. of NCT of Delhi), AIR 2004 SC

1253, the Supreme Court considered the applicability of Section 397 of the
IPC and its essential ingredients. It was said that there is a misconception
that unless a deadly weapon is actually used to inflict an injury in the
commission of an offence, the essential ingredients to attract Section 397 of
the IPC cannot be held to have been proved or substantiated. The Supreme
Court explained the meaning of the word “uses” found in Section 397 of the
IPC by relying upon an earlier decision in Phool Kumar v. Delhi
Administration, AIR 1975 SC 905. The Supreme Court cited the following
passage with approval:Crl.A.No.193/2000

Page 12 of 15

“Section 398 uses the expression “armed with any deadly
weapon” and the minimum punishment provided therein is also
7 years if at the time of attempting to commit robbery the
offender is armed with any deadly weapon. This has created an
anomaly. It is unreasonable to think that if the offender who
merely attempted to commit robbery but did not succeed in
committing it attracts the minimum punishment of 7 years
under S. 398 if he is merely armed with any deadly weapon,
while an offender so armed will not incur the liability of the
minimum punishment under Section 397 if he succeeded in
committing the robbery. But then, what was the purport behind
the use of the different words by the Legislature in the two
sections, viz “uses” in Section 397 and “is armed” in Section
398. In our judgment the anomaly is resolved if the two terms
are given the identical meaning. There seems to be a
reasonable explanation for the use of the two different
expressions in the sections. When the offence of robbery is
committed by an offender being armed with a deadly weapon
which was within the vision of the victim so as to be capable of
creating a terror in his mind, the offender must be deemed to
have used that deadly weapon in the commission of the
robbery. On the other hand, if an offender was armed with a
deadly weapon at the time of attempting to commit a robbery,
then the weapon was not put to any fruitful use because it
would have been of use only when the offender succeeded in
committing the robbery.”

Explaining this, the Supreme Court held that for the purposes of
Section 397 if a robbery is committed by a person who is armed with a
Crl.A.No.193/2000

Page 13 of 15

deadly weapon and that deadly weapon is within the vision of the victim so
as to be able to create terror in his mind, then there is no necessity of further
showing that the deadly weapon has been actually used for any other
purpose such as cutting, stabbing, shooting, etc.

This being the legal

position, we have no hesitation in upholding the conviction of the
Appellants under the provisions of Sections 392 and 397 of the IPC.

19.

In so far as the offence of attempt to murder Mukesh is concerned, we

find that in the absence of anything to suggest who wielded the knife, it is
not possible to say with certainty which of the Appellants attempted to
murder Mukesh. They are, therefore, entitled to the benefit of doubt in this
regard.

20.

In view of the above, we set aside the conviction of the Appellants on

all counts except for the offence punishable under Section 392 read with
Section 397 of the IPC. We find that the maximum term of imprisonment
Crl.A.No.193/2000

Page 14 of 15

for the offence of committing robbery (Section 392 of the IPC) is ten years
while the offence of committing a robbery with the use of a deadly weapon
(Section 397 of the IPC) is a minimum of seven years. Both the Appellants
have already spent more than eleven years in custody and we are of the
opinion that they have been adequately punished for the offences committed
by them in this regard. The Appellants be released forthwith unless they are
required in some other case. The appeals are partly allowed.

Madan B. Lokur, J

January 29, 2007
Upreti

Aruna Suresh, J

Certified that a corrected copy of the
judgment has been transmitted in the main
Server.

Crl.A.No.193/2000

Page 15 of 15

