*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

RFA No. 299 of 2004
Judgment reserved on: August 29, 2007

%

Judgment delivered on: September 21, 2007

1.

Shri Arun Kumar Jain

2.

Shri Tarun Kumar Jain
Both sons of Shri Bimal Prasad Jain
E-9, Connaught Place
New Delhi
Through

...Appellants

Mr. V.P. Singh, Senior Advocate with
Mrs. Anju Bhattacharya, Advocate

Versus
1.

Raghubir Saran Charitable Trust
through Shri Harsh Kumar Agarwal
42, Janpath, New Delhi

2.

Mrs. Kiran Agarwal
Trustee,
42, Janpath, New Delhi

3.

Shri Surender Nath Behl,
Trustee
42, Janpath, New Delhi
Through

RFA No.299/2004

...Respondents
Dr. A.M. Singhvi and Mr. Ravinder
Sethi, Senior Advocates with
Mr. Naresh Thanai, Mr. Simran Mehta
and Mr. Puneet Sharma, Advocates
Page 1 of 22

Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE S. MURALIDHAR
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

MADAN B. LOKUR, J.
This first appeal arises out of a judgment and decree dated
11th May, 2004 passed by the learned Additional District Judge, Delhi
purportedly on an application under Order VIII Rule 10 read with Order
XII Rule 6 of the Code of Civil Procedure (CPC) filed by the
Plaintiffs/Respondents in Suit No.356 of 2003.

2.

The primary facts of the case are not in dispute but what is

important is the contention of learned counsel for the Appellants that the
learned Additional District Judge passed the judgment and decree
without any application of mind. Unfortunately, we are of the opinion
that learned counsel for the Appellants is right in his submission and so
the judgment and decree deserve to be set aside. A reading of the
RFA No.299/2004

Page 2 of 22

judgment is a reminder of what the French jurist Saleilles said in his
treatise “De la Personnalite Juridique”:
“One wills at the beginning the result; one finds the principle
afterwards; ... ... ...”

3.

It is necessary to state some background facts.

The

Appellants are tenants in property bearing No.E-9, Connaught Place,
New Delhi (the suit property). The Respondents are the landlords.
When the tenancy commenced some time in 1954, the monthly rent was
Rs.585.50. This was increased from time to time and when the suit was
filed by the Respondents, the monthly rent had gone up to Rs.3,660.50.

4.

By virtue of the provisions of the Delhi Rent Control Act,

1958, a tenant who pays more than Rs.3,500/- per month as rent does
not have the protection of the rent control legislation. Consequently, for
recovering possession of the suit property from the Appellants, the
Respondents could file a simple suit for recovery of possession, if the
need arose, under the provisions of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882.

RFA No.299/2004

Page 3 of 22

5.

It appears that need did arise and so the Respondents sent a

notice to the Appellants on 7th June, 2000 terminating the tenancy and
seeking recovery of possession of the suit property.

However,

according to the Appellants, the parties had earlier entered into
negotiations and it was agreed between them that the suit property
would be sold to the Appellants for a sum of Rs.45 lakhs. Out of this
amount, the Appellants allegedly paid to the Respondents a sum of Rs.5
lakhs by cheque which was encashed by the Respondents on 8th May,
2000.

A further amount of Rs.10 lakhs was allegedly paid by the

Appellants to the Respondents much later in cash. Therefore, according
to the Appellants, the question of handing over vacant possession of the
suit property did not arise.

6.

Be that as it may, on 2nd August, 2000, the Respondents filed

a suit against the Appellants for recovery of possession of the suit
property as well as for mesne profits. The suit was filed in this Court
but was transferred to the District Court, Delhi in late 2003 for want of
pecuniary jurisdiction.

RFA No.299/2004

Page 4 of 22

7.

It appears that even during the pendency of the suit, the

parties held negotiations regarding the sale of the suit property.
However, we need not go into the details in this regard except to
mention that on 16th October, 2001, learned counsel appearing for the
Appellants informed the Joint Registrar before whom the matter was
listed that the disputes between the parties have almost been
compromised and that a compromise application would soon be moved.
The possibility of a compromise was denied by learned counsel
appearing for the Respondents. The Joint Registrar then gave time to
the Appellants to file their written statement but the record shows that
they did not do so till 1st August, 2002 in spite of an application having
been filed by the Respondents for a direction to the Appellants to file
their written statement.

8.

As mentioned above, on or about 22nd July, 2002, the

Respondents filed an application bearing IA No.6375/2002, being an
application under Order VIII Rule 10 read with Order XII Rule 6 of the
CPC with a prayer that the Hon'ble Court may be pleased to pronounce
judgment/decree against the Appellants in respect of the suit property

RFA No.299/2004

Page 5 of 22

and to pass any other and further orders which may be deemed
appropriate. This application was based on the fact that till then the
Appellants had not filed their written statement.

9.

When the application was taken up on 5th August, 2002, it

was noted that the written statement had been filed (on 2nd August,
2002) and, therefore, no orders were necessary on the application.
Accordingly, the application was disposed of with liberty to the
Respondents to file an application under Order XII Rule 6 of the CPC.

10.

On 21st April, 2003 when the case was taken up in Court,

learned counsel for the Respondents stated that even though his clients
had been permitted to file an application under Order XII Rule 6 of the
CPC, yet they did not wish to do so. Learned counsel further stated that
the Respondents request the Court to exercise its powers suo motu and
pass a decree in terms of Order XII Rule 6 of the CPC and submitted
that some arguments were advanced in this regard on an earlier occasion
also.

RFA No.299/2004

Page 6 of 22

11.

Thereafter, the pecuniary jurisdiction of this Court was

increased to Rs.20 lakhs and so the suit was transferred to the learned
District Judge, Delhi and an appropriate order in this regard was passed
on 4th November, 2003. Both parties were directed to appear before the
learned District Judge on 19th December, 2003. It is under these
circumstances that even though the suit was initiated in this Court, it
came to be taken up by the learned Additional District Judge, Delhi.

12.

The record of the case shows that IA No.6375/2002 filed by

the Respondents in this Court was disposed of on 5th August, 2002 with
liberty to them to file an application under Order XII Rule 6 of the CPC
but they chose not to file any such application. On the contrary, it was
stated on their behalf by their learned counsel on 21st April, 2003 that
the Respondents do not wish to file an application and that the Court
may exercise its powers suo motu and pass a decree in terms of Order
XII Rule 6 of the CPC.

13.

Notwithstanding this, when the matter was taken up by the

learned Additional District Judge on 25th February, 2004, she recorded

RFA No.299/2004

Page 7 of 22

in the order sheet that the matter would stand adjourned to 22nd March,
2004 for arguments on the application under Order XII Rule 6 of the
CPC. Strangely, none of the parties informed the learned Additional
District Judge that no such application was pending. On her part, the
learned Additional District Judge did not check the record of the case to
ascertain whether any such application was pending or not.

14.

Order XII Rule 6 of the CPC reads as follows:
“Order XII – Admissions
1 to 5

xxx

xxx

xxx

6. Judgment on admissions. – (1) Where admissions of
fact have been made either in the pleading or otherwise,
whether orally or in writing, the Court may at any stage of
the suit, either on the application of any party or of its own
motion and without waiting for the determination of any
other question between the parties, make such order or give
such judgment as it may think fit, having regard to such
admissions.
(2) Whenever a judgment is pronounced under sub-rule
(1), a decree shall be drawn up in accordance with the
judgment and the decree shall bear the date on which the
judgment was pronounced.”

15.

It is important to note that the learned Additional District

RFA No.299/2004

Page 8 of 22

Judge could have “of its own motion” made an order or passed
judgment, as she thought fit, having regard to the alleged admissions of
fact made in the pleadings. But, as the impugned judgment and decree
suggest, she did not exercise any suo motu power but purported to
decide a non-existent application filed under Order XII Rule 6 of the
CPC. This is one of the aspects (there are three more) highlighted by
learned counsel for the Appellants in support of his contention that the
judgment and decree suffer from a non-application of mind.

16.

In this context, we may note some of the statements made in

the judgment under appeal.
In paragraph 1, it is stated that “By the present order I shall
dispose of an application under order 8 r 10 read with order 12 rule 6
CPC moved by the plaintiff.”
In paragraph 2, it is stated that “In the present application the
plaintiff has stated ... ... ...”
In paragraph 4, it is stated that “Facts leading to the present
application are that ... ... ...”
There is no manner of doubt, from the above, that the learned

RFA No.299/2004

Page 9 of 22

Additional District Judge thought that she was dealing with a pending
application and was not exercising any suo motu power.

17.

As mentioned above, on 25th February, 2004 the suit was

adjourned to 22nd March, 2004 for arguments on the “application” under
Order XII Rule 6 of the CPC.
On 22nd March, 2004, the case was adjourned to 15th April,
2004 for arguments on the “application” under Order XII Rule 6 of the
CPC.
On 15th April, 2004 the case was adjourned to 19th April,
2004 for orders on the “application” under Order XII Rule 6 of the CPC.
On 19th April, 2004 learned counsel for the Appellants filed
some documents and so the case was adjourned to 30th April, 2004 for
re-arguments on the “application” filed under Order XII Rule 6 of the
CPC.
On 30th April, 2004 the case was adjourned to 11th May, 2004
for orders on the “application” under Order XII Rule 6 of the CPC.
On 11th May, 2004 the “application” under Order XII Rule 6
of the CPC was allowed and only a decree of possession was passed –

RFA No.299/2004

Page 10 of 22

there were no orders passed by the learned Additional District Judge on
the prayer of the Respondents for mesne profits. This is the second
aspect highlighted by learned counsel for the Appellants in support of
his contention that the judgment and decree suffered from nonapplication of mind. Learned counsel for the Respondents contended
that they are not aggrieved by the failure of the learned Additional
District Judge to award mesne profits. While this may be so, what is of
relevance is the question whether the learned Additional District Judge
applied her mind to the case at hand. The award of mesne profits was
one of the prayers made by the Respondents and since it was not
specifically given up, it should have at least been adverted to. Whether
the Respondents have decided to give up that prayer after the judgment
and decree is of no consequence.

18.

At this stage, it may be worthwhile to mention the third and

fourth aspects of the case which, according to learned counsel for the
Appellants, also show non-application of mind by the learned
Additional District Judge. The third aspect concerns the defence of the
Appellants that they had entered into an agreement with the

RFA No.299/2004

Page 11 of 22

Respondents to purchase the suit property. According to the Appellants,
the parties had entered into an agreement to sell on 11 th May, 2000. This
is how the learned Additional District Judge deals with this issue:
“As per the list of documents filed on record which is a
copy of agreement to sell dated 11.5.00 whereas the
document prima facie appears to be the original document
and stamp paper of Rs.2/- on which the agreement has been
written has been issued on 10.5.01 whereas the agreement
is alleged to have been executed on 11.5.00. That means
this agreement has been executed on a stamp paper which
was issued after one year of the execution of the
document.”

Quite naturally, we were a little taken aback on reading this and
therefore referred to the documents on record. The original agreement is
on the file of the case and on a perusal of the document, we find that it is
dated 11th May, 2001 and the stamp paper was purchased on 10 th May,
2001. It is not clear how the learned judge got the dates mixed up – it
may be a typographical error – but in the overall context of the facts of
the case, we have our reservations whether it was a simple case of a
typographical error.

19.

The fourth aspect of the case is also worth noticing. In

paragraph 11 of the judgment and decree, the learned judge observes
RFA No.299/2004

Page 12 of 22

that even if the Respondents had agreed to sell the suit property to the
Appellants, the agreement did not confer any right on the Appellants to
the suit property since “admittedly till 2003 the defendants have not
filed a suit for specific performance against the alleged agreement for
sale.” This observation hides the complete truth because it is only
partially correct, although in the context in which it is made, it is
completely incorrect. The Appellants had not filed a suit against the
Respondents for specific performance of the agreement “till 2003” but
on or about 17th March, 2003 they had filed a suit for specific
performance in this Court and a copy of the plaint was filed before the
learned Additional District Judge on 19th April, 2004 as per the record of
the case and as per the order sheet of 19th April, 2004. The learned
Additional District Judge appears to have been blissfully unaware of the
filing of a suit by the Appellants for specific performance of the
agreement to sell dated 11th May, 2001. The effect of this, for whatever
it is worth, ought to have been considered by the learned Additional
District Judge, but it seems that she was ignorant of this fact.

20.

On all the facts that have been mentioned above, there is no

disagreement between learned counsel for the parties. The difference of
RFA No.299/2004

Page 13 of 22

opinion between them is in respect of the law that has to be applied.
According to learned counsel for the Appellants, since there was no
application of mind by the learned Additional District Judge, the order
under appeal ought to be set aside. On the other hand, according to
learned counsel for the Respondents, even though the learned
Additional District Judge may have made some errors, the legal position
was correctly understood by her and was correctly applied.

Both

learned counsel for the parties addressed us on the scope of Order XII
Rule 6 of the CPC in the context of a case such as the present which
essentially deals with recovery of possession of the suit property
pursuant to termination of the lease under the provisions of the Transfer
of Property Act, 1882.

21.

There is no doubt that admissions for the purposes of Order

XII Rule 6 of the CPC must be clear, unequivocal and unambiguous.
This is settled by two decisions of this Court, namely, Baljit Kaur v.
United Insurance Co. Ltd., 1997 VI AD (DELHI) 937 and Jagannath
Chauhan v. S.C. Nanda, 2000 VII AD (DELHI) 961. Similar view was
earlier taken in Union of India v. M/s Feroze & Co., AIR 1962 J&K 66.

RFA No.299/2004

Page 14 of 22

What is equally important is that a judgment on admissions is a matter
of discretion and not a matter of right (Baljit Kaur) and that the
admissions should be taken as a whole and not in part (Jagannath
Chauhan).

22.

While we are in general agreement with the principles of law

mentioned above, what is of prime concern to us is this: Did the learned
Additional District Judge apply her mind to the facts of the case, as they
appear on the record? If the answer to this is in the affirmative, then the
next question would be whether the learned Additional District Judge
has correctly applied the legal principles?

23.

Proceeding on this basis, it seems to us that the four

circumstances presented by learned counsel for the Appellants, as they
appear from the judgment and decree and the case records, may not
mean very much if they are considered individually; but if they are
appreciated collectively or cumulatively, as they should be, then it is
quite apparent that the learned Additional District Judge did not apply
her mind to the facts and documents on record and proceeded to dispose

RFA No.299/2004

Page 15 of 22

of the “application” in a pre-determined manner. In view of this, the
impugned judgment and decree deserves to be set aside.

24.

Learned counsel for the Respondents contended that in a case

such as the present, the three elements that are required to be shown by
the plaintiff for recovery of possession are as follows:
(a)

There is no dispute about the existence of a month to month

tenancy between the parties.
(b)

There is no dispute that the provisions of the Delhi Rent

Control Act, 1958 are not applicable.
(c)

There is no dispute that a valid notice of termination of the

tenancy has been served by the landlord upon the tenant.

25.

According to learned counsel for the Respondents, once

these three elements are shown, a decree for possession must inevitably
follow.

Reliance in this regard was placed on Ved Prakash v.

Marudhar Services Ltd., 2000 (54) DRJ 654, Rajiv Sharma v. Rajiv
Gupta, AIR 2004 Del 248, Ms. Mani Mann v. Smt. Ram Dulari, 90
(2001) DLT 305, Surjit Sachdev v. Kazakhstan Investment Services

RFA No.299/2004

Page 16 of 22

Pvt. Ltd., 66 (1997) DLT 54 and Zulfiquar Ali Khan v. J.K. Helene
Curtis Ltd., AIR 2002 Del 425.

26.

Learned counsel for the Respondents also emphasized,

relying upon Rajiv Sharma, that the entire purpose of Order XII Rule 6
of the CPC is to enable a party to obtain speedy justice to the extent of
the relevant admissions that are made. It was submitted that it is for this
reason that the scope of enquiry under Order XII Rule 6 of the CPC is
rather limited and by limiting that scope of enquiry, the learned
Additional District Judge did not commit any error in law.

27.

It was also contended by learned counsel for the Respondents

that the mere fact that the parties had entered into an agreement to sell
(although this was denied by learned counsel for the Respondents) and a
suit for specific performance was filed by the Appellants against the
Respondents, the character of the relationship between the parties did
not change.

The Appellants continued to remain tenants of the

Respondents who were entitled to evict them in accordance with law
and if the Appellants did succeed in getting a decree in their favour in

RFA No.299/2004

Page 17 of 22

the suit for specific performance, they would be entitled to re-enter the
premises as owners thereof but until the ownership rights of the
Appellants are determined, the status of the Appellants as tenants does
not change nor does it give them any right to continue to remain in the
suit property until their status as owners is determined one way or the
other. In this context, reliance was placed upon D.S. Parvathamma v.
A. Srinivasan, (2003) 4 SCC 705 wherein the Supreme Court observed
as follows:
“…till a final decision has been reached the contract creates
a right in the person in possession i.e. the tenant, to refuse
to surrender possession of the premises even if such
possession was obtained by him not in part-performance of
the contract but in his capacity as a tenant. Having entered
into possession as a tenant and having continued to remain
in possession in that capacity he cannot be heard to say that
by reason of the agreement to sell his possession was no
longer that of a tenant.”

28.

Reliance was also placed by learned counsel for the

Respondents on Bhagwandas Parsadilal v. Surajmal, AIR 1961 MP
237 wherein it has been held as follows:
“But that does not mean that till a final decision has been
reached the contract creates a right in the present appellant
to refuse to surrender possession of the premises, even if
such possession was obtained by him not in part
performance of the contract but in his capacity as a tenant.
RFA No.299/2004

Page 18 of 22

… … … Having entered into possession as a tenant and
continued to remain in possession in that capacity the
defendant cannot, in my opinion, be heard to say that by
reason of the agreement to sell his possession is no longer
that of a tenant.”

29.

We really do not think it necessary to go into the various

contentions urged by learned counsel for the Respondents on the
interpretation of Order XII Rule 6 of the CPC or on the validity of the
defences urged by learned counsel for the Appellants. The reason for
this is that these issues have not been objectively examined by the
learned Additional District Judge. These issues have been examined on
the basis of incorrect facts. Had the issues been considered in the
context of the correct factual position, we would have certainly been
obliged to go into the correctness or otherwise of the conclusions
arrived by the learned Additional District Judge; but what has happened
in the present case is that the learned Additional District Judge has taken
a decision which, in our opinion suffers from a total non-application of
mind inasmuch as important facts have been completely overlooked or
distorted. The learned Additional District Judge proceeded on the basis
that she was deciding an application Order XII Rule 6 of the CPC when

RFA No.299/2004

Page 19 of 22

in fact there was no such application on record.

We could have

understood, and indeed it was permissible, if the learned Additional
District Judge had taken suo motu notice of the admissions said to have
been made by the Appellants and reached a conclusion on the basis of
those admissions. But even that has not happened and we are, therefore,
left wondering about the occasion which prompted the learned
Additional District Judge to pass a decree on alleged admissions, the
occasion being neither an application under Order XII Rule 6 of the
CPC nor the exercise of suo motu jurisdiction. The learned Additional
District Judge, in a sense, completely debunks the agreement to sell
dated 11th May, 2001; she also overlooks the filing of a suit for specific
performance of this agreement by the Appellants. Finally, the issue of
mesne profits is not at all adverted to.

30.

If we were to decide on the contentions urged by learned

counsel for the Respondents, we would really be depriving the
Appellants of a chance to put forward their case in the Court of first
instance on all the above aspects. This would needlessly prejudice the
Appellants who have really not had a fair chance to put forward their

RFA No.299/2004

Page 20 of 22

point of view before the learned Additional District Judge. For this
reason, we do not think it appropriate to express our opinion on the
contentions urged by learned counsel for the Respondents.

It is

primarily for the Trial Court to take a view, if an appropriate application
is made before it, or if it feels so inclined then in exercise of suo motu
jurisdiction, and it is only thereafter that the first appellate Court can test
the correctness or otherwise of the views expressed by the Trial Court.

31.

For these reasons, we think that the appropriate order that

should be passed is only to set aside the impugned judgment and decree
and remit the matter back to the Trial Court for proceeding further in the
matter in accordance with law. Of course, the learned Trial Judge will
proceed from where the matter got diverted into unchartered territory.
We also make it clear that our decision will not preclude the
Respondents from moving an application Order XII Rule 6 of the CPC
or any other application that they may choose to nor will it preclude the
learned Additional District Judge from taking up the matter for passing
a judgment on admissions should it feel inclined to do so and should the
parameters of law permit such a course of action to be taken.

RFA No.299/2004

Page 21 of 22

32.

The appeal is allowed. The parties are directed to appear

before the learned District Judge on 8th October, 2007. The Registry
should send back the Trial Court record immediately.

Madan B. Lokur, J

September 21, 2007
ncg

S. Muralidhar, J

Certified that the corrected
copy of the judgment has
been transmitted in the main
Server.

RFA No.299/2004

Page 22 of 22

