*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

ITA No. 247 of 2006

%

Date of Decision: April 26, 2007
COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX
DELHI-IV, NEW DELHI.
..... Appellant
Through Mrs. P.L. Bansal
versus
M/S DENSO INDIA LTD.
CAPITAL ROAD, LEFT WING
OL OF PALME MARG
MUNIRKA, NEW DELHI.
..... Respondent
Through Mr.M.S. Syali, Sr.Advocate with
Ms.Mahua C. Kalra and
Mr.Saubhagya Aggarwal
Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA

1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

ITA No.247/2006

Page 1 of 5

MADAN B. LOKUR, J. (ORAL)

2.

Admit.
The following

substantial

question

of

law

arises

for

consideration: -

3.

“Whether the Assessing Officer could have imposed a
liability on the Assessee without giving any reasons?”
The filing of paper books is dispensed with.

4.

We have heard learned counsel for the parties and we find from

the assessment order dated 26th February, 2002 that the Assessing
Officer had included by way of deemed profit under Section 115JA of
the Income Tax Act, 1961 a provision for gratuity and a provision for
leave encashment.

While doing so, the Assessing Officer gave

absolutely no reason.
5.

Feeling aggrieved by the addition, the Assessee preferred an

appeal before the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals). Ordinarily,
the appellate authority ought to have called for a remand report but,
instead of doing so the appellate authority took into consideration the
actuarial valuation submitted by the Assessee and on the merits of
the case came to the conclusion that the provision towards gratuity
and leave encashment and was an ascertained liability and, therefore,

ITA No.247/2006

Page 2 of 5

could not be added back as was done by the Assessing Officer.
6.

In further appeal before the Tribunal, a prayer was made by the

Revenue for remanding the matter to the Assessing Officer for a
decision on merits but we find that no consideration was given to this
request and on the merits of the case the Tribunal accepted the view
of the First Appellate Authority by relying upon Bharat Earth
Movers v. Commissioner of Income Tax, (2000) 245 ITR
428.
7.

We are of the view that the Assessing Officer was under an

obligation to give reasons for adding back the amount made for
provision of gratuity and for leave encashment. The principles of
natural justice require that in situations of this nature, there must be
a reasoned order given by the Assessing Officer. In the absence of
any reasoned order, the appellate authorities, including this Court
exercising jurisdiction under Section 260-A of the Income Tax Act,
1961, would not have the benefit of the reasoning adopted by the
statutory authorities.

The appellate authorities cannot supply

reasons which are themselves non-existent, as has been done by the
Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) as well as by the Tribunal.

ITA No.247/2006

Page 3 of 5

This is destructive of the requirement of a reasoned order which may
be tested in a higher forum.
8.

Under the circumstances, we have no option but to set aside the

order passed by the Tribunal and to answer the question in the
negative, in favour of the Revenue and against the Assessee.
9.

We remand the matter back to the Assessing Officer with the

direction that he should passed a reasoned order, after considering
the actuarial valuation that may be produced by the Assessee and
after considering whether it is necessary or not to add back the
provision for gratuity and for leave encashment and whether these
liabilities are ascertained liabilities or unascertained liabilities.
10.

We make it clear that reasons must always be given by the

Assessing Officer if a decision is taken against the Assessee failing
which it is quite likely that the conclusion arrived at by the Assessing
Officer may be set aside merely on the ground of lacking in any
reasons.
11.

The appeal is disposed of accordingly.

MADAN B. LOKUR, J

ITA No.247/2006

Page 4 of 5

APRIL 26, 2007
kapil

ITA No.247/2006

V. B. GUPTA, J

Page 5 of 5

