*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

ITA No. 1075 of 2006

Judgment reserved on: July 23, 2007
%

Judgment delivered on: July 31, 2007

Director of Income Tax (Exemption)
Laxmi Nagar, New Delhi.
Through

...Appellant
Mrs. P.L. Bansal with
Mr.Vishnu Sharma

Versus
Angreji Hatao Nidhi
A-19, Press Enclave,
New Delhi.

...Respondent
Through

Mr. M.P. Rastogi

Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Not necessary

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Not necessary

ITA No.1075/2006

Page 1 of 4

MADAN B. LOKUR, J.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, we admit this
appeal filed under Section 260-A of the Income Tax Act, 1961.

2.

The following substantial question of law arises for

consideration: “Whether the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal was correct
in law in treating the donation of Rs.10 lakhs given by the
U.P. Government to the Assessee as a corpus fund and
thereby allowing exemption to the Assessee under Section
11(1) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 on such income?”

3.

Filing of the paper book is dispensed with.

4.

The Assessee is a charitable society engaged in the

promotion of Hindi language. According to the Assessee, it received a
donation of Rs.10 lakhs from the UP Government along with a letter
dated 23rd September, 1994. The Assessing Officer found that the letter
did not require the donation to be treated as a corpus donation and on
the contrary the Assessee was required to send a utilization certificate in
respect of the amount. On this basis, the Assessing Officer treated the
donation as financial assistance for the activities of the Assessee and not
ITA No.1075/2006

Page 2 of 4

as a corpus donation.

5.

Both the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) as well as

the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal treated the amount as a corpus
donation on the ground that the Assessee had deposited the amount in a
fixed deposit and had been treating the amount as a corpus donation.
The Assessee had also informed the UP Government that the amount
was invested in the fixed deposit. It was further held that the failure by
the UP Government to mention that the amount was a corpus donation
would not detract from the nature of the donation.

6.

We are afraid that it is not possible to agree with the view

taken by the Tribunal. Section 12 (1) of the Act, which is relevant for
our purpose, reads as under: “12. Income of trusts or institutions from contributions.
(1) Any voluntary contributions received by a trust created
wholly for charitable or religious purposes or by an
institution established wholly for such purposes (not being
contributions made with a specific direction that they shall
form part of the corpus of the trust or institution) shall for
the purposes of section 11 be deemed to be income derived
from property held under trust wholly for charitable or
religious purposes and the provisions of that section and
ITA No.1075/2006

Page 3 of 4

section 13 shall apply accordingly.”

7.

A plain reading of the section shows that there must be a

specific direction from the donor that the amount donated shall form a
part of the corpus of the trust or the institution. The admitted position is
that there is no such specific direction in so far as the donation given by
the UP Government is concerned. On the other hand, we find that the
UP Government, by its letter dated 23rd September, 1994, required the
Assessee to indicate the utilization of the amount. It is quite clear that
utilization of the donation would be possible only if the amount is not a
corpus donation and, therefore, it must follow that the intention of the
donor was that the amount was not to be treated as a corpus donation.

8.

Under the circumstances, we answer the question in the

negative, in favour of the Revenue and against the Assessee.

Madan B. Lokur, J

July 31, 2007
kapil

V.B. Gupta, J

Certified that the corrected copy of the
judgment has been transmitted in the main
Server.

ITA No.1075/2006

Page 4 of 4

