*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Crl.REV.P. No. 333/2007 & Crl.M.A. 5573/2007

%

Date of reserve : 25.03.2009
Date of decision: 09.04.2009

BABITA

…Petitioner
Through: Mr. A.K. Singh and Mr. S.K. Singh,
Advocates.
Versus

STATE
Through:

...Respondent
Mr. Navin Sharma, APP

CORAM:
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MOOL CHAND GARG
1.

Whether the Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?

Yes

MOOL CHAND GARG, J.
1.

This criminal revision petition has been preferred under Section

397/401 Cr.P.C. against the order framing charge passed by Learned
ASJ dated 23.01.2007 and the charges framed in pursuance thereof on
01.02.2007 under Section 498-A/304-B/34 IPC against the petitioner
along with others.
2.

Briefly stating the facts of this case are; that late Smt. Vimla Devi

(hereinafter referred to as the deceased) was married with Mahesh
Pant, who is related to the petitioner as her brother, in the year 2003.
From the wedlock of deceased with Mahesh Pant, one female child was
born on 01.11.2004. According to the prosecution the deceased was
caught by fire on 24.02.2006 while working in the kitchen of her
matrimonial house and was taken to Irwin Hospital for treatment by

Crl.REV.P. 333/2007

Page 1 of 10

her husband and was also given treatment by the hospital. However,
she could not survive and succumbed to the burn injuries which were
to the tune of 100%. She was declared dead on 25.02.2006 before
making any dying declaration.
3.

On the basis of the statements made by the parents, including

father of the deceased, recorded on 25.2.2006 before the SDM, FIR
No.126/2006

under

Sections

498-A/304-B/34

IPC,

Police

Station

Mandawali was registered against the husband, Shri Mahesh Pant and
his other family members, including the petitioner. In the statement of
the father of the deceased and the statement of her mother allegations
were leveled mainly against her husband to the effect that at the time
of marriage a demand of Rs.1,50,000/- was made as dowry in addition
to what they had given like T.V., Fridge, Almirah, Double Bed, Utensils,
Gold ornaments weighing 6 tolas etc. It was further alleged that the
relationship between the deceased and her in-laws was not cordial. It
would be appropriate to take note of the statement made by the father
of the deceased which is to the following effect:
“After the marriage, the relations between my
son-in-law and my daughter were not cordial. The girl
after three months of the marriage came to my house
and stated that in her in-laws house, her mother-in-law
Smt.Ishwari Devi, Sister-in-law Babi, Father-in-law Gopal
Dutt Pant and Husband Mahesh Pant pass sarcastic
remarks saying that I have not given anything in dowry
and my daughter belongs to a poor family.
Thereafter, my daughter, came to my house
when her daughter became one year old and told me
that her husband used to beat her and always demand
for more dowry. At that time her husband was also with
her and that he asked me to keep my daughter and he
wanted to give divorce to her, as I had not given
anything to him in dowry.
My daughter was subject to rough treatment by
her in –laws and used to raise demand for dowry.
Yesterday on 24.02.2006, at about 3:00 PM day
time, my son-in-law Mahesh informed me in my office
that there was a fire in his house and my daughter Bimla
had sustained burn injuries and she was admitted in
Irwin Hospital. Hearing it, I immediately rushed to my
house and took my wife Leela Devi and reached the

Crl.REV.P. 333/2007

Page 2 of 10

house of my son-in-law Mahesh where the sister-in-law
of my daughter Babita met us. She informed that due to
stove bursting my daughter had also got burn injuries
and she was admitted in Ward No.20 of the Irwin
Hospital. I and my wife immediately reached to the Irwin
Hospital where my daughter was admitted with burn
injuries and she was not in a position to give any
statement. Today on 25.02.2006, in the morning about
3:00 AM my daughter has died in the hospital.
About it I have the opinion that my daughter is
burnt on account of a conspiracy because I am poor man
and could not complete their demand of dowry and as
such my son-in-law Mahesh has killed my daughter by
burning her.”

The

mother

of

the

deceased

made

exactly

the

similar

allegations.
4.

It is the case of the petitioner that deceased was living with her

husband happily since the inception of marriage. As stated above a
daughter was also born from the wedlock who was aged about 15
months old at the time of the death of the deceased. Till that time, no
complaint of any kind was ever made by the deceased.

It is also

stated that the deceased was suffering from Epilepsy before her
marriage. The counsel for the petitioner further submitted that nobody
could be blamed for her death because as per the post-mortem report,
the death of the deceased had taken place due to shock consequent
upon the burn injuries which could have been due to flames of fire.
5.

It is submitted that all the allegations made by the father and

mother of the deceased reveals that the alleged demand of dowry was
made either before the marriage or just after three months of the
marriage while the incident leading to the death of the deceased took
place after three years of her marriage.

Moreover, the allegations

made regarding torturing, harassment and beatings of the deceased
are highly vague. The allegations against the present petitioner are
highly vague and general in nature. It is also submitted that neither

Crl.REV.P. 333/2007

Page 3 of 10

the father of the deceased nor his wife has mentioned as to when such
harassment, beatings and demand were made and caused to the
deceased, by the petitioner.
6.

It is also submitted that the deceased’s father also stated that

the deceased came to his house with her daughter when she was one
year old and stated to him that her husband always used to beat her
and demand more dowry.

She also made an allegation that her

husband asked her father to keep her and wanted to give her divorce.
But these allegations are also old and do not implicate the petitioner.
7.

The Police after completing investigation, on the basis of the

statements of the parents of the deceased, filed the challan and on
that basis the Trial Court charged the petitioner and her family
members under Section 498-A/304-B/34 IPC.
8.

The counsel for the petitioner further submitted that the couple

was married in 2003 and there was never any complaint regarding
harassment and torture for demand of dowry.

No dying declaration

was made by the deceased so as to implicate the petitioner as an
accused in the present case.

The post-mortem report also goes to

show that the deceased expired on 25.02.2006 at 4.20 AM in the
morning during the course of her treatment.

Nothing incriminating

was recovered from the place where the deceased caught fire so as to
implicate the petitioner.
9.

However, the Trial Court has charged all the accused persons,

including the present petitioner, under Section 498-A/304-B/34 IPC.
The relevant portion of the order on charge reads as under:
3.
I have gone through the file. The photographs
depict that neither the kerosene store had burst nor the
gas cylinder had caught fire. Even the damage to the
other articles in the kitchen is minimum and the only

Crl.REV.P. 333/2007

Page 4 of 10

sign of burning is that the plastic cover of the Fridge as
well as the cloth hanging on the Taund are partly burnt
but there is no damage to any other articles including
the table cloth and plastic container etc. lying in the
kitchen, so the possibility of foul play cannot be ruled
out. Specific allegations have been levelled against all
the accused persons regarding demand of dowry and
torturing the deceased which culminated in the incident
and the same is the subject matter of the present case.
4.
In my view, there is sufficient material on record
to frame prima facie charge against all the accused
persons under Section 498A/304B/34 IPC. Charges be
framed accordingly against them on 01.02.2007.
Ld. ASJ
23.01.2007

10.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the

petitioner, who is the sister of the deceased’s husband, has no role to
play whatsoever in the present case and has been falsely implicated by
the parents of the deceased. It is stated that the petitioner at the time
of the said incident was working in her office and was not present at
the spot which is proved by the certificate on record by her employer,
which is at page 68 of the petition. It is also submitted that she was
living separately at her parent’s home and as such no specific
allegations regarding the demand of dowry has been made against
her.

It is thus submitted that the order to frame charge and the

charges framed are bad in law. It is also stated that the Learned ASJ
gravely erred in not appreciating the evidence in hand such as Postmortem, CFSL report and the statements of the witnesses which does
not make out a case under Section 498-A/304-B IPC against the
petitioner and thus, the charge framed against the petitioner is liable
to be quashed.
11.

The learned counsel for the petitioner who has filed written

synopsis has submitted that:
Section 498A IPC requires an act of cruelty which
includes a willful conduct of a nature likely to derive the

Crl.REV.P. 333/2007

Page 5 of 10

woman to commit suicide or grave injury etc or
harassment of woman with a view to pressurize her to
meet unlawful demand for any property or valuable
security. It is humbly submitted that there is no such
allegation against the petitioner in the entire statement
except a sentence that in-laws including petitioner used
to pass sarcastic remarks for not bringing document.
Petitioner humbly submits that it does not fulfill
the requirement of section 498A IPC.

12.

The counsel also submitted:
Section 304B IPC requires that the deceased should be
soon before her death subject to cruelty or harassment
for demand of dowry. Soon before is explained by a
“three judges bench” of Supreme Court of India in
State of Punjab Vs. Eqbal Singh reported in 1991 (3) RCR
page no. 489 para 8.
There should be evidence immediately before her
death, that she was subject by such person to cruelty
and harassment.
Immediate is defined in Black Law Dictionary as
at once, without delay.
These judgments of three judges of Supreme
Court ahs not been modified/changed by any bench of
equal number of judges or more judges.

13.

It is also submitted that:
There is no evidence in the entire FIR and
statements recorded after death of the deceased
to show that the petitioner immediately prior to
her death had committed any act of cruelty.
On the contrary, she was on service as is evident
from certificate of employer.

14.

The petitioner has also relied upon following judgments:
i)

Gurdatta Singh Vs. State of Rajasthan 1(1992)CCR
471(DB)

ii)

Jagbir Singh & Ors. Vs. State of Punjab 1992(2) Crimes
746

iii)
iv)

Dinesh Ahluwalia & Ors. Vs. State 2003(2) JCC 1093

v)

Smt. Deepa Bajwa Vs. State & Ors. 2004(3) JCC 1754

vi)

Majhar Vs. State 2002(1) JCC 515

vii)

15.

Lila Ram Vs. state of Rajasthan 1(1993) CCR 412

Ashok Kumar Vs. State 2004(2) JCC 1187

However, the learned APP appearing for the State opposed the

present petition on the ground that it is a case of the unnatural death
where the demand of dowry was made and further the allegations

Crl.REV.P. 333/2007

Page 6 of 10

were made against all the in-laws and the death has occurred within 7
years of the marriage, which attracts the provisions under Section 498A/304-B IPC and according to him charges have been rightly framed by
the learned ASJ.
16.

I have heard the submissions made on behalf of the petitioner as

well as learned APP for the State and have gone through the
judgments cited at bar. The facts as noticed above, goes to show that
the death of the deceased occurred on 25.02.2006 while the demands
of dowry were allegedly made either soon after the marriage or after
the birth of female child but not soon before the death of the
deceased. Moreover, no specific allegations have been made except
the demand of Rs. 1,50,000/-, which according to the father of the
deceased, was made at the time of marriage which cannot make out a
case of harassment soon before the death.
17.

At this juncture I may refer to provisions contained under Section

304-B IPC as well as Section 498A IPC which are reproduced
hereunder:
Section 304B. Dowry death

(1) Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns
or bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal
circumstances within seven years of her marriage and it
is shown that soon before her death she was subjected
to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative
of her husband for, or in connection with, any demand
for dowry, such death shall be called "dowry death" and
such husband or relative shall be deemed to have
caused her death.
Explanation:-For the purpose of this sub-section, "dowry"
shall have the same meaning as in section 2 of the
Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 ( 28 of 1961).
(2) Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment
for life.]

Crl.REV.P. 333/2007

Page 7 of 10

498A. Husband or relative of husband of a woman
subjecting her to cruelty.
Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the
husband of a woman, subjects such woman to cruelty
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three years and shall also be liable to
fine.
Explanation-For the purpose of this section, "cruelty"
means(a) Any willful conduct which is of such a nature as is
likely to drive the woman to commit suicide or to cause
grave injury or danger to life, limb or health whether
mental or physical) of the woman; or
(b) Harassment of the woman where such harassment is
with a view to coercing her or any person related to her
to meet any unlawful demand for any property or
valuable security or is on account of failure by her or any
person related to her meet such demand.]

18.

A bare perusal of these Sections makes it absolutely clear that

the

following

ingredients

are

required

to

be

proved

by

the

prosecution:(a)

that it is a death of a woman,

(b)

that the death is caused by burns of bodily injury or
occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances,

(c)

that it is within seven years of her marriage,

(d)

that it is shown that soon before her death she was
subjected to cruelty or harassment,

(e)

that it was by her husband or any relatives of husband,

(f)

that it was in connection with any demand of dowry.

Unless all the above ingredients are established it is not possible
to hold the accused guilty of offence under Sec. 304-B IPC.
19.

In Gurditta Singh v. State of Rajasthan (supra) it has been laid

down:
“Keeping in mind the principles enunciated and the guidelines
laid down in the various pronouncements by the Courts referred to
above and the aims and objects of the remedial Legislation under the
Dowry Act and making demand of dowry punishable under the penal
law, we would now discuss the facts and circumstances of the case to
make out as to whether the ingredients of Sec. 304-B have been
established and it is a fit case in which presumption under Sec.113-B of

Crl.REV.P. 333/2007

Page 8 of 10

the Evidence Act has rightly been drawn.”
“The main ingredients to be proved for establishing a case
u/Sec. 304-B IPC are (i) unnatural death of woman within seven years
of her marriage and (ii) she being subjected to cruelty or harassment
by her husband or any relative of her husband, in connection with any
demand of dowry.”

20.

In the aforesaid case, the threat ingredients that the deceased

was subject to cruelty or harassment by the petitioner in connection
with any demand of dowry soon before her death has not been
established.
21.

I may also refer to a judgment delivered by this Court in Sunil

Bansal Vs. State of Delhi 2007 (7) AD (Delhi) 780 wherein it was held
that:
12.
The above facts would show that the incidents
relating to demands for dowry and acts of harassment
pertaining to dowry, allegedly occurred either soon after
the marriage or around the time of the birth of two
children - 1998 and 2000. None of the allegations point
to any kind of cruelty, harassment or cruel behaviour
having any proximity, in point of time to the date of
death ie 25.9.2004. Though there is no thumb rule as to
what is meant by the expression "soon before" death of
a woman, under Section 304-B yet despite substantial
flexibility, the charge cannot be maintained, if the acts
are remote in point of time.
The Supreme Court has
held in Kedya Perumal Vs. State of Tamil Nadu AIR 2003
SC 3828 and Yashoda Vs. State of M.P. 2004 III AD (S.C.)
305 = 2004(3) SCC 98 that there should not be too
much of a time-lag between cruelty and harassment in
connection with demand for dowry and the death in
question. It was also held that there must exist a
proximate and live link between the effect of cruelty
based on dowry demands and death of the woman. The
Court held that if the alleged incident of cruelty is
remote in time and has become stale, not to disturb
mental equilibrium of the woman, it would be of no
consequence.
13. The evidence in this case about dowry harassment,
which could have been the cause for death of the
deceased, is at best sketchy and
most certainly
contradictory. Both sets of statements recorded by the
relatives of the deceased point to dowry or other
demands proximate to the marriage and birth of the two
children which would go back to at least 3-4 years before
the incident. In these circumstances, on exercise of
sifting of materials and particularly keeping in mind the
existence of two contradictory statements, it cannot be
said that a grave suspicion exists about the commission
of offence under Section 304-B, by the Petitioners. It is
well-settled that if two views at charge framing stage

Crl.REV.P. 333/2007

Page 9 of 10

exist, based upon the materials available, the view
favouring the accused is to be preferred. (Ref. Dilawar
Balu Kurane Vs. State of Maharashtra 2002 I AD (S.C.) 7
= 2002 SCC (Crl) 310.

22.

Similarly, in the facts of the present case there is not a single

instance soon before the death of the deceased where she was
harassed for demands of dowry at least by the petitioner whatsoever in
the present case. Thus, there is no basis to frame charge against the
petitioner and the criminal revision petition is accordingly allowed. The
charges framed against the petitioner/ accused are hereby set aside.
Her bail bonds stand discharged.

However, nothing stated herein

would affect the merits of the case qua the other accused persons.
23.

Trial Court record be sent back forthwith.

Crl.M.A.5573/2007
In view of the orders passed above, the application stands
disposed of.

APRIL 09, 2009
ag

Crl.REV.P. 333/2007

MOOL CHAND GARG, J.

Page 10 of 10

