*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP (C) No.5714/2007

%

Date of decision: 12.05.2008

MAHENDER SINGH (EX.CONST)
Through:

…PETITIONER
Mr. Bishram Singh, Advocate.

Versus
UNION OF INDIA & ORS.
Through:

...RESPONDENTS
Ms. Barkha Babbar,
Advocate.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MOOL CHAND GARG
1.

Whether the Reporters of local papers Yes
may be allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J. (ORAL)
1.

Rule D.B.

2.

At request of learned counsel for the parties, the petition is

taken up for final disposal.
3.

The petitioner was enrolled as a Constable in BSF on

1.10.1992.

When the petitioner was deputed on duty on

25.10.1992, an incident took place resulting in a charge sheet
against the petitioner dated 8.12.2003. A record of evidence was
prepared wherein the petitioner denied the allegations and
WP(C)-5714/2007

Page 1 of 6

claimed that it was SI Chattar Singh and HC Bala Ram who had
abused the petitioner and assaulted him. On a fresh charge sheet
dated 30.5.2004, Summary Court Force proceedings were held.
On 7.6.2004, the petitioner is alleged to have pleaded `guilty’ to
the first three out of the four charges while pleading `not guilty’
to the fourth charge.
4.

The evidence was recorded on the fourth charge and the

petitioner was held guilty of all the four charges and imposed with
a sentence of dismissal from service.

The DIG, BSF, however,

while upholding the conviction on the first three charges set aside
the conviction on the fourth charge being against the weight of
evidence but did not interfere with the sentence.
5.

The petitioner aggrieved by the said order filed a statutory

petition before the DG, BSF which was rejected by an order dated
16th/17th December, 2004.

The petitioner then filed a review

petition which was rejected on 1.3.2006.
6.

The petitioner thereafter approached this Court by W.P.(C)

No.8100/2006. The said writ petition was partly allowed by the
orders of the Division Bench dated 6.3.2007 whereby the two
orders dated 16th/17th December, 2004 and 1.3.2006 were set
aside and the Director General, BSF was asked to consider afresh
the statutory petition filed by the petitioner in terms of Section
117 of the BSF Act, 1968 (hereinafter referred to as the `said Act’)
and pass appropriate orders. The Director General, BSF was also
directed to examine the question of proportionality of sentence.

WP(C)-5714/2007

Page 2 of 6

7.

The Director General, BSF, thereafter passed an order dated

10.5.2007 wherein he has found that there was sufficient
evidence on record to sustain the findings of the Court on all
the three charges and there was no infirmity or illegality in the
trial proceedings. The petitioner has thereafter filed the present
petition.
8.

The proceedings of the SSFC has been produced before us.

The proceedings show that the petitioner initially in his written
statement and the ROE claimed that he was not guilty of any of
the charges. The proceedings of the SSFC, however, record the
plea of `guilty’. Thereafter, six witnesses were examined to prove
the fourth charge where the plea of `not guilty’ had been entered
by the petitioner. It is thereafter that further proceedings of the
plea of `guilty’ with respect to first, second and third charge has
been recorded and it is noted that before recording the finding,
the Court has explained to the petitioner the meaning of pleading
guilty and that he understands the nature of the charges. The
tenor of what is recorded is almost verbatim of what is required
as per Rule 142 of the Border Security Force Rules, 1969
(hereinafter referred to as the `said Rules’). Rule 142 reads as
under:“142. General plea of “Guilty” or “Not Guilty”.(1) the accused person’s plea of “Guilty” or “Not
Guilty” (or if he refuses to plead or does not plead
intelligibly either one or the other), a plea of “Not
Guilty” shall be recorded on each charge.
(2) If an accused person pleads “Guilty”, that plea
shall be recorded as the finding of the Court; but
before it is recorded, the Court shall ascertain that the
WP(C)-5714/2007

Page 3 of 6

accused understands the nature of the charge to
which he has pleaded guilty and shall inform him of
the general effect of that plea, and in particular of the
meaning of the charge to which he has pleaded guilty,
and of the difference in procedure which will be made
by the plea of guilty and shall advise him to withdraw
that plea if it appears from the record or abstract of
evidence (if any) or otherwise that the accused ought
to plead not guilty.
(3) Where an accused person pleads guilty to the
first two or more charges laid in the alternative, the
Court may after sub-rule (2) has been complied with
and before the accused is arraigned on the alternative
charge or charges, withdraw such alternative charge
or charges as follow the charge to which the accused
has pleaded guilty without requiring the accused to
plea thereto, and a record to that effect shall be made
in the proceedings of the Court.”
(emphasis supplied)
9.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has pointed out that as

per sub-rule (2) of Rule 142 of the said Rules, the plea of `guilty’
shall be recorded but “before it is recorded”, the accused is to be
put to the necessary notice. It is thus pleaded that, firstly, the
plea of `guilty’ on part of the petitioner is wholly improbable in
view of the earlier proceedings in ROE and his written statement
and secondly no such caution as envisaged under sub-rule (2) of
Rule 142 of the said Rules was addressed to the petitioner and it
is only after recording of evidence on the fourth charge that such
a caution is claimed to have been extended.

It is also noticed

that there is no signature of the petitioner accepting the plea of
`guilty’ nor is the caution in the own handwriting of the person
holding the SFC.
10.

Learned counsel for the respondents submits that the

signatures of the petitioner are not necessary in view of the
WP(C)-5714/2007

Page 4 of 6

Division Bench judgment of this Court in Chokha Ram Vs. Union
of India & another; 110 (2004) DLT 268 and that there is no
circular, unlike the Army, which requires the plea of `guilty’ or
`not guilty’ to be recorded in the own handwriting of the SFC after
extending the caution.
11.

On hearing learned counsel for the parties, we are of the

considered opinion that the mandate of sub-rule (2) of Rules 142
of the said Rules has not been satisfied in the present case. The
caution should have been extended to the petitioner at the
threshold itself before recording the plea of `guilty’ of the
petitioner and not in the form of a formality post-facto after
recording, if any, the evidence in respect of the fourth charge
where the petitioner pleaded `not guilty’.

The stand of the

petitioner in the ROE as well his written statement also appear to
belie with the stand of the respondents that the petitioner
pleaded `guilty’ to the first three charges.
12.

We may also note that it is desirable that the Director

General, BSF, on a parity of the guidelines of the Army should
issue instructions in respect of the manner of recording the plea
of `guilty’ because of the serious consequences which arise in
such cases as also the environment in which the personnel are
tried. The object is to ensure that both in letter and spirit, the
mandate of the Rule is complied with and the accused person is
fully conscious of the consequences of pleading guilty.
13.

We are thus of the view that the plea of `guilty’ as recorded

in respect of the first three charges cannot be sustained and so
WP(C)-5714/2007

Page 5 of 6

far as the fourth charge is concerned, it has been found in favour
of the petitioner.
14.

The result of the aforesaid is that the impugned order dated

10.5.2007 is quashed and the plea of the petitioner should be
entered as `not guilty’
concerned.

insofar as the first three charges are

The respondents would be at liberty to hold

proceedings in respect of trying the first three charges in
accordance with law.

In view of the order dismissing the

petitioner from service being set aside, the petitioner would be
entitled to the consequential benefits.
15.

The petition is allowed in the aforesaid terms leaving the

parties to bear their own costs.

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

MAY 12, 2008
vk

WP(C)-5714/2007

MOOL CHAND GARG, J.

Page 6 of 6

