*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP (C) No.4370/1992
Reserved on : May 08, 2008
Date of decision: May 21, 2008

%
B.K. SHARMA

Through:

…PETITIONER
Ms. Bharti Kochhar, Advocate.

Versus
UNION OF INDIA & ORS.
Through:

...RESPONDENTS
Mr.B.K. Berera, Advocate.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MOOL CHAND GARG
1.

Whether the Reporters of local papers Yes
may be allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

MOOL CHAND GARG, J.
1.

ASI/Executive B.K. Sharma, the petitioner joined CISF on 3rd

January, 1970.
1984.

He was promoted as ASI/Executive in the year

While in service and being posted as ASI, `F’ Company,

Durgapur Steel Plant, the petitioner availed casual leave of 15
days. He was to join the duties on 16th June, 1986, but he failed
to do so and was proceeded departmentally for his unauthorized
absence when a Memo was sent to him directing him to submit
his written statement of defence by Registered post on 13th
WP (C) No.4370/1992

Page 1 of 14

August, 1986. Such an

absence of the petitioner was without

permission/sanction for overstaying for more than 57 days
unauthorisedly.

Since no response was received from the

petitioner to the charge sheet as also that the petitioner failed to
participate, an ex parte inquiry report was given by the Inquiry
Officer

against

the

petitioner

proving

the

charge.

The

Commandant (Plant) after agreeing with the finding of the Inquiry
Officer awarded punishment of dismissal from service to the
petitioner with effect from 16th October, 1986.
2.

An appeal preferred by the petitioner to the DIG, CISF Unit,

DSP, Durgapur, was dismissed vide order dated 28th February,
1987. He, thereafter, submitted a revision petition to the Director
General, CISF which was disposed of by the Inspector General
(ES), CISF, Calcutta. The Inspector General found that there were
some procedural irregularities in holding the inquiry against the
petitioner, inasmuch as, the petitioner was not even supplied with
a copy of the inquiry report and the punishment imposed upon
him

had

not

been

imposed

by

a

competent

authority.

Accordingly, while setting aside the order of dismissal and
directing re-instatement of the petitioner in service, he
also ordered holding of a de novo proceeding against the
petitioner from the stage of supply of copy of the finding
to the individual concerned.

The petitioner was directed to

report to his last Unit posting, i.e., CISF, DSP, Durgapur within 15
days from the receipt of the said order. The period of absence
WP (C) No.4370/1992

Page 2 of 14

from duty from the date of his dismissal from service to the date
of joining duty on reinstatement was proposed to be `dies non’
and it was held that he would not be paid allowances for the said
period, but at the same time was given an opportunity to submit
his representation within 15 days from his joining the Unit, if any,
against the aforesaid proposal on reinstatement.
3.

The petitioner, reported for duty in the Unit on 26 th

November, 1991. He was reinstated in service vide order dated
28th November, 1991 and thereafter a de novo inquiry was started
from the stage of supply of copy of the finding to the petitioner.
The petitioner was also called upon to submit a representation in
terms of the order passed by the revisional authority.
4.

The

petitioner

submitted

his

representation

on

28th

December, 1991 which was considered by IG/CISF/(DS) Calcutta
on 21st April, 1992.

While dismissing his representation, it was

ordered that the period of absence of the petitioner from duty
from the date of his dismissal from service till the date of
reinstatement in service would be treated as `dies non’ for all
purposes and he shall not be paid any pay or allowances for the
said period.
5.

It may be observed here that the DIG, CISF, who held de

novo inquiry and also considered the representation made by the
petitioner before him aggrieved from the finding of the Inquiry
Officer regarding overstay for a period of 123 days from 16th June,
1986, made the following observations:WP (C) No.4370/1992

Page 3 of 14

“In his representation dated 28.12.91, he
denied the charge and has challenged the
findings of the Enquiry Officer on grounds
amongst others that he was not given
opportunity to deny his guilt and prove his
innocence. Further his main contention in his
representation is that his home is within
Ghaziabad District (U.P.); whereas the
notices of the enquiry were sent to him to
Ghaziabad
District
(U.P.)
within
the
jurisdiction of Meerut District. Since 1977
District Ghaziabad has been established upon
bifurcation of the erstwhile Meerut District
and his home fell within the jurisdiction of
Ghaziabad. Therefore, the district anomaly
in the matter of postal address remained
uncared by the authority for which he is not
responsible.
Also, he contended in his
representation to consider his prayer for
extension of leave sent by him from time to
time on the grounds of illness of his son and
himself supported by medical certificates.
On going through the case records of
the
delinquent
and
considering
the
submission made by the delinquent, I find
that the delinquent ASI/Exe. B.K. Sharma,
who went on leave and overstayed
unauthorisedly for 123 days from 16.6.1986
(F/N) to till the date of earlier disposal of the
case i.e. 16.10.86 and did not bother to
inform the department about the reasons for
OSL and also did not even bother to attend
the enquiry in spite of several notices sent to
him. All the notices were sent to him to his
home address which he has given in his
service records. Further, he had also not
informed the department about the change
of his address. The Enquiry Officer did not
consider it proper to delay the proceedings
for an indefinite period, as such the enquiry
was held ex parte.
6.

Consequently, the charge of overstay after 16th June, 1986

was accepted as proved and by treating this as an act of

serious

misconduct and grave indiscipline, punishment was imposed upon
WP (C) No.4370/1992

Page 4 of 14

the petitioner of dismissal from service from the date of receipt of
the order dated 4th March, 1992. However, by the said order, the
period of OSL (overstay of leave) was treated as under:“EL from 26.5.86 to 15.6.86
EOL from 16.6.86 to 15.10.86”
7.

The petitioner then filed a fresh appeal challenging the

orders dated 31st October, 1991, 4th March, 1992 and the order
dated 21st April, 1992. A perusal of the appeal goes to show, that
the only ground to justify his absence from duty after 16th June,
1986 taken by the petitioner was his own illness during the period
of leave.

Even though there is a mention about sending of a

medical certificate, the record goes to show that no such
document was placed on record by the petitioner either along
with his appeal or along with the writ petition.
8.

The Inspector General, CISF, Eastern Sector, Calcutta,

dismissed the appeal by observing that on perusal of the relevant
records, he was satisfied that the charge of OSL levelled against
the petitioner was duly proved during the course of inquiry and
the plea taken by the petitioner in his appeal was having no
merits.

Consequent to the passing of this order, the petitioner

has filed the present writ petition.
9.

The writ petition has been contested by the respondents

who have also filed a counter affidavit. According to the
respondents the appeal filed by the petitioner was considered by
the Competent Authority on merits. It is stated that since there
WP (C) No.4370/1992

Page 5 of 14

was nothing to substantiate the plea taken by the petitioner to
justify his absence from duty after the sanctioned leave period, it
was rightly dismissed vide order dated 1st April, 1992.
10.

The petitioner thereafter, also preferred a revision petition

which was also dismissed vide order dated 21st February, 1993,
passed by the Second Respondent whereby the petitioner was
even allowed 50% of wages as admissible u/s 30 (4) of the CISF
Rule

for

the

reinstatement.

period

between

Respondents

the

have

date

also

of

dismissal

stated

that

to

mere

regularization of period of absence from 16th June, 1986 till 16th
October, 1986 by treating the said period as the extraordinary
leave cannot have any effect on the order of dismissal which has
been passed due to misconduct of the petitioner i.e. over stay of
leave without sanction of more than 123 days. It is the case of
the respondents that unauthorized absence that too willfully is a
serious misconduct and as such punishment awarded to the
petitioner is fully justified. It has been stated that the plea to
justify his unauthorized absence due to his illness has not been
substantiated in as much as, there is nothing on record to support
the plea taken by the petitioner. It is thus pleaded that in the
aforesaid

circumstances,

the

competent

authority

rightly

presumed that the petitioner over stayed the leave granted to
him which proves the charges leveled against the petitioner. As
regards the change of postal address the respondents have
stated that it was the duty of the petitioner to inform about the
WP (C) No.4370/1992

Page 6 of 14

change of address which was not done. Moreover, had the
petitioner sent any application of extension of leave/medical
certificate to his unit Commandant, his address could have been
identified thus it is contended that the petitioner cannot find fault
with the enquiry proceedings attached by the respondents.
11.

The learned counsel for the petitioner was unable to point

out any deficiency either in the procedure or the conclusion
drawn by the competent authority holding the petitioner guilty of
unauthorized absence by over staying the leave period w.e.f. 16th
June, 1986.
12.

The only submissions made by the learned counsel is that it

was an isolated act of absence on the part of the petitioner, that
also after he was granted leave and on account of his own
sickness. It is submitted that the petitioner who has served CISF
for a period of more than 20 years needs indulgence at least qua
the punishment awarded to him which is highly excessive and is
disproportionate to the guilt of the petitioner. It is submitted, that
except for the solitary incident of the petitioner having over
stayed his leave w.e.f. 16th June, 1986 till 16th October, 1986,
there is nothing on record which can be taken adversely against
the petitioner. Thus, it is not a case where the petitioner could be
presumed to be a habitual offender or a habitual absentee.
13.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has also relied upon a

judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court delivered in the case of
Shri Bhagwan Lal Arya Vs. Commissioner of Police, Delhi & Ors
WP (C) No.4370/1992

Page 7 of 14

reported in (2004)4 SCC 560. On the strength of this judgment it
is contended that this court can interfere and change the
punishment awarded to the petitioner as the punishment of the
dismissal from service can only be awarded for acts of grave
nature or cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving his
incorrigibility and complete unfitness for service.

It may be

appropriate to extract the relevant paragraph of the aforesaid
judgment which is as under:“the punishment of dismissal/removal from
service can be awarded only for acts of grave
nature as cumulative effect of continued
misconduct
proving
incorrigibility
or
complete unfitness for police service. Merely
one incident of absence and that too because
of bad health and valid and justified
grounds/reasons cannot become basis for
awarding such a punishment. No reasonable
disciplinary authority would term absence on
medical grounds with proper medical
certificates from government doctors as
grave misconduct in terms of the Delhi Police
(Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1980. Nonapplication
of
mind
by
quasi-judicial
authorities can be seen in this case. The
very fact that the respondents have asked
the
appellant
for
re-medical
clearly
establishes that they had received the
applicant’s
application
with
medical
certificate. This can never be termed as
willful absence without any information to the
competent authority and can never be
termed as grave misconduct. After issuing
sanction for leave for the period in question,
the employee’s legitimate expectation would
be that no stern action would be taken
against him with respect to the alleged act of
misconduct which by no stretch of
imagination can be considered an act of
gross misconduct or continued misconduct
indicating
incorrigibility
and
complete
unfitness for police service. It is not the case
of the respondents that the appellant is a
WP (C) No.4370/1992

Page 8 of 14

habitual absentee. He had to proceed on
leave under compulsion because of his grave
condition of health and, therefore, the
punishment of removal from service is
excessive and disproportionate”.
14.

In the aforesaid case, the Hon’ble Supreme Court while

setting aside the punishment awarded to the petitioner on
account of overstaying his leave, directed reinstatement in
service without any financial benefit.

A reference can also be

made to paragraph 13 and 14 in this regard.
“In B.C. Chaturvedi v. Union of India (three
Judge Bench) the question posed for
consideration was as to whether the High
Court/Tribunal can direct the authorities to
reconsider punishment with cogent reasons
in support thereof or reconsider themselves
to shorten the litigation. In this case, at para
18, this Court has observed as under: (SCC p.
762)
“18.
A review of the above legal
would establish that the disciplinary
authority, and on appeal the appellate
authority, being fact-finding authorities
have exclusive power to consider the
evidence with a view to maintain
discipline. They are invested with the
discretion
to
impose
appropriate
punishment
keeping
in
view
the
magnitude of gravity of the misconduct.
The High Court/Tribunal, while exercising
the power of judicial review, cannot
normally substitute its own conclusion on
penalty and impose some other penalty.
If the punishment imposed by the
disciplinary authority or the appellate
authority shocks the conscience of the
High
Court/Tribunal,
it
would
appropriately mould the relief, either
directing
the
disciplinary/appellate
authority to reconsider the penalty
imposed, or to shorten the litigation, it
may itself, in exceptional and rare cases,
WP (C) No.4370/1992

Page 9 of 14

impose appropriate punishment with
cogent reasons in support thereof.”
14. Thus, the present one is a case wherein
we are satisfied that the punishment of
removal from service imposed on the
appellant is not only highly excessive and
disproportionate but is also one which was
not permissible to be imposed as per the
Service Rules. Ordinarily we would have set
aside the punishment and sent the mater
back to the disciplinary authority for passing
the order of punishment afresh in accordance
with law and consistently with the principles
laid down in the judgment. However, that
would further lengthen the life of litigation.
In view of the time already lost, we deem it
proper to set aside the punishment of
removal from service and instead direct the
appellant to be reinstated in service subject
to condition that the period during which the
appellant remained absent from duty and the
period calculated up to the date on which the
appellant reports back to duty pursuant to
this judgment shall not be counted as a
period spent on duty. The appellant shall not
be entitled to any service benefits for this
period. Looking at the nature of partial relief
allowed hereby to the appellant, it is now not
necessary to pass any order of punishment in
the departmental proceedings in lieu of the
punishment of removal from service which
has been set aside. The appellant must
report on duty within a period of six weeks
from today to take benefit of this judgment.”
15.

Even though on facts this judgment does not apply squarely

to this case yet, the principle laid down in the aforesaid judgment
gives

guidelines

to

deal

with

the

proportionality

of

the

punishment awarded to the incumbent in the peculiar facts of this
case.
16.

One more judgment of some relevance delivered by the

Apex Court in the case of V. Ramana v. A.P. SRTC
WP (C) No.4370/1992

reported in

Page 10 of 14

(2005) 7 SCC 338 needs our attention. In the aforesaid judgment
in paragraph 11 it has been observed:“11. The common thread running through in
all these decisions is that the court should
not interfere with the administrator’s decision
unless it was illogical or suffers from
procedural impropriety or was shocking to
the conscience of the court, in the sense that
it was in defiance of logic or moral standards.
In view of what has been stated in
Wednesbury case the court would not go into
the correctness of the choice made by the
administrator open to him and the court
should not substitute its decision for that of
the administrator.
The scope of judicial
review is limited to the deficiency in decisionmaking process and not the decision.
12.
To put it differently unless the
punishment imposed by the disciplinary
authority or the Appellate Authority shocks
the conscience of the court/tribunal, there is
no scope for interference. Further to shorten
litigations it may, in exceptional and rare
cases, impose appropriate punishment by
recording cogent reasons in support thereof.
In a normal course if the punishment imposed
is shockingly disproportionate it would be
appropriate to direct the disciplinary authority
of the Appellate Authority to reconsider the
penalty imposed.”
17.

Taking into consideration the law as discussed above and

the facts of this case, we do not find any reason to interfere with
the order of the enquiry officer or the Appellate Authority in so far
as the guilt of the petitioner on the point of over staying on leave
for a period commencing from 16th June, 1986 to 16th October,
1986 is concerned but we certainly feel that in a case of solitary
incident of absence where the incumbent served CISF for a period
of more than 20 years out of which more than 17 years service
WP (C) No.4370/1992

Page 11 of 14

consists of active duty, the punishment of dismissal is unjustified
and shockingly disproportionate.
18.

We have scanned through the judgments delivered by

various Courts and find that in case of absence, the punishment
awarded to the incumbent varies from dismissal to compulsory
retirement.

However,

the

reason

to

impose

such

harsh

punishment is the incorrigibility and the habitual nature of
absence of the incumbent. We rarely find a case where a person
with only one instance of absence has been dismissed from
service nor has any such judgment been brought to our notice.
We have also examined the provisions as contained under Rules
113 and 124 of the Pension Regulations for the Army, 1961, which
again provides discretion to the competent authority to even treat
a case of dismissal as a case of discharge for enabling the
incumbents to, at least, earn his pension once he serves the
Department for qualifying year of service for enabling him to
obtain the pension. The provisions are as under:Condonation of an interruption of
service
113. Upon such conditions as it may think fit
to impose, a competent authority may
condone interruptions of service in the case
of person whose pension is sanctionable by
an authority subordinate to the President as
under:(a) When proposed pension exceeds Rs.25
p.m. – interruptions not exceeding a period of
12 months in all.
(b) When proposed pension is Rs.25 p.m.
or less – all interruptions whatever their
duration.

WP (C) No.4370/1992

Page 12 of 14

Individuals remustered within the
same group, from a higher to a
lower group, or vice versa
124. (a) An individual who was remustered
from a higher to a lower group on being
declared redundant after rendering 15 years
or more of qualifying service may be granted,
if more favourable than the pension the
otherwise admissible, the service pension for
which he would have been eligible had he
been discharged on the date he was declared
redundant.
(b) An individual who was remustered to a
new trade in the same or higher group but in
a lower rank for service reasons other than
inefficiency or medical unfitness, but who is
discharged either (i) without restoration of
the rank held prior to remustering, or (ii) if
such rank was restored, without completion
of two years of service in that rank after
restoration will be granted, where more
favourable than the pension otherwise
admissible, the pension based on the
qualifying service rendered up to the date of
discharge but assessed on the group and the
substantive rank held on the date of
remustering provided such rank and group
had been held for two years in all (the period
of service rendered after remustering
counting for this purpose).
19.

We, therefore, set aside the order dated 19th August, 1992

passed by the Appellate Authority, i.e., respondent No.2 only on
the point of sentence and direct them to re-consider the
punishment imposed upon the petitioner and to pass appropriate
orders by taking into consideration that it was a solitary act of
overstay of leave in his career of more than 17 years as also
taking into consideration the provisions contained under Rules
113 and 124 of the Pension Regulations for the Army, 1961.
While passing the order, the authorities will also consider that the
WP (C) No.4370/1992

Page 13 of 14

petitioner has not only served the CISF for a period of more than
17 years on active duty but was reinstated in service with effect
from 28th November, 1991 after setting aside the punishment of
dismissal earlier awarded to him by the authority who was not
competent to do so till 19th August, 1992 by which order, the
petition was again dismissed and also been granted suspension
allowance for the intervening period as per the order passed in
the revision petition dated 21st February, 1993 which makes his
service of more than 20 years.
20.

A speaking order be passed by the appellate authority

within a period of three months from today and the said order be
duly communicated to the petitioner within 15 days thereafter.
Needless to say that the petitioner shall be entitled to all
consequential benefits as a consequence of the order passed by
the Appellate Authority.
21.

The writ petition is allowed in terms aforesaid leaving the

parties to bear their own costs.

MOOL CHAND GARG, J.

MAY 21st, 2008
vk/rk

WP (C) No.4370/1992

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

Page 14 of 14

