*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP (C) No.15450/2006

%

Date of decision: May 21, 2008

Ravi Shanker Sharma
Through:

…PETITIONER
Mr.Rajesh, Advocate.

Versus
Union of India
Through:

...RESPONDENTS
Ms. Jyoti Singh, Advocate.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MOOL CHAND GARG
1.

Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J. (ORAL)
1.
2.

Rule DB.
At the request of learned counsel for the parties, petition is

taken up for final disposal.
3.

The petitioner was appointed as a Constable in the CRPF on

15.3.1988.

The petitioner was posted at Nizamabad, Andhra

Pradesh when disciplinary proceedings were initiated against the
petitioner by issuance of a memorandum dated 2.12.2001.
petitioner is alleged to have quarreled with
Constables

on

WP(C) No.15450/2006

24.01.2001

and

26.01.2001

The

the two Head
and

further
Page 1 of 8

on

26.10.2001 is alleged to have willfully fired a round in the air from
his service weapon.
4.

A preliminary enquiry was initially held which found his

conduct blame-worthy resulting in the departmental enquiry. It may
be noticed that the petitioner is alleged to have deserted the lines
even during the departmental proceedings and warrants of arrest
had to be issued. The petitioner however reported on his own for
duty and the warrants of arrest were withdrawn.
5.

The departmental enquiry resulted in finding of a guilt against

the petitioner and the petitioner was imposed with the penalty of
dismissal from service on 28.2.2002. The suspension period and the
desertion period were however regularized into extraordinary leave.
6.

The

petitioner

approached

the

Allahabad

High

Court

aggrieved by the said order but was directed to seek redressal by
first filing a statutory appeal under Rule 28 of The CRPF Rules 1955
(hereinafter referred to as the said Rule). The petitioner accordingly
filed an appeal but the same was dismissed on 13.5.2005.

The

revision petition filed by the petitioner thereafter also met with the
same fate on 20.10.2005.

Thus, the petitioner again approached

the Allahabad High Court but on 11.5.2006 but withdrew the
petition to file the writ petition before the competent court of
territorial jurisdiction and thereafter the present writ petition has
been filed.
7.

The sum and substance of the contention of learned counsel

for the petitioner is that the earlier conduct of the petitioner
whereby he is alleged to have got three red-ink entries was taken
into account by the disciplinary authority even though the same
WP(C) No.15450/2006

Page 2 of 8

formed not part of the two articles of charges.

Thus material

extraneous to what is stated in the article of charges is alleged to
have weighed with the disciplinary authority both while finding the
petitioner guilty and while imposing the punishment.
8.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon the

Constitution Bench Judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of
State of Mysore Vs. K. Manche Gowda reported in AIR 1964 SC
506. In para 8 of the Judgment it is observed as under:
“Before we close, it would be necessary to
make one point clear. It is suggested that
the past record of a Government servant, if it
is intended to be relied upon for imposing a
punishment, should be made specific charge
in the first stage of the enquiry itself and if it
is not so done, it cannot be relied upon after
the enquiry is closed and the report is
submitted to the authority entitled to impose
the punishment.
An enquiry against a
Government servant is one continuous
process, though for convenience it is done in
two stages. The report submitted by the
Enquiry Officer is only recommendatory in
nature and the final authority which
scrutinizes it and imposes punishment is the
authority empowered to impose the same.
Whether a particular person has a reasonable
opportunity or not depends, to some extent,
upon the nature of the subject matter of the
enquiry. But is not necessary in this case to
decide whether such previous record can be
made the subject matter of charge at the
first stage of the enquiry. But, nothing in law
prevents the punishing authority from taking
that fact into consideration during the second
stage of the enquiry, for essentially it relates
more to the domain of punishment rather
than to that of guilt. But what is essential is
that the Government servant shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to know that fact and
meet the same”.
9.

The aforesaid expression of views shows that though a

suggestion was made that the material which did not form a part of
WP(C) No.15450/2006

Page 3 of 8

the statement of charge should not be taken into account that view
was left open as it did not require adjudication. It was, however,
observed that nothing in law prevents the punishing authority from
taking the past conduct into consideration during the second stage
of enquiry for its essentially relates to the domain of the punishment
rather than finding of guilt. Thus the Government servant should be
given a reasonable opportunity to know the fact and meet the
same.
10.

Learned counsel has also drawn our attention to an Office

Memorandum

No.

134/20/68-AVD-28-8-68

issued

under

the

CCS(CCA) Rules which is as under:“It is considered that if previous bad record,
punishment, etc, of an officer is proposed to
be taken into consideration in determining
the penalty to be imposed, it should be made
a specific charge in the charge-sheet itself,
otherwise any mention of the past bad record
in the order of penalty unwittingly or in a
routine manner, when this had not been
mentioned in the charge-sheet, would vitiate
the proceedings, and so should be
eschewed”.
11.

Learned counsel submits that the aforesaid rule would apply

to the petitioner and in any case analogous principle must be held
applicable and thus if the previous bad record, punishment etc. of
an officer is proposed to be taken into consideration in determining
the penalty to be imposed, it should be made a specific charge in
the charge-sheet itself failing which the proceedings would be
vitiated.
12.

Learned counsel for the respondents, however, opposes the

petition and submits that the past record of the petitioner showed
his quarrel-some nature and his propensity to overstay on leave.
WP(C) No.15450/2006

Page 4 of 8

The past red-ink entries have not improved the conduct of the
petitioner. Learned counsel submits that in a recent decision of the
Apex Court in Government of Andhra Pradesh & Others Vs.
Mohd. Taher Ali, (2007) 8 SCC 656, it has been observed that
the matter should not have been remanded back by the Tribunal
and the High Court to the disciplinary authority for reconsideration
of punishment merely on the ground of his earlier mis-conduct not
being mentioned in the charge-sheet.

A reading of the said

Judgment however shows that the Constitution Bench Judgement in
the State of Mysore Vs. K. Manche Gowda (supra) was taken
note of but in the given facts of the case, it was observed that the
nature of mis-conduct of the petitioner was such that the imposition
of penalty was justified. Thus, the naturally, the principles, as set
out in State of Mysore Vs. K. Manche Gowda (supra), would
hold good as they form a part of the observations of the
Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court.
13.

Learned counsel for the respondents also relied upon the

Judgment of Supreme Court in the case of Karnataka State Road
Transport Corporation Vs. S.G. Kotturappa & Anr., (2005) 3
SCC 409 to contend that if there is past mis-conduct, requirements
of natural justice are deemed to be complied with where the
delinquent official has been given opportunities in the past to
redress his behavior.

It is thus contended that there was no

improvement in the conduct of the petitioner and even during the
enquiry proceedings the petitioner’s conduct left much to be
desired. Thus, the principles of natural justice would not apply in

WP(C) No.15450/2006

Page 5 of 8

the present case.

The CCS(CCA) Rules are stated to be not

applicable.
14.

In the end, it is canvassed before us that the petitioner has

not even taken the aforesaid plea in the grounds of appeal filed
before the appellate authority and cannot be permitted to urge this
plea at this stage.
15.

We have examined the rival contentions of the parties. It is

no doubt true that there are past three red ink entries against the
petitioner but they relate only to the overstay on leave for short
periods of duration.

The mis-demeanor of the petitioner in the

incident in question is, however, more serious.

It is also not in

dispute that the article of charges did not include the past conduct
nor was the petitioner put to notice of this aspect either at the stage
of holding of enquiry or at the stage of punishment.

The

observations of the Apex Court in State of Mysore Vs. K. Manche
Gowda (supra) clearly show that at least at the stage of
punishment, the question of the petitioner being put to notice about
the past material being used against the petitioner should have
been put to him.

This has undoubtedly

not happened in the

present case. Thus a serious legal issue is raised in respect of the
past material not being put to the petitioner at the stage of
punishment. In the given facts of case, what is important is that the
past conduct, though repeated, were minor aberrations in terms of
overstay of leave for small periods.
16.

The government itself has issued office order dated 28.8.1968

which has been quoted above which reinforces the principle that
prior to the imposition of penalty,
WP(C) No.15450/2006

the past material against the
Page 6 of 8

delinquent official to be taken into consideration must be put to that
officer. This plea of the petitioner thus cannot be brushed aside and
at least analogous principles would apply even if those rules are not
directly applicable.
17.

The question is whether we should ourselves examine this

material to take a decision in view of the aforesaid principles of Law
or whether the Appellate authority should have an opportunity to
deal with the submission of the petitioner since the absence of such
grounds being raised by the appellant earlier has denied the
appellate authority of such an opportunity. We are inclined to take
the second course of action.

We think that the matter is serious

enough for a rethink by the Appellate authority on the basis of
principles referred to by the petitioner. The petitioner has served
for more than 14 years and does not has a pensionable service even
if the punishment of the petitioner was converted from one of
dismissal from service to compulsory retirement. In this behalf our
attention has also been invited to the Division Bench Judgment of
this court in the case of WP(C)No.4656/2003 Ex.sepoy Sube Singh
Vs. UOI & Ors. decided on 20.4.2007 where the court suitably
moulded the relief in such a manner as to give the benefit of service
pension to the petitioner therein without grant of the relief of
reinstatement by granting a notional period of service without
monetary benefits so that the person can avail of the pensionary
benefits. However, this would be an aspect to be considered by the
appellate authority while arriving at the finding in respect of the
challenge to the order of guilt as well as the question of sentence.

WP(C) No.15450/2006

Page 7 of 8

18.

The result of the aforesaid is that a writ of mandamus is

issued quashing the order of the appellate authority dated
10.9.2005 and of the revision authority dated 27.1.2006 and
remanding the matter back to the appellate authority for reconsideration of the appeal keeping in mind the plea of the
petitioner as referred to aforesaid and the observations made by
this court. The appellate authority to take a decision within three
months of the receipt of this order.
19.

The parties are left to bear their own costs.

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

MAY 21, 2008
rm

WP(C) No.15450/2006

MOOL CHAND GARG, J.

Page 8 of 8

