*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP (C) No.67/2008

%

Date of decision: May 22, 2008

COLONEL R. JAYAPRASAD
Through:

…PETITIONER
Mr.Rajiv Manglik, Advocate.

Versus

UNION OF INIDA & ORS
Through:

...RESPONDENTS
Ms. Maneesha Dhir, Advocate.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MOOL CHAND GARG
1.

Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J. (ORAL)
1.

Rule D.B.

2.

At request of learned counsel for the parties, the petition is

taken up for final disposal.
3.

The petitioner was commissioned as a Second Lieutenant in

the Army under the Technical graduate course scheme in August
1987 and was granted a permanent commission on 11.6.1988.

WP (C) No.292/2000

Page 1 of 13

4.

The petitioner attained his ranks of promotion and was

serving as a Lt. Col. in the Army when an option was given to him
to join the project team at Kazakhistan on deputation.

The

petitioner exercised the option and joined the project team on
26.11.2003. The petitioner returned from the foreign deputation
on 6.4.2005 after about an year and a half service. The petitioner
on his return was promoted a Colonel on 14.6.2005.
5.

The

petitioner

applied

for

premature

retirement

on

9.4.2007 on account of family problems arising from his ageing
and ailing parents and the requirement to take care of his
property.

The said application was however, rejected on

17.5.2007 on the ground that “the officer has service liability up
to April 2010 due to foreign tenure”.

The petitioner made a

representation against the same on 28.5.2007 stating that he
never submitted any undertaking or bond in respect of his service
liability before proceeding on deputation abroad and thus the
reason for the rejection of his application was not borne out from
the records. This representation was also rejected on 10.8.2007
by stating that a reference should be made to the policy decision
of the Headquarters of the respondents contained in the letter
dated 21.12.99.

The further representation of the petitioner

dated 21.8.2007 was also rejected on 19.10.2007.
6.

The Engineer-in-chief, Head of the Corps of Engineers,

addressed a letter dated 19.11.2007 to respondent no. 3, the
Military Secretary, Integrated Headquarters,
WP (C) No.292/2000

stating that in the
Page 2 of 13

absence of any service liability certificate the case of the
petitioner merited attention and once again forwarded the
application dated 9.4.2007. This request was also not acceded to
on 14.12.2007 on the ground that the service liability of an officer
remains valid irrespective of whether the officer had submitted an
undertaking or not. It was also stated that officers with foreign
service liability were permitted to apply for pre-mature retirement
only if non-empanelled or placed in permanent low medical
category made them ineligible for further promotion. Since these
two conditions did not apply to the petitioner, the petitioner was
not eligible for premature retirement.

The petitioner has

thereafter been constrained to approach this Court under Article
226 of the Constitution of India.
7.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has pleaded that at the

stage of selection of the petitioner on deputation to the project
team at Khazakistan neither was any option in respect of service
liability brought to the notice of the petitioner nor was the
petitioner asked to sign any such bond. The counter affidavit of
the respondents as also the records produced show that such an
undertaking or bond was, in fact, never taken from the petitioner.
The reason for the same is stated to be an omission which arose
at the concerned branch where the petitioner was working. The
defence of the respondents is that even if such willingness
certificate from the officer concerned had not been taken, the
policy decision of 21.12.1999 would apply.
WP (C) No.292/2000

Page 3 of 13

8.

In order to appreciate the rival contentions, it is necessary

to reproduce the policy decision which is as under:“FOREIGN ASSIGNMENT AND COURSES
1.
Ref Army HQ letter of even No dated 21 Aug
91 as amended vide letter of even No dated 17
Sep 93.
2.
As per para 7 of Army HQ letter of even No
dated 21 Aug 91, offrs selected for foreign
assignments/courses abroad will give a Written
Undertaking to continue to service for a min period
of five yrs after the termination of such
assignments/courses. Provisions of AO 17/95 are
equally applicable to them.
3.
A doubt has arisen whether the service
liability is applicability to offrs deputed to UN Msns
alongwith top contingents. Offrs deputed to UN
Msns alongwith tp contingents are screened by the
MS Branch for suitability and thereafter approved
for the deputation. A deputation to the UN Msns
with tp contingent is also treated as a deputation
abroad. Hence service liability clause is applicable
to all offrs deputed abroad on foreign assignments
and courses including the offrs proceeding with tp
contingents.
4.
All offrs deputed abroad on foreign
assignments and courses, incl offrs proceeding
abroad with tp contingent are required to submit
Willingness Certificate and Undertaking.
The
relevant formats are as follows:(a)
(i)
(ii)

Foreign Assignments.
Willingness Cert
Undertaking
-

Appx A
Appx B

(b)
(i)
(ii)

Courses Abroad
Willingness Cert
Undertaking

Appx C
Appx D

-

5.
The procedure for submission of the above
docu is enumerated in succeeding paras.
WP (C) No.292/2000

Page 4 of 13

6.
Offrs called for interview for selection on
foreign
assignment/courses
will
bring
the
Willingness cert and Undertaking in duplicate duly
signed by their Commanding Offrs for submission
to Army HQ/MS Branch. MS 3D will fwd one copy
for the willingness cert and Undertaking to MS 4CR
for filing in CRD of the Offr. One copy of the
Willingness cert and Undertaking will be fws to
controlling MS section.
7.
In some cases, offrs are selected for foreign
assignments/courses without interview under the
following circumstances:(a) Notice is short and adequate time is not
available to hold interview.
(b) Offrs are selected by controlling MS secs for
deputation abroad along with tp contingent.
(c)
Offrs deputed for each tech trg of eqpt under
procurement from abroad as part of the contract.
8.
When offrs are nominated without interviews,
they report at Delhi for pre-despatch formalities.
Such offrs should submit Willingness Certificate
and Undertaking in duplicate on arrival at Delhi to
the Sponsoring Dtes. The sponsoring Dtes will
dispose of the Willingness Cert and Undertaking as
follows:(a) One copy of the Willingness Cert and
Undertaking to be fwd to MS 4CR for filing in CRD
of the offr.
(b) One
copy
of
Willingness
Cert
and
Undertaking to be fwd to controlling MS section.
9.
In addition to the above, the offrs will be
directed by the Sponsoring Dtes to report to the
concerned MS Branch section for briefing and
documentation immediately on arr at Delhi. The
MS Branch section will confirm that the Willingness
cert and Undertaking have been given by the offr.
Offrs will report to the following MS sections:(a) Deputation with tp contingents – respective
Controlling
WP (C) No.292/2000

Page 5 of 13

MS section
(b)

All other cases

- MS 3D

10. May please be disseminated down to the
units.”
11.
(emphasis supplied)
9.

If the aforesaid policy decision is analyzed, clause 2 of the

same provides for a written undertaking to be taken from the
concerned officer to continue in service for a minimum period of
five

years

after

the

termination

of

such

assignment.

Undisputedly, this period of five years has not expired. However,
it is also not in question that the willingness certificate and
undertaking as provided in para 5 of the aforesaid decision was in
fact never taken from the petitioner.
10.

Learned counsel for the respondents has attempted to

explain the omission by reference to para 7 of the policy as in the
case of the petitioner the selection was without an interview in
view of of sub-para (a) of para 7, i.e., notice was short and
adequate time was not available for holding interviews.

The

matter, however, does not rest at this since in terms of clause 8
willingness certificate and undertaking in duplicate has to be
taken on arrival at Delhi by the sponsoring directorates.

Thus,

the blame is sought to be put on the sponsoring directorate.
11.

The aforesaid pleas of the respondents is not sustainable

on account of para 9 of the policy decision which requires the M.S
Branch section to confirm that the willingness certificate and
undertaking have been given by the officer.
WP (C) No.292/2000

Thus, it is only a
Page 6 of 13

case of one department blaming the other without accepting the
responsibility. The moot point is that the willingness certificate
and undertaking was neither taken by the Directorate on arrival
at Delhi nor verified by the MS Branch nor thereafter during this
tenure, the petitioner was asked to submit the same. Not only
that even on the petitioner re-joining in India no such certificates
were sought and the matter did not even crop up till the
petitioner applied for pre-mature retirement.

Interestingly, the

petitioner has never been asked to comply with this requirement
either before or after the decision taken for rejection of the case
of the petitioner.
12.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has pointed out that the

present case is really not even one of omission as it is only on
30.11.2005 that a circular was issued in respect of foreign
assignments, screening of officers of Corps of engineer for
engineering

task

forces

and

other

engineering

specific

appointments abroad. It is, thus pleaded that at the stage when
the petitioner joined the assignment, the policy decision was not
even applicable to the cases like that of the petitioner and the
clarity emerged only by the subsequent letter dated 30.11.2005.
13.

A communication dated 19.11.2007 addressed by the

Engineer-in-Chief (where the petitioner is working) is as
under:“Dear General,
1.
IC 48004 N Col Jayaprasad R was on
deputation to Embassy of India, Dushanbe,
WP (C) No.292/2000

Page 7 of 13

Tajikistan from 26 Nov 03 to 06 Apr 05 (fifteen
months).
This tenure was for an urgent
assignment for a specific job and not as per the
structured/reg vacs abroad, for which the offrs are
nominated, based on the selection process of the
MS Branch. Since the offr did not go through a
formal selection process, neither the service
liability aspect was apprised nor a cert to this
effect was obtained from him.
2.
The offr submitted an application for PMr on
Apr 07. This application was returned indicating
his service liability up to Apr 10, due to his tenure
abroad. The offr re-submitted his application on 28
May 07 (clearly indicating the reasons for non
applicability of service liability) and again on 21
Aug 207. These have been turned down citing the
MS Branch policy letter No.33023/Gen/Engrs/MSPR
dt 31 Dec 99.
3.
I have examined the offr’s case.
His
domestic compulsions coupled with the absence of
service liability cert merits attn. I would therefore
request you to reconsider and process his
application for PMR, to enable him to get relief. I
am also encl a copy of the offr’s application dt 09
Apr 07.”
(emphasis supplied)
14.

The aforesaid shows that the present case is not one where

the certificates were not taken but it was not even put to the
petitioner that he would be bound by any such service liability.
Thus the expression used is “neither the service liability aspect
was apprised”.

The result is that the petitioner was not made

aware of any such service liability restriction before he proceeded
for the assignment.
15.

A rejection letter dated 14.12.2007 of the respondent reads

as under:WP (C) No.292/2000

Page 8 of 13

“My dear General,
PREMATURE RETIREMENT:
JAYAPRASAD R. ENGRS

IC-48004

COL

1.
Reference
your
DO
letter
No.
90900/Posting/2045/E1A dt 19 Nov 2007 addsd to
the MS regarding PMR application in r/o IC-48004
Col Jayaprasad R.
2.
The case has been examined. The service
liability of an offr remains valid irrespective of
whether the offr has submitted an undertaking or
not. This aspect has been amplified at Paras 4,7
and 8 of our letter No.04526/MS:Policy dt 21 Dec
1999 (copy encl for ref). Offrs with foreign service
liability are permitted to apply for PMR only if nonempanelled or placed in Permt Low Med Cat
ineligible for further promotion. In the instant
case, the offr does not qualify in either of the
categories. Under the circumstances, he is only
eligible to apply for PMR on completion of the
service liability.”
(emphasis supplied)
16.

The reading of the aforesaid letter also shows that the only

impediment in the way of the petitioner being given pre-mature
retirement is the service liability. The relaxations are permissible
only in cases if the pre-mature retirement is of a non-empanelled
officer or an officer placed in permanent low medical category but
the pre-requisite is that the officer should have a foreign service
liability. The aforesaid facts show that there can be no question
of any such foreign service liability when it was never put to the
petitioner nor was the petitioner asked to execute any document
in that behalf.
17.

We find force in the contention of learned counsel for the

petitioner that the assignment was optional and thus it was for
WP (C) No.292/2000

Page 9 of 13

the petitioner to have chosen to go for the assignment.

If the

petitioner would have known about the restriction of the foreign
service liability,

he may or may not have opted for the said

assignment.
18.

Learned counsel for the respondent has referred to the

Division Bench judgment of this court in Shkul Tyagi (Sqn. Ldr.)
Vs. UOI & Ors. 2006 1 AD Delhi 157 but we find the same would
have no application to the facts of the present case. All that has
been observed in the said Judgment is that the cases of premature

retirement

determined

in

the

on

compassionate

circumstances

of

grounds
each

shall

case

be

and

the

requirement of the officer for the service. The only reason of the
rejection of the case of the petitioner of having a service liability
is fallacious and not sustainable.
19.

Lastly, learned counsel for the respondents also pleaded

that the petitioner had an alternative remedy in the form of
Defence Service Regulation where regulation 105(f) reads as
under:“The applications for premature retirement /
resignation will be examined by Army HQ and
submitted for consideration and approval of the
COAS, who may reject an application which is not
based on adequate and justificable reasons at his
level without reference to the Government or
recommend for acceptance by the Central
Government. In case, the officer feels aggrieved
by the decision of the COAS, he can, if he so
chooses, file a statutory complaint addressed to
the Central Government under the provisions of
section 27 of the Army Act. The decision of the
Central Government on application to retire
premature/resign will be final.”
WP (C) No.292/2000

Page 10 of 13

(emphasis supplied)
20.

Learned counsel for the petitioner on the other hand points

out that a reading of the aforesaid provision shows that it is not a
mandatory provision but only “if he so chooses”.

Thus the

petitioner should not be relegated to the alternative remedy in
the present case more so when the Head of the Department
where the petitioner is serving has in fact already re-commended
the case of the petitioner by noticing in the letter dated
19.11.2007 that the case was a fit one for grant of relief to the
officer concerned.

In this behalf, learned counsel has also

referred to the provision of Section 27 of the Army Act 1950 which
reads as under:
“Remedy of aggrieved Officers.—Any officer who
deems himself wronged by his commanding
officer or any superior officer and who on due
application made to his commanding officer does
not receive the redress to which he considers
himself entitled, may complain to the Central
Government in such a manner as may from time
to time be specified by the proper authority.”
21.

Learned counsel submits that the remedy of making such

representation

and

seeking

redressal

only

arises

if

the

Commanding Officer or a superior officer does not recommend
the case of the petitioner which is not so in the present case.
22.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has also pointed out

that the undertaking obtained from the officer is not unconditional
and there is an alternative remedy available for the release of the

WP (C) No.292/2000

Page 11 of 13

officer subject to the liability to pay the government. The format
of the undertaking is as under:“UNDERTAKING TO BE GIVEN BY OFFICERS
SELECTED FOR DEPUTATION/ASSIGNMENT
ABROAD
1.
On being selected for an assignment abroad
to ________________ I hereby undertake to continue
to serve in the Army if required to do so, for a
minimum period of five years after completion of
my tenure abroad.
2.
In
the
event
of
my
obtaining
release/premature retirement at my request during
this period, I shall be liable to pay to the
Government that much as decided by the
Government.

Signature:___________
IC No.:_______________
Rank:________________
Name:_______________
Arms/service/Regt_________
Dated:

SIGNED IN MY PRESENCE

Dated:”

23.

Signature:___________
Rank:________________
Name:_______________
Unit of the Commanding Officer _______

The question of however exercising the second option really

does not arise in the present case because the undertaking was
never taken from the petitioner.
WP (C) No.292/2000

Learned counsel for the
Page 12 of 13

petitioner also points out that a number of officers with similar
qualifications have already been granted premature retirement at
their request.
24.

We are thus of the considered view that the decision taken

by the respondents in rejecting the case of the petitioner for
premature retirement on the ground of service liability cannot be
sustained and is hereby quashed. The respondents are directed
to communicate the release of the petitioner on the regular terms
and conditions within the maximum period of four weeks from the
receipt of this order.
25.

The petition is allowed in the aforesaid terms, leaving the

parties to bear their own costs.

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

MAY 22, 2008
rm

WP (C) No.292/2000

MOOL CHAND GARG, J.

Page 13 of 13

