*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Crl. Appeal No.750/2002
Reserved On:12.05.2011
Date of Decision:24.05.2011

%

Anna Wankhade
Through: Mr.Abhishek
Prasad
Bhatnagar, Advocates

…. APPELLANT
and
Mr.S.K.

Versus
…. RESPONDENT
Central Bureau of Investigation
(Through State)
Through: Mr.Narender
Mann,
Special
Public
Prosecutor for State/CBI.
CORAM:
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE M.L. MEHTA
1.
2.
3.

Whether reporters of Local papers be
allowed to see the judgment?
To be referred to the reporter or not?

YES

Whether the judgment
reported in the Digest?

YES

should

YES

be

M.L. MEHTA, J.
*
1.

The appellant has been convicted by learned Special Judge, Shri
R.K. Gauba, in Corruption Case No.14/98 vide judgment dated 6 th
September,

2002

and

sentenced

vide

order

dated

10th

September, 2002 as under:Crl. A. No.750/2002

Page 1 of 25

“Sentenced for rigorous imprisonment for four years
with a fine of `500/- each under Section 7 and
Section 13(1)(d) read with Section 13(2) of the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (hereinafter
referred to as “the Act”). Substantial sentences shall
run concurrently. In default of payment of fine, the
convict
was
to
further
undergo
rigorous
imprisonment for three months on each count.”
2.

By virtue of the present appeal, the appellant has assailed the
conviction imposed upon him by the learned Special Judge. The
prosecution story as set out briefly is that one Anil Kumar
Sharma (PW6) was allottee of a flat from Delhi Development
Authority (DDA).

Though he had made entire payment along

with interest, but the possession of the flat and other formalities
remained to be completed on the part of DDA. On behalf of Anil
Kumar Sharma (PW6), his brother in law, Mr.K.S. Bhardwaj (PW3),
complainant in this case was making representations to the
concerned authorities in DDA regarding expediting the handing
over of the possession of the flat.

It so happened that the

accused was dealing with the matter of the completion of the
formalities regarding handing over possession of the flat allotted
in favour of PW6. It is in this connection that the complainant
PW3 came in contact with accused and met him several times for
doing the needful.

During the process, the accused allegedly

demanded a sum of `10,000/- from PW3 and to be paid to him in
his office on 30th June after 2 PM. The complainant (PW3) instead
Crl. A. No.750/2002

Page 2 of 25

approached CBI and made a complaint (Ex.PW3/A) on 30th June
stating that he did not want to pay any bribe and want to take
legal action against the accused. On this FIR (Ex.PW7/B) came to
be registered. The matter was entrusted to Investigating Officer
(IO), Inspector Anil Sharma (PW7), for laying trap.

I.O. (PW7)

requisitioned two independent witnesses, namely, Prem Narain
(PW2) and Pawan Kumar (PW5), the clerks from the office of
NDMC. PW6 arranged `4,000/- in the form of 40 currency notes
of denomination of `100/- each (Ex.P1 to P40), the numbers of
which were noted down in the memo (Ex.PW2/B) prepared during
the pre-trap proceedings.

The usual procedure of treating the

notes with phenolphthalein powder and giving demonstration
thereof regarding the manner in which it reacts, was all done by
I.O.(PW7) in the presence of complainant (PW3), Ajit Kumar
Sharma (PW6) and two independent witnesses (PW2 and PW5).
The treated currency notes were handed over to the complainant
with the instruction to hand them over to the accused on specific
demand. PW2 was directed to remain with the complainant as a
shadow witnesses and to hear the conversation and observe the
proceedings.

He was also instructed to give signal after

completion of the transaction.
programme,

the

trap

party

As per the pre-arranged

reached

the

office

of

DDA.

Complainant (PW3), his brother in law, Mr.Anil Kumar Sharma
Crl. A. No.750/2002

Page 3 of 25

(PW6), and the shadow witness (PW2) went to contact the
accused in his office. It is during this meeting that the accused
allegedly repeated the demand of bribe in the presence of
shadow witness. The complainant handed over the trap money
to the accused which was taken by him with his left hand.
Immediately thereafter the shadow witness gave pre-determined
signal and thereupon the raiding party rushed and apprehended
the accused. The trap money was recovered from his left hand
through PW5.

In the meantime, R.K. Azad (PW9), Assistant

Director of the concerned Section of DDA, also reached there and
rest of the formalities including taking wash of left hand of the
accused and preparation of documents etc. was done in his
presence.

After the required sanction (PW1/A), the accused was

sent for prosecution.

3.

The charges were framed against the accused under Section 7
and 13(2) read with Section 13(1)(d) of the Act to which he
pleaded not guilty.
witnesses.

The prosecution examined as many as 10

The statement of the accused was recorded under

Section 313 Cr.P.C. wherein incriminating evidence appearing
against him was put to him.

He denied the entire evidence

regarding demand and acceptance of the bribe.

It was put to

him that PW3 was the attorney of the allottee (PW6) to which he
Crl. A. No.750/2002

Page 4 of 25

stated that he refused to hand over the papers to the
complainant since he had no authorization of the allottee. He,
however, admitted that PW3 had met him in connection with the
handing over of papers of flat. He stated that he (PW3) tried to
pressurize him to hand over the papers and since he was not
obliging him, he got him falsely implicated.

He, however,

admitted that the complainant had told him that he had paid
installments for the flat from his own funds. The accused did not
lead any evidence in defence.

4.

The foremost contention that was sought to be raised by the
learned counsel for the defence was that the accused has been
falsely implicated by PW3 in collusion with CBI.

He submitted

that the allottee of the flat in question was Ajit Kumar Sharma
(PW6) and not the complainant (PW3) and so the latter had no
business to approach the accused for asking for issue of
possession letter. He also submitted that it was PW3, who had
submitted documents under the forged signatures of PW6
without any authority letter or power of attorney of PW6 in this
regard. Learned counsel drew my attention to some part of the
cross-examination of PW6, Ajit Kumar Sharma, who was allottee
of the flat.

Crl. A. No.750/2002

Page 5 of 25

5.

There is no dispute with regard to this that the allottee of the flat
was PW6, Ajit Kumar Sharma. It is also not in dispute that the
complainant is the brother in law of PW6. It is worth noting that
PW6 had stated that he was called to the office of DDA by the
accused several times and that the accused obtained his
signatures on some papers.

He also stated that he had

authorised his brother-in-law (PW3) to deal with DDA office
regarding his flat.

In his cross-examination also, he maintained

that he authorised his brother-in-law (PW3) to deposit the
installments in DDA on his behalf and he was also authorised to
put his signatures in DDA papers including the challan forms.
He did not know as to which applications were filed by the
complainant (PW3) on his behalf in DDA.

Letters/challans

Ex.PW3/DA, Ex.PW3/DB, PW3/DC and PW6/DA did not bear his
signatures, but that of his brother-in-law (PW3).

From this

evidence on record, it can be seen that some of the documents
were submitted by the complainant in the office of DDA in
respect of the flat in question. May be that these were signed by
the complainant in the name of his bother-in-law (PW6) and that
was not proper, but the fact remains that admittedly he was an
authorised representative of PW6 and was representing him in
the matter before DDA. In any case, that piece of evidence was
of no help to the accused inasmuch rather it leads towards
Crl. A. No.750/2002

Page 6 of 25

veracity of the prosecution case that the accused was not issuing
the possession letter and doing the needful and was demanding
bribe for that and that accused got the signatures of PW6 on
some papers in the file before the trap.

This also goes in

consonance with the defence of the accused that he was refusing
to issue the possession letter to the complainant.

It is in this

background that it would be seen that whether the testimonies
of the prosecution witnesses have been well-analysed by the
learned Special Judge.

6.

It may be noted that PW3 had categorically stated and
maintained that he had gone to DDA office to collect the relevant
papers and met the accused, who had demanded illegal
gratification of `10,000/- for delivery of papers to him. PW6 was
a small-time tea shop vender and had meager income and had
even arranged partial payment of `1,500/- from his brother-inlaw (PW3).

PW6 also conceded that installments had been

deposited by his brother-in-law (PW3) who had also filed the
challan forms and signed some papers.

7.

The submission of learned counsel that if DDA had come to know
that it was PW3, who was interested in getting the flat and not
the allottee (PW6), DDA would have cancelled the allotment

Crl. A. No.750/2002

Page 7 of 25

though apparently looked worth appealing, but is of no help to
the accused in the given facts and circumstances.

In fact this

was all the more reason for the accused to demand bribe so as to
save

complainant

from

cancellation

of

the

flat

by

DDA.

Assuming that some of the applications were unauthorisedly
signed by the complainant on behalf of his brother-in-law (PW6),
and that the same may not be legal and could have brought him
some trouble, this may also be the reason for the accused to ask
for bribe.

The evidence shows that accused abused this fact

situation to his advantage and demanded payment of bribe for
doing the favour of getting signatures of PW6 and to further
process the file.

There is nothing in the material on record to

show that PW3 ever intended to get the flat in question in his
name or for such purpose he was trying to pressurize the
accused to hand over the documents to him or was avoiding
obtaining proper authorization/attorney from the allottee.

The

fact remains that PW3 was acting as auhtorised representative of
PW6.

8.

Learned

counsel

next

submitted

that

there

were

many

discrepancies in the testimonies of the witnesses PW2, PW3,
PW5, PW6 and PW7 and so they are not reliable.

It was pointed

out by the learned counsel that PW3 stated that he along with
Crl. A. No.750/2002

Page 8 of 25

PW6 went to CBI office on 30.06.1997, whereas PW6 said that
during the period 26.06.1997 to 30.06.1997, he did not meet
anyone. This was in fact no discrepancy. If we read the relevant
part of the PW3 and PW6, it may be seen that PW3 stated that
after meeting the accused, he discussed the matter with his
brother-in-law (PW6) and thereafter he along with him went to
office of CBI at about 2.00 PM where he narrated the details of
bribe to SP, CBI, and thereafter he wrote the complaint and gave
it to the Inspector.

Stating by PW6 that he did not meet anyone

between 26.06.1997 to 30.06.1997 cannot be interpreted that he
did not meet his brother in law PW3 and did not go to the office
of CBI. He further clarified by stating that he does not know as
to whom he met in the office of CBI on 30.06.1997 where he and
his brother-in-law PW3 had gone.

9.

No doubt there appear to be some discrepancy with regard to
mention of time of registration of FIR as 12 Hrs in Ex.PW7/B and
PW3 stating about his reaching the office of CBI at 2.00 PM, but
this can only be attributed to human error or loss of memory
after such a long time. This being very trivial cannot be said to
be sufficient to create a dent in the prosecution case.

Crl. A. No.750/2002

Page 9 of 25

10.

With regard to PW2 and PW5, learned counsel submitted that
these witnesses are not reliable being stock witnesses of CBI.
Learned counsel pointed out that PW2 stated that he along with
PW5 went to CBI office on the written requisition by CBI, but later
in his cross-examination stated that PW7, Inspector Anil Kumar
Sharma came to their office to take them.
discrepancy.

This was in fact no

It is correct that PW2 earlier joined a raid

conducted by CBI and PW5 also joined a raid about 1½ years
ago, but that alone was not sufficient to brand them as stock
witnesses and discard their testimonies.

11.

It was the case of prosecution that both these witnesses were
requisitioned by CBI from the office of NDMC. PW5 in cross had
admitted about the written order received from CBI in this regard
and that one official came to their office and they both went
along with him. PW2 had stated that he had received a written
order to report to CBI office and the said orders also included the
name of PW5, Pawan Kumar. The mere fact that both of them
have been earlier associated with some trap cases by CBI cannot
make them unreliable. They are the official employees of NDMC
and were duty bound to join the proceedings when so ordered by
their senior officers on the request made by CBI.

Crl. A. No.750/2002

Page 10 of 25

12.

It was next submitted by the learned counsel that it was
unbelievable that the accused was contacted by the complainant
(PW3) and PW6 in the presence of PW2 at about 3.55 PM when
the accused also allegedly obtained signatures of PW3 at three
places in his office file, but came to take bribe after 40-45
minutes on the ground floor. In other words the submission of
the learned counsel is that if the accused was to take bribe, he
would have taken it there in his office and not after some time
and that too on the ground floor.

Further, it was also pointed

out that since the signatures in the name of PW6 were already
there in the file although forged, there was no need to obtain the
signatures of PW6 at that time by the accused. All these do not
appear to be either any discrepancy or infirmity in the
prosecution case inasmuch invariably it is normal human nature
to accept illegal gratification at some safer place away from the
public view.

In the office where the accused was seated, there

may be other officials near and around him and may be to avoid
the viewing, he after getting the signatures of PW6, for replacing
the papers already on record signed by the complainant, advised
the complainant and others to reach on the ground floor hall
which he might have found more safer than his work place.

Crl. A. No.750/2002

Page 11 of 25

13.

Learned counsel next submitted that the appellant did not obtain
the signatures of PW6 on the file but these were obtained by CBI
after the file was seized. PW7 (TLO) deposed about the recovery
of file Ex.PW2/C from the accused in which he had obtained
signatures of PW6 earlier on pages 1, 3 and 19.

All the

witnesses, namely, PW3, PW2 and PW6 have categorically
deposed that the accused had obtained the signatures of PW6.
In fact no dispute is raised by the accused about the seizure of
the file from his possession by the TLO/PW7.

14.

It was also pointed out by the learned counsel that there was
infirmity in the prosecution case inasmuch as PW3 in his
statement revealed that he was handed over a micro cassette
recorder by CBI to record the conversation with the accused, but
it was ostensibly not made part of the court record by CBI.
Learned counsel submitted that the same will lead to draw an
adverse inference against the prosecution that there was no talk
of demand in the conversation that took place between the
complainant and the accused.

This was also submitted before

the learned Special Judge and the same was dealt with by him by
recording that PW3 testified that the cassette was played during
the pre-trap proceedings earlier in CBI office to see that it was
blank and he was instructed as to how the same was to be used.
Crl. A. No.750/2002

Page 12 of 25

He stated that he did not remember the name of CBI officer, who
had handed over the recorder to him.

The complainant was

cross-examined by the learned prosecutor on this ground since
he was trying to introduce a new version about the use of tape
recorder.

In his cross-examination, the complainant PW3

explained that there was no mention of the tape recorder in the
court proceedings since it was found to be having noise of the
crowd and the conversation between him and the accused was
not audible.

The reasons recorded by the learned Special Judge

in rejecting the contention of the learned defence counsel in this
regard are these - “I must reject this plea for the simple reason
that the theory about use of cassette recorded apparently has
been introduced so as to create doubts. This fact has not been
spoken of by any other witness.

The Handing over memo, to

which PW3 was also a signatory, does not reflect such additional
arrangement. It is not the case of PW3 that the Handing Over
Memo was recast and signatures of all including PW3 were taken
afresh on the modified Memo. There is explanation as to why he
would not object to omission about use of such machine in the
Handing Over Memo at the time of signing it, if it had actually
been arranged.” I find myself in agreement with these reasons
to reject this contention of the learned counsel.

Crl. A. No.750/2002

Page 13 of 25

15.

Learned counsel also pointed out that the testimony of PW5, who
had spoken about the recovery of the tainted notes from the
pocket of the accused is at variance from the other witnesses,
who had stated about the recovery from the hand of the
accused. The statement of PW5 is definitely at variance from the
other witnesses, but then the said witness has no where
explained as to when the money was put into the pocket of the
accused.

It is noted that PW5 had categorically stated about

having seen the complainant giving the money to the accused.
This small variance in the version of PW5 in any case, can not
make him either unreliable or to shake the prosecution version
that the money was recovered from the left hand of the accused.
It is noted that in answer to a question this witness stated that
he did not remember from which hand of the accused the money
was recovered.

Then he also clearly identified currency notes

Ex.P1 to P40 as the same which were recovered from the
accused.

He also denied the suggestion of learned defence

counsel that nothing was demanded, accepted or recovered from
the accused in his presence. He maintained that he and one CBI
official counted and compared the recovered notes with the
numbers already noted in annexure A of Ex.PW2/A.

This small

discrepancy can be due to oversight or human error.

Crl. A. No.750/2002

Page 14 of 25

16.

With regard to the discrepancies, it may be stated that it is trite
law that small contradictions or discrepancies by themselves are
no reason to throw the case out. It has been held time and again
by catena of judgments of Apex Court that discrepancies do not
necessarily demolish the testimony.

The proof of guilt can be

sustained despite some infirmities [Narottam Singh v. State,
1978 Crl.L. J. 1612 (SC)]. Further no undue importance can be
attached to such discrepancy if they do not go to the root of the
matter and do not shake the basic version of the witness (Lallan
v. State, 1990 Crl.L. J. 463).

In the case of Ramni v. State,

1999 (6) SC 247, it was held that all the discrepancies are not
capable of affecting the credibility of the witnesses and similarly
all the inconsistent statements are not sufficient to impair the
credit of a witness.

17.

Learned counsel next submitted that neither the recovered notes
were sent to CFSL nor the phenolphthalein treated notes were
sealed after recovery and also that neither the shirt of the
complainant was seized nor his hand wash was taken and all
these infirmities create doubt in the prosecution case.

With

regard to the non-seizure of the shirt of the complainant and not
taking of his hand wash, it may only be stated that the same was
not at all required by the prosecution. What was required to be
Crl. A. No.750/2002

Page 15 of 25

proved was the demand and acceptance and recovery of the
tainted money from the accused.

In fact the case of the

prosecution is that the tainted money was with the complainant
PW3 and if that was so, what was the necessity of going for hand
wash procedure of PW3 or that of seizure of his shirt which he
was wearing.
the

recovered

With regard to the plea regarding non sending of
notes

to

CFSL

and

non

sealing

of

the

phenolphthalein treatment solution, it may be stated that PW2,
PW3, PW6, PW5 and PW7 have deposed about the proceedings of
the accused having been apprehended.

PW7 specifically

testified that the solution of sodium carbonate was prepared and
wash of the left hand fingers of the accused was taken which
turned pink. He stated that wash was transferred into a glass
bottle, which was sealed with the seal of CBI.

He proved the

wash bottle (Ex.PW41) and the cloth wrapper as Ex.PW42.

18.

PW9, who was the Assistant Director of DDA and had arrived at
the time of apprehension, also confirmed the proceedings
relating to hand wash taken in his presence. All the witnesses
present there have spoken about the recovery memo (Ex.PW2/C)
prepared at the site and signed by each of them.

There is

nothing in the cross-examination of any of these witnesses to
raise any doubt about the aforesaid proceedings.
Crl. A. No.750/2002

Page 16 of 25

19.

PW4, K.S. Chhabra, Senior Scientific Officer, had analysed the
contents of the sealed bottle vide report Ex.PW4/A. He stated
that the contents of the bottle gave positive results of presence
of phenolphthalein and sodium carbonate.

The testimony of

this witness remained unchallenged. When the phenolphthalein
treated wash was taken into possession and was sent for
analysis and confirmed the presence of Phenolphthalein, all this
substantiated that the accused contacted the tainted notes with
his hand of which wash was taken. There was no requirement or
need for taking into possession the tainted notes by the I.O.

20.

It was lastly submitted by the learned counsel that no
independent witness was joined by CBI whereas there were
several available in the office of the accused and also in the hall
where the appellant was allegedly caught receiving the money.
Learned counsel in this regard relied upon the judgments of Som
Parkash v. State of Punjab, 1992 CRl. L.J. 490; Ved Prakash
v. State of H.P., II (1998) CCR 317; G.V. Nanjundiah v. State
(Delhi Administration), 1988 Crl.L.J. 152; Gulam Mahmood
A. Malek v. The State of Gujarat, AIR 1982 SC 1558 and
Satbir Singh v. State of Haryana, 2000 (1) C.C. Cases HC
195.

Crl. A. No.750/2002

Page 17 of 25

21.

There is no dispute with regard to the proposition regarding
desirability of association of independent witnesses by the police
so as to lend more credence and authenticity to the case, but
there is also no dispute that non-association of the independent
witnesses per se for any reason whatsoever was in itself not
enough to discard the prosecution witnesses or throw away the
case as a whole.

In the present case, CBI associated two

independent witnesses on the written requisition made to the
office of NDMC.

Since the prosecution/CBI already had two

independent witnesses, who had been informed and apprised
about the technicalities involved in the procedure during the trap
proceedings, it was not necessary for the IO to have joined other
public witnesses at the time of apprehension. May be to avoid
the risk of such a raw public person getting won over or being
unable to understand the proceedings at the last moment of raid,
that the IOs usually avoid associating public witnesses at that
stage in such type of cases.

22.

In the case of Som Prakash (supra), there was no independent
witnesses

associated

and

so

that

case

was

entirely

distinguishable from the present case. Similarly, the case of Ved
Prakash (supra) is also distinguishable.
Crl. A. No.750/2002

In that case the
Page 18 of 25

independent witness who was associated was the one who was
brought by the complainant and was already in contact with him
and therefore, was not regarded as independent. In the case of
Gulam Mahmood A. Malek (supra), the testimony of the
complainant was not reliable inasmuch as he himself was an
accused in four cases and though the independent witness was
available, none was joined. The case of G.V. Nanjudiah (supra)
was also on its peculiar facts where the testimony of the
complainant contractor was also found to be not trustworthy and
there was no evidence establishing the factum of acceptance of
bribe. Similarly, in the case of Satbir Singh (supra) also there
was no proof of initial demand of illegal gratification beyond
reasonable shadow of doubt and there was no other evidence to
corroborate the statement of the complainant, that the failure to
join the independent witnesses was held to be an infirmity in the
prosecution case.

23.

There is ample evidence on record to prove the factum of
demand, acceptance and recovery by the accused.

PW3

deposed the fact that he along with PW6 and PW2 went to the
office of the accused where he met him for some time.

He

wished the accused and also informed him that the allottee had
come.
Crl. A. No.750/2002

He also requested him to obtain allottee‟s signatures
Page 19 of 25

wherever required. The accused enquired if he had brought the
money (RUPAYE LAYE HO), to which he replied stating, yes I have
brought (HA JI LAYA HUN). On this accused took out the file
related to the flat and obtained the signatures of PW6 at three
places in the file and asked them to go downstairs. He along with
PW2 and PW6 came downstairs and waited for the accused who
came after few minutes and after telling him that his work would
be done, demanded the money in this form of conversation “AB
AAPKA KAM HO JAYEGA KYON KI AJIT KUMAR SHARMA NE FILE
PAR SIGN KAR DIYE HAIN, LAO RUPAYE DO”. On this he took the
tainted money from his pocket and passed it to the accused
which was taken by him in his left hand. At this stage, shadow
witness gave the signal upon which the trap party rushed and
apprehended the accused. PW6 also confirmed entire aforesaid
sequence narrated by PW3. Likewise, PW2 also corroborated the
statement of PW3 in its entirety with regard to the demand and
acceptance. PW5 has also equally corroborated the statement of
PW2 with regard to the acceptance and recovery of tainted
money from the accused. PW7 also fully corroborated PW2 and
PW3 with regard to the recovery and apprehension proceedings.

24.

PW7 stated that it was on his asking that PW5 recovered the
money from the accused and that same was checked.

Crl. A. No.750/2002

The

Page 20 of 25

numbers of notes were found to be tallying with those as noted
earlier in the handing over memo (Ex.PW2/B).
effect is the statement of PW5.

To the same

In fact PW9, Assistant Director

of the Department of accused who arrived at the ground floor
was also a witness to the proceedings of recovery and also
signatory of the recovery memo (Ex.PW2/E) prepared at the site.

25.

Section 20 of the Act provides that where at the trial it is proved
that an accused has accepted or obtained or agreed to accept or
attempted

to

obtain

any

gratification

(other

than

legal

remuneration), it shall be presumed unless the contrary is
proved, that he accepted or obtained or agreed to accept or
attempted to obtain such gratification as a motive or reward as
mentioned in Section 7 or, as the case may be, without
consideration or for a consideration which he knows to be
inadequate. The requirement of this Section is only that it must
be proved that the accused has accepted or obtained or agreed
to accept or attempted to obtain gratification. It may be proved
by direct evidence as in the present case it has been proved
from the direct evidence of testimonies of PW-4 and PW-5 that
the gratification was accepted as a motive or reward for helping
the complainant in the criminal case pending against him and
other

co-accused

Crl. A. No.750/2002

persons.

In

the

case

of

Madhukar
Page 21 of 25

Bhaskarrao Joshi v. State of Maharashtra (2000) 8 SCC p.
571, the Apex Court held as under:“12. The premise to be established on the facts for
drawing the presumption is that there was payment
or acceptance of gratification. Once the said premise
is established the inference to be drawn is that the
said gratification was accepted "as motive or reward"
for doing or forbearing to do any official act. So the
word 'gratification' need not be stretched to mean
reward because reward is the outcome of the
presumption which the court has to draw on the
factual premise that there was payment of
gratification. This will again be fortified by looking at
the collocation of two expressions adjacent to each
other like "gratification or any valuable thing." If
acceptance of any valuable thing can help to draw
the presumption that it was accepted as motive or
reward for doing or forbearing to do an official act,
the word 'gratification' must be treated in the
context to mean any payment for giving satisfaction
to the public servant who received it.”

26.

In the case of C.M. Girish Babu v. CBI, Cochin, High Court of
Kerala (2009) 3 SCC 779, it was held as under:“21. It is well settled that the presumption to be
drawn under Section 20 is not an inviolable one. The
accused charged with the offence could rebut it
either through the cross-examination of the
witnesses cited against him or by adducing reliable
evidence. If the accused fails to disprove the
presumption the same would stick and then it can be
held by the Court that the prosecution has proved
that the accused received the amount towards
gratification.”

Crl. A. No.750/2002

Page 22 of 25

27.

Though, the burden of proof on the accused to rebut the
presumption under Section 20 is not akin to that of the burden
placed on the prosecution to prove the case beyond reasonable
doubt, but the same, in any case, was required to be discharged
at least by preponderance of probability. The accused did not
lead any evidence in defence and also could not elicit anything
from the cross-examination of prosecution witnesses and thus
could not rebut the presumption of guilt under Section 7 against
him.

Insofar as Section 13(1)(d) is concerned, it stand proved

that accused demanded and accepted bribe money for doing of
favour in the exercise of his official function.

28.

From the above discussion, it comes to be that the prosecution
established its case beyond any reasonable doubt and defence
could not point out any reason to interfere or find fault with the
impugned judgment and order of the learned Special Judge. I,
therefore, maintain the conviction of the accused and dismiss the
appeal of the accused/appellant. With regard to the quantum of
sentence, the learned defence counsel prayed for a lenient view
stating that the accused has a large number of social and family
responsibilities and is without job for the last so many years and
also that he has already suffered a lot due to long protracted trial

Crl. A. No.750/2002

Page 23 of 25

of about 11 years. With regard to the mitigating circumstances,
as pointed by the learned counsel for the defence, it may be
stated that none of these can be made available to the accused
keeping in view the fact that corruption amongst public servants
has become a menace to the society.

It is experienced that

every case would have one or the other such circumstance.

The

pendency of the case for a long period of nearly 11 years was
equally no ground. It was held by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in
the case of State of A.P. v. V. Vasudeva Rao, (2004) 9 SCC
319, THAT the protracted trial is no ground to mitigate the
gravity of offence. However, in the said case, keeping in view
the age of the accused, the sentence was reduced to the
minimum of one year.

29.

Keeping in view the nature of the offence as committed by the
accused, I am of the view that ends of justice would be met in
imposing rigorous imprisonment of 1½ years on each count.
Accordingly, while maintaining the conviction under Sections 7 &
13(2) of the Act, the impugned order of sentence is modified.
The accused shall stand sentenced to one-and-a-half years‟
rigorous imprisonment each under Section (7) and 13(2) of the
Act.

Rest of the order of the learned Special Judge regarding

fine and imprisonment in default shall remain as before.
Crl. A. No.750/2002

The

Page 24 of 25

substantial sentences shall run concurrently.

The period of

imprisonment having already undergone by the convict shall be
set off.

The accused/convict shall be taken into custody to

undergo imprisonment as awarded.

The appeal is disposed of

accordingly.

MAY 24, 2011

M.L.MEHTA
(JUDGE)

„Dev‟

Crl. A. No.750/2002

Page 25 of 25

