*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+1.

Crl. Appeal No.343/2004
Reserved on:

September 26, 2007

Date of Decision: February 04, 2008
Staila Sayyed
Through

.... Appellant
Mr. Bhupesh Narula, Adv.
versus

State
Through
2.

.... Respondent
Dr. M.P. Singh, APP.

Crl.A.342/2004

Sayyed Mirazuddin @ Miraz
Through

....Appellant
Mr. Bhupesh Narula, Adv.

versus
State
Through
3.

....Respondent
Dr. M.P. Singh, APP

Crl.A.345/2004

Sayyed Salimuddin @ Salim
Through

...Appellant
Mr. Bhupesh Narula, Adv.

versus
Crl.A.343/2004

Page 1 of 34

State
Through:
4.

...Respondent
Dr. M.P. Singh, APP

Crl.A.368/2004

Ajay Singh
Through

....Appellant
Mr. Bhupesh Narula, Adv.

Versus
State
Through
5.

...Respondent
Dr. M.P. Singh, Adv.

Crl.A.592/2004

Bhupender Nath
Through

...Appellant
Mr. Bhupesh Narula, Adv.

Versus
State
Through
6.

Crl.A.674/2004

Yuvraj
Through
Versus
State
Through
Crl.A.343/2004

...Respondent
Dr. M.P. Singh, APP.

....Appellant
Mr. Bhupesh Narula, Adv.
...Respondent
Dr. M.P. Singh, Adv.
Page 2 of 34

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MUKUL MUDGAL
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1.
2.
3.

Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes
Yes

Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

: MUKUL MUDGAL,J.
1.

These appeals challenge the judgment of the learned Additional

Sessions Judge (hereinafter referred to as the “trial court”) dated 13th
February 2004 and 19th February 2004 in Session Case No.54/2001 arising
out of the FIR No.174/2000 registered at Police Station Vasant Vihar in
respect of offences under Sections 395/396/376/411/402 read with Section
120-B of the Indian Penal Code (hereinafter referred to as “IPC”) and
Section 25/54/59 of the Arms Act. By the impugned judgment the trial
court convicted all the six accused to undergo imprisonment for life and
fine. The case of the prosecution is as follows:
(a)

On 5th June 2000, one Anjali Ghate made a report to the police that

her maid servant Chanda Paswan has been murdered. The said Anjali Ghate
had only complained about the disarray in the house and had reported that
Crl.A.343/2004

Page 3 of 34

she did not think that anything was taken away. However, on the next day,
the said complainant Anjali Ghate reported about the missing of her
passport, cheque book, some watches, one wrist watch, one pocket watch,
one chain, one calculator, one necklace and one purse containing some
cash.
(b)

Sixteen witnesses were examined by the prosecution. The murder

was committed on 5th June 2000 and the police went to recover the missing
articles upon disclosure statements of the accused persons on 7th June 2000.
The entire prosecution case is founded on the recovery pursuant to the
disclosure statements of the accused person.

The case set up by the

prosecution was that the disclosure statements revealed that the accused
persons entered into a conspiracy to commit robbery and after committing
rape and murder of the deceased Chanda, the accused persons robbed the
house and took away valuable items from the said house.
In

the

written

submission

on

behalf

of

the

prosecution/respondent, the learned Additional Public Prosecutor, Dr. M. P.
Singh submitted that the present case is based on circumstantial evidence.
The basic premise that he dwelt upon was:
(i)

The appellant had failed to give any explanation, either at the time of

Crl.A.343/2004

Page 4 of 34

the recovery of the articles or during the trial with regard to her possession
of the stolen properties.
(ii)

The stolen articles were recovered by the police from the house of the

appellants within a short span of the said murder and dacoity.
In order to support the above submissions, the learned
Additional Public Prosecutor has cited the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the case of Sanjay v State, AIR 2001 SC 979, applying the
principle that the accused from whom recoveries were made consequent
upon their disclosure statement did not offer an explanation regarding their
possession of the stolen property and therefore, they were rightly convicted
for the offences of murder and dacoity. Dr. M. P. Singh also submitted that
the non joining of independent witnesses does not vitiate the recoveries and
dismissed it as a minor irregularity. He, however, did not cite any judgment
in support of this submission.
The depositions of the prosecution witnesses are found in the
trial court judgment. In support of its case, prosecution has examined as
many as 16 witnesses as follows.
(i)

PW1 Dr. Joginder Kumar is the Chief Medical Officer of Safdarjung

Hospital.

He had deposed before the court that on 8th June 2000 he

Crl.A.343/2004

Page 5 of 34

medically examined accused Bhupinder Nath, Yuvraj @ Raja, Ajay Singh
and these accused persons were brought by SI Rajesh Kumar.

In his

opinion all the three accused persons were capable of performing the sexual
act. He has further deposed that during his examination he found that
Yuvraj had an abrasion of 3 mm x 2 mm on his left hand ring finger. He
proved his report as Ex.PW1/A.
(ii)

PW-2 is HC Sukhbir Singh. He deposed before the court that on 5 th

June 2000 he was working as Malkhana Moharir. Inspector Suresh Daggar,
SHO of PS Vasant Vihar, on the said date deposited nine sealed pulandas
and an entry was made in register no 19 at serial no.736 by him that these
pulandas related to case FIR No.174/2000. He further deposed that on
7.6.2000 Inspector Mahinder Pal Singh, the then Additional SHO, PS
Vasant Vihar, deposited eight sealed pulandas and Inspector Mahinder Pal
Singh also deposited one motor cycle bearing no.DL8SCG-1789, make
Hero Honda, and the personal search articles of the accused Yuvraj, Sayeed
Salim and Sayed Miraj. PW 2 further deposed that he deposited the above
said pulandas and the above mentioned case property in the Malkhana after
making an entry in register No.19 at serial no.739. Again on 14th June 2000,
SI Rajesh Maurya of PS Vasant Vihar deposited five sealed pulandas duly
Crl.A.343/2004

Page 6 of 34

sealed with seals intact along with a sample seal of Safdarjung Hospital in
the Malkhana after making an entry in register no 19 at serial no.745. Again
on 13th June 2000 vide Road Certificate No.135/21 one sealed pulanda
alleged to contain knife was handed over to Inspector Mahinder Pal Singh
for obtaining opinion from the Safdarjung Hospital by him. On 14 th June
2000 the abovesaid knife in sealed parcel with the seal of the Safdarjung
Hospital along with sample seal was again deposited back by SI Rajesh
Maurya on 14th June 2000. He further deposed that on 18th July 2000 one
sealed pulanda alleged to contain cushion with cover was handed over to
HC Satbir Singh by him vide road certificate no.147/21 for depositing the
same in FSL Malviya Nagar. On 18th July 2000 he also handed over one
sealed earth control pulanda to HC Satbir Singh vide road certificate
no.147/21 for depositing in FSL Malviya Nagar and on the same day
another sealed parcel was given to HC Satbir Singh vide road certificate
No.147/21 for depositing in FSL Malviya Nagar. On 13th June 2000 he
handed over one sealed pulanda alleged to contain one dagger duly sealed
with the seal of MS to Inspector Mahinder Pal vide road cerficiate
no.135/21 for obtaining opinion by him from the Safdarjung hospital and on
14th June 2000 SI Rajesh Maurya deposited the said dagger back duly sealed
Crl.A.343/2004

Page 7 of 34

with the seal of Safdarjung hospital along with sample seal and on 18th July
2000 he handed over one sealed parcel alleged to contain one katta and two
rounds duly sealed with the seal of MS to HC Satbir Singh vide road
certificate no.146/21 for sending to the FSL Malviya Nagar and on the same
day another sealed pulanda alleged to contain underwear duly sealed was
also handed over by him to HC Satbir Singh for depositing in FSL Malviya
Nagar. PW 2 further deposed that on 18th July 2000 he also handed over
one sealed parcel of this case to HC Satbir Singh for depositing with the
FSL, Malviya Nagar. On the same day he made the relevant entry in
register no.19 and on 11th September 2000 Exhibits bearing serial no.1 to 10
which were sent to the FSL Malviya Nagar were again deposited in the
Malkhana by HC Satbir Singh duly sealed with the seal of DS FSL Delhi
along with report. He also made an entry in register no.19 in this regard and
proved his copy of register no.19 as Ex.PW2/A.
(iii)

PW 3 is Dr. Alexander. He has deposed before the Court that on 9th

June 2000 he had conducted the post mortem examination on the body of
Chanda Paswan. He found three injuries in the abdomen and according to
him death in this case was due to shock and hemorrhage caused by multiple
injuries and he proved his report as Ex.PW3/A. PW3 further deposed that
Crl.A.343/2004

Page 8 of 34

on 13th June 2000 he had received an application from the IO for subsequent
opinion in connection with the weapon of offence and the injuries caused on
the person of the deceased with the said weapon. He further deposed that he
received two parcels, one containing a kitchen knife and the other
containing a dagger. According to him injury No.1 might be caused by the
knife and injury no.2 might be caused by the dagger. The witness has
identified the kitchen knife and dagger before the court as Ex.P2 and P3.
His report is Ex.PW3/A.
(iv)

PW 4 is Anjali Ghate. She has deposed before the court that she was

living at the H.No.D-1/25, Second Floor, Vasant Vihar, New Delhi, since
1995 and on 5th June 2000 as usual she had left her house at about 8.10 am
for her job in J.R. Narang Deepalia School at B-64, Panchsheel Vihar, New
Delhi. She has further deposed that she had one maid servant and in her
absence she used to remain in the house and there was no other family
member living with her in that house. She further deposed that she returned
back to her house on 5th June 2000 at about 8.15. pm, and on reaching she
rang the door bell, but the door was not opened by her maid servant.
However, she opened the door with the duplicate key of her house, and after
entering the house, she saw lot of broken glasses inside the kitchen and in
Crl.A.343/2004

Page 9 of 34

the bathroom also, and she also saw one chappal lying in the lobby and one
chappal in the bathroom. PW4 further deposed that after entering the house
she had switched on the light and when she entered inside the kitchen, she
saw that the electric press had fallen on the floor. She saw her maid servant
Chanda lying on the floor of the kitchen and at that time she was not
wearing salwar. Her face was covered with a cushion. She also noticed
some blood on the middle part of her body. Her bra was also lying on her
thighs. PW 4 further deposed that she removed the cushion from her face
thinking that she might breathe and she then touched her face and cheek and
found that she was cold. Then PW 3 realised that she had expired and
thereafter she called Swaminath, a mali who told her that around 1.00 am.
he had rung the door bell but at that time nobody had opened the door from
inside. PW 4 further deposed that she then called the police. Police came to
her house and recorded her report Ex.PW4/A.

She also got the spot

photographed. She further deposed that she had entered her house and
found the book shelf disturbed from its actual position and she also found
that some articles were missing from her house and she had given a list of
those articles to the police. She further deposed that she signed all the
memos at the sport. The witness identified all the articles which were
Crl.A.343/2004

Page 10 of 34

shown to her before the court which were stolen from the house.
(v)

PW 5 is Ram Ashish Paswan. He has identified the dead body of

Chanda Paswan who was the wife of his brother-in-law Jaswant Paswan.
(vi)

PW 6 is Constable Arvind Kumar. He has deposed that on 5th June

2000 he took the dead body of Chanda to the Mortuary of Safdarjung
Hospital. He is a formal witness.
(vii) PW 7 is HC Md. Rashid. He is too formal witness.
(viii) PW 8 is Ankruz. He has also identified the dead body of Chanda
Paswan. He is a formal witness.
(ix)

PW 9 is ASI Chet Ram. He has deposed before the court that on 5th

June 2000 he visited the spot and lifted the chance prints and proved his
report as Ex.PW9/A.
(x)

PW10 is ASI Lala Ram. He has deposed before the court that on 5th

June 2000 he was posted as duty officer in PS Vasant Vihar and on that day
he recorded FIR No.174/2000 on the basis of the rukka brought by
Constable Narain Pati and proved the copy of the same as Ex.PW10/A.
(xi)

PW 11 is HC Satbir Singh. He has deposed that on 18.7.2000 he was

posted in PS Vasant Vihar and on that day he took one sealed pulanda from
the malkhana and deposited the same with FSL Malviya Nagar vide RC and
Crl.A.343/2004

Page 11 of 34

deposited back the acknowledgment with the malkhana. He is a formal
witness.
(xii) PW 12 is SI Madan Pal. He is a formal witness.
(xiii) PW 13 is SI Rajesh Dogra. He has joined the investigation alongwith
the Inspector Mahinder Pal and supported the prosecution case.
(xiv)

PW-14 is Inspt. Suresh Daggar. He has deposed before the

court that on 5.6.2000 he was posted as SHO with the Police Station Vasant
Vihar and on receipt on DD No. 34A, he along with SI Rajesh and
Constable Narain Pati reached D-1/25 Vasant Vihar, where he found the
dead body of the maid servant Chanda lying on the second floor. He
recorded the statements of Miss Anjali Ghate Ex. PW4-A and made
endorsement Ex.PW14/A thereon and got the FIR lodged through Ct.
Narain Pati. He also prepared the site plan Ex.PW14/B and summoned the
crime team which inspected the spot. The dog squad was also called. PW14 further deposed that he had also seized one kitchen knife vide memo Ex.
PW-D, earth control vide memo Ex PW4/E, one cushion cover with cushion
vide memo Ex PW4/F, a glass vide memo Ex PW14/G, broken glasses vide
memo Ex PW4/H, a liquor bottle vide memo Ex. PW4/J, a pair of chappels
vide memo Ex PW4/K and clothes vide memo Ex. PW4/ and he had also
Crl.A.343/2004

Page 12 of 34

seized a mangalsutra and koka of the deceased vide memo Ex PW4/C. PW14 also recorded the statements of the relevant witnesses at that time and he
further deposed that further investigation was taken over by Inspector
Mahinder Pal Singh.
(xv)

PW-15 is Ct. Ashok. He has deposed before the court that on

5.6.2000 he was posted with police Station Vasant Vihar and upon the call
of the IO he visited the second floor of the house no . D-1/25 Vasant Vihar,
where he took the photographs of the spot, including the dead body lying
there, and proved the same photographs as Ex. PW15/1 to 16 and negatives
as Ex PW15/17 (colly.).
(xvi)

PW-16 is Insp. Mahinder Pal. He has deposed before court

that on 7.6.2000 he was posted as Addl. SHO police station Vasant Vihar
and he received the investigation of this case. On that day he arrested
accused Salimuddin and Miraj from near the Vasant Vihar Club, their
mother Steila from her house, Ajay Singh and Yuvraj from their respective
homes and accused Bhupinder was arrested from India Gate and the arrest
memos of these accused persons prepared by him are on the record as Ex.
PW16/A,B,C,D,E, and F, which their personal search memos are Ex.
PW16/G,H,I,J,K and L respectively. PW-16 also recorded their disclosures
Crl.A.343/2004

Page 13 of 34

vide memos Ex. PW13/A,B,E,G,N and C respectively. In pursuance of the
disclosure of statement Steila one passport, wrist watch and locket were
recovered vide memo Ex PW13/F as stolen property.

He has further

deposed that in pursuance of disclosure statement of accused Salim one
laisel Ex PWP-24 was recovered from a box lying at his house vide memo
Ex PW13/C, and in pursuance of disclosure made by Miraj cheque Ex P-19
was recovered from an iron almirah lying in his room vide memo Ex
PW13/D, and in pursuance of the disclosure made by accused Ajay one
dagger and a pocket watch were recovered from an iron box lying in his
room and a memo to this effect Ex PW13/M was prepared. He further
deposed that articles which were recovered by him were sealed with the seal
of 'MS' and that recovery memo pertaining to dagger and pocket watch is Ex
PW13/M, and he also prepared the sketch of the dagger, which is Ex
PW16/N, the dagger is Ex. PZ while the pocket watch is Ex. P-25. PW-16
further deposed that in pursuance of the disclosure made by Bhupinder, one
pocket watch was recovered vide memo Ex. PW13/O which is Ex P-23
from accused Bhupinder, one kitchen knife was also recovered again said it
was recovered by the previous Investigating Officer from the spot, and in
pursuance of disclosure made by accused Yuvraj one katta and two
Crl.A.343/2004

Page 14 of 34

cartridges were recovered from his house and 5 pieces of hand gloves and
blood stained clothes were recovered vide separate memos Ex PW13/H and
13/U. PW-16 further deposed that accused Yuvraj also got recovered one
calculator Ex P-18 and cigarette packet Ex P-16 and P-17 vide recovery
memos Ex PW13/J from accused Salimuddin, motor cycle Ex A-8 was
recovered vide memo Ex PW13/Q at the time of his arrest and one
underwear of accused Bhupinder Singh was also seized vide memo Ex
PW13/P and the same is Ex A7. All the five male accused persons were
also sent for medical examination and all were found competent to perform
sexual intercourse. PW-16 also collected subsequent opinion of the doctor
on the weapon of offence i.e. the daggar. The exhibits were also sent to the
FSL and he collected the relevant FSL reports which are Ex PW16/P, and
also prepared inquest documents Ex PW16/Q, Ex PW16/R and request for
post mortem which is Ex PW16/S. After the post mortem the dead body
was handed over to Anuj Kumar, vide receipt Ex PW16/T and after
collection of the relevant documents and recording of the statements of
witnesses, the charge sheet was filed through the SHO.
(c)

The counsel for the appellants have preferred the appeal on the

following grounds:
Crl.A.343/2004

Page 15 of 34

(i)

It was submitted by the counsel for the appellants that neither the

fingerprints taken from the spot were ever matched with the fingerprints of
the appellants nor was the blood on the knife and dagger found to match
with that of the appellants. Besides, according to PW3 Dr. Alexander, he
could not detect the presence of any material such as blood on the two
weapons examined by him. Although semen was found on the genital swab
taken from the deceased, but no comparison was done with the semen of the
accused persons though such semen samples were taken from the five male
accused persons.
The prosecution story regarding the school teacher having lakhs of
dollars at home is also disbelievable according to the learned counsel for the
appellant.
(ii)

The alleged recoveries made allegedly at the instance of the

appellants, are doubtful since the police did not join independent public
witnesses at the time of recovery. There is no other evidence at all against
the appellants. It is extremely strange that the recoveries were witnessed
only by the policemen and it was not deposed that police witnesses were
necessitated due to the non-cooperation of the nearby members of public.
The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that since no public person
Crl.A.343/2004

Page 16 of 34

was joined at the time of arrest of the accused persons and the recovery of
the incriminating articles from them took place only before police witnesses
no reliance can be placed on them as they are bound to be interested in the
conviction of accused persons.
(iii)

The learned counsel for the appellants also submitted at the time of

lodging of the FIR the complaint was given in writing, in which the
complainant stated that: “One room has been ransacked but I do not think
anything was taken.” However, on the next day she reported to the police
that several items including passport, cheque book, some watches including
one wrist watch, some watches, one pocket watch, one chain, one calculator,
one necklace and cash of Rs.1000/- were missing from her house and
handed over a list of these items to the police.
(iv)

The learned counsel for the appellants further submitted that since the

investigation was being carried out by the SHO Suresh Daggar from 5 th June
2000 and the same was transferred to Inspector Mahender Pal on 7th June
2000, it is not clear as to which police official was the abovementioned list
handed over to. According to PW 4 Anjali Ghate, she handed over the list
Ex.PW4/B to the police on the next day of the incident in the late afternoon
but she did not remember the designation and name of the police official.
Crl.A.343/2004

Page 17 of 34

PW 14 Inspector Suresh Daggar on the contrary stated “.....We collected the
list of stolen articles on the next day from complainant at about early
morning but I cannot give the exact time.” Therefore, there are glaring
contradictions between the statements of the two PWs.
(v)

The learned counsel for the appellant also submitted that there are

serious doubts regarding the veracity of the testimonies of PW4 Anjali
Ghate, PW14 Inspector Suresh Daggar and PW 16 Inspector Mahender Pal
Singh, which are contradictory with regard to the timings of arrest and the
recovery of articles. Further, according to ExPW13/F the recovered articles
were seized and sealed with the seal of 'MS' and the seal was handed over to
SI Rajesh Dogra. But PW 4 Anjali Ghate stated that after the recovery of
various articles the police called her at the police station, where she was
shown those recovered articles by the police. However, PW 13 SI Rajesh
Dogra stated that these articles were never shown to the complainant. PW
16 Inspector Mahender Pal Singh also stated that no TIP of the articles was
conducted and that they had not shown the recovered articles to the
complainant.
Therefore, according to the counsel for the appellants the recovery
itself is rendered doubtful, particularly because according to the prosecution
Crl.A.343/2004

Page 18 of 34

the alleged articles were sealed and deposited in the malkhana, and there
was no entry in the malkhana register of the release of the articles thereafter
from the malkhana for showing them to the complainant.
(d)

The learned counsel for the accused had argued before the trial court

that no finger prints of the accused persons were found on glass tumbler, on
the floor and on the pieces of glass and the door which were lifted by the
police from the spot and accordingly, the accused were entitled to be
acquitted. The aforesaid argument has been rejected by the learned Sessions
Judge by relying upon the statement of the PW 9 ASI Chet Ram, whose
testimony was, however, only to the effect that he visited the spot and lifted
the chance prints. According to the testimony of the PW 9, the said finger
prints were forwarded to the Bureau for further comparison. The aforesaid
plea was rejected by the trial court on the ground that finger prints of none
of the accused persons were taken for comparison with the chance prints
lifted by PW 9. The trial court accordingly held that the finger prints of the
accused were not taken for comparison with the chance prints taken by PW
9 and therefore this fact cannot help the accused.
2.

In our view, the above reasoning of the trial court, to say the least, is

unsatisfactory.
Crl.A.343/2004

The learned counsel for the accused having made a
Page 19 of 34

significant plea that the chance prints were not compared with the accused's
finger prints, such a plea has been rejected in an absolutely inexplicable
manner while holding that this plea could not succeed as the finger prints of
the accused were not taken for comparison, to show whether the prints were
those of the deceased.

The trial court judgment on this ground alone

deserves to be set aside because if the prosecution on whom the burden of
proof lay, had chosen not to take finger prints of the accused, it is evident
that the non-taking of the finger prints of the accused and non comparing of
the finger prints of the accused with the chance prints lifted from the spot
leaves this court with no option but to conclude that the prosecution was
wary of comparison of finger prints lifted from the spot of this incident with
those of the accused. The obvious reason is that the prints may not have
matched.

We cannot also not lose sight of the fact that the entire case is

based on the circumstantial evidence of the recovery resulting from the
disclosure statements of the accused persons. In light of this, this scientific
evidence attains crucial importance and the prosecution has been wholly
unable to explain why the fingerprints of the accused were not taken and
compared with the prints lifted from the spot of the incident.
Similarly, the prosecution's own case was that the deceased was raped
Crl.A.343/2004

Page 20 of 34

and semen sample lifted from her body by taking a vaginal swab. Even
though the semen samples of the accused were taken, they were not
compared with the vaginal swab. This vital discrepancy which goes to the
root of the prosecution case has been totally ignored by the trial court and
vitiates the judgment.
In our view, these two basic lacunae based on non utilization of
scientific evidence to establish the presence and participation of the accused
goes to the root of the prosecution case and leaves this court with no other
option but to conclude that the prosecution was conscious that the finger
prints on the spot and vaginal swab of the deceased if compared to the
finger prints and semen of the accused would not have matched. The trial
court has unfortunately glossed over these two circumstances, resulting in a
gross miscarriage of justice.
3.

The next plea raised by the learned counsel for the accused was that

no public person was joined at the time of arrest of the accused and all the
witnesses to the recovery are police officials. The reasoning of the trial
court even on this issue indeed shows little regard to objective assessment
of the prosecution evidence led before it. The plea that the police witnesses
could not be relied upon is indeed based on the position of law laid down by
Crl.A.343/2004

Page 21 of 34

the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the judgment discussed hereinafter. The
Apex Court is of the view that such recoveries “do not inspire confidence”
and had ordered for acquittal in the case of Sanspal Singh v. State of Delhi,
(1998) 2 SCC 371. It was observed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in this
case that:
“3. Inter alia, it has been urged by the learned counsel for
the appellant that it would not be safe to maintain the
conviction because the recovery of the illicit arms did not
inspire confidence, supported as it is, by the evidence of
two police officials alone, unassociated by the testimony
of any independent witness. It has also been urged that
witnesses of the public were available and neither were
they associated nor was any explanation given at the trial
as to why they were not associated. From the evidence of
PW 5 Head Constable Sat Pal Singh, it is clear that the
police party did not ask any public witness to be witness
at the time of search of the accused. Likewise, PW 6 SubInspector Mahipal Singh has also stated that no public
witness was joined at the time of the search of the
accused even though a number of persons were passing
through at the time when the recovery was being effected.
It is thus evident that public witnesses were available and
could have been associated to witness the recovery. It
would have been a different matter altogether had there
been no public witness available or none was willing to
associate. Here, as said before, public witnesses were
available but no explanation on these lines is
forthcoming. Thus, we got to the view that it would be
unsafe to maintain the conviction of the appellant for the
offences charged. We, therefore, order his acquittal. He is
in jail. He be set at liberty forthwith.”

The Hon'ble Supreme Court has in a number of judgments asserted
that in the absence of independent witnesses the evidence of disclosure
statement and consequent recovery do not inspire confidence. The learned
Crl.A.343/2004

Page 22 of 34

court has also observed that neither is it safe to rely upon the testimony of
police witnesses specially where it is not supported by independent
witnesses on the material particulars, nor should reliance be placed upon
evidence where witnesses sign the document at the instance of the police
officer. The relevant parts of the said judgments are extracted as under:
(i)

Harjit Singh v State of Punjab, (2002) 6 SCC 739:
“50. Apart
from
the
versions
of
eyewitnesses discussed above, the trial court
attached importance to the fact that on a
disclosure statement of accused Satinderpal
Singh, pistol alleged to have been used by
Inderjit Singh was recovered under
memorandum Ext. P-19. We have referred to
the statement of Investigating Officer Puran
Singh (PW9). He is unable to explain the
reason for not procuring the attendance and
signature of independent witnesses on the
disclosure statement Ex.PV and memorandum
of recovery Ext. PU 1. We have noted that
these memoranda have been signed only by
two police officers Faqir Chand and Virsa
Singh. It is unbelievable that all the accused
persons who have alleged to use their
firearms/weapons kept all the arms concealed
in an open field in a gunny bag under the heap
of straw. In the absence of independent
witnesses and the alleged place of
concealment being accessible to the public, the
evidence of disclosure statement and the
consequent recovery of arms and weapons do
not at all inspire confidence. In any case, it is
not a piece of evidence which could be relied
on by the trial court to convict the accused by
treating it as eyewitness account.”

Crl.A.343/2004

Page 23 of 34

(ii)

Sukhpal v. State of Haryana, (1995) 1 SCC 10:
“4.
.....As a rule of prudence it is
desirable that the evidence of police
personnel should be corroborated
preferably by a reliable witness. But in
all cases, such corroboration cannot be
insisted as a matter of course because it
may not be possible in all cases to get
corroboration from an independent
witness.------”

(iii)

Bharat v State of M.P., (2003) 3 SCC 106:
“11. .......Relying on the case of State
Govt. of NCT of Delhi v. Sunil the
learned counsel contends that there is no
reason to disbelieve the evidence of the
police to doubt the recovery.
The
submission is that seizure memo need not
be attested by any independent witness
and that the evidence of the police officer
regarding recovery at the instance of the
accused should ordinarily be believed.
The case, relied upon has no relevance to
the facts of the present case. In the
instant case, learned counsel for the
appellant is right in her submission that
the evidence of the police officer is
unreliable in view of ample material on
record that the witnesses were signing at
the instance of the police officer on the
dotted lines.-------”

(iv)

Aslam Parwez v. Govt. of NCT of Delhi. (2003) 9 SCC 141:
“10. ......In view of these features of the
case, we are of the opinion that the testimony
of three police personnel, namely, PWs 10,

Crl.A.343/2004

Page 24 of 34

11 and 1 does not inspire confidence and it
will be highly unsafe to place reliance upon
the same in order to convict the accused
specially when the public and independent
witnesses did not at all support the
prosecution case on any material particular.”

The trial court has rejected the above plea of the accused by holding
that there was nothing to suggest that these witnesses were not present at the
time of recovery. In our view, this was not even the plea of the accused.
The accused only pleaded that when the recovery was made by the police
officials (which naturally presumed their presence), no independent witness
was present. In our view, the trial court inspite of noticing the plea has in
fact avoided to deal with the issue by making a cursory observation that the
police witnesses were present at the time of recovery and thus failed to
apply the well settled position of law laid down in the above judgments of
the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
4.

In fact, the substratum of the prosecution case is to be found in the

testimony of PW13. The said version indeed makes a curious reading that
secret information had been received in the morning of 7th June 2000 and
the accused were caught on a motor cycle on the said day. All the six
accused are said to be arrested between 6:00 pm to 9:45 pm on the same

Crl.A.343/2004

Page 25 of 34

day. Arrest memos were signed by the police witnesses. All the offending
articles had been recovered only by recording recovery memos witnessed by
the police witnesses.

The removed articles seized pursuant to the

disclosure are the sole basis of the conviction of the appellants. We are of
the view that the absence of any other evidence against the accused except
that given only by the police witnesses makes it extremely unsafe to sustain
the conviction of the appellants. This finding is further strengthened by the
non-comparing of the finger prints lifted from the spot with the finger prints
of the accused and the vaginal swab taken from the deceased with the semen
of the accused which not only provides with unsatisfactory explanation but
it actually makes the judgment of the trial court wholly unsustainable.
The trial court while dealing with the case law cited by the accused
had only the following observation to make:“However, counsel for the accused has relied upon the
following citations:
1. 2002 (62) DRJ 791 High Court of Delhi Sahibe
Alam vs. State.
2. 2000 (52) DRJ High Court of Delhi Des Raj @
Dass vs. State.
3. 1994 (3) DRJ High Court of Delhi
Ashok
Kumar vs. State.
4. 1983 1 Supreme Court Cases 143 Md. Abdul
Hafeez vs. State of Andhra Pradesh
5. Rajinder Kumar vs. State Delhi High Court
Crl.A.343/2004

Page 26 of 34

reported in 1983 (4) DRJ 95.
6. AIR 1970 Supreme Court 535 Sheo Nath vs.
State of U.P.
7. AIR 1981 Supreme Court 1388
1388 S.C.
Lakshman Prasad vs. State of Bihar.
8. AIR 1981 Supreme Court 1392
Wakil Singh
vs. State of Bihar.
“I have gone through the aforesaid citations but
the fact of the aforesaid citations are different from the
present case and they are not applicable to the facts of
the present case, however, there is no dispute about the
position laid by aforesaid the Hon'ble Judges.”

While the trial court noted that it had perused the given cases but only
held that the facts of the given cases are different from the present case and
thus not applicable to the present case, without showing how the judgments
were inapplicable.

In our view the above method of dealing with the

judgments cited by the appellant shows a wholly erroneous approach by the
trial Court. The trial court did not seem at all concerned about the case set
up by the appellants. In our view this is no manner and method of dealing
with the cases relied upon by an accused and discloses a miscarriage of
justice. The entire discussion of the evidence of the trial court also makes
an equally interesting reading and reads as follows:“This case is based on the circumstantial evidence. The
accused persons after their arrest made disclosure
statement before the police. It has come on the evidence
of PW-13 SI Rajesh Dogra that he (PW-13) alongwith
Inspt. Mahinder Pal Singh and other police officials
formed a raiding party and went in the search of accused
Crl.A.343/2004

Page 27 of 34

persons. They got a secret information that a boy
involved in the incident relating to House no.D-125
Vasant Vihar who was sitting on motor cycle might be
involved and will pass from Paschim marg and will go
towards Vasant Vihar Club. Upon this information PW16 formed a raiding party and a trap was laid near Vasant
Vihar Club and at about 5 p.m. two boys were noticed on
Hero Honda Motor Cycle of green colour and name of
those boys were revealed as Sayed Salimuddin and Sayed
Miraz and on their interrogation they admitted their guilt
and their disclosures were recorded vide memos
Ex.PW13/A and ex PW13/B. Thereafter these accused
persons led them to their home and from there at the
instance and in pursuance of the disclosure of accused
Sayed Salimuddin got recovered one lisel upon which
figure of 96 was written and at the instance of accuse
Miraz one cheque book was seized vide memo
Ex.PW13/D. Thereafter accused at the instance of
Sayeed Salimuddin, Smt. Stelia was arrested and in
pursuance disclosure of accused Steila one pass port, one
silver like chain and a wrist watch were recovered.
Thereafter at the instance of accused Salimuddin accused
Yuvraj was arrested and in pursuance of his disclosure
one calculator, one katta, two cartridges, five gloves and
a piece of T-Shirt carrying some stains were recovered.
Thereafter accused Ajay Singh was arrested and in
pursuance of disclosure one pocket watch and dagger
were recovered from his house and thereafter accused
Bhupinder was arrested and in pursuance of his
disclosure one pocket watch of Rolex was recovered.
All these articles recovered from the accused
persons were identified by the complainant Anjali Ghate
and she also stated that these articles were the same
which were looted by the accused persons at the time of
robbery committed at her house. She confirmed that she
was the owner of these articles. One pass port belonging
to her mother, one cheque book of her bank and one lisel
were recovered from these accused persons. The police
was also able to recover one blood stained cloth from
accused Ajay Singh which was used in the commission of
crime and one kitchen/knife was recovered from the
house of the complt which was used by the accused
persons at the time of commission of crime. Similarly
Crl.A.343/2004

Page 28 of 34

the hand gloves used by the accused persons at the time
of commission of robbery were also recovered from
accused Yuvraj. All these articles which were robbed by
the accused persons and were recovered from them has
sufficiently proved the complicity of the accused in the
commission of crime and all these articles were properly
identified by the owner Anjali Ghate. This is a very
important circumstances proved by the prosecution
against the accused persons.
In this case the murder was committed on
5.6.2000 whereas the recoveries of the robbed articles
was made from the accused on 7.6.2000 that is
immediately after the commission of murder. Since the
incriminating articles were recovered immediately after
the commission of crime so the presumption under
section 106 of the Evidence Act is attracted and charge of
murder stand proved against the accused persons. This
view also finds support from the decision reported in
2002 II AD (Cr.) Supreme Court 613 wherein it has been
held as under:“Indian Penal Code, 1860 – Sec. 302,392 r/w
34, 120B-201-Murder etc. - Recovery of
personal belongings of deceased with blood
stains – No explanation – Body of deceased
also found later on – Proximity of time
between recovery of articles and the body of
the deceased-Presumption u/s106 of Evidence
Act attracted – Charge of murder also stands
proved – conviction proper.”
This view also finds support from the decision reported
in 2001 I AD (Cr.) S.C. 361 Supreme Court where it has
been held as under:“Indian
Penal
Code,
1860Secs.302,394,397,342,120-B and 41-Arms
Act – Secs. 25,27,54,59 – TADA Act – Sec.5Robbery with murder – Accused is nephew of
deceased
with
friends-Circumstantial
evidence – Extra-judicial confessionStatement to police leading to recoveries of
Crl.A.343/2004

Page 29 of 34

weapons-stained clothes – stolen articles –
offence made out.
“Evidence Act, 1872-Sec.27- Confessional
statement – leading to recovery-words used in
statement “after commission of the offence”
and “looted property”-Whether made the
statement inadmissible?-(n0)- Hypertechnical
approach would defeat justice.”
“Indian Penal Code, 1860 – Sec.302, 394 –
Robbery and murder – Recovery of robbed
articles from possession – Robbery and
murder part of same transaction – Recent and
unexplained possession of stolen articles –
Presumption to be drawn U/s 114 of Evidence
Act for murder also.”
Keeping in view the law laid down by Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the above said cases and the fact in the
present case also the confessional statement made by the
accused persons leading to the recovery of the
incriminating articles immediately after the commission
of crime and the looted property recovered from the
possession of accused person makes confessional
statement admissible under the law and the implication of
the accused persons stand proved in the commission of
murder and robbery in the present case.
Some of the articles which have been recovered
from the possession of the accused persons are pass port
which belongs to the mother of the complt. One cheque
book which belongs to the complt., one liasel which is a
rare article which was also robbed from the house of the
complt. was recovered from the accused Sayeed
Salimuddin and one wrist watch recovered from the
accused Ajay, one pocket watch recovered from accused
Bhupinder while the pass port has been recovered from
accused Steila and cheque book was recovered from
accused Miraj and calculator and cigarette packet were
recovered from the accused Yuvraj besides blood stained
gloves which were used in the commission of crime were
Crl.A.343/2004

Page 30 of 34

also recovered from the accused Yuvraj. The entire
prosecution evidence was put to the accused persons U/s
313 Cr.P.C. But the accused persons have failed to
explain as to how these articles which were robbed from
the house of the complt. were found in their possession.
I, therefore, hold that it is the accused persons and none
else who committed the crime of murder of Chanda
Paswan and thereafter committed robbery at the house of
the complainant.”

Thus while the learned trial Judge extracted in detail the relevant
head notes of the judgments relied upon by the prosecution and applied
them, yet it dealt with the judgments relied upon by the accused in two lines
by observing that the facts were different. In fact it is not desirable for the
trial court to extract head notes of a judgment without adverting to the text.
Furthermore, vastly differing approach in dealing with the case law cited by
the prosecution and the accused does not commend itself to approval by this
court.
The trial court has also held that the medical evidence supported that
the dagger concerned was used in the commission of the crime as deposed
by PW3, Dr. Alexander of the Safdarjung Hospital. The dagger was sent to
the FSL for examination but it was reported that it did not reveal the blood
group, although it was human blood that was found on the dagger. The
blood was found to be too small for chemical analysis. The failure to
compare the blood group found on the dagger with that of the deceased has
Crl.A.343/2004

Page 31 of 34

been met by the trial court by stating that no explanation has come from the
side of the prosecution as to whose blood was found on the dagger. This is
in stark contrast to the testimony of PW3, Dr. Alexander who stated that
any naked eye examination could not detect the presence of any material
such as blood on the weapon i.e. dagger.
The trial court has again fallen into grave error by holding that no
explanation has come from the side of the accused as to how the blood was
found on the dagger.

Without comparing the blood group and indeed

without even finding positively by appropriate evidence, the existence of
the blood on the dagger and the blood group found on the dagger, the trial
court had transferred the burden of proof on the accused.

The blood group

of the blood as contained on the kitchen knife which was recovered from
the spot, was not even compared with any of the blood samples of the
accused persons. This aspect has not even been adverted to let alone dealt
with by the trial court.
Furthermore, the pair of gloves said to have been recovered at the
instance of the accused Yuvraj were blood-stained. However, the FSL
report clearly discloses that the blood group could not be determined from
the blood sample found on the gloves. The plea of the blood samples not
Crl.A.343/2004

Page 32 of 34

having been matched with either those of the the accused or the deceased is
met by holding that the accused Yuvraj failed to explain as to how the blood
stained gloves were found in the house immediately after the crime. The
further reasoning that the trial court has given is as follows:“Since the accused persons have failed to explained as to
how the robbed articles were found in their possession
and they also failed to explain about the recovery of
dagger which was used in the commission of crime. I,
therefore, hold that the prosecution has successfully
proved its case beyond reasonable doubt against all the
accused persons. It is the accused persons and none else
who have committed murder of Chanda Paswan and also
committed robbery, therefore, I hold all the accused
persons guilty for the offences punishable u/s
395/302/396/412 I.P.C.
Case is now to come up on 19.2.04 for order on
sentence.”

This again amounts to placing the burden of proof on the accused. In
fact, the entire judgment is largely unreasoned, based on impermissible
presumptions and totally unworthy of being upheld and we have no other
option except to set aside the said judgment.
Accordingly, the appeals are allowed and the impugned judgment of
the

learned

Additional

Sessions

Judge

February 2004 and 19th February 2004 in Sessions
arising

out

Crl.A.343/2004

of

FIR

No.174/2000,

Police

dated

Case

13th

No.54/2001

Station

Vasant

Page 33 of 34

Vihar, is set aside and all the accused persons are directed to be released
forthwith. If the accused are on bail the bail bonds shall be cancelled.

(MUKUL MUDGAL)
JUDGE

(REVA KHETRAPAL)
JUDGE

February 04, 2008
dr/sk

Crl.A.343/2004

Page 34 of 34

