*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Crl. Appeal No.09/2007
Reserved on: 20th August 2007
th
Date of Decision : 5 March, 2008

K.P. SINGH
Through

.... Appellant
Mr. Manmohan, Sr. Adv. with
Mr. Rajeshwar Singh, Adv.

versus
STATE & ANR.
Through

.... Respondents
Mr. Sunil Sharma, APP for the State.
Mr. J. P. Dhanda, Adv. for complainant.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MUKUL MUDGAL
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K. BHASIN
1.
2.

Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest? Yes

%

Yes
Yes

JUDGMENT
05-03-2008

: MUKUL MUDGAL,J.
1.

The trial court had delivered the impugned judgment dated 13th

Crl.Appeal No.09/2007

Page 1 of 18

December, 2006 by which the accused SHO, R.P. Tyagi along with Sub
Inspector Tej Singh and Inspector K.P. Singh were convicted. The appellant in
the present appeal Inspector K.P. Singh was convicted under Section 217 IPC
by judgment and order dated 13th December, 2006 and sentenced to one year
rigorous imprisonment as well as fine of Rs.25,000/-, by the Additional
Sessions Judge, Karkar Dooma, Delhi (hereinafter referred to as the “trial
court”) on the ground that there was a 5-1/2 months delay in registering the
FIR.
2.

As per the facts of the case, in the intervening night of 24th and 25th

August 1987, two persons Mahender and Ram Kumar were admitted in SDN
hospital having sustained injuries ostensibly due to beatings. Mahender was
shifted to LNJPN hospital where he died at about 2.00 pm on 25th August
1987. As it appeared an unnatural death, area SDM S.S. Rathore conducted
inquest proceedings and found involvement of the police in the crime and
recommended registration of FIR on 26th August 1987 against the police of PS
Vivek Vihar for offence under Section 304 IPC. Shri S.S. Rathore, SDM was
Crl.Appeal No.09/2007

Page 2 of 18

then subsequently transferred from the post of SDM. Shri Parimal Rai, the
next SDM submitted his report and after recording statements of several
witnesses. Shri Parimal Rai did not agree with his predecessor SDM and
reached a conclusion in his inquest report that Mahender Kumar had sustained
injuries on being beaten by the public. Though the FIR about this happening
was registered by the accused K. P. Singh himself being FIR No.59/88 but this
was done only when the order of the Lt. Governor of Delhi, was
communicated through the Deputy Commissioner, Delhi.

This FIR was

registered on 11th February 1988 while Mahender Kumar died on 25th August
1987. Thus, there was a delay of 5 ½ months in the registration of the FIR.
3.

The main plea of the learned Senior Counsel for the appellant, Mr.

Manmohan is that there were no documents to show that the order of the
superior officer was addressed to and served upon the appellant for the
registration of the FIR. Though the appellant was charged under Section 218
IPC for preparing false documents with the intent to save the accused but
conviction was only recorded under Section 217 IPC which was for 5-1/2
Crl.Appeal No.09/2007

Page 3 of 18

months' delay in registration of FIR.
4.

The learned counsel for the appellant in order to strengthen the

aforementioned plea submitted as under:
(a)

The letter dated 28th August, 1987 was not addressed to the SHO, Vivek

Vihar whereby directions appear to have been issued by the then SDM,
Shahdara Mr. S.S. Rathore to the SHO, Police Station Shahdara, to register an
FIR. The said letter was never received by the appellant and the same was
endorsed only to the DCP (East).
(b)

It is contended that on 29th September, 1987, the Lt. Governor, Delhi

issued a direction to the DCP (HQ) to register a criminal case against the
concerned errant police officers. However, a copy of the same was not marked
to the appellant though it was marked to DCP (East).

It is further submitted

that appellant was not aware of the letter dated 3rd November, 1987 though it
was recorded in the said letter of DCP (East) to DC(Delhi) that SHO, Vivek
Vihar contacted SDM, Shahdara to collect statements and documents to

Crl.Appeal No.09/2007

Page 4 of 18

proceed further in the matter but he could not get those documents.
(c)

By a letter dated 15th January, 1988 addressed to the DCP (Hqrs), the

DCP (East) has stated “thereafter the matter was discussed with Legal Adviser
to CP who was of the opinion that further action should be taken on receipt of
Inquest Report, which is an important document since inquest was conducted
by SDM, which is a semi-judicial body. On 10th February, 1988, the DCP
received second report of the SDM and on 11th February, 1988, an FIR was
filed by the appellant but DCP (East) directed investigation by ACP, Gandhi
Nagar, who on 7th July, 1989 filed the report as `untraced', which was then
accepted by the learned Metropolitan Magistrate as `untraced'.
(d)

It is further submitted by the learned counsel for the appellant that the

appellant was not arrayed as an accused in the complaint case filed by father of
the deceased Shri Tika Ram before ACMM, Karkardooma, as he had not
named the appellant in the complaint. The appellant took charge of the Police
Station Vivek Vihar as SHO at 10.10 pm on 25th August, 1987 after the
Crl.Appeal No.09/2007

Page 5 of 18

incident when the then DCP (East) had suspended R.P. Tyagi, the then SHO of
Police Station Vivek Vihar.
(e)

The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the accused being a

public servant is entitled to protection under Section 197 Cr.P.C. which
requires the sanction of the government for the offences alleged to have been
committed by him which acting or purporting to act in discharge of his official
duty. The learned Magistrate by taking cognizance of such offence erred in
law and vitiated the whole process of trial.

The learned counsel for the

appellant relied upon the following judgment:
(i)

In Sankaran Moitra v. Sadhna Das,(2006) 4 SCC 584:
“There cannot be any universal rule to
determine whether there is a reasonable
connection between the act done and the
official duty, nor is it possible to lay down any
such rule. One safe and sure test in this regard
would be to consider if the omission or neglect
on the part of the public servant to commit the
act complained of could have made him
answerable for a charge of dereliction of his
official duty: if the answer to this question is in
the affirmative, it may be said that such act was
committed by the public servant while acting in

Crl.Appeal No.09/2007

Page 6 of 18

the discharge of his official duty and there was
every connection with the act complained of
and the official duty of the public servant. This
aspect makes it clear that the concept of Section
197 does not get immediately attracted on
institution of the complaint case.
From the aforesaid decisions, in my opinion,
the law appears to be well settled. The primary
object of the legislature behind Section 197 of
the Code is to protect public officers who have
acted in discharge of their duties or purported to
act in discharge of such duties. But, it is equally
well settled that the act said to have been
committed by a public officer must have
reasonable connection with the duty sought to
be discharged by such public officer. If the act
complained of has no nexus, reasonable
connection or relevance to the official act or
duty of such public servant and is otherwise
illegal, unlawful or in the nature of an offence,
he cannot get shelter under Section 197 of the
Code. In other words, protection afforded by
the said section is qualified and conditional.”
(emphasis supplied)

(ii)

In S.K. Zutshi v. Bimal Debnath,(2004) 8 SCC 31:
“It has been widened further by extending
protection to even those acts or omissions
which are done in purported exercise of official
duty. That is, under the colour of office.
Official duty, therefore, implies that the act or
omission must have been done by the public
servant in the course of his service and such act
or omission must have been performed as part

Crl.Appeal No.09/2007

Page 7 of 18

of duty which, further, must have been official
in nature. The section has, thus, to be construed
strictly while determining its applicability to
any act or omission in the course of service. Its
operation has to be limited to those duties
which are discharged in the course of duty. But
once any act or omission has been found to
have been committed by a public servant in
discharge of his duty then it must be given
liberal and wide construction so far as its
official nature is concerned. For instance, a
public servant is not entitled to indulge in
criminal activities. To that extent the section
has to be construed narrowly and in a restricted
manner. But once it is established that that act
or omission was done by the public servant
while discharging his duty then the scope of its
being official should be construed so as to
advance the objective of the section in favour of
the public servant. Otherwise the entire purpose
of affording protection to a public servant
without sanction shall stand frustrated. For
instance, a police officer in discharge of duty
may have to use force which may be an offence
for the prosecution of which the sanction may
be necessary. But if the same officer commits
an act in the course of service but not in
discharge of his duty and without any
justification therefor then the bar under Section
197 of the Code is not attracted. To what extent
an act or omission performed by a public
servant in discharge of his duty can be deemed
to be official was explained by this Court in
Matajog Dobey v. H.C. Bhari thus: (AIR p.49,
paras 17 & 19)
The offence alleged to have been committed
Crl.Appeal No.09/2007

Page 8 of 18

[by the accused] must have something to do, or
must be related in some manner, with the
discharge of official duty.
There must be a reasonable connection between
the act and the discharge of official duty; the
act must bear such relation to the duty that the
accused could lay a reasonable [claim], but not
a pretended or fanciful claim, that he did it in
the course of the performance of his duty.”
If on facts, therefore, it is prima facie found
that the act or omission for which the accused
was charged had reasonable connection with
discharge of his duty then it must be held to be
official to which applicability of Section 197 of
the Code cannot be disputed.”

(iii)

In Amrik Singh v. State of Pepsu, (1955) 1 SCR 1302:
“The result of the authorities may thus be
summed up: It is not every offence committed
by a public servant that requires sanction for
prosecution under Section 197(1) of the Code of
Criminal Procedure; nor even every act done by
him while he is actually engaged in the
performance of his official duties; but if the act
complained of is directly concerned with his
official duties so that, if questioned, it could be
claimed to have been done by virtue of the
office, then sanction would be necessary; and
that would be so, irrespective of whether it was,
in fact, a proper discharge of his duties, because
that would really be a matter of defence on the
merits, which would have to be investigated at

Crl.Appeal No.09/2007

Page 9 of 18

the trial, and could not arise at the stage of the
grant of sanction, which must precede the
institution of the prosecution.”

5.

As per the case of the prosecution, what is of considerable importance in

this case is the allegation that FIR was not lodged in this case inspite of the
orders by the SDM, S. S. Rathore who had directed for the registration of the
FIR on the very next day of the incident which resulted in the death of
Mahender and the repeated requests made to the effect of lodging the FIR by
the father of the deceased Shri Tika Ram.
This allegation has to be seen in light of Section 154 Cr.P.C. which read
as under:
“154. Information in cognizable cases.— (1)
Every information relating to the commission of a
cognizable offence, if given orally to an officer in
charge of a police station, shall be reduced to
writing by him or under his direction, and be read
over to the informant; and every such information,
whether given in writing or reduced to writing as
aforesaid, shall be signed by the person giving it,
and the substance thereof shall be entered in a book
to be kept by such officer in such form as the State
Government may prescribe in this behalf.
(2) A copy of the information as recorded under
Crl.Appeal No.09/2007

Page 10 of 18

sub-section (1) shall be given forthwith, free of
cost, to the informant.
(3) Any person aggrieved by a refusal on the part of
an officer in charge of a police station to record the
information referred to in sub-section (1) may send
the substance of such information, in writing and by
post, to the Superintendent of Police concerned
who, if satisfied that such information discloses the
commission of a cognizable offence, shall either
investigate the case himself or direct an
investigation to be made by any police officer
subordinate to him, in the manner provided by this
Code, and such officer shall have all the powers of
an officer in charge of the police station in relation
to that offence.

Thus, Section 154 Cr.P.C. makes it obligatory for an officer in charge of
the police station to register an information about a cognizable offence if given
orally or to enter the substance thereof in a prescribed book if given in writing.
6.

It is also to be noted that the trial court from para 50 to 58 of its

judgment has dealt in detail with the case of the appellant. The trial court has
held that being head of a police station, SHO was duty bound to bring the
process of law into motion whenever information of such a heinous crime was
received by him. It further held that there is nothing on record to show that the
Crl.Appeal No.09/2007

Page 11 of 18

DCP had forbidden SHO K.P Singh to take action in this regard.
However, what the trial court failed to appreciate is the very fact that the
appellant was just an SHO, who had other senior officers above his rank in the
hierarchy. To disobey the senior officers could have invoked the ire of many
other senior officers in an organization such as the Delhi Police, specially the
DCP (East) who was directly handling the matter relating to the custodial
death of Mahender Kumar at that time.
7.

In our view, the accused K. P. Singh cannot be held guilty of the offence

punishable under Section 217 IPC, for the delay in the registration of the FIR.
The sequence of events from the date of the death of Mahender Kumar on 25th
August 1987 to the registration of FIR on 11th February 1988 prima facie
shows that the accused cannot be directly held to be involved in the delay for
the registration of the FIR.
8.

The following sequence of events reiterates the aforementioned position:

(a)

On 25th August 1987 at about 2.00 pm the deceased Mahender Kumar

Crl.Appeal No.09/2007

Page 12 of 18

died in Lok Nayak Jai Prakash Narain hospital. At 10.10 pm on 25 th August
1987 the appellant K. P. Singh took charge as SHO, police station Vivek
Vihar.
(b)

On 28th August 1987, SDM S. S. Rathore who conducted inquest

proceedings issued directions to the SHO, Shahdara, to register an FIR against
the guilty officials. However, this letter was not addressed to the SHO, Vivek
Vihar. Copy of this letter was never received by the appellant, though it was
marked to the DCP (East). The prosecution has led no evidence to substantiate
the service of the letter dated 28th August 1987 upon the appellant.
(c)

On 29th September, 1987, the Lt. Governor directed the DCP (East) to

register a criminal case against the concerned police officers vide Ex.CW
17/A.
(d)

On 3rd November, 1987, DCP (East) wrote a letter to the Deputy

Commissioner, in which it was recorded that the SHO, police station Vivek
Vihar contacted SDM Shahdara, to collect statements and documents to

Crl.Appeal No.09/2007

Page 13 of 18

proceed further in the matter but he could not get those documents vide
Ex.DW 12/A. The appellant has categorically denied without any refutation
that he was never served with the said letter. No evidence has been led by the
prosecution to prove the service of the said letter dated 3rd November, 1987
upon the appellant.
(e)

On 8th November, 1987, the DCP (East) wrote a letter to the DCP,

(Headquarters) wherein it was stated that “we may proceed in the matter
regarding registration of the case on receipt of the inquest report from SDM,
Shahdara”.
(f)

On 14th November, 1987, DCP (Headquarters) wrote a letter to the Joint

Secretary (Home) in which it was stated that “in the absence of reports /
documents from SDM, Shahdara, it is not possible for the Police Department
to take further action in this regard.”
(g)

On 26th November 1987, a complaint case was filed by the father of the

deceased Shri Tika Ram before the ACMM, Karkar Dooma, Delhi, in which

Crl.Appeal No.09/2007

Page 14 of 18

the appellant was not at all arrayed as an accused.
(h)

On 15th January 1988, a letter addressed to the DCP (Hqrs) by the DCP

(East) has stated “thereafter the matter was discussed with Legal Adviser to
the Commissioner of Police who was of the opinion that further action should
be taken on receipt of Inquest Report, which is an important document since
inquest was conducted by , Shri Parimal Rai, SDM, Shahdara.
(i)

On 10th February, 1988, the DCP received the second inquest report

from the SDM Shri Parimal Rai.
(j)

On 11th February, 1988, FIR was filed by the appellant but DCP (East)

directed investigation by ACP, Gandhi Nagar, who on 7th July, 1989 filed the
report as `untraced', which was then accepted by the learned Metropolitan
Magistrate as `untraced'.
It can be clearly seen from the aforesaid sequence of events that the
SHO was just obeying the directions and orders of his superior officers. From
a bare perusal of communications and sequence of events which occurred
Crl.Appeal No.09/2007

Page 15 of 18

during the course of the proceedings which ultimately led to the delay in the
registration of the FIR, it can be no way doubted that the whole matter leading
to the custodial torture and death of Mahender Kumar and the delay in
registration of the FIR was not occasioned by the appellant. There is no proof
brought on record to prove that the appellant was served with any direction of
the Lt. Governor or his superior officer to register an FIR. In fact, the facts in
this matter may indicate that the then DCP (East) did not appeared to have
taken prompt and appropriate action which he was duty bound as a superior
officer to take and no action of any kind was taken against him.
9.

It is further to be noted that the complainant did not make any allegation

against the appellant in the complaint under Section 190 Cr.P.C. filed on 26th
November, 1987.

The learned Metropolitan Magistrate summoned the

appellant by its order dated 2nd April 1994 on the basis of the deposition made
by the complainant during the enquiry under Section 202 Cr.P.C after a period
of six years. It is also pertinent to mention that the name of the appellant was
never mentioned in the complaint nor in the representation made by the
Crl.Appeal No.09/2007

Page 16 of 18

complainant to the higher authorities.

It was the appellant himself who

registered the FIR being FIR No.59/1988 under Section 304 IPC immediately
on receipt of the second inquest report. From the communications dated 8th
November, 1987 and 15th January 1988 between the superior officials it is
apparent that the directions to file the FIR was only given after the receipt of
the second inquest report. In fact, very soon after the appellant was served with
the second inquest report dated 8th February 1988 sent by the the DCP (East)
to the appellant on 11th February 1988, he registered the FIR No.59/88 under
Section 304 IPC on the same day showing his bonafides and thus can not be
convicted for the delay in registering the FIR. Hence, in our view, this is a
case where no conviction is warranted as the prosecution has failed to establish
the culpability of the appellant attracting Section 217 of the IPC.

The

question relating to sanction under Section 197 Cr.P.C. has been dealt in
connected Criminal appeal No.38/2007 and Crl. Appeal No.11/2007 which
may be read as part of this Judgment on the plea of Section 197 Cr.P.C. and a
copy thereof is placed on the file.
Crl.Appeal No.09/2007

Page 17 of 18

10.

Accordingly the appeal is allowed and the judgment dated 13th

December, 2006 passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge in SC
No.01/2006, in so far as it convicts the appellant under Section 217 IPC is set
aside and the appellant is acquitted of all the charges and bail bonds, if any,
stand cancelled and if the appellant is in custody he shall be released forthwith.

(MUKUL MUDGAL)
JUDGE

(P.K. BHASIN)
JUDGE
March 05, 2008
dr/sk

Crl.Appeal No.09/2007

Page 18 of 18

