*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Crl.Appeal No. 11/2007

Reserved on: 20th August 2007
th
Date of Decision : 5 March, 2008
TEJ SINGH

.... Appellant
Through

Mr. Mukesh Kalia, Adv.

Versus

STATE & ANR.
Through

.... Respondents
Mr. Sunil Sharma, APP for the State.
Mr. J. P. Dhanda, Adv. for complainant.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MUKUL MUDGAL
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K. BHASIN
1.
2.

Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Crl. A.11/2007

Yes
Yes

Page 1 of 52

3.

Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

%

Yes

JUDGMENT
05-03-2008

: MUKUL MUDGAL,J.
1.

The trial court had rendered the impugned judgment dated 13th

December, 2006 by which the accused SHO, R.P.Tyagi along with SI
Tej Singh and Inspector K.P. Singh were convicted. The appellant in the
present appeal SI Tej Singh was sentenced to three years rigorous
imprisonment and to pay a fine of Rs.25,000/- for his conviction for an
offence punishable under Section 218 IPC and in default of payment of
fine the appellant was directed to undergo three months simple
imprisonment. In addition to it, the appellant was further sentenced to
three years rigorous imprisonment and to pay a fine of Rs.10,000/- for
offence punishable under Section 201 IPC and in default of payment of
Crl. A.11/2007

Page 2 of 52

fine he was further directed to undergo three months simple
imprisonment and sentences awarded to the said convict were ordered to
run concurrently with a benefit of Section 428 Cr.P.C.
2.

The brief facts of the case as per the prosecution sans unnecessary

details are as follows:
a)

On 16th August 1987, it was the festival of Janmasthmi, constable

Rishi Pal posted at police station Vivek Vihar was deputed at Police post
Chota Bazar, Shahdara Delhi.
b)

At about 9.20 pm some one told Rishi Pal about two anti social

persons who were extorting money at the point of knife at Circular
Road, who thereinafter went to the spot.
c)

Subsequently information was received in the police station Vivek

Vihar that constable Rishi Pal has been stabbed by two persons and
consequently the police rushed to the spot.

Crl. A.11/2007

Page 3 of 52

d)

The police recorded the statement of constable Narender and on

the basis of his statement, FIR No.294/87 under Sections 307/353/186
IPC was recorded in Police Station Vivek Vihar. It was revealed that
constable Rishi Pal was stabbed by Mahender and Ram Kumar, who had
fled from the spot and were absconding.
e)

The Police launched a manhunt to trace the culprits but they did

not find them in and around the locality. The police officers in anger
picked up family members and neighbours of Mahender and Ram
Kumar and confined them at Police Station Vivek Vihar. The family
members and neighbours were harassed and beaten and were asked to
produce the absconding duo Mahender and Ram Kumar.
f)

Ultimately on 24th August 1987 at 7.45 am (approximately), both

Ram Kumar and Mahender were produced in the Police Station Vivek
Vihar and their family members were let off.

Crl. A.11/2007

Page 4 of 52

g)

The Police subjected Mahender and Ram Kumar to severe

beatings and showed their arrest at about 2.00 pm from Surajmal Park,
though they were produced in the Police station at about 7.45 am on 24th
August 1987.
h)

On account of the beatings Ram Kumar and Mahender sustained

grievous injuries and were taken to SDN Hospital, Shahdara, where they
were examined by Dr. A. K. Verma and seeing the serious condition of
Mahender, he was referred to Lok Nayak Jai Prakash Narain Hospital
(hereinafter referred to as the “LNJPN Hospital”).
i)

On 25th August 1987, Mahender died in LNJPN Hospital on

account of injuries sustained by him due to beatings by the police.
j)

Shri S.S. Rathore SDM conducted inquest proceedings and after

recording the statement of witnesses, recommended registration of a
case against police officials of police station Vivek Vihar for an offence
punishable under Section 304 IPC.
Crl. A.11/2007

Despite this order, case was not
Page 5 of 52

registered. Shri S.S. Rathore was then subsequently transferred from the
post of SDM.
k)

Another SDM namely Shri Parimal Rai then conducted further

inquest proceedings and submitted his report in which gave a finding
that Ram

Kumar and Mahender were subjected to beatings by

members of public which resulted in the death of Mahender.
l)

Ultimately due to pressure and upon an order of the Lt. Governor

of Delhi, Case No.59/1988 for an offence punishable under Section
304/34 IPC was registered on 11th February 1988.
m)

This case after investigation was sent to the concerned

Metropolitan Magistrate, Karkardooma Court, as “Untraced”.

The

request of ACP, Gandhi Nagar, to close investigation in this regard was
accepted by the then Metropolitan Magistrate Shri Z.S. Lohat by his
order dated 7th July 1989.

He further affirmed his order on an

application moved by Ram Kumar on 8th July 1989.
Crl. A.11/2007

Page 6 of 52

n)

Finding no alternative, Shri Tika Ram father of the deceased

Mahender preferred to file a complaint case in the court of learned
Metropolitan Magistrate and the present appeal is occasioned by the
order of conviction recorded subsequently.
o)

The Metropolitan Magistrate, Karkardooma Court, Delhi, found a

prima facie case against the accused SHO R. P. Tyagi under Sections
302 / 34/ 120B/ 325/ 323/ 342/ 343/ 167/ 201/ 217/ 218 IPC and Section
124 of the Delhi Police Act, SI Tej Singh under Sections 323/ 342/ 343/
167/ 201/ 218/ 219/ 120/ 211/ 109/ 114/ 120B/ IPC, Inspector K. P.
Singh under Sections 167/ 201/ 217/ 218/ 119/ 120/ 211/ 109/ 120-B
IPC and Section 120 of the Delhi Police Act.
p)

The learned Additional Sessions Judge convicted the main

accused R.P. Tyagi under Sections 302/342/120-B IPC, K.P. Singh who
at the relevant time was a sub-inspector under Section 217 IPC and the
appellant herein Tej Singh under Section 218/201 IPC.
Crl. A.11/2007

Page 7 of 52

3.

The trial court while dealing with the case of the appellant in

Paragraph 59 and 60 of its judgment held as follows:
“59. Accused SI Tej Singh investigated
said case (FIR 294/87). He prepared
documents shown as 'personal search
memo'
Ex.PW40/DCS,
disclosure
statements purporting to be made by
Mahinder Kumar Ex.PW 40/DC3, by Ram
Kumar Ex.PW40/DC4, seizure memo of
knife Ex.PW40/DC6, sketch of knife
Ex.PW40/DC1 and personal search memo
of Ram Kumar Ex.PW40/DC5. Accused
Tej Singh admitted to have prepared all
these documents in his statement recorded
u/s 313 Cr.P.C. It is well proved on file
that Mahinder Kumar and Ram Kumar
appeared in police station on their own and
not arrested from Surajmal Park as shown
in that case. It is not proved on file that
said Mahinder Kumar and Ram Kumar
gave any such disclosure statement or after
their arrest any personal search of them was
taken or any such knife was recovered from
possession of any of them from that place.
These facts if true were within the special
knowledge of police. It was held by the
apex court in case titled as State of
Rajasthan v. KashiRam (supra) burden to
prove such fact was upon the accused
which were within his special knowledge.
It was for this accused to establish all these
Crl. A.11/2007

Page 8 of 52

facts being specially within his knowledge
but no such evidence was led in this regard.
60.
As stated earlier it is well proved
that none of said accused was arrested from
said spot at Surajmal Park and all those
documents were false. Accused Tej Singh
is hence convicted for offence of preparing
false documents knowing that by doing so,
he will save some persons from legal
punishment and with that intention gave
information about offence which he knew
to be false, all punishable u/s 218 IPC.”

4.

The learned counsel for the appellant, Mr. Mukesh Kalia

submitted as follows :(i)

It is the case of the prosecution that the appellant Tej Singh

Verma was the Investigation Officer of the case FIR No. 294/87, Police
Station Vivek Vihar, Delhi registered under Sections 307/186/353/34
IPC in which the deceased Mahender and co-accused Ram Kumar were
wanted as accused.
(ii)

The charge framed against the appellant is that he prepared the

documents, i.e., DD No.7/A and 9/A dated 24th August 1987 and the

Crl. A.11/2007

Page 9 of 52

other documents in his official capacity. Hence, it is the admitted case
of the prosecution that whatever was done by the Appellant was in
discharge of his official duty. But, the Appellant was prosecuted without
taking any sanction from the competent authority.
(iii)

The learned counsel for the appellant strengthened his arguments

on three fold basis:(a)

Qua the morning incident: The counsel for the appellant

submitted that nothing incriminating has been attributed by the 48
prosecution witnesses including Raj Kali, Manoj and Narender to
suggest that the appellant had any knowledge about the morning
incident, wherein the prosecution claimed that the deceased was
produced in the P.S. by his relatives. More so, nothing incriminating has
been attributed to the Appellant to connect him with the morning
incident.

Crl. A.11/2007

Page 10 of 52

(b)

Receipt of information and formation of raiding party at

Police Station : In regard to the submission made by the counsel for the
appellant towards Receipt of information and formation of raiding party
at Police Station, he submitted that as per the case of the prosecution, the
role of the Appellant started only after the receipt of DD No.7/A dated
24.8.1987 at 2.05 P.M. when information was handed over to the
Appellant by a Duty Officer SI Surender Singh in the presence of
PW/47 H.C. Daya Ram and thereafter the appellant along with the other
staff proceeded towards Suraj Mal Park Road No.58.

The counsel for the appellant submitted that it was SI Surender,
Duty Officer, who had reduced in writing DD No.7/A and further had
assigned this DD No.7/A to the appellant for investigation/enquiry,
which was also admitted by PW/47 HC Daya Ram.

Crl. A.11/2007

Page 11 of 52

The counsel for the appellant further submitted that as per DD
No.7/A, SI Mukesh Kumar, No.1944/D, Ct. Rattan Lal, No.576/E, Ct.
Kanwar Pal, No. 962/E, Ct. Virender, No. 1469/E, Ct. Narender Singh,
No. 675/E and Ct. Manoj Kumar were the members of the Raiding Party
and proceeded from the P.S. to the spot on the direction of Duty Officer
SI Surender and this entry DD No.7/A was admitted by SI Surender to
be recorded by him. Out of these members of the Raiding Party, PW/8
Narender and PW/38 Manoj have deposed that they had not gone with
the Raiding Party.

It is further submitted that no credence can be given to the
statement of these two witnesses because circumstances suggest that
they are hand in glove with the complainant party and the possibility of
bargaining with the complainant cannot be ruled out, despite the fact
their names were mentioned in DD No.7/A as the members of the

Crl. A.11/2007

Page 12 of 52

Raiding Party. The complainant had not made them accused in his
complaint and in a way they were saved by the complainant from being
prosecuted in this case and on the other hand they have tried to help the
complainant by deposing in favour of complainant against the persons of
their own Department and that too in a complaint case where there was
no compulsion upon them to depose, and it is further submitted that they
were approached by the complainant and then they gave the statement
before the Court of Magistrate and thereafter the Trial Court.

(c)

Beatings given by member of the public : In regard to the last

submission of his three fold arguments, counsel for the appellant
submitted that when the appellant reached the spot, he had, no doubt, in
his mind about the possibility of the deceased Mahender and Ram
Kumar being beaten by the public as from the situation assessed by him

Crl. A.11/2007

Page 13 of 52

from the spot, where public in a large number was present, which
dispersed immediately after seeing the police.

The antecedents and past conduct of these two criminals is
doubtful as those two criminals were involved in various acts of
stabbing, extortion, drug trafficking, rape and assault especially in case
FIR No. 155/87 of P.S. Vivek Vihar registered u/s 452/376/506/34 IPC,
wherein the deceased Mahender, Ram Kumar and Fateh Singh entered
in the house of Smt. Kanti Devi and raped here in her own house in the
presence of her husband and her husband after hearing the cries had
caused injuries on the person of deceased Mahender and Ram Kumar
with a brick despite the fact that they were three in number and armed
with deadly weapons like knife etc.

Similarly, there are details of FIRs mentioned against these
persons wherein they have inflicted the injuries on the public persons as

Crl. A.11/2007

Page 14 of 52

well as on the police officials on duty and the possibility also cannot be
ruled out of their being involved in similar acts of causing injury and
harm to the general public, wherein the matters have not been
reported/brought to the notice of the police.

The Counsel for the appellant further submitted that it can also be
inferred that the anger had developed in the eyes of public against these
persons and the victims and aggrieved persons, were waiting for the
right opportunity and when much water had flown above their head,
they mobilized and gave beatings to Mahender and Ram Kumar to teach
them a lesson.

(iv)

The counsel for the appellant in respect to the question of motive

to kill Mahinder submitted that there was no motive for the appellant to
kill Mahender and even if one will go by the averments, made by the
complainant, then the police had more grievances against Ram Kumar,

Crl. A.11/2007

Page 15 of 52

as it was in fact Ram Kumar, who had given the vital blow from knife
on the chest of Ct. Rishi Pal and whereas Mahender is said to have only
snatched the danda and gave a blow to him by the danda.

(v)

The counsel for the appellant further submitted that the

complainant's family was having so many persons who were involved in
criminal activities. They were well-versed with the technicalities of the
law, Court procedure, safeguard and remedies, available to them. They
were of desperate character involved in including injuries on public
persons, police persons, indulging in rape, extortion and drug
trafficking. By implicating number of police officers, they had a motive
to put pressure upon the police, so that they can carry on their illegal
activities smoothly. It is further submitted that the motive to falsely
implicate police officials further gets corroboration from the fact the
same was done with a view to get compensation from the state.

Crl. A.11/2007

Page 16 of 52

(vi)

The learned counsel for the appellant contended that the trial court

failed to appreciate that there are various inconsistencies and
contradictions among the testimonies of various witnesses which create
a serious doubt regarding the veracity of the statements of the witnesses
on which the trial court has relied upon. The trial court has also based
undue reliance on the prosecution version and totally ignored the case of
the defence. The trial court has without any reasons disbelieved the
testimonies of the defence witnesses.

5.

The learned counsel for the State in order to strengthen the case of

the prosecution submitted that Mahender and Ram Kumar were
grievously injured as a result of beatings and torture meted out to them
by R.P. Tyagi and others and the accused launched a huge cover up in
order to justify the injuries sustained by them. As the injuries were
numerous and as a result of consequent beatings from R.P. Tyagi and

Crl. A.11/2007

Page 17 of 52

others, they devised a method to cover up the injuries sustained by
Mahender and Ram Kumar and what followed was a gigantic cover up
as under:(i)

At 2 pm on 24th August, 1987, police is said to have received a
call from some unknown person from Surajmal Park complaining
that two ruffians were harassing public and consequently DD No.
7A was recorded and a so called team as constituted by R.P.
Tyagi was dispatched to the spot.

(ii)

As per DD No. 7A, the members of the raiding team were SI Tej
Singh Verma, HC Narender Kumar, HC Manoj Kumar etc. who
were sent to Surajmal Park and there SI Tej Singh Verma
alongwith other members of the so called leading party
apprehended the culprits, who were being subjected to beatings by
the public.

(iii)

SI Tej Singh Verma in order to cover up the torture and beatings
meted out to Mahender and Ram Kumar fabricated documents
such as disclosure slip, seizure memo of knife, site plan, Jama
talashi memos.

Crl. A.11/2007

Page 18 of 52

(iv)

SI Tej Singh Verma fabricated the aforesaid documents as the
accused persons wanted to show that Ram Kumar and Mahender
were present at Suraj Mal Park at 2.05 p.m. In order to save
themselves and create evidence of their presence at Surajmal
Park.

(v)

SI Tej Singh Verma also admitted that he has prepared these
documents in his statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C.

(vi)

However, the deeds of SI Tej Singh Verma and SHO of R.P.
Tyagi were exposed by none other than their own police officers
who were examined in the court as PW8 HC Narender Kumar and
PW38, HC Manoj Kumar.

6.

After considering the pleas of the counsel for the parties we

are of the view that the counsel for the defence has built his case on the
fact that at around 2 pm on 24th August, 1987, the police station, Vivek
Vihar received a call from some unknown person from Surajmal Park
complaining to the police that two ruffians were harassing the public
and a police team constituted by R.P. Tyagi was dispatched to the spot.

Crl. A.11/2007

Page 19 of 52

The members of the so called leading police party apprehended the
culprits, who were being subjected to severe beating by the public.
Thereafter, the two arrested persons were taken to the hospital where
Mahender died subsequently. However, in our view the prosecution has
been able to prove the fact that the story built up by the defence is
concocted and based on false predications. The prosecution has been
successfully able to complete the chain of events beyond reasonable
doubt.
7.

The portions of the testimony of PW 9 Rajkali in the court

as a prosecution witness which is relevant is as under“Smt. Raj Kali deposed that on the day of
Janmashtmi, i.e., 16th August 1987 she along
with her children and husband was sleeping in
her house. On the same night at about 9:00
PM, police officials went to her house and
started enquiring about her son Mahender and
his friend Ram Kumar. Her family reported
that both Ram Kumar and Mahender were not
at home and the police officials took them to
police station, Vivek Vihar. She stated that
Crl. A.11/2007

Page 20 of 52

while she was kept in the police station, her
husband and her other sons Manoher Lal,
Rajinder, etc. were kept in Police Poost Anaz
Mandi. She further deposed that after about a
week on 24th August 1987 at about 7:30 or
8:00 AM she along with Yamuna etc. was
released from the police station. When they
were coming out of the police station she
noticed Mahender Kumar and Ram Kumar
present in the police station as well as the
presence of her three sons Manohar Lal,
Rajinder, and Kishan Chand. She stated that
Jassu and Rajinder were also present there and
police was shouting out that Ram Kumar and
Mahender have been produced in the police
station by their relatives. In the meanwhile,
when they tried to talk to Mahender Kumar the
police officer present there directed them not to
talk with them and further asked to them to
leave the police station.”

Thus, after a perusal of the statements and testimonies of
Rajkali before the SDM, as a witness in the complaint case before
learned metropolitan magistrate and as a prosecution witness in the trial
court, the following conclusive evidence can be relied upon to implicate
the appellant.

Crl. A.11/2007

Page 21 of 52

The sum and substance of the testimony of PW9 Rajkali,
which is worthy of belief is:a.

Mahender and Ram Kumar surrendered in the police station

Vivek Vihar between 7.30 a.m and 8.00 am. This testimony is
corroborated by the evidence of Constable Manoj Kumar (PW38).
b.

Rajkali along with her family members and her neighbours were

continuously detained by the police and given a beating right from 16th
August, 1987 till the date when the deceased, Mahender and Ram
Kumar surrendered on 24th August, 1987.
c.

This testimony is supported by the testimony of PW-10 Rakesh

Kumar, PW-11 Govind Ram, PW-12 Rajinder Prasad, PW-13 Manohar
Lal, PW-14 Prem Wati, PW-15 Anil Kumar, PW-16 Neetu, PW-19
Krishna, PW-20 Sondai, PW-21 Subash, PW-23 Jamna Devi, PW-31
Om Wati,

PW-33 Sukhbiri, PW-34 Jamman Lal, who all deposed to

Crl. A.11/2007

Page 22 of 52

the effect that they were summoned to the police station regularly since
16th August 1987 until the surrender of Mahender on 24th August 1987.
Though there are embellishments and improvements made in the
statements of Rajkali from that made before the SDM Shri SS Rathore
who had conducted the first inquest proceedings; in her statement before
the Metropolitan Magistrate in the complaint case on 7th December 1991
and in her testimony before the court recorded in Court as PW 9 on 17th
July 2004, 24th July 2004, 31st July 2004 and 7th August 2004, we are
not completely relying upon the same. We are only relying upon the
aforementioned portion of her testimony which has been consistent
before the SDM, the Metropolitan Magistrate and as a prosecution
witness in the trial court to complete the chain of events, as put up by
the prosecution to implicate the appellant which has also been supported
by PW 8 and PW 38 who are police personnel themselves and further
Crl. A.11/2007

Page 23 of 52

strengthened by the depositions of PW 10 Rakesh Kumar, PW11 Govind
Ram, PW 18 Pappu, PW 20 Sondai, PW 21 Subash, PW 23 Jamna Devi,
PW 33 Sukhbiri and PW 34 Jamman.
8.

Quite apart from the fact that her testimony on the above

issues is supported by other witnesses, even the police witness PW38
HC Manoj Kumar and PW8 HC Narender Singh support the case set up
by the prosecution about the presence of Mahender and Ram Kumar in
the morning of 24th August, 2007 in the police station .
There is no reason for at least the police witnesses to depose
falsely against their own brethren and the plea of the counsel for the
appellant that this was done so as to save themselves as they were hand
in gloves with the deceased Mahender Kumar’s father, cannot be
accepted as their evidence is supported by the testimony of Rajkali PW
9 and PW 10 Rakesh Kumar, PW 11 Govind Ram, PW 18 Pappu, PW

Crl. A.11/2007

Page 24 of 52

20 Sondai, PW 21 Subash, PW 23 Jamna, PW 33 Sukhbiri and PW 34
Jamman Lal, who all deposed to the effect that the deceased Mahender
and Ram Kumar were present in the police station Vivek Vihar between
7.30 a.m. and 8.00 a.m.
Once the presence of the deceased and his accomplice Ram
Kumar in the police station is established in the morning at about 7.30
a.m. then the whole story of the defence that Mahender and Ram Kumar
were arrested at Suraj Mal Park at around 2:00 pm by the police patrol
led by then SI (Investigating Officer) Tej Singh Verma the appellant
herein is totally unworthy of belief and appears to be a concoction. The
most vital evidence to falsify the version of 2 o'clock incident in Suraj
Mal Park is the testimony of PW38 HC Manoj Kumar. He is said to be
the driver of the official vehicle which is shown in the police record to
have taken the police party to Suraj Mal Park. The said Manoj Kumar
has deposed without any effective cross-examination that he did not go
Crl. A.11/2007

Page 25 of 52

to Suraj Mal Park at 2 pm on that day. PW 8 Narender Kumar stated to
the effect that he was not member of the raiding party that went to Suraj
Mal Park on 24th August, 1987 at about 2.00 p.m. Once the defence
version of an incident of 2 o'clock at Suraj Mal Park is falsified by the
evidence of the police driver of the jeep Manoj Kumar PW 38, who is
supposed to have driven the police party in the official vehicle along
with PW 8 Narender Kumar coupled with the fact that the presence of
Mahender and Ram Kumar in the police station having been established
by the testimony of PW 2 Satish Aggarwal, PW 4 Chiranjilal, PW 9
Rajkali, PW 10 Rakesh, PW 11 Govind Ram, PW 12 Rajinder Prasad,
PW 13 Manohar Lal, PW 14 Prem Wati, PW 16 Neetu, PW 17 Alah
Ram, PW 18 Pappu, PW 19 Krishna, PW 20 Sondai, PW 21 Subash,
PW 31 Om Wati, PW 34 Jamman Lal, the story of the 2 o'clock incident
appears to be fabricated with a view to explain the injuries on the person
of not only the deceased Mahender but Ram Kumar also.
Crl. A.11/2007

Page 26 of 52

Even otherwise, it is extremely odd and opposed to the
common course of human conduct that two culprits who were said to
have been bold enough to have stabbed a police constable causing him a
serious injury would, when the entire police force of the area is
relentlessly searching for them, surface on their own in the midafternoon at a public park and publicly pick up a quarrel with members
of the public to attract uncalled for attention to them.
9.

We cannot lose sight of the fact that it is not in dispute that

Mahender and Ram Kumar were said to be part of a criminal gang led
by their father and accordingly it is highly unlikely that two such alleged
criminals who had been outrageous enough to stab a police constable on
duty would be tackled by members of the irate public. Thus, not only
does the evidence of PW38 HC Manoj Kumar and PW 8 Narender
Singh amongst others falsifies the police visit to Suraj Mal Park at 2

Crl. A.11/2007

Page 27 of 52

p.m. on 24th August, 1987 but the said version of the 2:00 pm incident at
Surajmal Park, is also unbelievable for its very incredulous nature.
Owing to the reasons described above that this court cannot
accept the plea that Mahender and Ram Kumar were beaten up by the
public in the afternoon at about 1.30 and the police party took them to
the hospital from Suraj Mal Park. We are, thus, satisfied beyond any
doubt that Mahender and Ram Kumar were in the police station from
7.30 a.m. onwards.
10.

There can be no denial that some witnesses took a 'U' turn.

Rajender (PW7) deposed that he did not know any person in the name of
Jassu, Rajender, Kishan Chan, Manohar, Mahender and Ram Kumar.
Needless to say that in his statement before the court of learned
Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi this witness had deposed to have
produced Mahender Kumar and Ram Kumar in the company of said

Crl. A.11/2007

Page 28 of 52

Jassu, Kishan Chand and Rajender, Rajender and Mahender are his real
brothers. It cannot be presumed that he did not know his own brothers.
Sh. Jamman Lal (PW 34) during his cross examination by the learned
Additional Public Prosecutor flatly refused to have given any statement
in the Court. On being further cross examined, this witness identified
his signatures on statement Ex.PW34/A. Jaswant @ Jassu (PW3) denied
having given any statement before the court. He also refused about his
statement Ex.PW3/A, though he admitted his signatures on the same at
Point “A1”. PW 33 Sukhbiri also did not remember as to whether she
had given any statement before the court of Metropolitan Magistrate.
Similarly, PW 39 Anita refused to have given any statement in the court,
though she also identified her signatures on statement mark PW 39/A at
point 'A'.
It was held by the Supreme Court in the case of Sheikh Zakir v.
State of Bihar, AIR 1983 SC 911, that it is not quite strange that some
Crl. A.11/2007

Page 29 of 52

witnesses do turn hostile but that by itself would not prevent a court
from finding an accused guilty if there is otherwise acceptable evidence
in support of the conviction. The Hon'ble Supreme Court has upheld
this mandate of law in several judgments, including in the case reported
as State v. Ram Prasad Misra & anr., III (1996) CCR 115 (SC), where
the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed as follows:
“The evidence of a hostile witness would not
be totally rejected if spoken in favour of the
prosecution or the accused, but can be
subjected to close scrutiny and for portion of
the evidence which is consistent with the case
of the prosecution or defence may be accepted.
The fact that the hostile witnesses having given
the statements about the facts within their
special knowledge under section 161 Cr.P.C.
recorded during investigation, have resiled
from correctness of the versions in the
statements without giving any reason as why
the IO could record statements contrary to what
they had disclosed shows that they had no
regard for the truth, they fabricated evidence in
their cross examination to hold the accused
which did not find place in their section 161
statement.”

Crl. A.11/2007

Page 30 of 52

The trial court came to the conclusion that it is apparent that these
witnesses told a blatant lie. Having supported the case of complainant
before the court of Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi, these witnesses
clearly turned around. At the same time, it is equally true that nothing
came out in cross examination of these witnesses to belie their earlier
depositions except their flat refusal. Thus, the trial court held rightly
that even if these witnesses have turned hostile there is sufficient
material to establish the guilt of the accused.
We also cannot lose sight of the fact that the appellant in the
present appeal and the other connected appeals were police personnel of
the area who wielded considerable power particularly in the locality of
Vivek Vihar where the habitation of the deceased was. It is not unusual
in such a situation for the witnesses to turn hostile particularly when this
case has taken a tortuous and time consuming route and the date of the

Crl. A.11/2007

Page 31 of 52

incident was 24th August 1987 and the testimony of the prosecution
witnesses was recorded in the year 2004. With the passage of time
many witnesses would have been too tired out so as to have the
consistent courage to undertake to depose against the local police force.
In our view also even if witnesses have turned hostile, there is
sufficient material on record to establish the guilt of the appellant in the
case. It is clearly evident from the relevant portions of testimonies of
PW 8 HC Narender Kumar, PW 9 Rajkali and PW 38 HC Manoj Kumar
that the appellant is guilty and any witness turning hostile does not
detract from the essential case set up by the prosecution.
11.

In so far as motive of the crime is concerned, it is evident that the

incident of the Janmashtmi day, i.e., 16th August 1987, where Constable
Rishi Pal who was one of the policemen attached to the Vivek Vihar
police station, was stabbed by Ram Kumar who was the friend and

Crl. A.11/2007

Page 32 of 52

accomplice of the deceased Mahender Kumar has a pivotal bearing.
The prosecution has successfully established that as a sequel of the
stabbing of the Rishi Pal, the police force attached to the Vivek Vihar
police station of which accused Inspector R. P. Tyagi was the SHO, had
launched the full scale offensive to trace out Mahender and Ram
Kumar. Evidence of the witnesses PW 2 Satish Aggarwal, PW 4
Chiranji Lal, PW 9 Rajkali, PW 10 Rakesh Kumar, PW 11 Govind Ram,
PW12, Rajinder Prasad, PW 13 Manohar Lal, PW 14, Prem Wati, PW
15 Anil Kumar, PW 16 Neetu, PW 17 Alah Ram, PW 18 Pappu, PW 19
Krishna, PW 20 Sondai, PW 21 Subash, PW 22 Harpal Singh, PW 31
Om Wati, PW 33 Sukhbiri, who were all relatives and friends of
deceased Mahender, who deposed about their detention and the police
inquiries and atrocities to trace the whereabouts of the missing duo Ram
Kumar and Mahender clearly indicates that there was ample proof of the
involvement of police force of Vivek Vihar police station, who were
Crl. A.11/2007

Page 33 of 52

deeply incensed about the temerity of Mahender and Ram Kumar in
having caused an injury to one of their own brethren. The anger of the
police force was further fuelled by the fact that for about 8 days
Mahender and Ram Kumar had managed to cock a snook at the police
and evade apprehension. The desperation of the police to trace out the
missing duo has been testified to by PW 2 Satish Aggarwal, PW 4
Chiranji Lal, PW 9 Raj Kali, PW 10 Rakesh Kumar, PW 11 Govind
Ram, PW 12 Rajinder Kumar, PW 13 Manohar Lal, PW 14 Prem Wati,
PW 16 Neetu, PW 17 Alah Ram, PW 18 Pappu, PW 19 Krishna, PW 20
Sondai, PW 21 Subash, PW 31 Om Wati and PW 34 Jamman Lal, whose
testimonies are worthy of belief, particularly when it received
corroboration by the evidence of two witnesses, i.e., PW 8 HC Narender
and PW 38 HC Manoj Kumar. Thus, we have no doubt that the motive
in the incident of beating of Mahender and Ram Kumar was fully
established by the prosecution beyond doubt.
Crl. A.11/2007

Page 34 of 52

12.

It is also the plea of the learned counsel for the appellant

that the appellant being a public servant is entitled to protection of
Section 197 Cr.P.C. which requires the sanction of the government for
the offences alleged to have been committed by him which acting or
purporting to act in discharge of his official duty. The learned
Magistrate by taking cognizance of such offence erred in law and
vitiated the whole process of trial.
All these issues were considered in detail at the time of initiation
of trial and by summoning order dated 7th April 2001 wherein the
learned Additional Sessions Judge KKD Courts, held as follows:
“In the present case, the accused persons who are
public servants cannot at all claim that what they
did was by virtue of their office. It is no argument
that without being in office they would not have
committed the offence alleged against them. As
already observed, it is no part of official duty to
commit offence as defined under the IPC or any
other law including the Prevention of Corruption
Act wherein Section 197 Cr.P.C. has been held to

Crl. A.11/2007

Page 35 of 52

be not at all applicable. The specific actions
alleged against the accused persons are categorized
in the summoning orders which are altogether
outside the scope of official duties of the accused
persons which no reasonable man would deem to
commit under the color of that office. The
reasonable approach has to be taken in the facts and
circumstances of the case and that reasonable and
prudent approach goes against the accused persons.
To my mind even the use of filthy language and
abuses are not connected with the discharge of
official duties what to talk of custodial death,
wrongful confinement, making wrong entries,
acting upon wrong entries so as to create a net to
save the accused persons in connivance with each
other.”

In our view it was rightly held by the trial court that no such
sanction was called for in this case as actions alleged against the accused
persons were not in discharge of their official duties and that proceeding
of learned Metropolitan Magistrate in holding inquiry under Section 202
Cr.P.C. was also not illegal in any way. The specific actions alleged
against the accused persons which are categorized in the summoning
orders are altogether outside the scope of official duties of the accused

Crl. A.11/2007

Page 36 of 52

persons which no reasonable man would deem to commit under the
color of his official duties. By no stretch of human imagination the acts
of Custodial torture which results in death can be said to be falling
under the scope of 'official duties' and therefore in our view also,
prosecution of the appellant as in the present case does not require any
sanction from higher authority.
13.

In our view the reliance by the counsel for the accused on

the decision of the Bench of three Hon'ble Judges of the Supreme Court
in Sankaran Moitra vs. Sadhna Das and Anr., (2006) 4 SCC 584 is not
warranted. Paragraph 17 of the said judgment of the majority view
reads as follows:“17. The High Court has stated that killing of a
person by use of excessive force could never
be performance of duty. It may be correct so
far as it goes. But the question is whether that
act was done in the performance of duty or in
purported performance of duty. If it was done
in performance of duty or purported

Crl. A.11/2007

Page 37 of 52

performance of duty Section 197(1) of the
Code cannot be by-passed by reasoning that
killing a man could never be done in an official
capacity and consequently Section 197(1) of
the Code could not be attracted. Such a
reasoning would be against the ratio of the
decisions of this Court referred to earlier. The
other reason given by the High Court that if the
High Court were to interfere on the ground of
want of sanction, people will lose faith in the
judicial process, cannot also be a ground to
dispense with a statutory requirement or
protection. Public trust in the institution can be
maintained by entertaining causes coming
within its jurisdiction, by performing the duties
entrusted to it diligently, in accordance with
law and the established procedure and without
delay. Dispensing with of jurisdictional or
statutory requirements which may ultimately
affect the adjudication itself, will itself result in
people losing faith in the system. So, the
reason in that behalf given by the High Court
cannot be sufficient to enable it to get over the
jurisdictional requirement of a sanction under
Section 197(1) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure. We are therefore satisfied that the
High Court was in error in holding that
sanction under Section 197(1) was not needed
in this case. We hold that such sanction was
necessary and for want of sanction the
prosecution must be quashed at this stage. It is
not for us now to answer the submission of
learned counsel for the complainant that this is
an eminently fit case for grant of such
Crl. A.11/2007

Page 38 of 52

sanction.”

In our view the above judgment is inapplicable because it is the
case of the defence that the beatings were not administered by the police
and were administered by the members of the public at the incident
which took place at 1.30 PM on 24th August, 1987 owing to a public
outrage and violent reaction arising from the misbehaviour by the
deceased Mohinder and Ram Kumar. It is not the case of the defence
that the injuries were caused by the accused while doing their duties as a
police officer. The plea on facts by the accused is that the deceased
Mahender and Ram Kumar had been beaten up by the members of the
public and police had absolutely no role in it. Once such a plea is taken
by the defence, reliance on Section 197 Cr.P.C. is not justified as it is
not even the defence's case that the injuries were caused to the deceased
during the performance of official duties by the accused. In fact, the
accused's case is of outright denial of the occurrence of the incident of
Crl. A.11/2007

Page 39 of 52

beating in the police station. It is another matter that we have found that
such a case set up by the defence is absolutely unworthy of belief but
nevertheless in judging the applicability of Section 197 Cr.P.C., the plea
of the defence as to in what manner was the act complained of done and
performed as part of official duty becomes relevant. In the present case
the accused not having taken a stand that the injuries were caused during
the course of the performance of the official duties by the accused, the
reliance on Section 197 Cr.P.C. cannot be permitted to be raised.
Even assuming that the plea of Section197 was applicable to
the accused, we may also notice the judgment of the Constitution Bench
Judgement of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in K. Satwant Singh vs. The
State of Punjab, AIR 1960 SC 266, which does not appear to have been
brought to the notice of the Three Judge Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court hearing Shankaran Moitra's case (supra). The relevant portion of

Crl. A.11/2007

Page 40 of 52

law laid down by the Constitution Bench in so far as relates to Section
197 Cr.P.C. reads as follows:“16. Under S. 197 no Court shall take
cognizance of an offence committed by a
public servant who is removable from his
office by the Governor-General-in-Council or
a Provincial Government, save upon a
sanction by one or the other as the case may
be, when such offence is committed by him
while acting or purporting to act in the
discharge of his official duty. Henderson was
charged with intentionally aiding the appellant
in the commission of an offence punishable
under s. 420 of the Indian Penal Code by
falsely stating as a fact, in his reports that the
appellant's claims were true and that statement
had been made knowing all the while that the
claims in question were false and fraudulent
and that he had accordingly committed an
offence under S. 420/109, Indian Penal Code.
It appears to us to be clear that some offences
cannot by their very nature be regarded as
having been committed by public servants
while acting or purporting to act in the
discharge of their official duty. For instance,
acceptance of a bribe, an offence punishable
under S. 161 of the Indian Penal Code, is one
of them and offence of cheating or abetment
thereof is another. We have no hesitation in
saying that where a public servant commits the
offence of cheating or abets another so to
Crl. A.11/2007

Page 41 of 52

cheat, the offence committed by him is not one
while he is acting or purporting to act in the
discharge of his official duty, as such offences
have no necessary connection between them
and the performance of the duties of a public
servant, the official status furnishing only the
occasion or opportunity for the commission of
the offences (vide Amrik Singh's case). The
Act of cheating or abetment thereof has no
reasonable connection with the discharge of
official duty. The act must bear such relation
to the duty that the public servant could lay a
reasonable but not a pretended or fanciful
claim, that he did it in the course of the
performance of his duty (Vide Matajog
Dobey's case).”

In any event, therefore, the position of law would be governed by
the above judgment of the Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court and consequently the plea of the accused that Section197 bars the
prosecution of the accused can not be sustained.
14.

Section 197 of the Code of the Criminal Procedure (Act V

of 1898) reads as under:
“197. (1)Prosecution of Judges and public
servants – When an person who is a Judge
Crl. A.11/2007

Page 42 of 52

within the meaning of section 19 of the Indian
Penal Code, or when any Magistrate or when
any public servant who is not removable from
his office save by or with the sanction of a
(Provincial Government) or the (Central
Government), is accused of any offence
alleged to have been committed by him while
acting or purporting to act in the discharge of
his official duty, no Court shall take
cognizance of such offence except with the
previous sanction(a)
in the case of a person employed in
connection with the affairs of the (Dominion),
of the Governor-General exercising his
individual judgment, and
(b)
in the case of a person employed in
connection with the affairs of a Province, of
the Governor of that Province exercising his
individual judgment.)”

A comparison of Section 197 as defined under Code of Criminal
Procedure (Act 5 of 1898) and as defined under the Code of Criminal
Procedure 1973 leads to the conclusion that the genesis of the section is
the same though there are very minute changes. In light of the above,
the law laid down in Satwant Singh's case (supra) is of considerable
significance. Therefore, the findings in the impugned judgment of the

Crl. A.11/2007

Page 43 of 52

trial Court on the inapplicability of Section 197 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure when viewed in the light of the law laid down in Satwant
Singh's case (supra) thus, becomes sustainable.
15.

The learned counsel for the appellant has contended that the

evidence tendered by the defence witnesses has been disregarded by the
trial court without giving any justifiable reason. Since such evidence
was to the effect that the incident took place at 1.30 pm at Surajmal
Park, we have perused the entries in the police records and found that
the said incident could not have occurred particularly in view of the
evidence of two police witnesses PW 8 Narender Kumar and PW 38
Manoj Kumar themselves. Since we have recorded a finding as to the
fact that no such incident took place at 1.30 pm at Surajmal Park, as the
deceased was already in the custody of police at 7.30 am, the testimony
of the defence witnesses at the occurrence of incident at 1.30 pm cannot
be given any weight.
Crl. A.11/2007

Page 44 of 52

16.

In our view, once the prosecution has been able to prove the fact

that the story built up by the defence is concocted and based on false
predications, any subsequent act done by any person to cover up the act
of torture and beating administered to Mahender and Ram Kumar by the
police officers of Police Station Vivek Vihar is also concocted and based
on false predications. There cannot be any other finding except that the
appellant SI Tej Singh Verma in order to cover up the torture and
beatings meted out to Mahender and Ram Kuamr fabricated documents
such as personal search memo, disclosure statements purporting to be
made by Mahender Kumar and Ram Kumar, seizure memo of knife,
sketch of knife and personal search memo of Ram Kumar. Once the
prosecution has been able to prove beyond any reasonable doubt that the
story built by the defence about the incident alleged to have occurred in
the Surajmal Park in the afternoon is false as the accused were already in
custody of the Vivek Vihar police station in the morning. The whole
Crl. A.11/2007

Page 45 of 52

story built up by the defence is completely concocted and based on false
premises, there is no element of doubt that the appellant fabricated the
aforesaid documents so as to wrongly show that Ram Kumar and
Mahender were present in Surajmal Park, at 2.05 pm.

The appellant

SI Tej Singh Verma was the Investigating Officer in case FIR
No.294/87. He had himself prepared all the documents such as personal
search memo, disclosure statements purporting to be made by Mahender
Kumar and Ram Kumar, seizure memo of knife, sketch of knife and
personal search memo of Ram Kumar. It was also admitted by him in
his statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. that he prepared all these
documents. The prosecution has been able to prove beyond any
reasonable doubt that the story built up by the accused is false and
concocted, and the natural corollary of it is that Mahender and Ram
Kumar appeared in the Police Station on their own in the morning at
about 7.45 a.m., and were not arrested from Surajmal Park, at 2:05 in the
Crl. A.11/2007

Page 46 of 52

afternoon and all documents prepared by the appellant to demonstrate
the incident and arrest of the deceased Mahender Kumar and Ram
Kumar at 2:00 pm at Surajmal Park, are forged and prepared by the
appellant so as to support the false plea of the public beatings
administered to the deceased Mahender Kumar and Ram Kumar.
17.

The trial court convicted the appellant Tej Singh under Section

201 and 218 of the Indian Penal Code.
Sections 201 and 218 read as follows:
“201. Causing disappearance of evidence of
offence, or giving false information to screen
offender. - Whoever knowing or having reason to
believe that an offence has been committed,
causes any evidence of the commission of that
offence to disappear, with the intention of
screening the offender from legal punishment or
with that intention gives any information
respecting the offence which he knows or believes
to be false.
If a capital offence – if the offence which
he knows or believes to have been committed is
punishable with death, be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term
Crl. A.11/2007

Page 47 of 52

which may extend to seven years, and shall also
be liable to fine.
If punishable with imprisonment for life –
and if the offence is punishable with
imprisonment for life or with imprisonment which
may extend to ten years, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three years, and shall also be
liable to fine.

If punishable with less than ten
imprisonment – and if the offence is punishable
with imprisonment for any term not extending to
ten years, shall be punished with imprisonment of
the description provided for the offence, for a term
which may extend to one-fourth part of the longest
term of the imprisonment provided for the
offence, or with fine, or with both.

218. Public servant framing incorrect record
or writing with intent to save person from
punishment or property from forfeiture Whoever, being a public servant, and being as
such public servant, charged with the preparation
of any record or other writing, frames that record
or writing in a manner which he knows to be
incorrect, with intent to cause, or knowing it to be
likely that he will thereby cause, loss or injury to
the public or to any person, or with intent thereby
to save, or knowing it to be likely that he will
thereby save, any person from legal punishment,
or with intent to save, or knowing that he is likely
Crl. A.11/2007

Page 48 of 52

thereby to save, any property from forfeiture or
other charge to which it is liable by law, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years, or
with fine, or with both.
(emphasis supplied)”

In our view the trial court rightly convicted the appellant under
Section 218 of the Indian Penal Code but erred in convicting the
appellant under Section 201 of the Indian Penal Code.

The appellant

did not cause any evidence of the commission of the offence to
disappear but only prepared false documents such as personal search
memo, disclosure statements purporting to be made by Mahender
Kumar and Ram Kumar, seizure memo of knife, sketch of knife and
personal search memo of Ram Kumar. There is no evidence on record
to show that the appellant caused disappearance of evidence of the
offence with the intention of screening the offender from legal
punishment.

Crl. A.11/2007

Page 49 of 52

In our view, it is proved beyond any reasonable doubt that none
of the aforementioned persons were arrested from Surajmal Park. The
appellant SI Tej Singh Verma is hence only guilty of the offence of
preparing false documents such as personal search memo, disclosure
statements purporting to be made by Mahender Kumar and Ram Kumar,
seizure memo of knife, sketch of knife and personal search memo of
Ram Kumar in spite of knowing that by doing so, he will save his
colleagues in Vivek Vihar police station, from legal punishment and
with that intention gave information about the offence which he knew to
be false. The appellant is thus held guilty of the offence punishable
under Section 218 of the Indian Penal Code and the judgment of the trial
court in so far it convicts the appellant under Section 218 IPC is
affirmed.

However, it is also to be seen that the appellant was just

working and following the directions of his superior officers.

Crl. A.11/2007

Page 50 of 52

18.

In view of the above position of law, the appellant being

Investigating officer of the case FIR No.294/1987, in our view, is liable
for conviction under Section 218 of the Indian Penal Code. It is also to
be seen that the deeds of the appellant were exposed by none other than
his own colleagues in the police department, PW 8 Narender and PW 38
Manoj Kumar and further corroborated by the testimony of PW 9
Rajkali, the mother of the deceased Mahender.

Accordingly, the

judgment delivered by the learned Additional Sessions Judge vide SC
No.01/2006 convicting the appellant under Section 218 is affirmed as
observed by us in the aforementioned paras of this judgment and the
appellant is convicted under Section 218 IPC and sentenced to six
months imprisonment and to pay a fine of Rs.5000/-. But the conviction
under Section 201 of the IPC sentencing the appellant for three years

Crl. A.11/2007

Page 51 of 52

rigorous imprisonment and to pay a fine of Rs.10,000/- cannot be
sustained and the same is set aside.
19.

With the above observations and directions, the appeal is partly

allowed and stands disposed of.
(MUKUL MUDGAL)
JUDGE

(P.K. BHASIN)
JUDGE
March 05, 2008
dr/sk

Crl. A.11/2007

Page 52 of 52

