*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Death Sentence Reference No.01/2007
Reserved on: 20th August, 2007
Date of Decision : 05th March, 2008

STATE

....Petitioner
Through :Mr. Sunil Sharma, APP for
the State.
Mr. J. P. Dhanda, Adv. for
the complainant.
Versus

R.P. TYAGI

....Respondent
Through : Mr. R. N. Sharma, Adv.
With
Crl.Appeal No.38/2007

R.P. TYAGI

....Appellant
Through : Mr. R. N. Sharma, Adv.
versus

STATE & ANR.

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

....Respondent
Through : Mr. Sunil Sharma, APP for
the State.
Mr. J. P. Dhanda, Adv. for
complainant.

page1 of173

* CORAM:

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MUKUL MUDGAL
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K. BHASIN
1.
2.
3.

Whether the Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment?
Yes
To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
Yes

%

JUDGMENT
05-03-2008

: MUKUL MUDGAL, J.

1.

Death Reference 01/2007 arises out of the impugned judgment dated

13th December, 2006 delivered by the learned Additional Sessions Judge,
Karkardooma Courts, Delhi, by which the accused R.P. Tyagi posted as the
SHO at the relevant time, was convicted under Sections 302/342/120-B IPC.
Further, by his order dated 15th December, 2006 accused R.P. Tyagi was
sentenced to death.

2.

The Death Reference and the Appeal of the convicted accused R.P.

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page2 of173

Tyagi were taken up together for hearing and after hearing Mr. Sunil Sharma,
Additional Public Prosecutor for the State and Mr. R. N. Sharma, the learned
counsel for the accused, both the matters are now to be governed by this
common judgment.

3.

In order to appreciate the arguments advanced by the learned

counsel for the appellant and the learned counsel for the State, it is necessary
to notice at the outset the main evidence relied upon by the prosecution and
accepted by the learned trial court for convicting the appellant. Then we would
ourselves analyze and assess the worth of that evidence for satisfying
ourselves whether the prosecution has been able to prove its case beyond
reasonable doubt or not, since it was held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
State of Tamil Nadu v. Rajendran (1999)8 SCC 679 that when a Death
Reference is made by a court to the High Court for confirmation the High
Court has to satisfy itself whether a case beyond reasonable doubt has been
made out against the accused for imposition of the extreme penalty of death

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page3 of173

and for that the proceedings require a re-appraisal and reassessment of the
entire facts and law so as to arrive at its independent conclusion.

In an earlier case also reported as Jumman and Ors. v. State of U.P.
(1991)1 SCC 752, it was held by Hon'ble Supreme Court while dealing with a
death penalty case as under:

"12.
In fact the proceedings before the High
Court are a reappraisal and the reassessment of the
entire facts and law in order that the High Court should
be satisfied on the materials about the guilt or
innocence of the accused persons. Such being the case,
it is the duty of the High Court to consider the
proceedings in all their aspects and come to an
independent conclusion on the materials apart from the
view expressed by the Sessions Judge. In so doing, the
High Court will be assisted by the opinion expressed by
the Sessions Judge, but under the provisions of the law
above-mentioned it is for the High Court to come to an
independent conclusion of its own.”

4.

The brief facts of the case as per the prosecution sans unnecessary

details are as follows:

a)

On 16th August 1987, it was the Janmasthmi festival, when constable

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page4 of173

Rishi Pal, posted at police station Vivek Vihar, was deputed at Police post
Chota Bazar, Shahdara Delhi.

b)

At about 9.20 pm someone told Rishi Pal about two anti-social persons

who were extorting money at the point of knife at Circular Road, Shahdara,
Delhi, who thereinafter went to the spot.

c)

Subsequently, information was received in the police station Vivek

Vihar that constable Rishi Pal had been stabbed by two persons and,
consequently, the police rushed to the spot.

d)

The police recorded the statement of constable Narender and on the

basis of his statement, FIR No.294/87 under Sections 307/353/186 IPC was
recorded at Police Station Vivek Vihar. It was revealed that constable Rishi
Pal was stabbed by Mahender Kumar and Ram Kumar, both of whom had fled
from the spot and were absconding.

e)

The Police launched a manhunt to trace the culprits but they did not find

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page5 of173

them in and around the locality. The police officers, in the rage of anger,
picked up family members and neighbours of Mahender Kumar and Ram
Kumar and confined them at the Police Station Vivek Vihar. The family
members and neighbours were harassed and beaten and were asked to produce
the absconding duo Mahender Kumar and Ram Kumar.

f)

Ultimately on 24th August 1987 at 7.45 am (approximately), both Ram

Kumar and Mahender Kumar were produced in the Police Station Vivek Vihar
and, consequently, their family members and neighbours were let off.

g)

The Police subjected Mahender and Ram Kumar to severe beatings and

showed their arrest at 2.00 pm though they were produced in the Police station
at 7.45 am on 24th August 1987.

h)

On account of the beatings, Ram Kumar and Mahender sustained

grievous injuries and were taken to Swami Dayanand Hospital, Shahdara,
where they were examined by Dr. A. K. Verma, and seeing the serious

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page6 of173

condition of Mahender, he was referred to Lok Nayak Jai Prakash Narain
Hospital (hereinafter referred to as the “LNJPN Hospital”).

i)

On 25th August 1987, Mahender died in LNJPN Hospital on account of

injuries sustained by him due to the beatings given by the police.

j)

Shri S.S. Rathore SDM conducted inquest proceedings and after

recording the statement of witnesses, recommended registration of a case
against police officials of police station Vivek Vihar for offence under Section
304 IPC. Despite this order, no case was registered. Shri S.S. Rathore was
then subsequently transferred from the post of SDM.

k)

Another SDM, namely, Shri Parimal Rai then conducted further inquest

proceedings and submitted his report, in which he gave a finding that Ram
Kumar and Mahender were subjected to beatings by members of public which
resulted in the death of Mahender.

l)

Ultimately, due to pressure and upon an order of the Lieutinent

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page7 of173

Governor of Delhi, a case bearing No.59/1988 for an offence punishable under
Section 304/34 IPC was registered on 11th February 1988.

m)

This case after investigation was sent to the concerned Metropolitan

Magistrate, Karkardooma Court, as “Untraced”. The request of ACP, Gandhi
Nagar, to close the investigation in this regard was accepted by the then
Metropolitan Magistrate Shri Z.S. Lohat by his order dated 7th July 1989. He
further affirmed his order on an application moved by Ram Kumar on 8th July
1989.

n)

Finding no alternative, Shri Tika Ram, father of the deceased Mahender,

preferred to file a complaint case in the court of learned Metropolitan
Magistrate and the present appeal is occasioned by the order of conviction
recorded subsequently.

o)

The Metropolitan Magistrate, Karkardooma Court, Delhi, found a prima

facie case against the accused R. P. Tyagi under Sections 302 / 34/ 120B/ 325/

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page8 of173

323/ 342/ 343/ 167/ 201/ 217/ 218 IPC and Section 124 of the Delhi Police
Act, Sub Inspector Tej Singh under Sections 323/ 342/ 343/ 167/ 201/ 218/
219/ 120/ 211/ 109/ 114/ 120B/ IPC, Inspector K. P. Singh under Sections 167/
201/ 217/ 218/ 119/ 120/ 211/ 109/ 120-B IPC and Section 120 of the Delhi
Police Act.

p)

The learned Additional Sessions Judge convicted the accused R.P.

Tyagi under Sections 302/342/120-B IPC, K.P. Singh under Section 217 IPC
and Tej Singh under Sections 218/201 IPC.

q)

The convict R. P. Tyagi was awarded death sentence as per the

judgment and order dated 13th December, 2006 passed by the learned
Additional Sessions Judge in the trial court.

5.

The prosecution in order to establish its case examined the following 48

witnesses-:

1A.

PW1 S.S. Rathore deposed that he was assigned with the inquest

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page9 of173

proceedings by a letter on 25th August 1982. He went to LNJP hospital the
same day but did not conduct the proceedings as the relatives of the deceased
were not available. He further deposed that on the morning of 26th August
1987, he recorded the statements of Raj Kali, Manohar Lal, Kishan Chand,
Rajinder Prasad, Prem Wati, Ram Kumar, Tika Ram and Rakesh. After
recording the statements he examined the dead body of Mahender Kumar and
prepared the death report which is marked as Ex.PW1/K. Thereafter, he
ordered for the registration of the case. He allowed the photographs of the
dead body to be taken in his presence. He further deposed that there were
signs and marks of beatings over the entire body including soles of feet. He
deposed that he was thereafter transferred for a new posting.

On being cross examined by the counsel for the accused K.P. Singh,
he confirmed that he had made the order of registration of the case without
going through the post mortem report because the case was prima facie made
on the basis of the death report prepared by him.

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page10 of173

(i)

He said that it was wrong to suggest that he had deliberately not

collected the post mortem report before sending his order for the registration
of the case.

(ii)

He further stated that while making an order of the registration of

the case after conducting enquiry under Section 176 Cr.P.C. at the preliminary
stage, the complaint of the aggrieved person and the prima facie facts are
looked into and the police is directed to register the case and further
investigate the matter.

(iii)

He stated that the endorsement of ADM Headquarter, which is

marked as Ex.PW1/M, was not completely visible and it was partly torn, and a
document marked as Ex.PW1/A is supported by pasting a paper on its back
side. The SHO, Shahdara, Mr. Qamar Ahmed, DCP(East) and DCP (Crime
and Railways) did not approach him before his transfer on 28th August 1987
for handing over of the inquest papers.

On being cross examined by the learned counsel for the accused
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page11 of173

R.P.Tyagi:

(i)

He said that the request which is marked as EX.PW1/D.B for the post
mortem was in his hand writing.

(ii)

He further said that Ex.PW1/D-A was his interim report on the basis of
which the order for registration of the case was made by him.

(iii)

He stated that it was wrong to suggest that he conducted a one sided
enquiry in this case and that he was not competent to order for the
registration of the case.

(iv)

He said that it was further wrong to suggest that Ex.PW1/M was made
by him in a haste and at the instance of local politicians. He said that
he did not notice any mental or physical abnormalities in the witnesses
whose statements were recorded by him.

2A.

PW2 Satish Aggarwal deposed that he was a member of MCD from

Shahdara in 1987. In August 1987, he made a telephone call to the SHO of PS

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page12 of173

Vivek Vihar Chowki, Farsh Bazar in the morning hours. He could not
recollect as to what had he said to the SHO or what was the response of the
SHO. However, he deposed that the SHO had told him at that time that a
compromise had been arrived at.

On being cross examined by the counsel for the accused Shri. K. P.
Singh:

(i)

He admitted that initially he had a very good memory but for the last 5-

6 years he was suffering from 'Sugar' and as such his memory had gone down.

(ii)

He further said that he had spoken with the SHO, Police Station Vivek

Vihar, and that it was possible that Ram Kumar and Mahender might have
been in the police post, Farsh Bazar, when he had spoken with the SHO.

On being cross examined by the counsel for accused R. P. Tyagi, he
said that:

(i)

It was wrong to suggest that he had not spoken with the SHO on that

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page13 of173

particular day at any point of time or that phone call was made by him to the
police station on being asked to do so by Chiranji Lal.

3A.

PW3 Jaswant deposed that about 17 to 18 years back at about 7:30 am

when he was returning after answering the call of nature from the side of the
railway station, he saw Mahender, Manohar and Kishan. He could not
overhear what they were talking. Thereafter, he came back home and went on
his duty.

On being cross examined by the

learned Additional Public

Prosecutor, PW 3 said that:

(i)

It was correct that on 24th August 1987 at about 7:30 am, when he was

coming after answering the call of nature along with Rajender he saw
Manohar, Rajender, Kishan all brothers of Mahender and Mahender standing
near the railway line.

On being cross examined by the counsel for accused R.P. Tyagi, he

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page14 of173

said that:

(i) It was incorrect to suggest that he had not seen Rajender, Manohar, Kishan
and Mahender talking to each other at any point of time anywhere as deposed.

4A.

PW 4

Chiranji Lal stated that he knew Tika Ram who was resident

of his mohalla. On 24th August 1987 at about 8-8:15 am 4-5 mohalla people
came to his residence and told him that Tika Ram and others who had been
detained had been released from the police station. He stated that on hearing
this he went to Satish Aggarwal who was a Nigam Parshad and asked him to
make a telephone call in police station Vivek Vihar. On his asking, Satish
Aggarwal made the telephone call and told him that he had called the police
officer and the boys apprehended would be released after 1-1 ½ hours. He
further stated that thereafter he came to know that Ram Kumar and Mahender
have been taken to the General Hospital, and from that hospital, they were
further sent to Irwin hospital. He stated that he did not know anything more
about the case and admitted that statement which is marked as Ex.PW4/A bore
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page15 of173

his signatures at Point 1. However, he did not recollect as to where this
statement was made by him.

On being cross examined by the learned Additional Public
Prosecutor he said that:

(i)

On 24th August 1987 at about 8:30 am, a lot of people were coming to

the house of the complainant Tika Ram after he was released from the police
station to see his condition as he had been beaten up by the police in the police
station.

5A.

PW 5 Amit Kumar stated that in the year 1987 he was working as a

photographer in the shop of Gulshan which was being run in the name and
style of M/s Gulshan Studio, Shop No.15, Gandhi Market, Minto Road, Delhi.
He recognized the Cash Memo which is marked as Ex.PW5/A as to have been
prepared by him. He stated that he had seen the photograph which is marked
as Ex.PW5/B-1 to B-14 as been taken by him in LNJPN Hospital. He further
stated that he had also seen photographs which is marked as Ex.PW 5/B-15 to
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page16 of173

B-27 and admitted as having been taken by him only.

6A.

PW 6 Dr. S. Patnaik Director of Hospital Administration, MCD, Delhi,

stated that where a Medico Legal Case (hereinafter referred to as MLC)
comes, the history of the case is given by the patient himself or by the person
accompanying him and if the patient is not able to speak the history it is then
written in the MLC by the doctor who prepares the MLC. He stated that he
had seen the MLC of Mahender, son of Tika Ram, which could be in the hand
writing of Dr. A. K. Verma by whom it was signed and who was the Casualty
Medical Officer, in SDN Hospital, Shahdara, Delhi. He stated that the
signatures at Point A-1 could be that of Dr. A.K. Verma on MLC which is
marked as Ex.PW5/A but he could not say that definitely. He further stated
that he was a Medical Superintendent in SDN hospital in 1987 and the Dr. A.
K. Verma was junior to him.

On being cross-examined by the learned APP, he said that:

(i)

The Certificate of the doctor’s handwriting cannot be certified by him

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page17 of173

but it is only presumed that 10 years back when he had given the statement, he
had given it on the basis of his knowledge and of the record available at that
time.

(ii)

He further stated that it was wrong to suggest that he was deliberately

not giving specific reply pertaining to aforesaid questions in order to save the
accused.

(iii)

He stated that Dr. A.K. Verma had worked with him for about nine

years and said that it was correct that he had told before the learned MM in his
statement Ex. PW6/B that he had brought the office record of MLC No.9879
dated 24th August 1987 which was in respect of Mahender Kumar, s/o Tika
Ram, aged 25 years and which was brought by Constable Rattan Lal on the
same day at 4.35 PM.

(iv)

He stated that in the MLC, Dr. A.K. Verma had mentioned as many as

13 injuries which were blunt and the doctor had also mentioned “patient under
sedation, and not fit for statement”. He further states that treatment had been
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page18 of173

mentioned in the MLC.

(v)

He further said that he had stated before the learned MM in his

statement that the reason of causing the injuries in MLC and application were
one and the same. 43 injuries had been recorded in post-mortem report which
is marked as Ex. CW21/A whereas 13 injuries had been mentioned in the
MLC.

(vi)

He further stated that he had seen the photocopy of CMO Register

which is marked as Ex. CW-18/B, of SDN Hospital in which serial No.2200 of
Mahender, 25 years pertaining to MLC No.9879 was mentioned.

(i)

It is correct that when a patient is sent by police, a statement of injuries

is sent along with the patient and that the said injury statement is shown to the
examining doctor who signs or initials it as a token of having seen the same.

(ii)

He stated that the injury statement marked as Exh. 6/A-3 did not bear

the signatures of Dr. A.K. Verma or of any other doctor.

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page19 of173

(iii)

He further stated that by transferring the patient to LNJP

Hospital, Dr. Verma had certainly subjected his examination of injuries as
shown in the MLC which is marked as Ex. PW6/A to the opinion and
examination of other doctors in LNJP Hospital. In such circumstances, Dr.
A.K. Verma had absolutely no chance to conceal injuries on the patient at the
time of his examination.

(iv)

He stated that Mark 6/A-1 was the casualty card which had been

prepared by Dr. A.K. Verma when he had transferred the patient to LNJP
Hospital. This card mention the treatment and the medicines given to the
patient and this prescription of the treatment fulfilled the requirement of
mentioning treatment and medicines at the time of his examination in the
casualty of SDN Hospital.

(v)

He further stated that it was possible that when a patient came with

multiple injuries and was crying in pain, then some injuries might escape the
notice of the doctor. The examination of the dead body at the time of post-

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page20 of173

mortem would be easier than a clinical examination of the patient when he is
alive. In-depth injuries can be found and noted in the dead body more easily
than in the live patient.

(vi)

He further stated that the possibility could not be ruled out that the

patient had suffered further abrasions after examination by Dr. A.K. Verma if
he was transported or made to travel in a jeep for 1 ½ hour.

(vii)

He further stated that the post-mortem report Mark 6/A showed that

most of the injuries were bruises. At the time of examination, that may have
been generalized swellings of a part of the body because of freshness of the
injuries. Subsequently, there may be more number of bruises due to internal
oozing of blood. In order to find out the correct position of bruises, it is
desirable to have a second examination or a day to day examination after
initial examination. He further stated that it is correct that there may be
bruises which may show up externally even after death due to extra vacation of
blood fluid.

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page21 of173

(viii) He also stated that after seeing MLC which is marked as Ex.PW6/A and
post-mortem which is marked as Ex.PW6/A2 injury No.1 of MLC almost
covered injury numbers 24, 25, 26 and 27 of the post-mortem report and that
injury No.6 almost covers injury numbers 37, 38 and 39 of the post-mortem
report.

7A.

PW 7 Rajinder, son of Tika Ram, the complainant, had initially

supported the prosecution case in his testimony. However, he was later
declared hostile.

8A.

PW 8 HC Narender Singh stated that he was posted as beat constable in

Police Post Anaj Mandi, of the police station Vivek Vihar on 24th August 1987
and he had gone to the Police Station at 8:00 AM to attend a meeting. He
found all the officers including SHO R.P. Tyagi, SI Tej Singh, SI Mukesh
Kumar, Constable Rattan Lal and Constable Kunwar Pal, Constable Vijender,
present there. He further stated that on 24th August 1987, SHO R.P. Tyagi had
directed him to take the summons of SI Tej Singh to the Court of Mrs. Anu
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page22 of173

Prem Shankar Kapoor, Tis Hazari Court. Accordingly, he went to Tiz Hazari
court after making his departure entry in the Roznamcha in Police Post Anaj
Mandi he submitted the request on summons in the aforesaid court.
Thereafter, he went back to Police Police Anaj Mandi at 2:00 pm. He stated
that he did not go along with the raiding party and that no one was arrested in
his presence.

On being cross examined by the learned counsel for the accused Tej
Singh, PW 8 stated that it was wrong to suggest that he was a member of a
Raiding Party or that he has deliberately changed his stand in order to avoid
the prosecution in the complaint lodged by the complainant.

On being cross examined by the learned counsel for the accused
Constables Narender and Jagdish, PW 8 said that his old Belt No. was
675(East) and that he was under suspension in this very case. However, it was
wrong to suggest that he was put under suspension after the enquiry. He stated
that there was an endorsement by the SHO, the summons of which he had

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page23 of173

taken to Tis Hazari. These summons which expressed inability to attend Court
on 24th August 1987 were not written by him.

He further stated that he came

back from the court at 2:00 pm and made his arrival entry in Police Post, Anaj
Mandi. He was not a witness in the case in which Ram Kumar and Mahender
were made accused. He had gone to Tis Hazari, by bus and had also come
back by bus. He had not claimed any amount for the same.

9A.

PW 9 Rajkali

In her statement dated 26th August 1987 recorded by

the SDM Shri S.S. Rathore, Smt. Raj Kali stated that she was the mother of the
deceased Mahender Kumar. She stated that on 16th August 1987 a police
informer Dal Chand brought the police to her house. At that time, Mahender
who was present in the Mohalla fled from there when someone informed him
that police had come to his house. She further stated that the police gave her
severe beatings at the house as well as at the police station after having taken
them there. She stated that they locked her inside the room in the police
station and asked her to give birth to some other Mahender. She asked them if

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page24 of173

anyone had conceived a child in the old age and asked how could she give
birth to a child in this old age. The SHO, then said that he had already
committed three murders. She further stated that the SHO, Vivek Vihar, SI
Laxmi Chand and SI Mukesh took her in a room and misbehaved with her.
They told her that they had ordered for wood for her cremations and all
engagements for her funeral had been completed. She further stated that on
25th August 1987 morning when she went to LNJPN Hospital the SHO was
present there who did not allow her to see Mahender Kumar.

On 25th August

1987 at 4:00 PM she learnt that Mahender had expired. She further stated that
she had strong apprehension that the police had killed her son Mahender
Kumar and that she wanted legal action to be taken.

In her statement before the learned Metropolitan Magistrate, PW 9
Smt. Raj Kali deposed that on the day of Janmashtmi, i.e., 16th August 1987
she along with her children and husband was sleeping in her house. On the
same night at about 9:00 PM, police officials went to her house and started
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page25 of173

enquiring about her son Mahender and his friend Ram Kumar. Her family
reported that both Ram Kumar and Mahender were not at home and the police
officials took them to police station, Vivek Vihar. She stated that while she
was kept in the police station, her husband and her other sons Manohar Lal,
Rajinder, etc. were kept in Police Post Anaz Mandi. She further deposed that
after about a week on 24th August 1987 at about 7:30 or 8:00 a.m. she along
with Yamuna etc. was released from the police station. When they were
coming out of the police station she noticed Mahender Kumar and Ram Kumar
present in the police station as well in the presence of her three sons Manohar
Lal, Rajinder, and Kishan Chand. She stated that Jassu and Rajinder were also
present there and policemen shouting out that Ram Kumar and Mahender have
been produced in the police station by their relatives. In the meanwhile, when
they tried to talk to Mahender Kumar the police officer present there directed
them not to talk with them and further asked to them to leave the police
station. Police officials pushed them as well as gave beatings to them and also
asked her three sons along with the other two boys to leave the police station
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page26 of173

as there was no need of them anymore. She stated that they went out of the
police station and kept standing outside the boundary of the police station.
While they were standing outside the police station they heard beating noises
of Mahender Kumar and Ram Kumar. She stated that they tried to enter the
police station again just to see what had happened to Mahender Kumar and
Ram Kumar but the police did not allow them to enter the police station to see
her son Mahender. They also called her by bad names and again asked her to
leave the police station otherwise serious view would be taken against them.
She further stated that some neighbours told her that Mahender and Ram
Kumar had been admitted in the SDN Hospital and as they reached the SDN
hospital they came to know that Mahender and Ram Kumar had been referred
to LNJPN Hospital. On the next morning she went along with her daughter in
law Prem Wati to LNJPN Hospital and found that there were many police
officials sorrounding Mahender and that they did not allow her to see
Mahender. At about 2:00 pm on 25th August 1987 she came to know about
the death of Mahender Kumar. She stated that the SDM recorded her
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page27 of173

statement at the mortuary of LNJPN Hospital on 28th August 1987 along with
the statements of other persons. She stated that the dead body Mahender was
not handed over to them and they were only allowed to perform last ceremony
at the Nigam Bodh Ghat in the presence of the police.

PW 9 Smt. Raj Kali in her testimony before the court, stated that the
deceased Mahender Kumar was her son and that she did not know any Dal
Chand. She stated that about 18 years back on the day of Janmastmi, four
police officials of police station Vivek Vihar, whose names were SHO, R.P.
Tyagi, Surender, Narender, and Mukesh had gone to her house. She said that
the aforesaid accused persons enquired about the whereabouts of Ram Kumar
and Mahender Kumar on which she showed her ignorance. She stated that the
above mentioned accused persons had hurled abuses at her and directed her to
search Mahender and Ram Kumar and send them to the police station. She
further stated that at about 7:00 am her sons Manohar and Kishan along with
neighbours Jassu and Rajinder and one other person whose name she could not

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page28 of173

recollect were taken to the police station. She said that she did not know how
were they taken and that no other person had gone to the police station.
Thereafter the aforementioned accused persons took her and her daughter in
law Prem Wati to the police station and put them up in the lock-up. They also
lifted Ram Kumar's brother and sister from their house and brought them to
police station Vivek Vihar. However, they could not recollect on which date
they were lifted and put in the police lock-up. She further stated that R.P.
Tyagi told them in the police station that unless and until Ram Kumar and
Mahender were produced he shall keep them in the police lock-up. She stated
that R.P. Tyagi had also said to her that he would kill her son Mahender
Kumar and had also beaten her up with lathi, as a result of which she sustained
severe injury on her fingers. She stated that while R.P. Tyagi used filthy
language for her and her daughter-in-law Prem Wati, nephew of Ram Kumar
aged only 15 days was also not spared by SHO R.P. Tyagi. She stated that
when her son Kishan Chand produced Mahender Kumar and Ram Kumar in
the police station the accused R.P. Tyagi asked police constable Jagdish to
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page29 of173

release her along with others from the police station. When they came down
to the ground floor the police officials took Ram Kumar and Mahender inside
the police station. Thereafter, the accused R.P. Tyagi asked them to leave the
police station stating that Mahender and Ram Kumar were with him. She
stated that they kept standing outside the police station coupled with the
request to allow them to see Mahender and Ram Kumar because when both of
them were taken by the police officials inside the police station they were
given beatings by the police on account of which Mahender and Ram Kumar
were crying. She said that she did not want say anything more and that she did
not recollect if she had given any statement to anybody. She again stated that
she had given statement before the SDM which is marked as ExPW1/B, but
she could not say whether the signatures thereon at Point-B2 was hers or not as
she used to put thumb impression, being an illiterate. She stated that she had
not given any other statement besides that to the SDM.

On being cross examined by the learned Additional Public

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page30 of173

Prosecutor she said that she cannot admit or deny that on 16th August 1987
Dal Chand who was the Secret Informer of the police had gone along with the
police to her house and that when she had asked to Dal Chand that as to why
he had brought police to her house, deceased Mahender who was sitting in the
locality went away from there. She confirmed that she was beaten up by the
police at the residence as well as at the police station and volunteered that she
was beaten in the police station only by Mukesh. She further confirmed that
when she was detained in the police station Vivek Vihar, she was asked to give
birth to another Mahender and that she replied it was not her age to give birth
to a child because of old age. She confirmed that the concerned SHO had also
stated to her that he had committed three murders and he took her in a room
where he misbehaved with her and insulted her.

On being recalled for further cross examination by the learned
Additional Public Prosecutor PW 9 stated that it was correct that after a
week,i.e., on 24th August 1987 at about 7:30 or 8:00 am she along with

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page31 of173

Yamuna etc. were released from the police station. She noticed that Ram
Kumar and Mahender were present in the police station and that her three
sons, namely, Rajinder, Manohar and Kishan Chand along with Jassu and
another Rajender were also present in the police station. She further stated that
it was correct that the police officials were shouting that Ram Kumar and
Mahender have been produced in the police station by their relatives referred
to above and that, in the meantime, when they tried to talk to Mahender and
Ram Kumar, the police officials present there directed them not to speak with
them and further asked them to leave the police station.

She voluntarily

added that it was so directed by SHO R.P. Tyagi. She further said that it was
correct that the police officials present there pushed them and also gave
beatings to them and asked her three sons as well as the other two boys to
leave the police station saying that there was no need of them now. She said
that while they were standing outside the police station they heard the noise of
beating being given to Mahender and Ram Kumar and when they tried to enter
the police station again, they were not allowed to do so and were called by bad
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page32 of173

names. She further stated that she learnt from the neighbours that Mahender
and Ram Kumar were admitted in Shahdara hospital and when she reached
there she learnt that they had been referred to LNJPN Hospital.

In the

morning when she went to LNJPN Hospital along with her daughter-in-law
PremWati, she found that many police officials had surrounded Mahender and
did not allow them to see him. They came to know about the death of
Mahender Kumar at about 2:00 pm on 25th August 1987. She further stated
that an SDM had recorded her statement along with others' at LNJPN Hospital
at the mortuary on 26th August 1987. The dead body of Mahender was not
handed over to them and they were allowed to perform his last ceremony in
Nigam Bodh Ghat in the presence of the police.

On being cross examined by counsel for the accused R.P. Tyagi, PW
9 reiterated the same sequence of events. However, she made an improvement
to the earlier statement by stating that as a result of having been given beatings
with a lathi by accused R.P. Tyagi, she had sustained severe injuries on her

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page33 of173

fingers. Further, there was a contradiction in her statement when she stated
that in her statement before the SDM, which is marked as Ex.PW1/B and her
statement before learned Metropolitan Magistrate which is marked as
Ex.PW2/A that when Mahender and Ram Kumar were taken by the police
officials inside the police station they had started giving beatings to them.

On being cross examined by the learned counsel for the accused
Jagdish and Narender, PW 9 stated that she could not recollect as to the names
of the police officers she had taken before the SDM in her statement. Further,
she did not know any of the police officers who had gone to her house on 16th
August 1987. She further said that she could not get the opportunity to tell the
SDM that she could identify the police officials who had lifted her and
detained her in the police station. She had not told the concerned IO that she
could identify the police officials who had lifted her from her house and
detained her in the police station.

10A. PW 10 Rakesh Kumar, son of Ganga Ram, stated that police had taken
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page34 of173

him from his shop along with his brother Govind Ram on 17th August 1987 to
the police station and had given severe beatings to them. He stated that they
were given further beatings by the police persons in presence of their father
and MCD Councilor Satish Aggarwal. They were kept at the police post Farsh
Bazar for about 4 days and were crying in pain at night due to the beatings
given to them by the police persons. He further stated that his head was
tonsured and they were let off on the fourth day. On being cross examined by
the counsel for the accused R.P. Tyagi he stated that he did not lodge any
complaint to any higher officer in writing against the accused R.P. Tyagi for
getting his hair cut. He had also not filed any separate complaint case in that
regard. He did not take any photographs when his hair were cut and that it was
wrong to suggest that no incident had taken place.

11A. PW 11 Govind Ram, son of Ganga Ram, stated in a manner similar to
the statement of PW10 that he was taken by the police on 17th August 1987 to
police station Vivek Vihar, given severe beatings and that his head was

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page35 of173

tonsured on directions of SHO R.P. Tyagi.

12A. PW 12 Rajender Prashad , son of Sh. Tika Ram, stated that the police
lifted him from his house and enquired about the whereabouts of Mahender,
his brother on 16th August 1987. The police let him off asking him to search
for Mahender. He met Mahender and told him that the police had visited their
house, and lifted their father and brother. On hearing this, Mahender was
perplexed and he left.

On being cross examined by the learned Additional Public
Prosecutor, Rajinder stated that he did not remember if on 17th August 1987,
four policemen including SI Mukesh Kumar and Constable Jagdish had gone
to him and had made enquiries regarding Mahender and Ram Kumar at about
1:00 pm. He further stated that it was incorrect to suggest that he was given
beatings by them at that time. He further did not remember if he along with
Manohar Lal, Kishan Chand and Jassu had produced Mahender and Ram
Kumar at police station Vivek Vihar on 24th August 1987 at about 7:45 pm
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page36 of173

before SHO, R.P. Tyagi. He further stated that he had narrated that facts which
were known to him and the same was stated by him to the SDM.

13A. PW 13 Manohar Lal, son of Tika Ram, stated that the police had lifted
him from his house on the occasion of Janmashtmi and took him to police
station where he was kept for about 4-5 days. He stated that he was let off
along with his father after 4-5 days but he did not know what happened
thereafter.

On being cross examined by the learned Additional Public
Prosecutor, he stated that the SDM had recorded his statement in this case and
which is marked as Ex.PW1/C bore his signature at point C-2. He also stated
that his statement was recorded in this case before the learned Metropolitan
Magistrate on 24th September, 1993 as CW 26. He did not remember if on
17th August 1987, four policemen including SI Mukesh Kumar and constable
Jagdish had come to him and made enquiries regarding Mahender and Ram
Kumar at about 1:00 pm and that he was given beatings by them at that time.
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page37 of173

He further stated that he did not remember if he, Rajinder, Kishan, Jassu and
another Rajinder had produced Mahender and Ram Kumar at police station
Vivek Vihar on 24th August 1987 at about 7:45 pm before the SHO, R.P.
Tyagi. He volunteered that he had narrated the facts which were known to him
to the SDM. Further, on being cross examined by the counsel for the accused
R.P. Tyagi, he stated that it was incorrect to suggest that they were never lifted
or detained by the police officials.

14A. PW 14 Prem Wati, wife of Manohar Lal, stated that her father-in-law
Tika Ram and her husband were lifted by the police on the day of
Janmashtmi. When her mother-in-law returned she told her that the police had
taken her father-in-law and husband and on being enquired as to why had
they taken them, she did not disclose anything.

On being cross examined by Learned Additional Public Prosecutor , she
stated that it was incorrect that in the affidavit she had stated that the police
had lifted her and her mother-in-law after giving beatings to them and taken
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page38 of173

them to the police station. She further stated that it was incorrect to suggest
that she had stated in her affidavit that the police released her on 24th August
1987 stating that the persons who they were searching for, have been
produced.

15A. PW 15 Anil Kumar stated that about 10-11 years back, 4-5 policemen
went to his house enquiring about Ram Kumar. He stated that he was not
taken to the Police Station and that he had not filed affidavit which is marked
as Ex.PW 15/A.

16A. PW 16 Neetu stated that about 17-18 years back, 3-4 police persons
enquired from him about Mahender and Ram Kumar. On expressing his
ignorance, they threatened him and asked him to inform them at the police
station as and when Mahender and Ram Kumar came.

17A. PW 17 Alah Ram stated that he knew the complainant party and they
resided in his neighbourhood and that on the occasion of Janmashtmi, 4-5
police persons had gone to his house at about 12.00 to 1:00 am at night and
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page39 of173

enquired about Mahender. He told them that he was not aware as to where
Mahender was.

18A. PW 18 Pappu stated that about 20 years back 4-5 police officers went to
his house and he was taken by them for the purpose of enquiry and left after
about 1 hour. He stated that he did not know anything else.

19A. PW 19, Krishna, wife of Jai Prakash, stated that around 8-10 police
persons had come to her long back and enquired about her brother Ram Kumar
and about Mahender. She stated that they had asked her to either produce
them or they would lift her. She further stated that the police had not taken her
to the police station and that she did not know anything else. On being cross
examined by the learned Additional Public Prosecutor she stated that it was
correct that the police had taken her to the police station and then volunteered
that they had let her off there only. On being cross-examined by the learned
counsel for the accused R.P. Tyagi, PW 19 stated that it was incorrect to
suggest that she was never taken to the police station or that her thumb

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page40 of173

impression was taken there.

20A. PW 20 Sondai wife of Nathu Ram, stated that some police persons had
gone to her home many years ago to enquire about Mahender and Ram
Kumar. She expressed her ignorance regarding the whereabouts of both, on
which the police took her husband along with her to the police station. The
police had also made enquiries about her son Suresh who was also taken to the
police station at about 4: 00 pm and was let off in the evening. On being crossexamined she stated that it was incorrect to suggest that she was never taken to
the police station

21A. PW 21 Subhash, son of Bal Kishan, stated that after four days of
Janmasthmi in the year 1987 he was taken by the police officials of Police
station Vivek Vihar, kept in confinement and was given beatings by the police
officials. He stated that the police enquired about Ram Kumar and Mahender
from him and he was directed by the police to produce them as and when they
were traceable.

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page41 of173

On being cross examined by the learned counsel for the accused R.P.
Tyagi he stated that it was incorrect to suggest that he was never lifted by the
police of Police Station Vivek Vihar, nor were any beatings given to him. It
was further incorrect to suggest that no enquiry regarding Mahender and Ram
Kumar was made from him by the police and it was correct that he had not
lodged any complaint independently against those police officials.

22A. PW 22 Harpal Singh stated that he had appeared as a witness in this
case before the Court of Shri. Ashwini Kumar Sarpal, the then Metropolitan
Magistrate, Delhi. He stated that he had produced the externment proceedings
of Ram Kumar passed by DCP Qamar Ahmed and the court had retained the
record.

23A. PW 23 Jamna Devi stated that Ram Kumar was her son and three days
after Janmashtmi, the police had come to call Ram Kumar. She did not know
that if the said police was from P.S. Vivek Vihar or somewhere else. She
stated that the police enquired from her as to where Ram Kumar was and she

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page42 of173

expressed her ignorance. She told the police that as and when Ram Kumar
came she would inform the police after which the police left. She further stated
that Ram Kumar never came to her thereafter. Later on, the police informed
her that his dead body was lying at Hindon River. The police had asked them
to identify his dead body and the mohalla people had gone to identify his dead
body. She had not gone there herself.

She did not know under what

circumstances Ram Kumar died. She had given her statement after the death
of Ram Kumar to the learned Metropolitan Magistrate.

On being cross examined by the learned APP, she stated that after
Ram Kumar's death she had filed an affidavit in the Court. She further stated
that it is correct that Pramod and Anil @ Neetu had come to call Ram Kumar
and had told that Ram Kumar was called by SHO Tyagi.

24A. PW 24 Jagjit Singh stated that he had appeared as CW 11 on 21st
December, 1991. He was working in Delhi Police as Head Constable and was
Incharge, VRK, East District. He stated that on the directions of the court he

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page43 of173

had produced the file of Case FIR No.59/88 and 294/87 of P.S. Vivek Vihar.
He further stated that as per record while Case Diary No.8 to 11 were
submitted in the office of VRK from the office of ACP, Case Diary No.1 to 7
were not submitted. The said record marked as Ex.PW11/A bore his
signatures at point A and he had seen Case Diary No.37 of case FIR No.59/88
having stamp of the office of ACP.

25A. PW 25 Constable Nuzumudeen stated that he had appeared as
Court witness CW 12 on 21st December, 1991 when he was working as
constable in the office of ACP, Vivek Vihar. He stated that he had produced
Crime Register of ACP, Vivek Vihar at the time of evidence. On that day, the
record of Case FIR No.294/87 was produced by him before the court and as
per the record, case Diary No.1 to 7 of case FIR No.294/87 was not submitted
in the office of ACP and that is why the said column of the Crime Register
was left blank.

On being cross examined by the learned counsel for the accused
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page44 of173

R.P. Tyagi, he stated that he had not brought the original register and that it
was correct that on the photocopy of the arrival register which is marked as
Ex.CW12/A, in which the FIR No.294/87 was visible. He volunteered that the
document in question was in torn condition. He stated that this document was
filled up by him and he had no personal knowledge about the entries of this
document. He further stated that it was incorrect to suggest that this document
was a fabricated document.

26A. PW26 SI Ram Avtar stated that he was summoned by the court with
the record, i.e., order No.30387/CNT/AC-1/dated 9th August 1987 and also
letter dated 29th September 1987 marked as Ex.CW17/A (inadvertently
mentioned as Ex PW17/A in original testimony) and letter dated 9th October,
1987 marked as Ex.CW 17/B.

He stated that all this record had been

destroyed by the order of DCP, (East). DD No.61 dated 2nd May 1997 which
was recorded, a copy of which is marked as Ex.PW 26/A and a letter No.82112 RB.East, dated 4th January 1997 is on the file marked as Ex.PW26/B.
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page45 of173

27A. PW 27 retired Inspector Baleshwar Singh stated that he was examined
in this case before the Court of MM Sh. Ashwini Sarpal, M.M. as CW 17. On
the day of examination, i.e., 3rd June 1993 he had brought the originals of
documents marked as Ex.CW 17/A and Ex.CW 17/B which are stated to have
been weeded out.

28A. PW 28 Shri Dheer Singh, Medical Report Clerk, SDN Hospital, stated
that he had brought the summons record, i.e., MLC No.9878 dated 24th August
1987 of Mahender, the copy of which is marked as Ex.PW 6/A and is signed
by Dr. A. K. Verma. He stated that he identified his signatures as some
signatures appeared on this document in his name.

29A. PW 29 Shri Z.S. Lohat stated that he was working as M.M. in Shahdara
Court from December, 1983 to 1st week of March 1991 and that he had passed
order in case FIR No.59/88 under Section 304/34 IPC on 7th July 1989. He
stated that the original order is marked as Ex.PW29/A. He further stated that

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page46 of173

on 8th July 1989 one Ram Kumar had filed an application before him which
was addressed to DCP, Vigilance, and that none appeared on behalf of the
applicant, although, he passed an order on this application marked as Ex.PW
29/A.

30A. PW 30 Inspector Pawan Kapoor stated that he had brought the Diary of
correspondence dated 15th November, 1993 and an entry dated 15th
November, 1994 shows that the file in question was appended with file 108/94
titled as Tika Ram v. Inspector R.P. Singh (AC-V) pertained to file
No.23/39/87 the photocopy of which is marked as Ex.PW 30/A.

31A. PW 31 Om Wati stated that she was examined in the court of learned
Metropolitan Magistrate several years back and this document was marked as
Ex.CW 29/9 at that time and that she had given the affidavit voluntarily.

On being cross examined by the learned counsel for the accused
R.P. Tyagi she stated that it was wrong to suggest that the said document did

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page47 of173

not bear her thumb marks or that no such incident had taken place as
mentioned in the said affidavit or that nobody was taken to the police station at
any point of time by any police officials.

32A. PW 32 HC Ramesh stated that he was examined earlier as CW 32 and
had brought register of FIR Nos.294/87 and 59/88 of P.S. Vivek Vihar. He
stated that the same were registered on the complaint of Inspector K.P. Singh,
the then SHO, by HC Suresh Prasad. (The FIR had been registered on the
order of the Lt. Governor.)

On being cross examined by the learned counsel for the accused
R.P.Tyagi he stated that CD entries are made immediately on their receipt and
are sent to ACP office in original.

On being cross examined by the learned counsel for the accused
K.P. Singh and Gurdas he stated that it was true that no acknowledgment was
received from the office of ACP and from the VRK Branch.

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page48 of173

33A. PW 33 Sukhbiri, W/o Jaman Lal stated that about 20 years back, the
police of P.S. Farsh Bazar called her and her daughter along with two or three
other persons to the police station and released her in the evening after making
inquiry. She stated that she did not know the reason why the police called her

34A. PW 34 Jamman Lal stated that about 17-18 years back on the day of
Janmashatami, at about 1.00/1.30 a.m., when he was not at home his family
members were picked up by the police. His wife Sukhbiri Devi, daughter
Omwati, sons Rampal and Dharampal and one of his relatives, Mormukut and
his cousin Narain Dass were all taken by the police. They returned to the house
by 7.00-8.00 am, and were directed by the police to come again the next day.
He stated that he was called in the police station and all this continued for 4-5
days. He further stated that he heard from somebody that Ram Kumar and
Mahender were handed over to the police and he filed an application before
the Court but his statement was not recorded.

On being cross-examined by learned APP, he stated that it was true

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page49 of173

that when he went to GRP police station, Ghaziabad and identified the dead
body of Ram Kumar which was lying on the railway track near the shed, there
was no blood on his body. He met SHO, PS VijayNagar Ghaziabad. He
stated that he did not tell the court that accused R.P.Tyagi had gone there or
requested the SHO, P.S. Vijay Nagar not to take any actions against the
culprits or that the SHO had refused to do so.

On being cross-examined by the learned counsel for the accused
R.P. Tyagi he stated that it was wrong to suggest that his family members
never visited the police station in connection with the inquiry.

35A. PW 35 Shri P.S. Gosai stated that he was a dealing clerk in the
office of Deputy Secretary, Govt. of NCT of Delhi and he was trying to trace
out the complaint case file no. F-3/78/87 Home/P1 dated 29th July, 1987 but
the file could not be traced out. He stated that a circular was also issued in the
branch for tracing out the file but the same could not be traced out and that it
might have been weeded out being an old record.
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page50 of173

36A. PW 36 Dr. Vinod Kumar Rimtek, MS, LNJP Hospital stated that
he had seen the post mortem report no. 393/87 dated 26th August, 1987 of
deceased Mahender prepared and signed by Dr. Vishnu Kumar. He stated that
he had not brought the office record about this report as the same had already
been weeded out. He stated that he could identify the signatures of Dr. Vishnu
Kumar as he had seen him writing and signing before him as a colleague for
about two years. On being cross-examined by the learned counsel for the
accused Dr. A.K. Verma, he stated that he had never seen Dr. Vishnu Kumar
preparing any medical report or post mortem report or any other office note
etc. He could not identify the signature on the document put on the file
marked as Ex.CW19/B on which three injuries had been shown and the
document was dated 24th August, 1987. He stated that in his opinion it would
have been prepared after 6.20 p.m. as the patient was shown to have been
received in the hospital at 6.20 p.m. He further stated that most of the injuries
in the post mortem report which is marked as Ex. PW 36/A were bruises and

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page51 of173

abrasions and that bruises are injuries caused by blunt weapons according to
medical jurisprudence by Dr. Modi which is acceptable and authentic textbook
on medical jurisprudence. He further stated that ecchymosis depends upon the
duration of the injury caused by bruises when accompanied by swelling and
crushing or tearing of the sub-cutaneous tissues without solution of continuity
of skin. He stated that he did not agree with Dr. Modi in saying that
ecchymosis may not appear until after death and the same is due to more rapid
haemolysis of stagnant blood as a part of post mortem changes. He further did
not agree with Dr. Modi in saying that there may not be any trace of external
bruising even after receipt of substantial violence. He stated that at times
bruises may not show up externally at all and the extent and time of
appearance of bruising will depend upon the following:-

(1)

Nature and severity of the force applied.

(2)

Vascularity of the affected body part.

(3)

Number and size of the blood vessels injured.

(4)

Condition and type of tissue affected.

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page52 of173

He stated that it was correct that at times bruises of the chest wall
may not show up readily even in the presence of severe internal injury though
on dissection their presence will be demonstrable. He further stated that it is
easy to examine injuries on a dead body in spite of examining the person of a
living patient. He stated that it is true that a medical officer who is examining
an injured patient in severe pain may not be able to note all the external
injuries as compared to the doctor who is performing post mortem on the dead
body.

37A. PW 37 H C Mange Chand stated that he had brought the summoned
record i.e. Malkhana Register of the year 1990 and as per entry no.49 of 19th
November 1990, the personal search articles of the deceased Ram Kumar
along with other articles were deposited in the Malkhana by the IO of the case,
Crime No. 308.90 under Section 365/302/34 IPC. He stated that he had
brought the personal search articles of the deceased Ram Kumar and produced
an unsealed purse containing various visiting cards and papers. One of these

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page53 of173

cards belonged to the accused R.P. Tyagi and showed his office and residential
telephone numbers.

38A. PW 38 HC Manoj Kumar stated that he had not brought the summons
log book as the same had been destroyed. He said that he was examined in
this case earlier before the court of Learned Metropolitan Magistrate, Karkar
Dooma Court, Delhi and the said log-book was produced in the court at the
time of his earlier statement. He contradicted himself by first saying that the
log-book was shown to him in the court on the said date and later saying that
he was not shown that log-book. He stated that no accused in this case was
arrested before him.

He stated that on 24th August 1987 at about 8:30 am when he had
gone to police station and set his vehicle in order by cleaning it he saw two
persons sitting in the police station in the room of SHO along with 4-5
persons. He did not know the name of those persons. He also did not know
in context of which case were they sitting there. He said that R.P. Tyagi was

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page54 of173

posted as SHO at that time. He said that he could not say whether R.P. Tyagi
was present in the court or not even after seeing all the persons present in the
court.

On being questioned as to whether he had seen anyone being beaten
in the police station on that day, i.e., on 24th August 1987 he replied that SI
Mukesh had given two/three slaps on the mouth of those two persons
mentioned by him above. He further stated that he could not see that and
hence he returned to his room. He did not remember whether any other police
officer posted in the said police station was present there or not. He further
stated that he came to know of the names of those two boys on the next day
which he did not remember now. In the evening on the same day, he took
two-three police officials of their police station along with those two boys who
were beaten by SI Mukesh to the hospital in his jeep.

On being cross examined by the learned Additional Public
Prosecutor he said that on 24th August 1987 he took police officials on Ilaka
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page55 of173

Gasht. They started from police Station Vivek Vihar, to SDN Hospital
through Anaaj Mandi and returned to the police station thereafter. He did not
remember whether SHO had travelled in his jeep on that day between 2:05 pm
and 4:30 pm. He did not know whether DD No.7 was recorded in this regard
and no copy of such DD was referred by him in his statement given in the
court of learned Metropolitan Magistrate, Karkar Dooma courts, Delhi. He
further stated that it was wrong to suggest that on the same day,i.e., 24th
August 1987 he had taken SI Mukesh Kumar, Constable Madan Lal,
Constable Kawar Pal, Constable Vijender and HC Narender along with SI Tej
Singh to the spot, i.e., Road No.58, Suraj Mal Park, at about 2:05 pm in that
jeep. He did not know whether any information was received in the police
station about the fact that two boys were threatening the public. He further
stated that it was true that the name of the those two boys were Ram Kumar
and Mahender who were sitting in the police station in the SHO's room. He
said that he had taken the two boys to the hospital and that it was wrong to
suggest that he had seen both the said boys being beaten by the police.
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

He

page56 of173

stated that the he had seen one of them being beaten by SI Mukesh. He stated
that he did not identify SI Mukesh and could not say whether he was present in
the court or not. He further stated that he did not remember whether the SHO
had directed him to take the said two boys to the hospital. He said that it was
wrong to suggest that SHO RP Tyagi had returned to police station at 4:30 pm
in his jeep from the spot. He did not remember whether he had told about any
DD recorded in this regard in his statement in the court of learned metropolitan
Magistrate, Karkar Dooma Court, Delhi. He further stated that he had done
his duty in the said police station for 22-23 days under the SHO R P Tyagi.

On being cross examined by the counsel for accused A.K. Verma,
PW 38 stated that 2-3 persons had accompanied him while he took those two
boys to the SDN hospital. He did not remember the name and designation of
those police officials. He said that it was true that a DD entry was recorded
whenever he left the police station along with the vehicle. He stated that no
document was given to him while he left the police station to be handed over

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page57 of173

to the doctor concerned. He further stated that they reached the said hospital
in the evening after 2:30 pm.

On being cross examined by the counsel for the accused R P Tyagi,
he said that he was in the police job since 1986 and had never signed blank
papers during his duty. He stated that he would read any document before
signing it. He further stated that it was wrong to suggest that on 24th August
1987 he went to Surajmal Vihar in his jeep as 'Driver' along with the police
party. Further, it was wrong to suggest that he had seen those two boys
severally beaten by the public or that he had taken them to the hospital from
Surajmal Vihar. He stated that it was true that Ex.PW38/D-A was written and
signed by him and that it was written by him on being compelled by the
accused R.P.Tyagi. He did not lodge any complaint against R. P. Tyagi for
compelling him to write the said document to any higher police officer as he
saw no such need. He further stated that it was wrong to suggest that he had
written the said document voluntarily. Further he stated that it was true that a

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page58 of173

log-book was written on the prescribed performa and that he had filled that log
book during his tenure as was prescribed.

On being cross examined by advocate for accused Surender and
Kanwar Pal, he stated that he did not make any false entry in the log-book or
prepared any false document. He stated that it was true that whenever the
jeep was taken outside the police station by him he made the entry as Ilaka
Gasht. He had not received summons to depose before the court of
Metropolitan Magistrate, Karkar Dooma Court Delhi and had attended the
court on being requested by SI Ram Kishan. He further stated that he was
asked by the latter to speak truly and was also told that if he did not depose in
the court something will happen against him. The latter was the IO of the
case. PW 38 stated that he did not know whether he was SI Ram Kishan or
Kishan Singh. He further stated that they used to write the log book daily and
not in 3-4 days. He came to know the names of those two injured persons
from the newspapers the next day.

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page59 of173

39A. PW 39 Statement of Anita, Stenographer in Planning Commission

She stated that she gave the copy of some official documents i.e. letter
no. 23198/SO/DCP (east) dated 3rd November 1987 along with copy of the
order of Lt. Governor to one Sub inspector of the Delhi Police.

40A. PW 40 Statement of Vinod Kumar, Reader

He stated that he had bought the file relating to case no. 294/87 PS
Vivek Vihar in the court of Shri Ashwini Sarpal the then MM , Karkardooma
Delhi.

41A. PW 41 Constable Sat Pal Singh stated that on 10th October, 1993 he was
posted as Naib Court in the Court of Sh. Om Prakash, the then MM,
Karkardooma, Delhi and had produced police file FIR No. 294/1987, P.S.
Vivek Vihar in the court, the detail of which he did not remember.

42A. PW 42 SI Dharamvir Singh stated that he could not bring the summoned
record/log book of DED 1762 for the year 1987 and the said log book could
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page60 of173

not be found as the same was never consigned to their office.

43A. PW 43 ASI Amar Jeet, Incharge VRK East, stated that he was asked to
bring case file of case FIR 294/87, P.S. Vivek Vihar. He stated that he had
checked the records and had come across an order passed by Sh. Pradeep
Chadha, the then MM, Shahdara, Delhi dated 10th April 1991, a copy of which
was marked PW 43/A. He further stated that in compliance with this order all
the documents of this case were handed over to inspector Kishan Singh by the
then VRK incharge and hence the case file was not available with them.

44A. PW 44 Constable Sat Pal Singh stated that on 8th October, 1993 he was
posted as Naib Court in the court of Sh. Om Prakash, MM, Karkardooma
Courts and he produced the police case file in Case FIR No. 294/87 PS Vivek
Vihar before the court of Sh. Ashwini Sarpal, Ld. MM, Karkardooma Court.
He stated that on the direction of the court he read over the case diary and did
not give any statement in the court on that day. On being cross-examined by
the learned APP he stated that it was wrong to suggest that he gave a statement
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page61 of173

in the court of Sh.Ashwini Sarpal, MM Karkardooma Court on 8 th October,
1993 and that his statement was recorded as directed by him. He stated that it
was true that exhibit PW 44/A bore his signatures at point X. On being crossexamined by learned counsel for the accused Tej Singh he stated that he had
taken the case diary to the court and since it was his first effort to read any
case diary in the court and because of some difficulty in reading urdu words
there, the same was read over by IO Inspector Kishan Singh in the Court. He
stated that he had signed his statement on the direction of the court and that he
had knowledge about the case.

45A. PW45 ASI Dinesh Bhargav stated that he was posted as Malkhana
Moharrar in PS Vivek Vihar in the year 1993-94 and had brought summoned
record i.e Register No. 19 pertaining to the said period. He stated that he had
also produced this register in the court of Sh. Ashwini Kumar, the then MM,
Karkardooma, Delhi. He stated that as per record on 16th August, 1987, SI Tej
Singh was shown to have deposited one Pulinda which was recorded at serial

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page62 of173

no. 1853/87 and as per the same record, one knife sealed in the pulinda was
entered at serial no. 1856/87. He stated that he did not identify the
handwriting of the Malkhana Moharrar concerned who had written the
aforesaid entries and the copies of the said entries are marked as Ex.PW45/A
and Ex.PW45/B.

46A. PW 46 Mohd. Kunwar Siddiqui, Advocate, stated that he had attested
affidavits putting his signatures at points X and Y.

He further stated that all these executants mentioned above came to
him with the affidavits in person and put their signatures on their respective
affidavits before him.

47A. PW 47 Retired HC Daya Ram stated that on 24th August, 1987 he was
posted as DD Writer from 8.00 am to 8.00 pm in PS Vivek Vihar and he had
seen DD No. 7 dated 24th August, 1987 recorded by SI Surender at 2.05 pm.
He stated that he could identify the handwriting of SI Surender having worked

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page63 of173

with him and seen him writing and signing. He further stated that on 24th
August, 1987 he had recorded DD No. 9 which was about the return of the
SHO R.P.Tyagi to the police station as constable Manoj had come to him and
asked him to make an entry about the return of the SHO and also the official
vehicle no. DED-1762. He stated that he had seen the original register in
which there appeared to be cutting in the name of Constable Manoj.

On being cross examined by the learned counsel for the accused R.P.
tyagi he stated that there was no pressure upon him when his statement was
recorded before the court of MM Delhi. He stated that it was true that
whenever a DD entry was made about the arrival of a police officer, reference
of departure entry number was also recorded in the arrival entry. He stated
that he could not say that the vehicle Jeep DED 1762 was driven to the police
station by SI Mukesh. He stated that it was true that as per the record brought
to him there was no entry about the departure of Inspector R.P. Tyagi before
entry DD 9A. He stated that no departmental or penal action was taken against

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page64 of173

him about the entry in this case.

On being cross examined by learned counsel for the accused Tej
Singh he stated that it was wrong to suggest that overwriting in DD entry no.
9A Ex.PW14/B was in his handwriting. He stated that it is true that
Ex.PW47/DB pertained to registration of case FIR No. 301/1987 bearing the
time as 4.20pm. He further stated that DD 7 was recorded in his presence and
it was wrong to say that Constable Manoj did not ask him to make an entry
about arrival of SHO Tyagi in the police station in official jeep or that he was
deliberately making an improvement in his statement. He stated that he did
not remember whether this fact was told by him in his statement recorded in
the court of Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi or whether the fact that constable
Manoj had asked him to make such an entry was disclosed by him in his
statement in the court of learned MM Delhi. He further stated that he had not
stated in the statement recorded in the Court of MM Delhi that DD No. 9A
was recorded on instructions of SI Surender.

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page65 of173

48A. PW 48 SI Ram Kumar stated that on 25th August, 1987 he was posted in
PP Anaaj Mandi PS Vivek Vihar as HC and that on that day he was deputed to
guard the injured who were the accused in that case in JPN Hospital. The said
accused were Mahender and Ram Kumar. He stated that he went there along
with two constables and relieved HC Ghanshyam who was on night duty. He
stated that he saw that the general condition of the said injured was very
critical and that the treating doctor was insisting to discharge the injured which
he opposed to in view of their critical conditions. He called the duty officer
and asked him to appraise the facts to the SHO. He stated that on his
opposition the doctors recalled their opinion and altered the discharge slip. He
stated that the condition of Mahender further deteriorated and he again
telephoned the duty officer and told him about the facts. He stated that he
went to the injured Mahender who breathed his last in his presence and further
conveyed the message in the PS. He stated that the SHO, Area SDM and
public persons including the relatives of the deceased also gathered at the
spot.
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page66 of173

On being cross examined by counsel for the accused K.P.Singh, he
stated that the SHO who reached the hospital was inspector R.P. Tyagi.

On being cross examined by counsel for accused R.P. Tyagi, he
stated that it was wrong to suggest that he did not oppose the discharge of the
injured, Mahender. He stated that he was not informed from the PS through
DD or in any other manner that the injured persons were to be produced before
the DCP for the externment proceedings. He stated that the discharge slip was
handed over to him at about 12 noon and that it was wrong to suggest that he
had taken out both the said injured outside the hospital after getting them
discharged. He stated that it was true that he had contacted PS seeking a
vehicle to carry the injured but he received no reply according to which no
vehicle was ready or available in PS and he was asked to hire an
autorickshaw. He further volunteered that he had sought a vehicle in case the
injured were discharged from the hospital despite his opposition. He further
stated that the injured, Mahender died within 10-15 minutes after the discharge

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page67 of173

slip was taken back by the doctor concerned. He further stated that it was
wrong to suggest that he got injured, Mahender readmitted in Orthopedics
Department with a fresh registration number. He had no knowledge about the
admission slip Ex.PW 48/DE. He stated that it was wrong to suggest that he
had abused injured Mahender.

He stated that he did not get the matter

recorded with the duty constable deputed in that hospital and volunteered that
the same had no roznamcha registered with him. He further stated that it was
true that there was police post in that hospital and he did not report in that
police post about the conduct of the treating doctor. He further stated that he
remained posted in the same PS for about one year of that incident and from
25th August, 1987 till date he did not report the facts of this case to any senior
police officer. He stated that it was wrong to suggest that the injured
Mahender and Ram Kumar were actually discharged from the hospital or
remained in his custody for more than two hours before their readmission.

6.

The following witnesses were examined as defence witnesses in the

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page68 of173

Trial court:

1B.

DW1 ASI Rishi Pal stated that when he was posted in PP Anaj Mandi,

PS Vivek Vihar, there was a police arrangement on the occasion of
Janmashatami on 16th August, 1987 and he was deputed at Chhota Bazar,
Shahdara from 2.00 pm till the completion of celebrations of Janmashatami.
He deposed that at about 9.20 p.m. two unknown persons came to him and told
him that two anti social elements were extorting money from people passing
by at Circular Road at the point of knife. He stated that he went along with
those persons to Circular Road near a paan shop and when he asked the two
anti-social elements to accompany him to the police station they started
quarelling with him. He deposed that the aforementioned were Mahender and
Ram Kumar who were previously known to him as having been booked earlier
for several offences and were known as "Ruffians". He stated that someone
had informed Constable Narender and Constable Jagdish and they had also
reached there. He further stated that Ram Kumar stabbed a knife in his chest

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page69 of173

on the right side and Mahender snatched his Danda and hit him on his left
arm. After that both of them fled away from the spot. Although Constable
Narender and Constable Jagdish chased them but they could not overpower the
said accused persons and returned to see his condition. They took him to SDN
hospital on their scooter and got him admitted there and remained with him till
next morning.

2B.

DW 2

ASI Ghanshyam stated that on 16th August 1987, when he

was posted in PP Anaaj Mandi, PS Vivek Vihar, he was informed that
Constable Rishi Pal was stabbed. In the intervening night of 24th August 1987
and 25th August, 1987, he was on duty in LNJP hospital where the two
accused persons namely Mahender and Ram Kumar were admitted. He stated
that his duty was till 8 a.m. and while handing over the charge to HC Ram
Kumar he asked him to produce the accused persons before the area ACP after
their discharge. They were due to be discharged from the hospital in the
morning. He stated that both Mahender and Ram Kumar were all right and

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page70 of173

responding well when he left the hospital after handing over the charge to HC
Ram Kumar. On being cross examined by the Learned APP he stated that he
had a talk with the two accused/injured persons and during his duty he served
them water etc. on their request. He stated that he told their condition to the
parents and relatives of both of them who were present in the hospital.

3B.

DW 3 HC Rajender Kumar stated that he had brought the summoned

record i.e. FIR registers pertaining to FIR Nos. 155/87, 294/87, 399/86 and
400/87, PS Vivek Vihar.

4B.

DW 4 Inspector Ramesh Chand stated that on 22nd August, 1987 he

was posted in PS Vivek Vihar as a Duty Officer and on the next day i.e. 23rd
August, 1987 SI Surender had worked as Duty Officer in the same PS. He
stated that he did not know about his duty hours and after consulting the
Roznamcha, Register B, he stated that as per record, SI Surender had joined
PS Vivek Vihar on 21st August, 1987 at 7.30 p.m. and that 23rd August, 1987
was his first day of duty as Duty Officer. He stated that as per the records, SI
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page71 of173

Surender Kumar had worked as Duty Officer on 24th August, 1987 from 8
a.m. to 8 p.m. He admitted that whatever information is received by a Duty
Officer during his duty, the same is bound to record the information in the DD
Register, after which the information is recorded in the form of DD and the
same is marked to competent officer for enquiry. He stated that entries about
detainees in the PS were made in Roznamcha Registers. Both the said
registers were in Court but he could not tell after going through the said
registers as to whether any “suspects” were detained in the PS Vivek Vihar on
22nd August, 1987 during his duty hours. On being cross examined by the
learned APP he stated that whatever had been deposed by him was stated by
him after going through the record.

5B.

DW 5

HC Meer Singh stated that on 23rd August, 1987 he was

posted in PS Vivek Vihar as a driver. He stated that he identified his
handwriting on Ex.DW 5/A i.e. entry in the log book on 23rd August, 1987.
He stated that he was driving vehicle jeep DED 1762 on that day and handed
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page72 of173

over the charge of the said vehicle along with the log book after his duty at 8
a.m. on 24th August, 1987 to Constable Manoj Kumar. He identified the
handwriting of Constable Manoj Kumar on portion 'B to B' on Ex.DW5/A. He
admitted that whenever they went along with the vehicle in their area of
jurisdiction they used to write “illaaca gasht” as purpose and if they happened
to go outside their jurisdiction, they used to write the name of the place in the
said column. He identified the handwriting of Constable Manoj Kumar at the
point 'A to A' on entry in log book dated 26th August, 1987 marked as
Ex.DW5/B.

6B.

DW 6 Shri Jagmohan Jain, Medical Record Technician, SDN Hospital

stated that he had brought the summoned records i.e. MLC of Constable Rishi
Pal bearing no. 40911/87 dt.16th August, 1987, the true copy of which was
DW6/A. He stated that he had seen signatures of Dr. A.K. Verma
(inadvertently mentioned Kulkreshtha in the original testimony) and that he
identified his signatures on the said MLC at point A.
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page73 of173

7B.

DW 7 Sh. Parimal Rai stated that on 3rd November, 1987 he was

posted as SDM Shahdara and the inquest about the death of Mahender was
done by him in the same capacity. He stated that after the inquest proceedings
he submitted the report marked as Ex.DW7/A which was signed by him at
point A and comprised of 10 pages.

He stated that 25 witnesses were

mentioned by him in his report who had been examined during these
proceedings. The report assigned the cause of death of Mahender Kumar as a
result of beatings by members of the public.

8B.

DW 8 HC Nand Kishore stated that he was posted as Malkhana

Moharrar in PS RND and that he brought the summoned record i.e. original
FIR NO. 273/1987 registered in PS RND, the copy of which is marked as
Ex.DW8/A.

9B.

DW 9 HC Jitender Singh stated that he was posted as Malkhana

Moharrar in PS Vivek Vihar and had brought the summoned record i.e.
original FIR No. 294/87 registered in PS Vivek Vihar, the copy of which is

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page74 of173

marked as Ex.DW9/A.

10B. DW 10 ASI Shiv Lal stated that the summoned record of Office Order
No. 1791-4810/HAP East dated 26th August, 1987 required to be produced
had already been destroyed by order of DCP dated 16th February, 2001. The
copy of this order was marked as Ex.DW10/A. He stated that he could not
identify the signatures done in the name of Sh. Qamar Ahmed on this
document at point A.

11B. DW 11 Dr. A.K. Verma stated that he was working as Medical Officer
in SDN Hospital and on 24th August, 1987 he was posted as CMO, Casualty
Ward from 2 p.m. to 9 p.m. He stated that a total of 3 registers were
maintained in the Casualty Ward to make entry about the patients i.e. Casualty
Register, MLC Register and the Admission Register. He deposed that he had
seen the MLC marked as Ex.PW6/A about patient Mahender who he had
examined in casualty on the said date at 4.35 p.m. He identified his signatures
and handwriting on the document. He stated that as per the record, the patient
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page75 of173

Mahender was brought to the casualty by Const. Rattan Lal No.576E. He
further stated that the alleged history of the patient was “beating by public
persons” and that the history of the patient was given by Constable Rattan Lal.
He stated that no police officer had met him before the aforesaid patient was
brought to him for medical examination. No injury statement was given to
him by the police before the examination of the said patient. He stated that he
had seen the document marked as Ex.CW21/B which was not handed over to
him by the police before the examination of the patient. It was not signed by
him anywhere. He stated that if it was handed over to him, he would have
signed it. He stated that he had also seen document Ex. CW18/B and that the
entry pertaining to patient Mahender was marked as Ex.DW11/A and was in
the handwriting of Dr. V.P. Arya made at 5:00 pm. He further deposed that
due to the seriousness in the condition of the patient, the same was examined
first and then the entry was made in the Register. His pulse beat was not
recordable and his life was in danger. He further stated that his priority was to
save the patient's life and therefore, he examined the patient before making the
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page76 of173

entry in the said register. There was a standing order of the Medical
Superintendent in this regard. He further stated that since there was no
prescribed format of MLC and no column prescribed in the said format to
prescribe the medicines required to be given to the said patient, it was not
necessary to mention the medicines in the MLC prescribed to the patient. He
stated that the said patient was referred to LNJP hospital as the same had
suffered extensive injuries, he had suspected fracture and he appeared to be in
a state of shock, therefore, he opted to refer him to the said hospital for
specialised treatment and management in a better equipped hospital like the
LNJPN Hospital. He stated that he had not given his final opinion regarding
the nature of injuries to the said patient as he had kept it under observations
and the final opinion was to be given by the treating doctor in LNJPN
Hospital. He stated that the clinical examination is done by the treating doctor,
who examines a live patient. It is not a thorough but a cursory examination
and only salient injuries are to be recorded in addition to vital signs like the
pulse beat, BP etc. On the other hand, a post mortem examination is a
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page77 of173

thorough examination since the person is already dead, the body of the same
can be tilted or moved in any direction in order to trace out the injuries
suffered by him. He stated that since the aim of post mortem is to find out the
cause of death, all the injuries are examined minutely including internal
injuries. He further stated that bruises are injuries caused by blunt objects by
compression of crushing and are accompanied with painful swelling of the
relevant part. Superficial bruises appear within one to two hours of impact
whereas when the injuries are more severe, there is rupture of blood vessels in
deep tissues like muscles etc. He stated that it takes the blood to show up
externally after several hours or 1-2 days to show the impact. Further, some
bruises may show up even after the death due to breakdown of stagnated blood
and pigmentation causing external staining. He stated that as per his
experience such patients are required to be examined 2-3 times after the initial
examination. He further stated that the patient Mahender Kumar was under
sedation at the time of his examination and that death could have been caused
due to shock of injuries. He stated that he had seen casualty card marked as
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page78 of173

Ex.CW18/C and admitted that it was in his handwriting and bore his
signatures at point A. He stated that in the said card, he had advised the
patient to be referred to LNJPN hospital and had also prescribed medicines in
this regard. He stated that the said patient remained with him for about one
hour.

12B. DW 12 Sh. Qamar Ahmed, stated that in the year 1987 he was posted
as DCP (East Delhi). He stated that as far as he could remember during his
said posting one Mahender Singh died allegedly in the police custody and he
had requested the ADM concerned to depute an SDM to hold an inquiry under
Section 176 Cr.P.C. He admitted that the complainant of this case had filed a
writ petition in the High Court of Delhi and an SLP in the Supreme Court and
both were dismissed. He further stated that he did not write any letter to the
SDM about the registration of the case and had communicated with the DCP,
Headquarters-II. He stated that he identified signatures on document marked
as Ex.DW12/B which was a letter which appeared to be signed by him. He

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page79 of173

stated that as far as he remembered SHO K.P.Singh registered FIR on receipt
of entire inquest papers from Delhi Government. He further stated that vide
order no. 4791 to 4810/HAP (E) dated 26.8.1987 he had placed SI Tej Singh,
Mukesh Kumar, Constable Rattan Lal, Constable Vijender Singh, Constable
Narender Singh NO. 675/East and Constable Kanwar Pal under suspension.

7.

The learned counsel for the State Mr. Sunil Sharma, Additional Public

Prosecutor contended as follows:

(a)

The genesis of the case originated on 16th August, 1987 at around 9.30

when constable Rishi Pal of PS Vivek Vihar was stabbed by Ram Kumar and
Mahender Kumar and consequently Case FIR No. 294/87 was registered
against the aforesaid persons. The investigation of the case was entrusted to SI
Tej Singh Verma. The assailants in this case escaped from the spot and a
manhunt was launched to apprehend those culprits. As the victim in this case
was a policeman therefore, all the policemen headed by SHO R.P.Tyagi
entrusted themselves with the task of apprehending the assailants. All the

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page80 of173

family members of the assailants were picked up and were illegally confined
in the Police Station. The family members were conveyed that they would be
freed only when Mahender Kumar and Ram Kumar surrendered. Undue
pressure was exerted on the family members of the assailants to produce them
as one of their own brethren was stabbed and the whole police station was set
into motion to nab the culprits. The stabbing incident where the policeman
was a victim, aggravated the feelings of the SHO and other police personnel
of the police station which ultimately culminated in the death of Mahender
Kumar.

The counsel for the State further contended that the tactics of the SHO
R.P. Tyagi and other police personnel paid off and the assailants in the case
FIR NO. 294/87 surrendered on 24th August, 1987 between 7.30 am and 8 am,
as their own relatives including brothers of Mahender Kumar and Ram Kumar,
brought them to the police station. The onslaught of the police on Mahender
Kumar and Ram Kumar soon started and continued in the presence of the

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page81 of173

family members of Ram Kumar and Mahender Kumar. They were taken
inside the building and the family members heard their cries. Thereafter,
subsequently, the family members of Ram Kumar and Mahender were released
from the police station. Ostensibly, the process of beating commenced from
morning of 24th August, 1987 when they surrendered and as the events
subsequently unfolded continued till late in the afternoon i.e. uptil around 2
p.m.

(b)

The counsel submitted that Mahender and Ram Kumar were grievously

injured as a result of beatings and torture meted out to them by the accused
SHO R.P. Tyagi and others and the accused launched a huge cover up in order
to justify the injuries sustained by them. As the injuries were numerous,
consequent upon beatings from SHO R.P. Tyagi and others, they devised a
method to cover the injuries sustained by Mahender and Ram Kumar and what
followed was a gigantic cover up as under:-

(i)

At 2 :00 pm on 24th August, 1987, police is said to have received a call

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page82 of173

from some unknown person from Surajmal Park complaining that two ruffians
were harassing public and consequently DD No. 7A was recorded and a so
called team as constituted by R.P. Tyagi was dispatched to the spot.
(ii)

As per DD No. 7A, the members of the raiding team were SI Tej Singh

Verma, HC Narender Kumar, HC Manoj Kumar etc. who were sent to
Surajmal Park and there SI Tej Singh Verma alongwith other members of the
so called leading party apprehended the culprits, who were being subjected to
beatings by the public.
(iii)

SI Tej Singh Verma in order to cover up the torture and beatings meted

out to Mahender and Ram Kumar fabricated documents such as disclosure
slip, seizure memo of knife, site plan, Jama talashi memos.
(iv)

SI Tej Singh Verma fabricated the aforesaid documents as the accused

persons wanted to show that Ram Kumar and Mahender were present at Suraj
Mal Park at 2.05 p.m. In order to save themselves and create evidence of their
presence at Surajmal Park.
(v)

SI Tej Singh Verma also admitted that he has prepared these documents

in his statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C.
(vi)

However, the deeds of SI Tej Singh Verma and SHO of R.P. Tyagi were

exposed by none other than their own police officers who were examined in
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page83 of173

the court as PW8 HC Narender Kumar and PW38, HC Manoj Kumar.
(c)

The counsel for the State contended that Ram Kumar and Mahender

were initially taken to SDN Hospital and there the policemen accompanying
the injured wrongly stated to the doctor that the injured were subjected to
beatings by the public.

This shows that the accused persons even gave wrong

information to the doctors who treated them initially in SDN Hospital.
Subsequently, the injured Mahender was shifted to LNJPN Hospital as his
condition was critical and there he died at around 2 p.m. on 25 th August,
1987.

The counsel contended that since the death of Mahender was a case of
custody death, Sh. S.S. Rathore, SDM, was asked to conduct inquest
proceedings and on 28th August, 1987 he directed the police to register a case
relating to the death of Mahender but no such case was registered by the
police. It is further submitted that subsequently for some inexplicable reasons,
Sh. S.S. Rathore was transferred on the date of his report and Sh. Parimal Rai

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page84 of173

succeeded Sh. S.S. Rathore, who then conducted inquest proceedings. The
learned counsel submitted that this SDM conducted inquest proceedings afresh
and vide order dated 3rd November, 1987 exonerated the policemen and gave a
report that Mahender and Ram Kumar were subjected to beatings by public on
24th August, 1987 and further stated that in the report that he did not agree
with the findings of Sh.S.S. Rathore, the earlier SDM. It is submitted by the
counsel that Sh. Parimal Rai was not authorised to sit in appeal over the
actions of his predecessor, i.e., Sh. S.S. Rathore. It seems that even the actions
of Sh. Parimal Rai acquiesced in the huge cover-up as is evident in this case.

The learned counsel for the State submits that Sh. S.S. Rathore gave
directions for the registration of the case on 28th August, 1987 but no case was
registered and instead the new SDM with his report dated 3rd November, 1987
submitted that the beatings were given by the members of the public and
armed with his report the case was sent as "untraced" which was then accepted
by the MM, Z.S. Lohat.
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page85 of173

(d)

The learned counsel for the State in order to strengthen his case further

relied on the following important contentions:-

i)

Ram Kumar was an important eye witness to the beatings meted out to
Mahender and himself. Externment proceedings were launched against
him intendingly enough on 25th August, 1987. The accused persons
were very well aware that the statement of Ram Kumar could put them
in trouble and in order to remove him from the scene, such proceedings
were launched. Unfortunately, Ram Kumar was found murdered and
his dead body was found lying near a Railway track in Ghaziabad under
mysterious circumstances on 19th November1990 during the pendency
of the trial.

ii)

A perusal of the injuries on the body of the deceased as per the post
mortem report shows that some of the injuries, such as injuries on the
soles of the deceased shows that this was the work of the policemen. It
is highly improbable that members of the public could have given
beating to Mahender on the soles of his feet and further it is only the
policemen who were best known to beat the culprits on this part of the
body. Moreover there are injuries of rail pattern which shows that only
professional policemen had given beatings to the deceased as has

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page86 of173

happened in this case.
iii)

There are letters on record as written by senior officers and the perusal
of these letters show that even DCP Qamar Ahmed expressed his
concerns about the custody death and called upon the concerned police
officers to collect documents and initiate actions as per law. But even
this command of DCP was not adhered to and no action was taken by
the accused persons and inspector K.P. Singh despite collecting
documents relating to inquest proceedings did not register a case.

iv)

As per Section 80 of the Evidence Act whenever any document is
produced before any Court, purporting to be a record or memorandum
of the evidence, or of any part of the evidence, given by a witness in a
judicial proceeding or before any officer authorized by law to take such
evidence, or to be a statement or confession by any prisoner or accused
person, taken in accordance with law, and purporting to be signed by
any Judge or Magistrate, or by any such officer as aforesaid, the Court
shall presume that the document is genuine, that any statements as to the
circumstances under which it was taken, purporting to be made by the
person signing it, are true, and that such evidence, statement or
confession was duly taken.

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page87 of173

v)

In the instant case, statements of witnesses including statement of Ram
Kumar who was the co-accused with deceased in case FIR No. 294/87
were recorded before Ld. SDM in the inquest proceedings as well as in
the complaint case and these statements speaks about involvement of
the accused persons in this case. With the aid of Section 80 of The
Indian Evidence Act, the documents which were part of evidence
recorded before the Ld. SDM and before the Ld. MM can be safely
relied upon. If these documents are considered then the accused persons
will have no escape route and their criminal liability in the instant case
is clearly established.

(e)

In the present case, the prosecution strongly relied upon the testimonies

of PW8 HC Narender, of PW38 HC Manoj Kumar and PW9 Rajkali as already
mentioned earlier in order to establish its case. In relation to the testimony of
the star witness of the prosecution PW 9 Rajkali the counsel submitted that
even if there are minor discrepancies in the statement of Rajkali, however it
does not in any way hamper the case of the prosecution.

The Hon'ble Supreme Court had laid down the following position of law in the
case of State of Rajasthan v. Kalki, 1981 (2) SCC 752:
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page88 of173

“.....normal discrepancies in evidence are those which
are due to normal errors of observation, normal errors
of memory due to lapse of time, due to mental
disposition such as shock and horror at the time of
occurrence and those are always there, however honest
and truthful a witness may be. Material discrepancies
are those which are not normal, and not expected of
normal person. Courts have to label the category to
which a discrepancy may be categorized. ”

Relying upon the aforementioned testimonies the counsel contended that
the accused R.P.Tyagi played the pivotal role in the whole episode right from
16th August, 1987 till 25th August, 1987 and every subsequent action of the
police in the entire incident had the stamp of R.P.Tyagi. Testimony of PW8
HC Narender, PW38 HC Manoj Kumar and PW9 Rajkali implicates this
accused person. Particularly, corroborative is the evidence of surrender of
Ram Kumar and Mahender Kumar in the police station in the morning of 24 th
August, 1987 and the plight of the two who surrendered all under the
directions of R.P.Tyagi and he is liable for the custodial torture and death of
Mahender. It is further submitted that R.P. Tyagi and others had beaten and

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page89 of173

tortured Mahender and Ram Kumar which led to the death of Mahender. The
presence of Ram Kumar and Mahender in the police station between 7.30 and
8:00 am in the morning on 24th August, 1987 has been clearly established by
the statements of PW9, Rajkali, PW8 HC Narender and PW38 HC Manoj
Kumar as well as the other witnesses. Any other story of the public beating of
Mahender Kumar and Ram Kumar in Surajmal Park is nothing but a facade
erected by the accused persons.

Further the accused Tej Singh Verma

fabricated the documents to prove the presence of Ram Kumar and Mahender
at Surajmal Park. All subsequent events showed that the incident of Surajmal
Park was manufactured by the accused persons.

(f)

The Counsel for the State submitted that by no stretch of imagination

one can say that the acts of R.P. Tyagi can be covered u/s 197 of Cr.P.C.
which speaks about sanction. There is no provision in law that after inflicting
injuries on a person in a police station any police person can say that action
cannot be taken against him without taking sanction from some competent

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page90 of173

authority. Thus, there is no question of sanction in such cases relating to any
provision of law.

(g)

The prosecution in order to examine and prove the case of custodial

torture and death relied upon the following judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court:

(i)

State of M.P. vs. Shyamsunder Trivedi and Ors, 1995 SCC (Crl.)

715.:

“The exaggerated adherence to and insistence
upon the establishment of proof beyond every
reasonable doubt, by the prosecution, ignoring the
ground realities, the fact-situations and the peculiar
circumstances of a given case, as in the present
case, often results in miscarriage of justice and
makes the justice delivery system a suspect. In the
ultimate analysis the society suffers and a criminal
gets encouraged. Tortures in police custody,
which of late are on the increase, receive
encouragement by this type of an unrealistic
approach of the courts because it reinforces the
belief in the mind of the police that no harm would
come to them, if an odd prisoner dies in the lockup, because there would hardly be any evidence
available to the prosecution to directly implicate
them with the torture; The courts must not lose

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page91 of173

sight of the fact that death in police custody is
perhaps one of the worst kind of crimes in a
civilized society, governed by the rule of law and
poses a serious threat to an orderly civilised
society. Torture in custody flouts the basic rights
of the citizens recognised by the Indian
Constitution and is an affront to human dignity.
Police excesses and the maltreatment of
detainees/undertrial prisoners or suspects tarnish
the image of civilised nation and encourages the
men in 'Khaki' to consider themselves to be above
the law and sometimes even to become law unto
themselves. Unless stern measures are taken to
check the malady, the foundations of the criminal
justice delivery system would be shaken and the
civilization itself would risk the consequence of
heading towards perishing. The courts must,
therefore, deal with such cases in a realistic
manner and with the sensitivity which they
deserve, otherwise the common man may lose faith
in the judiciary itself, which will be a sad day.
18.
In its 4th Report of June 1980, The National
Police Commission noticed the prevalence of
custodial torture etc. and observed that nothing is
so dehumanizing as the conduct of police in
practicing torture of any kind on a person in their
custody. The Commission noticed with regard that
the police image in the estimation of the public has
badly suffered on account of the prevalence of this
practice in varying degrees over the past several
years and noted with concern the inclination of
even some of the supervisory ranks in the police
hierarchy to countenance this practice in a bid to
achieve quick results by short-cut methods.
Though Section 330 and 331 of the Indian Penal
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page92 of173

Code make punishable those persons who cause
hurt for the purpose of extorting the confession, by
making the offence punishable with sentence up to
10 years of imprisonment, but the convictions, as
experience shows us, have been very few because
the atrocities with the precincts of the police
station are often left without any ocular or other
direct evidence to prove who the offenders are.
Disturbed by this situation, the Law Commission
in its 113th Report recommended amendments to
the Indian Evidence act so as to provide that in the
prosecution of a police officer for an alleged
offence of having caused bodily injuries to a
person while in police custody, if there is evidence
that the court may presume that the injury was
caused by the police officer having the custody of
that person during that period unless, the police
officer proves to the contrary. The onus to prove
the contrary must be discharged by the police
official
concerned.
The
recommendation,
however, we notice with concern, appears to have
gone unnoticed and the crime of custodial torture
etc. flourishes unabated. Keeping in view the
dehumanizing aspect of the crime, the flagrant
violation of the fundamental rights of the victims
of the crime and the growing rise in the crimes of
this type, where only a few come to light and
others don't, we hope that the Government and
Legislature would give serious thought to the
changes in the law not only to curb the custodial
crime but also to see that the custodial crime does
not go unpunished. The courts are also required to
have a change in their outlook and attitude,
particularly in cases involving custodial crimes and
they should exhibit more sensitivity and adopt a
realistic rather than a narrow technical approach,
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page93 of173

while dealing with the cases of custodial crime so
that as far as possible within their powers, the
guilty should not escape so that the victim of the
crime has the satisfaction that ultimately the
majesty of law has prevailed.”

(ii)

Munshi Singh Gautam (D) and Ors. Vs. State of M.P, 2005 SCC

(Crl.) 1269.:
“2. Custodial violence, torture and abuse of police
power are not peculiar to this country, but it is
widespread. It has been the concern of international
community because the problem is universal and the
challenge is almost global. The Universal Declaration
of Human Rights in 1948 which marked the
emergence of a worldwide trend of protection and
guarantee of certain basic human rights stipulates in
Article 5 that "No one shall be subjected to torture or
to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment". Despite this pious declaration, the crime
continues unabated, though every civilized nation
shows its concern and makes efforts for its
eradication.
3. If it is assuming alarming proportions, now a days,
all around it is merely on account of the devilish
devices adopted by those at the helm of affairs who
proclaim from roof tops to be the defenders of
democracy and protectors of peoples' rights and yet do
not hesitate to condescend behind the screen to let
loose their men in uniform to settle personal scores,
feigning ignorance of what happens and pretending to
be peace loving puritans and saviours of citizens'
rights.
5. The diabolic recurrence of police torture resulting
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page94 of173

in a terrible scare in the minds of common citizens
that their lives and liberty are under a new and
unwarranted peril because guardians of law destroy
the human rights by custodial violence and torture and
invariably resulting in death. The vulnerability of
human rights assumes a traumatic torture when
functionaries of the State whose paramount duty is to
protect the citizens and not to commit gruesome
offences against them.
6. Rarely in cases of police torture or custodial death,
direct ocular evidence of the complicity of the police
personnel alone who can only explain the
circumstances in which a person in their custody had
died. Bound as they are by the ties of brotherhood, it
is not unknown that the police personnel prefer to
remain silent and more often than not even pervert the
truth to save their colleagues - and the present case is
an apt illustration - as to how one after the other
police witnesses feigned ignorance about the whole
matter.
7. The exaggerated adherence to and insistence upon
the establishment of proof beyond every reasonable
doubt by the prosecution, at times even when the
prosecuting agencies are themselves fixed in the dock,
ignoring the ground realities, the fact-situation and the
peculiar circumstances of a given case, as in the
present case, often results in miscarriage of justice
and makes the justice delivery system suspect and
vulnerable. In the ultimate analysis the society suffers
and a criminal gets encouraged. Tortures in police
custody, which of late are on the increase, receive
encouragement by this type of an unrealistic approach
at times of the courts as well because it reinforces the
belief in the mind of the police that no harm would
come to them if one prisoner dies in the lock-up
because there would hardly be any evidence available
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page95 of173

to the prosecution to directly implicate them with the
torture. The courts must not lose sight of the fact that
death in police custody is perhaps one of the worst
kind of crimes in a civilized society, governed by the
rule of law and poses a serious threat to an orderly
civilized society. Torture in custody flouts the basic
rights of the citizens recognized by the Indian
Constitution and is an affront to human dignity. Police
excesses and the mal-treatment of detainees/undertrial prisoners or suspects tarnishes the image of any
civilized nation and encourages the men in 'Khaki' to
consider themselves to be above the law and
sometimes even to become law unto themselves.
Unless stern measures are taken to check the malady
of the very fence eating the crops, the foundations of
the criminal justice delivery system would be shaken
and the civilization itself would risk the consequence
of heading; towards total decay resulting in anarchy
and authoritarianism reminiscent of barbarism. The
courts must, therefore, deal with such cases in a
realistic manner and with the sensitivity which they
deserve, otherwise the common man may tend to
gradually lose faith in the efficacy of the system of
judiciary itself, which if it happens will be a sad day,
for any one to reckon with.
8. Though Sections 330and 331 of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860 (for short the 'IPC') make punishable
those persons who cause hurt for the purpose of
extorting the confession by making the offence
punishable with sentence up to 10 years of
imprisonment, but the convictions, as experience
shows from track record have been very few
compared to the considerable increase of such
onslaught because the atrocities within the precincts
of the police station are often left without much traces
or any ocular or other direct evidence to prove as to
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page96 of173

who the offenders are. Disturbed by this situation the
Law Commission in its 113th Report recommended
amendments to the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (in
short the 'Evidence Act') so as to provide that in the
prosecution of a police officer for an alleged offence
of having caused bodily injuries to a person while in
police custody, if there is evidence that the injury was
caused during the period when the person was in the
police custody, the court may presume that the injury
was caused by the police officer having the custody of
that person during that period unless the police officer
proves to the contrary. The onus to prove the contrary
must be discharged by the police official concerned.
Keeping in view the dehumanizing aspect of the
crime, the flagrant violation of the fundamental rights
of the victim of the crime and the growing rise in the
crimes of this type, where only a few come to light
and others don't, the Government and the legislature
must give serious thought to the recommendation of
the Law Commission and bring about appropriate
changes in the law not only to curb the custodial
crime but also to see that the custodial crime does not
go unpunished. The courts are also required to have a
change in their outlook approach, appreciation and
attitude, particularly in cases involving custodial
crimes and they should exhibit more sensitivity and
adopt a realistic rather than a narrow technical
approach, while dealing with the cases of custodial
crime so that as far as possible within their powers,
the truth is found and guilty should not escape so that
the victim of the crime has the satisfaction that
ultimately the majesty of law has prevailed.
9. But at the same time there seems to be disturbing
trend of increase in cases where false accusations of
custodial torture are made, trying to take advantage of
the serious concern shown and the stern attitude
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page97 of173

reflected by the courts while dealing with custodial
violence. It needs to be carefully examined whether
the allegations of custodial violence are genuine or are
sham attempts to gain undeserved benefit
masquerading as victims of custodial violence. The
case in hand is unique case in the sense that
complainant filed a complaint alleging custodial
torture while the accused alleged false implication
because of oblique motives.
10. It is the duty of the police, when a crime is
reported, to collect evidence to be placed during trial
to arrive at the truth. That certainly would not include
torturing a person, be he an accused or a witness to
extract information. The duty should be done within
four corners of law. Law enforcers can not take law
into their hands in the name of collecting evidence.”

8.

Now as far as involvement of the appellant R.P. Tyagi is concerned in

the present case, learned counsel for the appellant Shri R.N. Sharma raised the
following contentions:

(i)

The single accused such as the appellant herein could not have been

convicted and sentenced under Section 302 IPC read with Section 120-B IPC
when in the entire judgment trial court has not given any findings with regard
to the alleged criminal conspiracy.
(ii)

The learned Magistrate who recorded the statements of the

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page98 of173

complainant's witnesses after taking cognizance under Section 202 Cr.P.C. for
the purpose of finding out as to a prima facie case existed against the accused
persons cannot at all be said to have recorded evidence since the case was
exclusively triable by Sessions Judge in view of the allegations levelled by the
complainant.
(iii)

The enquiry conducted under Section 202 Cr.P.C. cannot be said to

have been conducted in exercise of judicial powers, and the learned Magistrate
while embarking upon enquiry under Section 200 and 202 Cr.P.C. was not
empowered to refer portion of the enquiry to an outside agency like police
which is evident from the perusal of the summoning order that all the
statements of complainant's witnesses were recorded with the active help and
dictation of Inspector Kishan Singh of Crime Branch.
(iv)

The learned Magistrate had flouted the mandatory provisions of Section

210 Cr.P.C. which provides the procedure to be followed when there is a
complaint case when police investigation in respect of the same offence is
being undertaken. It was further submitted that wherein investigation under
Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. was in progress and the Investigating officer of the case
was granted time to file his final report then without waiting for the police
report, the learned Magistrate resorted to enquiry under Section 202 Cr.P.C.
whereas the mandate of law is that Magistrate shall stay the proceedings of
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page99 of173

such inquiry or trial and call for a report on the matter from the police officer
conducting the investigation.
The learned counsel for the appellant relied upon the following
judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court to strengthen his arguments:

a)

In Markandey Rai v. Sheo Kumar Thakur & anr., AIR 1961 PATNA

120, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held as follows:

“During the course of an inquiry under
Section 202, Criminal P.C. has to satisfy himself on
the evidence adduced by the prosecution, if a prima
facie case has been made out so as to put the
proposed accused on trial, and it is only at the stage
of the trial that the truth or falsity of the allegations
made in the complaint petition has to be finally
determined. The accused in such an inquiry cannot
be compelled to appear, but there will be no
illegality if he, of his own accord, appears before the
inquiring officer and assist him in the matter of the
inquiry; but he cannot be permitted either to cross
examine the witnesses produced by the complainant,
or to produce his own evidence in defence. Where
the inquiring officer has allowed the accused to cross
examine the 'witnesses of the complainant, or to
adduce evidence in defence, or has taken into
consideration some informations received by him
either on confidential inquiry or from some other
source, the procedure, though not illegal in the sense
that it vitiates the ultimate order passed by the
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page100 of173

Magistrate,
is
unjustified,
improper
and
condemnable.
(9)
In an earlier, decision of Upper Burma
Judicial Commissioner's Court in 11 Ind Cas 249
(UB), the same view has been taken, and it has been
held that a local investigation is not intended by the
Legislature to supersede a regular trial, and that
when it is found that there is evidence in support of
the complainant's charge, the function of the officer
making the local investigation is fulfilled. The
process should then issue and the truth or falsity of
the evidence determined in a regular manner. It was
pointed out that the object of Section 202 is to
prevent the issue of process where there is some
initial ground for doubting the truth of the complaint
and where on a local investigation there appears to
be no evidence to support it.
12.
On a consideration of the authorities referred
to above, the law on the subject in our opinion, is
that, during the course of an inquiry under Section
202 Cr.P.C. the inquiring officer have to satisfy
himself on the evidence adduced by the prosecution,
if a prima facie case has been made out so as to put
the proposed accused on trial and it is only at the
stage of the trial that the truth or falsity of the
allegations made in the complaint petition has to be
finally determined.”

b)

In Dr. S.S. Khanna v. Chief Secretary, Patna and another, AIR 1983

SC 595, the following position of law was laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court:

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page101 of173

“An inquiry under Section 202 is not in the nature of
a trial for there can be in law only one trial in respect
of any offence and that a trial can commence only
after process is issued to the accused. The said
proceedings are not strictly proceedings between the
complainant and the accused. A person against whom
a complaint is filed does not become an accused until
it is decided to issue process against him. Even if he
participates in the proceedings under Section 202 he
does so not as an accused but as a member of the
public. The object of the inquiry under Section 202 is
the ascertainment of the fact whether the complaint
has any valid foundation calling for the issue of
process to the person complained against or whether it
is a baseless one on which no action need be taken.
The section does not require any adjudication to be
made about the guilt or otherwise of the person
against whom the complaint is preferred. Such a
person cannot even be legally called to participate in
the proceedings under S.202.”

v)

The trial court erred by not recording the pre-charge evidence as per the

provisions of law which caused serious prejudice to the defence of the
appellant since he was deprived of an opportunity of proving his innocence.

In Raj Kishore Prasad v. State of Bihar, 1996 (4) SCC 495, the
Hon'ble Supreme Court held as follows:

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page102 of173

“10. Now it is well neigh settled that “evidence”
envisaged in Section 319 of the Code is the evidence
tendered during trial of the case if the offence is
triable by a court of Session. The material placed
before the committal Court cannot be treated as
evidence collected during enquiry or trial.”

vi)

The evidence placed before the trial court in the form of statements

during pre summoning stage cannot be treated as evidence and the same can
not be the basis for sentencing and convicting the appellant as he had no
opportunity to cross examine the witnesses at that stage.

In Shashi Jena & ors. v. Khadal Swain & anr., II (2004) SLT 650,
the Hon'ble Supreme Court held as follows:

“8.
From a bare perusal of the aforesaid
provision, it would appear that evidence given by a
witness in a judicial proceeding or before any person
authorized to take it is admissible for the purpose of
proving in a subsequent judicial proceeding or in a
later stage of the same judicial proceeding, the truth
of the facts which it states in its evidence given in
earlier judicial proceeding or earlier stage of the same
judicial proceeding, but under proviso there are three
pre-requisites for making the said evidence
admissible in subsequent proceeding or later stage of

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page103 of173

the same proceeding and they are, (i) that the earlier
proceeding was between the same parties; (ii) that the
adverse party in the first proceeding had the right and
opportunity to cross examine; and (iii) that the
questions in issue in both the proceedings were
substantially the same, and in the absence of any of
the three pre-requisites afore-stated Section 33 of the
Act would not be attracted. This Court had occasion
to consider the question in the case of V.M. Mathew
v. V.S. Sharma & ors., AIR 1996 SC 109, in which it
was laid down that in view of the second proviso,
evidence of a witness in a previous proceeding would
be admissible under Section 33 of the Act only if the
adverse party in the first proceeding had the right and
opportunity to cross examine the witness. The Court
observed thus at pages 110 and 111:
“The adverse party referred in the
proviso is the party in the previous
proceeding against whom the
evidence adduced therein was given
against his interest. He had the right
and opportunity to cross examine the
witness in the previous proceeding...
the proviso lays down the acid test
that statement of a particular witness
should have been tested by both
parties by examination and cross
examination in order to make it
admissible in the later proceedings.”

vii)

The appellant could not legally have been confronted with the contents

of the statements recorded during the pre-summoning stage while recording
his statements under Section 313 Cr.P.C. and more particularly
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

any

page104 of173

allegations during the testimony recorded during the trial.

viii)

The appellant being a public servant is entitled to protection of Section

197 Cr.P.C. which requires the sanction of the government for the offences
alleged to have been committed by him which acting or purporting to act in
discharge of his official duty. The learned Magistrate by taking cognizance of
such offence erred in law and vitiated the whole process of trial.

In B. Saha and Ors. vs. M.S. Kochar 1979 (4) SCC 177 it was
held:-

“The words 'any offence alleged to have been
committed by him while acting or purporting to act
in the discharge of his official duty' employed in
Section 197 (1) of the Code, are capable of a narrow
as well as a wide interpretation. If these words are
construed too narrowly, the section will be rendered
altogether sterile, for, 'it is no part of an official
duty to commit an offence, and never can be'. In
the wider sense, these words will take under their
umbrella every act constituting an offence,
committed in the course of the same transaction in
which the official duty is performed or purports to
be performed. The right approach to the import of
these words lies between two extremes. While on
the one hand, it is not every offence committed by a
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page105 of173

public servant while engaged in the performance of
his official duty, which is entitled to the protection
of Section 197 (1), an act constituting an offence,
directly and reasonably connected with his official
duty will require sanction for prosecution and the
said provision.”

The Supreme Court in the case of Sankaran Moitra vs. Sadhna
Das & Anr. III (2006) SLT 168 held as under:-

“In H.H.B. Gill & Another vs. King, 75 FA 41 :
AIR 1948 PC 128, the Judicial Committee of the
Privy Council had an occasion to deal with the
provisions of Section 197 of the Code in
juxtaposition of Section 270 of the Government of
India Act, 1935. Referring to Dr. Hori Ram Singh
and applying the ratio laid down therein, their
Lordships observed that a public servant can only be
said to act or purport to act in the discharge of his
official duty, if his act is such as to lie within the
scope of his official duty. The Judicial Committee
proceeded to state that in considering Section 197,
'much assistance' could be derived from the
Judgment of Dr. Hori Ram Singh.

It then formulated the test thus:
“A public servant can only be said to act or to
purport to act in the discharge of his official duty, if
his act is such as to lie within the scope of his
official duty. Thus, a Judge neither acts nor purports
to act as a Judge in receiving a bribe, though the
judgment which he delivers may be such an act; nor
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page106 of173

does a Government medical officer act or purport to
act as a public servant in picking the pocket of a
patient whom he is examining, though the
examination itself may be such an act. The test may
well be whether the public servant, if challenged,
can reasonably claim that, what he does, he does in
virtue of his office.”

ix)

The learned Magistrate did not follow the dictum of law in allowing the

complainant to examine his witnesses without examining the complainant
himself first as in this case the complainant was examined as CW 52 and was
fully allowed to fill up the gaps for a considerably long time. It is further
submitted that the learned trial court erred in law in totally relying upon the
statements of complainant's witnesses recorded during pre-summoning stage,
while passing the impugned judgment and order on sentence by holding that
the deposition of CWs made before learned Metropolitan Magistrate who did
not stick to their earlier statements have not become irrelevant or inadmissible
in view of Section 33 of Indian Evidence Act.

x)

The counsel for the appellant contended that the trial court erred in

holding that Section 80 of the Indian Evidence Act obliges the court to
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page107 of173

presume a document purporting to be a record on memorandum of evidence or
of any part of the evidence given by a witness in a judicial proceeding taken in
accordance with law and purporting to be signed by a Judge or Magistrate is
genuine and that statements purporting to be made by the person signing it, are
true and that such evidence, statements or confession was duly taken
particularly when none of the witnesses examined during trial supported their
earlier recorded statements recorded during pre-summoning stage.

9.

The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the evidence

tendered by the defence witnesses was entitled for an equal treatment as that of
the prosecution witnesses since the learned trial court rejected the evidence of
defence witnesses quite casually without assigning any justified reasons.
Particularly instructive was the documentary evidence brought on record
regarding the bad antecedents of Mahender Kumar and Ram Kumar and
regarding the fact that the police party apprehended them on 24th August, 1987
from Road No. 58, Surajmal Park, Shahdara where they were found in injured

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page108 of173

condition having been beaten up by the public. The defence witnesses further
supported the fact that after the spot proceedings, both the aforesaid injured
persons were referred to General Hospital, Shahdara and this position was
fully supported by DW7, namely Sh. Parimal Rai.

10.

The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the post mortem

report cannot by itself be treated as a substantial piece of evidence, when the
doctor conducting the post mortem namely Dr. Vishnu Kumar was never
th

produced in the witness box and the said P.M. report No. 393/87 dt. 26

August, 1987 of deceased Mahender Kumar was got exhibited as Ex.PW-36/A
through Dr. Rimteke, who explicitly admitted in his cross-examination that the
service record of Dr. Vishnu Kumar was available with the hospital which
contains even the personal addresses of the doctors and further admitted that
he had never conducted any post mortem as he was a General Surgeon. It is
further submitted that Dr. Vishnu Kumar had been examined during presummoning stage as CW-21 and at that time he specifically stated that there

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page109 of173

was no injury on any vital part of the body of the deceased Mahender Kumar
and as such no intention to commit murder on the part of the appellant is made
out. The counsel further submitted that no efforts were made by the
prosecution to call Dr. Vishnu Kumar in witness box to tender his evidence,
despite the fact that his presence could have been easily obtained and as such
non-examination of the author of post mortem report is fatal to the prosecution
case in view of Section 45 of the Indian Evidence Act.

The learned counsel for appellant raised the plea that even if the
entire case of the Prosecution is deemed to be true, without admitting the
same, it does not fall within the ambit of Section 302 IPC particularly when
the injuries reflected in MLC and post mortem report reveal that the said
injuries were mainly bruises, lacerations and abrasions caused by blunt
weapon. Dr. S. Patnaik, PW6 admitted in his cross-examination that the
possibility cannot be ruled out in patient suffering further abrasions after
examination by Dr. A.K. Verma if he was transported or made to travel in a

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page110 of173

jeep for one and half hour and that there may be bruises which may show-up
externally even after death due to extra-vasation of blood fluid, particularly
when the injured were rushed to hospital immediately after having been
apprehended from Road No. 58, Surajmal Park, Shahdara, New Delhi after
having been found in injured condition since they had been beaten-up by
public.

The counsel for the appellant stated that the testimony of Dr.A.K.
Verma recorded during the inquest proceedings by Sh. Parimal Rai cannot be
totally ignored who had stated that he had medically examined the patient
Mahender Kumar on his arrival in Casualty and at that time he was in
agonizing pain and replied to questions relevantly and the patient gave an
alleged history of being involved in some quarrel and being assaulted by some
persons during the quarrel and more particularly when all the medical records
like M.L.C., Post Mortem report and records of LNJP hospital corroborate the
police records to the effect that deceased Mahender Kumar and Ram Kumar

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page111 of173

were beaten up by the public persons. In light of the above mentioned facts,
the appellant cannot be said to be involved in any of the alleged offences as
held by the Trial Court.

To strengthen his plea, it was further submitted that

the Inquest Report of Sh. Parimal Rai, DW 7, exhibited as DW7/A, referred to
the dying declaration of deceased Mahender Kumar in which it was stated that
the deceased was assaulted by public persons.

In the case of State of Haryana vs. Ram Singh 2002 (1) JCC 385
the Hon'ble Supreme Court held as under:-

“Value of the Post mortem report by itself is not a
substantive piece of evidence, but the evidence of the doctor
conducting the post mortem can by no means be ascribed to
be insignificant. The significance of evidence of Doctor lies
vis-a-vis the injuries appearing on the body of the deceased
person and likely use of the weapon therefore and it would
then be the prosecutor's duty and obligation to have the
corroborative evidence available on record from the other
prosecution witnesses.”

11.

The learned counsel for the appellant raised a plea that the trial court

should not have relied upon the testimony of those witnesses who had been
making constant improvements before the court when compared to their
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page112 of173

previous statements and statements of such witnesses who were constantly
changing their stand were not worthy of any consideration. Particularly
noticeable were the improvements in the statements and testimonies given by
the star witness of the prosecution PW9, Smt. Raj Kali. This PW was
examined on three occasions:-

a)

th

During inquest proceedings by Ld. SDM on 26 August, 1987 i.e.
Sh. S.S. Rathore.

b)

During Pre-summoning stage as CW-8 i.e Ex.PW-9/A.

c)

During Trial as PW-9.
A comparative analysis of the statements tendered before the MM

as compared to the statements tendered before the SDM shows that there are a
lot of improvements and the same are as follows:-

i)

th

During the inquest proceedings she did not state that on 24 August,

1987 at 7.30 or 8.00 a.m. she noticed Mahender Kumar and Ram Kumar
present at P.S. or that her other three sons Rajender, Manohar and Kishan

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page113 of173

Chand as well as Jassu and Rajender-II were present in the Police Station.

ii)

She did not state before the SDM that the police officials were shouting

or that she tried to talk to Mahender and Ram Kumar but was prevented from
doing so.

iii)

She had not stated during the inquest proceedings that while she was

standing outside P.S., she heard weeping voice of Mahender Kumar and Ram
Kumar or that when she tried to meet them she was prevented from doing so
by the police officials.

iv)

In statement before Ld. M.M. she did not impute any role to the

appellant, which she had done in her statement during inquest proceedings,
like the appellant allegedly saying that he had already committed three
murders or taking her inside the room and misbehaving with her. Rather in
this statement she does not allege that appellant R.P.Tyagi was present in P.S.
on 24th August 1987 at 7.30 to 8.00 a.m. or that the SHO, SI Lakhmi Chand
and SI Mukesh were involved in this act or that it was they who said that they
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page114 of173

had ordered to bring the woods for burning her and all arrangements for her
funeral had already been completed or that when she alongwith her daughterin-law Premwati went to JPN Hospital, the SHO was present there, who did
not allow her to see Mahender Kumar.

v)

Statement recorded before the Ld. M.M. on 7th December 1991 in fact

does not attribute any role to the appellant R.P.Tyagi either regarding alleged
lifting of this PW or her family members or regarding their alleged detention
in P.S. or regarding alleged production of deceased Mahender Kumar and Ram
Kumar or the presence of appellant at P.S. Vivek Vihar at relevant time or any
role as attributed to said appellant during inquest proceedings and before Ld.
Trial Court.

The learned counsel for the appellant further contended that the
following improvements were made during the testimony in the trial by PW9
Raj Kali when compared to her earlier statements tendered during inquest
proceedings and before the Ld. MM Shahdara, Delhi.

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page115 of173

a. In Ex.PW1/B she stated that on 16th August 1987 police came to her house,
gave them severe beatings, took them to Police Station and there again gave
them severe beatings. Whereas in statement Ex. PW-9/A before Ld. MM
Shahdara, Delhi, she does not impute any role to any police officials regarding
beatings given to them at her residence as well as Police Station. On this
aspect she has not alleged anything in her statement before Ld. Trial Court.

b. In Ex.PW-1/B i.e. the statement tendered before Sh. S.S. Rathore, SDM,
Shahdara, Delhi this PW only alleged that while being detained in P.S. the
SHO said that he had already committed three murders and they took her in
room and misbehaved with her and the SHO i.e. appellant, SI Lakhmi Chand
and SI Mukesh were involved in this act and that they allegedly had ordered to
bring the woods for burning her and all arrangements for her funeral had been
completed or that when she went to LNJPN Hospital with tea, the SHO, i.e.
the appellant was present there, who did not allow her to seek Mahender
Kumar. Whereas, in her statement Ex.PW-9/A before MM Shahdara, Delhi

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page116 of173

she has not supported her earlier version regarding alleged role of appellant
herein on the aforesaid aspects and has completely exonerated him in this
statement.

c. This PW for the first time named the appellant herein and others while
deposing before Ld. Trial Court, thereby alleging that four police officials
namely R.P. Tyagi, Surender, Narender and Mukesh Kumar asked her
regarding whereabouts of Mahender Kumar and Ram Kumar, to which she
expressed ignorance.

d. She alleged for the first time that they started hurling abuses to them and
that it was the appellant who detained her as well as daughter-in-law Premwati
in lock-up and that the appellant told them that unless and until Ram Kumar
and Mahender Kumar will be produced, he will keep them in Police lock-up.

e. She further alleged for the first time before Ld. Trial Court that the
appellant also stated that he will kill her son and that he also gave her beating
with lathies, as a result of which she sustained severe injuries on her fingers
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page117 of173

and that he also used filthy language for her and her daughter-in-law Premwati
and that nephew of Ram Kumar aged only about 15 days was also not spared
by him.

f. This PW further alleged in her statement for the first time before the Ld.
Trial Court that when her son Kishan Chand produced Mahender Kumar and
Ram Kumar in P.S., then appellant went to them in the P.S. and asked the
accused Constable Jagdish to release them from P.S. and that they came down
to the at ground floor and then Police officials took Ram Kumar and Mahender
inside the police station.

She further alleged for the first time that the appellant herein asked them
to leave P.S. stating that now Mahender and Ram Kumar were available to him
and that she requested the appellant to allow them to see Mahender and Ram
Kumar.

According to the learned counsel for the appellant a perusal of the
above mentioned statements and testimonies lead to the following conclusion:Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page118 of173

a.

This PW was duly confronted with all her previous statements recorded

during the Inquest Proceedings and before the Ld. MM during pre-summoning
stage and after confrontations nothing incriminating against the appellant
herein remained in her statement tendered before the learned Trial Court.

b.

During her cross-examination before the Ld. Trial Court this PW

admitted it to be correct that her statement was read over by her counsel before
deposing in the Court, which makes it evident that she was a tutored witness
and as such her testimony even otherwise neither inspires confidence nor
deserves the weightage attached to it by learned trial court.

c.

She admitted she did not recollect as to which Police Official's name she

had stated to the SDM in her statement and that she did not know any of the
police officials who had come to her house on 16th August, 1987 and that she
had not mentioned the names of those police officials right from the day they
had come to her home till the day when her statement was recorded by Ld.
M.M. and that she had not given the description and facial features of those

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page119 of173

police officials in her statement before the SDM or before the Ld. MM.

The learned counsel for the appellant contended that after perusal of
statements of witnesses recorded during trial i.e. statements of PW 3 Jaswant,
PW4 Chiranji Lal, PW7 Rajinder, PW12 Rajinder Prashad, PW13 Manohar
Lal, PW14 Prem Wati, PW15 Anil Kumar, PW16 Neetu, PW17 Alah Ram,
PW18 Pappu, PW19 Krishna, PW20 Sondai, PW23 Jamna Devi, PW33
Sukhbiri, PW34 Jamman Lal, PW38 HC Manoj Kumar and PW44 Constable
Satpal Singh, who did not support the complainant's case, and were declared
hostile and nothing could be elicited by the learned Additional Public
Prosecutor during their cross-examination, no link remain as to evidence to
connect the appellant with the alleged offences.

12.

The counsel for the appellant submitted that non-examination of the

complainant and not proving his signatures on the complaint during the trial
has an adverse effect on the case of the complainant and under such
circumstances, the complaint which was a basic document based upon which

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page120 of173

the law was set into motion cannot be looked into. It was further contended
that when a case is based on circumstantial evidence, the prosecution is duty
bound to complete the chain of events and in the present case, production of
deceased Mahender Kumar at P.S. Vivek Vihar on 24th August, 1987 by PW7
Rajinder, PW3 Jaswant @Jassu, PW12 Rajinder Prasad and PW13 Manohar
Lal has not been proved during trial since the aforesaid PWs did not support
the prosecution case on this aspect or any other aspect of the complainant's
case. The counsel further contended that the statement of PW38 HC Manoj is
enough to destroy the alleged story of the complainant that deceased Mahender
Kumar was produced before appellant herein on 24th August, 1987 at about
7:00 or 7.15 am when this PW categorically denied the presence of the
appellant in the police station as the relevant time and further stated that he
saw SI Mukesh giving 2-3 slaps on the mouths of those two persons i.e.
deceased Mahender Kumar and Ram Kumar.

13.

The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the court must

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page121 of173

arrive at the following conclusions with regard to the conviction and sentence
by the learned trial court:

(i) It is wrong to convict and sentence the appellant merely because he was
SHO of PS Vivek Vihar at the relevant point of time. The principle of
vicarious liability is inapplicable in all criminal jurisprudence.

(ii) When there is not even an iota of evidence on record against the
appellant, how can the present case fall in the category of rarest of rare
cases. The following case therefore, does not warrant death penalty which
has been awarded to the appellant.

14.

After considering the pleas of the counsel for the parties we are of the

view that the counsel for the defence has built his case on the fact that at
around 2:00 pm on 24th August, 1987, the police station, Vivek Vihar received
a call from some unknown person from Surajmal Park complaining to the
police that two ruffians were harassing the public and a police team constituted
by R.P. Tyagi was dispatched to the spot. The members of the so called police
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page122 of173

party apprehended the culprits, who were being subjected to severe beating by
the public. Thereafter, the two arrested persons were taken to the hospital
where Mahender died subsequently. However, in our view the prosecution has
been able to prove the fact that the story built up by the defence is concocted
and based on false predications. The prosecution has been successfully able to
complete the chain of events beyond reasonable doubt.

15.

The portions of the testimony of PW 9 Rajkali in the court as a

prosecution witness which is relevant is as under-

“Smt. Raj Kali deposed that on the day of Janmashtmi,
i.e., 16th August 1987 she along with her children and
husband was sleeping in her house. On the same night
at about 9:00 PM, police officials went to her house
and started enquiring about her son Mahender and his
friend Ram Kumar. Her family reported that both
Ram Kumar and Mahender were not at home and the
police officials took them to police station, Vivek
Vihar. She stated that while she was kept in the
police station, her husband and her other sons
Manoher Lal, Rajinder, etc. were kept in Police Poost
Anaz Mandi. She further deposed that after about a
week on 24th August 1987 at about 7:30 or 8:00 AM
she along with Yamuna etc. was released from the
police station. When they were coming out of the
police station she noticed Mahender Kumar and Ram
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page123 of173

Kumar present in the police station as well as the
presence of her three sons Manohar Lal, Rajinder, and
Kishan Chand. She stated that Jassu and Rajinder
were also present there and police was shouting out
that Ram Kumar and Mahender have been produced in
the police station by their relatives. In the meanwhile,
when they tried to talk to Mahender Kumar the police
officer present there directed them not to talk with
them and further asked to them to leave the police
station.”

Thus, after a perusal of the statements and testimonies of Rajkali
before the SDM, as a witness in the complaint case before learned
metropolitan magistrate and as a prosecution witness in the trial court, the
following conclusive evidence can be relied upon to implicate the appellant.

The sum and substance of the testimony of PW9 Rajkali, which is worthy of
belief is:-

a.

That Mahender and Ram Kumar surrendered in the police station Vivek

Vihar between 7.30 a.m and 8.00 am. This testimony is corroborated by the
evidence of PW38 Constable Manoj Kumar.

b.

She along with her family members and her neighbours were

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page124 of173

continuously detained by the police and given a beating right from 16th
August, 1987 till the date when the deceased, Mahender and Ram Kumar
surrendered on 24th August, 1987.

c.

This testimony is supported by the testimony of PW-10 Rakesh Kumar,

PW-11 Govind Ram, PW-12 Rajinder Prasad, PW-13 Manohar Lal, PW-14
Prem Wati, PW-15 Anil Kumar, PW-16 Neetu, PW-19 Krishna, PW-20
Sondai, PW-21 Subash, PW-23 Jamna Devi, PW-31 Om Wati,

PW-33

Sukhbiri, PW-34 Jamman Lal, who all deposed to the effect that they were
summoned to the police station regularly since 16th August 1987 until the
surrender of Mahender and Ram Kumar on 24th August 1987.

Though there are embellishments and improvements made in the
statements of Rajkali from that made before the SDM Shri SS Rathore who
had conducted the first inquest proceedings; in her statement before the
Metropolitan Magistrate in the complaint case on 7th December 1991 and in

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page125 of173

her testimony before the court recorded in Court as PW 9 on 17th July 2004,
24th July 2004, 31st July 2004 and 7th August 2004, we are not completely
relying upon the same. We are only relying upon the aforementioned portion
of her testimony which has been consistent before the SDM, the Metropolitan
Magistrate and as a prosecution witness in the trial court to complete the chain
of events, as put up by the prosecution to implicate the appellant which has
also been supported by PW 8 and PW 38 who are police personnel themselves
and further strengthened by the depositions of PW 10 Rakesh Kumar, PW 11
Govind Ram, PW 18 Pappu, PW 20 Sondai, PW 21 Subash, PW 23 Jamna
Devi, PW 33 Sukhbiri and PW 34 Jamman Lal.

16.

While PW9 Raj Kali has made some improvements from her statements

before the Inquest Officer, the Metropolitan Magistrate and in her testimony in
Court, we cannot lose sight of the fact that Rajkali is the widowed mother of
the deceased Mahender who was a young man. She has battled against heavy
odds and the largely obstructive attitude of the entire administrative machinery

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page126 of173

to bring to book the killers of her son. Thus, due to her traumatic experience
and the passage of time there are bound to be discrepancies. Undoubtedly,
there are certain other minor improvements and embellishments made in her
evidence as a prosecution witness but her version on the essence of the case set
up by the prosecution is credible and worthy of belief even after discarding the
improvements and consequently where her testimony is supported by other
witnesses, she can be relied upon.

17.

Quite apart from the fact that her testimony on the above issues is

supported by other witnesses, even the police witness PW38 HC Manoj Kumar
and PW8 HC Narender Singh support the case set up by the prosecution about
the presence of Mahender and Ram Kumar in the morning of 24th August,
1987 in the police station .

There is no reason for at least the police witnesses to depose falsely
against their own colleagues and the plea of the counsel for the appellant that
this was done so as to save themselves as they were hand in gloves with the
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page127 of173

deceased Mahender Kumar’s father, cannot be accepted as their evidence is
supported by the testimony of PW 9 Rajkali and PW 8 Constable Narender
Kumar, PW 10 Rakesh Kumar, PW 11 Govind Ram, PW 18 Pappu, PW 20
Sondai, PW 21 Subash, PW 23 Jamna Devi, PW 33 Sukhbiri and PW 34
Jamman Lal.

Once the presence of the deceased and his accomplice Ram Kumar
in the police station is established in the morning at about 7.30 a.m. then the
whole story of the defence that Mahender and Ram Kumar were arrested at
Suraj Mal Park at around 2 :00 pm upon being beaten by the enraged public is
totally unworthy of belief and appears to be a concoction. The most vital
evidence to falsify the version of 2 o'clock incident in Suraj Mal Park is the
testimony of PW38 HC Manoj Kumar. He is said to be the driver of the
official vehicle which is shown in the police record to have taken the police
party to Suraj Mal Park. The said Manoj Kumar has deposed without any
effective cross-examination that he did not go to Suraj Mal Park at 2:00 pm on

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page128 of173

that day. Once the defence version of an incident of 2 o'clock at Suraj Mal
Park is falsified by the evidence of the police driver of the jeep PW 38 Manoj
Kumar, who is supposed to have driven the police party in the official vehicle,
coupled with the fact that the presence of Mahender and Ram Kumar in the
police station having been established by the testimony of PW 2 Satish
Aggarwal, PW4 Chiranji Lal, PW 9 Rajkali , PW10 Rakesh Kumar, PW11
Govind Ram, 12 Rajinder Kumar, PW 13 Manohar Lal, PW 14 Prem Wati,
PW 16 Neetu, PW 17 Alah Ram, PW 18 Pappu, PW 19 Krishna, PW 20
Sondai, PW 21 Subash, PW 31 Om Wati, PW 34 Jamman Lal, the story of 2
o'clock incident appears to be fabricated with a view to explain the injuries on
the person of not only the deceased Mahender but his friend Ram Kumar also.

Even otherwise, it is extremely odd and opposed to the common
course of human conduct that two culprits who were said to have been bold
enough to have stabbed a police constable causing him a serious injury would,
when the entire police force of the area is relentlessly searching for them

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page129 of173

almost for more than a week, would surface on their own in the mid-afternoon
at a public park and pick up a quarrel with members of the public so as to
attract uncalled for attention to them.

We cannot lose sight of the fact that it is not in dispute that
Mahender and Ram Kumar were said by the police to be part of a criminal
gang led by their father and accordingly it is highly unlikely that two such
alleged criminals who had been outrageous enough to stab a police constable
on duty would be tackled by members of the irate public of the area. Thus, not
only does the evidence of PW38 HC Manoj Kumar and PW 8 Narender Singh
amongst others falsifies the police visit to Suraj Mal Park at 2 p.m. on 24th
August, 1987 but the said version is also unbelievable for its very incredulous
nature.

Owing to the reasons described above that this court cannot accept
the plea that Mahender and Ram Kumar were beaten up by the public in the
afternoon at about 1.30 pm and the police party took them to the hospital from
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page130 of173

Suraj Mal Park. We are, thus, satisfied beyond any doubt that Mahender and
Ram Kumar were in the police station from 7.30 a.m. onwards.

18.

The statement of Ram Kumar before the SDM Shri S.S. Rathore on 26th

August 1987 is the most contemporaneous account of the incident of 24th
August 1987. The following paragraph of Ram Kumar's statement is relevant:

“On 24th August 1987 at 7.30 am, we surrendered in
the police station Vivek Vihar. Subsequently at
about 8.00 am, they (policemen) released mine and
Mahender's family members. Then Sh. Tyagi, SHO,
Vivek Vihar came over there, removed our clothes
and handed us upside down by tying our stomach and
legs with an iron rod and gave us severe beatings.
Then they made us keep our hands on a bench, gave
iron rod and danda (cudgel) blows on them as a
result whereof Mahender and mine fingers of hand,
hands and feet got fractured. They they made me lie
on the bench with my back resting on the bench and
5-6 policemen rolled an iron rod twice on my legs as
a result whereof I became unconscious.”

The statement of Ram Kumar has to be seen in view of Section 80 of
the Evidence Act, which reads as under:

“Presumption as to documents produced as record
of evidence – Whenever any document is produced
before any Court, purporting to be a record or
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page131 of173

memorandum of the evidence, or of any part of the
evidence, given by a witness in a judicial proceeding
or before any officer authorized by law to take such
evidence, or to be a statement or confession by any
prisoner or accused person, taken in accordance with
law, and purporting to be signed by any Judge or
Magistrate, or by any such officer as aforesaid, the
Court shall presume that the document is genuine; that any
statements as to the circumstances under which it was
taken, purporting to be made by the person signing it,
are true, and that such evidence, statement or
confession was duly taken.”

It has also been held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Bhagwan Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1952 SC 214, as under:

“The certificate of the committing Magistrate endorsed
on the deposition sheet states that the deposition was
read out to the witness and that the witness admitted it
to be correct. The Court is bound to accept this as
correct under S.80 of the Evidence Act until it is
proved to be untrue. The burden is on the person
seeking to displace the statutory presumption and if he
chooses to rely on
the testimony of a witness which
the Court is not prepared to believe the matter ends
there. The duty displacing the presumption lies on the
person who questions it. The Court, is, of course,
bound to consider such evidence as is adduced but it is
not bound to believe such evidence nor is there any
duty whatever on the court to conduct an enquiry on its
own.”

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page132 of173

Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court
statement given by Ram Kumar, the only eyewitness of the incident of 24th
August 1987 of the police torture and attrocities cannot be ignored altogether.
The Court is bound to accept this under S.80 of the Evidence Act until it is
proved to be untrue. The onus of displacing the presumption lies on the person
who questions it. This Court is thus bound to consider such evidence as is
adduced but it is not bound to believe such evidence. The statement of Ram
Kumar can be relied upon to the extent of corroborating the evidence as
rendered by PW 9 Raj Kali, PW 8 HC Narender Singh and PW38 HC Manoj
Kumar. Further, the story put forward by the defence is totally contrived and
the presumption as to the truth of the statement of Ram Kumar has also not
been displaced by the defence. Hence, in our view the statement of Ram
Kumar can be used to complete the chain of events which led to the torture and
custodial death of Mahender.

19.

There can be no denial that some witnesses took a 'U' turn. Rajender

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page133 of173

(PW7) deposed that he did not know any person in the name of Jassu,
Rajender, Kishan Chan, Manohar, Mahender and Ram Kumar. Needless to
say that in his statement before the court of learned Metropolitan Magistrate,
Delhi, this witness had deposed to have produced Mahender Kumar and Ram
Kumar in the company of Jassu, Kishan Chand and Rajender. Since Rajender
and Mahender are his real brothers, it cannot be presumed that he did not know
his own brothers. PW 34 Jamman Lal during his cross examination by the
learned Additional Public Prosecutor flatly refused to have given any
statement in the Court. On being further cross examined, this witness
identified his signatures on statement Ex.PW34/A. PW 3 Jaswant @ Jassu
denied having given any statement before the court.

He also denied his

statement Ex.PW3/A, though he admitted his signatures on the same at Point
“A1”. PW 33 Sukhbiri also did not remember as to whether she had given any
statement before the court of Metropolitan Magistrate. Similarly, PW 39 Anita
refused to have given any statement in the court, though she also identified her
signatures on statement, which is marked as PW 39/A at point 'A'.
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page134 of173

It was held by the Supreme Court in the case of Sheikh Zakir v. State of
Bihar, AIR 1983 SC 911, that it is not quite strange that some witnesses do
turn hostile but that by itself would not prevent a court from finding an
accused guilty if there is otherwise acceptable evidence in support of the
conviction. The Hon'ble Supreme Court has upheld this mandate of law in
several judgments, including in the case reported as State v. Ram Prasad
Misra & anr., III (1996) CCR 115 (SC), where the Hon'ble Supreme Court
observed as follows:

“The evidence of a hostile witness would not be
totally rejected if spoken in favour of the prosecution
or the accused, but can be subjected to close scrutiny
and for portion of the evidence which is consistent
with the case of the prosecution or defence may be
accepted.”

The trial court came to the following conclusion that it is apparent
that these witnesses told a blatant lie. Having supported the case of
complainant before the court of Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi, these

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page135 of173

witnesses clearly turned around. At the same time, it is equally true that
nothing came out in cross examination of these witnesses to belie their earlier
depositions except their flat refusal. Thus, the trial court held that even if
these witnesses have turned hostile there is sufficient material to establish the
guilt of the accused.

We also cannot lose sight of the fact that the respondent R.P. Tyagi
was the SHO of the area who wields considerable power particularly in the
locality of Vivek Vihar where the habitation of the deceased was. It is not
unusual in such a situation for the witnesses to turn hostile when this case has
taken a tortuous and time consuming route and particularly when the date of
the incident was 24th August 1987 and the testimony of the prosecution
witnesses was recorded in the year 2004. With the passage of time many
witnesses would have been too tired out to have consistent courage to
undertake to depose against the local police force.

In our view even if witnesses have turned hostile, there is sufficient
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page136 of173

material on record to establish the guilt of the appellant in the case. It is
clearly evident from the relevant portions of testimonies of PW 8 Constable
Narender, PW 9 Smt. Rajkali and PW 38 Constable Manoj Kumar that the
appellant is guilty and other witnesses turning hostile does not detract from the
essential case set up by the prosecution.

20.

In so far the complicity of the accused and particularly of accused R.P.

Tyagi is concerned, the following factors clearly incriminate him:

(a)

The fact that Externment proceedings in relation to Ram Kumar were
initiated by him on 25th August 1987 itself, the day when Mahender had
died.

(b)

The death of Ram Kumar under mysterious and unexplained
circumstances removed the only actual eye witness of the assault which
led to the death of Mahender.

(c )

Injuries on the sole of the deceased Mahender Kumar show a typical

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page137 of173

mode of custodial torture and the non registration of the case in respect
of the alleged public beatings at 1.30 p.m. on 24th August, 1987, leading
to the death of Mahender Kumar on 25th August 1987, for a period of
nearly 8 months.

(d)

PW 2 Satish Agarwal's deposition to the fact that he had called up the
police station for release of the family members of Mahender and Ram
Kumar. This clearly shows that the accused had surrendered in the
police station in the morning hours around 7:30 am prior to the call
made by PW 2.

(e )

The fact that the witnesses who had earlier supported the prosecution
case had resiled from their statements is very natural following the
death of Ram Kumar under highly mysterious and unexplained
circumstances. This circumstance of Ram Kumar's sudden death would
have been a deterrent to the witnesses who eventually turned hostile.

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page138 of173

(f)

The deposition of PW 34 Jhamman Lal, uncle of Ram Kumar further
strengthens the prosecution case where he said as follows:

“...I also did not tell to the court that a constable had
asked me to see R.P. Tyagi by handing over a visiting
card of latter. I did not tell that police persons who
cam there, returned to PS. (Confronted with statement
Ex.PW34/A from portion L to L where it is so
recorded).
It is true that I went to GRP Police Station, Ghaziabad
and identified the dead body of Ram Kumar which
was lying on Railway Track, near shed. I had seen
the dead body. There was no blood on his body. We
met SHO PS Vijay Nagar, Ghaziabad. I did not tell to
the court that accused R.P. Tyagi had gone there or
requested SHO not to take any action against the
culprits or that SHO had refused to do so.
(Confronted with statement Ex.PW34/A from portion
N to N where it is so recorded).”

Thus, PW 34 Jhaman Lal has deposed that Inspector R.P. Tyagi was seen
at the Ghaziabad police station under whose jurisdiction the body of Ram
Kumar was recovered following his unexplained death.

(g)

The threat administered to PW 16 Neetu by the accused R.P. Tyagi, the

fact that the PW 3, 7, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 23, 33, 34, 38 and
44 turned hostile after the death of Ram Kumar under highly mysterious and
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page139 of173

unexplained circumstances. The admission of PW 16 Neetu that threat was
administered to him by the accused R.P. Tyagi in relation to the given case
provides us with an insight into the reason for the witnesses turning hostile
thus leaving the prosecution case intact and pointing towards the culpability
of R.P. Tyagi.

21.

In so far as motive of the crime is concerned, it is evident that the

incident of the Janmashtmi day, i.e., 16th August 1987, when Constable Rishi
Pal who was one of the policemen attached to the Vivek Vihar police station,
was stabbed by Ram Kumar who was the friend and accomplice of the
deceased Mahender Kumar has a pivotal bearing.

The prosecution has

successfully established that as a sequel of the stabbing of the Rishi Pal, the
police force attached to the Vivek Vihar police station of which accused
Inspector R. P. Tyagi was the SHO, had launched the full scale offensive to
trace out Mahender and Ram Kumar. Evidence of the witnesses PW’s
2,4,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,31,33, who were all relatives

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page140 of173

and friends of deceased Mahender Kumar, who deposed about their detention
and the police inquiries and atrocities to trace the whereabouts of the missing
duo Ram Kumar and Mahender, clearly indicates that there was ample proof of
the involvement of police force of Vivek Vihar police station, who were
deeply incensed wtih the temerity of Mahender and Ram Kumar in having
caused an injury to one of their own brethren. The anger of the police force
was further fuelled by the fact that for about 8 days Mahender and Ram Kumar
had managed to cock a snook at the police and evade apprehension. The
desperation of the police to trace out the missing duo has been testified to by
PW’s 2,4, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16,17,18,19,20,21, 31 and 34 whose
testimonies are worthy of belief, particularly when it received corroboration by
the evidence of two witnesses, i.e., PW 8 HC Narender and PW 38 HC Manoj
Kumar. Thus, we have no doubt that the motive in the incident of beating of
Mahender and Ram Kumar was fully established by the prosecution beyond
doubt.

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page141 of173

22.

The counsel for the appellant contended that the accused R.P. Tyagi

could not have been confronted with the contents of the statement recorded
during pre-summoning stage while recording his statements under Section 313
Cr.P.C. and more particularly with regard to the allegations put to him during
the testimony recorded during the trial. It was also contended by the counsel
for the appellant that the trial court erred in law while relying upon the
statements of the complainant's witnesses recorded during pre-summoning
stage and also erred by holding the view that the deposition of the CWs made
before the learned Metropolitan Magistrate who did not stick to their earlier
statements have not become irrelevant or inadmissible in view of Section 33 of
Indian Evidence Act.

However, in the case of State of Tamilnadu v

Rajendran (supra) it was observed that when a death reference is made by a
court to the High Court for confirmation, the High Court has to satisfy itself
whether a case beyond reasonable doubt has been made out against the
accused for imposition of extreme penalty of death and for that the
proceedings require a reappraisal and reassessment of the entire facts and law
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page142 of173

so as to arrive at its independent conclusion. Therefore, we considered and
examined the evidence afresh and took into cognizance the testimonies of the
prosecution witnesses and the defence witnesses and did not consider it
necessary to look into the facts and circumstances of the case in light of the
evidence tendered during the pre-summoning stage as complainant's witnesses.

23.

It is submitted by the learned counsel for the appellant that the post

mortem report cannot by itself be treated as a substantial piece of evidence as
the said post mortem report No.393/87 dated 26th August 1987 of deceased
Mahender Kumar was exhibited as Ex.PW 36/A. Even though Dr. Vishnu
Kumar was examined during pre summoning stage as CW-21 but was never
examined as a witness in the trial court proceedings. However, it is a proven
fact through the deposition of PW-36 Dr. Vinod Kumar Ramtek that he had
seen Dr. Vishnu Kumar writing and signing before him the aforesaid post
mortem report. He had also stated that the said doctor who conducted the post
mortem report had already retired and his whereabouts were not known. In

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page143 of173

our view, the trial court rightly held that the post mortem report Ex.PW-36/A
has been proved as per law. Dr. Vishnu Kumar had rightly pointed 43 external
injuries on dead body of Mahender Kumar caused by a blunt object. A bare
perusal of the said port mortem report shows that the injuries inflicted, such as
soles of feet of the deceased found flattened and marked by bruises, were more
probable in the police station rather than at a public place. Photographs
marked as Ex.PW5/B-1 to PW5/B-27, and statement of PW-1 S.S. Rathor, the
then SDM, corroborate and prove the fact that such injuries were caused as a
result of beating of the deceased by the police in the police station Vivek
Vihar.

24.

It is also the plea of the learned counsel for the appellant that the

appellant being a public servant is entitled to protection of Section 197 Cr.P.C.
which requires the sanction of the government for the offences alleged to have
been committed by him which acting or purporting to act in discharge of his
official duty. The learned Magistrate by taking cognizance of such offence

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page144 of173

erred in law and vitiated the whole process of trial.

All these issues were considered in detail at the time of initiation of trial and
by summoning order dated 7th April 2001 wherein the learned Additional
Sessions Judge KKD Courts, held as follows:

“In the present case, the accused persons who are
public servants cannot at all claim that what they did
was by virtue of their office. It is no argument that
without being in office they would not have
committed the offence alleged against them. As
already observed, it is no part of official duty to
commit offence as defined under the IPC or any other
law including the Prevention of Corruption Act
wherein Section 197 Cr.P.C. has been held to be not at
all applicable. The specific actions alleged against the
accused persons are categorized in the summoning
orders which are altogether outside the scope of
official duties of the accused persons which no
reasonable man would deem to commit under the
color of that office. The reasonable approach has to
be taken in the facts and circumstances of the case and
that reasonable and prudent approach goes against the
accused persons. To my mind even the use of filthy
language and abuses are not connected with the
discharge of official duties what to talk of custodial
death, wrongful confinement, making wrong entries,
acting upon wrong entries so as to create a net to save
the accused persons in connivance with each other.”

In our view it was rightly held by the trial court that no such sanction
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page145 of173

was called for in this case as actions alleged against the accused persons were
not in discharge of their official duties and that proceeding of learned
Metropolitan Magistrate in holding inquiry under Section 202 Cr.P.C. was also
not illegal in any way. The specific actions alleged against the accused persons
which are categorized in the summoning orders are altogether outside the
scope of official duties of the accused persons which no reasonable man would
deem to commit under the color of his official duties.

By no stretch of

human imagination the acts of Custodial torture which results in death can be
said to be falling under the scope of 'official duties' and therefore in our view
also, prosecution of the appellant as in the present case does not require any
sanction from higher authority.

25.

In our view the reliance by the counsel for the accused R.P. Tyagi on the

decision of the Bench of three Hon'ble Judges of the Supreme Court in
Sankaran Moitra vs. Sadhna Das and Anr., (2006) 4 SCC 584 is not
warranted. Paragraph 17 of the said judgment of the majority view reads as

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page146 of173

follows:-

“17. The High Court has stated that killing of a person
by use of excessive force could never be performance
of duty. It may be correct so far as it goes. But the
question is whether that act was done in the
performance of duty or in purported performance of
duty. If it was done in performance of duty or
purported performance of duty Section 197(1) of the
Code cannot be by-passed by reasoning that killing a
man could never be done in an official capacity and
consequently Section 197(1) of the Code could not be
attracted. Such a reasoning would be against the ratio
of the decisions of this Court referred to earlier. The
other reason given by the High Court that if the High
Court were to interfere on the ground of want of
sanction, people will lose faith in the judicial process,
cannot also be a ground to dispense with a statutory
requirement or protection. Public trust in the
institution can be maintained by entertaining causes
coming within its jurisdiction, by performing the
duties entrusted to it diligently, in accordance with law
and the established procedure and without delay.
Dispensing with of jurisdictional or statutory
requirements which may ultimately affect the
adjudication itself, will itself result in people losing
faith in the system. So, the reason in that behalf given
by the High Court cannot be sufficient to enable it to
get over the jurisdictional requirement of a sanction
under Section 197(1) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure. We are therefore satisfied that the High
Court was in error in holding that sanction under
Section 197(1) was not needed in this case. We hold
that such sanction was necessary and for want of
sanction the prosecution must be quashed at this stage.
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page147 of173

It is not for us now to answer the submission of
learned counsel for the complainant that this is an
eminently fit case for grant of such sanction.”

In our view the above judgment is inapplicable because it is the case
of the defence that the beatings were not administered by the police and were
administered by the members of the public at the incident which took place at
1.30 PM on 24th August, 1987 owing to a public outrage and violent reaction
arising from the misbehaviour by the deceased Mohinder and Ram Kumar. It
is not the defence's case that the injuries were caused by the accused while
doing their duties as a police officer. The plea on facts by the accused is that
the deceased Mohinder and Ram Kumar had been beaten up by the members
of the public and police had absolutely no role in it. Once such a plea is taken
by the defence, reliance on Section 197 Cr.P.C. is not justified as it is not even
the defence's case that the injuries were caused to the deceased during the
performance of official duties by the accused. In fact, the accused's case is of
outright denial of the occurrence of the incident of beating in the police
station. It is another matter that we have found that such a case set up by the

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page148 of173

defence is absolutely unworthy of belief but nevertheless in judging the
applicability of Section 197 Cr.P.C., the plea of the defence as to in what
manner was the act complained of done and performed as part of official duty
becomes relevant. In the present case the accused not having taken a stand
that the injuries were caused during the course of the performance of the
official duties by the accused, the reliance on Section 197 Cr.P.C. cannot be
permitted to be raised.

Even assuming that the plea of S.197 was applicable to the accused,
we may also notice the judgment of the Constitution Bench Judgement of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in K. Satwant Singh vs. The State of Punjab, AIR
1960 SC 266, which does not appear to have been brought to the notice of the
Three Judge Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court hearing Shankaran Moitra's
case (supra). The relevant portion of law laid down by the Constitution Bench
in so far as relates to Section 197 Cr.P.C. reads as follows:-

“16. Under S. 197 no Court shall take cognizance of
an offence committed by a public servant who is
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page149 of173

removable from his office by the Governor-Generalin-Council or a Provincial Government, save upon a
sanction by one or the other as the case may be, when
such offence is committed by him while acting or
purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty.
Henderson was charged with intentionally aiding the
appellant in the commission of an offence punishable
under s. 420 of the Indian Penal Code by falsely
stating as a fact, in his reports that the appellant's
claims were true and that statement had been made
knowing all the while that the claims in question were
false and fraudulent and that he had accordingly
committed an offence under S. 420/109, Indian Penal
Code. It appears to us to be clear that some offences
cannot by their very nature be regarded as having
been committed by public servants while acting or
purporting to act in the discharge of their official
duty. For instance, acceptance of a bribe, an offence
punishable under S. 161 of the Indian Penal Code, is
one of them and offence of cheating or abetment
thereof is another. We have no hesitation in saying
that where a public servant commits the offence of
cheating or abets another so to cheat, the offence
committed by him is not one while he is acting or
purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty,
as such offences have no necessary connection
between them and the performance of the duties of a
public servant, the official status furnishing only the
occasion or opportunity for the commission of the
offences (vide Amrik Singh's case). The Act of
cheating or abetment thereof has no reasonable
connection with the discharge of official duty. The act
must bear such relation to the duty that the public
servant could lay a reasonable but not a pretended or
fanciful claim, that he did it in the course of the
performance of his duty (Vide Matajog Dobey's

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page150 of173

case).”

In any event, therefore, the position of law would be governed by the
above judgment of the Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court and
consequently the plea of the accused that Section197 bars the prosecution of
the accused can not be sustained.

26.

Section 197 of the Code of the Criminal Procedure (Act V of 1898)

reads as under:

“197. (1)Prosecution of Judges and public servants
– When an person who is a Judge within the meaning
of section 19 of the Indian Penal Code, or when any
Magistrate or when any public servant who is not
removable from his office save by or with the
sanction of a (Provincial Government) or the (Central
Government), is accused of any offence alleged to
have been committed by him while acting or
purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty,
no Court shall take cognizance of such offence except
with the previous sanction(a)
in the case of a person employed in
connection with the affairs of the (Dominion), of the
Governor-General exercising his individual judgment,
and
(b)
in the case of a person employed in
connection with the affairs of a Province, of the
Governor of that Province exercising his individual
judgment.)”
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page151 of173

A comparison of Section 197 as defined under Code of Criminal
Procedure (Act 5 of 1898) and as defined under the Code of Criminal
Procedure 1973 leads to the conclusion that the genesis of the section is the
same though there are very minute changes. In light of the above, the law laid
down in Satwant Singh's case (supra) is of considerable significance.
Therefore, the findings in the impugned judgment of the trial Court on the
inapplicability of Section 197 of the Code of Criminal Procedure when viewed
in the light of the law laid down in Satwant Singh's case (supra) thus,
becomes sustainable.

In so far the other plea of the learned counsel for the appellant R.P.
Tyagi that material placed before the trial court in the form of statement during
pre-summoning stage cannot be treated as evidence and be the basis for the
conviction of the appellant, is concerned, there can be no quarrel on this
proposition. However, this Court while sustaining the conviction of the
appellant has not relied upon any portion of the evidence as substantial

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page152 of173

evidence which was recorded at the pre summoning stage. In so far as the
plea relating to Section 33 of the Indian Evidence act by the appellant is
concerned, we are not basing the conviction on statements recorded at the pre
summoning stage but have viewed such pre summoning statement only with a
view to ascertain whether the prosecution witnesses have been consistent in
the various stages of pre summoning evidence and substantive evidence given
as a prosecution witnesses.

Similarly, the order of examination of the complainant as a witness is not
a plea on the basis of which judgment of the trial court can be assailed,
particularly when no such plea was taken before the trial court. The learned
counsel for the appellant has contended that the evidence tendered by the
defence witnesses has been disregarded by the trial court without giving any
justifiable reason. Since such evidence was to the effect that the incident took
place at 1.30 pm at Surajmal Park, we have perused the entries in the police
records and found that the said incident could not have occurred particularly in

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page153 of173

view of the evidence of two police witnesses PW 8 Narender Kumar and PW
38 Manoj Kumar themselves. Since we have recorded a finding as to the fact
that the incident took place at 1.30 pm at Surajmal Park, as the deceased was
already in the custody of police at 7.30 am, the testimony of the defence
witnesses at the occurrence of incident at 1.30 pm cannot be given any
credence.

27.

The law laid down by the statutes both national and international

strongly condemns cases of custodial death. When a person dies in the custody
of police due to injuries ostensibly caused by beatings and there were severe
allegations of torture against the police, in such circumstances, it is for the
police to explain the injuries suffered by such deceased. It is not sufficient for
the accused in whose custody the deceased was, merely to deny claim of
torture. The police has to establish that injuries found on the body of such
person were caused not by them but by someone else.

The trial court in reference to the aforementioned contention referred to

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page154 of173

the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in State of Rajasthan v. Kashi
Ram, 2006 IX AD SC (561).

“The respondent was tried for murder of his wife;
relationship between them was not cordial. There were
instances of respondent assaulting deceased and
treating her with cruelty, prosecution established that
deceased was last seen alive in her house and that PW
2 had seen her as well as the accused in their rented
premises. It was proved that two doors of the house
were found locked in the morning, the respondent
made only a bald denial of all the incriminating
circumstances put to him and had no explanation to
offer. In these circumstances, it was held by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India that the respondent
having been seeing last with the deceased, the burden
was upon him to prove as to what happened thereafter,
since those facts were within his special knowledge.”

The Hon'ble Supreme Court has also emphasized on aspects of
custodial violence and death and emphasized on the need to curb the cases
relating to tortures in police custody as has been aforementioned in the case of
State of M.P. vs. Shyamsunder Trivedi and Ors, 1995 SCC (Crl.) 715 and
in Munshi Singh Gautam (D) and Ors. Vs. State of M.P, 2005 SCC (Crl.)
1269.
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page155 of173

28.

The National Police Commission in its 4th Report of June 1980 took

note of the existing scenario of custodial torture and according to its
observations the practice of torture of any kind on a person in custody the
police is most “dehumanizing”. It also took note of the fact that the public
estimation of the police image had received a severe blow over many years,
because of the prevalence of the practice of custodial torture.

The

Commission expressed regret over it and expressed concern over the
inclination and partiality of even high ranking police officials towards the
practice of custodial torture with an aim to achieve quick results. Although the
persons who cause hurt for the purpose of extorting the confession are
punishable under Section 330 and 331 of the Indian Penal Code but
convictions have been rare since “the atrocities within the precincts of the
police station are often left without any ocular or other direct evidence to
prove who the offenders are.”

This situation also drew the attention of the Law Commission which

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page156 of173

recommended, in its 113th Report, an amendment to the Indian Evidence Act –
by introducing Section 114- B in order to provide for an alleged offence of
having caused bodily injuries to a person while in police custody, if there is
evidence then the court may presume that the injury was caused by the police
officer having the custody of that person during that period, unless the police
officer proves to the contrary. The Law Commission recommended the
introduction of Section 114-B which reads as under:-

“Section 114-B. (1) In a prosecution (of a police
officer) or an offence constituted by an act alleged to
have caused bodily injury to a person, if there is
evidence that the injury was caused during a period
when that person was in the custody of the police, the
court may presume that the injury was caused by the
police officer having custody of that person during
that period.
(2)
The court, in deciding whether or not it
should draw a presumption under sub-section (1),
shall have regard to all the relevant circumstances,
including, in particular, (a) the period of custody, (b)
any statement made by the victim as to how the
injuries were received, being a statement admissible
in evidence, (c) the evidence of any medical
practitioner who might have examined the victim,and
(d) evidence of any magistrate, who might have
recorded the victim's statement or attempted to record
it.”
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page157 of173

The burden of proof in such a case has been recommended to lie on the
concerned police official. These recommendations, however, have not
effectuated upto now and the “dehumanizing” crime of custodial torture has
continued.

29.

Now, we come to the plea of the learned counsel for the appellant that

the offence even held proved against the appellant does not constitute murder
as defined under Section 300 of the IPC. Section 300 IPC reads as follows:

“300. Murder. Except in the cases hereinafter
excepted, culpable homicide is murder, if the act
by which the death is caused is done with the
intention of causing death, or
2ndly. If it is done with the intention of causing
such bodily injury as the offender knows to be
likely to cause the death of the person to whom
the
harm
is
caused,
or
3rdly. If it is done with the intention of causing
bodily injury to any person and the bodily injury
intended to be inflicted is sufficient in the
ordinary course of nature to cause death, or
4thly. If the person committing the act knows
that it is so imminently dangerous that it must,
in all probability, cause death or such bodily
injury as is likely to cause death, and commits
such act without any excuse for incurring the

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page158 of173

risk of causing death or such injury as
aforesaid”

We are of the view that offence, in the present case, at best against the
appellant is culpable homicide not amounting to murder. The most salient
feature to put this offence in the category of culpable homicide not amounting
to murder is that the established facts and the evidence on record does not
disclose that the beatings administered to the deceased Mahender were with
the intention of causing death or with the intention of causing such bodily
injury as is likely to cause death or with knowledge that the said act is so
imminently dangerous that it must in all probability cause death or such bodily
injury as is likely to cause death.

30.

In view of the above finding, we find ourselves unable to sustain the

conviction of the appellant under Section 302 of the IPC. However, this is a
case which clearly falls under Section 304 of the IPC. Section 304 of the IPC
reads as follows:

“304. Punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page159 of173

murder. Whoever commits culpable homicide not amounting to
murder, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine, if the act by which
the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death,
or of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death;
or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to ten years, or with fine, or with both, if the act is done
with the knowledge that it is likely to cause death, but without
any intention to cause death, or to cause such bodily injury as is
likely to cause death.”

In our view, the offence falls in Clause II of Section 304 of the IPC, as
the act committed by the policeman was done with the knowledge that it is
likely to cause death because the accused being the SHO of the police station
must be aware that the beatings administered to the deceased Mahender could
result in death. However, we are not able to come to a finding in favour of the
prosecution that the act was done with the intention to cause death or the
intention to cause such bodily injury as was likely to cause death. The
intention of the accused was to teach a lesson to the deceased who had dared to
hurt a policeman by giving him severe beatings in the police station.
However, an intention to cause death or such injury as would, in all likelihood,
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page160 of173

cause death, has not been proved. There were multiple injuries on the body of
the deceased person but no evidence had been given to show any particular
injury of grievous nature. If the factual matrix of the whole case is taken into
consideration it must be held beyond any doubt that the accused were
responsible for inflicting those injuries and they must be attributed only with
the knowledge that by inflicting such injuries they were likely to cause the
death in which case the offence would be one punishable under section 304
Part II IPC. So, the Death Reference and the appeal stands answered to the
effect that the death sentence awarded to the appellant R.P. Tyagi cannot be
confirmed. As far as the appeal of this appellant is concerned we allow it to
the extent that his conviction under Section 302 IPC stands converted into one
under Section 304(II) IPC. Now, we proceed to consider as to what
punishment appellant R.P. Tyagi deserves for his conviction under Section 304
Part II of the Indian Penal Code.

In coming to such conclusion we are fortified in our view by the position

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page161 of173

of law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the following judgments:

A.

In the case of Dalip Singh and Ors. Vs. State of Haryana 1993

Supp (3) SCC 336, it was observed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that :

"Taking the case as a whole into consideration it must be
held that the accused were responsible for inflicting those
injuries and they must be attributed the knowledge only
that by inflicting such injuries they were likely to cause
the death in which case the offence would be one
punishable under section 304 Part II IPC. Accordingly,
we set aside the conviction of the accused under Section
304 Part I IPC and sentence of 10 years RI awarded
thereunder. "
B.

In the case of Munshi Singh Gautam vs. State of M.P. (supra) the

Supreme Court held as under:-

"From the medical evidence on record it is clear that the
injuries to the deceased were confined to the skin and
upper level of the body. Grievous injuries were not found
on the vital parts of the body like the head, liver, spleen,
heart, lungs etc. The duration of the injuries were widely
variant. The right lung of the deceased was TB affected.
The combined effect of alcohol and the injuries shortened
the period of death and resulted in a quicker death. That
being so, the conviction of the accused G in terms of
Section 304 Part II IPC cannot be faulted."

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page162 of173

31.

In Gauri Shanker Sharma v. State of U.P., 1990 (Supp) SCC 656 ,

at page 666 it was observed on cases of custodial death :

“The offence is of a serious nature aggravated by
the fact that it was committed by a person who is
supposed to protect the citizens and not misuse his
uniform and authority to brutally assault them
while in his custody. Death in police custody must
be seriously viewed for otherwise we will help
take a stride in the direction of police raj. It must
be curbed with a heavy hand. The punishment
should be such as would deter others from
indulging in such behavior. There can be no room
for leniency.”

The courts must not lose sight of the fact that death in police
custody is perhaps the worst kind of crime in a civilized society governed by
the law. Torture in police custody flouts the basic rights of the citizens as
recognized by the Constitution of India and is against the basic principles of
human dignity of life and liberty of an individual as envisaged in the Preamble
to the Constitution. The men in uniform should not consider themselves to be
above the law and sometimes even to become law unto themselves. In cases
of the police tortures and excesses, stern measures are requied to be taken so
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page163 of173

that common man may not lose faith in the law enforcement machinery and
the foundations of the criminal justice delivery system is further strengthened.
Nothing is so dehumanizing as the conduct of the police officer in inflicting
torture of any kind on a person in their custody. The courts are also required
to adopt a more deterrent stance, particularly in cases involving custodial
torture and death.

In view of the above position of law and the accused being the SHO
of the police station, in our view, deserves the most severe punishment
because when the upholder of law turns into a law breaker, the most stringent
punishment should be awarded. Accordingly, we sentence the appellant to
undergo eight years of Rigorous Imprisonment. After taking into account the
enoromity of the offence, we also impose a fine of Rs.2 lakhs on the accused
to be payable to the mother of the deceased, Raj Kali. In case, the fine is not
paid the appellant shall be liable to serve a further term of imprisonment of six
months. We are also of the view that had the same offence been committed by

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page164 of173

a superior officer, then the offence would have warranted an even more
stringent punishment.

32.

The relevant position of law in so far as compensation is concerned,

is to be found in the following cases.

(i )

In Mangilal v. State of M.P.,(2004) 2 SCC 447 :

“The power of the court to award compensation
to victims under Section 357 is not ancillary to
other sentences but is in addition thereto. In
Hari Singh v. Sukhbir Singh it was observed
that the power under Section 357 is a measure
of responding appropriately to crime as well as
reconciling the victim with the offender. It is, to
some extent, a recompensatory measure to
rehabilitate to an extent the beleaguered victims
of the crime; a modern constructive approach to
crimes and a step forward in our criminal justice
system. In Sarwan Singh v. State of Punjab it
was held that in awarding compensation, the
court has to decide whether the case is a fit one
in which compensation has to be awarded. If it
is found that the compensation should be
ordered to be paid, then while arriving at the
quantum to be paid, courts are obliged to keep
into account the capacity of the accused to pay
the compensation besides taking into
consideration also the nature of the crime in
each case, the justness of the claim for
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page165 of173

compensation and the need for it in the context
of the victim or members of the family of the
victim and other relevant circumstances, if any,
in so fixing or apportioning the amount of
compensation. As noted above, the mode of
application of the fine is indicated in sub-section
(1) of Section 357. Sub-section (3) contains an
independent and distinct power to award
compensation.”
“Sub-section (1) of Section 357 deals with a
situation when a court imposes a fine or a
sentence (including sentence of death) of which
fine also forms a part. It confers a discretion on
the court to order as to how the whole or any
part of fine recovered is to be applied. For
bringing in application of sub-section (1) of
Section 357 it is a statutory requirement that
fine is imposed and thereupon make further
orders as to the disbursement of the said fine in
the manner envisaged therein. If no fine is
imposed, sub-section (1) of Section 357 has no
application. In the case at hand no fine was
imposed by the trial court or the High Court.
Sub-section (3) on the other hand deals with the
situation where fine does not form part of the
sentence imposed by a court. In such a case, the
court when passing a judgment can order the
accused persons to pay by way of compensation
such amount as may be specified in the order to
the person who has suffered a loss or injury by
reason of the act of which the accused person
has been so convicted and sentenced. The basic
difference between sub-sections (1) and (3) is
that in the former case, the imposition of fine is
the basic and essential requirement, while in the
latter even the absence thereof empowers the
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page166 of173

court to direct payment of compensation. Such
power is available to be exercised by an
appellate court or by the High Court or Court of
Session when exercising revisional powers.
(emphasis supplied)”

(ii) In Pankajbhai Nagjibhai Patel v. State of Gujarat,(2001) 2 SCC 595 :
“A Magistrate who thinks it fit that the complainant
must be compensated with his loss he can resort to
the course indicated in Section 357 of the Code. This
aspect has been dealt with in Bhaskaran case as
follows: (SCC p. 521, para 31)
However, the Magistrate in such cases can alleviate
the grievance of the complainant by making resort to
Section 357(3) of the Code. It is well to remember
that this Court has emphasised the need for making
liberal use of that provision ( Hari Singh v. Sukhbir
Singh). No limit is mentioned in the sub-section and
therefore, a Magistrate can award any sum as
compensation. Of course while fixing the quantum of
such compensation the Magistrate has to consider
what would be the reasonable amount of
compensation payable to the complainant. Thus, even
if the trial was before a Court of a Magistrate of the
First Class in respect of a cheque which covers an
amount exceeding Rs 5000 the Court has power to
award compensation to be paid to the complainant.
In our view this question does not now pose any
practical difficulty. Whenever a Magistrate of the
First Class feels that the complainant should be
compensated he can, after imposing a term of
imprisonment, award compensation to the
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page167 of173

complainant for which no limit is prescribed in
Section 357 of the Code.
(emphasis supplied)”

(iii ) In Sube Singh v. State of Haryana,(2006) 3 SCC 178 :

“Award of compensation as a public law remedy for
violation of the fundamental rights enshrined in
Article 21 of the Constitution, in addition to the
private law remedy under the law of torts, was
evolved in the last two-and-a-half decades.
It is thus now well settled that the award of
compensation against the State is an appropriate and
effective remedy for redress of an established
infringement of a fundamental right under Article 21,
by a public servant. The quantum of compensation
will, however, depend upon the facts and
circumstances of each case. Award of such
compensation (by way of public law remedy) will not
come in the way of the aggrieved person claiming
additional compensation in a civil court, in the
enforcement of the private law remedy in tort, nor
come in the way of the criminal court ordering
compensation under Section 357 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure.”

In view of the above position, we direct the State to pay a
compensation of Rs.2 lakhs to the mother of the deceased in addition to Rs.2
lakhs awarded against the accused.
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

We are constrained to award
page168 of173

compensation against the State in view of the role played by the police officers
in delaying the proceedings and attempting to scuttle the course of justice as
well as vicarious liability for the action of its officers.

33.

The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of State of Uttar Pradesh v.

Ram Sagar Yadav and others, (1985) 1 SCC 552, held as follows:

“Before we close, we would like to impress upon
the Government the need to amend the law
appropriately so that policemen who commit
atrocities on persons who are in their custody are
not allowed to escape by reason of paucity or
absence of evidence. Police officers alone, and
none else, can give evidence as regards the
circumstances in which a person in their custody
comes to receive injuries while in their custody.
Bound by ties of a kind of brotherhood, they often
prefer to remain silent in such situations and when
they choose to speak, they put their own gloss
upon facts and pervert the truth. The result is that
persons, on whom atrocities are perpetrated by the
police in the sanctum sanctorum of the police
station, are left without any evidence to prove
who the offenders are. The law as to the burden
of proof in such cases may be re-examined by the
Legislature so that handmaids of law and order to
do not use their authority and opportunities for
oppressing the innocent citizens who look to them
for protection. It is ironical that, in the instance
case, a person who complained against a
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page169 of173

policeman for bribery, was done to death by that
policeman, his two companions and his superior
officer, the Station House Officer).”

In accordance with the above decision of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court, we also reiterate that the urgent need to amend the law appropriately
may be considered so that policemen who commit atrocities on persons who
are in their custody are not allowed to escape by reason of atrocities or absence
of evidence. The convictions in such cases have been rare since the atrocities
within the precincts of the police station are often left without any ocular or
other direct evidence to prove who the offenders are. The Law Commission in
its 113th Report recommended an amendment to the Indian Evidence Act by
introducing Section 114-B in order to provide for alleged offence of having
caused bodily injuries to a person while in police custody if there is evidence
then the court may presume that the injury was caused by the police officer
having the custody of that person during that period, unless the police officer
proves to the contrary.

However, these recommendations have not been

effectuated upto now and the dehumanizing crime of custodial torture has

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page170 of173

continued.

Therefore, this issue deserves due legislative and executive

attention.

34.

Certain glaring features of the case cannot escape our attention and

we enumerate them as follows:

(a)

Delay in registration of FIR for about 5 ½ months inspite of the Lt.

Governor's order which was communicated through the office of Deputy
Commissioner, Delhi. This FIR was registered on 11th February 1988 while
Mahender Kumar died 25th August 1987.
(b)

Change without any cause of the Inquest officer, the then SDM Shri S.S.

Rathore, who had also directed to register a case on the very next date of the
incident, i.e., 26th August 1987.
(c )

Application for externment order of Ram Kumar put forward by the

accused R.P. Tyagi, the then SHO of police station Vivek Vihar on 25th
August 1987 which was mechanically approved on 28th October, 1987 by Shri
Qamar Ahmed, Deputy Commissioner of Police.

Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page171 of173

(d)

Death of Ram Kumar under highly mysterious and unexplainable

circumstances.
We regretfully note that the crime of custodial death instead of attracting
critical attention and ire of the higher authorities, unfortunately, resulted in
sustained efforts first to ignore the crime and then thereafter attempt to cover it
up by the factors enumerated above. The Lieutenant Governor, in the present
case, in a commendable manner, had adopted the correct approach by directing
the registration of the FIR. However, we are sorry to note that inspite of the
direction by the Lieutenant Governor, the attempt to obfuscate and delay the
course of justice and prevent unravelling of truth continued and the FIR was
th

eventually registered only on 11 February 1988. Dedicated efforts of the
mother of the deceased, Raj Kali in relentlessly battling with the authorities, in
the present case, reached its fruition by the conviction rendered by the learned
Additional Sessions Judge, while the act of the Lieutenant Governor in
responding to the public outcry occasioned by the death of the deceased has
been praiseworthy. The delay by the remaining officers of the government of
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page172 of173

National Capital Territory of Delhi has not been exactly covered with glory
and we deprecate such attempts to cover up a heinous crime. The appeal is
partly allowed and the Death Reference stands answered in terms of this
judgment. The judgment dated 13th December 2006 delivered by the learned
Additional Sessions Judge, Karkardooma Courts, Delhi, recording the
conviction of the appellant R.P. Tyagi vide SC No.01/2006 under Sections
302/342/120-B IPC is set aside and the appellant is convicted under Section
304 Part II and sentenced to undergo eight years Rigorous Imprisonment. The
fine and compensation shall be paid to Rajkali, the mother of the deceased
Mahender.

(MUKUL MUDGAL)
JUDGE

(P.K. BHASIN)
JUDGE
March 05, 2008
dr/sk
Death Sentence Ref.01/2007

page173 of173

