*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP(Crl.) 304/2005
Reserved on

: 14th November, 2007

Date of Decision: 07 April, 2008
BABY SEEMA & ANR.
....Petitioners
Through Mr. Ravish Pathak and Mr. Sanjeev Singh, Advs.
Versus
STATE OF GOVT. OF NCT OF DELHI & ORS.
...Respondents
Through Ms. Mukta Gupta, Standing Counsel with
Mr. Rajat Katyal, Advocate for State.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MUKUL MUDGAL
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1.

Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

%

WP(Crl.)304/05

JUDGMENT
07-04-2008

Page 1 of 19

MUKUL MUDGAL,J.
1.

This writ petition was filed in this Court with the following

prayers:“a. Allow the petition and thereby issue
writ order or directions in the nature of
mandamus or any other appropriate writ
commanding the respondents to hand over
investigation of the case, FIR No. 245/2004
u/s 304A, 34 IPC P.S. Roop Nagar to CBI or
any other independent investigating agency
for investigation of the case and further to
investigate the conduct of police officials,
b. quash the report of gynecologist body
constituted by Govt. of NCT of Delhi vide
letter No. F342/87/2004 H&FW,
c.
constitute a new medical board by
and under monitoring of this Hon'ble Court,
d.
convert the case from 304A to 304
IPC on the basis of the complaint,
e.
summon the case diary of
investigation recorded under section 172 Cr.
P.C.,
f.
to deliver the copy of the report of
gynecologist body and other relevant papers
to the petitioners,
g.
summon the papers from Apollo
Hospital pertaining to admission and
treatment of the petitioners' deceased
mother,

h.
WP(Crl.)304/05

samples of the uterus to be sent for
Page 2 of 19

fresh examination,
i.
appropriate legal proceedings may be
initiated against ACP Rajan Bhagat and
other guilty officers for intimidation and
creating obstruction in administration of
justice by delaying the registration of FIR
and investigation thereof,
j.
a copy of videography tapes, still
photographs of the post mortem of the
petitioners' deceased mother may also be
given to the petitioner,”

2.

The brief facts of the case as stated by the petitioner are as

follows:(i) The petitioners are the minor daughter and son of the deceased
Seema Sinha, who is alleged to have been died at the hands of Dr.
Gauri as a result of acts done by her and her husband Dr. Chandra
Prakash.
(ii)The deceased Seema Sinha, who was pregnant at the relevant time,
was undergoing periodic check-ups at Dr. Gauri's Hospital. On
27th July, 2004 also, the petitioners' mother visited the said hospital
along with her husband and relatives for routine check up. She
was asked to be admitted in the hospital by Dr. Gauri though the
expected date of delivery was 9 days away.

WP(Crl.)304/05

Page 3 of 19

(iii) Subsequently, on 27th July, 2004, the patient gave birth to a girl
child i.e. Petitioner No. 1 through normal delivery and she was
shifted to the ward from O.T.

Since the condition of the patient

Seema was deteriorating even after shifting to the ward and she
was bleeding profusely, the doctors asked the husband and
relatives of Seema to make arrangement of blood and plasma for
the patient.

On demand of the doctors, the relatives of Seema

arranged blood and plasma for her.
(iv)However, there was no improvement in the condition of Seema.
On 27th July, 2004 itself, Dr. Gauri told that uterus of Seema had
ruptured and had to be removed.

The husband of the patient

Seema was made to sign certain papers some of which were blank
and unfilled.
(v) Consequently, uterus of Seema was removed by the doctors. It is
the case of the petitioners that the doctors removed the uterus of
Seema without obtaining consent of the husband and other
relatives of Seema and played fraud on them after obtaining their
signatures on blank papers.
(vi)Observing that the condition of Seema was not improving, she was
WP(Crl.)304/05

Page 4 of 19

taken to Apollo Hospital on the same day by her husband and
relatives, where they were told that Seema had expired.
(vii)Thereafter, on 28.7.2004, the husband of deceased Seema made a
complaint to the SHO, Roop Nagar but no FIR was registered by
the police on the basis of the same on the ground that the postmortem of the deceased' body was yet to be conducted.
(viii)On 29.7.2004, the post mortem of deceased Seema was
conducted at Subji Mandi Mortuary.

Report of the said post

mortem was received on 30.7.2004, on the basis of which a case
vide FIR No. 254/2004 under Sections 304A/34 IPC was registered
at Police Station Roop Nagar.
(ix) During the course of investigation, the Investigating Officer of the
case put a questionnaire of six questions to the post-mortem
committee relating to the death of deceased Seema. The committee
gave its finding in clear terms that cause of death was severe
hemorrhage and shock consequent to rupture of uterus and its
surgical removal.
(x) Having dissatisfied with the investigation and the finding given by
the post mortem committee, the husband and relatives of the
WP(Crl.)304/05

Page 5 of 19

deceased Seema wrote letters dated 3rd August, 2004 to the
Commissioner of Police, Delhi and DCP (North) and other highups of the Delhi Police for conversion of the case to Section 304
IPC instead of 304A IPC and also for sealing of the Operation
Theatre of Gauri Hospital, but to no avail.
(xi) Subsequently, on the recommendations of the post-mortem
committee, the Govt. of NCT of Delhi constituted a body of three
Gynaecologists, which submitted its report. The said committee in
its report gave a clean chit to the accused doctors, which according
to the petitioner was contrary to the finding of an expert committee
constituted for the postem mortem of the deceased Seema.

3.

On 27th July, 2005, the learned Single Judge treated this

matter in the nature of public interest and gave the following directions in
this respect:“The Secretary (Health), Government of
NCT of Delhi is further directed to issue a
press release in three English daily
newspapers and three Hindi daily
newspapers in circulation in Delhi within
three weeks from today inviting grievances
from general public in regard to the problems
faced by them in Government Hospitals as
WP(Crl.)304/05

Page 6 of 19

well as Private Hospitals and Nursing Homes
so that on the basis of the complaints,
remedial measures may be undertaken and
directions issued. The press release be
issued within three weeks informing the
general public that it is being issued under
the orders of the Court and the names of the
complainants would be kept confidential.
These complaints would be addressed to the
Registrar General of this Court. Three
weeks' time be given for sending complaints
to the Registrar General. The complainants
would be given segregated separately in
respect of Government Hospitals and Private
Hospitals/Nursing Homes.
After receiving the complaints and
the responses by the Secretary (Health),
Central Govt. and the Secretary (Health),
Government of Delhi, this Court would
consider as to what remedial measures and
steps can be taken to protect the citizens' life
and health. It has to be kept in mind that the
patients facing serious health problems
cannot be left to their fate. State has to
intervene.
List again on 18th October, 2005 at
2.00 p.m.”

4.

The order dated 27th July, 2005 of the learned Single Judge

noted that a Board of Doctors constituted on the request of the police had
found that prima facie, there was no negligence, and consequently
directed the Medical Superintendent to constitute another Board of the
doctors of the AIIMS to submit a report.
5.

On 22nd September, 2005, in LPA No. 1916/2005, on the

WP(Crl.)304/05

Page 7 of 19

basis of the public interest litigation of the matter, the following
directions were given by a Division Bench of this Court.
“1. The Secretary, Ministry of Health, Government
of India is directed to constitute a Committee of
representatives drawn from experts in Government
Hospitals and All India Institute of Medical
Sciences, selected Government functionaries
including the Government of NCT of Delhi and
representative/s of Delhi Medical Association or
any other professional body. This Committee's
terms of reference would be to survey the prevailing
conditions in these hospitals and to indicate the
reasons for the present none too-happy state of
affairs and to suggest remedial measures and their
mode of implementation. This Committee shall be
constituted within two weeks from the receipt of
this order and the Committee in turn would have
three months' time to submit the report to the
Secretary, Ministry of Health, Government of India,
who is directed to take steps thereafter for
implementation
of
any
recommendations/
suggestions made in the report. The Secretary is
further directed to provide all secretarial facilities to
the Committee.

2.Both Secretary, Ministry of Health, Government
of India and Secretary, Health, Government of
N.C.T. of Delhi are directed to constitute Redressal
Committees at the State and Central Level, which
will receive grievances from the patients/ public,
examine these and suggest redressal of these to the
concerned functionaries of the hospitals/institute.
All these functionaries to whom these grievances
are addressed shall take necessary steps for
redressal.

3.All Government Hospitals both under State
Government and Central Government control

WP(Crl.)304/05

Page 8 of 19

including the Director of All India Institute of
Medical Sciences are directed to constitute
Grievance
Cells
in
their
respective
hospital/institution for receiving complaints and
grievances. These Grievance Cells would have the
option to report to the Central Grievance
Committee or alternatively refer the grievances to
the authorities of the respective hospital, who are
directed to take cognizance of these grievances and
take steps for their redressal.
4.The Secretary, Ministry of Health and Director
General, Health Services, Government of India are
directed to publicize the constitution of Redressal
Committee to be set up by the Health Secretary and
its location and also the procedure/ mechanism of
receiving the complaints/grievances.

5.The Secretary, Health, Government of NCT of
Delhi and Director of Health Services, Government
of NCT of Delhi are similarly directed to publicize
the constitution of the Redressal Committee to be
set up by the Government of N.C.T. of Delhi
indicating its location and the timings and the
authority concerned for receiving public
complaints/grievances.

6. The Director of AIIMS is also directed to set up a
similar committee and publicize its constitution,
timings and location.

7. All Medical Superintendents of all Government
Hospitals and also the Director of AIIMS are
directed to stop public entry to the hospitals wards
forthwith, except for one attendant per patient.

8. In view of the serious complaints about the
conditions prevailing in hospitals, all Medical
Superintendents of these hospitals and Director of
WP(Crl.)304/05

Page 9 of 19

AIIMS shall take steps to improve the sanitary
conditions and change their dirty linen in the ICUs
and the wards whenever required. They are further
directed to take immediate steps to stop entry of
attendants of patients in the ICUs of these hospitals.

9. All concerned are directed to submit a status
report showing the compliance and enforcement of
directions passed by this court.”

6.

Thereafter, the matter was listed before the Division Bench

on 20th October, 2005, and the following order was passed :“This writ petition has been filed with a
prayer for mandamus to the respondents to
hand over the investigation in FIR No.
245/2004 under Section 304A, 34 IPC P.S.
Roop Nagar to CBI or any other independent
investigating agency.
It has been held by the Supreme
Court in 1997 Crl. L.J. 63 CBI and Anr. Vs.
Rajesh Gandhi and Anr. that no one can have
a say as to which agency will investigate the
alleged criminal offence.
Moreover, if the petitioner has a
grievance that the investigation is not being
done properly by the police he has the
alternate remedy of approaching the
Magistrate under Section 156(3) of the
Cr.P.C. and if the Magistrate finds that the
allegations of the petitioner are correct, he
can direct the Police to make a proper
investigation and he can also monitor the
investigation which is being made.
As regards the prayer for quashing
the report of the Gynecologist, in our
WP(Crl.)304/05

Page 10 of 19

opinion, no writ can be issued for this
purpose. There is no force in this petition
which is dismissed.”

7.

The above order led to the filing of SLP in the Hon'ble

Supreme Court. On 21st July, 2006, the Hon'ble Supreme Court passed
the following order :“Leave granted.
In this case, we are not concerned
with the merits of the controversy since the
main objection
raised
by
the writ
petitioners before the High Court and
appellants before
us
is
that
the
impugned order dated 20th October,
2005
was passed on their writ petition
dismissing the same without any notice to
them or their counsel and on a preponed
date. Writ Petition (Crl.) No.304 of 2005,
filed
by the appellants, was pending
determination before a learned Single Judge
of Delhi High Court. In that petition, an
order dated 27th July, 2005 was
passed
by
a learned Single Judge
observing, inter alia, that the court would
consider as to what remedial measures and
steps can be taken to protect citizens' life
and health after receiving complaints and
responses by the Secretary (Health),
Government of India and the Secretary
(Health), Government of NCT of Delhi. By
the self-same order, the court had directed
issue of a press release inviting
grievances from general public in
regard to the problems faced by them in
Government Hospitals as well as Private
Hospitals and Nursing Homes so that
on the basis of the complaints,
remedial measures may be undertaken
WP(Crl.)304/05

Page 11 of 19

and directions issued.
The order
dated 27th July, 2005 was challenged by
the Delhi Medical Association before a
Division Bench in L.P.A. No.1916 of
2005. The Division Bench held that there
was nothing wrong in the directions given
by the learned Single Judge because the said
directions can help in
enabling
the
public to redress their grievances and
for the authorities to take steps.
After so observing, the Division
Bench felt that matter of wider
public interest was involved, took
cognizance thereof and treated the Letters
Patent Appeal as
Public
Interest
Litigation.
Having regard to the
conditions in some of the hospitals,
particularly in Government Hospitals, the
Division Bench issued notice to various
authorities in terms of the order dated 5th
September, 2005 and directed the matter to
be listed on 22nd September, 2005. On
22nd September, 2005, we are told that the
matter was adjourned to 18th October,
2005. On 18th October, the writ petition
was also listed before the learned Single
Judge when it was adjourned to 8th
February, 2006. When the Letter Patents
Appeal which was treated as Public Interest
Litigation came up before the Division
Bench on 18th October, 2005, the same
was adjourned for 20th November, 2005
with a direction that Writ Petition (Crl.)
No.304 of 2005 would also be heard by the
Division Bench on the same date, namely,
20th November, 2005.
The grievance of the appellants
herein is that instead of 20th November,
2005, without any notice, the matter was
taken up on 20th October, 2005 and the
impugned order was passed in the absence
of their counsel and that Mr. Devendra
WP(Crl.)304/05

Page 12 of 19

Singh, Advocate, who is shown to
have appeared for the appellants is in
fact
the counsel representing the Delhi
Medical Association. In the reply affidavit
filed by the respondents, there is hardly any
fact which has been disputed relevant for
the preponing the date. In fact, para 11
of the counter affidavit admits that on
18th October, 2005, the matter was
adjourned to 20th November, 2005.

Under these circumstances, we set
aside the impugned order and allow the
appeal and remit Writ Petition (Crl.)
No.304 of 2005 for fresh decision by the
High Court. The writ petition will be
placed before a Division Bench of the High
Court. The High Court is requested to
decide the matter expeditiously.

...................CJI.
(Y.K. SABHARWAL)

......................J.
(C.K. THAKKER)
New Delhi,
July 21, 2006.”

8.

The matter is now listed before this Court pursuant to the

above judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court dated 21st July, 2006.
Thereafter, the order dated 15th May, 2007, passed by the previous Bench
shows that a Board of eight doctors of AIIMS including doctors from the
department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, had filed a report.
WP(Crl.)304/05

Page 13 of 19

On 20th September, 2005, the final report of the medical

9.

board constituted for expert opinion on the issue raised in the writ
petition was filed, which reads as follows:“ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES
Ansari Nagar, New Delhi-110029.
No. F.7-30/2005-Estt.(H.)

Dated: 20th September, 2005

Subject: Final medical report of the medical board
constituted vide memo. No. F.7-30/2005-Estt.(H) dated 25th
August, 2005, for expert opinion in the case of alleged
negligence by the doctors at Gauri Nursing Home, Delhi.
*******
The meeting of the Medical Board was held on 20th
September, 2005 at 3.30 p.m. in VVIP Room No. 14, M.S.
Office, AIIMS. The following members were present:1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Dr. Sunesh Kumar, Prof. of Obst. & Gynae., AIIMS
Dr. R.K. Batra, Prof. of Anaesthesiology, AIIMS.
Dr. D.N. Bhardwaj, Addl. Prof. of Forensic Medicines, AIIMS.
Dr. Deepika Deka, Addl. Prof. of Obst. & Gynae, AIIMS.
Dr. Renu Misra, Addl. Prof. of Obst. & Gynae, AIIMS.
Dr. Ruma Ray, Assoc. Prof. of Pathology, AIIMS.
Dr. G. Dey, Resident of Hosp. Admn., AIIMS.
Dr. J.P. Prasad, Resident of Hosp. Admn., AIIMS.
After going through all the relevant papers sent to the
Office of Director, AIIMS, vide letter F. No.
23/80/04/NH/DHS/30111 dated 16th August, 2005 by Dr. Anil
Mehra, Director, Health Services, Govt. of NCT of Delhi,
Delhi, in W.P.(Crl.) No. 304/2005 of the High Court of Delhi,
New Delhi, the medical board came to the following
unanimous opinion.
Patient Mrs. Seema Sinha, 30 years of age, who had a
vaginal delivery on 27th July, 2004 at Gauri Nursing Home,

WP(Crl.)304/05

Page 14 of 19

Delhi following induction of Labour, had very heavy vaginal
bleeding after birth of baby (Massive Post Portum
Haemorrhage). When bleeding failed to be controlled by
medical means, she was subjected to emergency hysterectomy
(Surgical Removal of Uterus) at the same Nursing Home.
Even after this procedure, her condition continued to remain
serious (Pulse Rate remaining high and blood pressure
remaining low). Several units of Intravenous Fluids and
Blood Transfusion were given, however, her condition
continued to deteriorate. Subsequently she was shifted to
Apollo Hospital, Delhi for Intensive Care where she died
sometime after admission.
The management of this case for complication of
vaginal delivery (Massive Post Partum Haemorrhage) was on
standard established treatment guidelines and there appears to
be no Negligence/omission on the part of treating team at any
stage.
In a situation like this with life threatening
complication of vaginal delivery, adequate and prompt
replacement of blood and blood products are of immense
importance towards saving life of some of these patients. Post
Portum Haemorrhage (PPH) is a well documented severe
complication and is responsible for about 30 percent of all
women dying during child birth in India.
Sd/sd/sd/(DR. SUNESH KUMAR) (DR. R.K. BATRA) (DR. D.N. BHARDWAJ)
CHAIRMAN
CO-OPT. MEMBER
MEMBER
Sd/(DR. DEEPIKA DEKA)
CO-OPT MEMBER
Sd/(DR. G. DEY)
MEMBER

10.

sd/sd/(DR. RENU MISRA) (DR. RUMA RAY)
CO-OPT MEMBER CO-OPT MEMBER
sd/(DR. J.P. PRASAD)
MEMBER SECRETARY”

The above final report shows that Professors from Obstetrics

and Gynaecology departments were part of the Board which perused the
WP(Crl.)304/05

Page 15 of 19

relevant papers sent along with letter dated 16th August, 2005 issued by
the Director, Health Services, Govt. of NCT of Delhi.
11.

The learned counsel for the petitioner has questioned the

above report of AIIMS while reiterating the prayers made in the writ
petition. In our view, the prayers would become relevant only when there
is some indication of negligence on the part of the doctors of the
concerned nursing home viz., Gauri Nursing Home. The report of the
Board of eight senior Doctors including six professors in AIIMS shows
that there appears to be no negligence/omission on the part of the doctors.
12.

The learned counsel for the petitioner had submitted that the

following answers given to the queries of the Investigating Officer of the
case, clearly shows that there is a negligence:“In response to the queries asked by the I/O,
the reply of the each question is as follows:1. The Uterus is removed antemortem and
just before death.
2. Can be answered only after inspection of
the remand uterus at Gauri Nursing Home.
3. Shall be answered by the another board
of Gynaecologist as recommended in the PM
report page Ante.
4. The reply can be given by another board
of Gynaecologist recommended after they
WP(Crl.)304/05

Page 16 of 19

inspect the Gauri Hospital in person in
response to the request of Police I/O.
5.
Shall be answered by the second board
of Gynaecologist as recommended by this
Board.”

13.

He has also relied on the following portion of the post mortem

report:“RELEVANT PORTION
MORTEM REPORT

OF

POST-

3. ABDOMEN & PELVIS
a) Liver & Gallbladder
b) Spleen
c) Kidneys
d) Pancreas
e) Stomach – Contents contained 50-60 ml.
semi digested food
Mucosa : Pale
Abnormal Smell : Nil
f) Bowels
Small
Large
G) Urinary Bladder Half filled
H) Rectum Empty
I) Genital Organs
Cervix dilated, walls
closed, closed at upper end with thread,
vaginal walls are inflamed & cross, blood
oozing seen.
J) UTERUS(Females) Absent, both ovaries
are intact & normal.
Incised stitched wound cut open shows
clotted blood in abdominal layer in the area
of cut. Abdominal cavity including pelvis
cavity contained 3 litres of liquid blood &
about 1 Kg. Of ante mortem blood clots.
The blood gushed out after opening the
abdominal cavity.
Uterus
is missing,
appears to be surgically removed, ovaries
ligaments with other structures found tied

WP(Crl.)304/05

Page 17 of 19

with thread. The vessels are not separately
ligated. The stump above the upper end of
cervix along with vessels are tied en block.
No cauterization of individual vessel seen.”

14.

The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that above post

mortem report clearly shows that there was negligence. The counsel also
attempted to refer to technical pleas such as lack of cauterization of
individual vessels. However, no medical evidence in support of such
allegations qua the negligence alleged have been placed on record or
shown to this Court.
15.

In light of the above, when a medical Board has been constituted

by the AIIMS, which is one of the premier institutes of the country,
comprising of eight of their senior doctors (including six professors and
additional and associate professors of pathology, Obstetrics and
Gynaecology and forensic medicine), it is not for us under Article 226 of
the Constitution to question the expert opinion of the Board, particularly
when no part of the expert opinion of the said Board has been shown to
be perverse.
15.Accordingly, we are constrained to hold that since the
16.
medical Board constituted by the AIIMS has not found any negligence or
WP(Crl.)304/05

Page 18 of 19

omission on the part of the concerned doctors, the reliefs claimed in the
writ petition, cannot be granted in the face of the report from the AIIMS,
which the learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to find a
flaw in.

There is, therefore, no merit in the writ petition and it is

dismissed.
MUKUL MUDGAL
(Judge)

April 07, 2008
sk/dr/kkb

WP(Crl.)304/05

REVA KHETRAPAL
(Judge)

Page 19 of 19

