*
+

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
WP (C) NOS. 18761/2005 and WP(C) 23716/2005
th
Reserved on 27 July 2007
Date of Decision : February 7, 2008

MAHESH BHATT
Through

..... Petitioner
Mr. Sandeep Sethi, Sr. Advocate with
Mr.Pradyuman Dubey, Advocate.
Mr. C.M. Lal, Adv.
Versus

UNION OF INDIA & ANR.
.... Respondents.
Through
Mr. P.P. Malhotra, Add. Solicitor General with
Mr.Suresh Kait and Mr.Mukul Gupta,
Advocates for Union of India.
AND
WP(C) No. 7410-11/2006
KASTURI & SONS
Through

..... Petitioner
Mr. Arvind Datar, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Nikhil Nayyar, Advocate.
Mr. Ankit Singhal, Adv.
Versus

UNION OF INDIA & ANR.
.... Respondents.
Through
Mr. P.P. Malhotra, Add. Solicitor General with
Mr.Suresh Kait and Mr.Mukul Gupta,
Advocates for Union of India.
WP(C)18761/2005

Page 1 of 34

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MUKUL MUDGAL
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?
2.
To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
3.
Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?
%
JUDGMENT
07.02.2008
MUKUL MUDGAL, J.
1.

Yes
Yes
Yes

I have read a copy of the judgment of my learned brother Sanjiv

Khanna, J.

I agree with the statement of the facts of the case and the

discussion by my learned colleague from paragraphs 1 to 14 and from
paragraphs 20 to 42 of his judgment and these paragraphs are not being
repeated herein for the sake of brevity. However, the only difference is my
inability to agree with my learned brother with the views expressed in
paragraphs 15 to 19 and paragraphs 43 to 56 of his judgment and the eventual
conclusion.
2.

The principal question which this Court is required to address in

WP(C)18761/2005

Page 2 of 34

this writ petition pursuant to the challenge by the petitioner as formulated by
Shri Sandeep Sethi, Senior counsel, relates to the constitutional validity of
Sub-rule 6 Rule 4 of The Cigarettes and other Tobacco Products (Prohibition
of Advertisement and Regulation of Trade and Commerce, Production, Supply
and Distribution) Rules, 2004 as amended in 2005 (hereinafter referred to as
'the Rules') framed under The Cigarettes and other Tobacco Products
(Prohibition of Advertisement and Regulation of Trade and Commerce,
Production, Supply and Distribution) Act, 2003 (hereinafter referred to as 'the
Act'). The said amended Rule reads as follows:“(6)
No individual or a person or a character in films
and television programmes shall display tobacco
products or their use:
Provided that this sub-rule shall not apply to(a)
old Indian films and old television programmes,
produced prior to coming into effect of this notification,
being screened in a cinema hall or theatre or aired on
television;
(b)
old foreign films and old television programmes,
including dubbed and sub-titled “foreign films” and
television programmes, being screened in cinema halls
or theatres or aired on television;
(c)
WP(C)18761/2005

Indian or foreign documentaries and health spots
Page 3 of 34

displaying use of tobacco products made to clearly and
unambiguously reflect the dangers and dire
consequences of tobacco use being screened in cinema
hall or theatre or aired on television;
(d)
live coverage of news, current affairs,
interviews, public meetings, sports events, cultural
events and the like, being telecast on television whereby
there is a purely incidental and completely unintentional
coverage of use of tobacco products:
Provided further that the exemptions under
clauses (a), (b), (c) and (d) above shall not extend to
display of brands of tobacco products or tobacco product
placement in any form:
Provided also that close ups of cigarette
packages or tobacco products shall not be permissible
and such scenes shall be edited by the producer or
distributor or broadcaster prior to screening in cinemas
or theatres or airing on television.
Explanation (1).- For the purpose of this sub-rule, all
films that receive Central Board of Film certification
prior to the effective date of this notification shall be
categorized as “old films”.
Explanation (2).- For the purpose of this sub-rule,
“foreign film” implies “imported” as defined in the
Cinematography (Certification) Rules, 1983.
(6A) In case of old Indian and foreign films, the
owner or manager of the cinema hall or theatre where
the film is being screened shall ensure that anti tobacco
health spots of minimum thirty seconds duration each
are screened at the beginning, middle and end of the said
film. The provisions of this sub-rule shall not apply to
clause (c) of sub-rule 6.
(6B)(a) In case of old television programmes, it shall be
mandatory for the broadcaster to ensure either placement
of an anti tobacco health warning as a prominent scroll
WP(C)18761/2005

Page 4 of 34

at the bottom of the television screen during the period
of such display or airing of anti tobacco health spots for
a period of minimum thirty seconds during the telecast
of each television programme of thirty minute duration
or less.
(b)
In case the television programme is more than
thirty minutes further airtime of thirty seconds shall be
allocated for each incremental thirty minutes, for
telecasting anti tobacco spots.
(c) the minimum duration of each anti tobacco spot shall
be not less than fifteen seconds.
(d)
The provisions of this sub-rule shall not apply to
clauses (c) and (d) of sub-rule 6:
Provided that, the anti tobacco health warning
scroll shall be legible and readable with font in black
colour on white background with the warnings
“Smoking causes cancer” or “Smoking kills” for
smoking form of tobacco use and “Tobacco causes
cancer” or “Tobacco kills” for chewing and other form
of tobacco or such other warnings as may be specified
by the Central Government, from time to time.
Provided further that, the anti tobacco health
warning scrolls or health spots shall be in the same
language(s) as used in the film or television programme.
In case of dubbed or sub-titled films or television
programmes, the scrolls or spots shall be carried in the
language of dubbing or sub-titlement.
(7)
Sub-rule (6) shall not apply to new Indian or
foreign films and television programmes displaying use
of tobacco products necessary to represent the smoking
of tobacco usage of a real historical figure or for
representation of a historical era or classified well
known character:

WP(C)18761/2005

Page 5 of 34

Provided that in very rare cases where there is
display or use of tobacco products due to compulsions of
the script, they shall be supported by a strong editorial
justification:
Provided further that the display of usage of
tobacco products in such movies and television
programmes under this sub-rule shall be subject to the
following safeguards:
(a)
Film and television programs depicting tobacco
related scenes shall mandatorily be given 'A'
Certification. Such films and television programmes
may be permitted to be telecast at such timings as are
likely to have least viewership from persons below the
age of eighteen years.
(b)
The films or television programs, which depict
such scenes, would have a disclaimer by the concerned
actor regarding the ill effects of use of such products.
The disclaimer would be shown in the beginning, middle
and end of the film.
(c)
Whenever such scenes are shown in a film or
television programme, an anti tobacco health warning
scroll will be continuously displayed on the screen
starting a minute before the scene and would be
continuously displayed until one minute after the scene.
Provided also that there shall not be any display
of brands of tobacco products or tobacco product
placement in any form:
Provided also that close-ups of cigarette
packages or tobacco products shall not be permissible
and such scenes shall be edited by the producer or
distributor or broadcaster prior to screening in cinemas
or theatres or airing on television.
Explanation (1).WP(C)18761/2005

For the purpose of this sub-rule,
Page 6 of 34

all films and television programmes that receive Central
Board of Film certification after the effective date of this
notification shall be categorized as 'new'.
Explanation (2).For the purpose of this sub-rule,
representatives from Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare shall also be represented in the Central Board of
Film Certification.”

3.

I have gone through the reasoning contained in paragraph 17, 18 and 19

of the judgment of my learned brother Khanna, J. The relevant operative
portions of the said paragraphs reads as under:
“Para 17. ..........The Act seeks to prohibit, direct and
indirect, advertisement by the person engaged in
production, supply or distribution of cigarettes and also
any person having control over the media shall be
prohibited from advertising, directly or indirectly,
cigarettes or tobacco products. Any other interpretation
would prohibit a person from participating directly or
indirectly in an offending advertisement but would
permit and tacitly permit indirect advertisements by
dealers, manufacturers, media etc.
Para 18. Sub-section (3) of Section 5 prohibits a person
from entering into contract or promote or agreeing to
promote tobacco products or even brand name of
cigarettes and tobacco products. Section 22 provides for
prosecution of persons who infringe or contravene the
provisions of Section 5 of the act.
Para 19.
.............. The impugned Rules, which
seek to define the term “indirect advertisement”,
therefore cannot be regarded as ultra vires or seeking to
go beyond the parent statute. The relevant Rules, their
scope, import, purpose and reasonableness has been
WP(C)18761/2005

Page 7 of 34

discussed in the later portion of this judgment and is not
being separately examined under this heading.”

I am respectfully unable to agree with the view taken by my
learned brother holding that the impugned rules cannot be regarded as ultra
vires or seeking to go beyond the parent statute. The scope of the rule-making
power conferred by Section 31 of the Act by virtue of which the impugned
Rules were framed is fundamental to assessment of the legality of such rules.
In my view, none of the provisions of Section 31 contemplates directly or
indirectly the power to make rules in respect of television serials and films
and, therefore, in my view, the plea of the petitioner that a blanket ban on
production of films and television serial which show a smoking scene is ultra
vires the rule making power under Section 31 of the Act appears to have
substance.
4.

The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Cigarettes and other

Tobacco Products (Prohibition of Advertisement and Regulation of Trade and
Commerce, Production, Supply and Distribution) Act, 2003 reads as follows:
“2.
WP(C)18761/2005

The proposed Bill seeks to put total ban on
Page 8 of 34

advertising of cigarettes and other tobacco products and
to prohibit sponsorship of sports and cultural events
either directly or indirectly as well as sale of tobacco
products to minors.
The objective of the proposed enactment is to reduce
the exposure of people to tobacco smoke (passive
smoking) and to prevent the sale of tobacco products to
minors and to protect them from becoming victims of
misleading advertisements.”

“Advertisement” has been defined under Section 3 (a) as :
“Advertisement” includes any visible representation by
way of notice, circular, label, wrapper or other
document and also includes any announcement made
orally or by any means of producing or transmitting
light, sound, smoke or gas;”

5.

Section 31 of the Act provides that Rules may be made on the following

subjects:“Section 31. “Power of the Central Government to make
rules:- (1) The Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the
provisions of this Act.
(2)
Without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of
the following matters, namely(a) specify the form and manner in which
warning shall be given in respect of cigarettes or other
tobacco products under clause (o) of section 3;
(b)
specify the maximum permissible
nicotine and tar contents in cigarettes or other tobacco
products under the proviso to sub-section (5) of section
WP(C)18761/2005

Page 9 of 34

7;
(c)
specify the manner in which the
specified warning shall be inscribed on each package of
cigarettes or other tobacco products or its label under
sub-section (2) of section 8;
(d)
specify the height of the letter or figure
or both to be used in specified warning or to indicate the
nicotine and tar contents in cigarettes or other tobacco
products under Section 10;
(e) provide for the manner in which entry into
and search of any premises is to be conducted and the
manner in which the seizure of any package of cigarettes
or other tobacco products shall be made and the manner
in which seizure list shall be prepared and delivered to
the person from whose custody any package of cigarettes
or other tobacco products has been seized;
(f)
provide for any other matter which is
required to be, or may be prescribed.
1. Every rule made under this Act and every
notification made under Section 30 shall
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it
is in session, for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one
session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the
session immediately following the session
or the successive session aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule or notification or both Houses
agree that the rule or notification should
not be made, the rule or notification shall
thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the
case may be; so, however, that any such
WP(C)18761/2005

Page 10 of 34

modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule or
notification.”

6.

The preamble of the Act avowedly deals with a total ban on cigarette

advertising and other tobacco products and the sponsoring of sports and
cultural events and sale of tobacco products to minors and does not deal with
media at all except advertising and sponsorship. Neither the preamble nor any
of the provisions of Section 31, in my view contemplates directly or indirectly
the power to make rules in respect to television serials and films. Section 31
(1) of the Act confers the power upon the Government to make Rules to carry
out the provisions of the Act. There is no provision in the Act, which seeks to
regulate or prohibit any matters relating to cinema or television, including the
contents of cinema or television programmes. If the Act is read as a whole, it
becomes obvious that the intention is to regulate the manner in which tobacco
products are packaged, sold and advertised and/or sponsored. There is no
reference to cinema or any other media in the Act. If the intention of the
legislature was to apply the Act to cinema, it would have found a mention
WP(C)18761/2005

Page 11 of 34

expressly or by necessary implication. The omission of any reference to
cinema and the matters incidental to it in the Act is not a result of oversight,
but the expression of a conscious legislative intention not to extend the
application of the Act to other subjects including the fields of cinema and
television, which are covered under the Cinematographic Act and the Cable
Television Act. A mere depiction of a smoking scene in a movie or serial
cannot be termed as an indirect advertisement. The impugned Rules, therefore,
cannot be framed under the powers conferred under Section 31 (1) and thus are
ultra vires the statute.
Since the impugned Rules are neither authorized under Sub section (1)
nor under sub-section (2) of Section 31 of the Act, the same are held to be
ultra vires the Rules making power under Section 31 of the Act and are
accordingly struck down.
7.

Even proceeding on an assumption that the rules were intra vires

Section 31 of the Act, the scope of freedom of speech and expression as
envisaged in Article 19 of the Constitution is required to be defined in order to
WP(C)18761/2005

Page 12 of 34

appreciate the issues arising in the writ petition de hors the plea about the vires
of the Rules qua Section 31 of the Act.
“Article 19 of the Constitution reads as under:
19. Protection of certain rights regarding freedom of
speech,etc.(1) All citizens shall have the right(a) to freedom of speech and expression;
(b) x x x x x
(c.) x x x x x
(d) x x x x x
(e) x x x x x
(g) x x x x x
[(2) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall affect
the operation of any existing law, or prevent the State
from making any law, in so far as such law imposes
reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right
conferred by the said sub-clause in the interests of [the
sovereignty and integrity of India,] the security of the
State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order,
decency or morality, or in relation to contempt of court,
defamation or incitement to an offence.]
(emphasis supplied)”

8.

The Constitution of India has not adopted the doctrine of preferred

freedoms nor has any such theory been evolved by our Supreme Court. The
Hon'ble Supreme Court has preserved this cherished right and has refused to
give a clean chit to legislative or executive measures abridging this vital
WP(C)18761/2005

Page 13 of 34

freedom unless such measures strictly and squarely conformed to the
permissible limits contained in Article 19 (2).
(i)

In Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting vs. CAB, 1995

(2) SCC 161, it was clearly held that the freedom to air one's view is the
lifeline of any democratic constitution. It was also held in the said judgment
that no restriction should be placed on the right to freedom of speech and
expression on grounds other than those specified under Article 19(2) of the
Constitution. The relevant portion of the said judgment reads as under:
“The freedom of speech and expression of
opinion is of paramount importance under a
democratic constitution which envisages changes
in the composition of
legislatures and
governments and must be preserved.”
“The Court must be careful to see that it does not
even unwittingly aid the effort to defeat the
parties' right.
Every free citizen has an
undoubted right to lay what sentiments he
pleases before the public. Freedom to air one's
views is the lifeline of any democratic institution
and any attempt to stifle, suffocate or gag this
right would sound a death-knell to democracy
and would help usher in autocracy or
dictatorship. This court has always placed a
broad interpretation on the value and content of
Article 19 (1)(a), making it subject only to the
restrictions permissible under Article 19 (2) ”

WP(C)18761/2005

Page 14 of 34

“Unlike in American limitations on fundamental
rights are specifically spelt out under Article
19(2) of our Constitution. Hence no restriction
can be placed on the right to freedom of speech
and expression on grounds other than those
specified under Article 19(2).”

(ii)

The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of S. Rangarajan vs. P.

Jagjeevanram, 1989 (2) SCC 574 para 51 & 53, held as follows:
“Fundamental Rights guaranteed under Article
19(1) (a) can be curbed or restrained only on the
grounds specifically mentioned under Article 19
(2).”

(iii)

In LIC v. Manubhai Shah, (1992) 3 SCC 637 , the Hon'ble Supreme

Court held as follows:
“The freedom of speech and expression must be
broadly construed to include the freedom to
circulate one's views by word of mouth or in
writing or through audio visual media. This
includes the right to propagate one's views
through the print or other media. The Court
observed:
Freedom to air one's view is the lifeline of any
democratic institution and any attempt to stifle
or suffocate or gag this right would sound a
death knell to democracy and would help usher
in autocracy or dictatorship.”

(iv)

In Sakal Papers (P) Ltd. v. UOI, (1962) 3 SCR 842 para 34, the Hon'ble

WP(C)18761/2005

Page 15 of 34

Supreme Court held as follows:
“There is nothing in clause (2) of Article 19
which permits the State to abridge this right on
the ground of conferring benefits upon the public
in general or upon a section of the public. It is
not open to the State to curtail, or infringe the
freedom of speech of one for promoting the
general welfare of a section or a group of people
unless its action could be justified under clause
(2) of Article 19.”

(v)

The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Bobby Art International v.

Om Pal Singh Hoon, (1996) 4 SCC 1 held as under: “Section 5-B of the Cinematograph Act, which echoes
Article 19(2), states that a film shall not be certified for
public exhibition if, in the opinion of the authority
competent to grant the certificate, the film or any part of
it is against the interests of, inter alia, decency. Under
the provisions of sub-section (2) of Section 5-B the
Central Government is empowered to issue directions
setting out the principles which shall guide the authority
competent to grant certificates in sanctioning films for
public exhibition.
The guidelines earlier issued were revised in 1991.
Clause (1) thereof reads thus:
“1. The objectives of film certification will be to ensure
that—
( a ) the medium of film remains responsible and
sensitive to the values and standards of society;
( b ) artistic expression and creative freedom are not
undulycurbed;
( c ) certification is responsive to social change;

WP(C)18761/2005

Page 16 of 34

( d ) the medium of film provides clean and healthy
entertainment;and
( e ) as far as possible, the film is of aesthetic value
and cinematically of a good standard.”
The guidelines aforementioned have been carefully
drawn. They require the authorities concerned with film
certification to be responsive to the values and standards
of society and take note of social change. They are
required to ensure that “artistic expression and creative
freedom are not unduly curbed”. The film must be
“judged in its entirety from the point of view of its
overall impact”. It must also be judged in the light of the
period depicted and the contemporary standards of the
people to whom it relates, but it must not deprave the
morality of the audience.”

9.

Freedom of press is a basic prerequisite of a democratic framework as

per our Constitution. This freedom depends heavily on the widest possible
dissemination and when the process of dissemination is hindered or obstructed
by means of legislation or otherwise, it defeats the right guaranteed by Article
19(1)(a) and it also takes away the rights of the people to find out what is
correct by means of a free discussion and criticism.

Any legislation

subordinate or otherwise affecting the freedom of the press therefore must first
undergo the test of directness i.e. whether the effect of the impugned action
shall take away or abridge the fundamental right of freedom of speech and
expression.
WP(C)18761/2005

Page 17 of 34

The Apex Court in Bennet Coleman & Co. Vs. UOI, AIR 1973 SC 106
observed as follows:“If it is to be assumed that the direct
object of law or action has to be direct
abridgment of the right of free speech by
the impugned law or action it is to be
related to the directness of effect and not
to the directness of the subject matter of
impeached law or action. The action
may have a direct effect on a
fundamental right although it direct
subject matter may be different.
Therefore, the word “direct” would go to
the quality or character of the effect and
not the subject matter.”

Thus it is the direct operation of the Act or the Rules upon the rights that
forms the real test. In Sakal Papers' case (supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court
referred to the ruling in Dwarkadas Shrinivas Sholapur Shining & Weaving
Co. Ltd. and held that the correct approach is to enquire what in actual form
was the loss or injury caused to the citizens and not just the method adopted by
the State in placing restrictions.
In Bennett Coleman (supra), the Court had further held that:

WP(C)18761/2005

Page 18 of 34

“No law or action would state in words
that rights of freedom of speech and
expression are abridged or taken away.
That is why courts have to protect and
guard fundamental rights by considering
the scope and provisions of the Act and
its effect upon the fundamental rights.
The ruling of this Court in Bank
Nationalization's case (1970) 3 SCR 530
- (AIR 1970 SC 563) (supra) is the test
of direct operation upon the rights. By
direct operation is meant the direct
consequence or effect of the Act upon
the rights.”

Thus when we examine the impugned Rule in the context of the above
discussion, it is clear that the blanket ban on production of films and television
serials which show a smoking scene is a direct encroachment on the creativity
and free artistic expression of the maker of such film or television serial
guaranteed under Article 19 (1) (a). Such restriction does not fall within the
parameters of reasonableness under Article 19(2) and hence cannot be upheld.
10.

Thus the Hon'ble Supreme Court proscribed the undue curbing of

artistic expression and creative freedom. At this stage, the scope and ambit of
the phrase 'decency and morality' in Article 19(2) relied upon by Shri P.P.
WP(C)18761/2005

Page 19 of 34

Malhotra, the learned Additional Solicitor General is required to be construed
in the context of the right to freedom of speech and expression guaranteed
under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution and under the scope of Article 19(2)
which specifies heads under which that right could be restricted. While the
petitioner is right in contending that the freedom of speech and expression
cannot be curtailed merely on the ground of public health but nevertheless I
find that the term 'decency and morality' under Article 19 (2) of the
Constitution must receive a wider meaning and to exclude public health from
the scope and ambit of decency and morality would be putting too narrow an
interpretation on the said phrase. The interpretation of the constitution must
receive the dynamic interpretation which is conditioned and indicated by the
societal development and reflects current societal norms.
11.

The incidence of research on ill effects of tobacco and the

knowledge and the connection between cancer and tobacco may bring public
health into the ambit of 'decency and morality' in the present context even
though it may not have been traditionally perceived to be so. The entries in
WP(C)18761/2005

Page 20 of 34

Schedule VII of the Constitution are required to be construed widely and
liberally and must receive an interpretation in accordance with the present state
of affairs in the Indian society.
12.

Therefore, I am of the view that in so far as the power to frame the

Rules is concerned, the impugned rules could have been framed under the
scope of the phrase 'decency and morality' used in Article 19(2) provided
Section 31 contemplated such a jurisdiction to frame rules.
However, merely because of the existence of the power to frame
rules, it does not necessarily imply that the rules formulated pursuant to the use
of such power are legal.

In testing the sweep of the right of freedom of

speech and expression under Article 19(1)(a), the reasonableness of the
restriction permissible under Article 19 (2), even if put for safeguarding public
health, which I have already construed to be part of decency and morality,
nevertheless, has to be judged.
restrictions must be reasonable.

Article 19(2) clearly stipulates that the
In my view, the blanket restriction put on the

scenes of smoking in all the films and television serials even with the editorial
WP(C)18761/2005

Page 21 of 34

justification cannot be sustained as it is, in my view, unreasonable and violates
Article 19(1)(a) for that reason.
13.

I also cannot lose sight of the fact that the Cinematograph Act,

1952 and the Rules framed thereunder provide adequate safeguards if a scene
of smoking is used as a surrogate/indirect advertisement or the use of a
smoking scene is so prominent so as to masquerade as an purported incident of
artistic freedom and leads to promotion of the use of tobacco. The undoubted
evils of tobacco and the need to curb smoking particularly among youngsters
who emulate their matinee-idols cannot be over emphasized. I do not have the
slightest doubt that the impugned rule is well intentioned and indeed if
constitutionally valid, would promote good health in the country. However, I
am required to judge the legality and not the noble intention or the public
interest subserved which led to the framing of the impugned rules. I cannot
lose sight of the fact that smoking per se has not been banned in our country,
and in such a situation, a blanket ban on the use of scenes of smoking in films
and television serials would clearly be unreasonable as it would proscribe the
WP(C)18761/2005

Page 22 of 34

depiction of what actually transpires in life in this country and curb
unreasonably, artistic expression and creative freedom contrary to the law laid
down in Bobby Art International (supra) by the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
14.

The Guidelines for Certification of Films for Public Exhibition

(hereinafter referred to as the “CBFS guidelines”) read as follows:“MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING
th

New Delhi, the 6 December, 1991.
NOTIFICATION
S.O 836(E). In exercise of the power conferred by
sub-section(2) of section 5 B of the Cinematograph
Act, 1952 (37 of 1952) and in supersession of the
notification of the Government of India in the Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting No. S.O. 9(E), dated
th
7 January 1978, except as respects things done or
omitted to be done before such supersession, the
Central Government hereby directs that in sanctioning
films for public exhibition, the Board of Film
Certification shall be guided by the following
principles:
1.
The objectives of film certification will be
ensure that(a) the medium of film remains responsible and
sensitive to the values and standards of society;
(b) artistic expression and creative freedom are not
unduly curbed;
(c) certification is responsive to social change;
(d) The medium of film provides clean and healthy
entertainment; and
WP(C)18761/2005

Page 23 of 34

(e) as far as possible, the film is of aesthetic value and
cinematically of a good standard.
2.
In pursuance of the above objectives, the
Board of Film Certification shall ensure that----------------------------------------(vi-a) Scenes tending to encourage, justify or
glamorise consumption of tobacco or smoking are not
shown;”
(emphasis supplied)

Any film or television serial which abuses the right of artistic
freedom of speech and expression and tends to encourage, justify or glamorize
the concept of tobacco can and certainly is bound to be dealt with, by the
Censor

Board

by

alterations/deletion.

denying

it

certification

or

ordering

suitable

Thus, the public intent sought to be sub served by the

impugned rules can be and indeed is required to be preserved by the above
noticed guidelines for film certification.
15.

No one can doubt the evils of tobacco and they are well

manifested in the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Murli S. Deora
vs. Union of India (2001) 8 SCC 765. Nevertheless, I cannot lose sight of the
fact that the tobacco consumption, in whatever form, has not been per se

WP(C)18761/2005

Page 24 of 34

banned in our country. Consequently, the question of ban on scenes of tobacco
consumption by smoking, the issue we are concerned with in the present
petition, has to be examined in that light.

Today, in the restricted form,

smoking is permissible in this Country. Movies and television serials are
meant to depict and reflect life in all its facets. In the guise of promoting good
health, which is undoubtedly a desired goal, the freedom of speech and
expression cannot be unreasonably interfered with particularly when such
restriction is in addition to the restrictions which may be imposed upon by the
Censor Board. Quite apart from the fact that I have already held that the Rules
are ultra vires the Section 31 of the Act for the reasons given in the foregoing
paragraphs, nevertheless I am of the view that even if assumed to be intra
vires, the rules insofar as they put a ban on the depiction of smoking scenes
even with the amended rider of strong editorial justification, will violate
Article 19(1)(a) and the right of artistic expression and creative freedom for
film makers and other media and the restrictions sought to be put cannot be
held to be reasonable.
WP(C)18761/2005

Page 25 of 34

The freedom of speech and expression is one of the pillars of the
Constitution of India and indeed sustains its democratic structure. What I find
in addition to the rule being ultra vires the Act is the safeguard, that all the
evils sought to be curbed by the rules impugned are remediable under the
Cinematographic Act and CBFS guidelines, as referred to above.
The evils sought to be remedied and public interest sought to be
advanced by the impugned rules can be and ought to be redressed by the Board
of Censors. I have already held that the Act and the Rule making power
conferred under Section 31 of the Act, does not empower the Government to
make the impugned Rules.

Consequently, with great respect I am unable to

agree with the conclusions in the erudite judgment of my learned brother
Sanjiv Khanna, J., and strike down the provisions of Rule 4 (6) as being ultra
vires Section 31 of the Act.
16.

The Hon'ble Supreme Court in K.A. Abbas v. Union of India,

(1970) 2 SCC 780 para 49 , held as follows:
“......Our standards must be so framed that we

WP(C)18761/2005

Page 26 of 34

are not reduced to a level where the protection
of the least capable and the most depraved
amongst is determines what the morally healthy
cannot view or read. The standards that we set
for our censors must make a substantial
allowance in favor of freedom thus leaving a
cast area for creative art to interpret life and
society with some of its foibles along with what
is good. We must not look upon such human
relationships as banned in toto and for ever from
human thought and must give scope for talent to
put them before society. The requirements of
art and literature include within themselves a
comprehensive view of social life and not only
in its ideal for and the line is to be drawn where
the average moral man beings to feel
embarrassed or disgusted at a naked portrayal of
life without the redeeming touch of art or genius
or social value. If the deprived begins to see in
these things more than what an average person
would, in much the same way, as it is wrongly
said, a Frenchman sees a woman's legs in
everything, it cannot be helped. In our scheme
of things, ideas having redeeming social or
artistic value must also have importance and
protection for their growth........”

17.

Creativity and the formation of artistic expression cannot be

curtailed to the extent of banning it as the films and television serials could and
would reflect reality. Even otherwise, if a film depicts a smoking scene which
is hit by the restriction, it may reflect life with all its manifestations.
Therefore, to put a total restriction on scenes of smoking in films and serials

WP(C)18761/2005

Page 27 of 34

punishable when smoking is not banned in the court, in my view, is an exercise
impermissible under the Constitution. As such, a blanket ban imposes an
wholly unreasonable restriction on the freedom of speech and expression
manifested by artistic freedom. Such a blanket ban, therefore, does not take
into account the cinematic necessity and the intent of the narration of the
Director and would even forbid the actual reality of life to be portrayed by the
scene. It would also curb artistic freedom. If a fetter imposed by the Rules is
upheld, a corollary of the above rule could be another rule proscribing scenes
which show promiscuity and villainy on the screen. Even such scenes could
legitimately be termed as setting a deleterious example before the youth and
the impressionable sections of the country. Such possible inroads into the
freedom of speech and expression could be illustrated by other depictions
necessitated by the script which show what is not necessarily good or moral.
However, cinema must both reflect good and bad aspects of life. Imagine a
movie where all is well and every character is moral and obeys the laws and is
happy and contented.
WP(C)18761/2005

Such a script apart from being very boring also
Page 28 of 34

necessarily has to be very short.

Even epics such as 'Mahabharata' and

'Ramayana' have gambling, kidnapping and deceit and such depictions cannot
be legitimately prohibited to promote a morally idealistic society.

For

example, it would be difficult to portray the youthful gathering say in a college
or a club without the use of incidental smoking being a part of the script. It is
precisely such inroads into the right of freedom of speech and expression that
have to be curbed and safeguarded as per Article 19(1)(a) of our Constitution
and accordingly must be struck down.
18.

Accordingly, the writ petitions are allowed and Rule 4(6) is

quashed and set aside as being ultra vires Section 31 of the Act and in any
event violative of Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India.

(MUKUL MUDGAL)
JUDGE
February 07, 2008

WP(C)18761/2005

Page 29 of 34

WP(C) No. 7410-11/2006

KASTURI & SONS:
1.

De hors the finding on the Rule 4(8) being ultra vires Section 31

and on the assumption that the Rules could be framed I proceed to consider
the validity of Rule 4(8) on the ground of violation of Articles 14 and
19(1)(a). The challenge by the petitioner Newspaper Hindu through senior
counsel Shri Arvind Datar is to publishing a photograph of a live event
containing a cigarette brand which has already been telecast. My reasoning in
so far as the Rules being ultra vires Section 31 of the Act has been formulated
in the judgment in WP(C) No.18761/05 and I adopt the same reasoning and
hold the Rule 4(8) to be ultra vires Section 31 of the Act. I also however
proceed to discuss the validity of Rule 4(8) on the assumption that it is intra
vires Section 31 of the Act. In my view if such an event has been telecast live,
then to forbid the photograph of the event which has already been telecast live
under the provisions of Sub-rule 7 of Rule 4 as amended in the year 2005 and

WP(C)18761/2005

Page 30 of 34

renumbered as Sub-rule 8 of Rule 4 would certainly be unreasonable, arbitrary
and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
2.

The challenge here is to amended Sub-rule (8) of Rule 4 which

reads as follows:“(8)
Wherever brand names or logos of tobacco
products form a part of the pictures to be printed in any
form or print or outdoor media or footage to be aired
through any form of electronic media, it shall be
mandatory for the media to crop or mask the same to
ensure that the brand names and logos of the tobacco
products are not visible, except in case of live or
deferred live telecast of sports, cultural and other
events or activities held in other countries being aired
on television in India.”

3.

It has been contended that while the unhindered live telecast of

Formula-I Race took place, the petitioner has been proceeded against on the
ground that they published a photograph of the same event which had already
been telecast live. The challenge is required to be adjudicated in the aforesaid
factual background. I have also noted the fact that the television channels are
permitted to telecast the said Formula-I Race without any editing as amended
sub-rule 8 of Rule 4 has clearly excluded from its ambit the live television

WP(C)18761/2005

Page 31 of 34

coverage of events. To the extent the print media is singled out while not
touching the live coverage on the television channels, the said ban is violative
of Article 14.

In so far as the pictorial representation of a live event in a

newspaper is concerned I am of the view that firstly it is not possible to
differentiate between the visual depiction of a live telecast and still
photography of the same event in the print media, and secondly I see no reason
why a visual depiction (though live) or even deferred live, both of which have
a far greater impact, can be permitted whereas a photograph of the said event
cannot be. This would amount to invidious discrimination clearly violating the
basic mandate of Article 14 of the Constitution of India. In my view the
Formula I Race attracts a lot of public attention and to forbid to print the
pictures of prize distribution ceremony as done in the present case, would
certainly amount to violation of Article 19(1)(a) as it impedes the right to
disseminate and circulate news guaranteed as part of freedom of speech and
expression.
4.

The freedom of speech and expression is a prominent constituent of

WP(C)18761/2005

Page 32 of 34

democracy. A healthy and fetter free press promotes dissemination of news
and views. A healthy democracy is sustained by informing and making aware
the citizens of conflicting and differing paints of view and any inroads into the
freedom of speech and expression,

and any rules made in the form of

imposing curbs thereon would violate Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution.
Such curbs are not saved by Article 19(2) of the Constitution. Accordingly,
the impugned Rule 4(8) in so far as it proscribes in toto the photographs of
already telecast events clearly violate not only Article 14 but also hinders
unreasonably the rights guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a) and is not protected
by sub-clause (2) of Article 19 of the Constitution. Thus, while I concur with
the quashing of the show cause notice issued to Kasturi and Sons by my
learned brother Sanjiv Khanna, J., I am further unable to sustain the
constitutional validity of the Rule 4 Sub Rule 8.

WP(C)18761/2005

Page 33 of 34

5.

Accordingly, the writ petitions are allowed and Rule 4(8) is quashed and

set aside as being ultra vires Section 31 of the Act and in any event violative of
Articles 14 and 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India.

MUKUL MUDGAL
(Judge)
February 7, 2008
dr/kkb

WP(C)18761/2005

Page 34 of 34

