*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

RFA (OS) No. 44/2001
Reserved on: 7th February, 2008
th
Date of Decision: 14 February, 2008
KULBHUSHAN SETH
..... Appellant
Through Mr. Ajay Vir Singh, Advocate.
versus
SEEMA SETH & ORS.
..... Respondent
Through Mr. R.K. Singh and Ms. Deepa Rai, Advocates.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MUKUL MUDGAL
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.L. BHAYANA
1.
2.

Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest? Yes

%

Yes
Yes

JUDGMENT
14-02-2008

MUKUL MUDGAL, J.

1.

This is an appeal against the order dated 7

th

April, 2000.

The

th

impugned judgment noted that on 19 January, 2000, the defendant was directed to

RFA(OS) 44/2001

Pg. 1 of 5

file affidavit showing his total gross amount of salary in the year 1999 which was
not done and at the request of the defendant/appellant two weeks' further time was
given on 14th February, 2000. This order was also not complied with and on 19th
March, 2000, a notice was given to the appellant to show cause as to why his
defence should not be struck off. The appellant was also required to be present in
person before the learned Single Judge.

The defendant/appellant neither filed

affidavit nor showed any cause nor remained present on 7th April, 2000. By the
said order the learned Single Judge has construed this conduct to show lack of
bona fide and in our view rightly so. On account of the aforesaid conduct of the
appellant, the defence of the appellant was struck off and the statement of the
plaintiff/respondent was recorded separately.
2.

From the averments made in the plaint and the statement made by the

respondent/plaintiff, the learned Single Judge concluded as follows:(a)

The respondent Nos. 1 & 2/ original plaintiff No. 1 and 2 were wife and

minor daughter of the appellant/defendant.
(b)

Both the respondents had no means, income or property for their

maintenance.

RFA(OS) 44/2001

Pg. 2 of 5

(c)

The salary of the defendant/appellant during the year 1997-98 was

Rs.4,21,120/- as per the income tax return.
(d)

The salary of the defendant/appellant would be beyond Rs.45,000/- P.M.

(e)

There were substantial savings in appellant's Provident Fund, LIC and NSC

as demonstrated by the Income Tax Returns.
3.

After taking into account the status of the appellant with monthly income

and also the fact that he has no other dependent, granted Rs.10,000/- per month for
respondent No. 1 and Rs.5,000/- per month for respondent No. 2 – who is the
minor daughter, as reasonable maintenance. Accordingly, a decree of Rs.15,000/was passed in favour of the respondents.
4.

The learned counsel for the appellant has challenged the above judgment of

the ground that the learned Single Judge was duty bound inspite of striking off the
defence, to look at the written statement of the appellant/defendant which
contradicted the evidence recorded by the learned Single Judge.

Reliance has

been placed on the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Modula India vs.
Kamakshya Singh Deo, (1988) 4 SCC 619.

The learned counsel for the

appellant submitted that the above judgment postulated that even if the defence is

RFA(OS) 44/2001

Pg. 3 of 5

struck off, the written statement ought to be considered before passing any
judgment. The relevant paragraph of the said judgment reads as follows:“24. For the above reasons, we agree with the
view of Ramendra Mohan Dutta, ACJ that, even in
a case where the defence against delivery of
possession of a tenant is struck off under Section
17(4) of the Act, the defendant, subject to the
exercise of an appropriate discretion by the court
on the facts of a particular case, would generally be
entitled:
(A) to cross-examine the plaintiff's witnesses; and
(b) to address argument on the basis of the
plaintiff's case.
We would like to make it clear that the defendant
would not be entitled to lead any evidence of his
own nor can his cross-examination be permitted to
travel beyond the very limited objective of pointing
out the falsity or weaknesses of the plaintiff's case.
In no circumstances should the cross-examination
be permitted to travel beyond this legitimate scope
and to convert itself virtually into a presentation of
the defendant's case either directly or in the form of
suggestions put to the plaintiff's witnesses.”
(emphasis supplied)

5.

A perusal of the above judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court makes it

clear that the right of the defendant in such a situation is to cross-examine the
plaintiff's witnesses and to address arguments on the basis of the plaintiff's case. It

RFA(OS) 44/2001

Pg. 4 of 5

has also been held that in no circumstances the cross-examination can be permitted
to travel beyond the legitimate scope

and to convert itself virtually to a

presentation of the defendant's case either directly or in the form of suggestions
put to the plaintiff's witnesses. In our view, this itself shows that the judgment of
the Hon'ble Supreme Court does not support the plea advanced by the learned
counsel for the appellant and on the contrary supports the stand of the respondent
that the appellant's written statement cannot be taken in account. Accordingly,
there is no merit in the appeal.
6.

The appeal is thus dismissed and stands disposed of in the above terms.

(MUKUL MUDGAL)
JUDGE

February 14, 2008
kkb

RFA(OS) 44/2001

(S.L. BHAYANA)
JUDGE

Pg. 5 of 5

