*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Crl. Appeal No.73/2007
Date of Decision : 18th September, 2007

JAI SHANKAR @ PAPPU
Through

.... Appellant
Mr. R. S. Boria & Ms. Sneh Rekha, Advs.

versus
STATE
Through

.... Respondent
Mr. Sunil Sharma, APP for the State.
Mr. Bharat Bhushan for DLSA.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MUKUL MUDGAL
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1.
2.
3.

Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes
Yes

Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

MUKUL MUDGAL,J. (ORAL)
JUDGEMENT
18-09-2007
1.

On 24th April, 2007 this Court had discussed the position of law

relating to the supply of copy of the judgment and other documents to the
Crl.A. No. 73/2007

Page No. 1 of 13

convicted accused in terms of Section 363 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as the “Code”).

The relevant

position in law is to be found inter alia in the judgment of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Suk Das vs. Union Territory of Arunachal Pradesh
(1986) 2 SCC 401 which guarantees the legal aid at State expense to
indigent persons.

The earlier practice

relating to supply of only the

judgment to a convict was leading to a situation where the preparation of
appeal was hindered because of non-availability of all the record with the
accused who was represented during the trial by an amicus curiae or Legal
Aid Cell nominated advocate. The liberty of a person is precious and as
guaranteed by our Constitution and a person cannot be deprived of it unless
such deprivation is in accordance with law. Not only does an accused have
a right to defend himself but the right to defence also includes the right to
effective and meaningful defence at the trial and indeed the appeal.
Accordingly, this Court is considering the effect of Section 363 of the Code
and the right of the accused on conviction to get the relevant documents. A
perusal of Section 363 Cr.P.C. shows that the poor and indigent accused
should have full access to the entire record of the trial court in order to
prefer and pursue meaningful and effective appeal. Section 363 of the Code
Crl.A. No. 73/2007

Page No. 2 of 13

reads as follows:
“363. Copy of judgment to be given
to the accused and other persons(1) When the accused is sentenced to
imprisonment, a copy of the judgment
shall,
immediately
after
the
pronouncement of the judgment, be
given to him free of cost.
(2) On the application of the accused,
a certified copy of the judgment, or
when he so desires, a translation in his
own language if practicable or in the
language of the Court, shall be given
to him without delay, and such copy
shall, in every case where the
judgment is appealable by the accused
be given free of cost.
Provided that where a sentence
of death is passed or confirmed by the
High Court, a certified copy of the
judgment shall be immediately given
to the accused free of cost whether or
not he applies for the same.
(3) The provisions of sub-section (2)
shall apply in relation to an order
under section 117 as they apply in
relation to a judgment which is
appealable by the accused.
(4) When the accused is sentenced to
death by any Court and an appeal lies
from such judgment as of right, the
Court shall inform him of the period
within which, if he wishes to appeal
his appeal should be preferred.
(5) Save as otherwise provided in sub
section (2) any person affected by a
Crl.A. No. 73/2007

Page No. 3 of 13

judgment or order passed by a
Criminal Court shall, on an
application made in this behalf and on
payment of the prescribed charges, be
given a copy of such judgment or
order of any deposition or other part of
the record:
Provided that the Court may, if
it thinks fit for some special reason,
give it to him free of cost.”

Although it was pointed that while the judgment against the accused
is to be given to him/her upon conviction free of cost nevertheless Subsection (5) of Section 363 Cr.P.C also indicates that judgment or orders,
any deposition or any part of record can be given on payment of prescribed
charges and court fee and for some special reason court may give it to him
free of cost also. We are of the view that since Article 21 of the
Constitution providing free legal aid is mandated, the fact that an accused is
represented through legal aid should be a sufficient special reason as
indicated in Section 363(5) Cr.P.C.
Thus the requirement of provision of a full papers/records to an
indigent accused who needs legal aid has been spelt out by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Supreme Court Legal Services Committee v. Union of
India and ors., 1998 (5) SCALE SP-20.

Crl.A. No. 73/2007

The Apex Court allowed the

Page No. 4 of 13

prayer for directions as sought in the writ petition in the above said case
which reads as follows:
“(iii) that the prisoner will be informed by the
Superintendent of every Jail about the availability
of legal aid in the High Courts and the Supreme
Court and be asked whether he is desirous of
exercising his constitutional right to avail of legal
aid.
(iv)
that every Jail will have to provide at the
cost of the State Exchequer cop of Vakalatnama,
proforma Affidavit in the form as required by the
respective High Courts and the Supreme Court for
being signed by the prisoner immediately upon
expressing his intention to avail of legal aid;
(v)
that the Superintendent of the Jail will
ensure that complete paper/records of the case are
sent to the Supreme Court Legal Aid Committee or
the High Court. Legal Aid Committee along with
the signed Vakalatnama and Affidavit of the
prisoner forthwith by registered post at the cost of
State Exchequer and that if there is any delay in
forwarding the papers, the reasons for forwarding
the papers belatedly will accompany such papers.”

The above binding mandate of the law laid down by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court contains the following two significant guidelines applicable
to the Supreme Court Legal Aid Committee and the High Court Legal Aid
Committee (now known as the High Court Legal Services Committee)
2.

Where an indigent accused cannot defend himself effectively and

adequately, the inbuilt right to equality, life and liberty envisaged under

Crl.A. No. 73/2007

Page No. 5 of 13

Article 14 and 21 of the Constitution becomes instrumental.

Further,

Article 39-A makes it obligatory on the State to ensure that legal system
promotes justice on the basis of equal opportunity and works towards
providing effective legal aid in order to ensure that no citizen is denied
opportunities of securing justice by reason of economic or other disabilities.
Articles 14, 21 and 39A are reproduced below:
“14: Equality before law The State shall not deny to any person equality
before the law or equal protection of law within the
territories of India.
21. Protection of life and personal liberty.
No person shall be deprived of his life or personal
liberty except according to procedure established by
law.
39A. Equal justice and free legal aid.
The State shall secure that the operation of the legal
system promotes justice, on a basis of equal
opportunity, and shall, in particular, provide free
legal aid, by suitable legislation or schemes or in
any other way, to ensure that opportunities for
securing justice are not denied to any citizen by
reason of economic or other disabilities.”

These constitutional provisions are echoed in the widely recognized
Universal Declaration of Human Rights (hereinafter referred to as “UDHR”)
norms, specially Article 3 and Article 10 which read as follows:
“Article 3.
Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of
Crl.A. No. 73/2007

Page No. 6 of 13

person.
Article 10.
Everyone is entitled in full equality to a fair and
public hearing by an independent and impartial
tribunal, in the determination of his rights and
obligations and of any criminal charge against him.”

3.

In Hussainara Khatoon v. State of Bihar, (1980) 1 SCC 108, the

Hon'ble Supreme Court emphasized upon providing legal aid to the
undertrials. Referring to both Articles 21 and 39-A the Court pointed out
that while Article 39-A emphasized that free legal service cannot be
segregated from 'reasonable, fair and just' procedure, the right to free legal
services is implicit in guarantee of Article 21. Further, these constitutional
objective cannot be achieved if a financial deprivation results in non
effective legal representation of the indigent leading to deprivation of
liberty. The Hon'ble Supreme Court held that:
“This is a constitutional right of every accused
person who is unable to engage a lawyer and secure
legal services on account of reasons such as
poverty, indigence or incommunicado situation and
the State is under a mandate to provide a lawyer to
an accused person if the circumstances of the case
and the needs of justice so require, provided of
course the accused persons does not object to the
provision of such lawyer. ”

The Hon'ble Supreme Court further held that:
Crl.A. No. 73/2007

Page No. 7 of 13

“Legal aid is really nothing else but equal justice in
action. Legal aid is in fact the delivery system of
social justice. If free legal services are not provided
to such an accused, the trial itself may run the risk of
being vitiated as contravening Article 21 and we
have no doubt that every State Government would
try to avoid such a possible eventually.”

Thus, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in its directions given in March
1979 in Hussainara Khatun made it clear that the right to free legal services
is inalienable from the reasonable, just and fair procedure available under
Article 21 for an accused person.
4.

While on one hand, the Hussainara order highlighted the inability of

the criminal justice system in relation to the indigent undertrials, on the
other hand it had a positive impact on the rights of undertrials belonging the
impoverished sections of the society. The court directed in Khatri II that
every accused not represented for the reason of his indigency was entitled to
free legal services at the cost of the state.
5.

In Suk Das's case the Supreme Court dwelt upon the factor of non

availing and non application for legal aid made by appellant though it was
the appellant's right to be provided with free legal assistance. It observed:
“it would ......... make a mockery of legal aid if it
were to be left to a poor ignorant and illiterate
accused to ask for free legal services.”
Crl.A. No. 73/2007

Page No. 8 of 13

Since Suk Das, it has been taken as settled law that free legal
assistance at the cost of the state has to be offered to person accused of an
offence which may jeopardize his life or personal liberty whether or not he
seeks it.

Further, the Court reaffirmed that “this fundamental right is

implicit in the requirement of reasonable, fair and just procedure prescribed
by law.”
Thus, Suk Das not only guaranteed the legal aid at State expense to
indigent person but also led to the concensus that a criminal trial would be
vitiated if an accused went effectively unrepresented by a lawyer in it for
want of financial resources.
6.

Earlier in M.H.Hoskot v. State of Maharashtra, (1978) 3 SCC 544,

the Hon'ble Supreme Court had not only held that every action which
“stultifies” a right to appeal in its being fruitful is unconstitutional but also
mandated that “the provision of free legal services to a prisoner who is
indigent or otherwise disabled from securing legal assistance where the ends
of justice call for such service.”
The Court further held:
“If a prisoner sentenced to imprisonment is virtually
unable to exercise his constitutional and statutory
right of appeal inclusive of special leave to appeal
for want of legal assistance, there is implicit in the
Crl.A. No. 73/2007

Page No. 9 of 13

court under article 142 read with articles 21 and 39A of the Constitution, power to assign counsel for
such imprisoned individual 'for doing complete
justice.”

7.

In Sunil Batra (I) v. Delhi Administration, (1978) 4 SCC 494, it was

directed that:
“Legal aid shall be given to prisoners to seek
justice from prison authorities, and, if need be, to
challenge the decision in court – in cases where they
are too poor to secure on their own. If lawyer's
services are not given, the decisional process
becomes unfair and unreasonable, especially
because the rule of law perishes for a disabled
prisoner if counsel is unapproachable and beyond
purchase. By and large, prisoners are poor, lacking
legal literacy, under the trembling control of the
jailor, at his mercy as it were, and unable to meet
relations of friends to take legal action. Where a
remedy is all but dead the right lives only in print.
Article 39 A is relevant in this context. Article 19
will be violated in such a case and the process will
be unreasonable. Article 21 will be infringed since
the procedure is unfair and arbitrary. In Maneka
Gandhi the rule has been stated beyond mistake.”

8.

The position in regard to the right of access to justice of convicts

came to be summed up in Law Poverty and Legal Aid to Criminal Justice
System (S. Muralidhar) :
(a)
(b)

Crl.A. No. 73/2007

----------------X--------------Where the prisoner is disabled from
engaging a lawyer, on reasonable
grounds such as indigence or
incommuncado situation, the court
shall, if the circumstances of the case,
the gravity of the sentence, and the
Page No. 10 of 13

ends of justice so require, assign
competent counsel for the prisoner's
defence.
(c)

(d)

Legal aid shall be given to prisoners to
seek justice from prison authorities,
and, if need be, to challenge the
decision in court – in cases where they
are too poor to secure legal assistance
on their own. Prisoners can bring
forth PIL to seek law and institutional
reform.

(e)

The need for legal services of convicts
continues even beyond the rejection of
their appeal by the courts. They are
entitled to legal assistance in the
matter of preferring review petitions,
and seeking remissions, pardon and
parole.

(f)

9.

Courts shall forthwith furnish a free
transcript of the judgment when
sentencing
an
accused
to
imprisonment.
Where the convict
seeks to file an appeal or revision,
every facility for exercise of that right
shall be made available by the jail
administration. A violation of this
requirement
would
be
unconstitutional.

----------------X--------------

A meeting was convened as directed in the order dated 10th May, 2007

between District & Sessions Judge and other Judges as well as Law
Secretary and Standing Counsel of Delhi Government and the following
minutes were recorded in the meeting.
“It was pointed out by all present that accused is
supplied with copy of police report, FIR recorded
Crl.A. No. 73/2007

Page No. 11 of 13

u/Section 154 Cr.P.C., copies of statements of
witnesses recorded u/Section 161 Cr.P.C. to whom
the prosecution proposes to examine as its
witnesses and documents annexed with the police
report, on the appearance of accused before the
Magistrate. Accused is also provided with copy
of judgment & order of sentence, free of cost, on
being convicted by the court concerned.
In order to overcome difficulty being
faced by the counsel for accused who are
nominated by Delhi Legal Services Authority that
they are not fully equipped with record of trial
court when they appear before High Court,
following consensus was arrived at by discussion
i.e. the accused be supplied with copy of the
charge, exhibited documents of prosecution as
well defence, copies of statement of witnesses of
prosecution as well as defence and statement
of accused u/Section 313 Cr.P.C., by the trial
Court concerned, when the matter is decided. An
order to this effect can be issued by the District &
Sessions Judge, on administrative side, for supply
of aforesaid documents/material free of cost to
the accused who is represented by counsel for
DLSA. Signatures of accused of having received
the aforesaid copies be taken on record by the
Court concerned. Reader of the court can certify
the document supplied as true copies. Existing
photocopiers are not sufficient to cope up with
aforesaid work. More photocopy machines will
be required. It will be appropriate if photocopy
machine is shared by two criminal courts.”
(emphasis added)

10.

Thereafter it has been determined that at least 20 photo copiers are

required to fulfill the constitutional obligation under Article 21 of the
Constitution of India as well as Section 363 of the Cr. P. C. This would
provide adequate access to justice to exercise an indigent person's right
Crl.A. No. 73/2007

Page No. 12 of 13

guaranteed under the Constitution of India.

Consequently,

20 photo

copiers were required to be installed on or before 1st August, 2007 by the
State Government in the concerned Session Courts.
11.

We are happy to note the statement of the learned counsel for the

State that the Delhi Government is alive to its Constitutional obligation and
has already sanctioned the requisite number of photo copiers. We also make
it clear that as per the position of law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in 1998 (5) SCALE SP-20 the Delhi High Court Legal Services
Committee is duty bound to collect the record as directed above and furnish
it to the indigent convicted accused or his legal aid lawyer for preparation of
an effective appeal by the accused.

MUKUL MUDGAL, J.

REVA KHETRAPAL, J.
September 18, 2007
dr/sk

Crl.A. No. 73/2007

Page No. 13 of 13

