*
+

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
RFA No. 607/1993 & CM Appl. No. 103/96
rd

Reserved on: 23 January, 2008
Date of Decision: 21st February, 2008
TIRATH DASS CHOUDHARY
..... Appellant.
Through Mr. Ravi Gupta, Ms. Reema Kalra and
Mr. Gaurav Gupta, Advocates.
versus
JAIDEVI BAI & OTHERS

..... Respondent
Through Mr. Ajay Kumar Tandon, Advocate.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MUKUL MUDGAL
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.L. BHAYANA
1.
2.

Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest? Yes

%

Yes
Yes

JUDGMENT
21-02-2008

MUKUL MUDGAL, J.

1.

This is an appeal against the judgment of the learned Additional
th

District Judge dated 15 October, 1992, by which an application under Order

RFA607/93

Pg. 1 of 20

VII Rule 11 CPC preferred by the respondent/defendant was allowed and the
suit filed by the appellant/plaintiff was dismissed by virtue of operation of
Section 4 of the Benami Transaction Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as the
Act).
2.

The briefly stated facts of the case are as follows:-

a)

The appellant filed a suit for declaration and injunction in the court of

the learned Additional District Judge stating therein that the appellant was the
owner in possession of the house built on residential plot No.22, Block A-1,
Paschim Vihar, New Delhi.

The plot

admeasures around 370.73 square

meters in area.
b)

The appellant had purchased the leasehold rights of the said property in a

public auction held on 31st March 1971. The said auction was held by the
DDA. The amount of Rs.21,600/- was paid to the authority as a consideration
price of the plot in question. This amount had been arranged by the appellant
from banks on his own account. The appellant was employed as Assistant
Central Tabulation Officer in the office of the Registrar General of India and
RFA607/93

Pg. 2 of 20

was the only person earning a handsome salary. The elder brother of the
appellant did not have sufficient means and the father of the appellant had died
in 1930 and the mother of the appellant, i.e., the Respondent No.1 was being
looked after by the appellant. The mother of the appellant had no independent
source of income of savings of any kind by which she could buy the property
by spending the huge amount.
c)

The appellant in order to give respect to his mother and out of sense of

devotion and with the clear intention that the said property shall be held by her
as his trustee and in a fiduciary capacity, had got the price paid at the time of
bid and even finally, in her name. The appellant had even raised construction
on the property in question on the said plot and was actually living with his
mother in that house prior to 1988. In the year 1988, the appellant had shifted
to Janakpuri and the property in dispute continued to be in possession of the
mother of the appellant on his behalf.
d)

The appellant submitted that the mother had never disputed his title and

ownership to the property but had always accepted the fact that she was
RFA607/93

Pg. 3 of 20

holding the property in a fiduciary capacity and for the benefit of the plaintiff
and appellant and his family members. As such, the property could not be
sold, transferred or possession thereof parted with by the said respondent no.1.
e)

The respondent No.2 to 5 had acted in collusion and under undue

influence and coercion and probably got some documents signed from
respondent no.1 even after kidnapping and various litigations in this regard
between the parties are pending.
f)

The appellant having come to know that the respondents were intending

to sell and transfer the property in question and were negotiating for the sale of
the superstructure, was compelled to file the suit on 9th June 1988 much before
the Benami Transfer Act came into force.
g)

In spite of the specific averments and during the pendency of the suit,

and in spite of the affidavit on behalf of the mother (the respondent No.1 in the
suit) filed in the court by her stating therein that the appellant was the lawful
owner of the property, the learned court below without considering the
affidavit filed and
RFA607/93

without giving reasons for disbelieving the affidavit,
Pg. 4 of 20

dismissed the suit as not maintainable under the provisions of the Benami
Transaction Act.
h)

The court below did not consider the various judgments and the

propositions of law which were submitted by the counsel for the plaintiff
appellant in this regard and dismissed the suit of the appellant.
i)

The property in question, as on date stands in the name of the mother of

the appellant for and on behalf of the appellant.
j)

The mother of the appellant as already submitted, has filed an affidavit

wherein she had clearly stated that the appellant was the lawful owner of the
property in question. In the face of the records, the court below ought not to
have dismissed the suit as not maintainable under the provisions of the Benami
Transaction Act.
3,

Since the suit has been dismissed in view of the application filed under

Order VII Rule 11 CPC, the relevant provisions of Order VII Rule 11 are set
out as under:3.
RFA607/93

Pg. 5 of 20

“The plaint shall be rejected in the following
cases:(a)
Where it does not disclose a cause of
action.
(b)
Where the relief claimed is undervalued,
and the plaintiff, on being required by the court
to correct the valuation within a time to be fixed
by the Court, fails to do so;
(c)
Where the relief claimed is properly
valued but the plaint is written upon paper
insufficiently stamped, and the plaintiff, on
being required by the Court to supply the
requisite stamp paper within a time to be fixed
by the court, fails to do so;
(d)
Where the suit appears from the
statement in the plaint to be barred by any law.”
(emphasis supplied)

4.

The learned counsel for the respondent/defendant had only relied upon

sub-clause (d) in support of the application under Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code
of Civil Procedure and contended that the statement in the plaint itself barred
the suit by virtue of the operation of Section 4 of the Act, which reads as
follows:-

RFA607/93

Pg. 6 of 20

“Prohibition of the right to recover property
held Benami No. 1) No suit, claim or action to
enforce any right in respect of any property held
Benami against the person in whose name the
property is held or against any other person
shall lie by or on behalf of a person claiming to
be real owner of such property.
(2)
No defence based on any right in respect
of any property held Benami, whether against
the person in whose name the property is held or
against any other: person shall be allowed in
any suit, claim or action by or on behalf of a
person claiming to be the real owner of such
property.
(3)

Nothing in this section shall apply:-

(a)
Where the person in whose name the
property is held is a coparcener in a Hindu
Undivided family and the property is held for
the benefit of the coparcerners in the family; or
(b)
Where the person in whose name the
property is held is a trustee or other person
standing in a fiduciary capacity and the property
is held for the benefit of another person for
whom he is a trustee or towards whom he stands
in such capacity.”
(emphasis supplied)

5.

The learned counsel for the respondent has submitted that a bare perusal

of the plaint shows that any suit for any right to claim the property held

RFA607/93

Pg. 7 of 20

benami against the person namely the mother of the plaintiff, Jaidevi, who was
the registered owner of the suit property was clearly barred.

Reliance has

been placed upon the following averments in the plaint:“1.
That the plaintiff is owner in possession
of all that residential plot No. 22, 317.73 sq.
meters in area, situate in Block A-1, Paschim
Vihar, New Delhi
.................
4.
That as Charan Dass, the elder brother of
the plaintiff did not have sufficient income to
support even his wife and children, the
plaintiff's mother has all along been with
maintained by the plaintiff and it was at her
behest that the plaintiff acquired the plot in
question to have house of his own for the family
to accommodate his said brother and his family
in times of need.
5.
That the plaintiff purchased the plot in
the name of his mother, defendant No. 1, as a
mark of respect and devotion to her last he
should feel neglected and uncared for.
6.
That she has accordingly remained
owner of the plot in name and has not at any
time here before denied the ownership of the
plaintiff of the plot in suit.
7.
That the plaintiff is the owner of the
plot in fact and besides payment of the premium
of Rs.21,600/- to the D.D.A. he has all along
been paying the taxes, levied by the Municipal
RFA607/93

Pg. 8 of 20

Corporation of Delhi and none else has
contributed even a shell towards the payment of
the price of the plot, or the taxes so far levied
thereon.”
(emphasis supplied)

6.

The following prayer was made in the plaint:“ It is therefore prayed that it may kindly be
declared that defendants have no right or title to
sell or transfer the plot bearing No. A-1/22,
Paschim Vihar, New Delhi and any document
executed by defendant No. 1 with respect to the
plot in suit in favour of defendants 2 to 5 or any
of them, is not binding on the plaintiff and
defendants No. 2 to 5 may be restrained from
interfering with the rights and title of the
plaintiff to the plot in suit.”

7.

The sum and substance of the defence taken by the respondent to the

suit, the contents of which have been extracted above was that the defendants
had no right or title to sell or transfer the suit property.
8.

The learned counsel for Respondent No. 1/Defendant No. 1 Smt. Jai

Devi Bai submitted as follows that in the written statement the following case
was set up by the defendant: a)

The plaintiff/appellant has no locus standi to file and maintain the

RFA607/93

Pg. 9 of 20

present suit because :(i)

He is neither the owner nor the lessee of the suit property bearing No.

22, Block A-1, Paschim Vihar, New Delhi admeasuring 317.33 sq. mtr.
(ii)

Defendant No. 1, Jai Devi Bai bid for and purchased the suit property in

a public auction on 31.3.71.
(iii)

The suit property was registered in the name of the defendant No. 1 vide

document No. 19150 in Addl. Book No. 1, Vol. Nol. 2439 on pages 190 to
196.

The entire consideration of Rs.21,611/- was paid by defendant No. 1

out of stridhan and lifetime savings on 3rd November, 1974.
(iv)

The defendant No. 1 was in actual possession of the suit property from

22nd December, 1989 i.e. the date of allotment. Thus, at no point of time the
plaintiff was in possession of the suit property.
(v)

The defendant No. 1 entered into an agreement to sell the suit property

as its absolute owner with Nand Lal & Sons HUF through its Karta Nand Lal
son of Shri R.D. Pruthi, resident of A-3/70, Paschim Vihar, New Delhi on 22nd
February, 1988 for the total consideration of Rs.3,90,000/- with clear terms
RFA607/93

Pg. 10 of 20

and conditions that the said purchaser shall bear half of the penalty amount
payable to the DDA.
(vii) The defendant No. 1 received in cash Rs.30,000/- as earnest money as
execution of “Agreement to Sell” and issued receipt thereof to Shri Nand Lal.
(viii) On 22nd December, 1989 actual physical possession was handed over to
the purchaser and on 12th September, 1990 after payment of balance
consideration of Rs.3,60,000/- the said purchaser became the sole owner with
lease hold rights of the said plot vide document No. 35075 in Addl. Book No.
IV Vol. No. 2315 on page No. 138.
b)

In the absence of any cause of action the suit is liable to be dismissed/

rejected under Order VII Rule 11 CPC.
c)

The suit has become infructuous and is not legally maintainable as the

defendant No. 1 had already sold the suit property prior to the filing of the
instant suit.
d)

The plaintiff used to receive money from defendant No. 1 with malafide

intention to grab the deposit of dues of DDA by issuing cheques and procure
RFA607/93

Pg. 11 of 20

bank drafts under his signature.
e)

Since the plaintiff was not in possession of the suit property or any part

thereof at any point of time, the suit is not maintainable and is liable to be
dismissed on this score alone.
f)

Since the suit has not been properly valued for the purposes of court fee

and jurisdiction and proper court fee has not been paid by the plaintiff for the
relief claimed this Court Court has no jurisdiction to entertain and try the
present suit.
g)

The suit is not maintainable and is liable to be dismissed since it is

against the provisions of the lease deed executed between the DDA and the
defendant No. 1.
h)

The suit is liable to be dismissed for misjoinder of the necessary parties.

i)

The suit is against the Benami Transactions (Prohibition of the Right to

Recovery Property) Ordinance 1988.
j)

The plaintiff has suppressed material facts from this Hon'ble Court and

has not come with clean hands before this Court.
RFA607/93

Pg. 12 of 20

9.

The learned counsel for the appellant/plaintiff Mr. Ravi Gupta has

contested the finding about the applicability of either Order VII Rule 11 subclause (d) of the C.P.C or Section 4 of the Act and contended that he is fully
covered by clause 3(b) of the said Section 4 which takes out the present
proceedings out of the ambit of Section 4 and hence makes the prayer made in
the application under Order VII Rule 11 C.P.C, without merit. The learned
counsel for the appellant/plaintiff has thus relied upon sub-clause (3)(b), which
reads as follows:“(3)

Nothing in this section shall apply:-

.................
(b)
Where the person in whose name the
property is held is a trustee or other person
standing in a fiduciary capacity and the property
is held for the benefit of another person for
whom he is a trustee or towards whom he stands
in such capacity.”
(emphasis supplied)

10.

It has been submitted that the property was held by the appellant's

mother as a trustee and in a fiduciary capacity.

RFA607/93

The learned counsel for the

Pg. 13 of 20

appellant was asked to take us to the averment in the plaint which according to
him averred that the property was held in a fiduciary capacity or as a trustee by
his mother.
11.

The learned counsel for the appellant has relied upon the averments in

paragraphs 4 to 6 of the plaint which have been extracted above to contend his
mother's trusteeship and fiduciary capacity.

In our view, none of the

averments in paragraphs 4 to 6 contain the averment of fiduciary capacity or
trusteeship. In fact the appellant's averment in paragraph 1 of the plaint to the
effect that he is the owner in possession of the suit property and the averment
in paragraph 6 of the plaint to the effect that the appellant's mother has
remained the owner of the plot only in name, is clearly covered under the
prohibition imposed by Section 4 of the Act. Accordingly, there is no merit in
the plea of the learned counsel for the appellant and the appeal being wholly
devoid of merits is liable to be dismissed.
12.

Before parting with the matter, we are constrained to remark upon the

conduct of the case by the appellant in the Court below and particularly in this
RFA607/93

Pg. 14 of 20

Court. The learned counsel for the defendant has stressed that in spite of the
knowledge that the property had been sold to the defendants 2 to 5, the
appellant deliberately did not make M/s Nand Lal & Sons , who is the
necessary party, as a party in this Court and to prolong the litigation has
belatedly moved the application being CM No. 103/1996 for impleadment of
the said M/s Nand Lal & Sons (HUF), in the year 1996 where indeed Nand Lal
& Sons HUF has been termed as a necessary party. The averments made in
paragraph 6 of the said application have been relied upon by the learned
counsel for the defendants, which reads as follows:“6. It is submitted herein that M/s Nand Lal &
Sons (HUF) were not made a party in the suit
No. 163 of 1988 filed by the appellant before
the Court of the Addl. District Judge because to
the appellant's knowledge it only transpired that
respondents No. 2 to 5 had started carrying out
negotiations for the sale of the aforesaid
property. But the appellant was not actually
aware of the identity of the said person. A
perusal of the written statement filed by the
respondents in the above mentioned suit would
also show that M/s Nand Lal & Sons have not
been mentioned anywhere. Therefore, the fact
that negotiations for disposal of the aforesaid
plot was the M/s Nand Lal & Sons was not
RFA607/93

Pg. 15 of 20

known to the appellant. Hence, M/s Nandlal &
Sons could not have been impleaded as
defendants in the appellant's suit against the
respondents.
(emphasis supplied)

13.

It has been submitted that in an application filed in January, 1996, the

appellant has submitted that he was not aware of the identity of the intending
purchaser. In fact a statement has been made that in the said C.M. No.
103/1996 that the identity of the purchaser, M/s Nand Lal & Sons has not
been mentioned anywhere.

For the sake of ready reference, the learned

counsel for the M/s Nand Lal & Sons relied upon the following averment in
the written statement on behalf of the respondent No. 1/defendant No. 1, which
reads as follows:“ ..................... So the defendant No. 1 was left
with no other alternative except to sell and
transfer the said property/plot to any intending
purchaser and finally on the threat of Delhi
Development Authority for cancellation of the
plot on account of committing continuous
breach of lease for not constructing building, the
defendant No. 1 entered into an agreement to
sell with M/s Nand Lal & Sons HUF through its
Karta Nand Lal son of Shri R.D. Pruthi, resident
nd
of a-3/70, Paschim Vihar, New Delhi on 22
February, 1988 for the total consideration of
RFA607/93

Pg. 16 of 20

Rs.3,90,000.00 (Rupees Three Lakhs and
Ninety thousand only) with clear terms and
conditions that the purchaser shall 50% of the
penalty amount payable to the Delhi
Development authority and received the earnest
money from the purchaser and in token of the
same issue valid receipt thereof in favour of the
said purchaser, in the presence of the
plaintiff............”

14.

Inspite of this written statement filed by the respondent No. 1 in the year

1988, the appellant has been bold enough to make a statement in 1996 in the
application for impleadment, being CM No. 103/1996 to the effect that a
perusal of the written statement filed by the defendant shows that the name of
M/s Nand Lal & Sons has not been mentioned anywhere. In our view, such a
statement clearly appears to be a deliberately false statement and the Court
may consider the initiation of Section 340 Cr.P.C. proceedings against the
deponent of the said affidavit.
15.

The learned counsel for the appellant has relied upon the judgment of

the learned Single Judge of this Court in IA No. 9987/2006 in CS(OS) No.
1593/2006 titled Sh. Sarabjit Singh Anand & Ors. vs. Sh. Manjit Singh Anand

RFA607/93

Pg. 17 of 20

& Ors., to contend that when the property is held in a fiduciary capacity or in
the capacity of a trustee, the provisions of Section 4 of the Act does not apply.
The said judgment interpreted Section 4 of the Act correctly, but is not
applicable to the facts of the present matter as the plaint does not contain any
averment averring trusteeship or fiduciary capacity.
16.

The learned counsel for the appellant has also relied upon the judgment

of the learned Single Judge in CS(OS) No. 690/2004 titled S.M. Wahi and Ors.
vs. Ms. Reeta Wahi. The said judgment also does not apply to the facts of the
present appeal because the plaint has not been found by us to have the
requisite averments about holding of the suit property by defendant No. 1 as a
trustee or in a fiduciary capacity.
17.

The conduct of the case and indeed the entire plaint demonstrates patent

lack of bonafide on behalf of the original plaintiff and his legal heirs in this
Court.
18.

The appellant has enjoyed an interim order dated 9th August, 1995,

restraining the respondents from alienating, transferring or parting with
RFA607/93

Pg. 18 of 20

possession of the suit property. Even otherwise, the said application is liable
to be dismissed as the appellant has in spite of being aware of the name of the
intending purchaser M/s Nand Lal & Sons (HUF) at least in 1988 had
deliberately not chosen to make them a party till 1994. The omission is not
innocent and it appears to be totally deliberate so as to delay the proceedings.
We have also noticed the fact that plaint was not filed along with the appeal
memo which in our view is a most essential document alongwith the written
statement in a challenge to a successful application under Order VII Rule 11
CPC and the plaint was only filed in the year 2007 after repeated mandatory
orders of this Court dated 3rd May, 2007 and 29th August, 2007. The only
explanation given for the delay was a disruption due to fire which still does not
explain why the plaint was not filed from 1995 upto 2007. This also shows
that the conduct of the appellant is less than bonafide and deserves not only
severe censure but also substantial exemplary costs. The reason for not filing
the plaint is not far to seek as the absence of the necessary averments in the
plaint about trusteeship and fiduciary capacity would knock out the very
RFA607/93

Pg. 19 of 20

foundation of their approval.
19.

Taking into account the fact that the appeal has been pending in this

Court since 1993 and the 38 number of hearings taken place and that the
appellant has enjoyed the interim order of this Court, we are left with no
alternative but to impose costs quantified at Rs.30,000/- on the appellant while
dismissing the appeal. The costs are required to be paid not later than four
weeks from today, failing which the said amount of Rs.30,000/- will carry
interest @ 9% p.a. from the date of the judgment until payment of the said
amount.
20.

The appeal is dismissed and stands disposed of in the above terms.

(MUKUL MUDGAL)
Judge

February 21, 2008
kkb

RFA607/93

(S.L. BHAYANA)
Judge

Pg. 20 of 20

