*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

RFA No.44/1999
Date of Decision :

BHAGWAN DASS

21st February, 2008

.... Appellant

Through

Mr. Sidharth Yadav, Adv.

versus

STATE BANK OF BIKANER & JAIPUR & ANR.
Through

.... Respondents

Mr. Rajiv Kumar, Adv.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MUKUL MUDGAL
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.L. BHAYANA

1.

Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?

%

Yes
JUDGMENT
21.02.2008

RFA 44/1999

page 1of 12

MUKUL MUDGAL, J (Oral)
1.

With the consent of the learned counsel for the parties this appeal is taken

up for final hearing.
2.

This is an appeal against the impugned order and judgment dated 7 th

September 1998 whereby the learned trial Court dismissed the suit for recovery
of a sum of Rs.2, 52, 999 filed by the appellant/ plaintiff.
3.

Brief facts leading to the culmination of this appeal are as follows:

a)

The appellant while working as a Branch Manager with the respondent

bank, was issued a charge sheet by the respondent bank on account of his
misconduct of allowing advances to M/s Sotan Lal Jamboo Prasada, M/s.
Dhanesh Tube Company, M/s Rakesh Steels, M/s. Jaypee Tubes and M/s. Jain
Industries.
b)

The charges against the appellant related to the misuse of official position

by allowing indiscriminate advances, much beyond the limit set up and beyond
his discretionary powers. Further he was charged with gross violation of Bank
RFA 44/1999

page 2of 12

norms and was also found to be negligent and lacking due care in the conduct of
business.
c)

An inquiry authority was appointed to investigate into the irregularities

allegedly committed by the appellant as the branch manager at the respondent
bank. The enquiry proceedings commenced on 14th September 1983 and
concluded on 2nd December 1983.
d)

The appellant was informed vide letter no. DAC/481 Baisakha17, 1906 (S)

dated 7th May, 1984 that the penalty of dismissal from services in terms of
regulation 67(h) of the State Bank of Bikanar and Jaipur (officers) Service
Regulations 1979 was imposed on him on account of his misconduct.
e)

Subsequently, the appellant approached the respondent for the payment

of his retiral benefits vide letter dated 16th Match 1990. The Respondent
reverted to the Appellants vide its letter dated 16th July 1991 whereby they
refused to release the bank’s contribution towards his provident fund, gratuity

RFA 44/1999

page 3of 12

and leave encashment.
4.

Mr. Yadav, the learned counsel for the appellant in challenging the

judgment dated 7th September 1998 passed by the learned Additional District
Judge, dismissing his suit, urges that since the entire amount has been recovered
from M/s Sotan Lal Jamboo Prasad, the appellant was entitled to avail the
benefits, i.e., the bank’s contribution towards his provident fund, gratuity and
leave encashment. The order of the Disciplinary Action passed by the General
Manager, State Bank of Bikaner & Jaipur, dated 7th May 1984 reads as follows:
“STATE BANK OF BIKANER AND JAIPUR
Associate of the State Bank of India
Head Office: Tilak Marg,
P.B. No.154, JAIPUR – 302005
(Rajasthan)
(Private & Confidential)
Dear Sir,
DISCIPLINARY ACTION
Please refer to the major penalty
proceedings initiated against you vide
memorandum dated 3.6.1983 and the enquiry
conducted by Shri S.L. Gulati, Inquiring
Authority. A copy of the enquiry report dated

RFA 44/1999

page 4of 12

27.12.1983 submitted by the Inquiring
Authority is enclosed.
2.
I have carefully gone through the
memorandum of charge issued to you, your
reply thereto, record of the enquiry
proceedings, written briefs and the enquiry
report aforesaid. Taking an overall view of
the evidence led both for and against the
charges I concur with the findings of the
Inquiring Authority and have come to the
conclusion that charge Nos.1 to 6 and 8 are
fully proved, charge Nos.7 9 and 10 are partly
proved and charge Nos.11 to 14 are not
proved.
3.
Having regard to the gravity of acts of
misconduct viz. Misuse of official position to
give undue advantage to the borrowers, grant
of unauthorized and indiscriminate credit
facilities to the subject borrowers far in excess
of the sanctioned limits/discretionary powers
out of which over Rs.45 lacs are yet to be
recovered, manipulations in the Branch
Books/records and exposing the Bank to
serious financial risk for huge amounts, it has
been decided with the approval of the
Managing Director, to impose upon you the
penalty of dismissal from the service of the
Bank in terms of Regulation 67 (h) of the
State Bank of Bikaner & Jaipur (Officer's)
Service Regulations, 1979. A copy of the
order dated th 4th May 1984 recommending
the imposition of the penalty of dismissal
from Bank's service and a copy of the order
dated 7th May 1984 of the Managing Director
according
approval
to
the
said
recommendation are enclosed.
4.
Accordingly, you stand dismissed from
the service of the Bank with immediate effect.
5.
As regards the period of your

RFA 44/1999

page 5of 12

suspension, it has been decided that the entire
period of your suspension will be treated as
such and apart from the subsistence allowance
already paid, you will not be entitled to
receive salary and allowance, etc.
6.
The Bank may take a view about the
release of your retiral benefits depending upon
the recovery of the present outstanding of
over Rs.45 lakhs in the subject borrowers
accounts.
Yours faithfully
Sd/(V.P. Dogra)
General Manager (Operations)”

5.

The learned counsel for the appellant has relied upon paragraph 5 to

contend that since the recovery of the amount of over Rs.45 lakhs stood
liquidated by way of settlement, no dues were payable, and the appellant was
entitled to avail of the benefit of Clause 5 since all the recovery proceedings
against the subject matter for sum of Rs.45 lakhs stood liquidated.
6.

On 16th March 1990, the appellant addressed a communication to the

Managing Director of the respondent bank and the relevant portion of the said
communication reads as follows:

RFA 44/1999

page 6of 12

“Respected Sir,
Reg: Payment of Retiral benefits – Staff
Supervising Bhagwan Dass.
I beg to lay down the following few
lines for your favourable kind consideration.
My services were terminated by the
bank authorities for allowing alleged
unauthorized and indiscriminate credit
facilities to M/s Jamboo Prasad Jain Group of
Firms vide HO Letter No.DAC/481, dated
7.5.84, the photostat copy of which is
enclosed herewith for ready reference. I have
been paid only my own P.F. Contribution
while the remaining retiral benefits were to be
released to me subject to the recovery of then
outstanding dues of Rs.45 lakhs from the
subject borrowers.
In this connection I understand that
entire amount of outstanding dues have since
been recovered from the above borrowers and
normal operations are being allowed in all
their Cash Credit Accounts.
Prior to this particular case during my
thirty one years service in the Bank, my
performance by way of sincerity, integrity and
dedication towards duties, has always been
highly satisfactory and at times excellent
reports were awarded to me in connection
with the development of the business of bank
especially when I was posted as Branch
Manager at Ramganj Mandi and Kota City
Branches. Ever since I joined the Bank in the
year 1953, I had a clean service record and
there was no adverse report against me at any
stage of my entire service.

RFA 44/1999

page 7of 12

Prior to my joining at Naraina, Phase II,
New Delhi Branch the party was being
accommodated over and above the sanctioned
limits which was well within the knowledge
of Bank's higher authorities. I had acted in
utmost good faith and all my predecessors had
been allowing excess accommodation to the
above party and it was a normal feature at the
branch. Moreover, there has been no
concealment of facts on my part and the
excess accommodation allowed to the party
from time to time was brought to the notice of
higher
authorities
by
sending
Monthly/Qtryly/Yearly/
Inspection/Audit
Returns. At that time this party was
considered one of the best borrowers of the
Branch. Moreover Sh. Jamboo Prasad Jain
was the President of Bon and Steel Merchants
Association, Naraina and was having a great
inflence among the business community of
the area.
I have already been awarded very severe
punishment, by way of dismissal from Bank's
service, in the above case and I should not be
penalised further by with-holding my retiral
benefits such as payment of Bank's
contribution
to
my
provident
Fund/Gratuity/Leave Encashment etc.
I, therefore, approach your kind honour
to review my case sympathetically and to
release my above retiral benefits at an early
date as I am in urgent need of money for the
marriage of my daughter and son who are of
marriageable age and to support my family.”

RFA 44/1999

page 8of 12

7.

The respondent bank responded to this communication of the appellant

vide its reply dated 16th July 1991:
“Dear Sir,
Payment of Retiral Benefits:
This has reference to your letter dated
16.3.1990 requesting for release of your
retiral benefits.
2.
In this connection, we have considered
your request and observe your contention that
the party has repaid the entire amount is not
correct. In fact, the Bank have suffered a
substantial financial loss to the tune of
Rs.24.89 lakhs in the subject borrowers
account in the shape of “write off” while
accepting the compromise proposal. As such,
you request for release of Bank's contribution
to your P.F. Account, Gratuity and leave
encashment does not merit any consideration.
As regards the payment of your own
contribution to the P.F. Account, the same has
already been paid to you.
Yours faithfully
Sd/General Manger
(Operations)”

8.

The respondent has relied upon the resolution of the Executive Committee,

which according to the respondent’s clearly shows that the recoverable dues are
to the tune of Rs.49, 37,732.98. The amount recoverable from the borrowers at
RFA 44/1999

page 9of 12

the time of settlement was Rs.49, 37,732.98 and thus, the bank had incurred a
loss of Rs.24, 88732.98. The respondent has thus, submitted that the appellant
is not entitled to avail the benefit of Clause 5 relied upon by him during the
foundation of the suit.
9.

The learned counsel for the appellant has submitted that it has been

demonstrated by him that the collateral security, which was taken by the
appellant as the Branch Manager, was more than Rs. 47 lakhs and the settlement
term warranted the return of such security documents to the borrowers. He has
further submitted that if the respondent bank had sought to realize the collateral
security, the liability would not have been accrued at all because the collateral
security was worth Rs.3 crores. In support of this plea, the learned counsel for
the appellant has referred to the cross examination of DW-1 Shri Suresh Kumar
Barjatya, to contend that such a suggestion was put in the cross-examination.
However, there is no admission of such a statement in the cross-examination.
The said witness stated that he does not know whether collateral security was
worth more than Rs.3 crores. He stated that even if it was to be assumed to be
RFA 44/1999

page 10of 12

more than 3 crores, a fact which is strongly disputed by the learned counsel for
the bank, nevertheless, if in the process of settlement, the bank takes a view that
in order to cut short the litigation some loss may be incurred and the collateral
security may be returned, no fault can be found by the delinquent appellant with
such a process or reliance be placed on such a course adopted by the
management to cut its losses.

The process of realizing collateral security is

time consuming and can lead to protracted and contentious litigation. In such a
situation, the settlement even by foregoing some part of the dues cannot entitle
the appellant to lay claim to the benefit of his plea that no loss was occasioned
to the respondent bank.
10.

In this view of the matter, we are unable to differ with the finding of the

learned Additional District Judge and accordingly the appeal is dismissed.
However, during the course of the hearing we ascertained that this was the only
charge leveled against the appellant in continuation of his unblemished 35 years
service's tenure, which is evident from the fact that the appellant was granted an
extension. In this view of the matter, we would still deem it fit and proper to
permit the appellant to make request to the Managing Director of the respondent

RFA 44/1999

page 11of 12

bank to release such of his retiral dues which may be available to the appellant
in law. If such a representation is made the respondent/bank in light of the
previous unblemished record of the appellant may consider such a
representation sympathetically.
11.

The appeal is accordingly dismissed with no order as to costs.

MUKUL MUDGAL
(Judge)

S.L. BHAYANA
(Judge)
February 27, 2008
dr/es

RFA 44/1999

page 12of 12

