*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

RFA No.95/2007
Reserved On : 11th March 2008
th

Date of Decision : 28 March 2008
SUSHIL KUMAR GUPTA.

.... Appellant

Through:

Mr. D.K. Agarwal, Sr. Adv. with
Mr. S.Mukherjee, Adv.

versus

ANIL KUMAR GUPTA THROUGH
LR's AND ORS.

.... Respondents
Through:

Mr. H. C. Tiku, Sr. Adv. with
Ms. Yashmeet, Adv. for Apeejay Ltd. &
Titan Estates Ltd.
Mr. K. K. Jain, Adv. for R-4.
Ms. Anita Supta, Mr. PCA Supta, Advs.
for Ajoy Bhushan
Ms. Usha Kumar, Adv. for R-7.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MUKUL MUDGAL
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.L. BHAYANA
1.

Whether the Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

RFA No.95/2007

Yes

Page 1 of 17

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?

Yes

%

JUDGMENT
28.03.2008

MUKUL MUDGAL, J

1.

th

This appeal arises out of the judgment and decree dated 16 August 2007

passed by the learned Single Judge in Civil Suit (OS) 3468/1991, whereby he
held that the suit was not maintainable and thus liable to be dismissed.
2.

The brief facts of the case are stated as follows:

a)

Late Shri Lala Hanuman Pershad Gupta (hereinafter referred to as

“Lalaji”) was Karta of a HUF styled as M/s Deoki Nandan & Sons (hereinafter
referred to as “DNS”) and one of the assets acquired by the said HUF was the
property in suit, i.e., 1, Tughlak Lane, New Delhi (hereinafter referred to as the
th

“suit property”) in pursuance of a perpetual lease deed dated 13 October,
1937. On the said plot a construction was raised and the family members
occupied the property.

RFA No.95/2007

Page 2 of 17

b)

The HUF is stated to have disrupted in the year 1957 which had a

consequent impact on the suit property. Lalaji passed away on 8th December,
1972 leaving behind a Will by which his estate was bequeathed to his four sons
in equal shares. The suit property in pursuance to a memorandum of mutation
dated 31st March 1975 was consequently mutated.
c)

With the passing away of Late Lalaji and the family members being

large, disputes arose between the members as is often the case. The suit
property was envisaged to be developed as a group housing complex.
d)

A resolution dated 15th March 1982 was passed by the firm whereby the

share in the property was divided between the four groups of co-owners.
However,. the group housing was never developed. There was further passing
away of the family members and ultimately the disputes were referred to
arbitration and consequently were resolved.
e)

The Arbitrator made and published an award dated 8th June 1988 which

was duly registered. In terms of the findings arrived at by the Arbitrator, the
property in suit was held not capable of division and was ordered to be put up
RFA No.95/2007

Page 3 of 17

for sale.
f)

By its order dated 17th September, 1990 in Suit No.1754-A of 1988 this

Court made the aforesaid Award dated 8th June 1988 Rule of Court with minor
modifications mainly concerning the amount found payable to respondents 2(i)
to 2(iii) and 3. The directions with respect to the sale of the suit property were,
however, maintained. This order and the award therefore became final.
i)

The appellant, subsequently came to know that Late Shri Anil Kumar

Gupta was intending to alter the state of affairs by entering into a transaction of
sale in respect of his undivided share in the suit property and induct strangers
in the family dwelling house.
j)

In the circumstances the appellant filed a Suit No.3466/91 seeking

injunction against Shri Anil Kumar Gupta from, interalia, alienating, assigning,
parting possession and/or otherwise creating any third party interest in any part
of the suit property on the ground that the intended sale would not only be
against the said award dated 8th June 1988 as made rule of court by order dated
17th September, 1990 but would also be in violation of the lease deed of the suit
RFA No.95/2007

Page 4 of 17

property.
k)

Subsequently, it also came to light that respondents 2(i) to 2(iii) and 3

had also entered into an alleged agreement to sell dated 8th November, 1991
with respondent no.8, M/s Titan Estates Pvt. Ltd. in respect of their undivided
1/4th share in the suit property.
l)

The appellant filed I.As No.13694 and 13695 of 1992 in Suit

No.3466/1991 for amendment of suit and impleading M/s Apeejay Ltd. and
M/s Titan Estates Pvt. Ltd. and also sought consequential relief. By order
dated 28th July 1998 this Court allowed the aforesaid I.As No.13694 and 13695
of 1992. In accordance with the said order an amended plaint was filed and
Apeejay Ltd. and Titan Estates Pvt. Ltd. were impleaded as parties.
m)

The respondents 2(i) to 2(iii) and 3 filed an execution petition no.62 of

1993 claiming the amount payable to them under award dated 8th June 1988 as
made Rule of Court by order dated 17th September 1990 and inter alia sought
an auction of the suit property.
n)

Suit No.3466/91 which was a precursor to the execution proceedings as

RFA No.95/2007

Page 5 of 17

originally filed was dismissed by the impugned judgment of the learned single
judge dated 16th August 2007 on the ground that the suit is not maintainable.
3.

The appellant and respondent nos.1 to 6 are related. The Appellant, Late

Shri Atul Kumar who died on 14th September, 1983, (predecessor of
Respondent no.2(i) to 2(iii) and 3), and Late Shri Anil Kumar Gupta who died
13th March 2002, (predecessor of respondent nos.1(i) to 1(iv) were brothers.
The Respondent no.4 Smt. Sudha Gupta, is the widow of Late Shri Krishan
Kumar Gupta who was the eldest brother of the appellant. The Respondent
no.5, Smt. Ritu Garg and the Respondent no.6, Smt. Sindhu Seth, are the
daughters of Respondent no.4.
4.

The learned counsel for the appellant contended that the learned Single

Judge ought to have appreciated that the award dated 8th June 1988,
subsequently made Rule of the Court by order dated 17th September, 1990 of
this Court, had specifically directed disposal of the property by public auction
in the course of which all the parties should be free to offer their bids. The
disposal of their individual share by the two sets of co-sharers viz. Late Shri
RFA No.95/2007

Page 6 of 17

Anil Kumar Gupta and Mrs. Prem Gupta and other legal heirs of late Shri Atul
Kumar Gupta by entering into agreements to sell directly violated the
directions of the Arbitrator which were subsequently made a Rule of the court
by this Court. However, the learned Single Judge in paragraph 22 of the
impugned judgment observed as under:
“In the end, I must note with some regret the
unwillingness of the plaintiff to even join in the
public auction of the suit property which was
proposed as a method to end the dispute since that
was the direction in the award which had to be
executed. The plaintiff insists that defendants no.7
and 8 must move out of the property first before the
public auction while he will not move out. Thus,
the plaintiff wants the public auction minus
defendants no.7 and 8 in the property and on his
remaining in the property on the ground that he is
the original owner. This is despite the willingness
expressed by learned counsel for defendants no.7
and 8 to give an undertaking to the court to vacate
the premises or that he and all the other parties may
move out and the property be put to public auction.
The result is that the dispute in its finality still
remain to be re-solved.”

5.

Since the surviving partners of M/s DNS were the beneficiaries of Lalaji,

his share in the DNS was divided amongst the surviving partners to the extent

RFA No.95/2007

Page 7 of 17

of ¼ th share each and in accordance with the Will of Lalaji, mutation was also
effected with respect to the suit property. Dispute arose between the members
of the family in pursuance of the award dated 8th June 1988 made by the
Arbitrator. In terms of the award, the suit property was held not capable of
division and was put on sale by way of public auction.
However, in our view, there is no sanctity of the dwelling house left any
more in the present case as it was the agreement between the co-owners and the
direction of the award that the property has to be sold by auction. It is the
appellant who himself does not want to see the end of the implementation of
the award. It has in our view been rightly observed by the learned Single Judge
that the appellant is unwilling to join the public auction of the suit property
which was proposed as a method to dispose of the dispute, despite the
willingness expressed by the respondents 7 and 8 to undertake to vacate the
premises if the property is put to public auction. Thus, the contention of the
appellant that the transactions entered with respondents 7 and 8 were wholly
illegal does not hold any ground as it is appellant himself who has been
RFA No.95/2007

Page 8 of 17

opposing the public auction for ulterior reasons and the lingering dispute in its
entirety still remains to be resolved.
6.

The learned counsel for the appellant contended that the provisions of

Section 44 of the Transfer of Property Act shall have application on the
property so long as it is not divided by metes and bounds and the occupation of
the different portions of the property by the co-sharers by itself made no
difference to this legal position. The brief case of the appellant was that the
respondents 7 and 8 could not step into the joint house or the family property
and must be treated as trespassers. Section 44 of the Transfer of Properties Act
reads as follows:
“44. Transfer by one co-owner – Where one of
two or more co-owners of immoveable property
legally competent in that behalf transfers in his
share of such property or any interest therein, the
transferee acquires as to such share or interest, and
so far as is necessary to give, effect to the transfer,
the transferor's right to joint possession or other
common or part enjoyment of the property, and to
enforce a partition of the same, but subject to the
conditions and liabilities affecting at the date of the
transfer, the share or interest so transferred.
Where the transferee of a share of a dwelling
RFA No.95/2007

Page 9 of 17

house belonging to an undivided family is not a
member of the family nothing in this section shall
be deemed to entitle him to joint possession or other
common or part enjoyment of the house.”

Section 4 of the Partition Act reads as follows:
“4.
Partition suit by transferee of
share in dwelling house – (1) Where a share of a
dwelling house belonging to an undivided family
has been transferred to a person who is not a
member of such family and such transferee sues for
partition, the court shall, if any member of the
family being a shareholder shall undertake to buy
the share of such transferee, make a valuation of
such share in such manner as it thinks fit and direct
the sale of such share to such shareholder, and may
give all necessary and proper directions in that
behalf.
(2)
If in any case described in sub-section (1)
two or more members of the family being such
shareholders severally undertake to buy such share,
the court shall follow the procedure prescribed by
sub-section (2) of the last foregoing section.”

The learned Senior Counsel for the appellant Shri D. K. Aggarwal relied
on the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Dorab Cawasji
Warden v. Coomi Sorab Warden and ors., AIR 1990 SC 867. The relevant
portion of the said judgment reads as follows:
RFA No.95/2007

Page 10 of 17

“Both these provisions are complimentary to each
other and the term 'undivided family' and 'dwelling
house' have the same meaning in both the sections.
In case of a dwelling house belonging to an
undivided family where the property is not divided
by metes and bounds, the transfer by the widow and
sons of a second paragraph of Section 44 of the T.P.
Act.
Interim mandatory injunction against the
vendors and vendees regarding possession was held
as liable to be issued.”

The learned Senior Counsel for the respondents Shri H. C. Tiku,
however, relied on the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Ganga Bhai Gopal Das Mohta v. Fulchand and ors., AIR 1997 SC 1812, the
relevant part of the judgment reads as follows:
“It was the duty of the executing Court to consider
the decree holder disputing the same.
The
resolution of this dispute has to be by the executing
Court.

The learned counsel also relied upon the judgment of the Division Bench
of this Court in Harinder Pal Singh Chawla v. Nirmal Daniere & ors. 51
(1993) DLT 191. The relevant portion of the said judgment reads as follows:
“The Will had been executed giving the exclusive
and independent portions of the property to
respective legatees. It was also held that though the
land was common, the construction actually stood
RFA No.95/2007

Page 11 of 17

divided and the nature of construction of the
building as one unit and the land underneath
undivided, cannot lead to the conclusion that it is an
undivided family dwelling house. An important
aspect considered was that the property developed
on the two legatees in pursuance of a Will giving
exclusive and independent respective portions of the
properties to the legatees.”

7.

In our view, the learned Single Judge had rightly dealt with this issue in

paragraph 18 of his judgment which reads as follows:
“On consideration of the aforesaid legal provisions
and judgments and haring the learned counsels for
the parties, I am of the considered view that the joint
character of a dwelling house no more remained
intact so as to invite the provisions of Section 44 of
the T.P. Act read with Section 4 of the Partition Act.
It cannot be lost sight of that the object of these
provisions is to protect a house from being invaded
by outsiders. In the present case, though there was
no division by meets and bounds, the parties were in
possession of respective portions of the house and
were enjoying the same. In view of the above, the
factual aspect is similar to the judgment in Harinder
Pal Singh Chawla v. Nirmal Daniere & ors.
(supra).”

We, therefore, are of view that the learned Single Judge was right in
observing that in light of the facts and circumstances of the present case the

RFA No.95/2007

Page 12 of 17

joint character of the suit property no more remains intact so as to invite the
protection of Section 44 of the Transfer of Property Act read with Section 4 of
the Partition Act. We have no doubt that even though there was no division of
the suit property by metes and bounds, the parties who sold their shares to the
respondents 6 and 7 were in possession of the respective portion of the suit
property and were enjoying the same and the denial of the applicability of
Section 44 of the Transfer of Property Act by the learned Single Judge waas
fully justified.
8.

The counsel for the appellant contended that the cause of action for filing

the suit was to prevent Shri Anil Kumar Gupta from altering the state of affairs
by entering into a transaction for sale individually and induct strangers into the
family dwelling house and thereby violate its sanctity and not as such the
apprehended action of Defendant No.1 to sell his share in the suit property.
The prayers made in the suit directly flew from the cause of action pleaded by
the appellant. The suit was not a precursor to the execution proceedings as
wrongly observed by the learned Single Judge.
RFA No.95/2007

Page 13 of 17

The learned Single Judge in paragraph 19 and 20 of the impugned
judgment observed as under:
“19. An important aspect which arises in the
present case is that the intent of the parties was also
to sell the property in a public auction. The object
was not to preserve the dwelling house. The
learned Arbitrator found that it was not possible to
divide the house by metes and bounds. A direction
was, thus, made for sale of the property by auction.
This award was made rule of the court and
sustained by the Division Bench in so far as this
direction is concerned. Since the parties have not
been able to put the property to sell by public
auction, that aspect will have to be considered in
the execution proceedings. ....
20.
....The Supreme Court has already observed
in Gangabai Gopaldas Mohata v. Fulchand and
ors. (supra) that in so far as these are concerned, the
powers of the executing court are wide enough to
deal with these aspect. The execution petition is
pending in which objections have been filed by the
plaintiff herein. It is in those proceedings that the
execution of the award which in turn would require
the sale of the suit property in a public auction,
naturally with a charge of the amounts liable to be
paid by the plaintiff from his share, would be
examined. There can be, thus, no question of
deciding or for the plaintiff to claim any of the
reliefs of injunction as prayed for in this suit in
respect of the suit property.”
We endorse and reiterate the view expressed by the learned Single Judge

RFA No.95/2007

Page 14 of 17

that since the parties have not been able to sell the property by public auction,
the aspect of respondent no.7 and 8 to step into the shoes of respondent no. 2
and 3 need to be examined in execution proceedings only. The award in the
present case was rendered on 8th June 1988. The direction in the award for the
auction sale of the property has become final. However, even up to date the
dispute has been simmering and the auction sale mandated by the award has
not taken place. In our view, the pleas of the appellant that the auction sale
cannot take place in view of the alienation by respondents no.2 and 3 if
accepted defeats the award dated 8th June 1988 by delaying/avoiding the
auction sale. The pleas as to Section 44 in respect of the sanctity of the joint
family property at this stage are meaningless as the property has already been
by the award directed to be auctioned. Furthermore, the property is in divided
occupation of the 4 co-sharers. Thus, the acceptance of the appellant's pleas
would tantamount to reopening the award as even if it is accepted that
alienations have been made, they do not affect the rights of either the appellant
or the other co-sharers. The agreement to sell the suit property by respondent
RFA No.95/2007

Page 15 of 17

no.2 and 3 in respect of their ¼ share in the property to respondent no.7 and 8
and whether the entitlement of the amount claimed is maintained or not, is a
question to be answered in the execution petition.
9.

Lalaji died on 8th December, 1972 and the suit property owned by M/s

DNS in accordance with his Will was divided and mutated vide Memorandum
dated 31st March 1975 amongst the surviving partners who became partners to
the extent of ¼ share each in the following names:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

Shri Atul Kumar Gupta HUF
Shri Anil Kumar Gupta HUF
Shri Sushil Kumar Gupta HUF
Smt. Sudha Gupta (w/o Shri Krishan Kumar Gupta)
It is also to be noted that there has been a constant dispute which arose

after the death of a few partners regarding division of the suit property. Till the
institution of the present suit the dispute in question still remains to be
resolved. At such a stage of proceedings, we do not deem it necessary to
interfere with the findings of the learned Single Judge. The learned Single
Judge had rightly held that “there can be thus no question of deciding or for the

RFA No.95/2007

Page 16 of 17

plaintiff to claim any of the reliefs of injunction as prayed for in this suit in
respect of the suit property. I am thus of the considered view that the suit is not
maintainable and thus liable to be dismissed.”
In view of the observations made by the learned Single Judge and in
light of the above mentioned discussion, we do not think it necessary that the
suit ought to be restored and directed to be proceeded with. Accordingly, the
appeal is dismissed and the impugned judgment dated 16th August 2007 passed
by the learned Single Judge is affirmed.

MUKUL MUDGAL
(JUDGE)

S.L. BHAYANA
(JUDGE)
March 28, 2008
dr

RFA No.95/2007

Page 17 of 17

