*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+ W.P.(C) No. 474/1982 &CMs2392/04, 5687/04, 6424/04, 8220/04, 9696/05
Reserved on:
25th January 2008
th
Date of Decision : 28 March, 2008
DR. PARMA NAND SHARMA
.....Petitioner
Through
Mr. Arun Mohan, Sr. Adv. with
Mr. R.K. Gupta and Mr. Arvind Kumar, Advs.
versus
LT. GOVERNOR, DELHI & ORS.
.....Respondents
Through
Mr. M. Chandramani Bhardwaj for
Ms. Sujata Kashyap for RCS.
Mr. Arun Kathpalia for R-4.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MUKUL MUDGAL
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
1.
2.
3.

Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes
Yes

Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

JUDGMENT
28-03-2008
: MUKUL MUDGAL,J.
1.

The petitioner has filed the present writ petition for setting aside the

WP(C) 474/1982

Page 1 of 27

Resolution and order dated 14th January 1978 passed by the respondent No.4
Ishwar Nagar Cooperative House Building Society Ltd., (hereinafter referred
to as the “Society”) whereby the name of the petitioner had been removed
from the list of members of the respondent no.4 society as well as the
confirmation of such an order through the Registrar, Cooperative Societies on
17th May, 1978 and the order of the Deputy Registrar dated 5th November,
1981 on a reference made by the petitioner by the nominee of the Registrar.
2.

The facts of the case briefly stated are as follows:

a)

The petitioner Dr. P.N. Sharma (hereinafter referred to as 'the

Petitioner') was on 11th March 1961 vide membership No.35 enrolled as a
member of the respondent society. The Property No. A-19/A Kailash Colony,
New Delhi was purchased by the Petitioner HUF for running a nursing home
and in 1969 the nursing home started functioning. Later, the membership of
the petitioner from Respondent No.4 society was terminated on the ground
that the petitioner owned another property, i.e., A-19/A, Kailash Colony, in
Delhi, since as per rule 25 (1)(c) of the Delhi Cooperative Societies Rules,
WP(C) 474/1982

Page 2 of 27

upon owning another property the petitioner was not entitled to be a member
of a Cooperative Housing Society. The petitioner was also expelled on 14th
January 1978 by the society under Section 36 (1) of Delhi Cooperative
Societies Act, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as the “Act”) for being a persistent
defaulter as he had not paid the dues demanded by the society. The action of
the society expelling the petitioner was approved by the Deputy Registrar,
Cooperative Societies, on

17th May 1978.

On 26th February 1980 one

application was filed under Section 60 of the Act for reference of dispute to
arbitration by the petitioner. The Reference was dismissed on 5th November,
1981 by the Deputy Registrar. This has led to the present writ petition.
3.

The learned senior counsel for the petitioner Shri Arun Mohan

submitted as follows:
a)

On 31st March 1973, the law applicable to the present case was the

Bombay Cooperative Society Act (7 of 1925) and the Rules applicable were
the Delhi Cooperative Society Rules 1950, and the provisions of the above
applicable statute /Rules, neither prohibited a member from owning or
WP(C) 474/1982

Page 3 of 27

acquiring any other residential property nor deemed the interest in an HUF as
being that of the member for purposes of membership. Therefore, the act of
the Petitioner in acquiring a plot for constructing

a nursing home in a

residential colony in 1968 was not a breach of provisions of the 1925 Statute
or the 1950 Rules. In short, on 31st March 1973, the Statute or the Rules did
not prohibit a residential house owner from being a valid member of the
Cooperative House Building Society.
On 31st March 1973, A-19/A, Kailash Colony was a HUF property. It
was not a residential house, but a fully constructed and functional nursing
home.
b)

(i)

The Petitioner's membership was 'saved' as an

accrued right

principle, under Section 98 of the Delhi Cooperative Societies Act (35 of
1972) which repealed the Bombay Cooperative Societies Act, 1928.
Section 98 of the Act reads as follows:
“Provided that the repeal shall not affect:
(a)
xxxxx
(b)
Any right, privilege, obligation or liability
acquired, accrued or incurred under the Act so
WP(C) 474/1982

Page 4 of 27

repealed; or
(c)
xxxxx
(d)
xxxxx”

In S.N. Maira v. UOI, 1992 (23) DRJ 145, the Division Bench of this
Court held as follows:
“.....Therefore, we are of the view that the rights,
privilege,obligations etc. which had been acquired
by such members or had accrued to them under the
1925 Act having been specifically saved by Section
98 of the 1972 Act, the same could not have been
taken away after the coming into force of 1972 Act.
Therefore, we do not find any defect or illegality in
the exercise of the right of vote by such member.”

(ii)

While the rule-making power is subservient to the statute could not take

away the membership in 1972, the latter statute can always take away vested
rights but its intention must be clear – taking away of a vested right cannot be
implied. Besides, the wording of Section 98(b) clearly and specifically saves
the rights or privileges of those members who were validly admitted when the
old statute was enforced.
Further, Section 98 (which is a statutory provision in contra distinction
to an implied disqualification by the Rules) makes it clear that unless the act

WP(C) 474/1982

Page 5 of 27

constituting such disqualification is of a point of time subsequent to the
commencement of new Act (under which the Rules were framed), it cannot be
enforced.
So looked at, it cannot be said that the right of the Petitioner to receive
that plot was lost or could be lost.
(iii)

Although Section 97 gives the power to frame Rules, but that power is a

very limited one and the Rules are liable to a narrow construction. Section 97
reads as follows:
97.
Rules – (1) The Lt. Governor may, for
any cooperative society or class of cooperative
societies, make rules to carry out the purposes of
this Act.
(2)
In particular, and without prejudice to the
generality of the foregoing power, such rules may
provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:xxxxxx
(v)
the conditions to be complied with by
persons applying for admission or admitted as
members, for the election and admission of
members, and for the payment to be made and the
interest to be acquired before the exercise of the
right of membership;

Section 97 is a general provision to make rules to carry out the purposes
WP(C) 474/1982

Page 6 of 27

of this Act, but does not give power to frame Rules which take away earlier
accrued rights. Further, the phrase, 'purposes of the Act' includes Section 98
of the Act.
Section 97 (2) (v) is only to frame rules qua members being admitted and as
distinct from disqualifying a member who had a prior disqualification, but no
disqualification after the crucial date, i.e., 2nd April 1973 can be based upon
such a rule.
(iv)

Since the Act itself does not provide for extinguishment of a pre-

existing right, the Rules cannot do so.
In Federation of Cooperative G/H Society v. Union of India, 1993 (26)
DRJ 156, while declaring Rule 41-A as ultra vires, this Court held as follows:
“89. It was contended by Shri Mahajan that this
Rule 41-A was promulgated in exercise of the
powers conferred by Section 97 (2) (v). The said
provision reads as under:
97 Rules (2)
In particular, and
without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide
for all or any of the following matters,
namely;
(v)
the conditions to be complied
with by persons applying for admission
WP(C) 474/1982

Page 7 of 27

or admitted as members, for the election
and admission of members, and for the
payment to be made and the interest to
be acquired before the exercise of the
right of membership.
This provision has nothing to do with Section 97 (1)
which gives power to the Lt. Governor to make
Rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. It is in
this connection that clause (v) / (iv) of Rule 97 (2)
provides for rules being made which may specify
conditions to be complied with by the persons
applying for admission to a society. This rule has to
be read along with Section 20 (1) of the Act.
Section 20 (1) inter alia, gives a right to an
individual who is competent to contract to become a
member of a cooperative society. No rule under
Section 97 (2) (v) can be so framed as to take away
this right which is conferred by the substantive
provision viz., Section 20(1). Clause (v) of Section
97 (2), read in this context, can only relate to the
provision being made regarding the procedural
requirement to be complied with by a person
applying for admission as member of a cooperative
society.
90
The problem may be viewed from another
angle. Whereas sub-section (1) of Section 20
provides for persons who may become members of
a society but sub-section (2) of section 20 gives an
overriding power to the Lt. Governor to declare
what persons or class of persons are to be
disqualified from being admitted or continuing as
members of a society. It is pertinent to note that
sub-section (2) enables the Lt. Governor to exercise
powers only in those cases where the interest of any
person or class of persons conflicts or is likely to
WP(C) 474/1982

Page 8 of 27

conflict with the objects of the society or class of
society. For example, under Rule 25(c) (ii) no
person is eligible for membership of a housing
society if he deals in purchase or sale of
immoveable properties either as member or as agent
in the Union Territory of Delhi. No power is given
to the Lt. Governor under sub-section (2) of section
20 to debar any other person from becoming a
member of a cooperative society. The restriction on
the right conferred by sub-section (1) of section 20
is only contained in sub-section (2) of section 20
and the right under section 20(1) can certainly not
be curtailed by framing of a rule in exercise of the
powers under section 97 of the Act. ....”

(v)

Rule 25 reads as follows:
““25. Disqualification for Membership – (1) No
person shall be eligible for admission as a member
of a cooperative Society if hea. has applied to be adjudicated an insolvent or is an
undischarged insolvent; or
b. has been sentenced for any offence other than an
offence of a political character or an offence not
involving moral turpitude and dishonesty and a
period of five years has not elapsed from the date of
expiry of the sentence;
c. in the case of membership of a housing society.
(i) he owns a residential house or a plot of land
for the construction of a residential house in
any of the approved or unapproved colonies
or other localities in the Union Territory of

WP(C) 474/1982

Page 9 of 27

Delhi, in his own name or in the name of his
spouse or any of his dependent children, on
lease hold or freehold basis provided that
disqualification as laid down in sub-rule (1)
(c)(1) shall not be applicable in case of
persons who are only co-sharers of joint
ancestral properties in congested localities
(slum areas) whose share is less than 65.72
sq. meters (80 sq. yards) of land;
(ii) xxxxx
(iii)xxxx
(2)
Notwithstanding anything contained in the
rules or the bye-laws of the cooperative society, if a
member becomes, or has already become, subject to
any disqualifications specified in sub-rule (1), he
shall be deemed to have ceased to be a member from
the date when the disqualifications were incurred.”

It is clear from the wording of such clause that it applies only at the
time the person is seeking admission, i.e., where he wants to become a
member and not at any point of time subsequent thereto. At best, it may apply
to an overt act by the member after 2nd April 1973. The intention of the rule is
not to disqualify old members.
In O.P. Sethi v. Lt. Governor, 1991 RLR 451, this Court held as
follows:
WP(C) 474/1982

Page 10 of 27

“20. ....
Having come to this conclusion, there
seems to be little difficulty in holding that the said
rule cannot apply in the cases where properties are
acquired by transmission / devolution. We feel that
Rules 25 and 35 of the said Rules have to be read in
different contexts. The former takes care of the
cases of acquisition of membership or its transfer
and the latter the cases of transmission etc. The
view, which we have taken, we feel, will give a
harmonious construction to the provisions of the
said Rules and bye-laws, referred to above. A
contrary view, in our opinion, will not only make
bye-law 9 redundant but may also lead to
unreasonable and anomalous results. For example,
member on being granted membership of a housing
cooperative society constructs a house on the plot
subleased in his favour. He registers his only heir as
his nominee. During his life time the said heir also
himself/herself acquires a residential house of a plot
of land for construction of residential house. It will
be extremely unreasonable if on the death of the
member, the said heir is told that he/she having
incurred disqualification as per rule 25, membership
and property of the deceased could not be
transferred in his/her favour. More so when the Act,
the Rules and the bye-laws are silent on the question
as to what will happen to the property after the death
of the member in such a situation. We feel the latter
part of bye-law 9 is intended to take care of such a
situation.”

If the Court has not applied Rule 25 to those members who inherited a
house after (and not before) becoming a member, or such a member married a

WP(C) 474/1982

Page 11 of 27

lady who owned a house, the Rule cannot operate to disqualify a member who
was a valid member and also owned a house prior to 2 nd April 1973 but did
not acquire any house thereafter. The respondents do not contend that after
2nd April 1973, the petitioner did any act which would disqualify him.
Rule 25 is not about expulsion or cessation of membership. It is only
about disqualification

for admission to membership.

Even the

disqualification is neither 'from' membership nor 'of' membership.
(vi)

The words 'residential house' is distinct from a residential plot.' The

term ' residential house in Rule 25 (1) (c) means what is used as a residential
house and cannot include what is a Nursing Home being run in a residential
colony like banks or schools. Secondly, since there was no overt act on part
of the Petitioner by which he acquired or came to own any residential house,
and since there was a mere continuing of the ownership of the past on the date
on which these Rules came into force, i.e., 2nd April 1973, there can be no
ground for disqualification. Thirdly, the plot A-19/A, Kailash Colony on 2nd
April 1973 was not a plot because it was already constructed upon as a fullWP(C) 474/1982

Page 12 of 27

fledged hospital and not a residential house. It was a nursing home, which
had been functioning for several years prior thereto. Fourthly, the purpose of
sub-rule (2) is only to override the bye-laws of a cooperative society.
(vii) Then, sub-rule (2) also contains a key when it says 'if a member
becomes, or has already become, subject to any disqualifications

specified

in sub-rule (1), he shall be deemed to have ceased to be a member from the
date when the disqualifications were incurred.' Obviously, if the Rule is
prospective in operation, then the disqualification will have to be reckoned as
of the date the Rule was in existence. Construing it as referring to a date in
the past is giving it a retrospective operation.
Therefore, Rule 25 is only of eligibility for admission as a member and
nothing further. The decision in Daulat Ram Mehndirratta case, AIR 1982
DEL 470, has been countered by the counsel for the petitioner on the
following grounds:
i)

The case is distinguishable on facts.

ii)

Per Incuriam.

WP(C) 474/1982

Page 13 of 27

iii)

is impliedly overruled by later Supreme Court pronouncements on the
legal principles of repeal by later statutes.

4.

The learned counsel for the respondent no.4/society, Sh. Arun

Kathpalia, in reply submitted that the petition is not maintainable because :
a)

Where the law provides an alternative remedy in the form of an appeal

etc., the High Court should not entertain any petition in exercise of its
ordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution.
b)

The petition was directed against the Resolution dated 14th January

1978 passed by the respondent society expelling the petitioner from the
membership of the society because of
i)

Non payment of call money and development charges despite repeated

demands; and
ii)

Non-furnishing of an affidavit/ declaration/undertaking to the effect that

neither the petitioner nor any of his dependent relatives own, in full or in part,
a plot of land or a house in Delhi and that his membership is valid and in
accordance with the Delhi Cooperative Societies Act, Rules and Bye-laws.
WP(C) 474/1982

Page 14 of 27

c)

Under the Delhi Cooperative Societies Act, 1972 (hereinafter referred

to as the “Act”) an appeal against the resolution of expulsion would lie under
Section 76.

The petitioner instead of preferring an appeal proceeded to

challenge the order by way of a reference under Section 60 of the Act which
was dismissed because the petitioner stood disqualified in terms of Rule 25 of
DCS Rules, 1973, and was not eligible to remain a member of the cooperative
society.
d)

The issue whether a person who is member of HUF which owns or has

been allotted a residential plot is eligible to become a member of a
Cooperative House Building Society or not stands settled by decision of the
Division Bench of this Court in Radhey Mohan v. RCS ,1996 [39] DRJ 603,
where it was held that a person having a share in a HUF property is not
eligible for membership and is liable to be disqualified under Section 25 (1)
(c) of the Act.
A similar view has also been taken by the Hon'ble SC in case of O.P.
Choudhary v. Rehabilitiation Ministry Employees Cooperative House
WP(C) 474/1982

Page 15 of 27

Building Society, 2003 (10) SCC 170, it was held as follows:
“no person shall be eligible for admission as a
member of the society in question if he owns a
residential house or a plot of land for construction
of a residential house in any of the approved or
unapproved colonies or other localities in the
Union Territory of Delhi either in his own name or
in the name of his spouse or any of his dependent
children on leasehold or freehold basis. The
proviso appended to this sub-rule makes an
exception in case of persons who are only co-sharer
of joint ancestral properties in congested localities
(slum areas), and whose share is less than 66,72 sq.
m (80 yds) of land. Even if a person's share in a
joint property is less than 66.72 sq. m. he would not
be eligible to be a member of the housing society
unless the said property is situated in congested
localities (slum areas)”

In the present case the petitioner's share alone in the property would he
more than 250 sq. yds. and the property is in Kailash Colony, which is not a
slum area and therefore, the exclusion and ineligibility is absolute.
e)

The contention of the petitioner that a residential property being used

for commercial purposes cannot be treated as a residential property for the
purposes of Rule 25 is wholly untenable. This is because A-19/A, Kailash

WP(C) 474/1982

Page 16 of 27

Colony, is used for residential purpose as has been stated by the petitioner in
his supporting affidavit to the writ petition. In any case if the petitioner has
used the residential property for purposes other than the designated purposes it
constituted and is illegal and the restrictions under Rule 25 would not apply.
The import of Rule 25 as discussed in Daulat Ram's case (supra) is as
follows:
“It is respectfully submitted that this is not the
meaning or the import of Rule 25. The purpose
and intent of conditions imposed by Rule 25 is to
serve “the pre-eminent purpose of equitable
distribution so as to enable the need of housing to
be satisfied for as large a number of persons as
possible. This condition prevented the richer
sections to concentrate the housing plots amongst
themselves. The huger for housing plots being in
millions the only rational manner is to make
allotment to those who are without any land/house.
Such a condition is pre-eminent just”.

5.

We have considered the rival pleas. In so far the submissions of the

learned counsel for the petitioner in the written submissions are concerned, it
is apparent that he has raised many pleas most of which were not urged before
us. The only plea however which was urged and which we need to consider is

WP(C) 474/1982

Page 17 of 27

that the premises of A-19/A, Kailash Colony, New Dlehi, was a HUF property
and was not being used for residential purposes, but for commercial purposes,
i.e., for running a nursing home and therefore, the petitioner could not be
barred from owning a residential plot in the respondent no.4 society.
6.

The counsel for the petitioner had submitted that the Petitioner's

membership was saved as an accrued right under Section 98 of the Act. The
reason why this plea must fail is that Section 98 of the Act would not save a
member from becoming ineligible for membership as has been specifically
ruled by the Full Bench of this Court in Daulat Ram's case (supra). The
relevant portion of the said judgment reads as follows:
“7.
......In such a situation the petitioner would
have to comply with the requirement of amended
bye-laws which made eligibility for a member
dependent upon a person not owning a dwelling
house in Delhi. Position would be different if there
was no amendment of the bye-laws. But once the
bye-laws are amended the petitioner would have
ceased to be a member from the date of amended
bye-laws. Section 98 (b) which saves the right,
privileges or obligations accrued or incurred under
the Act repealed namely 1912 Act, cannot avail the
petitioner because he is not claiming any right
which he had under the old Act. His right under the
WP(C) 474/1982

Page 18 of 27

old Acts were governed by the bye-laws of the
society which no doubt permitted him to become a
member in 1958 but when they were amended in
1966 the petitioner became ineligible to remain a
member and hence ceased to be a member. Now let
us examine the implication of Delhi Cooperative
Societies Act, 1972, and the Rules framed under it
being Delhi Cooperative Societies Rules, 1973.
Prior to the coming into force of Delhi Cooperative
Societies Act, 1972 (hereinafter to be called 1972
Act) Bombay Cooperative Societies Act, 1925, had
been extended to Delhi and was in force. There
was no provision under the Bombay Cooperative
Societies Act that a person cannot be a member of
more than one cooperative societies or that he owns
a residential house or a plot of land in Delhi.
Section 92 of 1972 Act while repealing the Bombay
Cooperative Societies Act provided that every
society registered under the said Act shall be
deemed to be registered under the corresponding
provisions under the 1972 Act and its bye-laws
shall so far as the same are not inconsistent with the
express provisions of the Act continue to be in
force until altered or rescinded.
Section 97
provided for the framing of the Rules by the Lt.
Governor. Section 97 (2) (v) read as under:

“The condition to be complied with by
persons applying for admission or
admitted as members for the election
and admission of members, and for the
payment to be made and the interest to
be acquired before the exercise of the
right of membership.”

Consequently, the plea of the counsel for the petitioner on this ground,
WP(C) 474/1982

Page 19 of 27

cannot be sustained, particularly, when the Full Bench of this Court has held
to the contrary.
7.

It has been argued by the learned counsel for the respondent that as per

the provisions of Section 25 (1)(c) of the Act, a person having a share in a
HUF property is not eligible for membership and is liable to be disqualified.
He has reiterated the judgment in Daulat Ram's case (supra):
“Of course rules can be framed to prescribe
conditions to be complied by persons applying for
admission or admitted as members which means
persons who already stand admitted. But this does
not mean that the rule as such to operate with
retrospective effect in that it is taking away some
vested right. Both the Benches held that as a person
would cease to be a member on the coming into
force of the Rules on account of his having been a
member or having owned a plot earlier to the
coming into force of Rules 1973, R.25 has to be
considered as if it was retrospective in effect. With
respect we feel that both the Division Benches fell
into error in assuming that R.25 (1) (c) or R 25 (2)
is retrospective in operation. Merely because a
person who had become a member of the society at
a point of time when the
disqualification
mentioned in R.25 was not in existence and because
of the said rule would now cease to be a member of
the society does not necessarily mean that the said
rule is retrospective. A statute is not properly called
a retrospective statute because a part of the
WP(C) 474/1982

Page 20 of 27

requisites for its action is drawn from a time
antecedent to its passing.”

Further, this Court is fully bound by the reasoning of the Full Bench of
this Court in Daulat Ram's case (supra) that signifies the import of Rule 25.
It is true that there is a need of housing to be satisfied for a large number of
persons and in order to enable this need the certain sections must be
preventive from concentrating multiple housing plots amongst themselves.
However, there is nothing either in Rule 25 or the reasoning in the judgment
that prevents a person from owning a property that is being used for
commercial purposes. Rule 25 in no manner provides for ineligibility of
membership if a member owns or comes to acquire a plot of land in a
residential locality and constructs a structure thereupon which is to be used for
commercial purposes and not for residential purposes. In the present case, the
acquired plot of land in the residential locality was being used as a nursing
home for commercial purposes.
Similarly, the view taken by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in O.P.

WP(C) 474/1982

Page 21 of 27

Choudhary's case (supra) is not applicable to the present case as the court has
recognized the ineligibility of a member to the membership of the society if
“he owns a residential house or a plot of land for the construction of the
residential house in any of the approved or unapproved colonies or other
localities in the Union Territory of Delhi, either in his own name or in the
name of his spouse or any of his dependent children or lease hold or freehold
basis”. In light of the above observations of the Supreme Court and in view
of the factual matrix of the case it is to be noted that apart from the above
property at A-19/A, Kailash Colony, New Delhi, neither the petitioner nor his
wife or any of his dependent children has been shown to own or said to have
purchased a residential house or a plot of land for construction of a residential
house.
8.

A perusal of the Rule 25 shows that the term 'residential house' in

Rule 25 (1) (c) does not include expressly or impliedly a commercial entity
such as a nursing home. The mere fact that such a nursing home is being run
in a residential locality does not change the character of the nursing home as
WP(C) 474/1982

Page 22 of 27

being used for commercial purposes even though the plot may be situated in a
residential colony. At best it may be a municipal wrong to be redressed by the
MCD under the Municipal laws but does not give the Society any right to treat
such user and ownership of such commercial property as a disqualification
under Rule 25. It may also be emphasized here that the words 'residential
house' is distinct from 'residential plot'. Therefore to conjure an expanded
meaning of the term 'residential house' in the present context is not necessary.
9.

It has been brought to the notice of the Court by the counsel for

the petitioner that the Petitioner came to acquire the property A-19/A, Kailash
Colony in 1968 and the Rules in question came into force in April 1973.
Since there was no overt act on the part of the Petitioner by which he came to
own any residential house after the said rules came into force, there can be no
ground for disqualification. Besides, the said property on 2nd April, 1973 was
not a residential plot as it had already been constructed upon as a nursing
home which had been functioning for the years before the Rules came into
force. Therefore, the act of the Petitioner in acquiring a plot for constructing a
WP(C) 474/1982

Page 23 of 27

nursing home in a residential colony in 1968 was neither a breach of
provisions of the 1925 statute (BCSA) nor the DCSR, 1950. These rules does
not contain any prohibition on a member for admission as a member of the
cooperative society if he owns or acquires any other property which is being
used for commercial purposes, even though the plot may be situated in a
residential locality. Hence, the statute or the rules do not in any way prohibit
an owner of a plot of land which is not being used for residential purposes
from being a member of the cooperative society.
10.

The pleadings in the writ petition in this respect are significant and are

reproduced as under: “11. That the Petitioner had become a member of
Respondent No.4 as far back as on 11.3.1961 vide
Membership Card No. 35 of the same date. He had not
infringed any law or bye-law of Respondent No.4 and had
also made all the payments. The property No.A-19/A,
Kailash Colony, New Delhi, was acquired and the superstructures thereon were constructed with the funds
belonging to the Joint Hindu Family consisting of himself,
his wife and children. The said property is being used
purely for professional and commercial purposes and is not
a residence of the Petitioner. The Joint Hindu Family,
which owns the said property, is a separate and distinct
legal person.”
WP(C) 474/1982

Page 24 of 27

This has been countered in the Counter Affidavit filed by the
respondent no.4-Society as under:“11. First part of the para 11 is admitted as correct. It is
further submitted that demand of the respondent Society
for the admission fee and the value of two shares was duly
met by the petitioner. Rest of the para is denied for want of
knowledge.”

Thus, it is evident that from the aforementioned pleadings there is only
a bare denial of this plea and the same has not been specifically denied which
does not in law constitute a denial. This plea has been countered by Sh.
Kathpalia by referring to the affidavit in support of the writ petition where the
petitioner describes himself as the resident of A-19/A, Kailash Colony. He
submitted that the address in this affidavit is sufficient to disbelieve the plea
of the petitioner that he was not a resident of Kailash Colony property.
Mr. Mohan submitted that no doubt the petitioner has described himself
as the resident of A-19/A, Kailash Colony in the supporting affidavit but this
is inadvertent, as being a doctor running a nursing home, he remained
invariably in his workplace for very long hours.
WP(C) 474/1982

Page 25 of 27

11.

In our view, the pleadings stand on a stronger footing than the affirming

affidavit and consequently we accept the plea of Shri Mohan that the address
of A-19/A, Kailash Colony was given by inadvertence and hold that there is
no denial in law by the respondent no.4 of the averment, that the Kailash
Colony plot was being used for commercial purposes.
Furthermore, since the writ petition has been pending in this Court since
1982, to entertain the plea of alternate remedy being a bar to the entertainment
of the petition at this stage would not be in the interest of justice.
Furthermore, the position of law that the user of a property for commercial
purposes would not constitute a violation of Rule 25 inviting disqualification
has been laid down by this Court for the first time and thus, this Court is
justified in entertaining this writ petition directly from the order of the Deputy
Registrar without directing the appellant to avail of the alternative appellate
remedy.
12.

WP(C) 474/1982

In

light

of

the

above

discussion ,

the

Page 26 of 27

writ

petition

is

allowed, resolution and order dated 14th January, 1978

passed by the respondent no.4, Ishwar Nagar Cooperative House Building
Society and the order of the Registrar, Cooperative Societies dated 17th May,
1978 and the order of the Deputy Registrar dated 5th November, 1981 whereby
the name of the petitioner had been removed from the list of members of the
respondent no.4-society, is quashed and set aside. There shall be no order as
to costs.

(MUKUL MUDGAL)
JUDGE

(ARUNA SURESH)
JUDGE

March 28, 2008
dr/sk

WP(C) 474/1982

Page 27 of 27

