*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P. (C) NO. 5673/2002 & CMs 9629/02, 1025/04
Reserved on
:
Date of Decision :

UNION OF INDIA
Through :

12th October, 2007
th
28 March, 2008

.... Petitioner
Ms. Jyoti Singh and
Mr. Karan Dewan,
Advocates.

Versus
SH. M.A.J. FAROOQUI
Through :

... Respondent
Mr. Hari Shankar,
Advocate.

CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MUKUL MUDGAL
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
1.

Whether the Reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the judgment?
Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?

Yes

%

W.P.(C) No. 5673/2002

JUDGMENT
28-03-2008
Page No. 1 of 26

MUKUL MUDGAL, J.
1. That the present writ petition arises out of a judgment dated 27th May,
2002 of the Central Administrative Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as 'the
Tribunal) in OA No. 950/2001. The OA challenged the punishment of
withholding of increments for two years with cumulative effect imposed
upon the respondent. The Tribunal allowed the OA and quashed the order
dated 7th March, 2001. The petitioner was further directed to open the
sealed cover and if the respondent was found fit, to promote him as DIG
and IG with all consequential benefits.
2.

That the brief facts of the case are as under:-

a.

That the respondent is an IPS officer of AGMU cadre, 1979 batch

and at the relevant time was posted as DCP, south-west district.
b.

The said officer was charge-sheeted vide OM dated 13th September,

1993 for an alleged misconduct in two separate events.
c.

The first event, related to his high-handed behaviour of 9th February,

1991 at/near Sangam Cinema, R.K. Puram where he allegedly abused and
W.P.(C) No. 5673/2002

Page No. 2 of 26

criminally assaulted Constable Chander Kumar on duty and misbehaved
with the manager of the Cinema Hall.
d.

Subsequently, on the intervening night of 9-10th February, 1991 he

conducted an operation for removal of various vendor owners including 31
Kashmiri migrants who were holding valid tehbazari rights.
e.

He was also alleged to have placed two constables under suspension

without any just and sufficient cause and without exercising his proper
jurisdiction.
f.

The second event relates to a case which was registered against Smt.

Neelam Mahajan, a Journalist on 28th September, 1992 at the instance of
the respondent for trespass and assault. Subsequently, the respondent got
Smt. Neelam Mahajan arrested in the aforementioned case after dusk and
detained her upto midnight in violation of the instructions and guidelines
laid in relation to arrest and custody of a woman.
g.

Therefore, seven articles of charges were framed against the

respondent.
W.P.(C) No. 5673/2002

Page No. 3 of 26

h.

The respondent submitted his reply denying the charges.

Accordingly, an oral inquiry was ordered by Sh.R.P. Rai, IAS, who in his
report submitted in January 1998 tentatively disagreed with the IO's
finding with regard to articles of charge (V) and (VII) of the chargesheet.
i.

Accordingly, the case was again examined extensively in light of

the reply submitted by the respondent and it was tentatively held that there
was sufficient evidence on record to hold that the articles of charge III, IV
and VII as proved against him.
j.

The case records were accordingly forwarded to Union Public

Service Commission (Hereinafter referred to as 'UPSC') as per the
prescribed procedure for advice before taking a final decision in the
matter.
k.

The UPSC vide their letter dated 3rd April, 2000 advised that the

articles of charges (I), (II), (V) and (VI) had not been considered by them
since the Disciplinary Authority (hereinafter referred to as 'the DA') had
concluded that the said charges had not been proved against the
W.P.(C) No. 5673/2002

Page No. 4 of 26

respondent.
l.

After taking into account all the facts, evidence/documents relevant

to the case UPSC advised that ends of justice would be met with in this
case if the minor penalty of withholding of increments of pay for two
years with cumulative effect is imposed on the respondent.
m.

The matter was further examined by the petitioner in light of the

aforesaid advice tendered by the UPSC and it was tentatively held that the
gravity of the lapses established against the respondent justified imposition
of a suitable major penalty. The case was accordingly referred to UPSC
for reconsideration of their advice. The UPSC on re-examination of the
case records, however, reiterated their earlier advice and recommended the
same quantum of penalty (i.e. withholding of increments of pay for two
years with cumulative effect).
n.

In June 2000, the respondent filed OA No. 2493/2000 before the

Tribunal, Principal Bench, praying for quashing charge-sheet dated 13th
September, 1993 and OM dated 7th July, 1998 and also for consideration
W.P.(C) No. 5673/2002

Page No. 5 of 26

for promotion to the DIG cadre with effect from the date of promotion of
officer immediately junior to him.
o.

The tribunal vide its order dated 29th November, 2000 directed the

petitioner to pass appropriate orders on the representations submitted by
the applicant expeditiously within a period of 3 months. It was further
held that in case the applicant was exonerated, his sealed cover would be
opened and appropriate orders in respect of promotion would be passed. It
was held by the Tribunal that in case the orders of the respondent therein
went adverse to the applicant, it will be open to him to approach the
Tribunal once again by raising all the contentions which have been raised
in the OA and also others that may become available to him.
p.

The order imposing a penalty on the respondent of withholding the

increment, for 2 years with cumulative effect, in agreement with the
advice tendered by the UPSC was passed on 7th March, 2001 by the
petitioner.
q.

The respondent subsequently filed OA 950/2001 before the Tribunal

W.P.(C) No. 5673/2002

Page No. 6 of 26

praying for quashing Charge-sheet dated 13th September, 1993 and the
order dated 7th March, 2001. He also prayed for directions to open the
sealed cover and promote him as DIG, if found fit.
r.

The Tribunal, vide order dated 27th May, 2002 allowed the OA and

quashed the order dated 7th March, 2001 imposing the penalty of
withholding of increment by 2 years. The petitioner was further directed
to open the sealed cover and if the respondent was found fit to promote
him as DIG and IG with all consequential benefits.
3.

The learned counsel for the petitioner submits as under:-

a.

The Tribunal by passing the impugned order dated 27th may, 2002

had gone beyond the scope of its own order dated 19th April, 2001 wherein
the notice was issued on the issue as to whether the petitioner is or is not
the competent authority to initiate disciplinary proceedings against the
respondent.
b.

The Tribunal had exceeded its jurisdiction in re-appreciating the

entire merits of the case as if it was an inquiry authority. It is a well
W.P.(C) No. 5673/2002

Page No. 7 of 26

settled law that the court or the Tribunal cannot sit as a court of appeal and
re-appreciate the evidence or the merits of the case and come to its own
conclusion regarding the guilt of the charged officer. The only ground on
which any interference is possible is when any mandatory rules had been
violated in the conduct of inquiry proceedings or principles of natural
justice had not been complied with.

The Tribunal erred in virtually

deciding the case as though it was the inquiring authority and was sitting
to decide the guilt of the delinquent officer.

The minor penalty of

withholding increments of pay for two years with cumulative effect was
imposed on the respondent after the Disciplinary Authority in consultation
with the UPSC and after arriving at the conclusion that the articles of
charge III and VII framed against the respondent stood established on the
basis of the evidence on record.
(c)

(i)

The allegation against Sh. Farooqui under article III of

charges that he carried out on the night between 9th and 10th February,
1991 outside/opposite Sangam Cinema, Vivekanand Marg, Sector-1, R.K.
W.P.(C) No. 5673/2002

Page No. 8 of 26

Puram, New Delhi an operation for removal of a number of vendors/kiosk
owners including 32 Kashmiri migrants who were holding valid
“tehbazari” rights and forcibly removed and caused damage to their
furniture, wooden 'takhats' and eatable items without proper planning and
without associating authorities concerned and without ascertaining the
legal rights of vendors/kiosk owners and without issuing any notice or
even without giving them an opportunity to show cause against the
proposed action.
(ii)

The Tribunal failed to appreciate that it was established in the

course of oral inquiry that the whole operation of removal of
“encroachments” was triggered off at the spur of the moment without any
proper planning and executed in a haste. The respondent had himself
admitted that his action was on the spur of the moment. The events on
record further showed that this set off a chain reaction which ended with
the removal of “takhats” set up by the Kashmiri migrants at Vivekanand
Marg without anyone having cared to ascertain whether they were holding
W.P.(C) No. 5673/2002

Page No. 9 of 26

“tehbazari” rights or not and as such the charge substantially stood
established.
d.

The Tribunal failed to appreciate that the article VI of charge

framed against the respondent also stood established inasmuch as there
was undisputed documentary evidence on record to show that he got a
criminal case registered against Smt. Neelam Mahajan Singh and caused
her arrest in a pre-determined manner without verification of facts as to
whether any cognizable offence had been committed at all. It is not
disputed that the respondent had given written instructions to the SHO of
the Police Station concerned to the effect that : “There is a serious
complaint against Smt. Neelam Mahajan Singh R/o Kasturba Gandhi
Apartments from Sh. A.K. Gupta, DIG, IB. You are hereby directed to
take cognizance of the complaint, reigster a case and arrest her in this case
under an intimation to me”. The disciplinary authority on the basis of this
documentary piece of evidence came to the conclusion that the respondent
had in a pre-determined manner directed his subordinate officer to arrest
W.P.(C) No. 5673/2002

Page No. 10 of 26

Smt. Singh. The Tribunal took the view that the disciplinary authority had
over-emphasized the aforesaid written order issued by the respondent and
held that it has been neglected that the respondent only wanted to ensure
that an FIR was registered against Smt. Singh on the basis of the
complaint lodged by her neighbour as the SHO was reluctant to investigate
the matter on the basis of the complaint. The Tribunal, however, erred in
completely ignoring the fact that the impugned direction was given by the
respondent in a pre-determined manner without following the prescribed
procedure in law.
e.

The Tribunal failed to appreciate that there was no delay let alone

considerable, on the part of the petitioner in completing the proceedings.
In any case, it is also a well settled law that a mere delay will not vitiate
inquiry when otherwise there is ample evidence to support the charges.
f.

The Tribunal had exceeded its jurisdiction and re-appreciated

evidence. The tribunal failed to see that all procedures were admittedly
applied correctly and there was no violation of any rules. It is a clear case
W.P.(C) No. 5673/2002

Page No. 11 of 26

where the charges leveled against the officers were very serious which
when having been proved clearly established that the respondent had
conducted himself in a manner unbecoming of a senior member of
uniformed force and lacked dedication and sincerity to duty. The Tribunal
was thus, not justified in quashing the impugned order awarding the
punishment. Moreover, there is no legal ground on which the impugned
punishment order has been quashed.
4.

The learned counsel for the respondent submits that :-

a.

The effect that “the only ground on which interference is possible”

by a Court or Tribunal hearing a writ petition against orders passed in
disciplinary proceedings “is when any mandatory rules have been violated
in the conduct of inquiry proceedings or principles of natural justice have
not been complied with”, does not stand in law. There is no such postulate
in law. In fact, the wideness of the ambit of judicial review against an
order of punishment consequent upon disciplinary proceedings has been
explained, in detail, in UOI vs. K.A. Kittu, (2001) 1 SCC 64, which has
W.P.(C) No. 5673/2002

Page No. 12 of 26

also been noted by the Tribunal in the impugned judgment.

The

interference, by the Tribunal, in the impugned judgment with the order of
punishment of the respondent, is well within the peripheries delineated in
K.A. Kittu's case (supra), and is entirely sustainable in law.
b.

A perusal of charge no.III shows that it was held to be proved to the

extent that the respondent had removed encroachments, on the pavement
outside Sangam Cinema, without any proper planning. The finding that
the respondent had acted without pre-planning was based only on his own
statement that he acted “on the spur of the moment”. No independent
material or evidence apart from this statement, justifies this finding and
none of the authorities had indicated what pre-planning the respondent
was expected to do before removing the encroachments. The IA had only
found that the applicant had acted with “thoughtless enthusiasm to set
things right in a prompt manner”, and held that this could not constitute
misconduct. Without any substantial material, the UPSC and DA held the
respondent to have committed misconduct for having acted without “preW.P.(C) No. 5673/2002

Page No. 13 of 26

planning”, but remained silent on the nature of “pre-planning” expected of
the respondent in the circumstances. The finding of the DA against the
respondent on the basis of this that the respondent has been penalised on
this Article of charge is only that he acted without any planning. There is
no allegation that the respondent has acted in removing the
encroachments, mala fide or any ulterior motives.

The Tribunal had

quashed this finding on the basis of the detailed reasoning given in its
judgment. The writ petition is also entirely silent on the question of
“planning” which was expected by the respondent in the circumstances.
Therefore, in no way it can be said that the Tribunal erred in its decision.
c.

The Article VI of the charges framed against the respondent was not

found to be proved by the Tribunal. In fact, one of the clearest indicators
of the fallacy of the findings of the DA against the respondent was that
after holding Article VI of the charge against him not to be proved, Article
VII was held to be proved. By no stretch of imagination it can be held so.
Articles VI and VII were as the Tribunal had rightly noticed, inextricably
W.P.(C) No. 5673/2002

Page No. 14 of 26

entwined. Article VI charged the respondent with having wrongly got a
case registered against Smt. Neelam Mahajan Singh, and Article VII
charged him with directing her arrest. If the respondent had not been
found to have wrongly got a case registered against Smt. Singh, the
inevitable corollary is that he could not be alleged to have wrongly
directed her arrest, either. As has been found by the Tribunal, registration
of a case against a person for committing a cognizable offence brought
inexorably, in its wake, the arrest of such person. The only two situations
could be that, if the person was charged under a non-bailable provision, he
would have to obtain bail from Court, whereas, if he were charged under a
bailable provision, he could be released on bail immediately. It has been
admitted throughout that the respondent was responsible for converting the
provision, whereunder the case was registered against Smt. Singh, from
Section 452 to Section 448, thereby ensuring that she was released on bail
without delay.
d.

The Tribunal had found Article VII of the Articles of charge against

W.P.(C) No. 5673/2002

Page No. 15 of 26

the respondent as not proved and had also given a detailed reasoning for
the same. The writ petition besides reiterating the findings of the DA,
does not advance any cogent ground as to discredit the findings of the
Tribunal so as to merit the interference in judicial review under Articles
226-227 of the Constitution.
5.

We are at first considering only Charge No.3. The charge under

Article 3 as it stands against the respondent is that the respondent while
being posted as Deputy Commissioner of Police, South West District,
Delhi on the intervening night of 9-10th February, 1991 outside Sangam
Cinema, Sector-1, R.K.Puram, New Delhi had without proper planning
and without approaching the concerned MCD authorities carried out an
operation for the removal of a number of vendors/kiosk owners including
32 Kashmiri migrants, who were holding valid tehbazaari rights granted to
them by the competent authority. The respondent had further, without
ascertaining any legal rights of the various vendors/kiosk owners to
occupy the sites in question and without issuing any notice, carried out the
W.P.(C) No. 5673/2002

Page No. 16 of 26

operation to forcibly remove them and cause damage to their furniture,
wooden planks, takhats and eatable items in a hasty and unjust manner.
The respondent also ordered the removal of a catering van number DBL619 from the footpath, although it had valid authority to be there.
6.

The Inquiring Authorities found the aforesaid charges proved in the

following terms:
“ Be that as it may, C.O's haste and lack of
systematic planning before the operations seems
rather indisputable. His action on this occasion
appear to have been triggered by his impatience
seeing the sorry state of affairs on the spot,
followed by his overwhelming enthusiasm to
cleanse the surrounding at one fell swoop. In the
process he suppressed his sensitivity to the
unnecessary suffering caused to the helpless
vendors. The basic facts in this Article of Charge
can be said to have been proved. Whether these
constitute an instance of misconduct on the part of
the C.O. Or whether it was just a case of
thoughtless enthusiasm to set things right in a jiffy,
may best be left to the judgment of the Disciplinary
Authority. In all probability, it appears to be the
later.”

The DA also found it proved initially as well as in the order of
th

penalty passed by him on 7 March, 2001 albeit only to extent that:W.P.(C) No. 5673/2002

Page No. 17 of 26

“The ingredient of the charge that the operation was
conducted by Shri Farooqui without any planning,
therefore, stands established.”
The UPSC by its letter dated 3rd April, 2000 and after a detailed
discussion of the evidence on record, held that the aforesaid charge stood
proved only to the extent that the entire operation of removal of
encroachment was triggered on the spur of the moment without any proper
planning and executed in an unsystematic fashion.
7.

After a perusal of the imputation of misconduct and misbehaviour in

support of the Articles of charge Nos.1 to 5 against the respondent and
after a perusal of the averments made against the Articles of Charges by
the respondent, it is evident that on 9th February, 1991 at about 9.30 p.m.
the family of the respondent, an IPS Officer, who was posted as Deputy
Commissioner of Police, South-West District, Delhi and the family of one
of his friends had gone to Sangam Cinema in order to see film 'Hum'
during 9.00 p.m. to 12.00 p.m. show. The ladies and children reached the
cinema hall in the staff car of Deputy Commissioner of Police, SouthW.P.(C) No. 5673/2002

Page No. 18 of 26

West District, while Shri Farooqui himself came with his friend in a
Maruti Car a few minutes later and got stuck in the crowd near the gate of
the cinema hall. While S.I. Surender Singh and Constable Angad Kumar,
Head Constable Varun Kumar, Wireless Operator and Shri P.D. Menon,
Manager of the cinema escorted the families of Shri Farooqui and his
friend inside the cinema hall, there was no one to receive Shri Farooqui
and his friend.
On the same night between 9.30 pm to around mid-night and
intervening night of 9th and 10th February, 1991, Shri Farooqui who was
present outside/opposite Sangam Cinema, Vivekanand Marg, Sector-I,
R.K. Puram, New Delhi, summoned the S.H.Os of Police Stations R.K.
Puram, Kapashera and Dabri along with the police force and
Gypsy/Allwyn Nissan vehicles of these police stations as also summoned
the Inspector, Special Staff along with some additional police force. Shri
Farooqui then undertook an operation of removing the alleged
unauthorised encroachments outside Sangam Cinema with the aid and
W.P.(C) No. 5673/2002

Page No. 19 of 26

assistance of the above police staff and got removed and caused damage to
the furniture, wooden planks/takhats and eatable items of various vendors
and kiosk owners including 32 Kashmiri migrants who were holding valid
'Tehbazari' granted to them by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi. A
catering Van No. DBL-619 (Chung King Chinese) which was stationed at
the footpath under valid authority from the competent authority was also
ordered to be removed by Shri Farooqui.
8.

In our view, after a bare perusal of the charge under Article 3 and

after considering the findings of the Inquiry Officer, the Disciplinary
Authority and the UPSC, it is aptly clear that the respondent is responsible
for gross misuse of his authority and official position for personal motives.
The respondent has acted malafide in garb of exercising his authority so as
to vent his anger for getting stuck in the crowd surrounding the vendors.
The undue haste of acting the same night for removal without any notice
on planning shows gross abuse of power and dereliction of duty.

The

respondent, by committing the above-mentioned acts, in such haste and
W.P.(C) No. 5673/2002

Page No. 20 of 26

by way of retribution had committed grave misconduct and dereliction in
the discharge of his official duties, which is not expected of a senior
member of the All India Services.

The respondent further failed to

maintain absolute integrity and thereby contravened the provisions of Rule
3 of the All India Service (Conduct) Rules, 1968 which reads as follows: “3.

General.-

(1)
Every member of the Service shall, at all
times, maintain absolute integrity and devotion to
duty and shall do nothing that is unbecoming of a
member of the service.
(3)
(i)
No member of the service shall, in
the performance of his official duties, or in exercise
of powers conferred on him, act otherwise than in
his own best judgment to be true and correct except
when he is acting under the direction of his official
superior.”

This finding is also based on the applicant's own admission that he
acted on the spur of the moment when he visited the Sangam Cinema area
and saw encroachments all over. We do not have an iota of doubt that the
respondent acted in a vindictive manner solely actuated by his being stuck
in the crowd surrounding the vendors. The respondent by his conduct
W.P.(C) No. 5673/2002

Page No. 21 of 26

transgressed and misused the powers vested in him by the official position.
The respondent without ascertaining the legal rights of various
vendors/kiosk owners and without issuing any notice and without giving
them any opportunity to show cause against the proposed action carried
out an operation for the removal of a number of vendors/kiosk owners
including 32 Kashmiri Migrants who were holding valid tehbazaari rights
granted to them by the competent authority and forcibly removed them.
He conducted the said operation without any prior planning and without
associating the concerned MCD authorities and was solely actuated by
personal motive by giving it a public colour. The operation of removing
the encroachments was conducted by him without any proper planning
stands established.
9.

The UPSC vide their letter dated 3rd April, 2000, in respect of

charge under Article 6 and 7 advised as under:“(a) Article III of the charge is established
against the charged officer to the extent that the
whole operation of removal or encroachment was

W.P.(C) No. 5673/2002

Page No. 22 of 26

triggered of at the spur of the moment without any
proper planning and executed in an unsystematic
fashion;
(b)
Article VI of the charge is not established
against the charged officer; and
(c)
Article VII of the charge is established
against the charged officer to the extent that he got
the lady against whom the complaint had been
received arrested by misusing his official position
and power and that he was partly responsible for
the delayed release of the said lady.”

The charge under Articles 6 and 7 reads as
under:“Article VI
That the said Shr. M.A.J. Farooqui, while
posted as Deputy Commissioner of Plice, New
Delhi District got a case registered on 28.9.1992
against one Smt. Neelam Mahajan, a Journalist
R/O A-506, Kasturba Gandhi Apartments, New
Delhi under Section 452/506 IPC at P.S. Tilak
Marg FIR No. 478/92 dated 28.9.1992 on a
complaint of Shri A.K. Gupta, R/O A-206,
Kasturba Gandhi Apartments otherwise than in his
best judgment and proper verification of the
relevant facts and circumstances and thereby failed
to maintain absolute integrity.
Shri M.A.J. Farooqui by committing the
above acts of commission and omission has
W.P.(C) No. 5673/2002

Page No. 23 of 26

exhibited grave misconduct and dereliction in the
discharge of his official duties which is
unbecoming of a member of an All India Services
and failed to maintain absolute integrity and
thereby contravened the provisions of Rule 3 of the
All India Services (Conduct) Rule, 1968.
Article VII
That the said Shri M.A.J. Farooqui while
posted as Deputy Commissioner of Police, New
Delhi District on the same date i.e. 28.9.1992, got
arrested above named Smt. Neelam Mahajan in the
above referred case after dusk, got her detained and
confined her upto around mid-night by misusing
his official position and power and in violations of
the instructions regarding arrest and custody of a
woman.
Shri M.A.J. Farooqui by committing the
above acts of commission and omission has
exhibited grave misconduct and dereliction in the
discharge of his official duties which is
unbecoming of a member of an All India Services
and failed to maintain absolute integrity and
thereby contravened the provisions of Rule 3 of the
All India Services (Conduct) Rule, 1968.”

The charge and Article 6 framed against the respondent stood
established in as much as there was undisputed documentary evidence on
records to show that he got a criminal case registered against Smt. Neelam
Mahajan Singh and caused her arrest in a predetermined manner without

W.P.(C) No. 5673/2002

Page No. 24 of 26

verification of the facts. It is not disputed that the respondent had given
the written instructions to the SHO of the Police Station concerned to the
effect that : “There is a serious complaint against Smt. Neelam Mahajan
Singh R/o Kasturba Gandhi Apartments from Sh.A.K. Gupta, DIG, IB.
You are hereby directed to take cognizance of the complaint, register a
case and arrest her in the case under an intimation to me”.

The

disciplinary authority on the basis of this documentary piece of evidence
came to the conclusion that the respondent had in a predetermined manner
directed his subordinate officer to arrest Smt. Singh without giving him
the opportunity to verify in the first place whether any cognizable offence
had at all been committed.

The Disciplinary Authority after holding

Article 6 of the as not proved against the respondent held Article 7 to be
proved. The charges under Article 6 against the respondent was held not
to be proved by the Tribunal.
10.

However, we are not going into the correctness of the charges

comprised in Articles 6 and 7 as we have held that the charge under
W.P.(C) No. 5673/2002

Page No. 25 of 26

Article 3 was fully established against the respondent. The impugned
order of the Tribunal dated 27th May 2002 quashing the punishment order
passed on 7th March 2001 by the petitioner imposing the penalty on the
respondent of withholding the increment for 2 years with cumulative
effect, in agreement with the advice tendered by the UPSC is not justified.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed and the Judgment dated 27th May
2002 of the Tribunal quashing the order dated 7th March 2001 passed by
the petitioner, is set aside and the punishment of withholding of increment
of pay for two years as imposed on the respondent is upheld.

MUKUL MUDGAL
(Judge)

ARUNA SURESH
(Judge)
March 28, 2008
sk

W.P.(C) No. 5673/2002

Page No. 26 of 26

